THE TRVE CATHOLIQVE, FORMED ACCORDING TO THE TRVTH OF THE SCRIPTVRES, and the
shape of the ancient Fathers, and best sort of the latter Catholics, which
seem to favor the Church of Rome. The Contents whereof are to be seen in
the Page following.

Exodus 12.35.36. And the children of Israel did according to the saying of
Moses, and they asked of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold,
and raiment.

And the Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, and they
granted their requests: so they spoiled the Egyptians.

Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3. And because now his second coming draws near,
his bountifulness and the great account that he makes of us, does lighten our
hearts with the light of truth every day more and more.

Ambros. de Abrah. pat. lib 2. cap. 9. We read of a fire kindled at the
sunne-setting, which should lighten the evening of the world, and should shine
in the darkness, and should reveal things which were hidden.

AT LONDON. Printed by PETER SHORT, dwelling at the sign of the Star on
Bredstreet hill. 1602.

THE CONTENTS OF this Book.
1 A Preface to the Reader. 2 The true Catholics Alphabet, or A, B, C. 3 His
Paternoster or Lords prayer. 4 His Catechism, or brief sum of Religion,
wherein the Papists opinion concerning Antichrist is refuted: and the true
means of the calling of the Jews is declared. 5 His house: or the notes and
marks of the true Church, drawn out of the Scriptures. 6 Certain godly
Prayers which daily he may use. 7 The lives and manners of the ancient
Christians, drawn out of the Scriptures and Fathers.
To the Christian Reader.
I Offer unto thee (good Christian Reader) in this Treatise, the sum of our
Religion. And if foreign things delight thee (as now adays they do all men
most commonly) I do offer unto thee, I say, our Religion, proceeding out of the
mouths of the very enemies thereof. For as the people cried and said in
Darius his days; 1. Esd. 4.41.
Truth is the greatest and strongest thing of all others: Even so this sentence
shall stand true for ever. And here thou shall see that performed in deed,
which David did but prefigurate; that Goliath his head is stricken off with his
own sword. 1. Sam. 17.51.
And surely if the body and the shadow be relatiues (as the Philosophers
teach) and that every shadow has a body; then truly Dan in the law may be
also a figure of Antichrist in the Gospel; Genesis 49.17. 2. The. 2.2.
and the Madianites of the Papists. Dan, as his name imports in Hebrew, is a
Judge: He will usurp the office of a Judge amongst his brethren. And even so
does the Pope, this spiritual Dan: Leuit. 13.3. Matt. 8.4.
He will be a Judge also by usurpation: he will not judge only between
leprosy and leprosy, that is, betwixt notorious sins, as the law commanded,
but he will judge every light disease which the law commands not. He will not
be judge only of those known sins which go before to judgment, 1. Tim.
5.22.24.
which Saint Paul bids Timothy that he should take heed of; but also of those
which follow after: He will know the secrets of men's hearts, of which Saint
Paul says: Judge nothing before the time, 1. Cor. 4.5.
until the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and
make the counsels of the hearts manifest: and then shall every one have praise
of God. And is not this to be Dan? Is not this to be a Judge? Madian signifies
judging.
And as he is Dan: so also his army and soldiers are Madianites, they come
of Dan; that is their name. For they take their name of him, as the Papists do
of the Pope: and they shall perish also as did the Madianites. Of whose
overthrow thus we read: Judge. 7.22.
When the three hundredth blewe with trumpets, the Lord set every man's sword
upon his neighbor, and upon all the host which fled to Beth-hashittah
Tsererah, to the borders of Abel-Meholah unto Tabbah. Here first is the small
number of the Lords army, the small number of the professors of the Gospel,
in comparison of the Madianites, of Papists and Friars. Here are also the Lords
weapons, the trumpets of the Gospel against Madian, and their destruction, by
one of them drawing swords against another. Here is (to make perfect this
victory, and to conquer also Satan, the father of Dan) the breaking of
pitchers: that is, the mortification of the flesh, Romans 6.19. Col. 3.5. Matthew.
16.24.
and of the lusts thereof, which Saint Paul so often teaches; and the denying
of our selves, and the following of him, with our cross on our backs, which
our Savior also commands.

And they fled to Beth-hashittah Tsererah, and to the border of Abel Meholah
unto Tabbah. Here is that verified which our Savior says of the eternity of
the Scriptures: That heaven and earth shall perish, Mat. 5.18. 2. Tim. 3.16
Romans 15.4.
but not one io^te or tittle of the word of God shall perish. And that Saint
Paul writes of the excellency of them: That all the whole Scriptures are given
by inspiration from God. And again, That whatsoever is written, is written for
our learning. And again, Now all these things came unto them for examples, 1.
Cor. 10.11.
and were written to admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are come.
Every verse and word in them, do edify, and are of force; nay they edify
and teach us: And in this one point, they surpass almost all other writings.
The laws of Justinian many of them are not convenient for our age; nor Galens
prescriptions of medicines for our bodies: 1. Pet. 1.25.
but the word of the Lord is the same for ever. The Madianites fled to
Beth-hashittah Tsererah, as to their castle of refuge; and that is in our
language, to the afflicted house now ready to fall on their heads. And do not
even now the Papists so? Ierem. 7.4,
Do they not cry, as the Jews did, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord? So now they, The Church of Rome, the Church of Rome. Is not the
continuance thereof so many years, and the great glory of it, their Refuge?
Is not this one of their chiefest arguments? But what is Rome? Is it not
Beth-hashittah Tserarah? that is, 2. These. 2.8.
that afflicted house, now ready to fall on their heads? It consumes daily by
the Spirit of God: as Saint Paul prophesies that it should do, and every day
is it in declining. And ere it belong, in one day, Reu. 18.8.
that is, suddenly, as Saint John prophesies, shall her plagues come upon her,
death and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire. For it is the
mighty Lord even God himself that judges her. And she shall fall into that
miserable sorrow and destruction, which here also follows: even to the very
border or lip (as it is in the Hebrew) of Abel Meholah that is, of the
sorrows of a woman traveling with child, eue^ to Tabbaath, to the last month
in the year, which answers to our December, which for the abundance of
waters, Psalm. 137.8. 1. Pet. 5.3.
which commonly are ^herein, is called in Hebrew Tabbah: which signifies to be
drowned. Surely such floods of sorrows and calamities remain for Rome the
daughter of Babylon, Reave. 17.2.
which Saint Peter calls Babylon: as the prophesies of the holy Scriptures
do teach. Nay, Saint John describes her most manifestly: That great city
which is built upon seven hills, and reigns over the kings of the earth,
Psalm. 73.27 Ier. 3 1.
and made them drink the wine of her fornication. What city in the world is
thus built, and has had this authority over Kings; Revel. 17.17.
and has made them drink wine of fornication, that is, Idolatry, which is so
called in the Scripture, but Rome? The day shall come, that these her lovers
(those kings which with one consent have given their kingdom to the beast)
shall hate her, and shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire. We
see now the former of these fulfilled: so no doubt we shall see the latter
also, When God shall put it into their hearts, and when his words are
fulfilled, and that even in one day. If Rome be in this case, may she not
fitly be called the afflicted tottering house? And therefore as the father and
prince of the Madianites Dan, may resemble the Pope, and the Madianites his
soldiers, which shall one of them kill another: so Beth-hashittah may resemble
Rome, their castle of refuge.

And God deals even now as mercifully with his Church, 2. Chro. 20.22
as he did in the days of good king Iehoshaphat; against whom when many
nations had conspired and came to make war, it is thus written: When they
began to shout and praise the Lord, the Lord (himself) laid ambushme^ts
against the children of Ammon, Moab and mount Seir, which were come against
Judah, and they slew one another: 1. King. 18.13. Ioh. 3.1. Luke. 25 50. Matthew.
27.19
even so the enemies of the Church of God at this day, by Gods special grace
and mercy, one of them kill another. And even as in the law Obadiah, Ahabs
steward, nourished the Prophets of the Lord; and Nichodemus and Joseph of
Arimathea, princes amongst the Jews, Phil. 4.22. Ierem. 38.7.
and even Pilates wife favored Jesus Christ: even so now also in the Gospel,
the Popes darlings and Friars some of them favor the truth. And as Saint Paul
also had some friends in Caesar's house; and Jeremy in the kings court: so now
has the Gospel some friends among the Popes train, and that in no small
matters. There is no one thing I am persuaded at this day does so dazell the
eyes of a great number, that they cannot behold the clear light of the Gospel,
and keeps the^ still in the obedience of the Church of Rome: as the reading of
Granatensis, Stella, Ferus, Philippus de diez, and such like. But all shall
clearly see in this book, how that in the principal points of religion they
join hands with us. And that we may say of them, 1 King. 22.43
as we read in the book of the Kings of Iehoshaphat, that he walked in all
the ways of Asa his father, and declined not therefrom; but did that was right
in the eyes of the Lord: nevertheless the high places were not taken away, and
the people offered still, and burnt incense in the high places. Good men have
their imperfections. So these follow the way of the Fathers in preaching and
setting forth zealously the word of God, in maintaining the authority thereof;
as also the knowledge, reading, and meditation thereof: they teach also the
true use of prayer with faith, devotion, and understanding: our perfect
redemption by Christ, and the assured faith that we ought to have in him; and
how that we ought to trust in his merits, and not in our own works; his
exceeding great love toward us, and the great corruption of our nature without
his grace. In these points they worship God aright, with good king Iehoshaphat,
and they follow the ways of their fathers. But yet the high places are not
taken away; they burn incense there still: They maintain the Popes supremacy
their patron, Col. 2.18, 2. King. 9.20. and 10.28.
they make prayers to Saints and Angels, through their overmuch humility, as
Saint Paul teaches us. Their great and good zeal is like to that we read of
Iehu. And the marching is like the marching of Iehu the son of Nimshie, for
he marches furiously. And again, So Iehu destroyed Baal out of Israel; but
from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin, he
departed not. He was the founder of his kingdom. The policy which he devised
to maintain his estate and kingdom, he also (although it were against the
word of God) embraced: So these are zealous, Mark. 12.34.
but they also maintain their founder the Pope and his authority. We may say
of these truly, as our Savior Christ in the Gospel said of that Scribe, Thou
art not far from the kingdom of God: no more surely are these. So that here
good gentle Reader, thou may see Popery pulled up even by the roots, by the
hands of Papists themselves.

The true Catholic faith, out of the Scriptures, out of ye Fathers, and out of
the mouths of them, who seem to be the very enemies thereof; this small
Treatise teaches: Every one therefore that tendereth his own salvation, let
him mark well that faith which herein is taught. In the time of ignorance, God
might, and no doubt did show mercy; but now at midday, in the most clear
sunshine of the Gospel, now I say, to shut the eyes, is wilful murder. Reu.
14.8.
For in the Revelation our days are most lively expressed: Then I saw (says
S. John) another Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having an everlasting
Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice: Fear God, give
glory to him: for the hour of his judgment is come, and worship him that
made heaven and earth, the sea, and the fountains of waters. Are not here our
days most evidently declared? The preaching of the everlasting Gospel: the
worshipping of God alone, that made all things, and not of any creature: nay,
the very time. For the hour of his judgment is come. This preaching of these
doctrines, and this preaching of the Gospel, shall be immediately before the
judgment: He that is not stark blind cannot choose but see this. Now
follows the Church of Antichrist. And there followed another Angel, saying:
It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great city: for she made all nations
to drink of the wine of her fornication. Here is likewise the Church of
Antichrist most evidently described: She shall make all nations drink of the
wine of her fornication. She is contrary to the true Church, which teaches to
worship God alone the Creator: but this Synagogue has caus^d men to drink of
the wine of her fornication; that is, to worship others besides God, and to
worship the creatures: and this is spiritual fornication. And has not the
Church of Rome done so? Who sees it not? He is only to be worshipped
according to the truth of the Gospel that made heaven and earth: but what
Saint or Angel had any fellowship with God in that work? And therefore the
Church of Rome in teaching the worship of these, is Babylon: and therefore she
dissenteth most manifestly from the truth of the Gospel: And therefore she is
that whore; whose fornication is rather in doctrine then in manners. Now she
being thus manifestly descried, the third Angel followed them, saying with a
loud voice, If any man worship the Beast, and his image, and receive his mark
in his forhead or on his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath
of God, yea of the pure wine that is poured out of the cup of his wrath: and he
shall be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the
Lamb, etc. O terrible sentence for all obstinate Papists! which as yet the
Gospel being so long, and so manifestly preached, will worship the image of
the beast, that is, which will acknowledge the Popes supremacy: or put their
trust in his characters and consecrated creatures. For as S. John has taught
before, He shall make an image of the Beast: Reu. 13.14.
that is, as the Roman Emperor was Monarch over the world, so he shall
challenge a Monarchy over the Church. And has not the Pope done th^s? God give
all men eyes to see this.

And here gentle Reader if peradventure in this Treatise I do dissent in some
points from the godly brethren, I must desire thee to bear with me patiently:
I dissent not with a contentious mind, but with a mind longing and searching
for the truth; and according to my simple Talent delivering it to thee and to
thy judgment. Our dissensions are as diverse boughs proceeding from the same
root of the tree: and as diverse arrows shot out of the same quiver, aiming at
the same mark, shot against Babel. Thou which art endued with Gods Spirit,
Ierem. 50.14, Romans 8.9. 1. Cor. 2.15.
and art Jesus Christ's, judge charitably who comes nearer the mark: condemn
not any. Gods soldiers are commanded to shoot not on one side against Babel,
but round about her. I urge the fasts of Wednesdayes, Fridayes, and of Lent,
which the Fathers, and the Primitive Church solemnly observed. Who as they were
not superstitious in these their fasts (as the Papists were) so they were not
so curious in the numbering of the days of Lent as we are, They fasted about
forty days, which was called of them Quadragesima: and every week the
fourth and sixth day, not superstitiously, but religiously, to study the
Scriptures, and to came the flesh. The which fasts I urge now again in our
days, to rouse out of the sleep of security the men of our age: which eat
and drink as the men did in the days of Noe; Luke. 17.27.
of whom our Savior gives us warning to beware, least we perish with them. I
wish that all men would watch in their private prayers, and that public
prayers also might be early in the morning: which times of praying are both
agreeing with the Scripture, and to the Primitive Church. I commend the sign
of the Cross as an holy sign, which diverse godly learned men have thought to
be that sign of the Son of man, which shall appear before the day of
judgment, whereof mention is made in the 24. of Saint Matthewes Gospel. If
that sword of Goliath that killed him, were kept reverently lapt up in a cloth,
and that in no obscure place, but behind the Ephod in the Tabernacle: Why
should not that sword which killed the true Goliath indeed (which vaunted
himself against all Israel (I mean the Cross) with which sword the devil
had thought to have killed our Savior Jesus Christ; 1. Sam. 21.9.
1. Sam. 17.10.
and whereof that other Goliath was but a shadow) be had in reverence in
Christ's Church amongst us Christians? And here we may note also, that the Ephod
may signify Christ, as the signification of the name it self may seem to
import, which signifies to put on above, or to cover over all. And all
Christians must put on this Ephod above all their other garments of their good
works, be they never so perfect: And in this respect also they may be called
Kings and Priests. Then Goliath his sword must not be placed before the Ephod,
or lapt up with the Ephod, but lapt up in a cloth behind the Ephod: So the
Cross is not to be made equal with Christ, as the Papists have made it, but
to be placed behind the Ephod lapt in a cloth, that is, as a reverend and
sacred thing to be accounted of. So that this estimation of the sign of the
Cross (for there is a mutual relation between the sign and the thing
signified) makes nothing for Popery.

As concerning the testimonies of the Scriptures, which concern these points
of doctrine, which are handled in this Treatise, in some places I allege them
not, because I have handled them else where, in the exposition of the Epistle
of Saint Jude. And I have here alleged the sayings of many of the Romish
Writers, whom they call Catholics: In translating of whose sayings, I protest
I have used as great faithfulness as can be; and that I have many times stuck
so unto the letter, that I have lost the grace of the sense. Thus fare thou
well good Christian Reader, and the Lord Jesus give thee a right judgment and
understanding in all things.

Thine in the Lord, FRANCIS TRIGGE.

Faults escaped amend thus.
Page 25. line 36. for son, read, sum of all Hammashe. p. 94. l. 8. merit. r.
mercy. p. 96 l. 37. put out only. page 103 in margin. Dom. 18. post, etc. r.
Dom. 8. page ibid. l. 33. works. r. worlds. p. 133. add in margin. De orat.
and med. die Lunae p. 148. l. 31. r. that they may, etc. p. 160. l. 25. now. r.
not. p. 161. l. 11. add, says. p. 163. l. 20. after declared. r. often
deceived. p. 174. l. 4. means, r. names. p. 187. l. 30. the, r. this. p. 227.
in margin. cap. 40. r. cap. 4. p. 242. lin. 5. It is not, r. Is it not. p. 247.
l. 26. count. r. cannot, p. 255. in margin. add, Ferus in Acta Apost. cap. 1.
p. 293. lin. 33. carried. r. cured. p. 307 l. 8. dele, four. p. 326. l. 4 dele
the first in. p. 342. l. 13. ^o. r. to. p. 370. l. 36. as, r. is. p. 441. l.
29. r. Lash vak. 462. l. 21. r. Banah. p. 577. l. 8, r. Stater, p. 585. l. 3.
r. out of their. etc. p. 586. in margin. word. r. world.

THE TRVE CATHOLIQVES Alphabet, or A. B. C. taken out of Saint Ierom.
OOR Savior Christ in the gospel, Mat. 10.1.11.1. Luke, 6.13.
often calls all those which followed him, Disciples; that is, Scholars: now
the first thing that a scholar must learn, is his Alphabet. And that
Christians might have as it were an Alphabet to learn, the holy ghost has put
down that also in many places of the scriptures. First in the 119. Psalm: Of
which Psalm, every part begins in the Hebrew with a letter, as they are
placed in order in the Alphabet: Gra. lib. 1. Deuot. cap. 5.
nay that Psalm contains in it (as some have noted) the word Law or
Testimony, almost in every verse: To the end no doubt, that every Christian
should be a scholar, and learn that Psalm. It is very easy, it is even
milk for children. The Proverbs of Solomon also end with an Alphabet: they are
also short and fit lessons, for young beginners in the Lords school to learn.
The Lamentations of Jeremy have four Alphabets in them: as Ierom notes in the
preface of the Lamentations. And he expounds every letter of the Hebrew
Alphabet very excellently in that place, to every Christians comfort and
edification; teaching therein which is the true Church, and which teaches her
children the true Alphabet: which I have set down here as thy Alphabet (good
Christian Reader) if thou will be Christ's and S. Ieroms scholar.

Even as (says he) in our writings we cannot come to read and spell the
words, unless we begin at the elements or letters: Ieron. in praef. Lam. 1.
so in the Scriptures we cannot know the greater matters, unless we begin at
the moral precepts contained in them. According as the Prophet says, By thy
commandments I get understanding: that is, after his good works he got the
understanding of secrets. But now I must fulfill your request (says he) to
Eusebius, that I may expound every letter and the meaning thereof.

Aleph, signifies learning; Beth, a house; Gimel, fullness or plenty; Daleth,
a Gallerie or boards; Ista or ^aec.
He, those; Vau, and Zain, these; Ceth, life; Teth, goodness: Iod, a
beginning; Caph, a hand; Lamed, of learning, or of the heart; Mem, of them;
Nun, everlasting; Samech, help; Gnain, a fountain or eye; Pe, a mouth, and
not a bone; Tsadi, of righteousness; Koph, a vocation; Resh, of the head;
Shin, of the teeth; Tau, signs. And here mark well, least thou be deceived
with the ambiguity of the letters (for there are many of them, one very like
another.)

After the exposition of the letters, now the order of the understanding and
meaning of them is to be showed. The first connection of them is, Aleph, Beth,
Gimel, Daleth, that is, doctrine, a house, fullness, of boards. Because the
doctrine of the Church which is the house of God, is fully and plentifully
found, in the fullness and plenty of the holy scriptures. The second
connection is of, He, Vau, Zain, Ceth, that is, those and these be life: for
what life can there be else, without the knowledge of the scriptures, by which
Christ himself is known, who is the life of the faithful? The third
connection has, Teth and Iod, that is, a good beginning, because that although
now we know all things which are written; yet we know but in part; (...) now we
see, as it were thorough a glass darkely: but when as ^^e shall be accounted
worthy to be with Christ, and shall be like the Angels; then we shall need
books no more. The fourth connection has Caph, Lamed, that is, the hand, of
the heart, or of discipline. The hand is meant in working, the heart and
discipline, is meant in understanding; because we can do nothing, unless we
first know what we must do. The fifth connection has, Mem, Nun, Samech, that is
of these we have an everlasting help. This needs no exposition, but is
clearer then the sun: that by the scriptures, everlasting helps are ministered
to the faithful. The sixth connection has Gnain, Pe, Tsadi: that is, the
fountain or the eye, of the mouth, of righteousness: agreeing with that we
have expounded in the third number. The seventh connection, which is the last
(that there may be also a secret meaning or mystery in the number of seven)
has, Koph, Resh, Shin, Tau, that is, the calling, of the head, the signs and
the teeth. By the teeth, a distinct voice is formed; and by these signs we go
to the head of all, which is Christ: by whom we come to the kingdom of heaven.
Now have we added these things (says Ierom) that we might instruct the Reader,
that these things were not in vain set down of the Prophet, according to the
laws and order of the letters, but all things which are written do belong to
the mysteries of Christ and his Church.

If this be the true meaning of the Hebrew Alphabet, by Saint Ieroms judgment,
and as it were also an Alphabet of Christian Religion, which belongs to Christ
and his church; and that she is the true church, which teaches her children
the same: then surely the church of Rome, is not the true church, which does
not teach her children this Alphabet: nay which teaches doctrine quite
contrary to this; that the fullness of Christian doctrine is not contained in
the scriptures; that lay men may have life without the knowledge of the
scriptures, and that they may do such good works, as please God, without the
knowledge of them; that they are not helpers but hinderers of their salvation,
and the very fountains of heresies.

But the scriptures are, by Saint Ieroms judgment, the very beginning and
first step to Christianity, and that in heaven we shall not need them: but
here we do; and that no man can do any thing well, unless he know first
what he must do. And no doubt his meaning is, that he ought to have this
knowledge out of the scriptures, and that they are not authors of heresies, but
everlasting helpers to our salvation, and contain in them plentifully all the
doctrine which is necessary for the Church.

Surely it appears by this, that the Church of Rome teaches not her children,
the very first step to heaven and this good beginning: and therefore she is
Antichrists Synagogue, and the mother of perdition, by Ieroms judgment; and
that without Gods great mercy she endangereth the salvation of her children.
Master Bellarmine in his Hebrew Grammar yeeldes the meaning of every Hebrew
letter, and also makes mention of Saint Ieroms exposition here declared: but
belike it pleased him not, he puts down another of his own.

The true Catholics Pater noster or Lords prayer, expounded briefly by Saint
Augustine.
Ench. ad Laur. cap. 114.
CVrsed is every one (as the holy scriptures witness) that puts his trust in
man. And by this also, whosoever shall trust in himself, is within the
compass of this curse. And therefore we are to desire of none other but of
God, whatsoever we hope, either to do well, or to obtain by our good deeds.
Therefore in Saint Matthewes Gospel the Lords prayer seems to contain in it
seven petitions: in three whereof, eternal things are desired; and in the
other four, temporal things: but yet such, as are necessary to the obtaining
of those heavenly things. For when as we say: Hallowed be thy name; Thy
kingdom come; let thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: All which
petitions some have very conveniently understood, that we shall keep them in
our body and soul altogether world without end; and that here being but as it
were begun in us (how greatly soever we shall profit in them) they are but
increased in us, but (that which we all hope for) being perfected, in another
life we shall enjoy them for ever.

But that we say, Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; and lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil: who sees not, but that these do belong
to the necessities of this present life? Therefore in that everlasting life,
where we hope we shall be for ever, both the sanctification of the name of God,
and his kingdom, and his will shall remain in our souls perfectly and
everlastingly. But it is therefore called our Daily bread, because that here it
is necessary for us, in as much as it is to be given both to our souls and
bodies, whether it be understood, either corporally or spiritually, or both
ways. Here also is that Forgiveness which we desire; where also is all
forgiveness of sins: Here also are those Temptations, which either allure or
move us to sin: Here also is that Evil, from which we desire to be
delivered. But there, that is in heaven; there are none of all these. The
Evangelist Saint Luke in the Lords prayer makes mention not of seven, but of
five petitions: neither does he for all that, dissent from Saint Matthew: but
by his brevity, he teaches us how these seven are to be understood. The name
of God is sanctified in spirit: And the kingdom of God, shall come at the
resurrection of the flesh: therefore Saint Luke, showing that the third
petition, is but as it were a repetition of the two former; by omitting that,
would teach us thus much. Then he adds the other, of our daily bread and
remission of sins, and of eschuing temptation: but that which Saint Matthew
has last: but deliver us from evil, that he has not mentioned, that we might
understand that it belonged to that other, which Saint Matthew spoke of
concerning temptation. And therefore Saint Matthew says, but deliver us: he
does not say, and deliver us: showing it to be but one petition. He did not say
that, I say; but this: that every one might know, that then they are delivered
from evil, if they were not led into temptation. Thus far Augustine.

In this short sum of the Lords prayer, every true Catholic may learn
these lessons. First to make al their prayers to God alone, if they mind to be
blessed and not accursed: as saint Austen here plainly teaches. And that this
prayer contains in it seven petitions, three whereof are for heavenly things,
and four for the things of this present life. And the first three by Saint
Austens judgment, we must begin to learn here in this life, and that although
we learn them never so well and pray for them all our life; yet we shall
never perfectly learn them as long as we live here: they shall be only
perfectly learned in heaven. How far then shall those be from learning these
lessons, which all their lives never knew what they meant; which said
Paternoster in Latin, in a tongue they understood not?

We may learn here also out of Austen, that all remission of sins, is in
this life: and therefore that there is no remission of sins (as the Papists
teach now) in the life to come: And therefore the Popes pardons and purgatory
are nothing worth. Every true Catholic must learn here out of Austen, that
all remission of his sins, is to be had in this life: and that after his
death, to give any thing whereby to hope to be relieved, is in vain. Again
here we may learn, to reconcile Matthew and Luke; and not to think, that
every thing that seems contrary at the first sight, is contrary. These two
Evangelists, though they seem to disagree; yet they agree most excellently,
as Saint Austen teaches. Thus much S. Austen teaches all Catholics in this
brief sum of the Lords prayer.

But to come more particularly to it; and to handle every part thereof: these
good lessons briefly and daily every true Catholic may learn out of it,
being said in English, which by the latin Pater noster, they could never have
learned.

First when as they say: Our Father: by these words they may learn, that God
is now their father, and therefore loves them, and cares for them; yea and that
so dearly, as that in comparison of his great love and care, which he has of
them; our savior Christ says, Mat. 23.9.
Call no man father now upon earth: for there is but one your father which is
in heaven. All the fathers in the world, love not their children so dearly,
nor are so careful for them, as God our heavenly father is for every one,
even the meanest of us that be his children; even for poor Lazarus. And this
also was the first lesson our Savior taught his after his resurrection; when
as he appeared first of all others to Marie Magdalen, who continued weeping at
his Sepulcher, when as Peter and John were gone home again. Io. 20.15.17.
A special and a comfortable lesson, how all true penitent sinners shall find
Christ, even now also after his ascension. Go (says he) and tell my brethren,
and say unto them: I ascend to my father, and to your father: to my God, and
to your God: Oh happy news; the gladdest tidings, that ever was brought to
men! And this is the fruit of Christ's passion. To purchase this for us, he
endured all those torments. This we should most assuredly believe, and ever
have this opinion of God; and ever carry this in our minds: This is a
comfortable lesson. This should make us forsake our old Pater noster: if we
should have said it all our life long, it could never have taught us thus much.
This should make us fear nothing. This should make us trust in God, in all our
dangers: and to come to him boldly and with great confidence, even as children
are wont to do to a most loving father, in all our necessities. The
forgetfulness of this, Mat. 6.32.
causes us often to begin to sink, as Peter did, when he saw a great wave of
the sea coming against him. Mat. 14.30.


Secondly we may learn by this, that if we account God our father, then also
we should account one another as brethren, and so deal with them, as with
brethren. He is a common father to us all; so we should be all, as brethren one
to another: and it is greatly to be feared, that at this day, that the lack
of this natural and brotherly love amongst our selves, makes God withdraw
this his fatherly love and care from us. Will thou not account the poor, thy
brethren? and deal with them, as with brethren? Surely then God will not be
thy father. Oh what a loss is this! We had better make leases of our lands for
nothing, nay leese all the goods in the world, then leese this. Mat. 16.26.


Which art in heaven.] Here is his Majesty declared unto us: we have a mighty
father, a father of the greatest majesty in the world. The wind, the rain,
the thunder, that comes from heaven, how mighty, how terrible, how forcible
are they? But our father, whose dwelling is in heaven, 1. King. 8.27.
naie whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain, is of far greater might.
These are but his servants: as the Psalmist says: Psalm. 104.4.
He makes the spirits or winds, his messengers: and his servants, the flames
of fire. He is most terrible when he is angry; Psalm. 18.7.2.12
yea if his anger be kindled but a little. Oh let us fear him: let us not
sin presumptuouslie, even the smallest sins. He is most merciful, Psalm.
19.13.
where he loves: Oh let us pray unto him: he is able to help; Heb. 10.26.
Psalm. 103.8.
let us trust in him. Let us not think that the darkness or any worldly
pretense whatsoever can cover or hide our sins. Ps 94.9, 139.1.
The sun which is but a little advanced in the heavens, we see how his
beams will pierce into every corner, much more the power of our God, which
dwells above all the heavens: his eyes, his brightness, his majesty is in
every place.

Hallowed be thy name.] We will not name the Emperor, nor any king, nor any
mean gentleman, without reverence, 1. Tim. 1.17. Psalm. 138.2.
and without his titles. We cannot see God, he is invisible: he has only
given us his name, here amongst us, to see how we will use it. Hereby are we
tried: as we account of his name; so we account of him: as we esteem it; so we
esteem himself. Let it be of the greatest account amongst us, above the names
of all Kings and Princes: let it be our greatest jewel: let us always use it
most reverently and holilie. Let here all Ruffians, and Atheists, and
blasphemous swearers, and perjured persons, quake and tremble, that make so
light account of the name of God. This is such a sin, that now, although they
make light account thereof; yet God has told them most plainly in his law
(which if they were not stark deaf they would mark and remember) that he
that committes it, Psalm. 58.4.
he will not account him guiltless, but at that great day of judgment (when
as he will pardon other sins) he will most assuredly condemn this. Exodus
20.7.


Thy kingdom come.] who, having land purchased for him, would not long to be
in the possession of it? who being an apprentice, would not gladly be at
liberty? who hearing his son to be a King, Genesis 45.27.28
would not now gladly make haste to go to see him? Did not Jacob (think you)
when as he heard, that Joseph his son was a Prince in Egypt, think every
day a year, till he were with him? Such are all our estates here in this
world: we have not great lands or possessions purchased for us; but even a
kingdom: yea and that such a kingdom, as far surpasses all the kingdoms
and monarchies of the world: Reu. 1.6.
who would not desire to be in the possession of such a kingdom? who would not
long to see it? we are here all apprentices, watching and many times wanting,
and ever warring and laboring. Who would not gladly be at liberty, Job. 7.1.
be delivered from this bondage, and be in franchised into that city, where
there is not want, nor watching, nor warring, Reu. 21.4.
nor laboring: but joy, rest, peace, plenty and freedom for evermore. We do
not only hear good news as Jacob did, that our son is a Prince in Egypt;
but that we our selves are made Kings and Priests by the means of Jesus
Christ, Reu. 1.6. 1. Pet. 2.9.
and that of the kingdom of heaven; and that we are now fellow heirs with
him. 1. Co. 3.21.22 Romans 8.17.
This is the sum of the Gospel. This is our joyful news. And did Jacob
make have to go into Egypt; and shall not we hasten to our heavenly kingdom?
O we of little faith! Reu. 22.17.
and therefore in the Revelation the spirit and the spouse say: Come Lord Jesus.
As though they should say, Come Lord Jesus, and end this our apprentiship:
finish this our pilgrimage: give us now possession of that kingdom, which we
believe that thou have purchased for us. And it is all one with that our
Savior here teaches us to pray: O Lord let thy kingdom come. Jacob was not
so sure of his son Joseph's kingdom in Egypt, nor any apprentice is so sure,
after his years expired, of his freedom, nor any purchaser of the lands he
has purchased; as we are sure of this our kingdom, Mark. 16.16. 1. Ioh. 5 13.
Mat. 5.18.
our liberty, our heavenly inheritance. The Gospel witnesses it unto us: it
assures us thereof. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but one tittle or jot
thereof shall not pass away: And therefore being thus assured we say boldly,
let thy kingdom come: and therefore as Saint Paul teaches, We groan and
sigh for that great day of our deliverance out of this bondage, and
apprentiship, with all the creatures of God, Romans 8.22.
which also groan with us; that they may be delivered also, into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God. And thinking therefore of that great day of
judgment, which is terrible to all Infidels, wicked persons, and Idolaters,
Psalm. 97.7. Esaias. 2.20.
( Confounded at that day (says David) and let them hide their faces, all
such as worship carved Images, and delight in vain gods. Reu. 9.20.
And to David agrees Esaias and S. John. Let all papists mark this.) then we
are not dismaide: but lift up our heads, because we know then that our
redemption draws near. Luke. 21.28.


We pray also (O Lord) let thy kingdom come: Romans 6 12.
let not sin reign in our bodies: let us not delight in it: let us not
submit our selves unto it: let not the law of our members, Romans 7.23.
which many times is so imperious, and with authority even commands, and with
necessity forces us, that we must needs do this or that: let not this law
(O good Lord) ever prevail against us; Ephesians. 5.18.
but be thou our king: Let thy holy spirit ever bear rule in our hearts:
Psalm. 2.6. Romans 8.14. Psalm. 119. 105. Ioh. 18.12.
let thy most holy law be a lantern to our ways, and a light to our paths,
in whatsoever we shall go about, or take in hand. We say, O good Jesus, which
for our sakes was content to be bound with coards: give us also grace, that
we may be bound with the coards and commandments of thy law; and that we
cast them not away as the wicked do: who said, Let us break their bonds in
sunder, and cast away their coards from us. Psalm. 2.3.


Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Psalm. 19.5.
] The sun every day, as we see, runned his most swift and steep race
without weariness: The earth yields not only her flowers to delight us, but
her fruits also to feed us; yea she opens her very bowels to do us good:
the seas and the waters also never stand still; Genesis 4 9. Ier. 5.12.
in the beginning they received a law, that they should keep them within their
bounds, and not cover the face of the earth, 1. Kin. 17.4.
against their nature; and yet even to this day they obeie it: God commanded
the greedy Ravens to feed Elias, and they obeyed his commandment: To
conclude, all creatures obeie the will and commandments of God: only man, Esaias
1.3.
who is of all others most bound to him, and for whom he has done most, is
most disobedient. The Angels and those mighty powers, which excel in strength
(as David says) are ready at his beck and do his commandments: only man a
vile worm dare presume to rebel against him, Psalm. 103.20.
and to disobey him. Job. 17.14.
O let us not only pray thus: but also labor, study and endeavor with all
our might, and maine, that the will of this our loving and most mighty father,
may be done, as well in earth as in heaven. It is a shame for sons, that
servants should go beyond them in dutifulness and obedience toward their
father: Mal. 1.6.
Ephesians. 3.20.
it is a shame for men endewed with reason, naie enriched and strengthened with
Gods spirit that unreasonable creatures should excel them, in dutifulness and
obedience to their maker and creator. And let us for Gods sake learn to bridle
our own wills, our own natures. The earth does so, as S. Paul teaches us,
Romans 8.20.
and against the will thereof, is subject to our vanities, for him that has
subdued it through hope. It would never suffer us else (cruel, covetous, and
vain men) not so much as to tread on it, and wickedly and vainelie to abuse
it: It would swallowe us up quick, Number. 16.31.
as it did Corah, Dathan and Abiram. The sea does so also: or else we should
have no houses to dwell in, nor lands to let. Psalm. 104.9.
Let us also, in our vain, curious and stately buildings of our houses, and in
letting our lands also, bridle our covetous, cruel and uncharitable wills.
These great and mighty and excellent creatures do bridle and contain their
own natures at Gods commandment (as we see and yet man will not bridle his
nature for Gods sake: he will have his will. Let all men learn to pray and
practice also, be it never so unpleasant or unprofitable unto them, that prayer
of our blessed Savior: Luke, 22.42.
Not my will, but thy will be done, O Father.

Give us this day our daily bread] What may we learn by these words? surely
that the best and richest of us all, are but beggars before the majesty of
God. It may be truly said to every one of us: 1. Cor. 4.7.
what have thou, that thou have not received? We must not be ashamed to beg
of God ever our daily bread. We have not so much of our own as a shiue of
bread: and yet we proud peacocks, the sons of Adam, how proud are we? how
deal we in the world? how do we account of our selves? as though we were
lords of all things. Psalm. 12.4.
We say in our dealings, with the wicked: 1. Sam. 25.10.
who is Lord over us? So we live, so we deal in all our earthly affairs: we
say with Naball, who is David? and who is the son of Ishai? There are many
servants now adays, that break away every man from his Master: shall I then
take my bread, and my water, and my flesh, that I have killed for my shearers
and give it unto men, whom I know not whence they be? This Naball is a right
pattern of a worldling: he will not know his brethren; he forgets that we have
all one father: he can find excuses enough, when he will not do good; as all
the wicked do, to make empty the hungry soul, Esaias, 32.6. He accounts all
his, my bread, and my water, and my flesh (says he:) so do all worldlings,
they forget that they are to beg of God, even their daily bread. Such poor
beggars they are indeed, how rich soever they seem in their own eye; yet
they account all their own. Nay the more to condemn this hard dealing of
worldlings toward the faithful and Gods children, be they never so base and
poor: that saying of David also concerning Naball is now verified in these
rich worldlings: ver. 21.
Truly I have kept in vain all this man's cattle in the wilderness (says
David) and not any thing that belonged to him perished, and he has requited me
evil for good. No doubt even now for the godly and poores sakes, God
preserues the lives and all the goods and cattels of the rich and wicked men:
and yet they will deal hardly with them. Is he a good man, and the servant of
God, that thou dealest withal whosoever art rich? deal well with him. Think
verily, that for his sake, God will preserve thy life, and all that thou have.
Genesis 18.32.
Remember how that if there had been ten good men found in all Sodom, it
had not been destroyed: And how that God blessed Putiphar (no doubt a profane
man) for Joseph's sake: 39 2.
and God gave Saint Paul all their lives that sailed with him. Act. 27.24.
Deal well with Gods children, which are in need and fly to thee for
succor, whosoever have this worlds goods. Know this assuredly, that as David
here preserved Naball, and his cattle: so shall these preserve thee and all
thine. 1. Sam. 25.37.
And as in the end his churlishness to poor David killed him; so be thou
afraid of his end.

Let us not forget that lesson which Peter teaches us, 1. Pet. 4 7.
that live now in the end of the world: Now the end of all things is at hand
(says he) Be ye therefore sober and watching in prayer: but above all things,
have fervent love amongst your selves: for love shall cover the multitude of
sins. Be harborous one to another, without grudging. Men in those days, (as
should seem) would make no conscience, to turn their brethren out of doors,
or to keep their gates shut, that none might come in, at them. They do not
fulfill that same general law of all christendom, Mat. 7.12.
and of all christians: Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you; the
same do you unto them. The which law, our Savior Christ commends with these
two notable commendations: This is the Law and the Prophets: as though he
should say, this is in one word, the sum of all, which Moses in all his
laws, and the Prophets teach in all their sermons: and shall we not obey it?
And Peter adds as a spur unto it: Let every man, as he has received the
gift; so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold
graces of God. This lesson concerns us that live in the end of the world. It
should seem, that the holy ghost did foresee, how that men in the end of the
world, should forget themselves and should take too much upon them (as many do
at this day) and therefore gives us this lesson: We deal here in the world
now, as though we were Lords; let us remember, we are but stewards of the
manifold graces of God, and not Lords of them. The covetous Landlorde thinks
not so, who thinks he may let his lands, as dear as he list. The cruel
usurer thinks not so, who thinks he may choose whether he will lend or no;
unless he have good usury for his loan. So likewise, the covetous
practicioners in every art and profession, either in law or in physic,
think not so; which do not pass what they gain by their brethren: to whom
(as the common proverb is) all is fish that comes to the net. All these do
not remember, that they are but stewards of the graces of God, which they have
received: if they remembered this, no doubt they would deal more charitably
with their brethren.

Secondly, we may learn hereby to be content with simple fare, Luke. 16.19.
and not to fare daintily every day with Dives that rich man: not to loathe
fish, as many do at this day: (they cannot away with fish, Aug. de Mirab.
scripturae. lib. 1. cap. 4. Mat. 14.17.15.34. Ioh. 21.13.
they must have flesh: But our Savior loathed them not. The most of his meat
that we read of was fish, and after his resurrection, he only did eat fish
and a honey comb:) and not to long for quails and such delicates, with the
Israelites. Remember that flesh was cursed in the beginning, and not fish. God
gave them their hearts desire: he gave them that they longed for; Psalm. 106.15.
but he sent leanness withal into their souls. And it is likewise now to be
feared amongst us, that many which do desire so daintilie to feed their
bodies, have lean souls. Nay the heavy wrath of God came upon them, Psalm.
78.30.
and slew the wealthiest of them, and they died with the meat in their
mouths. This should make all rich men beware of riot and dainty fare. Let us
learn that lesson of the Apostle: Having (...), not (...), 1. Tim. 6.8.
that is, such things as will nourish the body and not delicates; and (...);
that is, garments, to cover us and keep us from the cold, not ornaments to
set us out, and to make us fine: let us be therewith content. This lesson he
gives to all Christians. The forgetfulness of this lesson (our dainty fare,
our excess in apparel and our stately buildings) and these three makes most
men have such lean souls, such empty purses, and such nigardlie houses. God
resists the proud (says Saint James: Iam. 4.6.
) and can the proud thrive or prosper then? Many evils and miseries remain
for them that live in the latter days (says Esdras) because they shall walk
in great pride: 1. Esd. 8.50.
No doubt all the evils which are now in the world, and whereof every man
complains, comes of this root: If the flowers annoy us; let us pluck up the
root. And I would to God, all Christians would here also learn another lesson
of our Savior, as necessary for us at this day, as that other: It was the
last lesson that ever he taught his Apostles before his passion, after supper,
as Saint John records; Ioh. 13.3.
when as he knew that the Father had put all things into his hands: Our most
blessed Savior put off his garments and girded himself with a towell, and
washed his Disciples feet; and after he had done, he says unto them: Do you
know what I have done unto you? verse, 17.
If I your Lord and Master have washed your feet, you ought also one to wash
another feet. For I have given you an example, that you should do even as I
have done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the servant is not greater
then his Master; neither the Ambassador greater then he that sent him: If you
know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them. There is no one thing at this
day, that makes all men to deal so hardly with their brethren in all their
affairs, as this; to maintain their estates: for this they rack and wring
(as they say) and pinch their brethren. But they have not learned this lesson
of their Savior, to do their brethren good: they must make no account of
their states. Did he respect his estate, when as he washed his Apostles feet?
No verily. And he teaches all his this lesson: Verily, verily (says he) the
Disciple is not greater then his Master. And he urges this lesson with a
double oath: and shall we not mark it? shall we not learn it? will we be
greater then our Master? will we respect our estates? O proud and rebellious
servants! O proud and vile worms! O wonderful humility of my redeemer (says
one) that would so humble himself, and stoop down, even to poor fishers,
naie even to a traitor. If Jesus Christ had respected his estate, we had all
been damned: And shall we respect ours, and to maintain that, pinch our
brethren? we are none then of Christ's scholars. Let us remember what he says
unto us: If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. Then accursed
are they (no doubt) which know these things and do them not. Neither did he
forget himself when as he did this: But knowing (says Saint John) that all
things were given into his hands of the Father: therefore how great, how
worshipful, how honorable soever thou art, let not this thy estate hinder
thee, to do thy brother good. Genesis 3.21.
We are thou rather a leather coat with thy great Grandfather Adam; and dwell
in a tent with thy father Abraham, 13.18. Iud. 4.5.
or under a Palm tree with Deborah, a Princess and noble Lady in Israel;
and eat that homely, but heavenly food, which the Angel brought Elias, 1.
King. 19.6.
a cake and water, and pulse with Daniel; Dan. 1.12.
then to maintain thy estate, and pinch thy brother, gorgious and costly
apparel; curious and stately buildings, delicate and dainty fare. Remember who
these were: Adam was the honourablest that ever was; Abraham the father of all
the faithful; Deborah a Princess, a great lady in Israel; Daniel and Elias
great Prophets: and yet by this their simplicities, their dignities were not
impaired. We err greatly: we think now adays that honor, estimation and
worship consists in outward things, in apparel, in houses, and such like: no
no; it consists in the virtues of the mind; as even the very Philosophers
could teach. Adam was more honorable in his leather coat, then Dives in his
purple and fine linen: Abraham in his tent, then Ahab in his Iuorie house:
good king Josiah in his simple palace and little windows, Ier. 22.14.15.
then his proud and covetous son Iechonias, in his sieled parlours and great
windows: Daniel with his pulse, then Balthazar with his costly banquet. Dan.
5.1.


Let us ever remember our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, how that he made no
account of his estate, to profit us: Naie let us remember what he did; how he
washed his Apostles feet, and he commanded us to do the like: that is, to do
any thing that we are possibly able, for our brethren. For this his most
humble service contains in it all duties and services whatsoever; even as the
greater measure contains the lesser, the quart the pint. But do we at this
day wash our brethrens feet? Naie we thrust them over the shoes (as they
say) naie over the ears, into great sorrows and cares, by our excessive
rents and paiments, to maintain our pride: so that as David complains, Psalm.
69.
the waters enter even now into their souls.

Let us remember also that same rich man, who (neglecting his brother) was
clothed in Purple and fine linen; and fared delicatelie every day: but when
he died he went to hell for his labor. It is an old saying and a true:
Happy is he whom other men's harms do make to beware: let us beware, least
that if we follow his steps in our life, we do not lodge with him at our
deaths.

That same Meditation of Granatensis is worth the marking. Med. lib. 3. Med. 1.
O man (says he) made of clay! why art thou proud? Why art thou arrogant? O
dust! why delightest thou in praise? O ashes! whose conception is sin; birthe
a punishment; life a continual toil; and death an extreme necessity; why
do thou so daintily nourish thy body? Why do thou clothe it with such
costly garments? which within a while shall be devoured of worms in the
grave. Why do thou not rather adorn and make trim thy soul with good
works, which shall be presented before the majesty of God in heaven, by the
hands of Angels? Why do thou make so light account of thy soul, and set so
much by thy body? O great shame, and all things quite out of order! The soul
which ought to bear rule, is servant to the flesh; and the flesh which ought
to be the servant, she is the Mistress. Why do thou suffer that the
mistress should become the servant, and that the servant should take upon her
the authority of the mistress? Do thou not know, that the flesh is a privy
enemy to the soul, who under a fair show of friendship, is more cruelly set
against thee, then the cruellest enemy thou have in the world? when thou
cherishest and makes much of her, thou set up an enemy against thy self:
when thou pampers and adornes her, thou armest thine enemy, to cut thine
own throat: when thou clothest her with costly garments and outlandish
furs, thou spoilest thy soul of all heavenly ornaments. Thus far
Granatensis. I would to God these Meditations could sink into our hearts.

Thirdly, we may learn here to pray daily, Rejoice in the Lord always
(says the Apostle) pray continually, 1. These. 5.16.17.18.
and in all things give God thanks. We must every day not forget to say:
Give us this day our daily bread: naie we must with David and Daniel even pray
thrice a day, if we will be good scholars in the Lords school. Psalm.
55.17. Dan. 6.10.
In the Morning, and in the Evening, and at mid day I will pray, and that
instantly (says David:) and thou shall hear my voice: and Daniel (his window
being open toward Jerusalem) he kneeled on his knees three times a day, and
prayed and praised his God, as he did before time. Oh holy custom! many are
very precise, they will keep their old customs, they will do, as they have
been wont to do: but I would to God, they would learn here this good
custom of Daniel, and that they would pray thrice a day; and that they
would learn that good custom also to kneel when they pray, which custom
now very many have forgotten.

We must pray, Give us this day our daily bread, we are taught hereby also
not to be over covetous of these worldly goods. We must not be like that
other rich man, Luke, 12.16.
who made him greater barnes, and said to his soul, now soul be at rest, thou
have laid up for thee in store, for many years. Many at this day draw nigh
to this covetous rich man, by their overmuch providence and worldy carfulness
for themselves, and their children. They need not say, Give us this day our
daily bread; they have laid up in store for many years; as this covetous rich
worldling had. They are so careful for their children, that they will leave
nothing to do for them. Eral. apophth.
Alexander being a youth, when as he heard that Philip his father had conquered
many countries and cities, wept: And being demanded why he did so, seeing that
all should be his; he answered, that his father would leave nothing for him to
do. This mind was in him being a child, that he would do some thing
himself. I would to God it were now the minds of some fathers, that they
would leave some thing also, for their sons to do: that they would try
them, how they would use the talent God had bestowed upon them: that they would
leave God some thing to do for them also. God will not have his so covetous,
so careful; he will have them always depend of him; he will have them be
beholden to him.

And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
By this we are taught to be ready, to forgive the trespasses of our brethren
done to us. Every day we offend God hainouslie, and if we will not forgive
our brethren, which in small trifles offend against us, but be severe in
punishing and revenging them, how can we hope for pardon our selves at Gods
hands, of our so many and so grievous sins? Especially seeing our Savior
has not only with our own mouths, made us say thus, that if we should not
do so, our own mouths might as it were condemn us: but also after this
prayer, he only repeates this again of all the other petitions, as a lesson
as should seem, that greatly concerned us, and that many would hardly learn:
Matthew. 6.14.
For if you do forgive men their trespasses (says he) your heavenly father
will also forgive you: But if you do not forgive men their trespasses, no more
will your heavenly father forgive you your trespasses. Mark, here is both the
affirmative and the negative, to make us learn this lesson. He strikes on
this nail (as should seem) with many strokes, to fasten it firmly in our
hearts: and yet it being so manifestly taught us, we our selves praying so,
our savior teaching it again, both affirmatiuelie and negatiuelie, and as it
were sounding it into both our ears, both into our right ear, and into our
left; yet how hardly will we learn it. We will say, we cannot forgive: O
stubborn, and disobedient, and deaf, and hard hearted Christians! can thou
not forgive? surely then thou shall never be forgiven. Thy blessed savior,
who cannot lie, tells thee so plainly in his Gospel: and will thou not
believe him? he tells thee so twice together; and will thou not hear him? Will thou spend thy goods, and thy time, and also thy life many times, in going to
law (which all thou might have employed far better otherwise) then in
seeking revenge against thy brother? God turn thy heart. If thou look ever to
have forgiveness at Gods hands, of thy so many and grievous sins: forgive
thy brother his small trifles, wherewith he sins against thee. O happy sin
(says one) that cancels such a great obligation! and another says, God has
put his mercy into thine own hands. Forgive, and thou shall be forgiven: if
thou lack Gods mercy, thou may thank thy self thereof. If this lesson
were thoroughly learned; so many Nisi-prices (as they call them) so many
vain suites and quarrels, more now adays, then ever have been; would not be
in the world. Now there is no forgiveness: we all say now, I will do to him
as he has done to me: I will be even with him. But Solomon the wisest that
ever was, a good counselor if thou will be ruled by him, bids thee not say
so, and he gives thee that lesson twice in his Proverbs, Pro. 20.21. and 24.29.
mark it well. But thou will say: may I not go to law then? I answer thee
with Peter; 1. Pet. 2.21.22.
Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his
steps, who did no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth; who
when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered (even slanderous
speeches and the very spoiling of his garments) he threatened not: but committed
his cause to him that judges righteously (that is to God.) Art thou then
reviled and slandered? nay are thy goods taken wrongfullie from thee? naie even
thy coat from thy back? even in this case Peter bids thee follow the example
of thy Savior. He committed his cause to God: No not here in this ease he
appealed to any Magistrate. And the Apostle to the Hebrews of the first
Christians writes thus: Heb. 10.34.
That they suffered with joy, even the very spoiling of their goods: knowing in
themselves, that they had a better and an enduring substance. And this is that
which S. Paul also teaches all Christians: 1. Cor. 6.7.
Now verily without all doubt, (...), there is (...), a defect or want, an
imperfection, among you, that you go to law one with another: why do ye not
rather suffer wrong? As though he should say: To go to law is no sin, but
it is (...), a lower degree in Christianity. Why do ye not rather suffer
wrong? 1. Cor. 3.12. Ioh. 2 10.
this is a greater virtue: this is gold, the other is silver: this is wine,
the other is water: this is to sit on the right hand of Christ, Mat. 20.23.
Mat. 5.19.
the other on the left: this is to be great in the kingdom of heaven, the
other to be little. And in worldly affairs, we make this difference, we
prefer gold before silver: wine before water: the right hand before the
left: the chiefest room before the lowest: and shall we not do so also in
our heavenly? This is also that which the Apostle prays for the Philippians:
Phil, 1.9.
And this I pray (says he) that your love may abound yet more and more, in all
knowledge and judgment, that ye may try or discern what things differ among
themselves, what things are more excellent one then another, and that he may be
(...), that is, pure in judgment. There are things in Christianity that differ
one from another, even as there are also in the things of this life: And shall
we choose the worser? O foolish Christians! Let us learn to pray this prayer
of the Apostle, that we may be pure in judgment, that we be able to discern
as well in heavenly things as in our earthly affairs, what things excel.
There are diverse gifts of the holy Ghost; prophesying, speaking with diverse
toongs, 1. Cor. 12.29.
doing of miracles: But (says Saint Paul) do all prophecy? do all speak
with toongs? have all the gift of healing? Seek you earnestly for the most
excellent gifts: Ver. 31 c. 14.1.
and I show you a way that far excels all these: Pursue you after love,
even as dogs do after a wild beast. He that loves his brother, far
excelles him, that speaks and understands all languages, even the Greek and
Hebrew tongue; nay that speaks with the toongs of Angels; nay him that can do
all miracles, and even raise up dead men; nay him that is a Martyr, and gives
his body to be burned, without it: And shall we prefer a little vile earth,
a little money, a little pleasure of our own froward wills (by seeking
revenge) before this so excellent a virtue? O foolish judges and esteemers of
things!

Secondly, I safe here to these contentious persons, as our savior Christ said
to the Jews, who brought the woman to him that was taken in adultery, He that
is guiltless, Ioh. 8.7.
let him throw the first stone at her: So let him that needs crave no mercy
at Gods hands for his sins; seek to be revenged, and even with his brother.
But let all such well mark that saying of Ecclesiasticus: He that seeks
vengeance, Eccles. 28.1.2.
shall find vengeance of the Lord, and he will surely keep his sins.
Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done thee; so shall thy sins be
forgiven thee also, when thou prayest. That parable of the servant in the
Gospel, that owing his Master a thousand talents, Mat. 18.23.
and would not forgive his fellow servant an hundredth pence, who was therefore
condemned, confirms this doctrine of Ecclesiasticus: Luke, 6.37.
Forgive, and it shall be forgiven you (says our Savior.) Who is there now,
that knows either the Majesty of God, or the grieuousnesse and multitude of
his own sins, and what is due unto them, that will not gladly embrace and
accept of this condition offered him of God? If here on earth we were in any
man's debt; and he would be content to release us such a great debt for doing
him some such light service, for such a small trifle: how glad would we be:
how would we thank him? and shall we not do the like to God? In as much as ye
are able (says Saint Paul) live peaceably with all men, Romans 12.18.
not revenging your selves my beloved: but give place to anger. Shall I suffer
the wicked to escape unpunished then, says the malicious person? Yea, for
though thou forgive him, yet shall he not escape unpunished: For it is written
(says the Apostle) vengeance is mine, and I will revenge, says the Lord. If
thou shall seek revenge; then God will not revenge: but if thou forgive, with
Jesus Christ, and commit thy cause to God; then God will revenge thy cause: as
he did his cause, even forty years after, by overthrowing the common wealth
of the Jews, and at their solemn feast of their passover besieging them,
even as they then apprehended Christ; and by selling them even thirty for a
penie, as they sold him for thirty pence. So Amalecke pursued Israel when
they came out of Egypt, Exodus 17, 18.
now being weary, and wanting water, and faint: but in the days of king Saul
a great while after, 1. Sam. 15.2.
God remembered what Amalecke had done to Israel: and when as no doubt, both
the Israelites and the Amalekites had forgotten it, even then he remembered it
and revenged it.

Suffer thou wrong? then have thou patience, forgive thy brother freely,
commit thy cause to God; neither crave the magistrates sword: for what is that
but to seek revenge? and in the end, God shall revenge thy cause, as he did
Christ's, as he did Isreal's. And therefore to this purpose also Ecclesiastes
says. If in a country thou see the oppression of the poor, and the
defrauding of judgment and justice, be not astonished at the matter, either at
the will of God which suffers it, or at the froward will of the man that dare
do it: Eccl. 5.7.
For he that is higher then the highest of them, that do this injury (be
they never so high) marks it and regards it, and there be higher then they: Do
not thou so much as marvel at it, be not grieved there at in thy mind; let it
never trouble thee: for be sure God marks it, and if he mark it, he will also
surely revenge it. And also David in the Psalms says thus to the same
effect: Psalm. 10.14.
Thou have seen (O Lord) this oppression; and the sorrow of the poor man's
heart, thou respectest, to put the matter into thy hands, the poor will leave
it unto thee, thou have ever been a helper to the fatherless. God sees all
wrongs, and he sees also the sorrows of poor men's hearts, which no mortal
judge can see: therefore commit thy cause into his hands; he will give right
judgment. So we read that Jeremy did when the Jews sought his life: But thou,
O Lord of Sabbath (says he) who iudgest justly and triest the raines and
hearts: Ier. 11.20.21.
Let me see thy revenge upon them: for I have revealed my cause to thee. But
thou will say, I forgive my brother freely; but yet I will go to law with
him. Is this to forgive thy brother freely? This is as Ioab did, 2. Sam.
20.9.10
to embrace and kiss Amasa friendly with thy mouth, and to kill him with thy
hands. Is this to forgive, as thou would have God to forgive thee? Would
thou have God enter into judgment, and go to law with thee? Even as thou
would have God forgive thee, so freely ought thou to forgive thy
brother: As Saint Paul teaches, Coloss. 3. Cap. ver. 13. Forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another (if any man have a quarrel to another) even
as Christ forgave you, even so do ye.

Lastly, if so be thou will needs go to law, be sure that thou have ever
charity in thy heart. Ephesians. 4, 26.
For if the sun set on thine anger, thou give place to the devil, as Saint
Paul teaches thee. Oh that our quarrellers and contentious persons, which
delight in nothing, but in going to law, would remember this, and believe it; I
think it would make them make have to be friends with their brethren! Who
would set open the doors of his house but one night, for fear of robbing? And
shall we have less care of our souls? by our sleeping in malice or anger, we
set open the door of our souls to the devil, to enter into it, and to spoil
it of all heavenly virtues. There is no thief so watchful as he is, nor so
bloodthirstie, as saint Peter tells us: 1. Pet. 5.8.
He is like a roaring and raging lion, walking about continually to seek whom
he may devour. He will not only rob, but kill: And do thou not fear
him? Dare thou through thine anger toward thy brother, leave the door of
thy soul open unto him? Mat. 5.40.
see that according to thy saviors counsel, rather then thou would loose
this rich jewel of Christian charity, thou would loose both coat and
cloak, and lands and all.

Again by this petition we may learn, that we all are sinners. If we even
the Apostles of Christ (says Saint John, whom Jesus loved) shall say, Ioh.
13.23. 1. Io. 1, 8.
that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us:
And who is there then else, that must not say so? This lesson must humble us,
it must stop our mouths: it is like the Peacockes deformed feet, which when
she beholdes, she pluckes in her proud tail. This will make us pure in
spirit. Mat. 5.3.


And lead us not into temptation.] Gods grace is as it were a bridle to us,
without which we should stumble, and fall continually, even to the bottomless
pit of hell: without it, we cannot so much as think a good thought, nor
speak a good word, nor do a good work. It is like to the Oar of a boat;
without it, the boat wanders up and down the stream; it is carried hither and
thither: so vain and foolish likewise are all men's devises, if God guide them
not. And therefore we pray here, that God will not lead us into temptation;
that he will not take his grace from us, that he will not give us over unto
over selves; that he will not take this his bridle, Romans 1.24.
this his heavenly Oar from us; that he will guide us ever with his heavenly
grace, Romans 8.1.4.
and lead us with his holy spirit, least we incline our hearts and ears
unto vanity. Psalm. 119 37.52.11.
And this is that which David prays; O forsake me not, (O Lord my God) be not
far from me. And again: Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not
thy holy Spirit from me. And again: Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my
God: Let thy good spirit lead me into the land of righteousness. Psalm. 143.10.
King Saul may teach us, what we are without this good spirit of God: For thus
we read of him: 1. Sam. 18.10.
And on the morrow, the evil spirit of God came upon Saul, and he prophesied
in the midst of the house: and David played with his hand like as at other
times; and there was a spear in Saul's hand, and Saul took the spear and
said: I will smite David thorough to the wall. But David avoided twice out of
his presence. Mat. 26.33.34.
Peter the first Apostle also, when as God withdrew his good spirit from him,
denied his Master, and began to curse and to swear: although he before
(having Gods spirit) vowed that he would die with him. Leu. 26.36.
This may teach us, what we are of our selves, prone to all sin, more vain
then a leaf, which a small wind will move and make to quake: and therefore
we have need to pray continually: O Lord, lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from that evil.] That is, from the Devil: who tempted Jesus
our most blessed savior: and therefore no doubt will likewise tempt all his:
Mat. 4.1. Luke, 22.31. Luke, 17.5.
who desired to sift Peter even as wheat is sifted. And who is able to abide
this sifting? unless God give him the strength of faith, as he did to Peter. I
have prayed for thee (says he) that thy faith shall not fail. O let all
Christians pray also for themselves daily, for the increase of faith against
these his temptations, against these his siftings. So he sifted Job, Job.
1.12.2.5.11.
not only with the loss of his goods and children, but also with the grief
and torments of his body, and with the vexation of his friends. And here Job
is set down for an example to all Christians, by him to learn patience; as S.
James teaches them, Iam. 5.11.
and to endure lesser griefs and lesser losses, considering his end. Psalm.
30.5.
There is but a minute of an hour in Gods wrath (as David says:) but in his
favor are lives, as it is in the Hebrew, even a thousand lives and good
blessings. Nay Satan buffeted Paul, 2. Cor. 12. and 11.24.25.
and did so vex him in his flesh; that for that, to have it removed, Paul
prayed to the Lord thrice: No doubt it was a mighty temptation, that made
Saint Paul so earnestly desire to be delivered from it. He had sustained
shipwreck, he had been whipped often times, he had been stoned, he had been
in prison: but this grief, this temptation passed them all. But God answered
him, that his grace, his love, was sufficient for him. As long as God loved
him, (whereof these his troubles and afflictions were a most certain token) he
need care for nothing. And hereby also we may learn, that the multitude or
the sharpness of any afflictions whatsoever, ought not to move us. God loved
Paul in this extremity of afflictions, in this great affliction, which Paul
could very hardly endure; and therefore let no extremity of afflictions
dismaie any Christian, or make him doubt of the love of God toward him. David
also in the Psalm faith, I am troubled above measure, O Lord, Psalm. 119.107.
quicken me according to thy word: David being afflicted even above measure;
yet despaired not: he trusted and prayed to God. Again, if we shall pray with
Paul, and with David, and with the Woman of Canaan, and yet not perchance be
heard: let us not forsake God; let us continue in prayer still. Gran. lib. 2.
de orat. cap. 3. Med. ex Bar,
God will either give us our petitions, or that which is better for us. Saint
Paul he received of God this answer, this honey to sweeten that his bitter
potion: My grace, my love, is sufficient for thee: As though he should say;
If I love thee, what carest thou for else? Let satan buffet thee, vex thee,
torment thee, and do what he can against thee, if thou have my love it is
sufficient for thee. If thou loose all thy goods, it is riches enough for thee;
if thou endure all pains and griefs, it is comfort enough for thee; if thou
be wounded never so deadly, it is plaster enough for thee: Think only
this, that I love thee: and it shall be able to counteruaile all the pains,
and griefs, and losses in the world.

1. Pet. 5.8.
Be sober and watchful (says saint Peter) for your adversary the devil as
a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour, whom resist
steadfast in the faith. The diuelles study and daily practice is here declared
unto us: he goes about continually, and is malicious, like a Lion seeking
whom he may devour. He is a watchful, painful, spiteful, and blood
thirsty enemy: O be sober, and vvatch (says saint Peter.) If you exceed in
any thing, ye give him the advantage. The Papists even in this point err
mightily, and they disagree from saint Peter: they are not sober, they keep
no mean in their religion: they make the sacrament a god; they make the
blessed Virgin an angel, saying; that she was without sin: they also
decline too far from the use of this world, by teaching their wilful and
voluntary poverty. They exceed in the worshipping of saints, in making their
Images, and in worshipping them; as though this kind of honor pleased them:
naie in praying unto them; and yet they would make us believe that they give
not (...) unto them (as they call it) but (...). And is not prayer Latria? that
who sees not? They go also beyond all measure in whipping and scourging their
bodies: we never read in the scriptures that any of the saints did so. Paul
was whipped of others, but he never whipped himself. In the moderate use of
these, we would join with them; but their excess in these, with Peter we
condemn. Gods religion is called a reasonable service: Romans 12.1. (...)
Let all Christians be sober, and use a mean in all things. Mean things are
firm and sure; but huge things are tottering and unstable, as the common
Proverb is. Be fober therefore in your cares, in your apparel, in your fare;
exceed not herein with Dives that rich man, least with him ye be
overthrown. Watch in prayer: pray often. O deliver us from that evil one:
Remember that saying of David; Psalm. 56.9.
Whenever I call upon the Lord, then shall mine enemies be put to flight;
this I know, for God is on my side. Let us mark this lesson well, and who it
is also that tells it us: David was an old beaten soldier against this
enemy; he had often experienced this: This is as it were an armor of proof
against him. This I know, says he, this I have often proved true by
experience. Would thou then put this enemy to flight most assuredly? why
then pray. And in another Psalm David says: When I called upon thee, O
Lord, thou heardest me, Psalm. 138.5.
and enduedst my soul with much strength. Would thou be strong then
against this enemy? call upon the Lord, pray. One compares prayer to
Sampsons hair; when it was long he was of an invincible strength; but when it
was cut short, Judge. 16.19.
he was no stronger then another man. Even so whosoever thou art, pray
continually, Pray thrice a day with David and Daniel, and thou shall be as
strong as Sampson; Psalm 55.17.
thy soul shall be endued with much strength: but if thou never use to pray,
Dan. 6.10.
thou shall be no stronger then another man. Nay even Sampson himself used
prayer: though his hair were grown long now again; yet when he came to take
the pillar in his hand, and to pull the house on the Philistines heads, he
prayed; O Lord God, I beseech thee think upon me: O God I beseech thee, Judge.
16.28.
now strengthen me at this time only. He used also prayer besides his hair.
S. James also says: ye have not, because you ask not. And our savior uses
so many words, as one notes; Ask, seek, and knock, to declare our dulnes
and slacknesse in prayer. Stella in 12. ca. Luc.
Let us pray that we may have.

And resist him steadfast in the faith. Ephesians. 6.16.
] Above all things (as saint Paul counsels us against this enemy) let us
take the shield of faith. Believe assuredly in Jesus Christ, and in his death
and passion, and be strong in his power and might: Ephesians 4.8.
He has led captivity it self captive; even that mighty conqueror, that
conquered all men: he has not only conquered him; but also he has made him
thy captive. The very witches confess, that against those that are strong in
faith; neither they, nor their devil have any power. Jesus Christ is Vcal and
Ithiel, Prou. 30.1.
of whom that man of might Agur the son of Iache prophesied, which is the
son of Hammoshe, the bundell of all religion knit up together, as the Hebrew
word may seem to signify; that is, Jesus Christ is ever with us, and can do
all things. And this lesson, no doubt, Saint Paul had learned: Phil. 4.13.
who said, I can do all things through Christ, which strengthens me.

For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever. Psalm.
97.1.99.1
Our God is the great king over all the world: if we mark, he gouernes all
things, Psalm. 62.11.
but most secretly and most patiently; even as corn grows. To him also
belongs all power. Those ever, which have gloried in their own strength, he
has overthrown by weak means: Judge. 4 3.21. 1. Sam. 17.51.
Sisera, who had nine hundred chariots of iron, by a woman: Goliath, whose
spear was like a weauers beam, Psalm. 65.1.
by a boy. To him belongs all glory, they which go about to rob him thereof,
Act. 12.22.
shall be eaten with worms, like Herod. To him therefore, with the son and
the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, power, and salvation now and for ever:
Amen, Amen.

The Contents or points of the true Catholics Catechism.
1. Of man's free will. 2. Of Justification. 3. Of special grace. 4. Of good
works. 5. Of the certainty of Salvation. 6. Of the reading the Scriptures,
and their sufficiency. 7. Of Pilgrimage. 8. Of Traditions. 9. Of the Popes
Supremacy, and in this Article is declared how the Papists have injuriously
dealt with Ferus, in leaving out many things in his Commentaries upon Matthew
printed at Rome, concerning this matter, which are in the copies printed at
Paris. 10. Of Antichrist and the calling of the Jews, 11. Of Miracles and
apparitions of spirits, 12. Of Invocation. 13. Of P^^^atorie. 14. O Idolatry.
The true Catholics Catechism, or brief sum of Religion.
1. Of man's free will.
THE Fathers of the council of Trent, Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. ca. 5.
concerning this weighty matter, declare their judgment thus: The beginning of
justification, in those that have years of discretion, is from God, by Jesus
Christ, his grace preventing them: that is, by his calling, by which they are
called, without any of their deserts, as such who by their sins, were turned
away from God, and are now prepared by his grace, stirring them up and
helping them to convert themselves to their own justification, by their free
assenting and working jointly with this grace. So that God touches man's heart,
by the light of his holy spirit, neither does man himself nothing, receiving
that inspiration (who might also have refused it) nor yet could he have moved
himself, without the grace of God, to righteousness before him, of his own
free will. And therefore it is said in the holy Scripture: Turn ye unto me,
and I will turn unto you. We are here put in mind of our freedom. And when we
answer, turn us O Lord unto thee, and we shall be turned: we confess that we
are prevented by the grace of God. This is the sentence of the council of
Trent, wherein they teach, that in man's first calling to God, Gods grace does
but only stir up his will, as being a sleep, and help it, as being weak:
And that being thus wakened and helped, and strengthened; it does freely and
willingly yield to this grace, and so helps her own justification.

But this their assertion diminishes the grace of God, which every true
Catholic must acknowledge that he has received, and it extols too much man's
corrupt nature, Romans 6.8. Ephesians. 2.1. 2. Cor. 3.5.
which every true Christian must with the Apostle confess to be in himself.
Man was not only a sleep through his sins, but dead in them, as Saint Paul
teaches: neither was he only weak, but unapt, unfit, (...), as the Greek
word signifies, to think a good thought, much less to do a good work.
There remained not in man, as in one that sleeps, his former strength, so
that he needs nothing, Genesis 3.10.
but wakening, to do his duty; but he was now quite spoiled and robbed
thereof, and left naked: as Adam himself confesses, and now stands need of a
supply of new strength to be given him. And therefore our Savior (to let
pass all Metaphors and allegories) tells Nicodemus in plain terms, That
unless a man be borne again, Ioh 3.3.
he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. This is more then the helping of
a man up that is fallen down; or wakening one that is a sleep. Man must be
borne again: he is stark dead: he must have new life put in him, if he ever
will enter into the kingdom of heaven. And this must all Gods children
confess. This was the first lesson concerning his salvation, that our Savior
Jesus taught Nicodemus: and as many as do mind to be saved must also learn
it: Mat. 5.3.
and this will make them poor in spirit, which is the first step to
blessedness. Nay our Savior there plainly teaches, that that which is borne
of the flesh is flesh. Whereby we may learn what we are by our own nature,
nothing but flesh, sons of Adam, having no goodness left in us: but that we
may become the sons of God, we must be borne again, and receive Gods
spirit; and by it, be now not helped (as the Council of Trent teaches) but
quickened and made alive again to do good works. And therefore Saint Paul
agreeing to this doctrine of our Savior writes: Ephesians. 2.8.
that by grace ye are saved, through faith; and that not of your selves, no
not in part; as the Council here would have it. For it is Gods gift (says
the Apostle:) and dare we imagine that Gods gifts, are not most free, most
ample? Dare we our selves challenge any part in them: this no doubt were
devilish pride and proud presumption. Nay but that which follows, plainly
proves the same: Not of works (says Saint Paul) least any man should
brag. In this matter of our salvation, God will have all the glory himself;
man may challenge no part thereof: God will not have him brag, no not of a
mite thereof: he will have all the glory thereof ascribed to himself alone.
As all the Saints of God in the Revelation to our instruction, do also
confess: Reu. 7.10.
And they cried with a loud voice, saying: Salvation comes of our God, that
sits upon the throne, and of the Lamb. Shall they thus alowde cry out this
lesson to us; and shall we not hear them? shall they all with one consent
testify this; and shall we not believe them? But Saint Paul to make this
matter more manifest goes on forward: For we are his workmanship created in
Christ Jesus to good works, which God also has long prepared before, that we
should walk in them. This is an invincible reason, able to stop the mouths
of all bragging Pharisees: we are Gods workmanship again, as well in our
Regeneration, as in our Creation; and we are new creatures: can he that is
created, challenge any part of his strength to himself? Such is man's estate to
that which is good, after his fall; and to all good works: he is regenerate
unto them. And the same doctrine Saint Paul teaches in another place: 2. Cor.
5.^7.
If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Old things are gone, and
behold all things are new. Here first this lesson is general: If any one be
in Christ, he is a new creature. It concerns all Christians: they were all in
the same case.

Secondly, we are all new creatures; we, every one of us now, have new
wills, new strength; new hearts: all things are new: The old things are not
only mended and repaired (as the Papists teach.) Man's natural frowardness to
goodness was described to us even in just Lotte: he was loath to go out of
Sodom, he protracted the time: And the men took him by the hand (the Lord
being merciful unto him) and led him out. He had Gods vocation; he had Gods
grace offered, preventing him: but did he by and by (as the Council teaches)
embrace it, and assent unto it? Naie it is said that the Angels constrained
him; Genesis 19.15.
(vim faciebant) as Arrius Montanus translates it. Such freedom of will to
assent to Gods grace offered, was in Lotte; and do we think that any of Gods
servants have had hearts better disposed? No verily. The like we may read of
the children of Israel, who, although God had promised them the land of
Canaan, Genesis 17.8. Exodus 14.27.16.15.13.21.
and drowned Pharao before their eyes, and fed them with Mannah, and went
before them by day in a cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire: yet such was
the frowardness of their wills, Exodus 16.3. Number. 11.6.14.4. Genesis 6.5.
that they spurned against all these graces offered them, and even daily before
their eyes, and often made mention of returning to Egypt again: so that the
will of man's corrupt nature of it self, is now even from the cradle prove to
all evil; enemy to all goodness; ever resisting (as Saint Stephen taught the
Jews) and not willingly and freely assenting to the Spirit of God, as the
Papists teach us. Act. 7.51.


The Council to confirm their doctrine, misapplieth that saying of the
Prophet Zachary: Zach. 1.3.
Turn you unto me, and I will turn unto you. These words were spoken to the
circumcised Jews, who had been well instructed in the law of the Lord: and
therefore cannot fitly be applied to the man unregenerate. Rupertus a Papist
expoundes this place of Zachary thus: Rup. in ca. 1. ver. 13. Zac.
Thus says the Lord of hosts the father, and the Lord of hosts the Son,
and the Lord of hosts the Holy Ghost: Turn unto me, and I will turn unto you:
that is, believe in me (and all anger being set apart) I will be reconciled
unto you. Be not like your Forefathers, to whom the former prophets cried,
saying: Turn from your evil ways, and from your wicked thoughts; and they
would not hear, nor give heed to me, says the Lord. This is like to that,
which the Holy ghost says by David; To day if ye will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts, as in the provocation, and in the day of temptation in the
Wilderness, when your Fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works, etc.
Thus far Rupertus. Where first that word of reconciliation argues
regeneration, and a former love and friendship; but most manifestly the
example of the Israelites, which he adds out of David. These Israelites, of
whom David here speaks, 1. Cor. 10.2.
were regenerate in the red sea, as Saint Paul teaches, and had seen Gods
wondrous works, and had been, as should seem, a great while scholars in
his school; and therefore to such might this exhortation fitly be applied.
But to the unregenerate the council does not rightly apply it, even by
Rupertus his judgment.

Luke 10.30.
That man that descended from Jerusalem to Jericho, may resemble a man
regenerate, and now falling into grievous sins; or if he signify Adam,
falling from Gods favor into the hands of the devil; let us mark what a
miserable case he was in: he had no power to help himself, no not a tongue
to ask help, and being helpen up, was neither able to stand, nor to go: but
was set upon the good Samaritans own beast, to bear him. He was half dead;
the flesh lived in him, his worst half: but his spirit and power, to do good,
was quite dead. If this man, which came from Jerusalem, was in this case; what
shall we say of them which never saw Jerusalem? It was not the helping up
that would serve the turn; but he stood in need of other legs to bear
him, of Wine and Oil to be powered into his wounds: and not of these only,
but his wounds were to be bound up, least these heavenly graces, being powered
in, should run out again; and of two pence to be given him, to pay for his
charges. Such a case was this man in, he had nothing left him; he was quite
robbed and spoiled of all his riches: Psalm. 104.15.
he had not a drop of the true wine of God to comfort him, nor of the oil of
Gods spirit to cheer his countenance: he now hid his face, Genesis 3.8.
he ran away from God: he had no will, nor mind, nor desire, nor love
toward him: he stood in need of all these afresh, to be powered into him.

Andradius also, and the University of Collen, Lib. 4. Orth. explic.
are of the same opinion, almost word for word, with the council of Trent. The
Fathers of Collen (says Andradius) do prove by many and strong reasons, that
there is free will in the minds of men, being possessed with never such ugly
monsters of sin, to undertake any good work; neither that, that can be
extinguished or blotted out with any filthiness of sin whatsoever: but yet it
may be so bound with iron fetters, that it cannot rid it self out of them,
without the power of God. And therefore the cause why wicked men can do no
perfect or spiritual good work, as long as their minds are overwhelmed with
the spots of sin; is not because they lack free will, but because that, that
is so entangled with the snares of sin, and so kept under with the weight of
their offenses, that it can no way unloose it self, nor by his own power, any
way look up: no otherwise, then they which are in the stocks, have power to
go; although they cannot go, unless the bonds be first taken away which
hinder their moving. When as therefore the light of Gods grace shines into
the minds of the wicked, it does not violently thrust righteousness upon them,
or forces them to embrace those ornaments of their souls; but stirs up the
will, which now lies on the ground, and being weak, helps it up, that now it
being as it were comen to it self, by Gods help it may freely yield to the
calling and pleasure of God, and receive his grace, neither is there any thing
then that may hinder or bind this liberty.

This is also the opinion of the University of Collen and of Andradius,
concerning this matter. But how quite contrary to the Scriptures, is this
their assertion? Man (say they) has free will still in him, be he never so
wicked, even to undertake any good work. But this his free will is fettered
or hindered only through sin; the which fetters being by Gods grace
removed, it works freely that which is good. So that they make man's freewill
the chief and principal cause of doing good: and the grace of God, but the
secondarie cause, or (causa sine qua non) as the Philosophers do term it;
that is, the cause without the which the thing could not have been done. And
thus Vocabularium scholasticae doctrinae, a book of the Papists own making
defines Causa sine qua non: Causa sine qua non, est, qua posita aliud ponitur
aliunde quamuis secundum candem. That is, which cause being present, another
effect follows in another thing, and yet by the means of it. Surely that
which wrought the effect (the let being taken away) freely and of it own
accord, may be said to be the principal, or an equivalent cause at the
least, if the grace of God do after the let be taken away, work with the
will, as the council of Trent seems to affirm. But the Scriptures teach
quite contrary to this: Esaias. 26.12.
Esaias says, Thou, O Lord, have wrought all our works in us: And what has
our will done then? And saint Paul says, Phil. 2.13.
that it is God which works in us both the will, and also the performance, in
those things which be good, according to his good pleasure. Man by saint Paul
his judgment, abiding yet in his sins, is not like a man in fetters, who
would gladly go if his fetters were loosed, and who would gladly have his
fetters taken away from him: but quite contrary, he delights in sin, he
loves and likes well of his fetters, he thinks that he is in Paradise; he
would never have, not so much as a will or mind to be loosed, unless God gave
it him. This will then remains not in man, as Andradius and the University of
Collen teach; but according to the doctrine of saint Paul, it is a new work of
God in him.

And whereas they say, that the grace of God does offer no violence in the
conversion of sinners: what means then that saying of our savior; Ioh
6.44.12.32.
that no man can come unto him, unless his father draw him? And again, when I
shall be exalted from the earth, I will draw all unto me: What means these
drawings, of God the father, and of his son Jesus Christ; but a certain holy
violence in the conversion of sinners? In that parable of the gospel, Luke, 14
23.
those that sat in the high ways, and under hedges: were they not types of
the Gentiles, which should be saved? And were they not compelled to come in to
the Supper? Surely without this compulsion, they would never have comen in of
themselves. What means also that which David so often prays in the Psalms:
Make me to walk, O Lord, Psalm. 119.35.144.8.11.119 107.
in the ways of thy commandments; and direct my paths unto thee, and make me
know the way that I should walk in; and quicken me according to thy word? but
that even he himself felt this froward will, in himself, to all goodness,
and this blind understanding: so that God had need even as it were to force
him to goodness. What mean those goades and nails which the Preacher speaks
of, Eccle. 12 11. Hebr. 10.24.
and that (...) that pricking and provoking to love and good works, which the
Apostle mentions? but a certain kind of violence, which both God himself
uses by the ministry of his word in drawing sinners to him; and we our
selves, after our calling, must use one toward another, in stirring up our
dull and slow wills to goodness. And no doubt, of this violence and of these
goades, which the Lord God himself uses in the conversion of sinners, it is
said in the Acts: that the Jews, who were converted to the faith by Peter's
Sermon, Acts 2.37.
were pricked in their hearts: No doubt they felt these goades of God: And in
their conversion God used some violence.

But let us a little consider, how other Catholics, somewhat so under then
these, have declared their judgments concerning this matter. First
Granatensis writes thus: Lib. 2. de orat, cap. 11.
The necessity of praying continually unto God, does spring of man's poverty
and misery, into the which he fell through his sin, and of the diversity of
his estate, wherein he is now, and wherein he was, when God created him: For
if he had continued in that first estate, he had not needed these engines, nor
so many means, to draw his soul to God, and that he might be lifted up to
the consideration of heavenly things. For even as the Eagle of her own nature
flies ever aloft, and makes her nest in high places: so if man had continued in
that first estate, he had ever been occupied in the contemplation of high and
heavenly things, and had had his delight and dwelling in these. But after that
he became also even subject to that curse of the old Serpent; which was, that
he should go upon his belly, and eat earth all the days of his life, by and
by he made an exchange of heaven for earth, and became altogether earth; he
loves now earth, he eats earth, he talks of earth, on earth he has his
treasure laid up, and he takes so deep root now on earth, that with no
chains or mattockes now he can be pulled from thence.

And how great this necessity is of continual praying, no man can understand,
but he that knows the great poverty which man fell into through sin; which
is so great, as with no words it can sufficiently be expressed. It is written,
that the eyes of our first parents were opened, Genesis 3.7.
and that they knew themselves to be naked: by which words the miserable
spoiling and extreme nakedness and poverty, into which mankind through sin
was thrown headlong, may easily be gathered. For man was robbed of all grace,
of original righteousness, and of all those free gifts, which he had received
of God. But if he having lost those free gifts; yet if he had remained safe and
sound, in the gifts of nature, it had been a great comfort unto him: but in
these also he was so corrupted and weakened, that from the sole of the foot, to
the crown of the head, there was no sound part found in him. So that of man
may truly be verified that saying of the Prophet: And he has put on cursing
like a garment, and it has entered as water into his bowelles, and as Oil into
his bones. It had been enough to have said, that man had put on cursing and
that he was cladde with it, from top to toe; for that had been a great
misery: but least any man should think, that only his outward parts were
accursed; he being hole and sound within: the Propet adds; that it entered
also like water into his inward parts, that he might declare, that nothing in
him, neither within nor without, was safe and free from that curse.
Furthermore, because water does not pierce so greatly into anything, least any
should think, that some thing perchance lay hid in man, which was not subject
to that curse, the Prophet adds; And as Oil into his bones: Oil of all
liquours pierces the most. The curse therefore, as Oil, entered into his
bones, which are the more secret and hid parts of man. This curse reaches even
to the very marrow; that is, to the inward and most secret parts of the soul;
or to that chief spiritual part thereof, which we call the mind, which is a
kin (as we say) to the Angels, and was made according to the image of God,
which as it is a spirit, naturally loves spiritual things, and hates those
things which are of the flesh: But it also being defiled and tainted through
sin, does also now incline to fleshly things. Therefore when as in man,
there are three principal parts: his body, his soul, and his spirit; they
are all infected, weakened, and corrupted through sin. The curse as a garment
covers the flesh, with all her senses, and like water it enters into the
soul, and into all her affections; and like Oil, it pierces into the inward
parts of the spirit, and into all her powers. Wherefore our understanding is
blind, our will weak, our freedom feeble, our memory corrupted, and
forgetting her creator: seeing man therefore is throughout corrupted,
destroyed, and as it were become flesh; how can he keep the law of God, which
is altogether spiritual? We know (says the Apostle) that the law is
spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin. What proportion is there,
between a spiritual law, and a carnal man? What fitness can a beast have,
which is altogether flesh, that he may live according to the rule of the law,
which is altogether spiritual? If therefore man through sin, be become like
unto a beast, altogether now inclined to the flesh; what fitnes can he have,
to keep the law, which is altogether spiritual, which is the law of Angels,
and altogether heavenly? Yea, he is so unapt and unfit to keep the law, that
he cannot do any work, or speak any word, that pleases God, unless from
heaven special grace be given him.

By these things it is manifest, that on the one side if you consider the body
of man, that neither in the Sea, nor in the air, nor on the earth, you can
find any creature, standing in so great need, as man does, and subject to so
many miseries and calamities, as he is; again on the other side, if you
respect his soul, you shall find her so weak and miserable, that she is scant
able to open her mouth worthily, to call upon the name of Jesus. By these
things we may see, where and in what state man was in the beginning, created of
God; and into what miseries through sin he is now fallen: that his
ingratitude and proud disobedience against his Creator, deserved such a
medicine. God created him in great prosperity, honor, and blessedness, and
thereof he took an occasion of waxing proud; wherefore by good right, he is
left so miserable, naked, and void of all goodness, that through his poverty,
he might become humble, and through his need diligent, and that the remedy of
this need (which is prayer) might the more delight him.

Thus far Granatensis. In which words, he says somewhat more then Andradius
and the council of Trent: that man is not only as it were asleep through
sin, but that even the curse of God is entered into his bones; and that it
has like Oil, even pierced quite thorough him. If this be true, then man
needs a new Oil to be given him, before he can do any good: and this curse
must be taken out of his bones, and out of his marrow and sinews, before he be
able to do any work that pleases God. Nay he is unapt and unfit now to that
which is good (says Granatensis) he must not only have his iron fetters taken
from him, as Andradius affirms: but that he may go straight forward, he must
have new feet given him, his old feet will not serve the turn: and the
refore the Samaritan set the wounded man upon his own beast; for his own legs
would not bear him. He is become a beast, and therefore he needs not only
loosing from the cribbe to do God service (as Andradius seems to affirm:)
but there must also a change and a Metamorphosis be made; he must now of a
beast be made a man: for our God will not be served with beasts, but with men.
And such a feeble freedom, Granatensis gives to man, to make him humble; they
which teach contrary, do make him proud.

Ibid.
And a little after he writes thus: Tell me what remedy can be given to man in
such a miserable plight? I demand what means can a man have to live, who has
neither inheritance left him, nor ability, nor knowledge, nor fitness, nor
aptness to gain any thing? Thou will say unto me, that such a man has no
other shift to make, but to beg, and from door to door, to ask alms for
Gods sake. The same only remedy is now left for man, after he has sinned. He
stands now in as much need: And therefore now, he has no other comfort; but
that he beg and cry, at the gate of Gods mercy, humbly acknowledging his
poverty, and asking alms, and saying with the Prophet, I am poor and needy,
but the Lord cares for me.

Let us mark here, how that he affirms, that man has neither ability, nor
knowledge left him, to do good: but that all his succor must be like a poor
beggar, to call for grace to God. And therefore he is not like a man only in
the stocks; as the University of Collen affirms.

And after he declares the same more plainly by an example: For I demand of
thee (says he) what remedy has a chicken new hatched, which neither has
wings, nor feathers, nor any thing else to help it self withal? It is most
certain, that it has no other remedy, but to chirpe, sigh and cry, and even
to make the air ring with her chirping, to make her damme pity her, and to
fly abroad for meat for her. And man, if through sin he be made more naked
and poor then such a chicken, what other remedy has he? but that he cry
day and night to God: as to his true damme and parent, and that he desire
help of him.

This is that which good king Ezechias means, when he says, as the young
swallow; so will I cry: I will groan or sigh, as the dove. As though he
should say: even as a young swallow, seeing it self so poor and naked, does
mind nothing else but to chirpe, sigh and cry to the damme, that she would
provide necessary things for it: so I (O Lord) seeing my self void of all
grace, destitute of all spiritual fortitude, adorned with no feathers of
virtues, having no wings to fly withal; to conclude, so unfit to all things
which concern me, that I cannot set one foot forward, to please thee, without
thy help; what other thing can I do else, then to follow the diligence of
this chicken, and to cry to thee, which art (as it were) my dam, my father and
my creator, that thou would come to my nest, and bring me all things
necessary for me? what should I do else, but that I should sigh and groan
unto thee, as a dove, without ceassing, bewailing and lamenting my
condemnation, poverty and sins, and desiring with tears and sighs,
remedies for so great evils.

He compares here again, man to a bird new hatched, which is void of all
things, lacking all power and strength to help her self: and not to a bird
in a cage, as some other Papists do, which would fame be out; and were able to
fly, if the let of sin by grace were only removed.

And after speaking of the corruption of our nature, Lib. 2. de ora^. cap. 13.
he writes thus: Above all things thou must know this, that our appetite
through sin is so disordered and destroyed; that ever it bends and inclines
man to love pleasant things, and such things as delight the flesh, having no
regard of those things, which God has commanded: for as the Apostle says; The
law which is in our members resists the law of our mind, and Gods law. One
evil neighbor which we have within us, dwelling at our very gates, ever
desires those things which delights him: as honors, riches, pleasures and such
like, and that with such feruencie and earnestness, as that the hill Etna
burns not so vehemently, as sometime man is inflamed with the fire of his
lusts and appetites.

And after writing of this concupiscence, which still reigns in man's heart, as
long as he lives in this world, he says thus: That thou may better
understand this, consider the singular and wonderful providence of nature, in
maintaining the heart: for when as the heart of all other members, is most
hot (for so it behooued it to be, seeing it warmes all the other members)
least it should be consumed through his overmuch heat, nature has given it a
continual flappe, or thing to cool and refresh it, that is to say, the
lounges; which continually like a pair of bellows, receives air and sendes
it out again, and so mildely cooling the heat, defends the heart, from the
force of it. I have not as yet hitherto in my judgment, found any example,
that does more evidently declare, how necessary the refreshing of prayer is to
our soul: for who can deny that we have in the bosom of our hearts, a most
vehement heat, consuming all things, which is concupiscence, which the divines
call the very tinder and nourisher of sin? And what else does this heat day
and night, but that it sets on fire, burns, and consumes with his flame, what
good things soever is in our souls? Therefore if this cooler were not added
to it, which might temper the heat thereof, with the breath of the holy ghost,
and the dew of devotion, what would be the end of that hot burning fever?
Surely it would consume and weaken all the strength of the soul.

Concupiscence by his judgment, is not only the nurse of sin, but sin it
self, and as it were, a most raging and hot burning agewe, that consumes all
goodness in us. And this fire is in every Christian as long as they live here
in this world, and therefore they have need daily to use the remedy of
devotion and prayer, to cool the heat thereof; least it get the victory over
them. This is Granatensis his opinion, whatsoever other divines think.

Again, he writes thus: When as our heart is the beginning of all our works:
as our heart is; so are all our works, that come of it. If it be devout and well
disposed, all our works which proceed from it, shall be also well ordered and
framed: but if it shall be out of frame and not devout, all our works also
that proceed from it, shall be out of order and without devotion. Therefore
as a Gardener has a special care, that his ground be mellow, moist, and well
dressed, that it may bring forth fruit; for it is of his own nature, cold and
dry, (which disposition will very hardly be brought to frame) and therefore
is not fit to bring forth fruit, unless it be helped by the benefit of water:
So the servant of God must give all his diligence especially, that his heart be
void from that disposition, which it has by the corruption of sin; but that
it be ever full of that moisture and fruitfulness, which it receives through
prayer and devotion, that it may ever be fit and prepared to bring forth
fruits.

We may note here, how he likens the heart of man unregenerate to the earth,
which of his own nature is cold and dry, unapt altogether to bring forth
any fruits: Even so is the heart of man of his own nature now being corrupted
through sin, unfit to bring forth any thing that is good.

And a little after he writes thus: I will show the same more briefly and
with a plainer example: Thou see a hen that sits upon her eggs, first she
warmes them; and after by the virtue of that heat, she gives them life, till
at length she hatcheth a chicken: after the same manner the soul humbly
continuing under Gods wings in prayer, is made partaker of the heat of his
spirit; by the means whereof by little and little, she loses that which she
was, and she puts off the manners of old Adam, and is partaker of that second
Adam, which is of God. So that as the continuance of that heat, makes of an
egg a chicken: so the continuance of this, by Gods grace, makes of a man even
a God, that is of a fleshly man, a heavenly.

Here is plainly man's Regeneration set out: Man of himself is like an egg,
having no life in him to goodness; and by the heat of Gods spirit, by little
and little, he is as it were hatched again and made perfect.

And after, the same author writes thus: Will you understand in few words, how
necessary it is for a man now being perfect, ever to stand in the sight of
God, and to have his eyes fastened upon him: (for this is it, which we call
continuing in prayer) let him consider the proportion and the necessity, which
the moon has with the sun, whose presence is ever necessary to her: for
this example will show what we mean very excellently. Thou shall find
therefore first that the moon has no light nor brightness of her self: but
she borrowes and takes that of the sun: so also our soul has no light, no
brightness, no virtue, no grace, no fitness of deserving any thing of her
self; but what good thing soever she has, she receives it from the sun of
righteousness Jesus Christ.

What can be said more plainly, or truly, then this? that one soul of it
self has no light, no clearenesse, no power, no fitness of deserving any
thing. And where is then man's freewill?

Orat. 5. pro impet. amore Dei.
And in another place he writes thus: I departed from thee like the prodigal
Son, and I went into a far country, and not inhabited; where loving vanity,
I became vain my self; I was blind, and I desired blindness still, I was a
bondslaue, and I loved this bondage; I was bound, neither did my bonds dislike
me: I judged sower sweet, and sweet sower; I was a most miserable wretch,
and perceived it not. When I lived in this miserable estate, thou did cast
the eyes of thy mercy upon me, and though I sinned without ceasing: yet
notwithstanding thou did not cease to reclaim me from sin, etc. Man
delighted in his sins, he was not like a prisoner with his gives, that
longes to have them taken from him; as other Papists teach: he had no will to
be loosed at all. Orat. 6.
And again after: Thou art my shepherd: for thou feedest and rulest my soul,
as a sheep of thy flock: thou art my meat; thou art he wherewith I am fed,
in that divine Sacrament of the Altar: thou art my father, and the father of
the world to come. For thou have borne me again with great pains upon the
tree of the Cross, and have given me a new essence: by the Holy Ghost thou art
my head and the universal head of thy Church. For from thee, as from a head,
virtue, life, and spiritual sense, flows into her, and into all her members.
Thou art my true Physician, for with thy blood thou have healed the wounds and
wannes of my soul.

In his regeneration man receives a new essence, by the holy ghost (says
Granatensis) and all spiritual powers and senses, from the head Jesus Christ,
and not from Adam.

Again, the same Granatensis writes thus of Herod: Thou see here in Herod,
Med. 9. vitae Christi.
murdering the young innocents, what madness the pride of man's heart and the
unhappy desire of rule would creep unto, seeing that he has not only
surpassed all tyrants in cruelty: but also all fools in folly. This my
brethren, is the misery of man's heart, this is the nature of inordinate love of
our selves: Self love will proceed thus far. And certainly persuade thy
self, that thou should also commit shipwreck against the same rocks, if so
be thou had the like occasion offered; if so be that the grace of God did not
prevent and preserve thee. No man's will naturally is better then Herod's: we are
all as ambitious, as blood thirsty, by nature, as he, if Gods grace did not
prevent and preserve us. This is Granatensis his opinion.

Again the same writes thus of man's natural corruption, and of the great
benefit of his justification. This our nature, Lib. 2. Mem. cap. 2.
by original sin, is deprived of that state and natural straightness,
wherein God created it. For God created it right and straight, and lift up to
him thorough love: but sin bowed it, and inclined it to her self; that is,
to the love of these visible things, which she loves above God, and makes more
account of, then of God himself. For even as a man which is borne from his
mothers womb, crooked or hutchbacked, can find no medicine, nor any thing in
the world, whereby he may recover his natural straightnes: even so whenas
our will is borne thus naturally, as it were hutchbacked and crooked, no man is
able to bring it again to this straightnes, and so to erect it to God, that it
should love God above all things, but God which created it. Therefore as we
cannot obtain this love, which surpasses all things, without God: so he
cannot also above all things be sorry for his sins, without the special gift
and help of the same God: for the one of these depends of the other.
Wherefore thereof did not our Savior without cause say, No man comes to me,
unless my father draw him. To come to Christ is nothing else but to love Christ
above all things, and to hate sin above all things. Such love and such sorrow
for his sins, no man can have of himself, as is required; unless God give it
him. When as God therefore deals so with a sinner, it is the greatest favor
and greatest good thing in the world, that he can do unto him. For how much
greater is the gift of glory above the gift of grace; so it is a far greater
thing, to draw man out of sin, and to place him in grace, then he now being
in grace, to bestow glory upon him. For there is far greater distance between
sin and grace; then between grace and glory. And therefore Thomas Aquinas
disputing of the works of God, says: That it is a far greater work to
justify a sinner, then to create the world. For the creation of the whole
world, is such a work as has his limits, and has an end, as all other things
created have: but the justification of man, is as it were the participation of
the divinity and glory of God, which is an infinite thing.

The Papists opinion of free will being true, the justification of man is not
such a great work as Thomas Aquinas here makes it. But as the world had no
power of it self to create it self, no more has man to his regeneration. His
regeneration is more by Aquinas his judgment, then the creation of the world:
Oh that this opinion were engrafted in every Christian, it would make him
thankful to God!

Lib. 2. de ieiunio cap. 15.
Again the same Granatensis in another place declares his judgment of man's
regeneration, and natural ability, or power, most manifestly, by this
example: Even as that which springs again, cease to be that which it was
before, and takes a new essence; so that nothing now remains in it, which was
in it before: As when a tree grows of seed, the seed cease to be, and the
tree takes another essence: so man, when he is borne spiritually, the whole
old man which he was before, dies, which was the Son of wrath, and he
becomes to be another new man the Son of grace; and so is free both from
fault and punishment.

This is Granatensis opinion of man's natural force and ability, which by so
many examples he has made manifest unto us: I would to God all true
Catholics would be of the same judgment with him.

Ferus part. 2. pass.
Ferus also in this matter agrees with Granatensis: The spirit is willing, but
the flesh is weak: as though he should say, I know that you have a willing
mind, but the weakness of the flesh hinders your willingness. The spirit would
do that which it ought, but the flesh is backward and slow: it delights in
nothing, but in those which seem profitable for it: it will never watch nor
pray willingly; it is afraid of adversity; it flies from the Cross; it is
offended at it; it denies it: to conclude, it does nothing that is good. But
contrariwise, the spirit is bold and valiant, it watches, it prays, it
endures adversity, it makes confession of the faith boldly. For the spirit, as
often as it is compared with the flesh, signifies the nature of man, with the
best motions thereof, without the help of the holy ghost. Therefore the spirit
is willing, and desires willingly those things that belongs unto it, and moves
us to all goodness: But the flesh is weak, because it ever takes not upon it
the yoke of the spirit, according to that; That good which I would do, that I
do not; and the evil which I would not do, that I do. And again, the flesh
fights against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, that you cannot
do that which you would. What, shall I use many words? To that which is good,
though we have a willing spirit, yet the infirmity of the flesh hinders it,
and ouercomes it: but to that which is evil, though we have but a sluggish
spirit, yet the flesh stirs it up, and pricketh it forward. Hence it is, that
Judas and the Jews sleep not, but are most vigilant and watchful, because
they make haste to that which is wicked: But the Apostles sleep, because they
are admonished to do that which is good. Therefore it remains, that as much
as we trust of the zeal on our mind, so much we ought to be afraid of the
infirmity of the flesh.

Ferus here plainly teaches, that the flesh ever, even in her best motions,
resists Gods spirit: and therefore what part of reward can man's free will
challenge at Gods hands?

And after, we are all like Peter, before Gods judgment come, when as yet we
do not know our own frailty and weakness; we are wont to be proud of our
strength, and as it should seem, to be very fervent in the zeal of God: but
when Gods judgment begins to draw near, we faint and melt away, as wax
does before the fire; and as the dust that the wind drives from the face of
the earth. Peter therefore is a figure of those, that will go about to do any
thing without the grace of God. To whom that ever happens that both they make
Christ a liar, and also that they never bring to pass that which they go
about. They make Christ a liar, who said, Without me you can do nothing. And
they themselves do not stand to their word and resolution: For Paul says, I
do not the good which I would, but the evil that I would not, that I do.

And a little after: Here also we see how that man is able to do nothing. For
even as iron, although it be hard of it own nature; yet is soon battered of
stones, unless it be hardened in some liquor: So the mind of man, although it
brag that for the love of truth, it will despise all dangers; yet it is
overcome when perils assault it, unless it be strengthened with the holy ghost.

And again: This is the surest way, that can be: to continue in as great
humility as a man can: still to wait on Gods mercy, and not to brag
himself on his own merits, or to judge others.

And again, it is to be marked, Fer. part. 4. pass.
that there were seven great wonders done in the death of Christ, which also
as yet, meet altogether in the justification of every one. The Sun was
darkened at noone day, the veil was rent, the earth quaked or moved, the
rocks were cloven, the graves opened, the dead rose up, and the Gentiles
confessed. These seven things I say are done now also, and ought to be done
in every sinner. First it is necessary that all worldly things do vanish
away, do displease him and be removed out of his sight. And this is that a
great darkness be made, when as the things of this world must neither have
color nor light in his eyes. Secondly, his inward and hidden things must be
revealed, that is, he must see his sins and acknowledge his own filthiness:
And that is the veil to be rent, under which such things were hidden, that
they appeared not to be unclean. Thirdly, he must quake for fear at the view
of the filthiness of his sins, and of his conscience, and that is, the earth
to quake: for no man fears nor is troubled in conscience, unless he see his
sin and the grieuousnesse of it. Fourthly, the cleaving of the rocks
follows, and that is contrition of heart, and a hatred and misliking of sin;
and he which before was a rock now is rent in sunder, and so the rock yeeldes
waters of weeping and tears. Fifthly, the graves are opened, when as the mouth
is opened by confession, and makes manifest that which was hid. Sixthly, she
must go out by absolution and come into the city of Jerusalem, that is, into
the holy Church and be reconciled to her again by a spiritual life. Lastly,
she must confess and testify both in word and work that Christ is the son
of God, as did also the Centurion. Here truly Ferus declares what man's heart is
before regeneration: It is a rock, there is no softness, nor aptness to
goodness in it, before grace. And it is even now as great a miracle for God to
convert a sinner, Exodus 16. ver. 6
as it were for him to make the water to run out of the hard rock.

Fer. in 9. cap. Act.
Ferus also on this matter, writes very excellently upon these words: O
Lord, what will thou have me to do? This is the speech of a changed heart.
See here what Gods correction can do, what grace can do, what the spirit can
do? In one word, it makes a wolf a sheep. For by and by he cries, what will thou have me do O Lord? For I am now ready hereafter to obey thy
commandments. I would to God we were made all so ready by the Lords
correction. Surely then it would fare better with us. For God strikes us, that
he might by and by heal us: and if we be not healed, that comes of our own
wickedness and frowardnes. Therefore we must pray thus, that he will convert us
also: Convert us (O God) of our salvation, etc. Thou see that this beginning
of true repentance does proceed of none other cause, but from God, when as he
does touch our heart with the feeling of sin, and does also so underprop
it, that it despair not: as we hear here, that he did to Paul. For he being
so terrified, had run from Gods presence, and had utterly despaired, unless
by Gods spirit, he had been called back again, that he might cry: O Lord,
what will thou have me do? Thou see therefore, how true repentance differs
from that which is false and counterfeit. For unless all the heart be kindled
with this earnest desire, that it say. O Lord, I covet to forsake mine own
evil way, and to do that which thou would have me do, it is but
hypocrisy, it is no repentance. But this earnest desire no man can frame to
himself, unless God touch his heart. Therefore the beginning, the middle, and
the end; is of God, and is Gods work.

Here we may learn what we were before grace, we were wolves, we were no
sheep: and therefore not a helping up or pricking forward was necessary for
us; but, as our Savior teaches, a regeneration. And this is that which God
himself promises by the Prophet Ezechiell: Ezech. 11.19.
I will take away their stony heart, and I will give them a heart of flesh:
God had need show his most mighty power, as well in man's regeneration, as in
his creation. His heart was become a stone: and therefore unapt to move and
apply it self to the grace of God, as the Papists teach. What fitness is
there in a stone to receive into it any moisture, or to move it self upward:
and such like were all men's hearts to grace, before regeneration; as God
himself here plainly teaches by his Prophet Ezechiell. And hereof also is
that, which John says in the Gospel to the proud and bragging Jews of their
carnal descent from Abraham, Matthew. 3.9.
That God was able of stones to raise up children to Abraham: no doubt by these
stones, he meant all Abraham's spiritual sons, who by the preaching of the
Gospel, and by faith in Jesus Christ should be borne unto him. And do we not
see now this prophecy of John verified? The proud bragging Jews are rejected,
and the Gentiles, who before were as stones, are by Gods grace now become
Abraham's children.

This also that vision, that God showed Peter, As Ferus also notes hereafter.
Act 10.11.
when as he would call the Gentiles, proves most evidently: He saw heaven
opened, and a certain vessel came down unto him, as it had been a great
sheet, knit at the four corners, and was let down to the earth, wherein were
all manner of foure-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping
things, and fowls of the heaven: No doubt these beasts (as Peter himself
also after expounds this vision) signified the Gentiles. Into such monsters we
were grown, by reason of sin. Psalm. 49.12.
Man being in honor had no understanding, even Adam that first man, and in him
all men, and so became as the beasts that perish: so that man must be killed
and quickened again, as God here commands Peter: he must have new life put
into him, before he can please God. So far off is he, of his own nature, to
assent freely to the grace of God, offering it self unto him, sin being
only done away. And this is that which Ferus here teaches, men must become of
wolves sheep, before they can be acceptable sacrifices unto God. The beginning
of the desire which they have to serve God, and the middle and continuance
thereof, when as they have once begun, and the end also thereof, is of God:
Not the beginning only, as the Papists do teach. And this is that also which
Saint Peter teaches all true Catholics, 1. Pet. 1.5.
in his Catholic Epistle: That we are kept by the power of God, through
faith, unto salvation. He not only at the beginning, works freely our
iustificaon, as the Council of Trent teaches; but even also freely, through
the same faith, he then wrought in our hearts, he continually preserves us. So
that our whole salvation, the beginning, and the middle, and the end thereof,
we must only and wholly ascribe unto God. This great work is his work alone:
no man what soever, may challenge any part in it, with him; he alone must
have all the glory of it.

Ibid.
And to this effect the same Ferus writes thus again: Mark here that God is
not only the beginning, but also the perfection of all goodness in us. For he
that begins; the same also finisheth. He works in us, both to will and also to
finish: he gives the increase. To this may be applied that which Moses says:
The land which the Lord will give you, is not like the land of Egypt, etc. The
forces and powers of nature, are sufficient to external works: but to those
things which concern our salvation, we must look for a shower from heaven,
that is, grace: Therefore every godly man must say, I will not trust in mine
own bow.

And after: The light of nature seems to be reason: but in divine matters,
they are but scales hindering the sight: as thou see here in Paul. These
scales signify that covering which is over Moses face, yea over the hearts of
all the Jews, before faith. Those scales also which claue together in the body
of Leuiathan, are wicked men; amongst whom Saul was. All these when the light
comes, fall down to the ground, etc. The light of nature by Ferus judgment,
profits nothing: but rather hinders our salvation.

And after: Fer. in cap. 10. Act.
These beasts signify all them which should believe of the Gentiles. For the
Church was to be collected, not only of the Jews; but also of the profane
Gentiles. And they are fitly compared to beasts: for what is man without the
knowledge and the fear of God, but a beast? according to that, Man, when as he
was in honor, understood not, etc. He was compared to beasts, and became like
them, he lives like a beast, as a swine that is washed will wallow in the mire
again, he lacks reason, he is full of poison. The poison of Aspes is under
their lips. He is more fierce and cruel then any beast. See what a miserable
creature a sinner is. If thou do not know thy self; at least wise hereof
learn to know thy self. Thus far Ferus.

Here man may see, as in a looking glass, what he is of his own nature: he
is a Lion, a Bear, a filthy Swine: no Lion so cruel, no swine so filthy as
he. Fer. Ibid,
And here also we may learn out of Ferus, what kind of sinners these beasts
do signify: he names three kinds of beasts: For all that is in the world, is
either the concupiscence of the flesh, or the concupiscence of the eyes, or the
pride of life. Four footed beasts signify riotous persons; creeping things
signify covetous men; fowls of the Air, ambitious men, that ambitiouslie
seek after honors. Peter is commanded, to eat and devour all these, etc. See
then what account God makes of thee, what an ugly monster thou art in his
eyes, whosoever art given to thy pleasures, who soever art covetous and greedy
of this earthly claie, whosoever art ambitous, and gapes after honors and
promotions. Though thou seem in thine own eyes never so glorious, nor of so
great estimation: thou art but a filthy swine, a creeping vermin, and a
soaring Kyte. And learn hereby rather to please God, then either man or thy
self.

Again upon these words (I also am a man) he wrytes thus: Ibid.
He teaches the Apostles successors, that they ought to fly ambition, for it
is an horrible fault, and it makes us ascribe unto our selves those things,
which God works in us, or by us as it were by instruments; when as all glory
is due unto God: And therefore Paul ascribed to himself all the pains he
took, but to God all the fruits of his labors. I (says he) have labored
more, then they all: but not I, but the grace of God with me.

The fruit of Gods word, he yields wholly to God: For he works in us both to
will, and to perform: he teaches them also to challenge no praise to
themselves, for these things which they have done in Christ's name, and by his
power. The false Apostles and Bishops observe neither of these.

Fer. in cap. 13. Act.
And after: Thou see how necessary Christ is: ascribe not light to reason, nor
salvation to thy works; but both to Christ.

And after upon these words: (And they believed as many as were predestinate.)
No man believes, but he which is predestinate. No man comes to me, unless my
father draw him. Here he gives us to mark, that faith is not of the desert of
man; but of the mercy and election of God: for the Lord says in the Gospel
to Peter confessing Christ: Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee:
but my father which is in heaven. And to Nicodemus: unless one be borne again
from above, he cannot see the kingdom of God. All these places do not impute
to God the fault, why the wicked are condemned; but rather they prove
evidently, that the election and grace of God, is the cause of the salvation of
the godly, least any man should attribute to our strength, that which belongs
only to God. Thou see also here, who are predestinate to life; they who
believe in Christ: therefore thou need not curiously dispute of
predestination: believe in Christ, and bring forth good works in him, and thou
art sure that thou art predestinate: Otherwise, if thou were the very signet of
Gods right hand, thou shall be cast away.

Our own forces and strength by Ferus his judgment may challenge no part in
our salvation. And declare thy faith by thy good works, as Saint James
teaches thee: and be sure of thy predestination, says Ferus.

In cap. Act. 17.
And upon these words: God is in us. The power of God appears in no creature
more then in man, although he fulfill all things, as he says by the Prophet
Jeremy: An^ I God only nigh at hand and not a far off also? Therefore he
says truly, that God is not far off, of every one of us, who works by us,
as a workman with the tool, which he has made.

And after: They are fit to receive the word of God, which earnestly thirst
after it, In cap. Act. 18.
which shut the eyes of reason, who altogether distrusting to their own
righteousness, wisdom, or knowledge; do rely only upon the word of God,
acknowledging themselves to be blind, and ever to err and stumble, unless they
be lightened with the heavenly light. And for this cause they require, and
earnestly desire often this lightening in their godly prayers. Of them it is
said in the fifth of Matthew, Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after
righteousness

And a little after: The flesh is ever fearful, Ibid.
and escheweth perils, and trembles at death; nor can endure any trouble for
the Lords sake: Therefore we have need of the grace of God; by which we are
that we are. By this it appears that there is no goodness in the flesh.

And of Abraham he writes thus: In cap. Act. 19.
True faith doubts not of the word of God, though all things seem contrary: So
Abraham believed God when as he had heard of him: This shall not be thy heir,
(meaning Ismael) but he that shall proceed out of thine own bowels; he shall
be thine heir. Though he himself were an old man, and had a very old woman
to his wife; who also was barren: yet he believed God, promising him a son,
against nature, against reason, against man's capacity. That I may say with
Paul: He believed in hope against hope; he gave God the glory, and he brought
in bondage himself, and his own reason: And that was accounted to him for
righteousness: that is, pleased God more, then all things that Abraham had
done hitherto. That for this faith he was just, and so accounted of before
God, etc.

Thus we may see what is in man even regenerate, still flesh and blood
resisting the will, word and promises of God, which all good Christians must
strive daily to conquour. 1. Epist. Ioh. 5.4.
And this is that great victory of faith, which Saint John speaks of. And of
S. Paul, when he was come to Jerusalem, the same Ferus writes thus: Letting all
other things pass; Fer. in Act. cap. 21.
he reckons up unto them the works of God; and he ascribes all things to God;
and he accounts himself, but as a servant or instrument. As also in other
places: What is Paul? What is Apollo? but Ministers, by whom you have believed.
I have planted, and Apollo has watered: but God has given the increase.

(The which things when as they heard:) he shows that they gladly heard,
what things Paul told them of the profiting of the Gentiles: and they glorified
God: they also ascribe all things to God.

Here it is worth the marking, how in the Primitive Church, all the Saints of
God, when as themselves or others had done any thing well, they all
attributed it wholly and only to God, excluding themselves; as in this place
Paul, and all the faithful do. And in the Acts, when as Peter and John had
healed the creple, Act. 3.12.
Peter said unto the people: Ye men of Israel why marvel you at this, or why
look ye so steadfastly on us; as though by our own power or godliness, we had
made this man go? The God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our
fathers, has glorified his son Jesus, whom ye betrayed, etc. And S. Paul
speaking of the alms of the Church of Macedonia, 2. Cor. 8.1.
writes thus: We do you also to wit, brethren, of the grace of God bestowed
upon the Church of Macedonia. And after not only he calls it so, but also
they, (no doubt as he had taught them: Verse. 4.
) And they prayed us with great instance, that we would receive that grace,
and that fellowship of the ministering which is toward the Saints.

And after Saint Paul applying their example to the Corinthians, Verse, 6.
writes thus: That we should exhort Titus, as he had begun, so he would
accomplish the same grace amongst you also. And after: As ye abound in every
thing, Verse, 7.
in faith, in word, and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love
toward us: even so see that you abound in this grace also. And after speaking
of Luke, whose praise is in the Gospel, thorough all the Churches: and not so
only, but is also chosen of the Churches, Verse, 19.
to be a fellow in our journey, concerning this grace, that is ministered by us.

We may note here how both the alms it self, and the very exhortation to
give the alms; is accounted a grace. They called and accounted all the good
things they did in those days, grace.

1. Pet. 4.11.
And so likewise Saint Peter teaches: Let every man, as he has received the
gift; minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace
of God. If any man speak, let him talk as the words of God. If any man
minister, or do any service, or good work in the Church of God, let him do it,
as of the hability, which God ministers; that God in all things may be
glorified, thorough Jesus Christ. To whom be praise and dominion, for ever
and ever, Amen.

Saint Peter here teaches us to account all good works, the manifold graces
of God; yea even every good word we speak: And that we should do all
things, that God might be glorified in all our works. And the greatness of
this work makes him also, abruptely break off his Epistle; and even himself
there to yield this praise and glory of God. No doubt all christians in those
days had perfectly learned this lesson: for so we read of them when as they
heard that Paul preached now the faith, Gal. 1.24.
which before he destroyed: They glorified God in me (says Saint Paul.) They
woondred not at him (as some would have done) but they gave God the glory:
they acknowledged his hand, his work.

And saint Paul writing but of the care that Titus had to move the Corinthians
to give alms: 2. Cor. 8.16.
Thanks be unto God (says he) who has put into the heart of Titus the same
care for you. Thus they call all good works, the grace of God; and all good
thoughts, as it were put into our hearts by God: and they glorified God in all
things.

And to the same effect Ferus writes again thus: Fer. in Act. cap. 22.
When as Gods light comes unto us, the eyes of reason must be shut; and we
must follow, what ways it leads us. And after: Mark here how hardly man's
will submits it self to Gods will; for it ever repines against it: and had
rather have the matter otherwise, then God would have. So Moses, although he
heard sentence pronounced against him; yet he says, I will go and see the
land: so also Jonas being scourged of God, would hardly obey: So Ezechiel,
although he foretold the judgment of God, yet notwithstanding he lamenteth it;
whereby he declares, that he had rather have it otherwise, if it were
possible: so does Paul here. These examples are written that we may see, how
that the Saints have had their imperfections; least we should despair, when we
find the like affections in our selves.

Man's will, by Ferus his judgment, is ever spurning against Gods will; it does
not willingly and freely work with grace, as the Papists do teach.

And although he do defend free will in some other places, saying; That the
greatest things that free will herein affoords, is, Fer. de filio prod. Ser. 6.
that it obeys grace, and embraces grace, and makes it profitable to it
self, when as otherwise by our own free will, we should very slowly or never
rise from our sins; if the grace of God were wanting and should not work
with us, both in the beginning, in the middle, and in the end; yet (says he)
our will must of necessity be added thereunto: for Augustine says, he that
created thee without thee, will not justify thee without thee. And Saint Paul,
Not I, but the grace of God with me.

But yet after he adds this: Secondly mark here what cogitations faith puts
in man's mind, I will say (says he) father I have sinned not ordinarily, but
above all measure. I have even sinned against heaven: I will not excuse my
self unto thee; but I will plainly confess my self unworthy of all grace and
favor, etc. All these things (says he) are quite contrary to nature, which
can hardly be brought that it should say; I have sinned, or that it should
account it self unworthy; upon whom any benefit should be bestowed: but it
self will ever be in the first place, and it desires to be highly accounted
of, etc.

Here Ferus plainly teaches the repugnance between nature and grace; nature
must have a new will put into it, or else it will never embrace these
cogitations, these good motions.

Lib. 5. de sapientia.
Osorius also out of Plato very excellently paints out the nature of man.
Call to remembrance (says he) that great cave or den, which he most wittily
has devised, and those chains, wherewith he makes men to be fast bound, that
they cannot behold the light; and those vain shadows, which seem to move
hither and thither, and to speak; and those resemblances of things, which
those men, which are thus bound in iron chains, falsely judge to be things
indeed. He could not more fitly by any other means, have set before our eyes,
the lives of wicked men. For they being here groueling on the earth, and in
love with their bodies, and chained with the innumerable chains of vices;
cannot turn their mind that way, that they may behold the light, and the
true shapes of things. For there is no truth indeed, in these bodily and
earthly; but in divine and eternal things: Therefore all the commodities of
this life, have no firm or sound thing in them, but only bear a face or show
of good things. And men being now acquainted with these shadows, and being
deluded with these Images of things; do with tooth and nail, pursue after
false good things, and being effeminated with the false sweetness of pleasure,
are so kept in bondage, that they are now enemies to all those, which would
rid them out of those bonds, and would endeavor to bring them to heaven, that
they might behold the true sun indeed, and the true light, and true men, and
true good things; that is, that they might behold heavenly and divine things,
and that they might have the whole force of their minds fixed in everlasting
things. Thus far Osorius.

This is man's estate before regeneration, to delight in sin, not to be able
to be hold the true light, naie to be even an open enemy to those that shall
go about to draw him from this bondage, or shall endeavor to make him see his
own misery and unhappiness: so far off is he from embracing the true
light, if it be offered unto him. This is Osorius his judgment in this place.

And a little after he writes thus: Is it not most certain that this is
granted to Christians, to behold God, as often as they stir up their weak
faith, and do devoutly pray for Gods grace, that being loosed from these
bonds, and turned away from these shadows of things, and turned to the true
good things indeed, that they may mount up with their minds into heaven, and
that they may behold those most excellent and eternal riches, and may enjoy
that sweet and most pleasant familiarity, and talk with God with
unspeakable joyfulness.

Here plainly appears, what effects the grace of God works in men's souls. It
not only loses them from the strong and iron chains of their sins, but
also it withdrawes them from the love of vanities, and turns them to the love
of virtue and true godliness. These effects here Osorius attributes to the
grace of God: man of his own nature has them not.

Ambrose of man's duty to God writes thus: De Abraham pat. lib. 2. ca. 8.
That soul which is full of wisdom and righteousness, is more devout in the
worship of God, and paies her tenthes of all the fruits of the earth, according
to a more heavenly wisdom herein, in that she referres the perfection of all
her senses and works to God, she challenges nothing to her self, which is
not able to govern her self, unless she were underpropped with Gods favor,
etc. All Abraham's children of their father must learn to pay these tenthes to
God.

But for the maintenance of free will, Romans 7.18.
that place of Saint Paul may be objected: To will is at hand; but to do
good, I cannot tell how to do it. Saint Austen expounds this place thus: De
praed. and gra. ca. 13.
Although that same will is not of us; it is the gift of God; because of him
we have both to will and to do, according to his good pleasure.

And concerning this place Austen first expounded it of a man unregenerate, but
after he changed his mind, and expounded it of the regenerate: as appears in
his Book, Contra Iu^. cap. 11.

Ambrose also is of the same mind with Austen herein, and expounds this place
of the regenerate, speaking of the strife that was between Abraham and Lot,
which he allegoricallie applies to the soul of man. Lib. 2. de Abra. cap. 6.
Hereof comes (says he) the discord of our cogitations, when as the flesh
rebels against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. Then there is no
small combat, when as the Apostle himself, the Lords chosen vessel says: I
see the law of my flesh, resisting the law of my mind, and bringing me in
bondage under the law of sin, which is in my members. He himself could not
pacify this combat: and therefore he fled to Christ, saying: O unhappy man
that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? that is, that I
cleave not to the pleasures of the flesh. Who is it, that shall loose me from
these bonds, and shall set me free; and shall writh rather the senses to the
sobriety of the mind, then to the drunkenness of the body? but because amongst
men he could not find such a guide; turning to God, he says: The grace of God
by our Lord Jesus Christ. If he that was so strong trusted not in his own
strength, that he might escape the body of death, but sought for help of
Christ; what shall we do who are weaker? etc.

Phil. de Dies sum. prae dic. Tit. amor. hominis erga Deum.
I will conclude this point of free will, with a saying of Philippus de Dies:
When as only God is the author of the reasonable soul, and that the will is a
power of such a soul; it follows manifestly, that only God can move it; not
only in bestowing the nature and essence unto it; but also the willing of that
which is good, and also the end, which is the conclusion of all our willings.
Therefore we must desire of him with most earnest prayers, with that kingly
Prophet: Incline my heart (O God) unto thy Testimonies.

2. Of Justification.
De indulg.
POligranes a Papist of Christ's merits, writes thus: We must know that Christ
the son of God, by his works and passions, did deserve many things of God his
father. To himself glory and exaltation, as Saint Paul says: for which cause
God has exalted him, etc. He has deserved also to men a general
satisfaction, for their sins. For by his blood, he has washed away the
faults, and by his death, has restored the grace of justification. You are
justified freely (says the Apostle) by his grace, Romans 3.
by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. But by this his merit, he has so
freely washed away the faults, that according to the faith of the Church, and
of the holy scripture, he has left some part of the punishment vnredeemed,
which is either here to be redeemed, with the works of mercy, or else to be
paid hereafter. And therefore thirdly he deserved; that he which of himself
has deserved it, through special faith and devotion, might forgive this
punishment himself, which we do not doubt, the thief did on the cross. This
is Poligranes his opinion.

But here first, how contrary is he in this his doctrine, to that saying of
Saint Paul, which he alleges? If we be justified freely by the grace of
Jesus Christ, and for his sake by the redemption which is in him; then we are
not justified for our own sakes. No part of this redemption, remains in our
selves. And what is it else to be justified, but a condemned man to be acquitted;
not only from his crime he has committed, but also from the punishment due to
that crime? For herein consists the chief part of justification, to be
delivered and discharged from the punishment: or else he will make our
justification with God, like the pardons of some kings, when as the malefactors
be hanged, and the pardons about their necks. But the pardon which our
merciful and loving Savior has obtained for us, is most free, is most ample:
it contains in it no such exceptions of any part of the punishment, of us
after to be redeemed. This work of redemption, man must let that alone for
ever, either in part or in whole; either for himself, or for his brother: As
the Psalmist teaches all men, high and low, rich and poor, one with another.
Psalm. 49.1.2.7.8
And he yeeldes them also the reason: So precious is that redemption of their
souls, that it requires such a great price, as all the goods, and riches, and
lands in the world, given or bestowed, will not serve the turn. And to this
place of the Psalm, alludes no doubt Saint Peter in his Epistle, 1. Pet. 1.18.
Knowing (says he) that you were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, from your vain conversation, received by the traditions of
your fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled
and without spot.

This point of doctrine all Christians must know: that it is only the blood of
Jesus Christ, that is the ransom of their souls, and not any work of man
whatsoever; as this Papist teaches: no not all their goods, and lands given to
the poor can challenge any part herein. This requires a greater price: So
precious is the redemption of souls, as David teaches.

Secondly they must know, that the traditions of their fathers will not be a
sufficient warrant for them before God; upon which thing at this day, many
simple Catholics ground their faith and religion. To deliver us from that
vain conversation, which we had learned from our fathers, Christ died: And
shall we follow our fathers steps still? Shall their doings be a light unto
us? God has given us another light to follow. Psalm. 119.105.
Thy word (says David) is a Lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths.
I would to God all true Catholics would learn these two lessons out of Saint
Peter: And here what need we any such supplies? Christ Jesus himself has
suffered for us; as saint Peter also tells us; and that not sparingly, but
abundantly.

Col. 1.24.
And the same Author goes forward in this matter thus, upon that place of saint
Paul: Now I rejoice for you in my sufferings, and I fulfill those things in my
flesh, which are wanting of the passions of Christ, for his body which is the
Church. Here (says he) he gives us covertly to understand, that he suffers in
his flesh, to profit the Church: and that in these his sufferings, that which
Christ's passions wanted, his did supply. Not that the sufferings of Paul were
more forcible then the sufferings of Christ; but because Christ by his passion
took away the fault, but Paul, and other just men working and suffering for
the body of Christ, fulfilled that which was wanting: that is to say; the
releasing of the punishment, which was due to the fault, and the daily increase
of grace. And therefore these merits of the Saints, although they have been
fully rewarded for them: yet because they were also done for others, must
needs profit them. Wherefore by good right, they do belong to the treasure of
the Church, to be bestowed of any man, for some special cause, or for the
great affection of his devotion together with the merits of Christ.

Mark here how he obscures the glory of Christ, teaching that he did not
wholly and absolutely redeem us, but in part only; and from the fault, and
not from the punishment, due to the fault. And he teaches, that Paul and other
just men, working, do deserve not some part of the punishment only (as he
said before) but simply and absolutely the punishment due to the same fault:
naie more then that also, the daily increase of grace. Is not that here
plainly fulfilled which is written in the Revelation? And the fourth Angel
blew his Trumpet, Reu. 8.1^.
and the third part of the Sun was stricken, and the third part of the Moon,
and the third part of the Stars. Is not this to obscure the third part of
the Sun (not as Gagneius a Papist expoundes this place;) the Pope and his
Cardinals, who (says he) are as it were Suns, Gag. in 8. cap. Apoc.
and give light to the people: But the true sun of righteousness Jesus Christ?
The Holy ghost here names but one sun: If his exposition had been true, it
should rather have been said suns, in the plural number. But does not saint
John himself expound unto us, who is this sun? Reu. 1.16.
And he had in his right hand seven Stars, and out of his mouth went a
sharp two edged Sword: and his countenance was as the Sun in his power. Who
is this, but Jesus Christ? This sun Jesus Christ was obscured; a third part
of it was stricken, not his whole glory, but some part thereof was diminished.
How can this prophecy more fitly be fulfilled, then by this doctrine? let
all men judge. Seewhat shifts they are driven to, to maintain their pardons.
Nay not only the third part of the Sun, but also the third part of the
Stars: Those also whom saint John expounds to be ministers of the Church,
were smitten, by the Popes fall from heaven, by his proud supremacy. That,
proud Boniface, who obtained this superiority of Phocas, fulfilled; Greg.
lib. 4. Epist. 2. ep. 32.
which Gregory his predecessor affirmed: That if he should challenge to
himself that name of universal Bishop, or Bishop of the whole world (as the
Pope does now) the honor and dignity of his fellow Bishops should be
diminished.

Saint Peter also lively paintes out this sun unto us: 2. Pet. 1.19.
We have also (says he) a most sure word of the prophets, to the which you
do well, that you take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place,
until the day dawne, and that day Star (or as the Greek word imports)
that light-bringer, that is, (...).
the true Sun Jesus Christ, arise in your hearts. Saint Peter also, whom they
would seem to make so great account of, tells them plainly, who is this
Sun, not the Pope and his Cardinals, and prelates; but that great
light-bringer Jesus Christ, who lighteneth every man that comes into the world.
Ioh. 1.9.
And dare they abridge the beams of this Sun? Dare they measure his merits?
dare they pinch his power? O blasphemous doctrine! Does not the Pope herein
declare plainly who he is? that is, that star that fell from heaven, and
has stricken the third part of the sun: who has done this but he?

Ioh. 17.19.
Has not Christ alone himself wholly and sufficiently redeemed us? Jesus
Christ did not only sanctify himself for us, that we might be freed from
sin and cleansed from our faults: but he also suffered for us, that we might
also be acquitted from punishment: And therefore Esaias says very excellently:
The chastisement of our peace was upon him. Esaias 55.3.
And our Savior himself says upon the Cross. John 19.20.
It is finished: No doubt meaning that great work of our redemption. It was
the last word he spoke: and shall we not believe him? And Saint Peter says:
that we were not in part, but wholly redeemed; not with gold or silver: but
with the precious blood of Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 1.18.19 20.
And this Granatensis also affirms, speaking of Christ when as he did sweat
water and blood: Medit. vitae Christi 22.
Is not thine anger appeased (O holy Father) with this so miserable a spectacle
of thy son? Behold what he suffers, which never deserved any evil? he has
satisfied thee for our sins; he has paid for our redemption a most excellent
price. For one drop of this most holy sweat, is more precious and of more
value, then all the treasures in the world. Thus far Granatensis. What shall
we think then of his heart blood shed for us upon the Cross? And therefore
Peter says: 1. Pet. 2.24.
By his stripes our wounds were not only bound up, and now brought to some
good perfection, that after we our selves might heal them (as the Papists
teach:) but they were perfectly healed. And David also prophesying of Christ's
passion, Psalm. 130.67.
faith: Let Israel wait on the Lord, for with the Lord is mercy, John 10.10.
and with him is plenteous redemption: and he shall redeem Israel from all
his sins. And the same also our Savior testifies of himself: That he is
comen that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly.
There is nothing remaining to our salvation; it is abundantly accomplished;
that which remains is to our conformation: Romans 8.29.
We must be like fashioned to the Image of Jesus Christ: No doubt they, which
deny this abundance of Christ's redemption, which was the end of his coming
(as he himself here witnesses:) deny that he is comen. And therefore we may
see here, as in a glass, what is that spirit of Antichrist, 1. John 4.3.
that shall deny Jesus Christ to be comen in the flesh: Surely even they, who
although they confess he be comen to give life; yet shall deny, that he is
comen to give it abundantly: He is comen (as himself witnesses) that we
might have life; and that abundantly. Let us mark this well; and let us take
heed least by pinching his merits, that we deny not, that he is comen.

Saint Paul himself takes away all parts of justification from man: I know
nothing by my self (says he; 1. Cor. 4.4.
) yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judges me is the Lord. As though
he should say with David: Although, as concerning this my ministry, I know
nothing to accuse my self of; Act. 20.26.27
I have declared all the counsels of God, etc. yet there are secret sins,
which man cannot epsy; from which David prays to be cleansed: Psalm. 19.12.
and therefore no man can justify himself, no not the holiest man in the
world. It is God that judges. And after he accounts his stricte kind of life,
wherein he lived even a Pharisee, and his integrity of life among all men, but
even as doung, Philip. 3.5.8.
that he might be found in Christ Jesus, not having his own righteousness,
which is of the law: but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the
righteousness which is of God through faith.

He repeates twice wherein true righteousness consists: even through faith
in Christ. If Saint Paul accounted his own righteousness, but as doung in
Gods sight, and all the good works he had done, and durst not trust in them;
what shall we account of the merits of Friars and such others? Can they profit
to the salvation of others? Shall we account them as treasures of the Church?
Paul accounted not so of his works, as here we may learn of him: Matthew. 25.4.
and shall we account better of our own works, or of the works of any
others? The wise virgins also teach all Gods Saints this lesson: They plainly
confess, that they were afraid least they had not oil enough for themselves;
and therefore they would impart none thereof to others: and shall we account
our selves more rich then they? Surely then we shall show our selves to be
foolish, and not wise virgins. And no doubt, such wise virgins are all Gods
Saints; and yet Poligranes will make them to have merits enough, not only to
serve their own turns, but also to be laid up in the treasure of the Church,
to profit others: and that for others also they wrought their works. All
Christ's servants must say: Luke 17.10.
that they are unprofitable servants, when as they shall have done all things
that are commanded them: (which who is able to do?) if they were able to do
all Gods commandments; yet even then they must say and confess, and that not
with mouth only, but with their hearts also, that they are unprofitable
servants: much more then now they must confess and acknowledge this, when as
they are not able to do the least part of those things, which are commanded
them; and when as, those things also which they do, they do very imperfectly.
Where are then those works, which they have done for others? where is that
wages of desert, which other Papists teach? An unprofitable servant can
challenge no wages at all; much less of due desert.

Nay our Savior in that place teaches all his, what account to make of their
works: Say (says he) we have done but that which was our duty to have
done. This our Savior teaches all Christians to say and believe: and shall
we not obey him? All Christians works, they are but duties; they are no
merits or deserts: they are rewarded of mercy, and not of merit; Luke 12.33.
of promise, and not of performance. They are laid up for themselves, as
treasures in heaven; and not (as the Papists teach) in the Popes treasury
here on earth, to profit others.

But let us consider what other sounder Catholics then Poligranes, has
written of Christ's redemption, Gagneius expounds that place of Saint Paul to
the Colossians thus: In 1. cap. ad Col.
I supply the wants, or rather the remnants, of the afflictions of Christ; as
Ambrose does translate it: not that Christ's passions are insufficient for us,
but that the afflictions of his mystical body the Church; that is, of the holy
Martyrs, are accounted the afflictions of Christ, which he accounts his,
saying: That which ye have done to one of the least of these; ye have done to
me.

Thus Gagneius expounds this place out of Ambrose: he confesses, that Christ's
passion is sufficient for our redemption; and that the passions and afflictions
of the Saints, are honored with that honorable title, that they are called
also the afflictions of Christ, because he is the head of his Church. He brings
in also another exposition of Photion: that to fulfill the wants and remnants
of Christ's passion, is nothing else, then to suffer for him, as he suffered for
us. For Christ suffered for you (says Peter) leaving you an example, that you
should follow his steps: Christ therefore suffered for us; what now remains?
but that we should also be afflicted and suffer together with him: he that does
this, fulfils that was wanting of the afflictions of Christ; not on Christ's
behalf, but on his own. For although Christ's afflictions were sufficient to
redeem all men: yet on our behalf this is wanting to them, that we should
suffer for the Church, and one for another. For by many tribulations we must go
into the kingdom of heaven. Therefore says Saint Paul, The want of his
afflictions: that is, that which wants for us to do, after his afflictions;
I fulfill in my flesh, in steed of Christ, by so long and grievous afflictions
for his body, which is the Church. Our afflictions are Christ's steps: we must
follow him in them: they are no part of the price of our redemption: they are
the way which we must walk in, if we will go to heaven: they are not the
purchase of heaven. And these S. Paul endured for the Church, in serving it,
not in saving it.

Stella also of Christ's redemption writes thus: In cap. Luc. 1^.
Fourthly looking for their master, they make all things ready, they strewe
and sweep their whole house: So we also which look for our master, must
furnish our understanding with the knowledge of God, and our wills with his holy
love, and our memories with the remembrance of all the good things, which we
have received of his bountiful hand. For when we were utterly lost and undone,
through the sin of our first parents: he redeemed us so perfectly, that Paul
says, where iniquity abounded, there grace superabounded: for by his death he
opened to us the gates of heaven, and gave us the resurrection of the flesh.

Stella here plainly confesses, that Christ redeemed us perfectly, and that
by his redemption: whereas by the fall of Adam, sin abounded to punish us and
to condemn us, now grace more abounds to pardon us, and to justify us.
Christ's grace is not limited within the banks of the Babylonicall Euphrates,
that his merits should take away crime, and not pain; that thereby the
merits of Friars and such like, might gain riches to the Church of Rome: but
it spreades it self far beyond all the banks of man's reason and device.
The virtue and force of Christ's passion, no man is able to comprehend: his
riches (which all Gods ministers are commanded to preach, with Saint Paul) are
unsearchable: they are without bottom or end. Eph^l. 3.8,
Even unto me (says Saint Paul) the least of all Saints, is this grace given,
that I should preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ:
And dare the Pope say, that he has found out the bottom of them to
establish his pardons?

In cap. 8. Act.
Ferus also very excellently teaches all Pastors, what is meant by that
phrase, when it is said, that the Apostles preached Christ. To preach Christ
(says he) is to teach, that he died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification: and that there is salvation in none other: And it is to preach
righteousness, sanctification, remission of sins, and redemption. For Christ
is become all these things unto us. Therefore he preaches not Christ, which
teaches to trust in works, or to seek by any means else salvation, then of
Christ: As the false prophets do, which teach us to seek righteousness and
remission of sins some where else, then in Christ. For they say: Behold here
is Christ: behold him there. In Christ only these things are to be found: For
there is no other name under heaven, in which we must be saved: To this all the
law, and the prophets bear witness, that we do receive remission of sins
by his name.

If this be true, then Poligranes and all the Popes pardon-sellers, which
teach, that not only by Christ's merits, sins are forgiven; but join the
merits of Martyrs, and the treasure of the Church unto them, preach not Christ
by his judgment: naie they are false Prophets. Neither here, nor there; in no
place else, nor in nothing else, remission of sins is to be had; but only in
Jesus Christ: no not at Rome in the year of Iubile, says Ferus.

In cap. 11. Act.
Again to the same effect the writes thus: To preach Christ, is to teach, that
all our trust is to be put in him alone: man can do no more, but preach and
exhort: the which he that shall diligently do, is guiltless before God if any
perish.

Ferus of Christ's satisfaction very excellently writes thus: What sorrow was
ever like mine, Part. 4. pass. 26.
from the crown of my head, to the sole of my feet, there was no found part:
what therefore remains (O father) but seeing that I make satisfaction so
abundantly, but that thou lay apart thine anger, forgive them, have mercy
upon them, and power upon them the streams of thy grace?

Ibide^.
Upon these words, It is finished, Ferus writes thus: Behold now (the Lord be
praised) by me is finished whatsoever my Father has decreed. I have suffered
whatsoever the law and the prophets have foretold: and whatsoever was necessary
or profitable to man's salvation. The sacrifice is made; the figures are
fulfilled; the shadows are taken away.

From whence springs the patience of Martyrs? but hereof; Bar. in Ser. Cant.
61.
that a Martyr by devout and continual meditation, does hide himself in the
stripes and wounds of Christ. The Martyr stands in this tryumphing and
dancing, although his body be all rent, and the Sword pierce his side: he
beholds the holy blood to boil out of his fide, not only valiantly, but
joyfully. Where then is the Martyrs soul? Surely in safety: that is to say, in
the rock; that is to say, in the bowelles of Jesus: His wounds being open,
that he may enter in thither. If he were in his own bowelles searching them,
without all doubt he would feel the Sword; he were notable to abide the
pain, he would yield, he would deny.

See how fitly Christ applies plasters unto our wounds. Sin first is
conceived in the heart: for concupiscence begets sin, Fer. de pass. part. 1.
and after it is by our works finished. So Christ is first sorrowful in heart,
and after outwardly, that he might take away all sin, and fully make
satisfaction for us. So that by Ferus judgment, Christ's salvation was full and
perfect for us. All men were like those two debtors, whereof our Savior
speaks in the Gospel: To whom when they had nothing to pay, the lender
forgave mercifully: so has God freely forgiven us our sins, for the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ. All our tears and kneeling down, Luke 7.4^.
and works of mercy, and repentance for our sins, are but signs to so
merciful a Lord, and of the loathing of our sins. And after Ferus writes
thus: I am he: by this word Christ puts himself in our stead, patiently about
to endure whatsoever the justice of God should endure for our sins.

And a little after: Idem part. 8.
For this cause especially he would not have his Apostles die with him, least
we should think that his death alone had not sufficed: and therefore he would
die alone, that he alone might be acknowledged our Savior. Esaias. 63. Deuteronomy. 33.
I have trodden the Winepresse alone (says he) and of all nations there was
none with me. And therefore Moses also says: God alone was his God, neither
was there any other God with him. Therefore he redeemed us, and not we our
selves, etc. But the Church of Rome adds the Apostles and Martyrs merits to
Christ's; as though he alone had not redeemed us, and calls those the treasure
of the Church.

Fer. part. 2. pass.
In these manifold sufferings of Christ, we see, as it were with our eyes, our
injustice, how wicked, how full of sins we are, but especially we were. For
how vile here Christ outwardly appeared to men: so vile were we before God in
our souls; yea, what kind of one Christ is here, such should we have been for
ever, unless he had taken these things on him.

Part. 3. pass.
And after: Here let us consider our selves, as here Christ with one consent,
and with great joy of his enemies, without all pity, without all hope of
deliverance, or of returning back again, no man assisting him, or knowing
him, is led to the judgment of death: So we should have been led to that
horrible judgment of God, unless Christ had put himself in our stead. Therefore
if thou mind to stand in Gods judgment, rely upon Christ then, by faith. For
without him none can stand in the judgment of God. For no man living is
justified, or found righteous in the sight of God.

And after, speaking of those things which Christ had suffered at the hands of
the Jews: Although (says he) those things which we have heard already, had
been enough for the redemption of all the world; yet he would suffer more then
these, that he might fully satisfy for our sins; that considering the
greatness of the remedy, no man might ever have cause to despair. And
speaking of his whipping he writes thus: He that clothes all things, is
spoiled of his clothes: and he that hides all our shame, is openly put to shame
in the sight of all men; least that we should be put to a perpetual shame:
which surely we should have been, if Christ had not endured this nakedness and
shame for us.

Part. 2. pass.
But that agony of Christ signified nothing else, hut the fear of our
conscience before the judgment seat of God: for the soul (now the time of the
judgment drawing near) is touched with the feeling of our sins, which being
touched, begins now altogether to tremble and quake, and even to perish, being
now alone before the tribunal seat of God. Of which trembling Job said; If he
shall suddenly call man to an account, who is able to answer him? This fear
was also showed in that feast of the Gospel, whereas he, who having no wedding
garment, being examined of the Lord, was straightwaies dumb. The godly are
sometime possessed with this fear, as appears in Job, and David says; O
Lord, chasten me not in thy wrath, because there is no health in my flesh, by
reason of thy displeasure. So also Ezechias: I (says he) said in the midst
of my days, I shall go to the gates of hell. Least therefore that we should
be ever in danger of this fear; Christ was for our sakes in this agony.
Therefore when that temptation shall invade us, let us pray with Ezechias: O
Lord, I am violently afflicted, answer thou for me: and with David; under the
shadow of thy wings protect me. Man is not able, no not the holiest man, to
appear before the tribunal seat of God, without this fear and quaking: his
best works are imperfect. And therefore Christ was in this agony for him, etc.

And after, the same Ferus writes thus: Yea, Fer. pass. part. 3. speaking of
Barrabas and Christ.
that which was done in Pilates judgment, the same falls out in the
judgment of God. On the one side stood that notable thief Adam, with all his
posterity, who all of them had deserved death: on the other side, stood the
most innocent Son of God. Now one of these by Gods justice was to suffer
death; and God of his great mercy spared Adam, and yielded his most innocent
Son up to death for him. Let us embrace this great mercy of God (brethren)
and be thankful to God for it.

And of Christ's spoiling of his garments, he writes thus: Ibidem.
He is turned naked out of his garments, which clothes the heavens with
Stars, and the earth with flowers: and what kind of one the first man was,
when he dwelt in Paradise, such a one the second Adam entered into Paradise
again. He suffered therefore himself to be spoiled of his garments, that he
might receive for us, the garment of innocence; he was not ashamed to stand
naked before all men, least we should be found naked before god the endured
shame, that he might cover the guiltines of our consciences: for he is blessed,
whose sins are covered.

And upon these words, (He that is washed, Part. 1. pass.
needs not but that his feet only should be washed) he writes thus: This second
washing is not done at the Font; but by repentance, which cleanses our daily
sins. For repentance is as it were a second board, by which they which after
baptism have suffered shipwreck, may swim out. Of this washing Esaias
speaks: Be ye washed, be ye clean: and this washing of our feet by
repentance, must be done ever. For the way wherein we walk, is mirie, as
David says; and Jeremy, 1. King. 21. Lam. 1. 2. Tim. 2.
the mire sticks to Hierusalems feet; and saint Paul: He that shall cleanse
himself from them shall be a vessel of honor.

But this may trouble some perchance, that Christ adds. But is all clean:
how is he all clean, which is commanded as yet to wash his feet? Yea, how can
he be all clean which is baptized, when as the Scripture in every place
affirms, that no man is without sin? It is most true, that no man is
without sin: and yet notwithstanding, it is also true, that he is all clean,
that is, purified by faith. For he because he is grafted into the body of
Christ, by faith, does participate and possess the holiness and purity of
Christ: And therefore Paul said to them that believe, ye are washed, ye are
sanctified by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And again, there is no
condemnation to those that are in Jesus Christ. Therefore they which are
grafted into Christ, are called holy, for the faith, name and blood of Christ;
although in the mean time, in themselves they are nothing else but sinners, and
have in them much sin as yet, but no condemnation, because they are accounted
just with God through faith in Christ. Hereof it is, that Paul speaks of
himself: with my mind I serve the law of God, but with my flesh the law of
sin. Ferus here plainly teaches, that man's righteousness is by imputation
of the righteousness of Christ, and not by any inherent righteousness in
himself.

And again, speaking upon Stephens death, he gives these notable lessons upon
these words: Fer. in cap. 7. Act.
(Lord Jesus receive my spirit.) He railes not, nor curses not; but with great
modesty calls upon God: To him alone he co^mits his soul. Here I would have
thee also learn the best manner of dying: First he is careful not for his
body, but for his soul: the wicked do contrary. Secondly, he calls upon God,
distrusting in himself, and of his own merits: but the wicked trust in their
own merits, and therefore they build upon the sand. Thirdly, he confesses
his faith briefly: but most perfectly, calling him Lord, who is able; and
Jesus, who is also willing to save. These three things are especially to be
marked: for they are very necessary to a blessed and happy death: For they
are blessed which die in the Lord.

I would to God all true Catholics, which mind to die well, would learn
these three lessons of Saint Stephen out of Ferus: First, to have more care of
their souls, then of their bodies. It makes no matter, what manner of death
they die, or what cost be bestowed upon their funerals: let them do good and
bestow their goods themselves, 3. Cor. 5.20.
while they are in the body. Secondly, that at the hours of their deaths;
yea and all their life long also, (if then in that extremity) they would call
upon none other, but, as Saint Stephen does here, upon Jesus Christ. Thirdly,
that they would condemn themselves, as unprofitable servants, before the
majesty of God, and not trust in their own merits: as Ferus here teaches
them. And here if Saint Stephen trusted not in his Martyrdom, being so notable
a work, neither was it laid up in the treasury of the Church, to help the
salvation of others; much less the works of any other: as Poligranes
teaches. And lastly, that they would confess the Lord Jesus, even this short
faith, these two words, as Saint Stephen did. For as Saint Paul says: God
will make his account, and gather it into a short sum, Romans 9.28.
with righteousness: for the Lord will make a short count upon the earth. God
will make now a short account with his faithful servants, Psalm. 143.2.12.
with them that believe in Jesus Christ, they shall not be called to so strickt
account of every idle word, as the Infidels shall: Psalm. 32.1 Matthew. 12.36.
Luke, 9 26. 1. Cor. 15.35. Reuelat. 1.18. Matthew. 11, 28,
they shall be blessed because their sins shall be covered, and because Jesus
Christ at that great day of account, shall not be ashamed of them. That they
would confess, I say, but even with S. Steven these two words: Lord Jesus:
That he is a Lord of death, of hell, and of the Devil; and therefore is able
to save them: and that he is Jesus, who calls all that are heavy laden with the
burden of their sins unto him. And therefore be thou never so blind, Mark,
10.49.
even as blind as Bartimeus, thou may boldly come unto him as he did, when
as he called him: and thou shall not only receive thy sight; but also be
saved, as he was. Who never repelled any from him, not halte, not lame, not
leapers, not possessed; Mat. 21.14.8.2 and 28. John, 11.44.
naie who raised even dead men up again: and therefore is willing to save.
They which acknowledge but these two things from a lively faith, need no more.
This is the sum of Christian religion: thus Stephen died, and in this
Religion.

Again, the same Ferus speaking of the word of God faith: That is rightly
called the word of grace, because it preaches grace, In cap. 14. Act.
and comes to us of the grace of God, and it condemns merits.

And again, Of this Chapter as well the preachers of faith, In cap. 15. Act.
as the Preachers of works, make their bragges; and therefore it is most
diligently to be marked of all men: the question was, whether the law was
necess^rie for them which were converted to Christ; or whether faith in Christ
sufficed? The same question is now also amongst us: whether faith or works do
justify? It is not called in question whether good works are to be done or
no: for all are forced to confess that; that good works must be done: but
whether they justify or not? The Apostles conclude, that faith justifies, and
not works, nor the law. And why does faith justify? because it leanes upon
the grace and mercy of God, upon the promises of God, upon the merits of
Christ. Why does not the law justify? because no man ever kept it. Why do not
works justify? because they are imperfect: All our righteousness is like a
defiled cloth.

This is the sum of the Apostles council, says Ferus; what can be spoken
more plainly then this? Here are questions proposed and answers shaped to
them: and the conclusion is, that faith only iustifies, because it relies
wholly and only of the mercy and promises of God: and that works, no not of
the best men, cannot justify, because they are imperfect.

I wish that all they which cry out, General councels, General councels, and
will believe nothing but that which general councels do teach, would mark
diligently the conclusion of this first General and Apostolical council, in
this great and weighty matter, even in the salvation of their souls: and that
they would condemn all other general councels, which do not agree with this
both in matter and form. They direct their decrees from that general thus:
Act, 15.28.
It seems good to the holy Ghost and unto us: Not, it seems good to Peter and
to us, which should have been the title, if Peter had been the head of the
Church: but they make the holy Ghost Christ's Vicar and his vicegerent. As he
also himself does: John 16.7.
Yet I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go
not away, the comforter will not come unto you: but if I go away, I will send
him unto you. The holy Ghost comes here in Christ's place, and he is his
Vicegerent; he places Bishops and Pastors in the Church; Act. 20.28, 13, 2,
10, 19.
he separates Paul and Barnabas to the work he appoints them: he sent Peter
to Cornelius. He is President in this council. And is not this to govern and
to be head of the Church?

And a little after, Ferus writes thus: This is the chiefest point of all
Christian Religion, upon which all other do depend, that in Christ Jesus is
all fullness: and therefore all that are justified, are justified only by
faith in him, and by nothing else. This is the sum of all the Gospel, this is
the matter of all Saint Paul's Epistles, especially of those which he wrote to
the Romans, Galathians, and Hebrews. And here mark the conditions of false
Apostles: First, they brag themselves to be Christians. They departed from
us, but they were none of us; they are accounted in the number of Christians,
when as they are nothing less; although they be baptized with water, and
partakers of other mysteries, yet they are not baptized with the spirit, nor
incorporate into Christ, from whom their life does so greatly disagree.
Counterfeit Christians have ever done more harm to the church of Christ, then
Infidels: no enemies more hurtful, then false teachers, and especially then
those, which teach men to trust in their works. For these reach us a broken
staff and daube up the wall without mortar: these Christ bids us beware of,
saying: Beware of false teachers.

Here Ferus declares his judgment plainly concerning our justification: That
we are justified (Vnica fide in Jesus Christo) by only faith in Jesus Christ:
and that this is the chiefest point of christian Religion: and that this
doctrine Saint Paul taught almost in every of his Epistles: and that they
which teach men to trust in works, are false teachers. If this be the chiefest
point of christian religion (as it is indeed) then in the chiefest point of
Christian religion Ferus is on our side. And as Basil writes of the
Philosophers: Bas. ho. 8. in. car.
The wise men of Greece (says he) have disputed much of the natures of all
things: but there is no reason, there is no firm or set opinion among them:
the latter opinion ever overthrowing the former, so that we may easily
overthrow their opinions, when as they by their mutual distension, are
sufficient to overthrow themselves: so I may say of the Papists.

Secondly, if they be false teachers, which teach men ts trust in their works,
by Ferus his judgment, then are the Papists false teachers. Again, of
Christian righteousness Ferus writes thus: He speaks not only of that
righteousness which gives every man his own (speaking of Saint Paul making his
Oration before Foelix and Drusilla) but of Christian righteousness, which is
faith in Christ. In cap. Act. 24.
Only faith in Christ by Ferus his judgment, is Christian righteousness. The
works of the Pharisees were, no doubt, as painful as are now the works of
the Papists: Luke 18.11.
They fasted twice in the week they prayed, they paid their tithes truly,
they were no extortioners, they offered no man violence or wrong: For Saint
Paul is said to have been brought up in the City of Jerusalem at the feet
of Gamaliel, Act. 22.3.
and instructed after the perfect manner of the law of the fathers. And their
works were done also in the faith of Christ, as well as ours: they all
believed that Messiah should come, as we now do believe that he is comen: and
yet because by these their works they went about to justify themselves, Romans
9.32.
God condemned them and their works; they lost all their costs, Ioh. 3. ver. 8.
and pains, and labors whatsoever. Let all christians learn to be wise, by
their examples, that they also loose not the works which they have wrought.
God cannot abide this mind in any of his servants, that they should go about
to justify themselves in his sight: Romans 3.19.27. Psalm. 115.1.
All mouths before his Majesty must be stopped: All glory must be ascribed to
him alone. And therefore were we made and predestinate, Ephesians. 1.6.
that we should be to the praise of the glory of his grace. Let all men mark
well this end.

Osorius also contrary to the assertion of Poligranes, of Christ's merits and
redemption, writes thus: He was so despised that we accounted him not a man: De
Sapie. lib. 1
but he bare our infirmities, and sustained our sorrows. But we supposed that
he had been stricken and rejected of God for his own sins. But he through
his wounds did bear the punishment of our rebellion, and was afflicted for our
iniquities. For this he took upon him, that he might establish by his
punishments, the nouriture and discipline of our peace; by which he was to make
us perfect friends with God, and that he might heal our wounds by his
stripes. For we al have gone astray like sheep, and every man turned his own
way: but the Lord appointed unto him the punishments due to our sins. These
and many other things, the Prophet Esaias prosecutes, by which he declares the
intolerable sorrows of Christ, and his most bitter and unspeakable torments.
Thus far Osorius. In which words he teaches that Christ suffered, not only
for the faults; but also for the punishments due to our sins: And that by his
sufferinges we are made perfect friends with God.

Ibidem.
And after he writes thus: But how this most pleasant liberty was established,
it is worth the marking: that there might an end be made (says he) to sin:
(Sin is iniquity against God, which contains in it, the seeds of all
euilles:) And that this sin might be sealed up; that is, that it might now no
more appear, or show it self, but that it should now be so covered by the
mercy of God, as though it had never been committed: even as David says;
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Such a perfect redemption and propitiation of all our sins, Osorius
attributes to Jesus Christ.

Again, Lib. 4. de Sapi.
of the merit of Christ's redemption the same Osorius very excellently writes
thus: Gods justice required that there should be a just recompense made of the
law of God, transgressed by man through his sins. There was nothing of such
force on earth, that was able to make this satisfaction. But without a just
satisfaction for the offense, the equity of Gods justice did not suffer, that
mankind which had offended the Majesty of God, and was now spotted with all
manner of sin, should be received into Gods favor again: therefore it was
meet, that man's nature being joined to the nature of God, should be so rich,
that it should abundantly make satisfaction to God the father for the sin of
all mankind. Therefore Christ borrowed this of his divinity, that his body
being holy, innocent, and stained with no spot of sin, should have in it
infinite virtue and force, whereby it might pay all the debt we were bound in.
And hereof he says, I paid them the things I never took.

And a little after he writes thus: He that has given us the blood of his
Son, what will he deny us, Ibidem.
that is necessary to our salvation? He that spared not his own Son, as
Saint Paul says, but required of him the punishment due to our sins: how
will he again now punish us, if we shall be unthankful for such a benefit?
So that Osorius here plainly affirms, that God required of his son Jesus
Christ the punishment due to our sins; and that whatsoever we now can suffer,
is but our duties; is but thankfulness for so great a benefit.

And after: We must be followers of God, Ibidem.
and if God could not be imitated unless he were seen; and if he could not be
seen, unless he became man, that he might stir up men to the earnest desire of
true virtue, not only in words, but also by examples; what thing could be
invented either more profitably or wisely to man's salvation, then to see the
Son of God, for man's salvation, even as it were shot thorough with
reproaches, torn in pieces with wounds, tormented with griefs, and enduring
all these with an invincible patience; that he might not only suffer punishment
for us, but that also be might strengthen our minds with the example of his
heavenly virtue, and with invincible patience. Let us mark how he says, that
he suffered the punishment for us.

David also in the Psalms teaches us very excellently the great benefit of
Christ's redemption: Psalm. 85.^
O Lord (says he) thou art now well pleased with the land (where the Hebrew
word (Ratsitha) which he uses, signifies the greatest good will that can be)
Thou have turned the captivity of Jacob. Jacob is now delivered from satan's
tyranny; Gen 3.15.
thou have broken the Serpents head, as thou have promised: thou have quite
taken away the transgression of thy people. That prophecy of Micah is now
fulfilled: we may say; Micah. 7.19.
He retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him; he will
return, and have compassion upon us: he will subdue or take with violence all
our iniquities, and cast all their sins into the bottom of the Sea. Our
sins done away by Christ's redemption, shall never be seen any more: this
we must all believe. And as Moses said to Israel of Pharaoh and his army:
Exodus 14.13.
Fear ye not, stand ye still, and behold the salvation of the Lord which he
will show to you this day; for the Egyptians, whom you have seen this day,
ye shall never see them again. So Saint Paul says to all Christians: Wh^
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Romans 8.33.
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea
rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes
request also for us. Ioh. 12.31.
And our savior says; Now is the judgment of the world, by faith or
incredulity; by receiving me, or not receiving me: And the prince of this
world is cast out of doors. And again, Luke 10.18.
I saw Satan like lightning fall down from heaven. As verily as Pharaoh is
drowned in the red sea; so that the Israelites which then saw him and his
army pursuing them, never saw him any more: so verily is this our spiritual
Pharaoh and his army, which pursues all christians, drowned in the sea of
Christ's blood, in the bottomless depth of his redemption, that the faithful
shall never see him any more. He shall not dare, or be bold now to appear
in God sight, to accuse them: He is now quite cast out of doors. Reu.
7.14.12.8
By the blood of the Lamb now; and by that mighty Michael Jesus Christ, is
that great Dragon, and all his angels conquered, they prevailed not, neither
was their place found any more in heaven.

Exodus 25.21.
And thou have covered all their sins.] Here is also the propitiation of
Jesus Christ: he is that golden covering or propitiatory, that covered the
whole arc. No part of the arc here is excepted: and therefore he also covered
the blessed virgin Mary her sins: Luke 1.47.
and hereof no doubt she called him also her Savior. He covered also the
Apostles sins; and therefore also they say; If any man sin, we have an
advocate with the father, 1. Ioh. 8.
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is also the propitiation of our sins.
Thou have gathered together as in a bundell, all thine anger, and laid it upon
Jesus Christ; and art now turned from thy wrathful displeasure. Here is no
doubt, the great redemption of Jesus Christ: and upon this word of God must our
faith be grounded: And do we not think then, that Christ by his passion has
quite taken away both the fault and punishment? all our repentance and
sorrows, are nothing unto the punishments due unto our sins. They are
fruits of repentance, (...), Mat. 3.8.
of our after wits, as the Greek word mate seem to signify: they are
Testimonies that now our former sins do displease us. As that great sinner
Mary Magdalen testified by the breaking of her Box of precious ointment, and
anointing Christ's feet therewith, and wiping his feet with her hair: Ioh.
12.3.
that now she made no account neither of that precious ointment, nor of her
hair, wherein before she took great pleasure. No doubt where true repentance
and turning to God from sin is, these fruits will follow: and without these
fruits worthy of repentance, we may say, as John said to the Pharisees,
that our repentance is but hypocrisy.

And after upon this love of God toward his Church follows a Prayer: Turn
us, O God of our salvation, Verse, 4.
and let thine anger cease from us. And after: Make us see thy mercy, Verse, 7.
O Lord, and give us thy salvation. What is this, but Jesus Christ? Unless God
reveal it to us, we cannot see the greatness of his mercy toward us: And
therefore David prays, Make us see thy mercy, O Lord, and give us thy
salvation. And after: Verse, 10.
Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have kissed each
other: As though he should say; In Jesus Christ is mercy it self; In him is
the truth of all Gods promises. What mercy, 2. Cor. 1.20.
or love, or blessing soever, God has ever promised by the mouth of any of
his Prophets, is verified now, and fulfilled in Jesus Christ. These four
virtues, never met in any man since Adams fall, till now. Truth now has
flourished out of the earth: Verse, 11.
O happy earth, that bore at length such a blossom! All men before were
liars, till Jesus Christ was borne: Psalm. 12.2.62.9.
In whose mouth was no deceit. So that now it may be said, that truth has
flourished out of the earth, and never till now: And righteousness has looked
down from heaven: Even now also to impart her self to men, who were all
before unrighteous, who were altogether naked (as their great grandfather Adam
confessed) to cloth and adorn them. Genesis 3.10.
O happy assembly of heavenly virtues! Oh blessed nativity of Jesus Christ!
Without this, earth had still brought forth lies, man had been still
unrighteous: anger and displeasure of God had reigned in the world: Luke 2.24.
Esaias, 53.5.
punishments and all manner of plagues had taken hold of all men. Oh happy
Metamorphosis and exchange! That for lies, truth, for sin, righteousness;
for anger, peace; for punishment, mercy and loving kindness is bestowed upon
man. Naie this our king is such a king, as that Righteousness shall go before
him, Verse. 13.
it shall direct his goings in the way: he shall not once tread awrie: So that
to the very faces of his enemies he shall say, John, 8.46.
Which of you can rebuke me of sin? And none of them shall be able to accuse
him. He shall justify sinners that trust in him: Esaias, 53.11.
He is able to pay their debts; and minister justice for all those that are
oppressed, to their oppressors: as he did to Naboth and Ahab; 1. King. 21.21.
Luke 16.25.
to Dives and Lazarus. This is the meaning of this Psalm.

Granatensis, as he is full of holy meditations; so especially he exceedes in
this matter: so that although the places I shall take out of him be very long;
yet, I hope, the excellency of the matter will make them seem short. Even as
it is written of Jacob; Genesis 29.20.
That he served seven years for Rahel, and they seemed to him but a few days,
because he loved her; So all they which love Jesus Christ, all the pains they
shall take in reading things that concern him, it should seem nothing unto
them. Granatensis first therefore in a discourse he makes upon the Lords
prayer, writes thus very excellently of man's justification by Christ, in ye
sight of God. But O Father, do thou forgive us our sins freely, and
without any recompense? Truly thou forgiuest them freely, and not freely: not
freely; for although mercy be ready to forgive, yet justice will be satisfied:
freely, because thou have given us freely that, wherewith to repaie justice;
that is, that great and inestimable treasure, which thy only begotten son,
the whole space of xxxi j years, did lay up as treasure for us An entrance to
the which, he has purchased for us, with his blood. We offer to thee this
treasure, O Father! take thereof as much as thou will: There may be drawn out
thereof abundantly; but it can never be drawn dry: we may spend thereof, but
it can never be diminished. All his merits are ours; his satisfaction is ours;
his blood is our ransom: Therefore we beseech thee, O Lord, that being
pacified with the blood and merits of thy son, that thou would wink at
our sins, the which if thou shall call into a straight account, there is no man
shall be able to abide the favor, much less the rigor of thy justice. Let
thy mercy help us, who acknowledge our selves worthy to be damned for a
thousand sins, by thy justice. Purge us with the fervent fire of thy love;
take us again to thy favor; be friends with us; Forgive us our trespasses.
Thus far Granatensis. And this which he teaches must all Gods Saints plead,
at the tribunal seat of Gods justice. They must say with David: Plead thou
my cause, O Lord, Psalm. 35.1.
with them that strive with me, fight thou against them that fight against me.
And again: And now truly what is my hope? 39.7.38.15.
Truly my hope is even in thee. And again: For in thee, O Lord, have I put
my trust, thou shall answer for me, O Lord my God. This must be their plea, if
they mind to be saved, against all the accusations of their own consciences
and enditements of Satan. And this is that which our Savior teaches: Verily,
verily, Ioh. 5.24.
I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me,
has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation: but has passed
from death to life.

Granatensis concludes the Lords prayer thus: Behold, most loving Father, how
our childishness has played her part, as well as she can, in uttering the
words, which thy only begotten son has taught us: but now we power out
altogether and at once without words, our whole hearts, that thou would
mercifully grant unto us those things, which we desire of thee. O Father, we
most humbly beseech thee, that thou would mercifully bestow upon us all
those benefits and graces before recited, not respecting our unworthiness;
but the worthiness of thy only begotten son Jesus Christ. For he is our
advocate, our priest, our sacrifice, and our patron before thee. For we do
not prostrate our prayers before thy face trusting in our own righteousness,
(as the Prophet says) but in the multitude of thy mercies and in the merits
of thy son our Lord. For whatsoever he has done or suffered, all that he
has given unto us, he has suffered and done all that for us: therefore for his
sake, we desire thee, that thou will grant us all these our requests. By him
thou have created all things, and by him thou have restored all things that
were lost: by him thou have created man to thine own image and likeness; and
by him thou have reformed man again to the same image. He is the foundation of
our being, he is the foundation of our righteousness; and the cause of our
merits: he is our intercessor with thee; he is our advocate, and the strength
of our hope. Therefore, whatsoever hitherto (O heavenly Father) we have asked,
we have asked all that, by thy son: for that which is not due to our
righteousness, is due to his merits. If thou shall find no goodness in us;
truly thou can find no wickedness in him. If there be no merits in us;
behold his merits, without estimation or number. By him therefore we pray
thee, by him we beseech thee; honor him in us. For that which thou give to
us; the very same thou give to him: for whatsoever is bestowed upon the
members, redounds to the head, whereof they are members.

We confess (O Father) we confess our poverty, we have nothing of our own,
that we may offer unto thee, least notwithstanding that we should appear
empty before thee (which thing thou forbiddest in thy law:) behold, we offer
up in sacrifice unto thee, thy only begotten son, with all his labors,
sorrows, stripes, wounds, and whatsoever he has done, and whatsoever he has
suffered, from the first minute that he was borne into this world, and that he
beheld this light, unto the very last gasp, which he dying on the Cross,
yielded up; all that we offer unto thee. For we are partakers of all these; al
these are ours; he did all these things for us; he suffered them for us: We
trusting and relying wholly of this oblation, of this sacrifice, of these
merits; do come unto thee, and we desire mercy of thee, even as it were now of
justice and good right; for if thou respect thy son, it is justice; but if
thou respect us, it is mercy.

But there is also another thing, that makes us bold, that makes us hope well,
that makes us be of good courage; because we do not come to thee, through man's
presumption, or with the impudent face of flesh and blood, and do beg of
thee these so great requests and petitions; but we come thus begging, sent of
thine only begotten son: for he commands us to come to thy throne, and to
ask in his name whatsoever is necessary, to both our lives. Neither does he
only command us this: but also he has put words in our mouths, fit for
the same purpose; he has given us those phrases and manner of speeches, which
thou know and art acquainted well withal; which hitherto we have repeated:
Know them, O Lord: it is the style of thy son: they are the words, which he
left us, to deserve our salvation. Remember (O Father) that woman of Thekoah,
which obtained pardon of David for his beloved son Absolon, as soon as the
king perceived, that she came, being sent of Ioab the captain of the host;
which favor Ioab expounded to be done unto himself, and not to the woman: so
I O Lord am sent of thine only begotten son; it is he that has put these
words in my mouth; it is he that beseeches thee by me, and for me. That which
thou grantest to me, thou grantest to him: and he will thank thee for it.

Remember (O Lord) how thou did not condemn, but commend that unjust
steward of thy goods, who made himself friends with them. Be not angry with
me, if that I the poorest creature in the world, who have evil spent thy goods
and wasted them, do come to thy son, make him my friend; submit my self to
his patronage and protection, that in this time of my need and extremity, he
may receive me into his tabernacle, and that his merits may protect and shrowde
me. I know that it is a dangerous thing, to come into thy sight, without our
spiritual brother Benjamin: that is, thine only begotten son: Behold him
therefore, behold we bring him with us, and we present him unto thee; that by
his intercession, we may be mercifully heard of thee. And thou also (O thou
only begotten son of God) who also art the son of man; stretch forth thy
arm over us. For thou art our protector, and with thy cloak cover our
nakedness, and with thy riches help our poverty, and do not put us back
from thy grace and favor, whom thou have vouchsafed to make partners and
companions of thy nature: who live with the Father and the holy Ghost, for
ever and ever.

We may learn here, how that, as our justification is free in respect of our
selves, but dearly bought with the precious blood and innumerable merits of
Jesus Christ: so likewise all the good things we have, we also obtain by his
means. He is the captain of the Lords host; by whose means, all disobedient
and wicked Absolons are restored into their heavenly fathers grace, and favor
again: he is that beloved Benjamin, without whom, it is dangerous to appear
in our heavenly fathers presence: Therefore in our prayers let us be sure ever
to bring him with us, and no body else.

To the same effect Granatensis also writes in another prayer. Thou art my
king, Orat. 7. pro impet amor. dei.
for thou gouernest me with thy spirit; thou have fought for me, and have
pulled me out of the hands of mine enemies: thou art my high Priest; for thou
have prayed, and do still pray for me without ceasing, as an everlasting high
priest, in the presence of God thy heavenly Father: Thou are my sacrifice; for
thou have offered up, even thine own self, a sacrifice upon the Altar of the
cross, that most graciously and mercifully, thou might purge and wash away
my sins: Thou art my Advocate; for when the devil accuses me, and teaches
to thy father against me an indictment, wherein are written all my sins; thou
defendest me, and maintainest my cause: Thou laiest down of thine, and
suppliest all that is wanting to my righteousness: Thou art my redeemer; for
thou art both God and man, man's friend, and also true man; a friend also that
can do much with God; and the true Son of God. And therefore thou set thy
self as a Mediator, in the midst between God and me.

And after: To conclude; thou art my Savior, and surely such a Savior, who
every where, always, and in all things suffices me: for thou did work in
the middle of the earth, most perfectly and absolutely, all whatsoever was
required to my salvation. Thou have lightened my ignorance, with thy doctrine;
thou have strengthened my weakness, with thy examples; thou have kindled and
enflamed my luke-warmenes, with thy benefits: Thou have instructed my soul,
with thy mysteries: Thou have enriched my poverty, with thy merits: Thou have
healed my wounds, with thy sacraments: Thou have paid and satisfied for my
pleasures, with thy griefs and sorrows; and now sitting in heaven at the
right hand of thy father, thou make intercession for me. What shall I use
many words? Thou art made my wisdom, my righteousness, my sanctification, and
redemption, and therefore all my goods.

This glory Granatensis attributes to Jesus Christ; and all true catholics
will most assuredly believe this, and do the same. Here is the perfect sum
of our salvation. And speaking of the holy communion, he writes thus: That it
is a Sacrament of infinite virtue; Lib. 3. Mem. cap. 1.
I say of infinite virtue (says he,) for it contains in it Christ; who is
the fountain of grace. And man by that Sacrament is made partaker of all the
merits of the Lords passion, which also have neither measure nor number.

If this be true, how does Poligranes measure and number them? affirming that
they take away the fault, and not the punishment.

He also writes thus: This faith affirms, Lib. 1. Mem. cap. 5.
that the reward of virtue and the punishment of sin, the one of them is so
sharp, and the other so great, that if all the world were full of books, and
all creatures were writers; yet all these writers should be sooner weary, and
the world should be ended, then that they should lack matter what to write, of
either of these, what these things contain in them, according to their
exceeding greatness. The same faith also teaches, that the debts we do owe unto
God, are so great, and the benefits we receive from him, are so excellent,
that if man should live so many years, as there are sands on the shore of the
Ocean sea, it were a thing of nothing, to spend all those in Gods service. The
same faith does also witness unto us, that virtue is such a precious thing, that
all the treasure of this world, and all that which man's heart can desire or
imagine, is not at al by any means to be compared unto it.

This place quite overthrows all proud conceits in man's heart of any merit:
all he can do, naie if he could do a thousand times more then he can, is but
his most humble duty to our most mighty and merciful God.

But above all other places, speaking of the name of Jesus, upon these words:
Thou shall call his name Jesus; Med. vitae Christi Med. 6
he writes thus most excellently. For he (says the Angel) shall save his
people from their sins. Blessed be this name, and blessed be this salvation,
and blessed be the day wherein such news was brought into the world. Hitherto
(O Lord) all the other saviors whom thou have sent into this world, were
saviors of our bodies, and of this flesh of ours, which saved our houses, and
Vineyards, and such like; but they could not save our souls, sighing under the
heavy burden of sin, and therefore subject to the devil. What aduantageth
it a man, if he win the whole world and rule over it, and he himself
continue the bondslaue of Satan, and lose his soul? To remedy therefore this
evil, this new Savior is sent, that the whole salvation of man might be
fulfilled and perfected. Who saving souls, also cured the bodies; and
delivering men from the evil of the fault, has delivered them also from the
evil of punishment: And so has perfected our salvation. This is that
salvation, which the Patriarchs desired; this is that salvation, which the
Prophets, with so many sighs and cries, longed for: This is that salvation,
which so often the Psalms promise and sing of: This is that salvation, for
which the Patriarch Jacob reioicing, died saying: O Lord, I will wait for thy
salvation, etc.

Granatensis here in plain terms affirms, that Jesus Christ has delivered
us, as well from the evil of the punishment, as from the guilt of sin. And
that he has perfected our salvation, contrary to that former affirmation of
Poligranes.

Med. 11. Vitae Christi.
And speaking of Christ's fasting, he writes thus: The solitarines of the
Wilderness did not terrify thee, not the assaults of the devil, nor the
sharpness of repentance, nor the watching in prayer: The need and weakness
of thy members, was ever before thine eyes: and therefore thou wast punished,
as a most faithful head, that thou might enrich all us, with the treasure
of thy merits, that whatsoever we wanted, we might have it in thee. Thou art
he, who with thine own mouth have said; I sanctify my self, O Father, for
them that they may be sanctified in the truth. For as we al by one man's fault
became profane and wicked: so we are sanctified and repaired again by the
merits and holiness of another.

As Adam made us all profane and wicked: so only Jesus Christ the second and
true Adam, sanctifies us, and restores us again.

Med. Vitae Christi. 24.
Of Christ's death he writes thus: That thing which the governor himself does
(meaning Pilate) is not justice, but very great and extreme injury. For he
judges him worthy to die, whom he himself, thrice before, had confessed to be
innocent and just, and that he could find no fault in him. But the true Author
of this justice, is the governor of heaven, in whose sight all the sins and
offenses of the whole world are committed; who is also so just, that he will
suffer no sin to escape unpunished and unrevenged. But because the whole
world was not sufficient enough, to satisfy and appease the wrath of God, even
for one only sin; he drew out the Sword of his justice, and smote the
innocent and harmless Lamb, who only amongst all the men in the world,
could and was able to answer for all the sins of the whole world. And this
justice was published and spread abroad, not by that injurious and material
Trumpet; (he supposed that they sounded a Trumpet at Christ's death:) but by
the mouths and writings of the Prophets, who foretold many hundredth years
before, that it should be that Lord, that should be smitten for the sins of
the people, and should suffer and endure most grievous and cruel torments for
their iniquities.

Again concerning the same matter, he writes thus: Ibidem.
How many and how forcible pricks and goades have we here, not only to make us
love; but also to trust and put al our whole confidence in this our Savior?
Tell me how is it possible not to love him again, who has first loved thee so
tenderly and dearly, that freely of his own accord, he has given himself to
be smitten of most cruel tormentors, and would take upon him, the sentence and
judgment of death, which thou dids^ deserve. What brother for his brother, what
father for his son, what wife for her husband, would take upon them and
suffer the punishment which any one of these should have endured? Suppose
therefore and think with your self, that there were some certain guilty
person, who being bound for his offenses, is kept in close prison, and even now
being condemned by the sentence of the Judge; imagine that there would nothing
be done, but that the tormentor should come, with his instruments of death,
wherewith he should be slain, and should now execute the Judges sentence; and
imagine also, that a certain friend of this guilty and condemned person,
should come into the prison, should put on his apparel, and should take to
himself that guilty man's unhappy lot; and that he might set him free, would
become himself an open spectacle, and be punished with the punishment of death
for his friend: would we not say, that the love of that friend toward that
guilty person, was wonderful and exceeding great, that would redeem the life
of his friend, with the loss of his own? And likewise, what again should
that guilty and condemned man's love be toward his redeemer and deliverer? O
eternal King! when thou saw me judged to eternal fire, thou being moved
with the bowels of pity and compassion, came down from heaven, into the
prison of this world, and taking upon thee the Image and shape of a sinner,
thou came into my stead, and was condemned and put to death for my sake: he
therefore who has suffered and endured such extreme and grievous pains for
me; shall I not say, that he will also love me exceedingly?

And again: Neither is only love, Ibidem.
but also a sure trust and confidence in our Savior kindled and stirred up, by
these merits and these benefits: why should I not therefore henceforth hope
for grace, glory, and the forgiveness of my sins, seeing I have such a
treasure, and such a bountiful treasurer; who is every day ready to satisfy
his father, for all my debts? For if it shall be a thing just and convenient,
that the innocent should be punished, and that the honorable should be
despised; that he should make satisfaction for sins, and should cancel the
bond and obligation openly in the sight of all men: shall it not be a thing also
both just and meet, that the guilty persons, for whom he suffered and made
satisfaction, should now be acquitted from all their debts, and pronounced
justified before God? Justice found out a way and means to enter into the holy
man's house; who ought nothing and was not indebted, and he executed his great
rigor there: and shall not mercy then find out a way, which leads to the
debtors house, that she may blot out our sins and pardon our offenses?

It is a greater miracle, that God should be taken, scourged and condemned, and
die upon a Cross; then to receive an enemy for a friend, and to use a
traitor as a son, if he would repent him, and be converted unto the Lord. If
therefore that be done which is the greater, why should we doubt then of that,
which is the lesser? Now therefore (O Lord) thy mercy is extold and lift up
very high, and thy bounteous liberality is proved and tried upon sinners; thy
justice also is magnified, it has exercised and executed her rigor and
severity upon the innocent and harmless without fault: wherefore, although
grace be not given to a sinner, to him as he is a sinner; yet notwithstanding
let it be given him, for thy dearly beloved sons sake, who redeemed him with
so dear a price, and at so great a rate. It is thy mercy that a sinner should
be saved, if we look into and consider the baseness and vileness of sinners:
but it is thy justice, if we respect Christ; and we having the one, have the
other also.

And again, Blessed be therefore that condemned innocence, which has
absolved and set free so many condemned persons, Ibidem.
and blessed be that blamed justice, which has justified so many reprobates.
Therefore if his merits have neither end nor number, and all of them belong
to the health and salvation of our souls; without all doubt this his petition
shall never be denied him, being our mediator and making now intercession for
us. For it were great wrong, that he who had endured so many injuries, should
not obtain that which he asks, least peradventure his pitiful and merciful
father should again torment and afflict the soul of his son, by denying him
that which he desires, whose body before he grieved with diverse torments: he
received wounds in his body, that they might effect and work salvation in
our souls, which he deserved and purchased for us, by his patience and
sufferings: he was taken, apprehended, and handled as a sinner, who
notwithstanding was just, that we sinners might be accepted of God as just. He
died and endured the punishment due to us, and descended even as it were into
the depth of the sea, with griefs which he suffered. It were an unjust thing,
that the father should twice judge one thing, and should punish one fault, with
double punishment: but it is meet, that the debtor should now be restored to
his former liberty (if he would but only repent) seeing that his surety has
paid his debt so liberally and bountifully for him, whom he was surety for.

And again, Look upon (O Lord) the face of thine anointed Jesus Christ, who
was made obedient unto the death, Med vitae Christi 25.
even unto the death of the Cross: and let not his wounds and scarres ever
depart out of thy sight; but let them always still remain before thine eyes,
that thou may remember, what a great recompense and satisfaction thou have
received of him for our sins and transgressions. I would to God thou (O Lord)
would way in a pair of balance, the sins wherewith we have deserved thy
wrath and indignation, and the grief and punishment, which thy innocent son
suffered for us: Surely it will appear a far greater and worthier cause,
that thou should power down thy mercy upon us, for that his suffering and
punishment; then was that transgression, that thou should hide thy mercies
in anger and displeasure for our sins. Let all tongues give thanks unto thee
(O Father) for the exceeding great abundance of thy goodness, who have not
spared thine only son, thy best beloved, the joy of thy heart, in whom thou
art well pleased; but have given him over unto death, for us all, that we might
have him as a most faithful advocate before thee in heaven. And what thanks
shall I offer and render worthily unto thee (O Lord Jesus) thou most zealous
lover of mankind, who am a man, dust and vile clay? for what could thou
more have done for my soul, that thou have not done? what have thou left
undone?

Granatensis in all these places has most manifestly set before our eyes, the
great benefit of Christ's Redemption; not only by the example of a surety,
who would pay another man's debts, but also of a most dear and faithful
friend, who would endure punishment, and would die for his friend. And does
Poligranes say, that he has only taken away the fault and not the
punishment? How does this doctrine diminish the merits of Christ's passion, and
his exceeding great love toward us? and that to maintain the Popes pardons,
for without this they fall to the ground.

Again, Granatensis whatsoever he teaches of satisfaction by our own works
in other places, Orat. 5. de vita Christi.
for himself he prays thus: O blood that gives life and salvation! O Lord,
vouchsafe to wash me with that blood, and to sanctify and purify me with that
most precious liquor. O Lord, offer it to thy father for a perfect
satisfaction, and remedy of all my wickednesses. What can be said more
manifestly then this? No doubt this was his faith: thus he prayed to God for
himself.

And in another place, writing of the worthy receiving of the Eucharist, De
sanct. euch. sacra. lib. 3. cap 2.
he prays thus: O my most sweet Lord God, so huge is the greatness of my
sins, that I can neither amend them, nor make satisfaction to thee for them:
Therefore I desire to receive thy well-beloved son, who upon the altar of the
Cross, offered to thee for me, a most perfect sacrifice; the same I offer unto
thee now, for my sins; that he may make satisfaction for me. For I know that
there is nothing else, neither in heaven nor in earth, that is more grateful
unto thee, or can by any means requite thee, the debt I owe thee.

Granatensis here plainly distrusts in his own payment, either in part or in
whole, of his debts and sins; and flies only to Jesus Christ and his
satisfaction. He says he knows none other thing in the world, that can pay
his debts, but his blood: and so must all true Catholics say with him.

That same conclusion and definitive sentence of Saint Augustine, concerning
our justification, is worth the marking against all Popish mystes and cauilles,
which he writes in his book. De spiritu and Lit. Cap. 13.14.
These things (says he) being considered and handled, according to the
ability which God has given us, we gather, that a man is not justified by
keeping the commandments of a good life; but by faith in Jesus Christ: that
is, not by the law of works, but by the law of faith; not by the letter, but
by the spirit. And although the Apostle, when as he would correct and reform
those which took pleasure in circumcision; called circumcision by the name of
the law, and other such ceremonies of the law, all which now as shadows of
that which was to come, the Christians refuse, holding that which was
figuratively promised by those shadows: yet he will have the law to be
understood, whereby he says that no man is justified, not only in those
mysteries which had figurative promises, but also in those works, which
whosoever shall do, lives justly.

Saint Augustine here plainly teaches that not only by the works of the
Ceremonial law, we are not justified, as some Papists seem to expound that
place of Saint Paul; but not also by the works of the moral law. And so
Gagneius goes about to expound Saint Paul, in his exposition upon Saint Paul to
the Romans. Out of the former Chapter (says he) whereas S. Paul said: We
think that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law; and out
of the Text of this present Chapter: wherein he shows that faith was imputed to
Abraham not in circumcision, but whenas he was uncircumcised; before his
circumcision, it is evident that it is meant in this place, that Abraham was
not justified of the works of the law; and after he was justified of works,
that is, those works he spoke on before, meaning Circumcision. And in his
exposition upon the Epistle to the Galathians, he alleges the Greek
Scholiast to confirm this his assertion. Nature her self taught those things
which were necessary in the law (says the Scholiast) as thou shall not
commit adultery, Gag. in 2. cap. ad Gal.
thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, but those things which concern
the Sabbath, circumcision, and leprosies and sacrifices and sprincklings; those
are the proper works of the law. And of these (says the Apostle) that of the
works of the law no flesh shall be justified.

But if there be any such opinion in the Scholiast, here we may see that S.
Austen is of a contrary opinion.

And Gagneius himself, as should seem, mislikes this opinion: for in his
preface upon the Epistle to the Romans he writes thus: But if any man will
urge, when as very often in this Epistle and also in other his Epistles, that
Paul says, that we are justified by faith without works; that not only the
works of the law are excluded, but also all other things else whatsoever: I
will not greatly say against him, if he will patiently endure to hear, that
justification is taken in the scripture two ways. First to be justified, is of
one that is wicked, to be made just; the which thing is done in a moment, and
without any merits of our works, yea and without any works of ours going
before it. And here mark that I say, going before it: for together with that
justification, must needs come the moving of free will repenting of her former
life, and believing in Jesus, being of God drawn and stirred up to that
motion. And of this Justification Paul speaks, as often as he says, that men
are justified and saved without works. Here he seems to say plainly, that
our first justification is without any works, that it saues us: and yet after
he says, that it is but a salvation imperfect, and begun in us, when as a man
arises from infidelity and sin to grace, which he deserves by no work, but
yet it is not done without a good work, and moving of the will: which freely is
powered into it of God. Here he seems to be contrary to saint Paul, when as
he says, that without the works of the law we are justified: and he will have
even in our first justification one concurrent.

Secondly, he seems to disagree from the council of Trent, which teaches,
that our free will being stirred up, agrees willingly and jointly works
with grace: but he says it must be drawn, and this argues a violence: and
things extorted and not voluntary, 2. Cor. 9.5.
have no reward with God, as saint Paul plainly teaches.

But after, he makes a second justification, and to this justification he
says; Good works are required. And he alleges that one place for proof
hereof, out of the Revelation: He that is justified, let him as yet be
justified.

But he might as well have considered, how that as in that one place the holy
Ghost exhorts all them that are justified, that they be justified still: so it
teaches all Christians to pray for the increase of faith. Roman. 1.16.
And again Saint Paul says; I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for
it is the power of God to salvation, to all that believe it, to the Jew first,
and then to the Gentile. Here is the first justification; but it follows: The
righteousness of God is revealed in it from faith to faith, as it is written:
The just shall live by faith. And here is also the second justification, if he
will needs have a second, From faith to faith. The justified man is more
justified, from faith to faith: as his faith increases, so his righteousness:
And hereof it is said here, that the just man lives by faith; not only the
first moment of his justification, but all his life long. And Saint Peter
says: 1. Pet. 1.5.
That through faith we are kept by the power of God, even unto salvation. Faith
not only liftes us up from hell, as the papists teach; but it preserues us
even to everlasting life. It is our first and our last justification: Christ is
a and o, the beginning and the ending, as Saint John in his Revelation
teaches. But the papists by this their distinction would make him be but Alpha
only. And here of we are said, Reuelat. 7.8. Mat. 17.20.15.28.
to have faith like a grain of Mustardseed: And some are said, to have a
great faith; and some the greatest faith of all; as our Savior witnesses of
the Centurion: I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel. Luke, 7.9
Romans 4.11.12.
And again saint Paul says: That Abraham received circumcision as a seal of
righteousness of the faith, which he had when as he was uncircumcised, that he
might be a father of the circumcision, not unto them only which are of the
circumcision, but unto them also that walk in the steps of the faith of our
father Abraham. This (to be justified more) which saint John speaks of, is (no
doubt) to walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham. And this no doubt also
is that, which saint Peter means, when he concludes his epistle thus; Grow
in grace, 2. Peter. 3.18.
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: That is, grow in
your faith, and knowledge of the Gospel. For this is life eternal (says our
Savior) to know thee to be the only true God, Ioh. 17.3.
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Gagneius should have considered all
these places, and not grounded his second justification of works upon that one
only place: Whereas also that same (...), Let him be righteous still, may
signify rather a perseverance then an increase.

But to let Gagneius go, with his mystes and cauilles against the truth, and
to return to saint Austen again. As he quite takes all our justification
from all works whatsoever, either ceremonial or moral; so he yields this to
that our first justification, that it makes us partakers of the glory of God:
Lib. spir. and lit. cap. 9.
and do we think then, that he ever thought of any second? Thus he
writes: By grace the wicked man is justified freely, that is, having no merits
of his works going before. For otherwise, grace were not grace; because
therefore it is given, not because that we have done good works, but that we
may do them: that is, not because we have fulfilled the law; but that we might
fulfill it. For he said, I came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it. Of
whom it is said. We have seen his glory, the glory (as it were) of the
only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth. This is the
glory whereof it is said: All have sinned, and are destitute of the glory of
God. And this is the grace, whereof by and by he says; Being justified freely
by his grace. So that by saint Austens judgment, this grace which we receive in
our first justification, is that grace of God, which before our justification
all men were deprived of: And will Gagneius say then, that our justification
is imperfect? Naie herein also saint Austen agrees with saint Paul, who
speaking of that first justification says: 1. John, 15.
We being justified by faith are at peace with God: and is it imperfect then?
no imperfect thing can please God. Ephesians. 2.16.
He is light, and in him is no darkness at all. Naie in another place he
says, that Jesus Christ has slain hatred between God and us, and that we
have an entrance now to the father by one spirit: no doubt which we receive in
our Baptismes, and at our first justification: 19.
And that now we are no more strangers or forreiners, but citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God. And is this our first justification, as yet
imperfect? Naie saint John says; 1. John. 1.3
That we have seen and heard, we declare unto you, that you also may have
fellowship with us, and that our fellowship may be also with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ. Do we believe this? O happy news! by faith we
are made fellows with the apostles; naie even with God himself: and is then
our first justification imperfect? and these things Saint John writes to us,
that our joy may be full. Who will not rejoice that hears this news?

Other Papists make another cavil at our justification, Stella writes thus: Of
these words of Christ, that error of the Lutherans is convinced, Stella in cap.
6 Luc.
who dare affirm that faith cannot be without charity, but one may truly (as
it is manifest out of this text of the Gospel) hear the words of God, and
believe them; and yet not be in grace. But here Stella adds this of his own
(and believe them) that is more then is in the text. The text says, One may
hear the words of God, and not do them, and not be in grace. But surely he
that hears them and believes them, will do them also no doubt; and therefore
such a one is in grace. S. Austen also very excellently condemns the Papists
in this their doctrine: De fide and operib. cap. 23
The Lord says in the Gospel; The hour shall come, wherein all they that are
in the graves shall he are his voice; and they shall go which have done well,
into the resurrection of life; and they which have done evil, into the
resurrection of judgment. Neither is it said, that they which have believed, or
that they which have not believed: but thus, they which have done well; and
that, they which have done evil: for a good life cannot be separated from
faith, which works thorough love: yea verily, that same is a good life it
self. A true lively faith and a good life, by saint Austens judgment, are
inseperable.

And again, saint Austen declares his judgment, concering our justification,
and she use of good works, very manifestly thus. When as the Apostle says,
Aug. de fide and operib. cap. 14.
that he supposes that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the
law: he means not that when as we have received and professed the faith,
that the works of righteousness should be despised; but that every one may know
that he may be justified through faith, although no works of the law have gone
before. For they follow a man that is now justified: they do not go before him
which is to be justified. This is saint Austens plain judgment, that works
are fruits of our justification, not roots: they are neither precedent, nor
concurrent causes, but effects following. Ibidem.
And after he adds the causes, why saint Peter, John, and James, and Jude,
wrote their Epistles; and expoundes their meanings, whereas they seem to make
much for good works: Because this opinion (says he) was then sproong up:
(that is, that works were despised) the other apostolic Epistles of Peter,
John, James, and Jude against this opinion bend al their force; so that they
very vehemently affirm, that faith without works profits nothing. As also
Saint Paul himself calls not faith, every faith, wherewith we believe in God:
but that healthful and evangelical faith, whose works proceed from
charity: and faith (says he) which works through love. Therefore he
affirms, that that faith which some men think is sufficient to salvation, to
be of so small force, that he says: If so be that I had all faith, so that I
could move mountains out of their places, and yet had no charity, I am
nothing. But where this faithful charity works, there is a good life, etc.

So that by saint Austens judgment, that vain and barren faith, which some
men in those days imagined of their own brains, and despised all good
works, do both saint James, and saint John, and the rest of the apostles
condemn in their Epistles: and not that Evangelical and lively faith, which
S. Paul calls faith. Some men in those days taught, that if one kept a whore
openly; and yet said, that he believed in Christ, by his faith he should be
saved. Aug. de fide. and oper. cap. 1.
Against such, saint Austen makes that Book, and affirms, that such a faith
cannot profit any man.

Again here we note, how the Fathers are to be understood, when as many
times they say, that charity couers sins, and mercy saues, and such like
phrases they use, that as saint Austen does here say, that faithful charity
lives well: so also faithful charity couers sins, and faithful mercy
saues. As Saint Paul also says of faithful prayer, that it saues; He that
calls on the name of the Lord (says he) shall be saved. But how shall they
call on him, on whom they have not believed? So that prayer has this virtue to
save, not of her self, but of faith. And so we may (no doubt) say of other
good works. Every thing the more excellent it is, does more communicate his
virtue to others: as even the very fire his heat to the cold and hard Iron;
so that now Iron burns, but it is by reason of fire, that impartes his virtue
unto it; so likewise the sun impartes his forces to these inferior creatures;
so trees impart their sap to their fruits: and shall we think that faith
is less forcible then fire? Phil. 1.11.
and are not works called the fruits of righteousness? and why may not
faith, which is the root of righteousness, impart this his sap unto them?

De Jacob. and beat. vit. lib. 2. cap. 1. Vno fidei munimine tegant.
Ambrose of faith and works writes thus: In this field flourish the
Pomegranets, which contain many fruits under one rind of faith, and do as it
were nourish them with the embracing of charity: so that faith, as the rind of
the Pomegranet contains many kernelles under it; so does faith cover all our
works. They may not appear in Gods sight without it: it gives life unto them.
And charity is as it were the nurse of them: as necessary as the nurse is to
the child after it be born; so necessary also is charity to all our good works.

Cap. 2.
And after writing how Isaac smelled a sweet savor of Esaues garments, which
Rebeccah had put on her son Jacob, he writes thus: Peradventure it means
this, That we are not justified by works, but by faith: because the infirmity
of our flesh is an hinderance to our works: but the brightness of faith
ouershadowes the error of our deeds, which deserves pardon of our sins. So
that whereas in our best good works are imperfections, by reason of the
infirmity of our flesh; the glory of faith lighteneth and covers them. This
is Ambrose his judgment: Our works then of themselves can justly challenge no
reward; nay they must crave pardon for their imperfections, and the help of
faith to patronize them.

Again, how that all men are sinners he writes thus: Amb. de lac. and beat.
vit. l. 2. c. 5
Oh how happy is that man, in whom the enemy can find nothing, that he may
challenge to be his! in whom the Devil can find nothing, that he may say
justly to be his: this seems impossible in man. But Jacob herein bare a type
of him, who said in the Gospel: The Prince of this world comes, and in me he
shall find nothing. Ambrose here plainly affirms that no man, except only
Jesus Christ, is free from sin: he excepts not the blessed virgin Marie, as
the Papists do now. Of whose judgment were Chrysostom and Theophylact; as
Titilman notes upon John. Titil. in Ioh. cap. 2.
But now (says he) that it is revealed to the Church that she is without
sin, we must believe it: though these fathers in their days taught
contrary. So lightly they account of the fathers when they make against them.

That lesson of Peter is worth the marking: 1. Pet. 1.13.
Therefore the loins of your mind being girded up, and being sober trust
perfectly in that grace which is brought unto you by the Revelation of Jesus
Christ. And after: If you call him father, Verse. 17.
which judges without respect of persons according to every man's work, pass
the time of this your pilgrimage here in fear. Here is a brief sum of a
Christians justification and conversation. He must trust perfectly in the love
of God brought to him and declared by Jesus Christ, as concerning his frailties
and sins of infirmity: (For who can say my heart is clean?) But he must
also have the loins of his mind girded up, and pass the time of this his
pilgrimage in fear. As concerning presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.13. Psalm. 59.5
Romans 6.12. Psalm 119.122. De iustificatione. lib. 2. cap. 7.
he may not sin of malicious wickedness: Sin may no more reign in him: he
may not take delight and pleasure in sin. This is the sum of Saint Peter's
doctrine concerning the conversation and justification of all Christians.

Master Bellarmine first of Justification writes thus: The fourth and fifth
error, which also have many maintainers, place our justification in the
imputation of Christ's righteousness: as though therefore we were righteous
before God, because Christ does cover us with his righteousness: and seeing us
thus covered pronounces, that he accounts us just. This doctrine Master
Bellarmine accounts erroneous, which agrees with the Scriptures, even as saint
Paul most plainly proves. Roman. 4.6.
The Prophet David also (says he) declares the blessedness of man, unto whom
God imputes righteousness without works, saying: Blessed are they whose
unrighteousness are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Here are David's
and saint Paul's plain resolutions, that the blessedness of every man
consists in the covering of his sins; and in the imputation of righteousness
without works. To this agrees also saint John: 1. Ioh. 2.2.
If any man sin (as before he had affirmed that all men did) even we (the
Apostles) have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the just: and he is the
propitiation or covering of our sins* Even Jesus Christ couers the Apostles
sins. And this is that, which our Savior himself teaches all Christians:
Luke, 9.26.
For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words; of him shall the son
of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his glory. What means this? that
Christ will be ashamed of some at his coming? No doubt, that he will not
clothe them with his righteousness, nor shadow them under his wings. But
Master Bellarmine goes on further, and writes thus: Our adversaries (says
he) affirm, that the imputation of Christ's righteous is necessary, not only
because sin truly ever remains in us: but also because our inherent
righteousness is not so perfect, that it might simply and absolutely justify
us. But we will easily refute this cause: if our adversaries will believe the
Scriptures.

For our inherent righteousness, or our inward renouation, is known chiefly
to consist in faith, hope and charity: wherefore if we shall prove, that
faith, hope and charity can be perfect in this life, we shall also prove,
that the imputation of Christ's righteousness, is not necessary. But how
contrary also is this his doctrine to the scriptures? We know in part (says
saint Paul) and we prophecy in part: 1. Cor. 13.10.
but when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be
abolished. There is no perfection in this life: that shall come hereafter in
the life to come. No doubt that prayer of the Apostles is set down as a
pattern for all Christians to use, Luke, 17.5.
even unto the worlds end. And the Apostles said unto the Lord: Increase our
faith. How contrary also he is, in this his assertion to Ferus and other
Papists, hereafter evidently shall, God willing, appear.

Of the merits also of good works Master Bellarmine writes thus: And first
of the nature of a merit or deserving: Lib. 5. de Iustifica. cap. 18.
many things (says he) as the sun, the moon, the fields, vineyardes, and
gardens, yield us great commodities; and yet they are not said properly, to
deserve any thing of us; because they do not their duties voluntarily,
neither can they choose, but they must do as they do. Then wages is due to a
desert or merit: but debt arises not, but hereof; that one gives another, that
which was his own. For if he should not give his own, but that which was
another man's, nothing were owing or due to him. There is nothing properly
ours, but that which is in our own power, either to do, or to let pass.
These things are in our power: and of these we are properly said to have the
Lordship. To conclude, our evil works, unless they be done freely, deserve
no punishment: therefore neither good works shall deserve any reward, unless
they be done voluntarily.

His drift is to prove, that we have in us freewill; and therefore we may
deserve of God. And therefore he writes thus after. Now truly the good works
of the just deserve eternal life (ex condigno) worthily, not only by reason
of the covenant and acceptance of God; but also by reason of the work it
self. So that in the good works which proceed from grace, there is a
certain proportion and equality to the reward of eternal life. And after he
writes thus: Whereby we perceive that same degree of glory which is due to us
by right of inheritance, is given us also by right of the reward: For one thing
(as we have often said) may be due by two titles; that is, by inheritance, and
of merits. How contrary also in this doctrine is he, to the doctrine of the
scriptures? whereas Christ shall say to all his: Come ye blessed of my father,
Matthew. 25.34. Luke, 12.32.
inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you: And again, Fear not little
flock; for it is your Fathers pleasure, to give you a kingdom: He dare
affirm, that the saints of God shall not only inherit this kingdom, by their
fathers free gift, (as the scriptures in these places manifestly teach:) but
also that they shall deserve it. How contrary is he also herein to Philippus
de Dies? Who says, that the just can challenge nothing of God: and to Ferus,
as appears in this that follows.

But here first let us mark, how contrary this his doctrine is to that,
which Gregory a Bishop of Rome, concerning this matter, Greg. in 7. Psalm.
paenit.
taught in his days: The mercy of the Lord (says he) is for ever and ever,
upon them that fear him: if so be that the blessedness of the Saints is
mercy, and is not gotten by merits; where is that which is written: And thou
shall give to every man according to his works? If it be given according unto
works; how shall it be accounted merit? But it is one thing to give according
to works; and another, to give for our works: In that he says, he will
give every one according to his works; the quality of works is understood, that
he, whose works shall appear good, shall have that glorious reward. For to
that blessed life, wherein we shall live with God, and of God, no labor can be
equal, nor no works compared, especially when as the Apostle says; The
sufferings of this life are not worthy the glory, which shall be revealed in us.

Master Bellarmine says, that in the good works, which proceed from grace,
there is a certain proportion and equality: but Gregory says, no labor or
work can be compared unto it.

And after, he writes thus: Although in this respect also it may be called
mercy, because it is given for those works, which unless Gods mercy did
prevent him, no man could obtain; wherefore it is said in the Psalm: My God
his mercy has prevented me. For unless he had made the Vessels of wrath
Vessels of mercy: his own holy life had separated none from that lump of
perdition, his own righteousness had delivered none, from the punishment of
everlasting death. Therefore it is certain, that to whom he gives mercifully,
that in this life they should do well, he gives them more mercifully, that in
that everlasting blessedness, they should a hundredth fold be rewarded. This is ye
grace, which for grace, the Apostle affirms, shall be given unto the Saints of
God, that to who^ in this life is given the grace of sanctification, to them of
this also in the life to come, shall be given the grace of everlasting hapines.

Here we may note, how Gregory makes two expositions of these words, God
shall render to every one according to his works. And in both, he takes away
all merit: and in both he sets down the only cause of our reward, to be
mercy. In the first he says, not for our works, as any cause of our
salvation; but according to our works, as effects, we shall be rewarded.
Again, not according to the quantity of our works, wherein many Pagans have
exceeded many Christians; as they which voluntarily did give themselves to
death, for the love of their country (these were great works; and of these
the Roman histories and other, do testify:) but according to the quality,
even be they never so few, or so small; yet if they shall proceed from a
lively faith, they shall be rewarded, as our savior witnesses: Even a cup
of cold water, given in his name, Mat. 10.42.
shall not loose his reward: Naie shall surpass all the Cups of most bitter
death, which those Pagans suffered for their country sakes. Such an excellent
thing is Christian faith, it alone gives virtue, and makes acceptable unto God
all our works. Our reward shall be like theirs that came into the Vineyard
at the last hour of the day; Mat. 20.24.
the merciful householder made them equal with them that came first: To teach
us, that it is not our vvorking, or running, or laboring, as the apostle
says, that crowns or rewards: But our gracious God showing mercy. Romans
9.16.


Secondly, he says, that as all our good works were of mercy given us, in
every of them, God by his grace preventing our wills; so they shall of mere
mercy be rewarded: as then we had no merits, for which in the beginning of
our sanctification, we deserved at Gods hands to have those good works given
us; so neither in the rewarding of them: nay they shall be more mercifully,
and of greater mercy (says Gregory) rewarded at the last, then they were
given at the first. Contrary to that Popish assertion, which affirms, that our
first justification is free, and of mercy, but it is not so in the second. But
Gregory says, he that of mercy has given us our good works, shall more
mercifully reward them. No doubt considering the unprofitableness of us all,
after we have been admitted into the Lords service, and the daily rebellions
of the flesh against his holy spirit: even in the best of his servants. Saint
John says: Gal. 5.17.
If we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth
in us. And our savior teaches all to say: 1. Io. 1.8.
When you have done all that is commanded you (which who can do) yet even then
say, Luke, 17.10.
we are unprofitable servants, we have done but our duties.

Jerome also has this notable sentence to this same effect: De filio prodigo
ad Damas,
Let this seem to none dangerous or blasphemous, that we have said, that even
this evil of envy could creep in, even to the very Apostles, when as we may
suppose, thus much also to be spoken of the Angels; for the Stars are not
clear in his sight: and he marked some frowardness in his Angels. And it is
said in the Psalms: No living thing shall be justified in thy sight: He does
not say, no man shall be justified, but no living thing, that is to say, no not
an Evangelist, not an Apostle, not a Prophet; nay I will ascend higher, not
Angels, not thrones, not rulers or powers, or other heavenly virtues. It is
God alone, in whom sin falls not.

Thus by Ieromes judgment, all Gods saints are sinners, Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, even the blessed Virgin Mary, all the heavenly powers whatsoever:
God himself alone, is only without sin. And this doctrine of the fathers is
agreeable to the scriptures: David writes thus of Canaan, which was but a
figure of our heavenly inheritance: Psalm. 44.3
They possessed not that land with their own sword, neither did their own
arm save them: But thy right hand and thy arm, and the light of thy
countenance (Ci Ratsitham) as it is in the Hebrew: that is, because thou
had an especial favor unto them. (This Ratson) this good pleasure of God,
gave them the possession of the land of Canaan, not their fighting or working;
nay it follows. Thou art my King, O God, command the salvation of Jacob. The
salvation of Jacob and of his posterity, is Gods royal commandment, not their
merits: they cannot challenge it. And to this also agrees our Savior in the
Gospel: Luke, 12, 32.
Fear not (says he) little flock; for it is your Fathers pleasure to give
you a kingdom: where in the Greek, the same word in effect is used which was
used before in the Hebrew, (...). This (...) and Rotson have both one
signification; and signify a special favor or good will toward any one. And
this is the cause of our justification.

In cap. 7. Mat.
Ferus also of trust in our own righteousness, writes thus: When the weather
is calm, every building easily stands; but winter tries the strength of the
building. He that trusts in his own righteousness, seems to have a strong
building: but in the winter, in the time of death, it then slips, and falls
down. For against death, our strength is nothing: this victory belongs only
to Christ: Here thou may stand safely. Thus Ferus writes in his copy
imprinted at Paris; 1564
but the Roman Corrector, biddes, put only in the edition printed at Rome.
1577
As though this victory did not belong only to Christ, but that man's arm and
power were able to do some thing also therein.

And after, of our works he writes thus: In 8. cap. Mat.
First we are taught by this, that for our good deeds, we should not hunt
after praise with men: for they are not ours, which God works by us. Ferus
attributes here all our good works to God, and takes them quite away from us:
but the Roman Corrector, biddes us add (only) that our good works are not
only ours: as though they were in some part men's, and in some part Gods. Thus
they dissent from Ferus, and from the truth; to maintain man's righteousness.
Of man's natural corruption Ferus writes thus: Again, beasts if they be not
provoked, will not hurt thee; but an evil man, being not provoked, nay whom
thou have done good to, will hurt thee. Again, a Serpent though he can infect
with his poison, yet he fears a man: but the wicked, without all restraint
rages in whom soever. Therefore man, without God, is nothing else, but a very
bruit beast, and dare do any thing.

Thus Ferus writes, teaching plainly the corruption of our nature: but the
Roman Corrector biddes put out (is nothing else:) They will have some
goodness remain in man. And again to the same effect he writes: In cap.
Mat. 12.
Thou hear that the Kingdom of Christ, is not in us, unless Christ first
with his Spirit, cast out devils out of our hearts, that hereby thou may
learn, that we by our own nature are under the devils Kingdom, from which
we are not delivered, but by Christ. The Roman Corrector biddes put out (our
nature) and put in (through our fault) we are under the diuelles Kingdom. They
still go about to advance the nature of man. And that we should put no trust
in our selves, he writes thus: We are united to Christ through faith; In cap.
Mat. 11
and faith only teaches to trust in Christ, which he cannot do, but that
distrusteth in himself; the which then we do, when we acknowledge our own
misery. And here thou see that also (which we have admonished before) thy
first step to salvation is, to acknowledge our own insufficiency. I would to
God all Catholics would ascend this step: and what this insufficiency is,
he hereafter further declares; for many Catholics, I think, will not stick
to say, that their works are imperfect.

But Ferus goes on further: For this cause (says he) we have showed,
without confession any can hardly be saved. For God will have us freely
confess, that we were damned in body and soul, and so should ever have been,
unless we had been saved by the mercy of God, bestowed upon us in Jesus
Christ. This confession is necessary for all men: For how perfect soever thou
art; yet thou have somewhat wherein thou must confess thy self a sinner
before God. Here is our salvation; the free mercy of God bestowed upon us in
Jesus Christ, and that we should knowledge our selves even damned creatures, if
Christ had not delivered us; and how perfect soever we are, still to
acknowledge our selves sinners before God; and therefore of our selves deserving
damnation. And after he writes thus: By these it appears that of Adam we are
borne evil and wicked: for even as a field of it self without seed, brings
forth no fruit; if any thing grow, it is either Tares, or if it be like good
fruit, yet there is nothing in it; it is but meat for beasts: so truly the
sons of Adam, unless they be regenerate by Christ, bring forth nothing, but
evil fruit; and if they shall seem to bring forth good fruit (as the
Philosophers taught moral virtues) yet they are vain; they justify truly,
and have their glory, In cap. 13. mat.
but with men, not with God. Whereas Ferus says, that the sons of Adam,
unless they be regenerate by Christ, bring forth nothing else, but evil
fruits: the Roman Corrector bids put out (nothing but;) as though man could
do some good, without Christ. What is this else, but to gainsaie the Gospel:
John. 15.5.
where Christ says, (meaning of good) without me you can do nothing?

In cap. mat. 14.
And of Christ in another place, he writes thus: Neither by any other mean
(meaning Christ Jesus) says Ferus, can thou pass over the sea, especially
at the extremity of death: which on the one side will make thee afraid, and
the Devil on the other side; and behind thee the multitude of thy sins:
what will thou do in this case? If thou respect these dangers, thou see
nothing but the sea and the depth: therefore thou must needs despair:
remember therefore that thou look only upon Christ, neither doubt any thing:
for by this means thou may pass over as Peter did. Thus far Ferus. And
he teaches plainly, that by no other means then by Christ, we can pass
over the sea of death: But the Roman Corrector bids put out that, and put in
(without this mean) we cannot pass over death. And whereas Ferus bids us
only have an eye to Jesus Christ, the Corrector bids put out (only.) They
must have an eye to their own works, and an other to Christ (as it should
seem:) so injurious are they, even to Christ himself, who is our only
Savior, Esai. 63.
who alone trod the wine press for us: as himself witnesses.

Of justification also Ferus writes thus: In cap. 16. Io.
The holy Ghost shall reprove the world of righteousness, because I go to the
father: my righteousness can pierce the heavens and come before God, and not
any other righteousness. And after, The holy Ghost shows that the
righteousness of the world suffices not to salvation. And then he shows that
there is one only true righteousness with God: that Christ is gone to the
father, that is, that his death and resurrection justifies us. And of faith he
very excellently writes thus: I require no great price; but as I have promised
freely; so I will give freely: only if thou can but believe in me. In Ioh.
cap. 11.
Faith therefore is the mean, whereby we obtain the life and resurrection,
and all the goods of Christ.

Ferus of man's righteousness writes thus: In cap. 4. Ioh.
All men's righteousnesses are more unclean, then that they may justify us, or
may commend us to God: If any man seek righteousness out of the law, how
much good soever he does; yet he cannot obtain thereby peace of conscience;
yea thereby also his conscience is the more disquieted, the law often times
accusing him, that at length, he is compelled to trust only to the mercy of
God: and to say, we are unprofitable servants; and no flesh shall be justified
in thy sight. Also in another place he writes thus: In cap. 3. Ioh.
Furthermore also by this word may be understood, that only Christ by right
and merit ascended into heaven; for to him by right belongs the kingdom of
heaven; because he is the natural son of God: And therefore he says, all
thine are mine: And David says, The heaven of heavens are the Lords, but the
earth has he given to the children of men. All others which have ascended, or
shall ascend, have this only of grace, by no right, but because God only has
promised this of his mercy: neither our works of what kind soever they be,
are so great, that they may deserve this reward, either of right or of desert;
but in as much as God accepts them in mercy. Hereof it is that Saint Paul
says, The sufferings of this life, are not worthy the glory we shall have:
And the same Paul says, The weight of eternal glory, above all measure
surpasses all the sufferings of this life. And of these he collecteth: That we
are saved by grace, and not of works; least any man should glory. And lastly,
so that word may be understood, that no man by his own righteousness, may
stand or appear before God, but only Jesus Christ: neither any marvel: For
all are gone out of the way, and are altogether become unprofitable.

And also if any good works of righteousness appear in us, yet we have ever
more sins: so that David justly cried out: If thou Lord shall extremely
mark what is done amiss, who may abide it? Furthermore, our good works have
some imperfections in them; yea for the most part they are infected with vain
glory, or with some other fault of the old man: so that it is truly said: All
our righteousnesses are like a defiled cloth. And for this cause also David
prayed, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified: If therefore our righteousness cannot stand in Gods
sight, how could it open heaven unto us, or deserve the holy Ghost to reconcile
us to God? But Christ dare appear before God, because he is the son of God,
and all other being damned and quite undone, he only has the favor and grace
of God; he only possesses righteousness: and to conclude, he only has in
himself, all the good gifts of God. Also only his righteousness is
acceptable to his father, because it is mingled with no sins: yea it is most
pure, having proceedeed from the great love and charity of his father: That
all the world may know (says he) that I love the father, I do as the father
has commanded: And Saint Paul says, he was obedient even to death: Therefore
he alone could deserve for us the opening of heaven, the love of his father,
and the holy ghost. By this word therefore Christ would humble us, that we
should never presume of our selves, nor of our own righteousness: not that we
should do no good; but that we should acknowledge our selves unprofitable
servants, although we shall have done all that is commanded us. Also by this
word, he taught that we should seek all good things from him and by him: for
it is a most true saying. No man ascends. etc.

And again, the same Ferus writes thus: Who, that he might spare his servant;
Ibidem.
would whippe his own son? But God, that he might spare his enemies and them
who were unthankful to him, gave his son to death. He has given us his
righteousness, merits, yea and whatsoever he has done or suffered. And
therefore we may glory of them, as if they were our own, which thing only
can preserve us from desperation. Thus far Ferus. If we have Christ with all
his merits given us, what need we any more, what need we any merits of
Saints out of the Popes treasure then, to satisfy for our sins? And after,
the same Ferus writes thus: But thou will say, Christ is now absent from our
eyes, how shall we lay hold on him? I answer, he is not laid hold on (says
he) by the hand of the body; but by the hand of the heart, which is faith.
Therefore in only Christ by the faith of thy heart, thou shall find
sufficiency and abundance, because he alone brought with him God himself,
with all his goods. This faith in Christ makes not ashamed, because Christ is
truth. And therefore Esaias says: All that believe in him shall not be
confounded. For faith directed aright, never confounds. This word therefore
teaches, that God is both top and toe; the beginning and ending of our
salvation: the Author and the finisher thereof: I am Alpha and Omega, says
he, etc.

And to the same effect, Ferus writes on the Preface of Matthew: Have that ever
before thine eyes of Esaias: A child is borne unto us, and lived for us, and
died for us, and that which is more, is given us, with all that he has:
Therefore when thou hear Christ to have done or suffered any thing, think
that same Christ, with that he has done or suffered, to be thine; insomuch
that thou may brag thereof, as of thine own: for he needed not, to be
incarnated or circumcised; he needed not to fast, pray, or suffer: but he has
given all these things to us, we stand in need of them: For our merits are
not sufficient. For they are like a defiled cloth of a woman. Therefore thou
must say, O Father, I acknowledge that I am nothing: but I know that Christ
has done this, not for himself; but for me, etc. But some will say then,
whereunto serve our good works, if Christ's merits be sufficient? Ferus
answers a little after, Have care (says he) that of the truth of God, thy
faith may be nourished; and of his mercy, thy hope; and of his goodness, thy
love; and of his justice, thy fear. Behold (says he) these are the exercises
of a Christian life: For what does God require else but that thou should
fear him. Here we may plainly see, how Ferus still makes our works not
merits; but duties and exercises of our Christian life: God will not have us
idle, or unprofitable or unthankful to him. And after, the same Ferus writes
thus: The wise men showed their inward devotion of their minds, In cap. ^. Mat.
by their outward falling down: for our outward worship is without
superstition, when it proceeds from the inward. So the children of Israel,
hearing that God had respect to their afflictions, fell down flat on the earth:
so we also are prostrated, by this acknowledging our selves to be nothing but
dust: and we arise again, acknowledging that our salvation is only of the
grace of God.

Thus Ferus writes in the Text in the Copy printed at Paris, but the Corrector
in correcting the escapes in the printing at Rome, biddes put out (only:) the
Papists will not acknowledge with Ferus, that our salvation comes only of the
grace of God, Apoc. 7.10.
but partly also out of our own merits and works. But all the true Saints
of God with Ferus, acknowledge their salvation to come of the Lamb. Genes.
38.18.
This was prefigured in the law by many Types and shadows. Thamar requires
of Judah, as a pledge of his love, his Signet, his Cloak, and his Staff. The
same pledges of his love has our true Judah Jesus Christ given to us, that is,
the signets, or seals of his Sacraments, the cloak of his righteousness, and
the staff of his holy spirit. By the strength where of, we may pass through
all the waves and floods of this world.

2. King. 2.11.
This was that which was prefigured long before also in the ascension of Elias,
who left his double Spirit and his Mantle to his Scholar Elizeus: so our true
Elias Jesus Christ; who by his own power has ascended into heaven, who (as it
were a shadow of him, the other Elias did ascend) has left to all his
Disciples, to all his faithful servants; his double spirit, his two
Sacraments and the mantle of his righteousness. Of him it is truly said,
that he has put on righteousness as an Habergion, Esaias. 59.17.
and an helmet of salvation upon his head. This Habergion of his
righteousness, and this mantle, and this shield of faith, he has left to all
his faithful servants and soldiers. And by the strength of these they are
able to stand against all the assaults of their enemies, and to quench all the
fiery darts of the devil.

Dominic. 1 in Septuagesima.
Philippus de Dies also writes thus concerning this matter: Our heavenly
Redeemer says, Know that your salvation depends of my only will and
pleasure, and this is his predestination, that shall be saved: wherefore let no
man be exalted, though he come early into the Vineyard; neither despair though
he come late, so that he come: for if he come early, he owes me more, then I
owe him, says God; for I helped him that he might come early; and I am the
Lord, who may do whatsoever pleases me. And this is better and more profitable
for men, that every one be sober and watchful; considering I received the
thief from the Cross, and dismissed Judas from my Table and Dish. And so
Saint Augustine says, that men how to know, how to live well; it is the gift
of God. And man owes more to God, because he does good works in his service,
then God owes to man, because he does them. And so this glorious saint says:
The works of man, they are the gifts of God. And if any shall say, O Lord I
fast, recompense me for my fasting: the Lord may say to him again, yea rather
pay thou me, because I gave thee grace, and help, that for me thou might
fast. Another says, Lord recompense me, because I have given away all my goods
for thy sake. Another, Lord recompense me, for in thy service I have beaten and
chastened my body. Another says, I have been a Virgin or martyr for thy
sake. Another, because I have endured so many tribulations. To whom the Lord
may say, yea rather you ought to recompense me, because I gave you help, that
you might obtain the victory in all these. Wherefore we owe more to God,
because we are good, and serve him, then he owes to us: For he needs not our
service, and if we serve him, we do our selves good, and not him. Thus far
Dies.

Here is all hope of merits taken away, we are all by his judgment debtors
to God, he is not debtor to us. And again in another place he writes thus:
There are other benefits, In Fest. Mat. Conc. 2.
which depend only of the will of God, as is the gift of predestination, of
which Paul says: When as they had done neither good nor evil, etc. And
after, he concludes: You see, how Paul affirms, how that Gods predestination
is not given according to merits. He seems to condemn those works
foreseen, which other Papists do allow.

Of the merits also of our Savior, he writes thus: Dominic. 18. post. Pent.
conc. 1.
There can be no equal reward given to the merits of our Savior Christ our
Redeemer: for the reward shall ever be less, then his merits. For this
heavenly Redeemer has not, wherewith his merits (being so many) may be
rewarded: for if there were a thousand other works, they were not able to empty
his merits. Who then of us is it not (most dear brethren) that is not ioiful
exceedingly? knowing the riches of his dear friend Jesus Christ to be so many,
that if every man had so many sins, as all the men in the world had committed
together; yet pardon is due to all those of the heavenly father, by his Son
Jesus Christ; if men would on their behalf, dispose themselves to receive it,
etc. What need then the merits of friars or monks to be bought? what other
doctrine does the Church of Christ now teach us, that all should repose
themselves most assuredly in these merits of Christ?

In 2. cap. Genesis
Oleaster also a Papist, of sin writes thus: In the grievous punishment of
Adam, for so light an offense, as it seems, God has taught us, that no sin
committed against him, is light. And again in pardoning of grievous sins, he
teaches us; that we must never despair. For he punishes light sins most
grievously, and he pardons all grievous sins easily. If this be true, where
are then their venial sins?

Of merits also, Stella a Friar writes thus: Of which we gather, In 1. cap.
Lucae
that the work of incarnation, was both of mercy and of debt. But you will say
by and by, if it were of mercy, how was it of debt? and if of debt, how of
mercy? (Hear how.) He owed it to us, or rather to himself, because he had
promised our redemption: but he promised that, not moved with our merits, nor
hindered by our deserts: the which was all, of his grace and mercy. I would to
God, the rest of the Popes defenders, would likewise keep that good correction
of Stella: that God owed it to us; nay, but rather to himself: who is true in
his promises, and cannot but keep them. To us nothing is due; so that, all the
rewards of the Gospel, are due by promise; not of merit or desert.

And after the same Stella writes thus: See how sure and firm Gods promises
are; because he fulfilles that which he has promised, although those to whom
the promises are made, do not perform that which they have promised. He had
promised Christ to David; but when David had sinned, many might have thought
that God would have called back his promise: but God, who is most constant in
his words, and who is wont never to be deceived, nor to deceive any; keeps
his promise. And hereof David himself says: That thou may be justified in
thy words, and overcome when thou iudgest. As though he should say: perform
thy promises, not because I am worthy, but that it may appear and be made
manifest, how true and just thou art in thy promises. This was David's saying,
and so must every good man say.

And again: It is worthy to be woondred at, that when as David seemed to put
all his diligence, that he might seek something to requite unto the Lord, he
could say nothing: But I will receive the Cup of salvation; by the which
thing, he was more bound unto the Lord, that he should serve him more
dutifully. Therefore it is true, that the Saints found nothing else, whereof
they could glory, but that they were laden with debts. And a man has so much
the more substance, as he owes less to another: but he that possesses any
thing, and owes all that he is worth, he may say, that he possesses nothing.
Therefore the saints and friends of God, which have all things, must confess
they owe all to God; they have nothing whereof they may brag, but of this
only, that they have nothing of themselves, but of God, and for God. Of his
fullness we all have received, says John, even grace for grace.

Stella also writes thus: In 1. cap. Lucae
Holy Job thought he committed a great fault, which kissed his own hand; the
which thing thou easily committest, when as thou braggest, or commendest thy
self for any work, that thou have done, taking from God his due service of
reverence.

Ferus also writes thus: It often comes to pass, Fer. in 11. cap. Matthew.
that whiles we drive away the Wolf from the flocks on the one side, a greater
danger is imminent on the other. As when one extols faith, it is dangerous,
least the people suspect, that works should not be necessary, etc. Thus writes
Ferus in his true original. But the Roman edition of Ferus adds, least the
people should suspect, that works should not be necessary, and meritorious.
This merit is their own: Ferus has it not in him.

Stella also writes very excellently of Christ, and his merits: In 2. cap.
Lucae
Why did Job desire that our sins might be wayed, and be put in one balance,
and in the other balance should be put Christ's tears, poverty, nakedness,
hard cribbe, cold, and all his other pains he took for us? Because Job knew
very well, that Christ's merits were of more force, and would way down all
our sins. Thus far Stella. And this is all true Christians comfort, and
only hope of salvation.

3. Of special grace.
MAster Bellarmine of special grace and mercy, Lib. 1. de iustificat. cap. 4.
writes thus: The Catholics dissent from the heretics, first in the object
of a justifying faith, which the heretics restrain to the only promise of
special mercy: but the Catholics will have it as general as the word of
God is; nay they affirm constantly, that the certain promise of special
mercy does belong not to faith so properly, as to presumption. This is Master
Bellarmines resolution, the Chiefetaine and Goliath of the Romish army. But
mark (I beseech you) how Goliath his head is stricken off with his own sword:
In Mat. cap. 3.
Ferus a Papist and a Friar, of this matter writes thus: This brings (says he)
great comfort to an afflicted conscience, to know, that Christ's promises (such
like as these are:) Thy sins are forgiven thee: and again, it is your
fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom: and again, your father knows that
you stand in need of these things: do not belong only to the Apostles, but
do belong also to him.

Ferus ser. 57. in cap. 19. Job.
But most plainly in his Sermons upon Job he teaches this doctrine: Thirdly
(says he) he does not say only a redeemer lives: but that my redeemer lives:
and not without an express signification of his mind, (as we say, and that not
coldly, or for fashion sake.) For what good does it me, that Christ is a
redeemer, unless he be also my redeemer, unless he have made me partaker of
his redemption? Satan knew that Christ was a redeemer, but he cannot call him
his redeemer: therefore all the force of this sentence consists in this word
(mine:) let us therefore endeavor to fashion our faith to this. Neither is it
sufficient if we do believe, unless we believe with a certain hope and
assurance. If I believe that there is a God, and do not believe that he is my
God; that faith brings me no comfort: for the Devils believe the same, and
tremble: Such a faith profits nothing. But then I believe aright with a
joyful assurance of my heart, if I can not only say, I believe that there is a
God, but I believe he is my God: nor only I believe, that God is a father; but
I believe that he is my father. This to conclude, is that, that makes the heart
merry: this is the true confession of the faith: this God requires. Hear, O
Israel, I am thy Lord God; that is to say, I will not that thou account me for
a God only, but that thou have me for thy God; but then thou shall acknowledge
that I am thy God, if thou shall boldly call upon me in thy necessities; so
Christ will not that we shall only say: Father which art in heaven; but Our
Father: as he himself has prayed in the garden. After this manner also Thomas
made a confession of his faith: my God and my Lord: acknowledging Christ not
only to be a God and a Lord, but also his God and his Lord. So does also Job
in this place: I know that he is a redeemer; and I know that he is mine. Let us
mark how plainly he teaches this doctrine, and strongly he confirms the
same against Master Bellarmines former position.

Philippus de Dies a Friar also of this matter, Domin. 3. post. pent. conc. 2.
agreeing with Ferus, writes thus: O immutable God (says he) wherefore when as
there are so many wicked men in the world; some for gaming, some for pleasures,
some for pride, some for covetousness: thou say, there is but one lost
sheep? because the most sweet Jesus wills, that thou should believe, that
he sought thee, so that if thou had been in all the world alone, he would
for thy sake only have died. Therefore every one is to account himself, as
that lost sheep, and should think these benefits of his redemption, not as
universal, but as particular, even done for him: And as for such like benefits,
should show himself thankful. What can be more plain then this, that every
man ought to account himself that lost sheep? And that Christ died for him
alone? And that not for a general benefit, as May. Bellarmine teaches; but
for such a particular benefit bestowed upon him alone, he should be thankful.
Surely their doctrine diminishes this thankfulness.

Philippus de Dies of special grace writes thus: Conc. 1. in fest. pet. and
Pauli.
In every temptation of our faith, we must fly to this point, saying: My Lord
Jesus Christ is the natural son of God, and the same is also God with the
father, and the holy Ghost: and therefore whatsoever he has taught or said,
concerning the Sacraments of grace, of the glory of heaven, and of the pains
of hell, is a most certain and infallible truth.

Stella of special grace writes thus: In cap. 12. Luc.
Mark that he says to them which wait for their Lord. Wherein thou must take
heed that the God which shall come unto thee, both that he be thine, and that
thou be Gods. So that thou may truly say with David: I am thine, O save me,
because I have sought thy righteousness. It is a bird seldom seen upon
earth, that can say to God: I am thine: He can say so truly, which cleaues to
God with his whole heart and affection. Can he say so which is greedy of
money, or which cleaues to a whore? He which thinks of the world, and seeks
after worldly things, without doubt is the worlds, as also they are the Devils
that serve the Devil. Lust comes and says, thou art mine, because thou
think of those things, which concern the body and concupiscence.
Covetousness comes and says, thou art mine, because thou take care for
money. And so other vices. How can thou, which art such a one, say to God, I
am thine? And he adds by and by: Because I have sought thy righteousness;
that is, I have sought nothing else: I have sought but yt which belongs to thee.
Some seek jewels, gold, silver, and precious stones, dignities, pleasures of
the flesh, revenge of their enemies: but I have sought for thy righteousness;
I cannot possess but that which belongs to thee: I am thine, because my
portion is not in these earthly things, but only in thee, etc. As we are Gods,
so also we must every one of us account God to be ours, by Stella his
judgment.

De Jacob. and vita beata ca. 6
Ambrose speaking of that place of S. Paul, Romans 8. writes thus: He has
wonderfully added that, (that he gave him to die for us all:) that he might
declare that he loved us all so, that he gave his dearly beloved son, even
for every one of us.

And in another place, speaking of Christ he writes thus: He died but once:
Ambr. de fuga seculi cap. 9.
but he died for every one that is baptized into the death of Christ, that we
may be buried with him, and may rise again with him, and may walk in the
newness of his life. And after, the chief Priest is dead for thee, is
crucified for thee, that thou might stick fast to his nails: for he took
thee and thy sins upon him on that Cross, the obligations of thy sins were
fastened to that gibbet, that now thou should owe nothing to the world, which
thou have renounced.

Ferus also of the same matter writes thus: Fourthly as it was said to Christ,
Fer. part. 3. pass
Let God deliver him, if he will have him; so this is the fourth temptation of
the godly when they are tempted, whether God love them or not. Where this word
(him) has a great force: let him deliver him, if he will have him. For who
doubts, but that God knows how to save, and is also able and willing to save?
For God is the God of salvation (as says the Psalm:) but whether he will
save him or no, this the Devil calls in question; especially if a man have
lived among the wicked, as Christ was here among the thieves. Therefore it is a
great temptation, when the Devil makes a man doubt, which trusts in the
Gospel: that although he believe that Christ is our righteousness; yet that
he should doubt whether he be his righteousness, or no, etc.

Every true Christian must believe in particular, that Christ is his
righteousness, if he mind to overcome the Devil, and be saved. To believe in
General, that he is the righteousness of all men, is the mark the Devil
shootes at; and this doctrine the Papists some of them do now teach. But he
must go further that will be saved, and apply this sovereign plaster of
Christ's death to himself, and to his own soul, and believe that he is his
righteousness also.

Granatensis also of the same matter writes thus: But thou (O Lord) as thou art
omnipotent in virtues; Granat. de perfectione amor. dei lib. 2. ca. 34
so thou art sufficient for all men in love; thou art infinite in them both: and
therefore, that cannot be wanting to any which has neither lymits, nor any
end, although it be divided amongst many. Even as no man enjoys less the
light of the sun, because it shines to all men, but he receives so much
thereof, even as though he were alone in the world; so that heavenly
bridegroom loves no less all the Godly souls, both in particular and in
general, then if it were one soul alone. For he is not a lover like to Jacob,
whose love toward Leah was colder, for the fervent love wherewith he loved
Rachel: but as an infinite God, whose virtue is no less in every particular
person, though it be divided also amongst many.

And after, The Philosophers say, Cap. 37.
that goodness is to be beloved of it self: but also that every one loves his
own goods the best: for when as man loves himself by nature, it follows by a
necessary consequent that he must love all his own things, as proper and
pertaining to himself alone. Wherefore every one loves his own house, his
own vineyard, his own money, his own servants, his own horses, and
whatsoever he possesses: for all these serve to his use: and therefore man as
he loves himself, so he loves all things which belong to himself. Therefore
if then thou my Lord God, be not the only best good thing in the world, but
also my best good thing that I have in the world, I mind here to consider in
what degree thou art mine, and by how many titles thou art mine, that hereby I
may more manifestly know how greatly I ought to love thee. Therefore I see (O
my God) that thou art my Creator, that thou art my sanctifier, and that thou
art my gloryfier: Thou art my helper, my governor, defender, tutour and
keeper: thou sustainest me, thou encouragest me, thou preseruest me: thou, to
conclude, art my God, thou art my Lord, thou art my salvation, thou art my
hope, thou art my glory, thou art all the good things I have. Thou art all
these things unto me, O Lord, as thou art God: but in that thou art man,
there are many other titles, other duties, and other bonds, wherewith I am
bound to thee. Thou art my repairer; for thou have made perfect again man's
nature, which by sin was corrupted and weakened: thou art my deliverer; for by
thy captivity, thou have delivered me from the tyranny of sin, death, hell,
and the devil, my deadly enemy: thou art my redeemer; for with a price and
incomparable treasure laid out for my sake, thou have redeemed me from that
servitude, into the which through sin I was fallen: thou art my King, for thou
gouernest me with thy Spirit: thou also have fought for me, and have delivered
me from the hands of mine enemies. (And so going forward, he reckons up a great
many benefits of Jesus Christ to his Church, and after concludes thus.) All
these things thou art, O Lord my God, and more then these, both to all, and to
every one, and to me alone. And therefore with what face shall I not love thee,
Lord, to whom I am bound by so many titles and means?

Par. prec. orat. 7. de impet. amore dei.
Michaelab Istelt cites thus Granatensis, praying: But when as indeed every good
thing is to be believed by it self; yet notwithstanding every one does love
his own good the best: I will therefore love thee, O Lord my God, not only
because that thou art the best good thing, but because that thou art my good
too. For when I consider and way with my self, by how many titles and means
thou art become mine, my very entrails melt within me: and I cry out with the
Bride, My love is mine, and I am his. For thou, O Lord, art my creator, thou
art my sanctifier and glorifier, thou have given me the essence of nature, thou
have given me the essence of grace, and thou will give me the essence of glory.
Thou art my helper, my governor, my defender, my tutor, my preserver, and
lastly, thou art my Lord, and my God; thou art my salvation, my hope, my glory;
thou art all the goods I have. And truly thou art all these unto me, in as much
as thou art God, in as much as thou art the Creator and preserver of all
things: but in that thou art man, there are many other titles, other duties,
and other bonds, wherewith I am bound to thee, and thou to me: for the which
also, I ought of good right to love thee (if it were possible) with an infinite
love, etc.

Granatensis here affirms, that God is not only the best good thing in the
world; but that he is his good to him. And what is this else, but to teach men
to believe special grace?

Mem. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Granatensis also himself, of special grace writes thus: Amongst all those
losses, which the sinner incurres through his sin, there is none greater or
more to be lamented, then that he loses God himself: for this is the root
and fountain of all other losses: For to have lost God, is not to have God a
special father, tutor, pastor, and defender, and now to have changed him from
being a most loving Father, into a most severe Judge. Here is the very word
used, that God is as it were a special father, protector, and defender to
every one of his.

Granatensis in another place of special grace writes thus: Mem. lib. 5. orat.
remiss. peccat.
O Lord, remember thy words, which are most comfortable, which sometimes thou
spakest by the mouth of thy Prophet: Ier. 31.
But thou having plaide the harlot with many lovers, yet turn again to me
(says the Lord.) Wherefore, O merciful father, I trusting to this thy
promise, turn to thee with my whole heart, no otherwise then if thou had
called me alone, and had invited me unto thee with this sweet word. As
Granatensis does apply this promise of God particularly to himself: so he
teaches all Christians, how they must also apply all the rest of Gods
promises, particularly to themselves.

Granatensis again of special grace writes thus: De orat. and Med. cap. 1.
We have not (says he) a fitter Shield against the darts of sin, then
ever to have in our memories, what faith has revealed against sin. And that
faith may work this thing in us, it is necessary, that we frame our selves
sometimes to think, and consider attentively, what faith says. For if we
shall not do this, we shall account the letters of faith, as shut and
sealed up from us, which although they contain, either very good or very evil
news; yet they shall neither make us merry, nor sorry no other ways, then as
if we had never received them. For we have not opened them, and seen what is
in them. And what can be more fitly said of the faith of wicked men? For there
can be nothing more terrible, nor more ioifull, then those things which are
handled in Christian Religion. But the evil, as though they had never opened
this Epistle, that they might have seen what had been contained in it, they
never think of this mystery of their faith, but run forcibly into all manner
of sins: so they never feel those good motions and alterations, which faith
works in others. Therefore it behooves every one of us, that sometimes we
diligently scanne over these letters, and that we read them diligently, and
that we mark attentively; what they teach, which all are done by the means
of consideration, or meditation: for this is that, which lightens obscure
things, and so by lightning our understanding by the greatness of the mysteries,
inclines our will also (as much as it is able) that we may live according to
the rule of them. God would also prefigurate this our duty in the old law, when
as among the conditions of clean beasts, he puts down this also; To chew the
cudde: not that God has such great care of beasts; but in this, he would give
us to understand, the condition and duty of clean spiritual beasts; that is
of just men: to whom it is not enough to have eaten the heavenly things, by
believing them by faith, but they must chew them over again by consideration,
thinking on the mysteries which they believe, and thoroughly discussing the
greatness of them, and dispersing this meat by and by through all the spiritual
members of the soul, that it may be the food and sustentation thereof. By
Granatensis his judgment, every Christian must open the letters of faith, that
is, the holy Scriptures, which God has as it were sent privately unto him,
and he must look into them, and examine and mark them well, and apply them
to his own soul. The wicked keep these Letters, as it were sealed, and never
mind them, and so run forciblie into their sins. Also the clean Beasts,
wherein God delights only, must chewe the cudde every one of them; and
distribute this spiritual food to the particular spiritual members of their
souls. They which do not so, are unclean in Gods sight, how devout and
religious soever they seem in the eyes of men. And is not this to have a
special faith?

Again he writes thus: The Scripture (says he) is the fountain, from
whence the just man draws the waters of comfort, by which he is strengthened
to trust in God. For there you see the greatness of Christ's merits, which is
the head and foundation of our hope; you see there the greatness of the
goodness and sweetness of God, expressed in a thousand places; his providence
whereby he preserues and keeps his; his mercy whereby he receives those that
draw nie unto him; the promises and certain pledges which he has given them,
that he will never forsake them that put their trust in him. You see nothing
oftener repeated in the Psalms, promised in the Prophets, declared in the
Histories, from the beginning of the world, then the favor, loving kindness,
and benefits, which God has ever used toward his: how he has ever helped
them in all their tribulations and afflictions: how he never forsook Abraham
in all his iourneys, Jacob in all his dangers, Joseph in his banishment, David
in his persecutions, Job in his griefs and sicknesses, Tobie in his
blindness, Judith in the atchieuing of her valiant act, Hester in her Prayers;
the Machabees in their wars, and triumphs; to conclude, how he has defended
and patronized all which with humility and with a religious and sincere heart,
have craved his divine help? These, and such other like, do encourage us, least
we should be weary in trusting in him.

This is Granatensis counsel, that every particular man should apply all
these examples to himself, and thereby have an assured hope in God, that God
will never leave him nor forsake him, as he did not any of these. And is not
this to have a special faith and trust in God?

But most manifestly of the Passion of Christ, he writes thus: Do not (says
he) think these things, as a thing that is past, but rather as a thing
present, and not as another man's griefs or sorrows, but even as it were thine
own. Imagine that thou thy self stoodst in that place wherein he is which
suffers, and examine thy self what thou would do, if any man should bore
through any member thou have so tender and sensible as the head is, with so many
thorns, and should thrust them even to the very boanes, so that they should
pierce through thy temples, thy hinder part of thy head, and thy forehead: what
talk I of thorns? thou could not endure the prick of an Needle: What
torments then suffered the most tender head of thy Savior, boared through with
so many and cruel thorns?

O thou brrightnesse of thy Father! who abused thee so greatly? O thou most
clear glass of the divine majesty! who be spotted thee so filthily? O thou
flood, which runs out of the earthly Paradise, and with thy stream makes
glad the City of God! who troubled these thy so sweet and pleasant waters? My
sins, O Lord, have troubled them: mine iniquities have defiled them. O wretch
that I am! O miserable man! how have mine own sins defiled mine own soul?
If other men's sins have filthily polluted the most clear Spring of all
beauty; Oh good Jesus, they are my sins, which prick thee, my foolery and
vanities are the purple wherewith thou art mocked, mine hypocrisy and fained
holiness are those ceremonies and cappings and kneelinges, wherewith they do
mock and despise thee, my pomp and vain glory, are that crown which is put
on thy head scoffingly, and yet with intolerable grief: In all my works, O
Lord, I am thy hangman: in all places I am the cause of thy griefs. Ezechias
purged the temple of God, profaned of the wicked; and he cast out all the
uncleanness thereof into the brook Cedron, says the Scripture: I am (O
Lord) thy lively temple profaned of the devil, and defiled with most vile
sins: but thou art that most clear fountain of Cedron, who by thy stream
maintains all the beauty of heaven. Into this fountain were all my sins
cast, and all my iniquities were drowned in it. For thou by the merit of thy
unspeakable humility and charity, by which thou wast moved, that thou
should take all my sins upon thee, did not only deliver me from them:
but also made me partaker of thy goods. Thou vndertookest my death, and thou
gave me thy life: thou tookest upon thee my flesh, and thou gave me thy
spirit: thou tookest upon thee my sins, and gave me thy grace: Therefore, O
my redeemer, all thy treasures, and riches are mine. Thy purple clotheth me;
thy crown honors me; thy wounds make me beautiful; thy sorrows are my
pleasures; thy bitternesses refresh me; thy stripes heal me; thy blood
enricheth me; and thy love as it were makes me drunken. But what marvel is it
if thy love were able to make me drunken, when as the self same love, wherewith
thou have loved me, was able to make thy self drunken, who made thee as
another Noah, naked and to be laughed at in the peoples eyes. The purple
garment of thy fervent love caused thee to bear that scornful purple, and
the zeal of my salvation moved thee to hold in thy hand that reed of despite
and the pity wherewith thou pitiedst me, being now about to perish, crowned
thee with that crown of shame. Thus far Granatensis. This every true
Christian must believe and apply to himself: and is not this to have a
special faith?

And again, the same Granatensis writes thus: That our will may be inclined to
love God, it behooves that our understanding go before it; weighing diligently
how worthy to be believed God is in himself; and then next how good he is
toward us. I think there is no man but knows how great the goodness of God
is, his sweetness, his kindness, his liberality, his nobility, and of all
other, his perfections which are innumerable. Again, how pitiful he is
toward us, how tenderly he loves us, what has he not done? What has he not
suffered even from his birth to his Cross for our sakes? what great good
things has he prepared for us, even from the beginning? how many bestows he
upon us even now presently? how many will he give us hereafter? from how great
evils has he delivered us? how patiently has he waited for us to come to
repentance? how lovingly has he dealt with us, in bestowing all his benefits
upon us, which are innumerable?

By considering and meditating diligently, and exercising himself in the deep
contemplation of these benefits, man shall by little and little feel his heart
kindled with the love of this bountiful God. For if bruit beasts love their
benefactors, and if (as the Spanyard says) a gift breaks a rock, and as a
certain Philosopher said; he that found out benefits found out fetters,
wherewith men's hearts are fettered together: who now will be so cruel and hard
hearted, who considering the hugeness and unmeasurable greatness of these
benefits, will not be kindled with the love of such a benefactor?

And after, As by use and often writing one becomes a good scriuener, and by
painting a good painter, and by working a good smith: so by loving one becomes
a lover, that is, that even as use of writing makes a good writer; so the use,
exercise and continuance of loving God (which is almost brought to pass by
meditation) causes that one shall be a perfect lover of God.

And after, Fire out of his Region is by and by extinguished, unless there be
some that continually throwing on wood do nourish it, by which it is
maintained: so it is necessary that the fire of charity may be maintained in
this life, whereas she is out of her natural place and a stranger, that she be
also nourished with wood; and the wood wherewith she is nourished, are the
considerations of Gods benefits, and of his perfections: for every one of
these things being well considered, is as it were a piece of wood, or a
firebrand, that kindles this love of God in our hearts. Therefore it is
requisite that we feed this fire often with this wood, least this heavenly
fire go out in our hearts. The which thing the Lord also meant in the old
law, when he said: Fire shall ever burn on my altars: that is, in the hearts
of just men. Therefore let the Godly man take care every morning to maintain
this fire with the consideration of these things; that so ever it may be
preserved: and so it is said in the Psalms: And while I mused, the fire
kindled. Thus far Granatensis. Every man must muse upon Gods benefits and
apply them to himself, and so kindle in his heart the fire of Gods love: and
without this wood it is impossible but this fire will go out. And after he
writes thus: It is most certain that no man's tongue is able to speak or utter
the great love, wherewith Christ loved not only his universal Church, Die
lunae Med. de ven. Sacram.
but also every particular soul of his elect. For every particular soul is
chosen of God, every particular soul is the spouse of Christ: This every
Christian must believe. That saying of Ferus is worthy to be written in letters
of gold: I would to God (says he) this word should remain ever laid up and
fast fixed in our hearts, Fer. in cap. 2. Act.
that in every tribulation or temptation, but especially at the point of
death, we might boldly say: I know assuredly that God has made Jesus to be
crucified for me, my Lord, my king and my Bishop. What is it, that this faith
were not able to do?

Again the same Ferus touching the same matter, writes thus: This is chiefly
to be marked, Fer. in cap. 17. Genesis
that he which before said generally that he was God, now he promises that he
will be our God. For no profit else would come unto us, if so great and mighty
a God were not our God. But he is ours by covenant and free mercy, not by
merits or deserts.

Of special grace also Petrus Berchorius writes thus in his Dictionarie: In
verbo pertinere.
Of God every Christian may say to every infidel, that saying which we read 2.
Kings 19.42. David belongs more to me, then to thee, etc. Thus far
Berchorius. But as the text it self seems to infer: Every Christian may
say to another Christian: (for these were the speeches of the men of Judah to
the men of Israel) that the true David which is Jesus Christ, belongs to him by
ten parts more then to him. For thus it is read in the Hebrew text: And the
man of Israel answered the man of Judah and said, I have ten hands or ten
handfuls (as we say) in the King and in David before thee: that is, more then
thou. So that this holy contention between Judah and Israel, who should be
most bound to David and love him best, may fitly be applied to us Christians,
Roman. 1.3. Roman. 2.2.
for whom our true David, that is, Jesus Christ, the son of David, has done
so much; and who are indeed the true Israel and the true Judah, as S. Paul
teaches; rather then to christians and infidels, as Berchorius teaches.

Stella also writes thus concerning this matter: But neither would I have thee,
In 1. cap. Lucae
having considered all these things, to forget through love to make God thine
also, that thou may be able to say with Abacucke. I will rejoice in God, my
Jesus and my Savior. And also remember this, least the most precious blood of
Christ perish in thee, but that as he most willingly died for all, and is the
Savior of all; so that he be a Savior and Lord to thee also; and that his
Cross, nails and passion may profit thee: God shall profit thee nothing but
to thy greater damnation, if thou shall not embrace him as thy Savior. Thus
much Stella. And what can be said plainer then this? That unless every one
embrace Jesus Christ as his Savior, Christ profits him nothing. The danger is
very great by his judgment to err in this point: and therefore let all true
Catholics have care of it.

But let every true Catholic mark, how in this point, the very plain text
of the Gospel overthrows the Papists opinion. They teach that it is
sufficient to salvation, to have a general faith of Christ, and to believe as
the Church believes: and not that every man should have a particular faith in
himself, that even Jesus Christ has cured his sins privately, and that he
is his Savior. But let us a little mark what the Gospel teaches herein:
Christ went to heal Iairus daughter, and a great multitude that followed him,
thronged him, and touched him. Luke 8.45.46.
But there was a poor woman which had been sick of a bloody issue twelve
years, and she thought in her heart, that if she might but touch the very
hemme of his garment, she should be healed. And she with this faith touching
him, was immediately made hole. There were many other that touched him
generally, as the Papists teach to touch Christ, with a general faith: but
though, no doubt, many of them that so touched him were sick of some disease,
or grievous sinners; yet not one of them were healed, but this poor woman, yt
thus by a special trust she had in him touched him. And of her Christ said;
That virtue went out of him, and to none other: even so now, no doubt, as many
as will have virtue to come out of Christ to heal them, must touch him, not
generally with that multitude, as the Papists teach; but particularly and
specially every man by his own faith, and for his own infirmity, as that
woman did; and then no doubt, shall virtue even now also proceed from Christ
to him. He that has not this faith shall have no virtue.

And this also Saint Ambrose teaches upon these words: De Isaac. cap. ^
They also drew near unto him, and held his feet and worshipped him: Jesus
therefore is held; but he delights to be held, when as he is held by faith.
To conclude, he took great pleasure in that woman, which touched him, and was
cured of her bloody issue: Of whom he said, Some body has touched me: for I
feel virtue to have proceeded from me. Touch thou him therefore, and hold him
by thy faith: and faithfully stick to his feet, that virtue may proceed from
him, and heal thy soul.

4. Of good works.
STella of good works, writes thus: They lie which say, nothing is due to our
works of justice: for as wages is due to the work, not of favor, but of true
debt: so glory is due to them which work well, by good right.

But this his assertion, how contrary is it to the whole course of the
Scripture? first our Savior says: Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers
pleasure to give you a Kingdom. Sell that you have and give alms, and make
you bags which wax not old; a treasure that can never fail in heaven, where
no thief comes, nor moth corrupts: for where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also. The kingdom of heaven is the free gift of God, as our
Savior here teaches us. Now when one has a Kingdom, he will endeavor by
all means possible, to amplify it and adorn it, to enrich himself: so our
alms, all our good works, are treasures laid up for us in store, against we
come into that heavenly kingdom: they are not purchases or prices of it; no
if we should sell all the land we have, we cannot purchase heaven. To be
accounted least in this world, grieves the nature of man: there shall be
greater and lesser in the Kingdom of heaven. There shall be Rulers of five
cities, and of ten cities. And to this purpose is it, that Saint Paul
compares all Christians lives to a race; We should all strive to win the
best game. And this is the end of our works; to be steps of our greater
glory.

But as concerning the kingdom of heaven, Saint Paul says plainly: Romans 6.
The wages of sin is death: but eternal life is the free gift of God. And
you are saved of grace, and not of your selves. And of our works David says:
Thou Lord art merciful, for thou shall reward every man according to his
works. Who dare then challenge reward of justice, which Stella here affirms?
Who dare say, that the kingdom of heaven is by as true debt due to Gods
Saints, as the wages of laborers is due to them, which labor in this world?

That Parable in the Gospel teaches us a contrary lesson: They which came at
the last hour of the day; received as much wages, as they which came at the
first: To teach us, that there is wages due to Gods Saints, but this wages is
due to them more of Gods mercy, then of their merits and deserts. And
therefore here David says: Thou, Lord, art merciful, and shall reward every
man according to his works. If Gods mercy were not, there were no wages due,
no not to him that came at the first hour of the day. And therefore David
himself, who rose so early to serve God (whose eyes prevented the night
watches) that he might be occupied in his statutes (who was a man according
to Gods own heart) cried out: Oh enter not into judgment with thy servant;
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. And Job said: I know
truly that it is even so. And what a thing is it, that man will justify
himself with God? If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one for
a thousand. Here is great odds: so far is man off to challenge any thing, as
of his own, of the justice of God. And that same one word of our Savior, were
enough to teach us this lesson: who in giving the possession of that glorious
kingdom to all Gods children, declares also to them the title, whereby they
attain unto it: Come (says he) and inherit a Kingdom, prepared for you,
from the foundations of the world. What son dare say, that he has
purchased his fathers inheritance? If it be a purchase, it is no inheritance:
this common reason teaches. But some will object that place of Saint Paul: I
have kept the faith, and henceforth is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day,
and not to me only, but to all them that love his appearing. Lira expounds
this place thus: The faith, Lira in 2. Ti^* to. 4.
which is the principal part of all Christian religion, I have kept; which
cannot be had but by the mercy of God, because it is the gift of God. And
hereof in another place he says: I have obtained mercy, not because I was
faithful, but that I might be faithful. For we find the Apostle without any
good deserts, yea with many vices, to have obtained the mercy of God, who
requites good for evil: who, now his death drawing near, reckons up his
merits: after which he shall obtain a crown, who after his evil merits
obtained grace, which if before it had not been freely given, a crown should
not have been requited him. Therefore his merits are not of himself, that is,
purchased to himself of himself: but they are the gifts of God, etc. If the
gifts of God, then wholly they proceed of God: for Gods gifts are not
imperfect: he gives no halfes, he gives the whole, when he gives.

And after, he writes thus: (Shall give.) If faith be grace, and everlasting
life be as it were the wages of faith, God seems to give eternal life as a
debt to the faithful, to whom he owes it: because he has deserved it by
faith. But because faith is grace, life eterenal is grace also: therefore by
grace he will give it unto us. Lira here plainly teaches, that we deserve
heaven by faith: and faith, as all men do confess, is given us without
merits: therefore eternal life also.

And after, upon these words (The just Judge:) Just truly, rendering good
things for good things; who before was merciful, rendering good things for
evil. That same justice, which requites good things for good things, is not
without mercy.

Lira affirms, that this justice, which rewards our good works, is not mere
justice, but justice mixed with mercy: justice in respect of God, who has
promised great rewards to our works; and it is justice, that he should
perform his promises. But this justice is mingled with mercy, in respect of
us, whose works are all imperfect, and not answerable to that perfection, which
Gods law and justice requires. This distinction Lira teaches: Luke, 17.10.
all Christians must call and account themselves unprofitable servants: and
can such servants challenge any wages, as of true debt, or of just desert?

Master Bellarmine concerning the rewards of our works, writes thus: Some
think (says he) that our good works proceeding from grace, De iustificat.
lib. 5. cap. 17.
not to be meritorious of worthiness or desert, by reason of the work, but
only by reason of Gods promise and acceptance. And so Scotus teaches. But
this opinion (which is the true opinion) Bellarmine rejects. But the middle
opinion seems more probable to us (says he) which teaches, that the good
works of the just, are meritorious, and deserve eternal life, of their
worthiness, by reason of the covenant and work also: not because the work
has not of it self, without the covenant and acceptance of God, a proportion
and agreement to eternal life; but because God is not bound to accept that
work for such a reward (although it be agreeable and equal to the reward)
unless there had been a covenant made. Which opinion we do not doubt to be
agreeing with the council of Trent, and to Thomas Aquinas, Bonauenture, and
other chief Divines.

So that by Master Bellarmines judgment, Gods promises and couenantes are but
limitations as it were, teaching us what rewards are due to every good work:
But the work it self without the promise, is equal and worthy of the reward.

But Saint Paul grounds all Gods promises on Jesus Christ: All the promises of
God (says he) in him are, yea; 2. Corin. 1.20
and in him are, Amen, unto the glory of God through us. So that they are not
only limitations, teaching us, that if we shall do this or that good work,
we shall have this or that reward for it; but they are grounded upon Jesus
Christ: so that for his sake, they are made unto us; and for his sake it
pleases our most gracious God, for such a small work, to give us such a great
reward. And this is that which saint Paul says: Roman. 4.13.
The promise was not made to Abraham and to his seed, that he should be the
heir of the world by the law, but by the righteousness of faith. And after
speaking of the same promise, he says: This is the word of promise, Roman.
9.9.
I will return at this season again; and Sarah shall have a Son. Was not
this promise made to Abraham of Gods great mercy? What work of Abraham moved
him to make this promise? naie what work could Abraham do, correspondent to
this promise?

And surely such like are all the other promises of God, which are annexed to
our works. They do not only show (as Master Bellarmine teaches) that such
a work is worthy of such a reward; but that it pleases our most gracious
God, for such a small work, to give such a great reward: even as amongst
Land-lordes, some have given Farms to their Tenantes, for a Pepper corn; so
great, so ample, and so liberal are all Gods promises, and rewards toward
us: and so little is all that we are able to do.

And the same thing does Saint Paul declare more plainly to the Galathians:
If the inheritance come by the law, Galath. 3.18.
then not of promise. But God (...), showed grace or favor to Abraham, in
making his promise. The same reason is of all the promises in the Gospel:
Forgive, and thou shall be forgiven (says our Savior: Luke, 6.37.38.
) Give, and it shall be given to you. What proportion is there here, the one to
the other? That which we can forgive to the uttermost, and a debt, for which
we must crave forgiveness, is described in that Parable of the unmerciful
servant: Matthew. 18.23.
He owed his Master a thousand Talents; And his fellow owed him, but a
hundredth pence: What proportion is between these two? Again concerning our
gifts, all that we can give, is but like that Widows Mite, Luke 21.1 Matthew.
10.42.
or a Cup of coldwater, in respect of that which God gives and must give us:
and is the work in it self then, answerable to the reward? O proud speech!

Mat. 5.3.
But to prove the same by more evident examples: Blessed are the poor in
spirit (says our Savior) for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven: what
proportion or equality is there, I pray you, between this poverty and
lowliness of mind, and the Kingdom of heaven? Blessed are the peacemakers,
for they shall be called the Sons of God. Verse, 9.
What proportion is there between this small work, to make two, which are at
variance, friends, and between this honorable title? And blessed are they,
which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, Verse, 10.
for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. What persecution in the world, that any
mortal man can endure, is equal or worthy of the kingdom of heaven? If
Master Bellarmine will affirm this, saint Paul will deny it: I account
(says he) that the sufferinges of this present life are not worthy of the
glory which shall be revealed unto us. Roman. 8.18.
He waighed our works, and the great glory of the kingdom of heaven, in
another manner of balance, then Master Bellarmine does. If the cruel
sufferinges and torments of Martyrs (by saint Paul's judgment) are not worthy
of the glory which shall be revealed unto us, much less the works of just
and good men whatsoever.

Again Master Bellarmine of the substance and nature of good works, writes
thus: The turning of man to God, as also every other good work, as it is a
work, it is only of free will, although not without general grace: and as it
is good, so it is only of grace: and as it is a good work, so it is of
free will and grace together. He ioines in the substance of every good work,
Gods grace and man's free will: ^. Corin. 3.5.
but saint Paul says: We are not fit of our selves, to think any thing, as
of our selves. And again, Philip. 2.13.
It is God which works in us both to will and to do, according to his good
pleasure. And saint Austen says: So God works in our free will, Aug. de
Eccl. dog. cap. 23.
that even a holy thought, a good counsel, and the very motion of a good will,
is of God. So that this turning of man to God, as it is a work, is of God
also, by his judgment. And saint Paul speaking of man's salvation, says,
Ephesians. 2.8.9.
that we are saved by grace through faith; and that not of our selves, it is
the gift of God. This faith, this chief work of Christians, this our first
turning to God, is not of us, no not any part thereof: It is the free gift of
God. But Master Bellarmine says, partly of us: whereas saint Paul says
plainly, not of us.

And concerning our good works saint Paul says, that by them we are not saved.
And he does not only affirm this, Ephesians. 2.^.
but he adds also a reason to prove it: Least any man should rejoice or
boast: no man may brag or boast of his salvation at all, no not in part. And
that which follows in saint Paul, takes away Master Bellarmines ground: For
we are his workmanshippe, Verse, 10.
created of Jesus Christ to good works. We are as it were now created again
to do good works in Jesus Christ: we are not by grace only helped, or
set free, or stirred up to good works (as master Bellarmine teaches) but
both the work and the goodness thereof, is Gods and not ours. We were like a
golden vessel, created of God most absolute and perfect, but so dashed and so
deformed of satan, that no straightning or bea^ing would serve the turn. We
must needs be new molten and cast again, before we can serve the Lords
use. Scouring would not suffice, or strengthening by soulder.

The University of Collen also writes thus: Neither from us, Contr. Monhe.
dialog. 5.
nor from our selves our works do challenge the cause of their merits; as
though without any grace we might obtain everlasting life: but what merit
soever is in them, we must attribute it to the grace of God. So that man's own
nature can challenge no part in the merit. This is their opinion.

Granatensis also speaking of the kingdom of heaven, Lib 2. Mem. cap. 4.
writes thus; speaking of those things which we loose through sin: The
Kingdom of heaven is also lost, which comes of grace. For (as the Apostle
says:) Glory is given by grace. And of the conceit and opinion that every
Christian ought to have of himself, he writes thus: The true lover of
humility thinks no better of himself, then of a dead and stinking carrion,
scrawling with worms; Med. vit. Christi 20.
whose stench he is not able to abide himself. Then he will remember that
saying of Saint Paul: If any man think himself to be any thing, when as
indeed he is nothing, he deceives himself. And also that: What have thou,
that thou have not received? And if thou have received it, why do thou
brag, as though thou had not received it? To which agrees also that saying
of the Apostle: 2* Cor. 3.3.
Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God. And that, Work your salvation with
fear and trembling: Phil. 2.12.13.
For it is God which works in you both to will and to finish, etc. Therefore
all that is good, is of God; and he that attributes any thing to himself,
steals Gods honor from him.

Macarius to the same effect, writes thus: Even as if a King should give a
beggar his treasure to keep, he that took it only to keep, does not account
it his own, but in every place still confesses his own poverty, neither dare
he impair or spend any thing of another man's treasure, ever thinking thus with
himself, that it is not only another man's treasure, but also that a mighty
King gave it him to keep, Citatur a Dadrao Loc. com. tit. de humilitat.
which when he list, will call for it again. They ought to be of the same
mind, which have received the grace of God, that is to say, that they think
humbly of themselves, and confess still their own poverty: for even as that
beggar, which received that treasure of the King to keep, if he bragging of
another man's treasure should be puffed up in his own works, and begin to
wax proud, the King will take away his treasure from him, which he gave him
only to keep; and then he shall be such a one, as he was before, that is, a
beggar: So they which have the grace of God, if they shall be puffed up
therewith, and wax proud in their hearts, God does take away his grace from
them; and then they remain such as they were before, when as they had received
no grace from the Lord. Such poor beggars Macarius makes all Christians that
have nothing of their own; but all their riches is Gods: But master
Bellarmine seems to make them proud beggars, as having somewhat of their
own, to which wages or reward is due by desert.

Stel. in 2. cap. Lucae.
Of the true and right end of good works, first Stella writes thus: Secondly,
circumcision principally was given to Abraham for a sign; and it began in
him, and ended in Christ. When we will keep Lettuce or cole wort seed, we will
give them a mark: so because Abraham was to be kept in the flesh, that Christ
should be borne of him, because also he was kept for seed; God therefore marked
him with the sign of circumcision. Did not (as Saint Paul says) Abraham take
the sign of circumcision? God commanded him circumcision, that his friend
should be marked with some outward sign: for it does not please God, that we
should be his friends inwardly, but he will have us also, to declare our
friendship by some outward token. If this be true, what kind of little show
of Christianity is there now amongst us Christians; now in the streets, you
shall hear nothing, but oaths, blasphemies, lies, thefts, sports, vanities?
So that we may rightly say that saying of the Prophet Osea: There is no truth,
there is no mercy, there is no knowledge of God in the land, but cursing, and
blaspheming, murder, lying, theft, and adultery have ouerflowed, and blood
touches blood. If a Turk or some Infidel should walk through this City,
wherein should he judge us better then himself? There is more truth found
among Infidels then amongst us.

If thou be a Christian, show the Sign of a Christian; show me thy faith by
thy works: and therefore Christ says: Let your light so shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
Did thou never walk by a field, and there when thou did see a Vineyard
well dressed and well fenced, did thou not say? This Vineyard has a good and
diligent Master: for I see it well pruned, and kept in order: so be thou good,
chaste, devout, humble, modest, that the Infidels which see thee may say: Surely
the God of the Christians must needs be a great God, because he has such
servants. Thus far Stella.

Here is the principal end of all good works: that they should glorify our
heavenly Father: that they should testify our faith: that they should be as
it were Badges and Cognisances, by which might be known, whose servants we
are.

And again of the same matter to the same effect, he writes thus: Mark how
the blessed Virgin offers to God the gift she has received of him; so we
also by our thanksgiving, must offer to him again all things we have received
from his hand. For all the streams of graces do proceed from that huge sea of
ye mercy of God, and God does abundantly distribute them and power them upon
us: Even as therefore all floudes return into the Sea, from whence they came;
so must we offer again to God all the good things we have, because they have
proceeded from him, for who planteth a Vineyard, and does not eat of the fruit
thereof? Whom will thou love else, but him who has given thee power, that thou
may be able to love? Therefore God, why should he not enjoy the fruit of
thy love, because he has planted in thy soul a will wherewith thou might
love him? If thou do any good works, if thou have any graces or virtues, or
gifts of nature, hear what Saint James says: Every best gift, and every
perfect gift, is from above, descending from the father of light: yea also if
thou have any good thoughts, they are of God; as the Apostle teaches, We are
not sufficient to think any thing of our selves as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God: therefore give to God that which is Gods. As here it is
manifest, that the Virgin did. Be not a tyrant, take not to thy self the
works of God, but give them to God which gave thee them freely. Many take
their soul in vain, which do not give it again to God, of whom they have
received it. Wherefore David says: Who shall ascend into the hill of the
Lord, or who shall stand in his holy place? And he himself makes an answer,
which has not received his soul in vain. A thing is received in vain, when
it is not used to that end whereunto it was made: thou have made thee a
garment, and thou wearest it not; that garment is made in vain: for a garment
is made to be worn. Thou have bought a horse, and thou never ridest on him;
thou have bought him in vain: for thou use him not to that end for which he
was made and found out. God has given thee an understanding, that thou
should know him, a will wherewith thou should love him, a memory where
with thou should remember him: but thou, because thou entanglest thy
understanding in discerning worldly matters, in gaining riches, in seeking for
honors, in getting worldly goods, and thou imploiest thy will in loving the
flesh, and goods of this world, and exercisest thy memory in thinking upon
injuries which have been done unto thee, least thou should suffer them to
escape unpunished: these things being well considered, it must needs follow,
that thou have received these powers of thy mind in vain, because God has
created them not to this purpose, but to serve him. They also have taken their
souls in vain, who live as though they had no souls; giving themselves to
covetousness, riot, and ambition. Thus far Stella. Where we may learn
first, that as all waters come from the sea: so we must acknowledge all the
good we have what soever, to proceed from God: and by our thankfulness, to
return it to him again.

And as another Papist very fitly affirms; Pet. Greg. in pref. Sintax, actis
mirab.
As all floods come from the Sea by certain secret passages, and do speedily
return thither again; but not with that pureness, that waters from spoutes
come from conduits, but carry with them filthiness and slime, which they have
gotten by running through the channels of the earth to the mother, from whence
they came; and yet she does no less now embrace them, then she did before, and
acknowledges her own, and by her often ebbing and flowing, casts all those
slimes and filthinesses upon the shore: so all the good things we have (O
gracious God) says he, flow from thy wonderful and unspeakable wisdom,
ever worthy to be adored, often unto us, by invisible pipes and conduits of thy
great mercy and liberality. But when they come into this earthly sink of ours,
it cannot choose, but they are polluted with the manifold darkness of our
ignorance, and that they take to them many dregs; yet thy gifts ought to
return to thee again, and to be consecrated to thee, what kind soever they be
of: otherwise we shall commit theft, and sacrilege to thy glory. Thus far
Petrus Gregorius.

He confesses that all goodness comes from God; and that coming into this
sink of our flesh, though they proceed most pure from him, yet they must
needs get filth and slime: And yet for all that, we must return them to
him again; and he like a most loving father will accept them. The best
actions we do, even the actions of the best men, are not void of this filth
and slime. And herein consistes, that the best men must still say; O Lord,
enter not into judgment with thy servant; Psalm. 143.
And if our best works have these imperfections, what may we judge of our
evil works? This only consideration will make every good Christian fly
from any trust in himself, and fly only to the sure anchor of Gods mercy.
Again, here we may learn the great mercy of our God; though we thus abuse
his good graces, and pollute those most pure gifts, we have received from
him; yet he reiectes us not, nor our works, but mercifully receives us.
Again, here that opinion of the Papists does fall down: which deny that a
just man in every good work does sin, what is this filth and slime, that
the grace of God gets in this filthy sink of ours, but sin?

Secondly, we may learn out of Stella, that popery pleases not God; For
God (says he) has given us understanding, will, and memory, to know, love,
and remember him, and his benefits. And they which employ not these to this
end, have received them in vain. But the Popish religion has taught the
contrary, and have nourished men in ignorance, as all the world can witness:
and can that religion then please God?

Augustine also of the merits of all Christians, whereunto they ought to
trust, Aug. manu. cap. 22.
writes thus: In all mine adversities I find no remedy so forcible, as the
wounds of Christ: in them I sleep soundly, and rest without fear: Christ died
for us. There is nothing so deadly and bitter, which Christ's death cannot
heal. All my hope is in the death of my Lord; his death is my merit, and my
refuge, and my salvation, my life, and my resurrection. My merit is the pity
and tender mercy of the Lord: I am not void of merits, as long as that Lord of
mercies remains. And if so be, the mercies of the Lord be many; then are my
merits many. And how far mightier he is to save; so less fearful and more
secure am I. Thus far Augustine. The merits of Christ were the merits, that
Austen trusted in: and in these only also must every true Christian and
Catholic trust.

Lib. 1. de deuot. cap. 28.
Granatensis of man's duty writes thus: If men would diligently mark how much
that is that is due to God, and how small it is that man's heart can afford; he
shall manifestly perceive, that no division there is to be made, where so much
is due, and so little can be requited. The bed is narrow (says Esaias) so that
one must needs fall out, Esaias, 28.20. Verse, 37.
and the covering be short, it cannot cover both. This thing may be plainly
seen in the heart of man, being so narrow, that it cannot both contain God and
the world. And after; Again, if thou shall consider the object which thou
make so great haste unto, to be infinite, thou shall hereby always judge thy
self to be beggarly, though thou be adorned with many graces bestowed upon
thee. And if thou shall think, that thou have gone as far as a man can go;
yet think it is but a sippe that thy mind has tasted. There are no works of
supererogation then.

Of the great mercy of God also, he writes thus: Besides all these things,
the great mercy of God in this place offers it self to our consideration, Vit.
Christ^ Med. 9.
which most clearly shines in the glory of these Infants. What greater
goodness or liberality can be, then that God should accept that death, not
only for a sacrifice, but for a martyrdom, which will did not undertake, but
necessity forced, where there was no vow, but violence; where there was no
merit, but misfortune; where there was not the heart, although the body of a
martyr; where there was not the desire of him that died, but the cruelty of him
that murdered: to conclude, where there was the tyraunts sword, and not so
much as the martyrs word. But Gods grace supplied all that wanted, which
changed this extreme misery, into a crown; and this chance into a merit. For
the wickedness of the tyrant is not of more force, then the goodness of God.
And if Herod's cruelty could punish where there was no fault, it is no great
matter if God could give a crown where there was no merit.

Mark this all ye that despair, cast your minds hither, which are faint
hearted, and scrupulous in conscience, which ever think that you shall be
condemned: how much more have you God merciful to you, think you, then they
which believed not? How greatly does he love men? how desirous is he of your
salvation? how ready to give his glory? For that he may give you it, he seeks
all means possible, neither desires he any thing else. A certain Philosopher
said once: He that is liberal, seeks all occasions of doing good to others,
that he may practice his liberality: The which if it be true, what will he do,
which beyond all his other virtues, is commended of his liberality and mercy?
He is not such a one, who delights in the works of the body only; but also of
the spirit or mind, by whose power they are done: for it is the will which
works them: Therefore this our God, who so greatly longs for our profit and
salvation, was content with that he found in these Infants, and he came to
supply with his grace, that which they wanted in their merits; adding,
according to his exceeding great goodness, to that ignorant and tender age,
that which it had not. This mercy of God must all Christians most assuredly
beeleue, and look for at Gods hands.

Saint Ambrose also writes thus very excellently of Abraham, the father of
all the faithful: De Abrah. patriar. lib. 2. ca. 8
How little he respected the reward in doing of his most excellent works, to
teach all his children to follow his steps; when as he had ventured his life
for the recovery of his brother Lot, and would not receive so much as a shoe
latchet of the king of Sodom for his labor. Ambrose says, that Moses added
after this victory, this speech of God unto him: Fear not Abraham; I will
protect thee: and thou shall have a great reward. I demand ( says Ambrose)
why after the hazard of the war, now is mention made of promising the wages?
No ( says Ambrose) he had done a less wonderful thing, a matter of less
importance, if being moved by the promise of God he had set upon the enemy. For
then he had gone (as we say) dead sure to the victory, rather drawn, then
willing, to such a great glory, or ready to have revenged the grief of his
brotherly pity.

The purpose of a godly mind looks for no reward; but so her reward has the
conscience of a good work, and the effecting and bringing to pass of a good
deed. Base minds are pricked forward with promises, and are encouraged with the
hope of wages: but the good soul which takes upon her the battle without the
obligation of Gods answer, reapes to her self double fruit of praise, that she
may lay up in treasure both the grace of most valiant courage, and also of most
perfect devotion.

Thus must all Abraham's Children do all their works, even venture their
lives; not respecting wages, but of a free heart, with their father Abraham.

And of God, Ambrose after writes thus: And also the justice of God is herein
commended, who rewards godly minds not by the necessity of his promise, but
through the consideration of his equity, thinking it worthy that they which
war without any reward of man, should have a reward laid up in store in his
goodness, for whose sake they have ventured their souls, etc. Gods mercy is
above his promises: naie his mercy is above all his works. He will most
assuredly reward all his.

Again, Ambrose speaking of the use of the law, writes thus: But also the law
yields me this commodity, that we are not justified of the works of the law:
Amb. de Jacob and beat. vit. ca. 6
therefore I have no cause why I should glory in my works: I have no cause why
I should boast of my self: and therefore I will glory in Christ. I will not
rejoice in that I am just, but I will rejoice in that I am redeemed: I will not
rejoice that I am void of sin, but because that my sins are forgiven me: I
will not rejoice, because I have done God any service, or that any other has
done any thing for me, but because Christ is become my Advocate with the
Father, because Christ's blood is shed for me. My fault is now become to me
the wages of my redemption, by the means thereof I obtain Christ. For my
sake, Christ tasted death; my fault profited me more, then my innocence: my
innocence made me arrogant, my fault made me humble. Here thou may see
wherein the law profited thee, etc.

Granatensis of works and merits writes thus: The second step to humility
is, if a man know that that which he has from God (if so be that he have any
thing) he has not obtained it by his own strength, but by the mere grace
and mercy of God, Gran. de perfect. amor. dei cap. 16.
that he has received it. There are found some, that being well grounded on
the first step, confess, that all which they have, comes from God; yet
notwithstanding they nourish in their breasts a secret persuasion, that they
have gotten all that they have to themselves, by their own labor and merits
or deserts, when as it is most certain, that the merits themselves, as well
as that which is obtained by the merits, to be the graces of God: when as we
cannot have a thought or one good desire, that is not of God.

Furthermore also, our works have not the value and merit they have, of
themselves, but of the grace of God; by which they are done: For even as the
value of any coin, is not of the substance of the coin, but especially of the
Image and inscription that it has; so the merit of our works does not so
much proceed of the substance of the work, as of the grace of God, which
gives value to them. And therefore as often as by them any grace is given unto
us, even one grace is given for another: even as if a friend should give thee a
hundredth pieces of gold, and for them afterward should give thee a horse: Here
were both a selling and a giving; gain and grace: Grace, because thy friend
gave thee; gain, because with the money that he gave thee, thou boughtest the
horse of him.

The Prophet does covertly teach us both these, when he says: Come and buy
without money, and without any exchange, Wine and Milk. That is, meat and
drink, both for the beginners, and for those that are perfect. In which words,
when as he biddes us buy, he declares our industry: but when as he excludes
Silver and all exchange, he shows grace. All this therefore declares, that man
has nothing in himself, whereof he may glory, thinking that which he has,
comes of himself; yea rather he ought to think that he has of himself
infinite sins, for which he deserves so many hels: And that all things else
whatsoever they are, come from above, from the Father of light, and are
bestowed on us of grace, when as merit it self is grace. Thus far
Granatensis: who plainly affirms, that all our merits are grace. And surely
our wages, that the best of us is to look for (if we be worthy of any) is
like the wages they received, that came into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour
of the day: a wages also of grace, and not of desert or merit. But Granatensis
goes forward.

To this, the fourth step is to be added: for it is not sufficient that a man
acknowledge himself poor and destitute of all good things; but also it is
necessary, that he acknowledge how truly he abounds with many euilles: that
is, how greatly he loves himself, and his own will, and stands in his own
conceit, how lively are all his evil affections, and how perfect are all his
wicked motions, how inconstant he is in good purposes, how lavish in his
tongue, how careless in keeping of his heart, what a lover he is of his own
profit, and of the desires of his own pleasures. To know these things is the
best knowledge in the world, and also most profitable: For other knowledges (as
the Apostle says) puff us up, but this only makes us humble. And it is also
true, that to the obtaining of this knowledge, our own exercise only
suffices not; but we stand need also of the light of heaven, that the mist of
our own self-love do not blindfold us, which is a very blind judge. And for
this cause every Christian ought to ask of God this light, and that as
earnestly as Saint Frances did, who very often in his prayers repeated these
words: O my God, that I may know thee, and that I may know me. Neither is it
sufficient for him, that he account himself such a poor and grievous sinner,
but let him imagine that he is the greatest sinner in the world, and the most
vile of al sinners. And this is a degree higher then the former: for as a
certain doctor says: It shall hurt thee nothing, to cast down thy self at the
feet of all men, but it may hurt thee if thou prefer thy self before any
one, etc. Thus Granatensis would have every Christian humble himself. And is
not this the very doctrine our Church teaches?

Granatensis also of our sins, and the satisfaction of them, writes thus:
Granat. Med. in orat. dom.
Who can ever cast the account of my vain thoughts? who can number my evil
works and idle words? For the just men scant know how to bridle their tongue.
And the number is infinite also of the sins of my transgression, and
commission, in doing that which I should not have done, and in omitting of that
which I ought to have done.

And after; But do thou so forgive us our sins freely, O Father, and
without any recompense? Truly thou forgiuest them freely, and not freely: not
freely, for although mercy be ready to forgive, yet justice will be satisfied:
and yet freely, because thou offerest us that freely, wherewith justice is
satisfied; that is, that huge and incomparable treasure, which thine only
begotten son laid up for us, the space of three and thirty years; to the which
he made a way to us by his blood. This treasure we offer unto thee (O Father)
take thereof as much as thou will; it may be drawn, but it cannot be drawn
dry; it may be spent, but it cannot be diminished. His merits are ours, his
satisfaction is ours, his blood is our ransom. Therefore we beseech thee (O
Lord) that being pacified with the blood and merits of thy Son, that thou
would wink at our faults, the which if thou will call to a strict account,
no man is able to abide the favor of thy justice, much less the severity of
it. Therefore let thy mercy help us, who acknowledge our selves be damned of
thy justice of many heinous offenses.

And again in another place he writes of the sins of all men thus: That
thou may better mark what things we have said, thou must diligently
consider the multitude of the sins of thy life past, especially of those
which thou committedst when as thou had less knowledge of God: for if so be
that thou shall come to the perfect knowledge of them al, thou shall
understand, that they are more in number, then the hairs of thy head, and that
thou have lived like a Pagan or Ethnike, which knew not what God was. After
that, run over both the Tables of the ten Commandments, and those seven
deadly sins, and thou shall learn that there is no Commandment of God,
which thou have not often broken; and no deadly sin, into the which thou have
not often fallen, by work, word, and thought. Remember the first man Adam, that
because he did eat the forbidden meat, he did commit the most grievous sin
in the world: and there is no kind of sin wherein thou have not diverse ways
and oftentimes offended. Call to thy remembrance all the benefits of God, which
thou have received all thy ages, and the whole course of thy life; and see how
thou have behaved thy self in all these. For a most strict account of all
these one day will be demanded of thee. Therefore if thou will be ruled by me,
thou shall do most vvisely if thou shall now presently judge thy self, least
hereafter thou be more severely judged of God. Go to therefore, tell me how thou
have past over thy childhood, how thy youth, how thy man's estate; and that I
may say all in a word, how thou have lived from thy mothers womb til this
day? To what things have thou employed thy appetite, and other powers of thy
mind, which thou have received of God, that thou should know him and serve
him withal? How have thou used thine eyes? no other wise, then that thou
might delight them in vain things, and fond shows. What have thou
delighted in to hear with thine ears? surely vain fables, filthy talk, and
lies. What have thou broched with thy tongue, but periuries, murmurings, and
such things as are not seemly? Thy taste, touching, and smelling, in what other
things have they delighted; then in those which were pleasant to the appetite,
delightful to flesh and blood, and which might satisfy their pleasures? Tell me
how thou have used the divine Sacraments given thee of God, as medicines to
cure thy wounds, what thanks have thou given God, for his infinite benefits
bestowed upon thee? How have thou kept his divine commandments, how have thou
employed thy health, thy strength, thy courage, thy riches, the prosperity of
this world, and other commodities given thee of God, that thou should with
them lead a godly life? What care have thou had of thy neighbor, as concerning
whom the Lord has given thee a special charge? what and how many works of
mercy have thou done, which God has so highly commended unto us? Of all these
will God call thee to account, in that terrible day of judgment, when as he
shall say unto thee: Give an account of thy Stewardshippe: Give account of
those riches, which thou have received of me: For thou may be no longer a
Steward. O withered tree, fit for hell fire! What answer will thou make, when
account shall be demanded of thee of all thy life, and of every point and
minute thereof? Thus far Granatensis.

Every one, by his judgment, must pronounce himself guilty at that great
day of assizes of the immortal GOD, and must fly to the wings of his
mercy, and must crave pardon.

And a little after, speaking of man's vileness, he writes thus: After thou
have weighed all these things with thy self in a just balance, go forward to
examine thine own self, and be not ashamed to think of thy self most vilely
and most basely. Think thy self to be no better then a reed, which is shaken
with every wind, which has nothing in it, without any virtue, without any
strength, without any constancy, without any stablenesse or firmness of mind.
Remember that thou art Lazarus, now four days laid in his grave, a stinking
Carrion full of worms, at the savor whereof, all they which pass by stop
their noses, and turn away their eyes: Think thy self thus to stink before
God, and his Angels: account thy self unworthy, who should lift up his eyes
to heaven, an unprofitable clodde of claie, and unworthy whom the earth should
bear, or whom the creatures of God should serve: unworthy of the bread thou
eatest, the Air thou breathest, the light by the means whereof thou see;
but far more unworthy of the comfort of the Holy ghost; I will not say the
adoption of a Son, and that heavenly providence, and care of thy heavenly
Father, which so dearly and tenderly cares for thee. Be in thine own eyes the
vilest of all other creatures, and who has abused all Gods benefits most
abominably. Think with thy self, that if God had done in Tire and Sydone,
that is, in other most notable sinners, the works which he has done in thee;
they would even now have repented in sackcloth and ashes. Confess thy self to
be the grieuousest sinner of al other sinners, that thou know. And the more
that thou shall be displeased with thy self, when as now thou shall think,
that thou have comen to the uttermost, thou shall find more things, which will
give thee occasion yet more to humble thy self. Cry unto God without
ceassing, and say: O Lord, I have nothing, I can do nothing, without thy
help, I can do nothing else but sin. Cast down thy self prostrate, with
that notorious sinner, and be so greatly ashamed, even as a woman is wont to
be that has defiled her husbands bed, and comes to ask pardon of her
husband: With such like shame (O soul) stand thou before thy heavenly spouse,
in despite of whom thou have committed fornication, so often with many
lovers: beseech him bedewed with many tears, and touched with great sorrow,
that he will pardon and forgive thee whatsoever thou have sinned against him,
and that he will receive thee again into his family, for his great mercy,
being indeed that riotous and prodigal Son. Thus far Granatensis. I
would all Papists would teach this doctrine. It would make men humble; it
would make them not trust in their works; it would make them fly truly to
the mercy of God, which is the only and true Sanctuary for all Christians to
fly unto.

Again, of the imperfections of our good works, he writes thus: It is most
certain that thou felst into the foresaid sins (speaking of the breaking of
all Gods commandments) before thou had received the true knowledge of God:
but after thou have known him (if thou have known him yet) desire of him,
that he will open the eyes of thy mind, and thou shall find many relics of
the old Adam, and many of the Iebusites yet to remain in the land of promise,
only allured by thy courtesy.

And again a little after: When as God does not so much respect the work it
self, as the meaning and purpose of the work, how many good works do thou
think that thou have done, which are pure from the dregs of vain glory, and
free from gaping after worldly praises? How many are there, which thou would
never have given thy mind to, but being drawn and moved with outward
ceremonies? How many are there, in which thou have sought thine own
estimation? And how few are there, which are done from a sincere heart, and
for the pure love of GOD, and for which thou have not paid the world her toll?
And all such works, what are they else, then a smoke, shadow, and as it were
a vizarde of virtue?

And again: If thou shall diligently search all the corners of thy soul, if
thou shall put thy hand into thy bosom, thou shall pull it out again full of
leprosy, as white as Snow, and thou shall find therein many deadly wounds. Oh
what deep root has swelling pride taken in thee! How does ambition reign in
thee? How many ways does hypocrisy and the counterfeite show of virtue
trouble thee, by which thou would feign cloak thy faults and imperfections,
and desire to seem another then thou art indeed? Ah how carefully do thou
pursue after those things, which are thine own, and which are acceptable to the
flesh, and pleasant to the body? how often under pretense of necessity, thou
make much of thy self and pamperest thy body most daintilie, so that hereby
thou seems not to nourish nor feed it so much, as longing after pleasures and
delites to put a spur unto it. And hereof this is a most evident argument,
that if any man (who before was most grateful and acceptable unto thee) shall
a little reprove thee, and find fault with thee and thine inordinate desires,
thou shall feel bie and bie the root of envy to sproute in thee, and thy
self to be woonderfullie moved against him: or if any one shall a little
impair thy honor, how greatly will thou be displeased with him? Thus far
Granatensis. In which words, he does very truly describe the corruption
of man's nature, that no pure work proceeds thereof. But as long as we live
in this flesh, we cannot so mortify old Adam, but he will be mingling his
Chafe amongst the Lords Wheat, and his dregs amongst his most clear water
streams of the holy spirit.

And as he has in this place most excellently showed the grieuousnesse of the
wound, so in another place he shows the salve and remedy: The Soldier
(says he) comes with his Spear, and shaking it, he thrusts it with all his
force into the Lords heart, the cross being moved with the force of the
stroke shakes, and by and by out of the fresh wound comes water and blood, to
wash away the sins of the whole world. O flood, issuing out of Paradise, and
with thy streams watering the whole world! Oh precious wound of that side,
not so much wounded with the fiercenes of the Iron, as with the force of love!
O gate of heaven! Window of Paradise! place of refuge! Tower of fortitude!
Sanctuary of the just! the grave of strangers! the nest of chaste Doves! the
fragrant bed of Salomons spouse! Blessed be the wound of that precious side,
wounding the souls of the godly: blessed be that pricking, which pricks the
souls of the just: blessed be that beautiful and red Rose, that
inestimable Carbuncle, the way to Christ's heart, the testimony of Gods love,
the free pledge of everlasting life. Thorough thee all beasts, clean and
unclean, do enter in; which desire to be saved from the waters of the flood,
by the means of the Arc of the true Noah. All they which are tempted fly
unto thee; all those which are afflicted find comfort in thee; with thy
liquour, all those which are sick are healed; through thee sinners do enter
into the Palace of heaven; in thee all pilgrims and banished persons do take
their ease most pleasantly. O fiery Oven of love, house of peace, treasure of
the Church, vein of the water of life, springing into life eternal! O Lord,
open unto me this gate, take me home with thee, and make me dwell in this most
pleasant house! Give me grace by this to enter into the secret places of thy
love. Give me leave to drink of this most sweet Fountain; and make me
drunken with this most precious liquour.

Sleep (O my soul) in this Cave most soundly, forget here all the cares and
businesses of this world, here take thy ease, here eat and drink: here sing
most ioifully with the Prophet: This is my rest for ever and ever, here will I
dwell, I have chosen this. Thus far Granatensis. Wherein he affirms, that
Christ's merits, and not the merits of Saints, or of Monks and Friars, are
the treasure of the Church: and that the water and blood of his wounds heales
all sick sinners.

And in another place, writing of the end of our works, he says thus: The
benefits (says he) whereby we do receive any good, De orat and Med tract.
7. cap. 8
are oftentimes perceived of men: but these secret benefits, which do not
consist in bestowing any good upon us, but in turning away and repelling
evil, who can understand? Therefore it is necessary that we give God thanks no
less for these, then for those other. Let us remember also, how many things we
do owe unto God, and how these our debts and duties are far greater then
our power and hability: nay when as we cannot understand how much we are
indebted unto him. Thus far Granatensis. Where he plainly teaches, that all
our works are not merits, but duties: nay that no man knows how much he
owes to GOD: and therefore can never challenge any merit.

And again in another place he writes thus: These (says he) four other
excellent and notable virtues do follow. Inward and outward humility, poverty
of body and soul, patience in adversity and tribulations, and a pure intent in
good works, that they all be done only for the love of God, without mingling
of any profit, or respect either temporal or spiritual. Thus far
Granatensis. If we must respect no profit, neither temporal nor spiritual,
in doing of our good works; then not the salvation of our souls, which mark
in Popery their blind guides taught all men to aim at.

And in another place against merits, he writes thus most plainly: Again
(says he) he that is about to pray, on the one side must know, that he
deserves no good thing; and on the other, he must believe, that although he
have no merits; yet God of his infinite mercy and goodness, will give him
that that shall be most profitable to his salvation. Therefore man must be
content, whether he receive at Gods hands much or little, and receive all
things thankefully whatsoever God does, accounting himself unworthy of all
things God gives him, and to be ready to do all things, that God commands him:
And to give God his due thanks, not so much for those things, which he hopes
to receive, as for these which he has received already. Thus far
Granatensis: where he plainly confesses, that there is no merits in man,
for which he can challenge to receive any thing at Gods hands.

Lodouicus Viues of good works, writes thus: Praepar. anim. ad r and. 35.
Take heed again and again, least that it ever come into thy mind, that thou
can profit or do any good to God; neither flatter thy self of thy good
work, as though by it thou had bound or demerited God unto thee; which
thought is most hurtful, and oftentimes the marrer of all good works. To take
which from our minds our Lord said: After that ye have done all these things,
say that ye are unprofitable servants.

Ferus also of the trust in our works, writes thus: Fer. in 2. Act.
Again by this sound it is foreshewed, that the holy spirit cannot be
received, unless the heart be first shaken. So when the Lord was about to come
to Elias, there went before him a wind, that overthrew the mountains; then
after a fire and an Earthquake. The same thing God does in us before he come
to our heart: first, he sends a mighty wind, overthrowing the mountains;
that is, he overthrows all things which seem great, and takes away all trust;
but yet the Lord is not present: for there are many which have nothing wherein
they may trust; and yet they have not God. But this is the first step of his
coming. Then follows the earthquake, when man understands what he is, and
when he considers the misery of the world; then the holy Spirit is nearer, but
yet he is not present. Thirdly the fire of the conscience follows; and then
the Lord is not far off. For it is a great matter, to feel sin. After the
fire, follows the noise of a soft air, that is, the grace of God, making
joyful a terrified conscience. Thus far Ferus. Where he plainly teaches,
that all mountains, what great good works we have done soever, must first
be overthrown in us: we must have no trust in our selves, before God come to
us: and that this is the first step of his grace. Let them that trust in
their works, here take heed to themselves, and see by Ferus his judgment how
far they are from the grace of God. God has not so much as made one step
to come unto them: Oh what a miserable case are all such in then?

And again upon that place: (Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord,
shall be saved:) Our name (says he) is sin, unrighteousness, lying,
vanity, etc. The name of God is, that he is only good, true, mighty, just,
merciful, and wise, etc. Of this Name Christ says; Father I have declared
thy name unto men. He therefore that accuses his own name, and calls upon the
name of God, that is, desires help by the goodness, truth, mercy, and power
of God, he shall be saved, whether he be Jew or Gentile. So David called upon
the name of the Lord: O Lord in thy name save me, and in thy power judge my
cause: and in thy righteousness deliver me. And again: in thee, O Lord, have
I put my trust; I shall never be put to confusion: deliver me in thy
righteousness. Here thou have the peril and the remedy; death and life are
set before thee: take heed least thou forget thy self, Call upon the Lord
while he is near. Hitherto he has terrified them, threatening like a people,
and he has foreshewed them generally, the medicines whereby euilles may be
driven away: Nay after, least any should be afraid to come unto God; he
plays the Preacher of the Gospel, and settes the mediator before their eyes:
who alone has manifested to the world the name of his father, unto whose power
also the Father has committed all things. By whom only and alone we also have
access unto the Father. Thus far Ferus. All men that will be saved, must
accuse their own name, that is, their own righteousness, before the Majesty
of God: and they must call upon the mercy of God, and his truth and
goodness, by the mediation only of Jesus Christ. Here is death and life set
before every man, by Ferus his judgment.

Cap. 3.
Again of the Jews he writes thus: The people also did lie lame before the
Temple. They had the Priesthood, the Temple, the sacrifices, examples of things
to come: but they only trusted in the external things; they never entered into
the Temple, to consider what those external things meant. Some went in, as the
Prophets, by the shadows gathering the things signified: but the lame people
followed them not. Thus far Ferus. Such like were our forefathers, who put
much trust in external things, and they devised of man, never knew what they
meant. And how could that profit them, seeing the trust in external things,
and which God commanded, could not profit the Jews?

And again, he writes thus: Neither can any external thing sanctify us, or
cleanse us, but only that he with his Spirit and his blood cleanses us.
Thirdly, he is just and justifies us, when he communicates unto us his
merits and righteousness, with the which being clothed, we dare app^are before
God. So the Psalmist testifies: I will make mention of thy righteousness
only. And again: In thee, O Lord have I put my trust; I shall never be
confounded: deliver me in thy righteousness. Thu^ far Ferus. Here is the
true Catholics righteousness, by Ferus his judgment, that is, Christ's
merits and righteousness communicated and imputed to him.

And after, he writes thus: Fifthly, he enjoys heaven by inheritance. No man
ascended into heaven, but he that came down from heaven: For by good right
heaven is due to him: for he is the natural Son of God. And therefore he
says: All thine (O Father) are mine. And Dau^d says: The heaven of heavens
are the Lords: and the earth has he given to the children of men: Whom
therefore he shall take into part of this inheritance with him, he shall enter
into heaven. We obtain this by no right, but only of grace, and because he
has mercifully promised it unto us. For our works, what kind soever they are,
do not deserve such a reward of equality or worthiness, but in as much as God
mercifully accepts them. And therefore Paul says: The sufferings of this life
are not worthy the glory to come. And the same says again; That the weight of
that glory to come, above all measure exceedes all that we suffer in this life.
And of them he concludes and says; By grace ye are saved, not of works, least
any one should brag.

Again, of faith and good works he writes thus: Fer. in cap. 4. Act.
They are builders, which with wholesome doctrine do erect and mainetaine the
house of God. But as all men cannot tell how to build, so nor how to preach. He
that will be a builder, must know what is to be placed beneath, and what above
also; he must take care, that his building be not only beautiful, but also
firm and strong. They which teach faith without works, build their wall with
untempered mortar; for the righteousness of the law cannot stand against the
judgment of God, and therefore it must needs fall. They which teach faith
without works, they lay truly a foundation but they build nothing on it:
therefore they refuse this stone, which teach to trust in work^; which teach
righteousness to come by works, as the Pharisees ^d. Thus far Ferus. And do
not the papists so now?

And a little after, upon these words: (There is no other n^^e:) God has
appointed no other means to the world, by which men must be saved, then the
name, power, and merit of Christ. Our name is sin, lying, vanity, curse,
death; but the name of Christ is that he is the Son of God, holy, just, the
Author of life. Also his name is righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, and
redemption, etc. He that calls upon this name, that is, he which trusts by
Christ and his only righteousness and merits to be saved; he truly obtaines
salvation: he that goes about to be saved by any other thing, beguiles
himself. No man comes to the father, but by me, says Christ: And S. Paul
says: By him we have access to the Father. Therefore he, which by his own
righteousness only strives to go to God and to his goods, shall never come to
them: So Israel following the law of righteousness, attained not to the law of
righteousness, because he sought it of works only, and not of faith. We
must do good works, but we must not trust in that righteousness: Good men may
pray for us, but they cannot save us. Therefore when all is done, we must put
all our trust in Christ, and we must cleave to him, with hearty love.

And after; In this name the fathers of the old Tastament were saved. For
although the Sacraments (by reason of the time) do differ, yet one, and the
self same faith agrees. Also Austen says: To the old just men something was
hidden, when as notwithstanding, they should be saved by the same faith, which
at their times should be revealed, whereof the Apostle says: Having the same
Spirit of faith: and therefore it is written: I believed, and therefore I
spoke. And we believe, and therefore we also speak. He would not have said the
same, unless they had had the same Spirit of faith. But as they when as that
Sacrament was hidden, believed that Christ should be incarnate, and we believe
that he is incarnate: his coming to judgment is looked for both of them and
of us. Thus far Ferus. Where he teaches plainly, that all true Catholics
must trust in Christ, and in his merits; they must do good works, but they
must not trust in them; they may one pray for another, but one cannot save
another: they must let that alone for ever, as David teaches in the Psalms.
And that the old fathers and we were saved by the same faith. Psalm. 49.7.


And after, that no man can fulfill the law, he writes thus, vp^n these
words: There was a murmur of the Grecians. Mark here hat the saints want not
their imperfections: they are Christians and Saints by faith, but sinners in
themselves. Fer. in cap. 5. Act.
Although GOD has given them grace; yet he has left in them their nature
still, both that we should know our selves; then also that we should have an
occasion of practicing charity. Every Christian has in himself that he would
should be borne withal of others: and he sees in others, which he himself
must bear withal. And hereof Saint Paul says: Bear ye one another burden,
etc.

Again, of vain confidence he writes thus: Hypocrisy neglecting the
righteousness of faith, Fer. in cap. 6. Act.
and (as Christ says) the greater things of the law, trusts in the outward
works of the law. They account righteousness to be placed in the external
observation of ceremonies, places and times: none therefore more brag of
Temples and Sacrifices, then that kind of men: So Christ, 16. of Luke, inueies
against them, saying: Woe be to you which justify your selves.

And of the manner of our salvation, he writes thus, In cap. 7. Act.
upon these words: The glory of God appeared to our Fat^er Abraham. Behold the
beginning of our salvation (says he) is of God, and not of our selves: No
man comes to me unless my F^^her draw him, (says Christ.) Our salvation
begins from he^uen; for unless God first do begin, we do ever remain in
our sins. And that he begins with his word, it is a sign tha^ our
salvation is begun of faith. For the word of God cannot ^therwise be received
then by faith: faith especially is necessary He that comes to God must believe:
For to be able to please God w^^hout faith, it is impossible. Also that besides
this voice of God, ^o merits of his are written: therefore it is done, that
we may k^ow, that our salvation is of Gods grace and mercy. For our saluat^^n
comes not to us of works or merits; but of the mercy of God according to that,
You are called of grace, and not of works. T^us far Ferus. Where he plainly
attributes, not only the beginning of our salvation to the free mercy and
grace of Go^, but also the end thereof; which other Papists do not with th^r
iustificatione prima and secunda, their first and last justification, whereof
they say, the first is freely of grace, without works or merits, but not the
second.

And after upon these words: By his name, all that believe in him shall
receive remission of sins. Super. Act. 10.
By his name (says he) not by our works and merits: (All which believe)
therefore faith justifies. And a little after: They began to speak with
diverse tongues, no otherwise then the Jews did in the 2: Acts. So in the first
and great calling of the Gentiles, it behooued them, without a^l help of the
law, to be made equal to the Jews, that it might now be most certain, that
righteousness is now only of the grace and election of God, and of no works.

And in another place of merits, he writes thus: But what are those so great
merits of a sinner, Fer. Ser. 7. de prodigo filio.
that God should entertain him so honorably? The answer is, there is no
mention made here of any merit, but the mercy of God is commended unto us. It
was in the prodigal Sons mind to do many things; to submit himself, and
to leave nothing unattempted, that he might win his fathers favor again:
but before he ever spoke a word, yea before he came at his father, before he
saw his father, when as now he was a great way from his fathers house; his
father had now set al his anger as^de, and could no longer refrain himself,
but that he must needs go and meet him: He tarried not till he came into the
^ouse; he de^anded not of him what his request was; he might easily ^oniectur^
what moved him, and what was the cause of his return: neither ^aried he till
he had asked pardon of his offense; but by and by he fe^ upon his neck. By
which what other thing is declared unto us, t^n that it is of mere grace and
mercy, that we are restored of God i^o the place of sons, from which we were
fallen. For which ca^ Christ has used very stately, and those not a few words,
by which his may very forcibly be convinced. For we must needs ascribe or
justification, and the forgiveness of our sins, to the grace of God: By
grace ye are saved (says Saint Paul) and that not of yo^^ selves: it is the
gift of GOD: not of works, least any man should ragge. And such like doctrine
did Jeremy the Prophet sing: A^^o it is the Lords mercy, that we are not
^onsumed.

And although also our work^ must concur, both sorrow proceeding from the
bottom of our he^^t, and also a pure and perfect will, and an earnest desire of
rising aga^ne; a plain and not counterfeit confession of the mouth; and to
conclude, the zealousnesse of our prayers: notwithstanding neither ou^ sorrow,
nor confession, nor prayers, nor all the external rites of repentance, can
take us out of our sins, no not if so be that we should even consume our
selves with the sorrows of repentance, and employ our labor in confessing our
sins, even till we waxed mad^e thereby, we should (as the common proverb
is,) loose both al our ^^bour and cost, to the obtaining of the remission of
our sins, unless God had promised us that he would freely forgive us,
unless by Christ's benefit and merit our salvation had been procured, unless
he had bestowed on us his repentance and merits, etc.

Our sins are freely pardoned by Jesus Christ (says Ferus) and all our
sorrows and repentance are not satisfactions, but signs and fruits of our
repentance. They are duties to our savior, not prices or raunsomes for our
sins.

Philippus de Dies of the imperfection of all Christians works, Phi. Dies conc.
1. de Phil. Iac.
writes thus: No man comes to the Father, but by me, that is, by following
me; or else by me, that is, by my works. The most ancient caruers of Images
were wont, before they showed their Images openly, to behold them very
diligently, and to examine very attentively, if there were any faults in them;
and if they found no faults in them, then to place them in some low place,
that all men might behold the excellency of them. But if there were some
imperfections in them, which they, who nearely and narrowly beheld them, might
easily espy, then they were wont to place them aloft, on some high pillar,
that being beholden a far off, their faults and imperfections might not be
discerned. Of all our works, yea even of our just works, says Esaias: As a
defiled cloth of a woman is all our righteousness. For they are unworthy that
they may be grateful or accepted of the majesty of God: Wherefore it is
necessary, that we follow the policy of these artificers, and that we place
them on the high Pillar Jesus Christ our Savior, that through his merits they
may be of some value and merit with God the father.

And again, speaking of the place of Esaias: Idem Conc. 3. in fest. Micha.
To whom shall I have regard, but to the poor and contrite in Spirit? etc. He
writes thus: He calls here the poor, the humble man. For he is indeed an
humble man, who acknowledges his poverty and nakedness, who knows that he
has nothing of himself but sin, who what good thing soever he has, what
benefit either of nature or fortune, he doubts not, but that he receives it
from God, who trusts not in his own judgment, wisdom, counsel, nor in his
own strength: but puts all his trust and confidence in God, and as a most
poor beggar, ever craves the crumbs that falls from his most bountiful table.

Ferus also of good works, writes thus: Therefore, In cap. 3. Mat.
John preached in the Wilderness, as though he should say, neither your riches
nor your sacrifices can get you true righteousness, but only the grace of
Christ: For if righteousness had comen by the law; then had Christ died in
vain. The same must we do, we must forsake al things, and make haste into the
Wilderness: that is, to acknowledge that all, These words take away all
trust, who will trust in a thing that is uncertain.
that the world makes account of, is temporal; nor can deliver thee from the
wrath of God: therefore trust in no such thing, no nor in thy only good works.
For thou can not tell, whether they be such before the eyes of God: yea, how
good soever they seem, yet they are imperfect; neither do they proceed from
such feruency, as they ought. Therefore thou may not trust in them: the
which thing also Christ himself does teach; When we have done all things we
are unprofitable servant. Therefore when as thou have nothing, neither within
thee, nor without thee, that may assure thy conscience; fly unto the grace of
God, and say, I have lift up my soul unto thee: In thee have I put my trust,
etc. We may note here, he will not have us put our trust in any works, neither
ceremonial nor moral; neither in those that go before justification, neither
in those that follow: but only in the grace of Christ. And this is one of the
chiefest points of Christian religion, to know whereunto one may trust in
his salvation: and in this he plainly agrees with our doctrine.

And again, in another place he says expresselie, That the woman coming for
another thing, In cap. 2. Ioh.
that is, for water, found Christ: so God deals with us. Our salvation
chances to us without desert; and commonly, neither desiring it, nor seeking
it: yea being busied about other matters, and seeking other things. So the
Kingdom fell to Saul, seeking his fathers Asses: So Christ was preached unto
the Shepherds, keeping their flocks: So Andrew and Peter casting their nets
into the Sea, were called of Christ: So Matthew and Paul and others, going
about other matters, received salvation of Christ: To conclude, so long we are
careful for our own affairs, that is, for carnal things, till Christ of his
own freewill offer himself unto us, beyond all our expectation. And hence it
is, that the Bride cries: Draw me after thee: and the prophet, Turn us, O God
of our salvation. For if Christ should not prevent us with his grace, we do
still remain in our sins: even as that woman had returned even as she came, if
Christ had not prevented her.

In cap. 3. Ioh.
And in another place he writes thus: Unless a man be borne again: Nicodemus
asked Christ nothing expressly, and yet Christ first of all answers him of
regeneration. By this he has taught all Preachers, that first they make the
tree good, and then that they require good fruits, that is to say, that first
they teach faith, whereby a man may be justified; and afterward good works:
and in this one short word, he comprehends the whole sum of Christian
religion. Man truly was created to everlasting felicity, but because thorough
his sin, he became accursed, it came to pass, that not only himself, and
all things that he had, but that also all his posterity became accursed:
therefore because we are borne of Adam, we are all become unprofitable and
abominable both in body and soul, in all our power and hability. Unless
therefore, by the grace of God we be borne again, and of Adams Sons, be
made the Sons of God, all things are in vain that we do, or endeavor, or
think, or speak; yea our selves are vain, and all our reason, will,
strength, and works. Therefore he that desires to enter into the kingdom of
God, must become a new man: so also he that desires to see the kingdom of God,
that is, to understand the mysteries of the kingdom of God, and his heavenly
doctrine; as God showed to Jacob the kingdom of God, in that ladder lift up,
which reached to heaven: he must lay aside all fleshly wisdom, he must deny
his own reason, he must despise his own strength, and must yield himself
wholly as it were a bondslaue to the word of God. By this word therefore Christ
condemns us, and all things that we have, that he might provoke us more
forcibly to seek help of him. Again, by this word, he wrests from us all
confidence in our selves, or in our own works, and takes from us that staff
of a reed; that we may learn to trust in the only mercy of God. For faith is
the sure staff of our old age, by which alone we may pass over this Jordan of
temptation: the figure whereof was showed before in Jacob. Here therefore
learn, why God in the Scriptures, oftentimes condemns our works and our
endeavors: for he does not this, to bring us into despair, or because good
works do not please him; but that he may teach us, to trust only in the mercy
of God.

And a little after he writes thus: Although one man being compared to
another, one may seem more nobler or wiser, or more just then another: yet if
we respect the power, wisdom, and justice of God, we are all alike weak,
ignorant, and sinners; neither one, not so much as an hair, excels another:
For we all stand need of the grace of God. And after, It is no marvel if
Nicodemus understood not the words of Jesus: For the fleshly man understands
not those things which are of God. For they are foolishness unto him.

Ferus here plainly teaches, that a right faith must be the root of all
good works, and that is such a faith as the Gospel teaches: that is, that
Jesus Christ is both able and willing to cure all diseases, both of body and
soul: and with such a faith all sinners should come to him alone: and that
this faith should be planted in every Christians heart, which the Papists
have not done heretofore in their Church. And after this faith, then good
works should be taught and required. Secondly he teaches, that we have no
power to do good left in us: we are not like Birds in a Cage, which if the
stop of sin were taken away, would voluntarily fly out, as other
Papists teach: but even dead Birds and Carions, having no strength or power
at all to do good: and that Christ condemns us, to make us more forciblie to
fly to him; and that we must not put any confidence or trust in our works:
and that before God, there is not any one man, a hair better then another;
but all are alike sinners, not excepting the blessed Virgin Marie of her own
nature. What doctrine can be more agreeable to the Gospel, then this? or to
that, we now teach in the Church of England? I would to GOD all Papists
would mark it and believe it.

Philippus de Dies also writes thus: King Ezechias asking life of God, Sermon
2. de resur.
recites his benefits, saying: O Lord, I beseech thee behold, I have walked
before thee in truth, and in a perfect heart: and that I have don that which is
right in thy eyes. Why, O holy King (says he) do thou allege thy
services, that thou have done to God? It had seemed better, if thou had
alleged thy miseries, thy poverty. So poor men are wont to do, that may
move them to pity, of whom they hope for an alms: they show them their wounds
and miseries. To this Saint Gregory answers: that the holy King here, does not
allege his virtues, as deserts; but as all Gods benefits: for all the good
things we do, they are Gods benefits. And so says Saint Austen,
expounding the Psalm, Who crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness, says
he: Is there not a crown due to good works? But because he works in us all
our good works, therefore he says, which crowns thee with mercy and loving
kindness, because al our good works are the mercies of God.

And in another place he writes thus: Conc. 2. in fest Matthew.
One of the holy fathers being asked, who was holy: answered, He that was
humble. And being asked again, who was more humble: answered, He that was
more holy. Lastly, being asked who was most holy: answered, He that was most
humble, and he that accounted himself least of all others. For he trusting
nothing in himself has all his trust reposed in God. David came down to this
step of humility, who said; O Lord, my heart is not exalted, nor I have no
proud looks, my soul is even as a wained child. By which words the Prophet
very excellently declared how humbly he accounted of himself: therefore he
most finely co^pares his will to a child, who being taken and wained from his
mothers pappes, relies altogether in his mothers courtesy, who by himself can
provide no meat for himself, etc.

Al true Christians should be as wained children; they should put their whole
trust in God; they should find no meat, no matter of strength, whereupon to
trust or rely in themselves, but in GOD. This is Philippus de Dies his
judgment.

Oleaster also a Papist writes thus: In 2. cap. Genesis
Can thy work be evil (O Lord) or can there be any imperfection in it, that
it should need to be examined? As if all other works need trial, yet not
light, which thou have made most pure and glorious, by which all the other works
are examined; what will thou teach me in this trial? I think thou would
tell me, that I should examine and try my darkness; if so be, that thou so
diligently examine thy light: for what are our works, if they shall come to be
examined in Gods judgment, but darkness? No flesh (says the Lords child)
shall be justified in thy sight. We may note here, how this Papist
confesses, that all our works, if they should be examined in Gods judgment,
are but darkness.

And yet after he adds: Not that we think with the Luthera^s, that the just
man sins in every work he does; but we mean to signify the imperfections
of our works, if they be brought to examination of Gods judgment. If there be
darkness in the works of the just, is there not sin? Are not all
imperfections and declining from the law of God sin? He teaches here the
same doctrine the Lutherans teach, that there are imperfections and da^kenesse
in the works even of just men, and that their works are not able to stand in
Gods Judgment: and yet he will not be of their opinion. And he adds for
more confirmation of this doctrine that place of Esaias: We have all been
unclean, and all our righteousnesses, as the defiled cloth of a woman.
Therefore (says he) how pure soever, and how good thy work seem to thee O
man, compare it to the glass of Gods law, that thou may amend, what thing
thou find fault in it, present it to Gods eyes, that thou may hear his
judgment of thy work.

Stella of the perfection of our works, and perfect fulfilling of the law, In
cap. 1. Luc.
writes thus upon these words: And they were both just before God; if
therefore it be written: In thy sight shall no man living be justified: how can
any man be called just before God? If our righteousness be considered as it
has some fault mingled with it, no man is justified, because In many things
we offend all: and all our righteousnesses are like a defiled cloth of a woman.
Also if you compare our righteousness to the righteousness of God, no man shall
be saved: and therefore most holy Job said, Shall man be justified being
compared to God? But if this righteousness be considered according to the
measure prescribed to man; so the best and those, who are friends with God, on
some sort are called just before God.

In cap. 16. Mat.
Ferus also concerning this matter writes thus: Although the Scripture call all
the faithful Saints; not that they want no perfection, but for the blood of
Jesus Christ, wherewith they are washed and sanctified; yet in themselves they
are imperfect, and have need to say, Forgive us our trespasses: and ever with
faith and trust in the mercy and goodness of God, they have fear joined for
their infirmity: as Job says; I feared all my works: when as the same Job
sometimes declared himself to be innocent. Both therefore are necessary to a
Christian, fear and hope; hope, least be should despair; and fear, least he
should presume.

Stella also writes thus: Neither was the holy Virgin content for the
excellent virtue of her humility, to say he had respect unto his hand maid, In
1. cap. Luc.
but to the baseness of his handmaid. And here thou must mark this baseness
concerning her merits, for she thought her self of no merit, of no virtue; and
this not fainedly or falsely: for she considered the excellency of her own
strength; and not on Gods behalf, his gifts bestowed on her. And this
consideration is the mother of an ^^mble heart, whose root is in the soul. Thus
far Stella. I would this root of humility did also grow in all Christians
hearts, which did grow thus fruitfullie in the heart of the Virgin, that they
would with her consider, not their merits, but their unworthiness.

5. Of the Certainty of Salvation.
ANdradius, Lib. 6. orthodox. explicat.
expounding the meaning of the University of Collen, against Monhemias, how
we may both hope and doubt of our salvation, writes thus: Although (says
he) our hope has ever doubting joined with it; yet it differs very much it
self from doubting. For when as our hope, whereby we do promise to our selves
eternal life, does trust both to our works, and also especially to the mercy
of God and his omnipotency, which does proceed of our merits; and when as we
do often loose the grace of God by our sins, and we our selves do hinder the
course thereof, that it does not flow into our hearts: it comes to pass
truly, that our hope is so certain, that yet it is ever coupled and joined
with fear and doubtfulnesse. For he, which considers the goodness and
omnipotent power of GOD, never doubts, nor fears any thing; but is as the
mount Sion, which of no side can be removed: but when he considers his own
frailty and pronenes to sin, as long as he lives; then he fears, least he
should expel or hinder the goodness of God. Wherefore when as Saint Paul says,
that hope makes not ashamed, and he calls it the sure Anchor of the soul; he
considered the omnipotency and power of God, upon which our hope chiefly
rests: by which it has this virtue, that it is without al doubt. But the
University of Collen, where they say, that it doubts very much, they consider
the infirmity of our nature, and the force of our desires, which oftentimes
force us from the standing in the law of God and reason; and do as it were
drive us into these sins, whereby we loose the brightness of righteousness,
and merit the anger of God, and everlasting torments.

But let us hear how far they are wide from Saint Paul's doctrine, in this
their consideration. Abraham (says he) is called the father of us all, as it
is written: A father of many Nations have I ordained thee, Roman. 4.16.
even before God, whom he believed, who quickneth the dead, and calls the
things which be not, as though they were: which Abraham believed against hope
under hope, that he should be the father of many Nations, according to that
which was spoken to him; So shall thy seed be. And he not weak in faith,
considered not his own body, which was now dead, being almost an hundredth
year old, neither the deadness of Sarahs womb; neither did he doubt of the
promise of God, through unbelief: but was strengthened in faith, and gave
glory to God, being fully assured, that he that had promised was able to do
it: And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness. Now it is not
written for him only, that it was imputed to him for righteousness; but also
for us to whom it shall be imputed for righteousness, which believe in him,
which raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our sins,
and rose again for our justification.

Saint Paul here (the Doctor of the Gentiles) teaches all Christians by the
example of their father Abraham, contrary to the doctrine of the University
of Collen, that they must not consider their own frailty and weakness (for
who then should not despair?) but the promise and mercy of God. Abraham
considered not, that now he and Sarah his Wife were as good as dead to
childbearing and begetting; but the word and promise of God, which even
quickens things that be dead, calls things which are not, as though they were:
and even so must all Abraham's Children, and all true Christians, not consider
their own frailty and weakness: for if they respect their own deseruings,
even the best of them all, they are like their Father Abraham, even dead in
their sins, and far off from obtaining the Kingdom of God; yet believing
the promise of God assuredly, and not respecting this their own frailty and
weakness, but even now with a lively faith, whenever it assaulteth them,
ouercomming it; they must all assure themselves of the kingdom of God, as
Abraham did of his son Isaac.

And this is faith: and this is to be the true son of Abraham: and without
this faith no man can be saved. We must not consider our own infirmities;
naie, that we are even of our selves dead, through our sins; as the
University of Collen teaches; but we must only respect the grace, mercy,
and promise of God, as Abraham our forefather did, and by this strengthened
overcome the other; which as an enemy is opposed and set against faith, to
wrestle with it, and to assault it. The University of Collen, in this their
doctrine, do gainesay the Prophet David, whom they allege for their
witness. Psalm. 125.1.
The just man (says David) is like mount Sion, which on no side can be
moved: He is firm on every side, he trusting on the mercy of God, is not
moved (as they teach) with the consideration of his own frailty.

Again, let us consider how the University of Collen and Master Bellarmine
do disagree, in this great point of salvation. Bellarmine, whereas saint John
says; Lib. 1. de Iustificat. cap. 11.
These things have I written unto you, which believe on the name of the son
of God that you may know, that you have eternal life, answers, that S. John
says truly, they which believe as they ought, have everlasting life. The
meaning therefore (says he) of the Apostle is conditional: for he writes to
those which believe, that they may know that they have eternal life, if so be
they believe indeed, as they ought to believe, that is, if they have faith,
which works by love. This is master Bellarmines judgment.

But the university of Collen writes thus: Dialog. 4. contra. Monhem.
Who ever has taught thus of faith, that the salvation of every particular man
should be obtained by it, or have relation to it? For faith is of all things
most assured, which neither can be deceived, nor deceive. But the justification
of every private man (say they) is very uncertain, much more their eternal
salvation; how therefore can faith be had of such uncertain things? This is
the censure of the University of Collen, whereas both Saint John and master
Bellarmine avouch, that they which believe aright, know that they have eternal
life: so that by the censure of the University of Collen, we must not believe
assuredly, we must not know that we shall be saved; we must only hope
that we shall be saved. And they say again, That the certainty of hope is
not such, that any man trusting thereunto, should not doubt: for so long as we
hope (say they) we are uncertain: as the very Etymology of the name of hope
does teach us. Thus we may plainly see, how they will have us doubt still
of our salvation, which doubting, is both contrary to faith, and also to
knowledge, which Saint John the Apostle teaches.

But to return again to M. Bellarmines former answer, his meaning is
thereby, though he dissent from the university, to prove, that no man shall
be assured, or know that he shall be saved. For he says a little before,
that even by our confession, faith is necessary to the forgiveness of sins.
But (says he) out of what word of God do they learn, that they have such a
faith, as is required to get and obtain remission of sins? This is one of
his mistes, whereby he would have every one doubt, whether he has faith or
no, and so doubt whether he should be saved or no. But this doctrine is
contrary to Saint Paul, who thus writes to the Church of Corinth: 2. Cor. 13.5.
Try your selves (says he) and search your selves, whether you be in faith
or no. Do you not know your selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, unless you
be reprobates? All Christians must know, that Jesus Christ is in them, that
they are by faith engrafted into him, or else they are reprobates. By master
Bellarmines doctrine, all Christians are reprobates; For no Christian (says
he) knows whether he has such a faith, as obtains remission of his sins:
and then it must needs follow, that no Christian knows, that Jesus Christ
dwells in him; which all should know: and so all are reprobates by his
doctrine. 1. Pet. 1.
Peter the Apostle writes his Catholic Epistle in general to all Christians,
and he says; that they have gotten like precious faith to the Apostles: And
shall they not know then, that they have obtained such a faith, as is required
to the forgiveness of sins? The Papists imagine God to be a respecter of
persons; and that to the Apostles he gave a great faith, and that they might
be sure of their salvation; but to none else, he gave the like faith; and
that all others ought to doubt: but Saint Peter here plainly teaches, that
even those to whom he wrote, had obtained even as precious a faith as he. And
shall not we judge so of our Christians at this day? Naie in the Acts he
pronounces the same sentence, Act. 10 34.
that God is no respecter of persons, that in every Nation he is accepted unto
him, which fears him and works righteousness. And when as the Holy ghost
fell upon them, he commanded them to be baptized: and have not all Christians
at this day likewise the holy Ghost? does not Saint Paul say, that they
which have not the Spirit of God, Roman. 8.9.
are none of his? If all christians then have the Holy ghost, then must they
needs have faith, which is the first and principal fruit thereof: and such a
faith as is required to the obtaining of the remission of their sins.

May not we say of our christians, as Saint Paul speaks of the christians
in the Primitive Church? 2. Corin. 3.3. 1. Corin. 1.7.
You are the Epistle of Christ (says he to the Corinthians) made by our
ministry, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God. And
in his first Epistle, he gives thanks to God that they wanted no gift:
Therefore they had, no doubt, such a faith as is required to the forgiveness
of sins, by Saint Paul's own Testimony; yea, although that their faith had
some imperfectio^s in it, of dissension and of diverse errors, both concerning
the Sacrament, and also the resurrection of the dead. Why may we not
therefore, believe and pronounce of all christians, in these our days, which
are not notorious Atheists, or cut off from the church, as saint Paul did of
the christians generally in his days? Thus we may see, how saint Paul's
doctrine and master Bellarmines differs, the one tends to consolation and
edification; the other plainly to the destruction of the faith, and to
desperation.

Ferus writes, That most justly the holy Ghost is called the comforter, not
only for this cause, In. cap. 14. Ioh.
that it comforted the Apostles the Children of the Bride, of the death and
absence of their father, by the word of the Scripture, saying; that it behooued
Christ thus to have suffered: but also for this cause, that as an earnest penny
and pledge, it assures the faithful, that they are the sons of God. But
Bellarmine says, That the Spirit witnesses to our spirits, that we are the
Sons of God; but this Testimony is by no express word, that is, by
Revelation; but by a taste of some inward joy and peace, which ingenders in us
no certainty but coniectural: But an earnest given to any, takes away all
conjecture. And Ferus speaking of this Testimony, says: O this happy
knowledge, yea, most happy union, so to be knit, not only to the Son, but to
the father! It makes us know surely we are Gods Sons. So this earnest takes
away all conjecture; nay more then this, it unites us to God.

But that place of Ecclesiastes is alleged of some, to disprooue this
certainty of our salvation; the which place, if it be indifferently
considered, proves no such thing: but rather it condemns all rash judgments
of Christians, Ecclesiast. 9.1. Matthew, 7.1.
according to our Saviors doctrine. Judge not, and ye shall not be judged.
The place is this: I gave my self (says Solomon) to consider this whole
matter, and to declare the same, because that just men and wise men and their
service are in the hands of God; even the just men and wise men are in the
hands of God; if he held them not up, they should surely fall, even into the
pit of hell: Love also and hatred no man knows, all things are before their
faces* for all things happen to all men alike. There is one event to the just
and wicked, to the good and pure, and to the unclean, to him that sacrifices,
and to him that sacrifices not. The plain meaning of this place is, that no
man knows by the external euentes, which happen to himself or others,
whether he be beloved of God or hated. The same things chance very often
alike, both to the godly and to the wicked. 2. King. 23.29. 1. King 22.35.
Genesis 13.2. Luke 16.19. 2. Sam. 12.18. 1. Kin. 19 14 17 1 King. 22 49. Psalm.
48.6. Luke, 13.4. Act. 28.4. Genesis 22.2.
Good Josias was slain in the battle, as well as wicked Ahab; Abraham was
rich, as well as Dives: David's child died, as well as Ieroboams: Iosaphats
Ships were broken, as well as the Ships of the wicked. Let no man pronounce
sentence of condemnation against his Brother, by reason of these outward
events: as did the superstitious Jews against those, upon whom the Tower of
Siloam did fall, or as did those profane Paganes against Paul, who judged him
a wicked man, because a Viper caught him. God deals woonderfullie with his
Isaac, the hope of the world is commanded to be sacrificed; Jesus the light of
the Gentiles, Luke 2.32.23.33.
and the glory of Israel is crucified: who will then judge or condemn, by any
external accident? This sense, the very coherence of the verse that
follows, inforceth: for thus it follows in the Text. This is an evil, that
is done amongst all, under the sun, that there is one chance or event to all,
and that the hearts of the sons of men, are full of evil, and madness is in
their hearts whilst they live. And because in all men's hearts this sin and
madness remains, so that no man can say, he has no sin: therefore these
like events and chances outwardly happen to all alike.

Again it is to be noted, that Solomon here says, The man knows not, that
is, the carnal man, and he that is not regenerate, in whose person he has
spoken many things before: as that, Who knows whether the spirit of man
asce^d upward, and the spirit of a beast descend downward, Eccles. 3.21.
to the earth? It is evident, that Solomon speaks not that of himself, who
affirms in the 12. Chapter, that the spirit of man returns to God, Cap. 12.
ver. 7.
that gave it him: so that the carnal man knows not then whether he be
worthy of love or hatred: It is Gods Spirit that bringes this certainty, that
works this effect, that witnesses this, without which our spirits should
doubt, naie even despair, even the spirits of the most courageous and
valiant. So our Savior told Peter of the profession of his faith, that flesh
and blood had not revealed that unto him, Matthew. 16.17.
but his heavenly father, by the working of his holy spirit. So we read in
the Gospel, Mark. 13.32.
that our Savior himself knows not the day of judgment, as he is man: so
man, in that respect he is man, knows not his love, nor his hate; Rom,
8.15.16.
but the holy spirit bears witness to our spirits, that we are the Sons of
God: and therefore beloved of God, and upon this assurance of love, makes us
call boldly upon God, and cry Abba* father. And Solomon himself after seems
to make this distinction of man: The end of all the Word (says he) is easy
to be heard: Fear God, and keep his Commandments: this is the whole man. As
though he should say: he that does this, is the man regenerate: this is the
son, not of Adam, but of the Preacher: this is the son of God by
regeneration; who fears and loves God and his, and keeps his commandementes.
This is not the old man, whose judgments are corrupt: but this is the new
man, the whole man, who judges rightly, and discerns all things.

But Master Bellarmine would same pervert this place, and make it serve for
their doubtful uncertainty of salvation, and first he says, that Solomon
speaks only of just men, De Iustificat. lib. 3. cap. 4.
as those words declare: There are just men, and wise men, and their works are
in the hand of God; and man knows not, that is, the just man (says he)
whether he be worthy of love or hatred. First Master Bellarmine dissenteth from
Arrias Montanus, and from the Hebrew, where it is, that the services of the
just men are in the hands of God, and not their works: And may more
properly be referred to servants and to living creatures, which are properly
rather said, to be in the hands of God, then any qualities or insensible
works of man. Secondly, he makes a conjunction copulative, betwixt this
former sentence and the other, which is not in the Hebrew: but they are rather
two distinct sentences, and of diverse matters. And this sentence of love and
hatred has coherence with that which follows rather, then with this
precedent; as the very Text it self, being indifferently weighed and
considered, declares, which is this: Also hatred, also love no man knows; all
things are before their faces: all things happen to all men alike; as well to
the wicked as to the godly: And therefore, as by these outward works, no man
knows the love or hatred, either of himself, or of any other. The former
sentence in the first verse going before of the just and wise men, has this
peculiar doctrine; that no man is saved by his own strength or wisdom, but
even the just men and wisest of the world are in the hands of God; he holds
them up: how much more then other baser or meaner men? This is the doctrine of
that verse: and then follows this second verse, that No man knows his love
nor his hatred, because all things chance to all men alike.

And whereas Master Calvin alleges, that this reason immediately following,
proves evidently that Solomon speaks of the knowledge which may be had by
events: Bellarmine aunsweres, that it is not necessary, that the reason should
be as large as the conclusion, which is proved by the reason. But here how
does he dissent from reason? for it is necessary, that the reason be as ample
at the least, naie rather amplier, then the conclusion; or else the conclusion
is naught: even as the foundation of a building must be larger then the top,
or else the builders will make but a tottering building.

Secondly he says, that Solomon would prove, that just men could not surely
know, whether they were beloved of God or no. Whereas Solomon in this verse,
speaks of man simply, and not of the just only; as in the former. Then he
says, that all things are kept uncertain to the time to come, till we shall
have entered into life everlasting. But the meaning of Solomon is, that all the
events of the time to come in this our life, are uncertain; as the Hebrew
phrase declares: All things are before our eyes; that is, are uncertain. While
they are here, men cannot see, what will happen, till it happen.

Lastly he answers, that the just man may know, whether he be worthy of love
or hatred, if the spirit of God reveal it unto him: but ordinarily he says,
that the spirit of God does not reveal that to any man, by manifest knowledge,
but by certain experiments or inward comforts, which do not make certain
credit or assurance. O devilish doctrine, and absurd against reason!

Epistola 96.
Seneca writes thus very excellently: Our life without a full set purpose or
resolution is wandering and vain. If a man purpose a thing, he will do it
indeed. I think you will grant (says he) that there is nothing worse, then
one that is doubtful, fearful, Epistola 75.
and uncertain; now setting his foot forward, now pulling it back again.
This we shall be compelled to do in all things, unless those things be taken
away, which hinder and pluck back our minds, and suffer them not to be
valiant. As though he should say, there is none, but by nature he is subject to
doubtfulnesse, unless these lets be taken away.

Thus much Seneca saw by the light of nature: and shall not we see so much,
being lightened by Gods spirit? especially when as saint Paul says, that the
spirit of God witnesses to our spirits, Romans 8.15.16.
that we are the sons of God: and Bellarmine says, that his witness is not
sufficient, it does not warrant and assure us. Is not this to discredit the
Testimony of God? It certifieth (says Bellarmine) but not manifestly, but
obscurely. To charge the spirit of God with this obscurity, from whence comes
it, but from the prince of darkness? The spirit of God is light, security,
and assurance, and joy wheresoever it comes.

But Andradius is not so bold, nor so wicked in this matter, Andrad. lib. 6.
ortho. explicat.
he answers the place of saint Paul thus: When as (says he) the holy Ghost
can neither be deceived nor deceive; if it be certain that any thing is
established by the holy Ghosts Testimony, it is so surely to be believed, as
the other mysteries of our faith. But now here is the doubt, whether it may
evidently be proved, that that Testimony of their souls, which men feel, be
the voice of the holy Ghost or no? And we affirm (says he) that can be
evident to none, without the special revelation of the holy Ghost. Andradius
affirms, that if the holy Ghost do witness, his testimony is most certain:
and we must believe it as surely, as the articles of our creed. But he
doubts whether the holy Ghost does testify this so to any man's conscience or
no, without special and extraordinary revelation. But that doubt saint Paul
plainly takes away, who affirms, that the holy Ghost bears witness with
our spirits, that we are the Sons of God. And that it not only witnesses
thus much unto us, but also makes us cry, Abba, father, which is the effect of
this testimony, and assurance. For without this testimony and assurance, who
durst be so bold? And therefore he calls it the earnest of the spirit,
which every Christian has given of God in the pilgrimage of this life, and the
manifold dangers and chances thereof, to assure him of the certainty of this
covenant and bargain betwixt God and him, of his salvation.

Three things even in our worldly affairs, bring credit and assure any
thing: Ancient writings testifying any thing; and excellent personages; and
the dignity of the things themselves. The things themselves oftentimes do
speak and witness. And here concerning the certainty of our salvation, first
that plain and short Epistle, which saint John writes to all that believe in
Jesus Christ, as a most ancient record, does testify. Ioh. Epist. 1. ca. 5.13.
Secondly, saint John himself, who wrote the Epistle, who was the beloved
Disciple, on whom Jesus Christ leaned: and lastly, the dignity of
Christians; all that believe in Jesus Christ must know, that they have eternal
life. Faith in Jesus Christ is no small jewel: it bringes with it this virtue,
even the assurance and knowledge of our salvation. They diminish and take the
dignity both of faith and of Christians from them, that deny this which saint
John repeates twice, in that his short Epistle; as a thing not lightly to be
regarded; as a thing which the devil should go about to steal from
Christians, and to deface; for he cannot abide the dignity of faith. These
things have I written to you (says saint John) which believe on the name of
the son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may
believe on the name of the Son of God. Let us mark here first, that he
says, that all Christians must know, that they have eternal life; now that
they shall have it: but that they must now know that they are assured of it,
even as if they had it already. Secondly, that he repeates that they which
believe on the name of the son of God, have this knowledge and this
assurance. And he urges this knowledge and assurance, as a spur and a mighty
cause, to make them believe on the name of the son of God. Who would not, to
be assured of his salvation, to know certainly that he should be saved, do any
thing? Now saint John teaches all true Christians, that to the obtaining of
this so weighty a matter, there is one thing necessary; and that is, To
believe on the name of the son of God: who will not now believe, and every
day pray, for increase of faith, that hears and believes this?

In ca. 5. Epi. Io.
Ferus also (as I have noted before) affirms, that as Christ had witness
from heaven and on earth, that he was the only true Savior of the world; so
every Christian has the same Testimony, that he is the son of God: And shall
any christian doubt then, whether he be the son of God or no? First, the
Father from heaven witnesses, they shall be my sons and my daughters, and I
will be their father. Secondly, the holy Ghost witnesses to our spirits, that
we are the sons of God. And thirdly, the Sacrament of Baptism, wherewith we
are washed; and the Sacrament of the Eucharist, wherewith we are sed, does
witness the same: what can then be more happy then a Christian, says Ferus,
that has so many Testimonies?

Master Bellarmine, that Solomon spoke generally of the uncertainty which just
men have of their proper grace, either as men, or as the sons of God; may be
gathered of two things, first of these words, that all things are kept
uncertain, or before their faces, But here Bellarmine must not mistake
Solomon; for all things are not kept uncertain, as the words seem to import:
for then the Articles of our faith should be uncertain, which I think
Bellarmine will not affirm: among which Articles also are contained the
remission of sins, and the resurrection of the body; I marvel why they will
not make the one of these, as certain to every man's conscience as the other?
So that then, these words of Solomon, that all things are uncertain, must be
restrained within their limits: and to be understood, in that respect he
spoke them, which the words following do declare; that is, that by these
external events a man cannot judge any thing, but all things are uncertain.

Secondly Master Bellarmine says, that of the intent or purpose of Solomon,
this may be gathered, which was to show, that this was one of the miseries of
this life, and that not the least, that even just men might justly fear, least
peradventure they were not just: but if they knew they were just, howsoever
they know it; then (says he) all things were not reserved as uncertain to
come. But what was Salomons purpose, appears by the Chapter going before: And
I see all the work of God (says he) that man cannot find it out; the work
that is done under the Sun: Eccl ca. 8. v. 17
the which man studies to search out, and cannot find the same: yea, though a
wise man say, he will search it out, yet he cannot find it. And then follows,
I gave my mind to this whole matter, and to declare it all. Here is first
Salomons purpose, that Gods works are wonderful, and that no man can attain
to the depth or to the reason of them: not to teach (as master Bellarmine
teaches) that this is not the least misery of man, to fear whether he be just
or no. And then after Solomon has put down this his intent and purpose; he
sets down this foundation concerning the matter propounded; That all men,
whether wise or just, whether servants or masters, are in the hands of God. How
soever God deals with men, this is a sure ground: That be they wise and just,
they are in the hands of God: and therefore are sure to be saved, whatsoever
befall them. But his love or hatred (says he) man knows not, for all things
happen to the good and wicked alike: so wonderful are the works of God, that
by them no man can tell his love or his hatred. This is Salomons drift and
purpose, as most evidently appears out of this Text: whereas that first
ground, That the just and wise men are in the hands of God, whatsoever befalles
them, seems to infer necessarily, this certainty of our salvation.

But to conclude this place: does not that saying of the Apostle prove
evidently the certainty of our salvation? That the fervent desire of the
creature waits, Romans 8 20.21.22.
when the sons of God shall be revealed. For we know, that every creature
groneth with us also, and trauelleth in pain together unto this present. And
not only the creature, but we also which have the first fruits of the spirit,
even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption
of our bodies. If all the godly do sigh and groan for the day of Judgment
with the earth, which then shall most assuredly be restored, to the glorious
liberty of the sons of God; do we think, that they do doubt of their
salvation, or do we think God deals more hardly with them, then with the
earth? It is sure of deliverance and liberty even now, which causes it to
groan; and are not they?

That saying also of Peter confirms the same: That all Christians should look
for, 2. Pet. 4 12.
and hasten unto the day of God: that is, every day look for it, and wish that
it might come speedily. Would any man wish for the speedy coming of Jesus
Christ, unless he were sure he should be saved? That saying in the
Revelation evidently proves the same: Revel. 22.17.
The spirit and the bride say, Come. As the spirit doubts not of his
salvation; so neither the bride of her marriage; And shall she doubt of her
salvation? That saying of the Prophet Esaias, of the Church of Christ, is most
manifest to prove this doctrine: One shall say, I am the Lords: Esaias. 44.5.
another shall be called by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with
his own hand unto the Lord, and name himself by the name of Israel. Here is
the state of Christ's Church plainly set down: One shall say, I am the
Lords: another shall say, I am Jacob; another shall say, I am Israel: and
shall any then doubt of his salvation? does any man doubt of Isreal's or
Jacobs salvation? But see how contrary the Papists doctrine is to that which
the Prophet here sets down and teaches: One shall say, I am the Lords, says
the Prophet; and this one is every one, no doubt, in the Church of Christ: but
they dare not teach any one to say so; but think to say so, were great
presumption. But how can that be presumption, which Gods word so plainly
teaches? Let every true Christian well ponder in his heart, whether he now
will believe them or the Prophet Esaias?

But the University of Collen speaking of Christians, says, that they hope
firmly, and with great courage: Dialog. 40.
but they believe not, that they shall be saved: for faith (say they) cannot
be deceived, but hope is after declared.

But here to answer their first point: that No man ought to believe that he
should be saved: does not David say plainly: Psalm. 27.13.
I should utterly have fainted, but that I believe verily to see the goodness of
the Lord in the land of the living? David here plainly confesses, that he
believed, that he should be saved: and why may not other Christians also say
so? Job also says: Job. 19.25.
I know that my Redeemer lives: And Abraham's faith was accounted to him for
righteousness. And Saint John says; John, 20.31
That these things were written, that all Christians might believe, and
believing might have eternal life.

But master Bellarmine alleges that place of Saint Paul: 1. Lib. de
iustificat cap. 11.
We are saved thorough hope: and therefore we must hope and not believe that we
shall be saved.

But if we mark well the natures of these three, faith, hope, and charity,
we shall plainly see that our hope saves us, by the means of faith: for
these three virtues, faith, hope, and charity, spring one of another, and have
their diverse objects. Hope and charity spring of faith: and faith first of all
has respect unto the word of God, and embraces most assuredly the promise of
God; then of faith of the promise, necessarily springs the hope of the thing
promised: and lastly, he that believes ones promise, and hops for the thing
promised, will love the promiser, and all that be his: and this is Christian
charity. So that these three virtues are, as twins, all lincked together,
and one takes her virtue and force of another: And none of these, has any
force without another. Therefore hope saves, which proceeds of the faith of
the word of God: and that charity pleases, which proceeds to him, and to
all his, from this faith of his word and promise.

And although hope be properly of good things, (of things which concern our
selves,) yet as faith is of the pains and torments of the wicked; so also is
hope, as we do believe verily the promise of God made to Abraham, concerning
himself and his posterity; Genesis 12 3.
I will make thee a great nation, and will bless thee, and make thy name
great, and thou shall be a blessing: So also we must believe the same promise,
as verily, concerning his friends and his enemies, which immediately follows;
I will also bless them that bless thee, and I will curse them that curse
thee, and in thee shall all the Nations on the earth be blessed. And as we
believe the promise, so we must assuredly hope and look for the things
promised, even the plagues and punishments, which, without all doubt. God will
inflict upon all Abraham's enemies, and upon all the enemies of his Church. And
upon this promise, no doubt. David pronounces thus boldly: All mine enemies
shall be confounded and sore vexed: Psalm. 6.10.
They shall be turned back and put to shame suddenly. And in another Psalm:
Mine eye has seen his desire upon his enemies. Psalm. 54.7. Psalm. 38.37.
And again: I will follow upon mine enemies and overtake them, neither will I
turn again till I have destroyed them. So yt then as we believe this promise
of the confusion of our enemies, so we may most assuredly hope and look for
their plagues, and the perfourmance of the same: and so our hope, in some sort,
stretches out it self, as ample as our faith.

But to end this place of the certainty of our salvation, that place of the
Prophet Esaias of all Christians is worth the marking: Esaias, 32.1.
Behold (says he) a king shall reign to be righteousness to justify: and
his princes shall bear rule to teach men judgment. What King is this, but
Jesus Christ, who is called by the Prophet, Ier. 23.6.
The Lord our righteousness? And what be those his Princes, which bear rule in
judgment, but his Apostles and ministers, and magistrates, which teach men to
judge themselves, least they be judged of the Lord; and to minister judgment
to his people? 1. Cor. 11.31. Psalm. 82.3.


(And this man shall be a hiding place from the wind:] Gods wrath is compared
to the wind, and men to grass: Psalm. 103.15.
The days of man are but as gr^sse, says the Prophet David: for he
flourishes as a flower in the field; for as soon as the wind goes over it,
it is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more. From this sharp
pinching wind of the wrath of God, Jesus Christ saves us, according as Saint
John writes: John, 3.36.
He that believes in the son has everlasting life; and he that obeieth not
the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. This is that
hiding place which is mentioned in 1. Sam. 22. which is called Adullam, 1. Sam.
22.1.
that is, their Testimony, their protestation: all Christians must protest
this, that but for Jesus Christ, the wrath of God had even consumed them. And
to this cave or hiding place, fled David, and saved himself there, and his
brethren, and his fathers house, and there gathered to him thither all men that
were in trouble, and all men that were in debt, and all those that were vexed
in mind. Here is that prefigured, which Christ himself in the Gospel lively
verified and expressed, when as he said: Come unto me all that travel and be
heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Matthew. 11.28.
This was that cave, wherein also Elias hid himself, 1. King. 19.11.
till the mighty strong wind, that even rent the mountains, and brake the
rocks before the Lord, and the earthquake and the fire were past: And until
that soft, small, and loving voice was heard. And if Elias was glad to hide
himself in this cave, until all these sharp storms of Gods wrath were past,
how much more all other Christians, how holy soever they be.

And a refuge from the tempest.] Not only Gods wrath outwardly does punish
us; but even the storms and huge tempests, which by reason of our sins
Satan does rain often even in our own hearts. And these raging tempests
also, Jesus Christ does pacify and swage in us: he is a refuge or hiding
place. Of these David complains: Psalm. 93.^.
The waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly: but yet the Lord that
dwells on high is mightier: No doubt David here speaks, not of the waves of
the earthly seas, which he never meddled withal, but of the waves and sea of
his conscience, which by reason of his sins, daily vexed him. And for the
waves of this sea, that we might be delivered from them, may very fitly
spiritually that prayer the Apostles made in the tempest of the other sea,
wherein they were, be understood: Save us, Lord, we perish. And he rebuked
the Sea and the winds, Mat. 8.25.
and there followed a great calm. He that was of power to control and
pacify the storms of the sea, can also control and make calm those storms
of conscience of all them, that are in trouble, and seek to him for succor,
even with one word now, as he did then.

He is as rivers of waters in a dry ground.] All men's hearts by nature are as
a Wilderness, even as a dry ground, wherein no goodness dwelles: He only is
the heavenly deaw, that fell upon the hills of Sion, Psa. 133.3.
that makes both Hermon of the Gentiles, and Sion of the Jews fruitful. He
is that fountain of all good graces and blessings, of whose fullness we all
have received even grace for grace; Ioh. 1.16.
even most frankly and freely all that we have. John. 15.1.
He is that Vine, into whom whosoever is not grafted, brings forth nothing:
nothing that is acceptable or pleasant to God. He makes our works grapes, and
our alms and prayers wine in Gods sight, which otherwise in Gods sight were
but al vinegar, and stinking Elder berries. Therefore, whosoever lacks any
spiritual gift, either heavenly wisdom, or the gift of faith, or of the
holy Ghost: let them beg it of him, and without all doubt, they shall not
return empty away. And as the shadow of a precious rock in a weary land.]
This our life is a pilgrimage; and we are all here but as pilgrims: and in
this the service we do to our God, how slothfullie, how negligentlie, how
wearilie, and how vnperfectlie do we it: when we have done the best we can,
Luke 17.10. Psalm, 130.3.
We must all say (as our Savior Christ taught us) we are unprofitable
servants, and we must say with David: O Lord, if thou will mark what is done
amiss, who may abide? And with saint John, If we, even the Apostles of
Christ, say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth
in us. The best of us all, Ioh. 1. Epi. 1.8. Exodus 17.12.
in our prayers, are ever weary, and in some thing halting, as was Moses: and
therefore needed to have Aaron and Vr to help to hold up his arms; and
besides these, to have a great stone put under him, to bear the weight and
wearines of his whole body; and that was, no doubt, Jesus Christ. Our forsaking
this world, Genesis 19.16.
is like to Lots going out of Sodom, when as he prolonged the time, the Angels
caught him, with his wife and his two daughters by the hands (the Lord being
merciful to him, Genesis 6.8. Luke, 1.28.46. Romans 3.14.
) and so they brought him forth, and set him without the City. Even Noah
himself found grace in the eyes of the Lord. And likewise the blessed Virgin,
as the Angel told her, and as she her self confessed, and all the Saints of
God, that all mouths should be stopped, as saint Paul teaches, and that all
glory and power might be given to GOD alone.

Now Jesus Christ is that great and precious Rock, whereon all the saints do
rest and repose themselves, in their thousands of imperfections, in all their
sins and works; to their God, in this their pilgrimage, he bears all their
imperfections as a mighty rock, for his sake our prayers and alms, all our
works, though all of them imperfect, done wearilie and lazilie, and not with
such seal and perfection, as Gods law requires, are accepted: A thousand may
sit upon a rock, Exodus 25.17.
and it will ease the weariness of them all. He is that golden table, which
was called the propitiatory, which covered the whole Arc. Art thou a piece or
a part of God's ark, or Church? then Jesus Christ must cover thee, whosoever
thou art; and this our king is our hope; 1. Col. 1.27.
he makes all his Christians sure of their salvation: for what should make them
afraid? he is a hiding place from the winds of Gods wrath: he is a most safe
refuge, and haven against all the storms and tempests of our sins and
conscience; he is a most plentiful fountain of all heavenly graces, still
watering the drines and barrenness of our hearts, and ever making us springing
and fructifying in all good works: and lastly, in our manifold imperfections
and works, even in our best works we do in the service of our God; he is a
Rock for us most assuredly to rely and rest upon: and what will we more?
shall we any more doubt of our salvation? Let us rather believe the Prophet
Esaias, then all the doctrines of men whosoever, he that believes this, cannot
doubt any more. Therefore, let every one remember, and ruminate upon these
four virtues, and principal effects of our heavenly king and Savior, and
never hereafter doubt any more.

Stella makes this difference of the godly and of the wicked: Stella in 2. cap
Lucae.
The just (says he) rejoice in death, they desire it, and passing out of the
bonds of this body, they reioicing triumph: but the wicked do contrary, for
even as thieves which fear the Judges and officers; so these wicked men being
reproved of their own consciences, fly from death, fearing least they should
appear before the Judge. And no doubt, the joy of the godly is grounded upon
this rock: they rejoice in the Lord ever; even in death, as Saint Paul
teaches them.

Granatensis de perfectione amoris dei ca. 15.
Granatensis of the certainty of our salvation, writes thus: A fourth thing
that especially helps to keep and preserve this peace of conscience, is a
certain familiar and a filial trust, which the just have in God; of which we
will speak briefly; which in some of them is so great, that there is no son
in the world, which in all his necessities trusts so much in the protection of
his father, as they do in the protection of God. For they know, that there is
no father on earth worthy of this name, if he be compared with their heavenly
father. They know that this father has a care not only of their bones, but
also of the very hairs of their heads: and that not one of them does fall
without his appointment and will. These and such other like things, they know
by faith: And they know also by the experience of particular graces, and by his
providence and loving kindness, which God uses toward them; and they know
that God will so certainly provide for them in all their necessities, that they
sing ioifully with the Prophet: The Lord gouernes me, or as some other does
translate it: The Lord does feed me, and therefore I can lack nothing. And
after, Although I walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil, because thou art with me. Such like promises has the scripture in a
thousand places, and with the truth of these the just man is defended, as with
a most sure shield: and therefore he is neither troubled, nor any whit moved in
all the chances of this life. For whatsoever is taken from him on the one side,
he trusts shall be restored again of God on the other side, in matters of
greater weight and importance. Thus far Granatensis. And what could be more
truly and plainly written of the great love, which God has to every
Christian, and of the love which he ought to believe most assuredly? To
believe this love of God toward them, is the only shield of Christians in
the manifold chances of this life. Take this love away from them, and you
leave them naked: and what is more contrary to the doubtful doctrine of our
salvation, which the Church of Rome daily teaches?

Ferus speaking of the time between Christ's death and his resurrection, writes
thus: Fer. Ser. 10. de filio predi.
What marvel is it (says he) if the Disciples then doubted, whether their
faith in Christ were a right faith or no? That, without all doubt, was a most
sorrowful time unto them, when as they were so perplexed in their minds. For
what does so torment a man's conscience, as then when he is compelled so to
stick in two ways, doubtful of his faith, whether there be any hope of grace
and mercy or no? This, I say, the holy Apostles and Disciples tried by
experience, in the death of Christ, etc. Such a doubtful faith the Church of
Rome now teaches, which Ferus here plainly condemns, as a most miserable
thing. In the psalm every soul now is called the beloved of God: Psalm.
118.6.
That thy beloved may be delivered, says David: Let thy right hand save me,
and hear thou me: Every soul in the sight of God is now David, that is,
beloved; is Solomon, is at peace with God, is Iedidiah, on the Lords behalf.

But to return again to Granatensis, after he adds this: And by this means
the people of God, as the Prophet Esaias says, Ibidem.
shall sit in the beauty of peace, and in tabernacles of sure confidence, and
in rich tranquillity, where she shall find all things in him who is all in all.
Therefore the Prophet fitly ioines peace with confidence: for one of these
comes of another; that is, peace of confidence: for he that trusts in the Lord,
there is nothing that may cause him to be afraid, or that may trouble him: for
he has God his defender, and one that prouides and takes care for him.

Of the certainty also of salvation, Med die lunae de vener. Sacram.
he in another place writes thus: Christ also would make his spowse sure of the
inheritance of the heavenly kingdom, and he would leave her thereof an earnest
penie and pledge, that being sure of it, she might pass over without wearines
the pilgrimage and troubles of man's life. There is nothing yt does more
forcibly move us to co^temn al these things which are under the sun, then the
hope and looking for of those things which we shall have in heaven. And
therefore our Savior said, when as he was now ready to die, I tell you the
truth, it is expedient that I go away from you, etc. And a little after: That
his spouse might most certainly look for this good thing, he has left her this
incomparable pledge, which is of so great price and value, as are those things,
which by the hope thereof she looks for. And he has left her these pledges,
least she should distrust the promises of God: but should verily believe, that
God will give all things in the life to come, which he has promised, where she
shall live by the spirit: seeing he has not denied her the pledge thereof in
this vale of misery, where she lives in the flesh.

And in the same Chapter a little before: Why was it not enough (O King of
glory) to thy most fervent and unspeakable love, to have despoused my soul
unto thee? my soul, I say, which before was a servant and bondslaue of the
devil, but also, when as thou had seen her to languish in thy love, thou
made for her this mystical love medicine, which is consecrated and
transelemented with these words, that it has power of transforming the soul
that eats it, into thee; and of inflaming it with the love of thee. Nothing
declares more manifestly ones love, then to will to beloved again. Therefore
when as thou so earnestly desires our love, and have sought for it with so
great pleasure, who is it, that hereafter will doubt of thy love? I am sure, O
Lord, that when I love thee, I am loved again of thee: I am sure, O Lord, that
I need use no new means to kindle thy love toward me, as thou have done to
ravish my affections toward thee. Thus far Granatensis.

What can be more plainly said, that every one is sure of his salvation,
then that every spouse of Christ, that she might be sure of her heavenly
inheritance, and that she might pass over this pilgrimage ioifully, has
received a pledge and earnest penie thereof of God; and that hereafter now none
will doubt of the love of Jesus Christ toward him: why then, he is sure of his
salvation?

And in another place: Love and mercy compassed thee about, and laid that
heavy burden upon thy shoulders; love moved thee to give me thy goods, and
mercy caused thee that thou should take upon thee all my euilles: if
therefore mercy with love brought thee unto such and so miserable a state, who
ever hereafter will doubt of the greatness of thy love? For if that be the
greatest sign of love, to suffer for him that is beloved, what else are all
thy sorrows, then special testimonies of thy love? If then there are so many
testimonies thereof, as there are blows and strokes, who will doubt of this
love, being confirmed with so many Testimonies? Oh then how great is my
incredulity! which is not overcome with so many, and so great arguments. John
marvelled at the infidelity of the Jews, saying: that When as Jesus had done
so many and so great signs amongst them to confirm his doctrine; yet they
believed not in him. O blessed Evangelist! cease to wonder at the incredulity
of the Jews, and wonder at mine. For it is no less an argument to persuade
us to believe the exceeding great love of Christ toward us, that he suffered
for us: wherefore if it be greatly to be woondred at, that the Jews believed
not the preaching of Christ, having seen his so many miracles; how is it not
far more wonderful, that seeing Jesus has received for us more then five
thousand wounds in his most tender body, that we will yet doubt of his love
toward us? But what a matter will it be, if we shall join all the sorrows
and sufferings of his life, to those stripes which he suffered, when as he
was bound to the pillar: when as he suffered all those euilles for the love he
bare unto us? what thing else, O Lord, drew thee from heaven, into this valley
of tears, but love? what made thee come out of the bosom of the father, into
the womb of thy mother, and there to be cladde with earth, and coming out
from thence; caused thee to endure all kinds of miseries, but love? What drove
thee into the stable and manger, and carried thee after into a strange land, as
a banished person, but love? what caused thee to take such pains to run up
and down, hither and thither, to watch, to endure all the troubles of the long
night, to compass about Sea and land, to seek the lost sheep, but love? What
bound Sampsons hands and feet, what powled his head, and bereaved him of al his
strength, and made him a laughing stock to his enemies, but the only love of
his spouse Dalilah? And O Christ! what bound thy hands and feet, what powled
thee and deprived thee of all thy strength and fortitude, and gave thee into
the hands of thine enemies, of whom thou wast mocked, spit upon and slain; was
it not only the love, wherewith thou louedst so dearly the spouse of thy
Church, and the souls of every one of us? To conclude, what bound thee to this
Pillar, where thou stoodest from the sole of thy feet, to the crown of thy
head, most injuriously dealt withal, with thy hands bound, thy ribs torn from
their flesh, thy members al out of joint, thy body al to be bathed with blood
thy veins cut in pieces, thy lips thirsting thy tongue being bitter as gal,
and that I may say al in a word, al thy body torn and rent, and all thy
members crushed in pieces. O Christ! I beseech thee, what other thing forced
thee into this gulf of so rows, but only love? O exceeding great love! O
love full of favor! O such a love, as becomes his com^assion and greatness,
who is infinite goodness it self, bountifulness it self, love it self, and
mercy it self! Gran. de orat. and med. die Mer.
how therefore (O Lord) having so many and so great testimonies as these are,
can I not believe, that thou love me most dearly? when as it is most
certain, that in heaven now thou have not changed thy mind from that, since
thou wast here upon earth? Thou art not that Pharaohs Butler, who when as he
saw himself restored again to his former honor, forgot his miserable friend
whom he left in prison: but thou now abounding with all prosperity, glory, and
majesty in heaven, loves more dearly thy Sons dwelling here on earth, then
before. When as therefore thou have so greatly loved me, how cannot I but love
thee again? How shall I not but trust in thee? how shall I not but commit my
self wholly to thee? how shall I not now account my self rich and happy enough,
seeing I have God mine such a dear friend? It is greatly to be wondered at, yt
I should delight in any transitory things in this life, or to give my mind to
any outward things; when as I have such a mighty and rich friend, by whose
means all good things both temporal and eternal are bestowed upon me. Thus
far Granatensis: wherein he most excellently describes the exceeding great
love, that Jesus Christ our most blessed Savior, ever had and even now has
toward us: so yt he that now will doubt thereof, is worse then any Turk,
Pagan, or Infidel: for what is this else, but to deny that he suffered all
these things for us? And if every one is to believe assuredly this exceeding
love of Jesus Christ toward him; then surely he is not to doubt of his
salvation.

And after, speaking of Christ, when as he was whipped, and then again showed
to the Jews of Pilate: We must know (says he) that Christ even now
shows to his Father in heaven, the same shape and the same countenance, Med.
die louis.
which he showed to this furious people, even as fresh, and as blew with
stripes, and as besprinkled with blood, as he was at that day, when he lived
here on earth. What Image can be more forcible to pacify the eyes of an angry
father, then the bloody countenance of this his son? This is that golden
propitiatory: this is that Rainbow of diverse colors placed in the clouds;
by the sight whereof God is appeased: this delights the eyes of God: this
satisfies his justice: this restores to God again the honor that man had
stolen from him: this yields to God that service which his greatness requires.

Tell me (O thou faint-hearted Christian) whosoever thou art, distrusting of
the goodness of God, if the shape and form of Christ was such that it was
able to pacify the eyes of such cruel enemies, how much more forcible shall
it be, to pacify the eyes of a loving Father? especially when as he suffered
all things which he suffered, for his honor and obedience. Make a comparison of
eyes with eyes, and of person with person, and thou shall easily persuade thy
self, that thou art more secure and certain of the mercy of this father, if
thou offer unto him such a shape and figure of his son, then Pilate was of
the compassion of the Jews, then, when as he bringing forth Jesus showed him
to the people. Therefore in all thy prayers and temptations lay hold on this
Lord for a shield, and put him between thee and thy God, offering him and
saying: Behold the man: Behold (O Lord God) here thou have that man, whom thou
soughtest for so many hundred years, that he might be a mediator between thee
and miserable sinners. Behold how thou have such an excellent just man, as thy
goodness required: thou have here one justified according to the measure of our
sins: Therefore (O our defender) look upon this my Lord, and look upon the
face of thine anointed. But also thou (O our Savior) do not cease to set thy
self always before thy fathers sight for us. If thy love were such that thou
fearedst not to yield thy members to the tormentor, that he might beat them,
wrest them, and tear them: let thy love also be so great, that it may not
grieve thee to offer those members so torn and rent to thy eternal father,
that he being moved with the sight of them, may forgive us all our sins, and
receive us again into his favor. See how Granatensis calls those Christians
cowards, that distrust of the goodness of God, now having so mighty, and
loving, and forcible a Savior, to plead their cause. To be accounted a coward
in worldly exploites, is the greatest disgrace in the world: and shall all
Christians, which are accounted soldiers, be cowards in this necessary and
weighty matter of their salvation? Naie if ever courage were necessary, it is
here necessary: and to be cowardly in other matters, it makes no great
matter, so that here we be not cowards: lack of courage here killes the soul;
and loses all the goods we have, all the good works we have done. The
fearful shall never enter into heaven, but their portion shall be in the
lake.

But some object, that the gift of perseverance is not given to all:
Granatensis writes thus thereof: Gran. de orat* and med. vesp. 7.
What kind of great mercy was it, that after he have restored thee, being
fallen, to thy former righteousness again? besides this, he gave thee grace,
by the means whereof thou might not fall again; and might overcome thy
enemy, and persevere in doing good. This is that former and latter rain,
whereof the Lord speaks by his Prophet Joel: Ye Sons of Sion be glad and
rejoice in the Lord your God, who has given you a teacher of righteousness;
Joel. 2.23.
and he will rain upon you the early and latter rain as in the beginning,
that is, he will prevent you with his grace, that the seeds of virtues may
begin to grow in you, and his grace shall also still continue and follow you,
that those seeds may wax ripe and answer your expectation. Thus far
Granatensis: where he plainly teaches, that the gift of perseverance is so
knitte to the gift of faith, even as the former rain by Gods promise here in
the Prophet, is to the latter. And this is every true Christians comfort,
which they learn also out of the Apostle, that God, who has begun that good
work of faith in them, will finish it, Phil. 1.6.
even unto the end. And out of the Gospel, that When as our Savior loved his,
which were in the world he loved them unto the end.

Pintus of the sign Taw, wherewith every one of the faithful that should be
saved was signed, writes thus: It is written in the book of Exodus, Ioh in
Ezec. ca. 13.
that The Lord passed over and stroke all the first borne, besides those which
were signed with the blood of the lamb, etc. And Saint John in the Revelation
says, that The Angel imprinted a sign in the forehead of Gods servants,
which should obtain everlasting salvation. And after, Saint Paul willing to
exhort the Ephesians, who had embraced true Religion, and now were become
Christians, that they should not defile the excellency of their souls, with
the filth of sin, speaks to them in this manner: Do not make sad the holy
Ghost, wherewith ye are sealed against the day of redemption: As though he
should say; Do not commit those sins, wherewith the holy Ghost, like a man
vexed or molested, should forsake you: call to your remembrance how you were
sealed with it, in the day of your baptism. And our prophet Ezechiel says, yt
they were only delivered from death, which were marked with the letter Tau of
the man clothed in linen. All these in my judgment come to one, and signify
one thing: for that same Lamb, with whose blood the Israelites were signed,
that they might be saved, being without blemish and roasted with fire, whose
bones were not to be broken, as the holy Scriptures do testify in Exodus,
what do they signify, but Christ? etc.

And after: He is the Lamb of God, of whom John Baptist says: Behold the
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. He was inflamed with
the fire of love, and roasted with the flames of most bitter torments, and was
sacrificed for us on the Altar of the Cross, that he might purge our sins with
his blood, and that he might bring us unto the true land of promise. They which
are not marked with his blood, they which have not the memory of his death
imprinted in their minds, believing it, and reposing all their trust therein,
as in our remedy: they which are not sealed with his mark, which he in
Baptism has imprinted into us, which print is not in the substance of the
soul, as in a subject, but in the power thereof; cannot obtain everlasting
life.

And after; When as the letter Tau signifies a consummation and end, as Saint
Ierom says, in the Book of Hebrew names, and all the Hebrew letters have
their proper significations; and when as Christ is the end, as that place
says, which I have even now alleged out of the Revelation, and according to
that which Saint Paul writes in the Epistle to the Romans, Christ is the end
of the law: it is plainly and manifestly concluded, that it is he wherewith we
ought to be sealed.

And after, he alleges Cyprian against Demetrius, who affirms very
vehemently, that This sign belongs to the passion and blood of Christ: And
that he only shall be preserved to salvation, who is marked with the blood of
Christ. And after: There are some which by the letter Tau, do understand the
sign of the Cross; saying, that this letter in Hebrew has the figure of the
Cross, but they are greatly deceived: for it is not like the Cross, being
thus written ^: Unless they will say, that the Hebrews changed the characters
of their letters, and the old letters to have remained among the Samaritans.
For Saint Ierom says, that in his time the Samaritans used the Cross in
stead of this letter: but in Saint Ieroms days the same Hebrew letters were,
which are now. Thus far Pintus: wherein he plainly teaches, that all
Christians are to be sealed with a mark, that is, with the blood of Christ,
and with the holy Ghost. And if they be sealed, then they are sure of their
salvation: for as Saint Paul says: The foundation of God stands sure,
having this seal, God knows who are his. 2. Tim. 2.19. Ioh. 10.28. and 16.14.
His sheep have all his mark: And he knows them: and no man shall take them
out of his hands. And the holy Ghost (says our Savior) shall glorify me,
for he shall take of mine, and shall show unto you: he shall imprint Christ's
death and passion in the hearts and minds of the faithful. Secondly, he makes
that sign, not to be an external sign, but an inward sign.

But after he adds; He does not only seal us with the Sacramental
print, which can never be blotted out of the soul, but also with his grace,
which may be blotted out, and lost through sin. But here he goes besides his
Text; for both Ezechiel and saint Paul, and S. John, Revel. 7.2. mentions but
one sign, and not two: and therefore that print of baptism, which he says
cannot be blotted out, is the grace of God. And S. Austen and the best Divines
say; A Sacrament is an outward sign or seal of Gods invisible grace; Aug.
Epist 23. and in Psalm. 77.
so that the inward print of the sacrament in the soul, is the grace of God by
saint Austens judgment; which inward print of the sacrament can never be
blotted out, says Pintus: And therefore neither can the grace of God be
blotted out: and so the salvation of the faithful is most certain. And to
saint Austen agrees also saint Paul: 1. Cor. 6.11.
But such like ye were in times past: but ye are washed, ye are sanctified,
ye are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and in the spirit of our God:
here is both the outward sign, and the inward print of baptism; To be washed
outwardly, and to be sanctified, to be justified by the Spirit of God inwardly.
The same doctrine saint Peter teaches, who speaking of the arc of Noah: 1.
Pet. 2.21.
The type whereof (says he) saves us now, even baptism, not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh: here is the outward element, which of it self
is not available, But the request or prayer of a good conscience to God: here
is the inward print, or seal of the holy Ghost, Romans 8.26.
whose chief property is to teach the faithful to pray, as they ought to
pray. And here is that same lesson repeated again of saint Peter, which he
taught in the Acts; that, He that calls on the name of the Lord, shall be
saved. Here is Those pure hands which saint Paul also requires in prayer, Act.
2.21.
which saint Peter calls a good conscience. This is the inward print of
baptism, by saint Peter's judgment. To this also agrees saint Paul in another
place; As many as are baptized, have put on Jesus Christ: here is also the
outward sign: Galath. 3.27.
and the inward print, the putting on of Christ Jesus: here is the
sanctification and justification of all the faithful, whereof saint Paul spoke
before, which they do receive in their baptism.

And here first they which flatter themselves, that they have faith, and will
do no good works, do deceive themselves. For if the holy Ghost be imprinted
in their souls; and if it be compared to fire of Saint John, who says to the
Jews, Mat. 3 1^.
that Afterward Christ shall baptize them with the holy Ghost and with fire;
then it will show it self; it will shine by good works; it will burn in
charity; it will work through love. Gal. 5.6,
Can a man carry fire in his bosom, and will it not burn and give light? So is
it as impossible to have the holy Ghost in our souls, but it will inflame us
with the love of our neighbors; it will make us shine in all good works; it
will make us reprove sin: and therefore the holy Ghost fell upon the
Apostles in the shape of fiery tongues. Act. 2.3.
And therefore David says, as saint Paul also alleges him, 2. Cor. 4 13.
I have believed, and therefore I spoke. And our Savior; Luke. 12 49.
I have comen to send fire upon earth; and what will I but that it burn?
Secondly they are reproved, which will not read nor hear the word of God:
the preaching of the word is called, 2. Cor. 3.8.
The ministration of the Spirit. God has appointed means to obtain all
things; as plowing and sowing to obtain Corn: eating and drinking to sustain
nature; study to obtain learning: no doubt, as we cannot obtain any of these
without these means which God has appointed; no more can we obtain that
other: therefore how greatly deceived are they, which think to have the
spirit of God without hearing the word; it is even as though they should think
to have corn without plowing; or strength without eating; or learning without
studying. Oh that men would be wise therefore, that they would be as careful
to procure those means which profit their souls, as they are those means
which profit their bodies. For their bodily health to take the air, they will
climb up hills, they will walk by water sides: Genesis 1.2. Psalm. 23.1. and 130.1.
The spirit of God is carried on the waters of comfort, the holy scriptures are
those holy hills, and the spirit of God blows in them continually; be as
careful for ye soul to be conversant amongst these, as thou art for ye body
amongst the other. When Peter preached, The holy Ghost fell upon Cornelius, Act.
10.44. and 8.29. Luke, 24.15.
and upon all that were present: when the Eunuch read, the holy Ghost sent
Philip a Schoolmaster unto him: when the Apostles talked of Christ in their
journey, he was straight ways in the midst of them: Surely if we would so
occupy our selves, the same effects would follow even now. The holy Ghost, if
we would diligently and humbly read the scriptures, would not send Philip
to us to be our school master, but would come to us even his own self: as
saint John tells us: 1. Ioh. 2.27.
Now we need not that any man should teach us, for the holy Ghost himself
teaches us.

But here Pintus will object, why then, shall all they be saved, which are
baptized? Surely there is an inward and an outward baptism: they which are
both inwardly and outwardly baptized, they which have once put on Christ
Jesus, they which are sealed with the holy Ghost; shall most assuredly be
saved: but not all which are outwardly washed; although we are to say with
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 6 11. Gal. 3.27.
Ye are washed, ye are sanctified. And again, as many as are baptized, have
put on Christ Jesus: This christian hope we ought to have of all our brethren.
The seal may be applied to the wax, and make no print: but that we must
refer to the secret judgments of God. We must here say: O Lord how
unspeakable are thy judgments, Romans 11.33 John. 10.27.28
and thy wa^^s past man's finding out! My sheep (says our Savior) hear my
voice, I know them, and they follow me: I give them eternal life, and they
shall not perish for ever, and no man shall snatch them out of my hand. The
sun may be eclipsed, but never lose his light: the faithful are the sons
of the son; 1. These. 5.5. Mat. 14.31.
They are children of light; Peter may doubt and also be afraid, but he
cannot be drowned: Luke 22.31. Matthew. 8.24. Psalm. 94 18.
Satan may fifth him; but his faith shall not fail. The ship even wherein
Christ is, may be full of water, but it cannot sink, David's foot may slip,
but Gods mercy holds him up: The fire may be covered with ashes, Psalm.
116.10. and 30.6. and 8 9, 31.
but at last it will burst out, And David will speak with his tongue: God may
be angry with his over night, but io^e shall come in the morning. If David
seed break Gods law, and do not walk in his judgments, if they profane his
statutes and keep not his commandments: He will visit their iniquities with
a rod, and their sins with scourges, but his loving kindness will he not
take utterly from them, nor suffer his truth to fail. He has sworn once by
his holiness, that he will not fail David. The Apostles may be at their
wits ends, 2. Cor. 4.8.
but never driven to despair. For that saying of the Prophet Esaias shall stand
fast for ever to Christ's Church, and to every member thereof: Esaias. 54.7.
For a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee for a little season, but
with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, says the Lord thy
redeemer: For this is unto me as the waters of Noah: for as I have sworn,
that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn,
that I would not be angry with thee or rebuke thee; that is, to destruction.

Ferus very excellently confirms this Doctrine, In cap. 19. Act.
upon these words: If they had received the holy Ghost or no: Being about to
search out whether they believed aright or no, he enquires whether they had the
chiefest fruit of faith, which is the holy Ghost. And the holy Ghost, though it
be invisible, yet it does make manifest it self by many signs. This is a
most sure and evident argument of the holy Ghost, and of a true faith, the
security of our conscience. For the holy Ghost witnesses to our Spirits, that
we are the sons of God; not by nature, but by adoption and by the grace of
God. It does also encourage us and make us take pleasure and delight in God,
and it makes us to stand and to trust without any care or fear; as John says:
We now know and believe the love that God has toward us. To feel this love
of God, is to be well affected toward God, in praising of him, in giving him
thanks, and in believing in him: And being justified through faith, we are now
at peace with GOD. What is better then peace? What is more excellent, or more
to be wished for then peace with God? This is the chiefest and most excellent
good thing in the world: as on the contrary, to have God our enemy, is the
greatest evil in the world: as Cain had, whose sins the Lord discovered; so
also he brings to light all the sins of the wicked, of whom the holy Prophet
writes thus: I will reprove thee and set thy sins in order before thy face.
And again: Psalm. 49.
I will discover his shame, he is a vagabond and cursed upon the earth, and in
his labors. But the Christian has peace: and what peace, I pray you is that?
Hear what God says by his prophet: I will heal all their sorrows and
griefs, and I will love them freely: Esaias. 47.
for mine-anger is turned away from them. If God forgive sins, who shall
condemn us? If he love us freely, what can the hatred of the world hurt us?
If he assuage his anger, what harm can the devils malice do us? So he says
in Esaias: I will not be angry for ever, etc. This is our true peace: but from
whence have we it? Surely from no where else; but only by Christ. And hence he
is called, The king of righteousness and of peace: As Melchisedecke also, who
was a Type of him, was also in times past adorned with these titles. He
therefore that as yet lacks this foresaid peace, truly cannot have neither the
holy Ghost, not a lively faith.

And what else is this free love, this forgiveness of sins, this turning
away of anger, this Christian peace, which every Christian must have, which
has received the holy Ghost, and has a true and sure faith, but the
certainty of his own salvation?

And they answered, we have not as yet heard whether there be any holy Ghost or
no. These frankely and freely, and very apparently bewray and confess their
ignorance, they have not as yet heard, that the holy Ghost does work these
things in the hearts of the faithful. And how many are there at this day, who
have been a great many years Christians, and yet never have felt this peace
of conscience; when as it is the first and principal virtue of the Gospel, to
make quiet our consciences. Ferus here complains greatly of the want of this
peace; and shall we not exhort all men then diligently to labor for it? They
which have not this quietness and peace of conscience, have not as yet tasted
the first drop of the Gospel?

Of the force of faith both in the receiving of the holy sacraments, and in
the certainty of our salvation, that lesson of Granatensis is worth the
marking: De Euch. lib. 3. cap. 1.
He that (says he) with all his soul and with all his strength strives to be
purged from his sins, and to be cured of all his faults, vites and
imperfections, and to be enriched with heavenly graces, and now from wandering
after the vanities of this world, to return to his beginning again: let him
so order and govern his life, that he may be fit very often to receive and be
satiated with this most excellent Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
and by this means inwardly to be united with our most glorious God; even as if
one should drop a drop of water into a Tun of Wine: so that if all
creatures were gathered together, they could not find any space or distance
between such a soul and God himself. And although perchance a man do not
feel in himself by and by this union, yet let him not be troubled in his
mind: but with a most strong faith let him believe Christ, who says, He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him. And how
much less he feels God in himself; so much more assuredly let him believe
him: for then his faith shall be more perfect, and shall receive greater
rewards of God, if so be he do as much as in him lies. Thus far Granatensis.
This is the nature of faith, to believe the word even against reason, against
sense. The more lets and objections which it overcomes, the greater Crown it
shall have. And this is that which S. Paul says: The just man shall live by
faith, Heb. 10.38.
but he that shall withdraw himself, he that shall shrink (as we say) and
whose heart shall fail him, My soul shall have no pleasure in him. This faith
we must have in all things, in the matter of our salvation, in receiving of
the Sacraments; as here Granatensis teaches us; Mark. 11.24. Iam. 1.6. Heb.
11.6.
and in our prayers, as also our Savior and saint James instruct us: And
without this faith, it is impossible to please God in any thing we go about.

Ferus of the certainty of our salvation writes thus: O father, I will that
those which thou have given me, be with me, etc. All the Gospelles are full of
such promises. And Saint John plainly affirms, that the Gospel for no other
end has been and is now preached unto us, then that we should have all these
promises common to us, together with the Apostles.

And a little after: Fer. in cap. 1. Epist. Iouis.
Our Apostles for this end preached the gospel, that men's consciences might be
comforted, and that all Christians might be knitte, and remain so knitte fast
and united to God and the Church, that is, the society and communion of the
faithful. Therefore he that teaches to this end, that men's consciences may
be made to doubt or troubled, and that the Communion of Saints may be rent,
and that men may be pulled back from GOD and heavenly things, etc. surely he
is not led with the Spirit of the Apostles. And here who sees not, if we
shall pronounce sentence according to this doctrine of Saint John, how many of
them, which think themselves even next to the Apostles, will be one day
rejected for false prophets? Ferus may seem here to touch the pope for his
doubtful doctrine of salvation.

Philippus de Dies also of the certainty of our salvation, B. Dionys. Epist. 8.
Phil de Dies Sum praed. Tit. amor Dei. erga hominem, Exodus 20.
writes thus: Saint Denis in his Epistle very greatly extolling the love of
God, says: We dare boldly avouch this for truth, that God himself for the
greatness of his love is as it were even besides himself (as we say) having a
care of his creatures: and through love he abaseth himself from his high
estate of Majesty, that he should be present amongst all things. Wherefore also
he is called, A zealous God, that is, earnest and fervent in love toward
those things, which are worthy to be loved. And this is his property, both to
be the only thing which is to be beloved, and also to be love it self. The
Kingly Prophet David considering the excellency of this love of God toward man
faith: What is man, that then art mindful of him? or the Son of Adam, that
thou visitest him? In this place this holy King (as that wise learned man
Eusebius notes) uses two means, that is to say, ( Enos and Adam) whereof the
one was given to man, to signify the wants and imperfections which the soul
runs into through sin; and the other, to declare the mortality and misery,
which naturally in his body he is subject unto. For Enos is derived of a
certain word that signifies forgetfulness: and so Enos is nothing else, then
one that is forgetful or that lacks memory: and Adam signifies that which is
earthly and mortal. This did so woonderfully amaze the holy prophet, that he
said. Who is man, O Lord, who being unmindful of thee, and offending thy
Majesty, that he should be ever imprinted in thy memory? Do thou remember
him, who forgets thee? Do thou seek for, visit and love exceedingly him,
that flies away from thee? A thing verily to be greatly woondred at, that God
of such infinite majesty should set his love upon such a miserable thing.
Whereupon Saint Ierom expounds those words of the divine Psalmist (Thou have
done, Psalm 39. Beat. Ieron. super Psalm.
O Lord, thy many wonderful works, and in thy thoughts who is like unto
thee?) on this manner: Thou have wrought, O Lord my God, many wonderful things
worthy of thy wisdom and power; but of all other, this is the chief, thy
very thoughts, in the favor which thou yeeldest to men, in the love, wherewith
thou love them, in the help that thou affoordest them, and in the
justification which thou bestowest upon them. Is not this of all other miracles
the greatest? that God should love men so greatly, and should think on them so
earnestly, that he should say: Prou. 9.
My delight is to be with the Sons of men. Truly this secret was made
manifest only to the divine heart that when as the most high God has not
communicated to the Angels his personal essence, and also the divine
properties which are in it: as the Apostle also considered, saying; Has he
taken upon him the Angels? who as far as man's reason can judge, would not
perchance have been so unmindful of his benefits, but would have been more
thankful then men: when as I say, he has not granted all these things to the
Angels; yet he has vouchsafed to communicate, to bestow them most liberally
upon unthankful and miserable men. Of which unspeakable love it comes, that
the good things which he does to us, he says that he does them to himself.

Wherefore the Patriarch Jacob, amongst the blessings of his Son Dan, being
suddenly turned to think of the Messiah, speaking with the eternal father,
he said: O Lord, I will look for thy salvation: which the Chaldee paraphrase
expounds literally of the Messiah: for Jacob being now about to die, did
prophecy of Sampson; which was to spring of the Tribe of Dan, and to save the
people of the Hebrews, from the tyranny of the Philistines. But that he might
give to understand that he should not be the true Savior, being as it were
rapt into a tra^ce, he breaks out into these words: O Lord, I will look for
thy salvation; as though he should have said; I will not look for Sampson,
nor Gedeon, nor Iepthe, nor others, as though they were true Saviors; but I
will yet look for the true Messiah, which shall come, being the true Savior
of the world. With such and so stately a title, Simeon also named him saying:
Luc. 2. Psalm. 11^.
O Lord now thou let thy servant depart, etc. Because mine eyes have seen
thy salvation. The Kingly prophet also calls him so: And let thy mercy come
upon me, O Lord, even thy salvation, according to thy word: Christ is called
the mercy of God; because he is the beginning and foundation of all the mercies
of God. For in this mercy, wherein the word became flesh, all other have their
foundation. And therefore Saint Paul says to the Ephesians; Ephesians. 1.
In whom we have redemption by his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins,
according to the riches of his grace: And thy salvation according to thy word,
that is, according to thy promise. In all these places, Christ our Lord, who is
our salvation, is called the salvation of God; because the eternal father, for
the exceeding great love, wherewith he loves us, he calls that his salvation,
which is our salvation. Wherefore also the Prophet Esaias, speaking in the person
of God, says; Esa. 42.
I have given thee to be a light to the Gentiles; that thou may be my
salvation, even to the uttermost parts of the earth. O blessed and praised be
such a God, who loves us so, that he calls our salvation, his salvation! Saint
Paul also shows us this love, saying: I beseech you, 1. These. 4.1.
that you walk as you ought to walk, and to please God: for you know what
commandments I have given you by the Lord Jesus: for this is the will of God,
even your sanctification. Mark I beseech you, what commandments these are,
and what is this will of God? The former words did seem to require, that he
should have added; This is the will of God; that you should praise him, that
you should offer him sacrifice; and yet notwithstanding, having made that
preface before, he adds, that the will of God is Our sanctification; which in
truth is accounted one of the greatest good things which man has. Therefore (O
my brethren) give thanks to God, for this his singular love wherewith he loves
you; for his will, and that thing which most pleases him, is your profit and
commodity. This love wherewith the highest loves us, he calls the coards,
wherewith he draws us unto him, when as he faith by the prophet Osee, Ose. 11.
I will draw them with the coardes of Adam: that is, with what affection I made
Adam their first parent holy, and created him in grace (as the interlmeal
Gloss expounds it) with the same love, I will sanctify these; which he adds,
expounding it, In the bonds of love, that is, with the affection of charity.
Whereas another translation has, I will draw them with the coards of men: that
is, with the same love, that I bound unto me Abraham, Isaac, and the other
patriarchs, I will also join them unto me. Although Lira expounds it thus:
With coards, that is, with benefits bestowed upon them; which draw the heart
of man, and are certain bonds of love. Saint Ierom expounds it otherwise, that
is, I have had a care of them, for the coards and bonds of love wherewith I
have bound Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, unto me. Woe be unto us, if so be that we
shall not be thankful for such singular love, as those fathers were. Thus
far Philippus de Dies.

If this ought to be the faith of all Christians, and that they ought to have
this firm and most assured belief of the love of God toward them; and that
not only the Scriptures, but the fathers do teach them most manifestly this
exceeding great love of God toward them: who then will doubt of his salvation?
To doubt, is plainly to deny this exceeding great love.

And after of the love of Christ our redeemer, he writes thus: Ibidem. Tit.
amor. Christi Cant. 1
Whereas we read in the Canticles: My beloved is to me a grape of Ciprus:
another Text has, My love is to me a cluster of Camphire. O heavenly and most
fit similitude! Alcamphor is a certain Tree, whose gum has this property:
that if a grain or a little of it be kindled with fire, and be put in a Lamp
full of water, it will give a most clear and bright flame. It is a woonderful
thing, that that flame should not be extinguished with the water, but that it
should burn and shine more clearly. This grain, and not only a grain, but
a cluster, is our Lord Jesus Christ. For those waters of the unthankfulness of
his enemies, and those waters of so many and great torments, which entered in
even to his very soul, did not only quench his love, but caused it to glister
and shine more brightly, while it showed more manifestly his unspeakable love,
patience, mildnes, and liberality. When as even the self same night, wherein
he was betrayed, he ordained that most high mystery of his most blessed body and
blood, and hanging on the cross, prayed for his enemies: Let us learn of this
our heavenly master, to show love to our enemies, and to have in greater
travel and pains greater patience. Thus far Philippus de Dies: Such a love
must every Christian believe, that Jesus Christ has toward him, that no
waters in the world either of sins or of unthankfulness is ever able to
quench: and this, flesh and blood, and our spiritual enemy go, about to make
us often forget. And therefore saint Paul prays for the Ephesians: Ephesians.
3.19. Iud. Ep. v. 21.
that They may know the love of Christ, which passes all knowledge, and that
they may be filled with all the fullness of God. And this also no doubt, Saint
Jude means in his Epistle, when as he says: Keep you your selves in the
love of God.

Theodoret also writes thus of this matter: In ca. 8. ad Heb
He calls heaven the veil, etc. God has promised the kingdom of heaven to all
that believe in him: we hope for (says he) those good things; and we hold
fast this hope, as a sure Anchor: for this Anchor being hid in the bottom of
our hearts, will not suffer that our souls should be dashed hither and
thither. And also by another man's he shows the certain hope of our good
things, and such a hope as cannot be gainesaid: Whither, our forerunner Jesus
is entered for us: for our sakes (says he) He became man: for our sakes he gave
his body to be slain, and having vanquished and overcome death, he has
ascended into heaven, being the first fruits of them which sleep. And he has
given us here a greater confidence by calling him our forerunner: For if he be
our forerunner, and has ascended for us, then we must needs follow him, and
ascend also.

And Basil writes thus of every Christian: In examer. Homilia. 5.
Thou also shall be like a fruitful Olive in the house of God, neither shall
thou ever be deprived of thy hope; but shall ever have thy salvation
flourishing in thee through faith.

Ambrose of the certainty of our salvation writes thus: Ambros. de Jacob and
beat. v^t. cap. ^.
But thou fear the manifold chances of this life, and the deceits of the
enemy; when as thou have God himself to be thy helper, and his so great favor
toward thee, that he spared not his own son, for thy sake. The scripture
has used a comfortable word, that it might declare the good will of God the
father toward thee, who offered himself wholly to die for thee. In that he was
a father, he left nothing to himself; he offered it all for thy sake only,
he left not the fullness of his deity. Consider the love of a father, as
concerning pity, he hazarded the life of his son: he drunk for thy sake the
sorrowful cup of one that is childlesse, least the price of thy redemption
should not have been paid. The Lord had such an earnest care of thy salvation,
that almost he hazarded his own, that he might gain thee. He took upon him
all our losses, that he might place thee in heaven; that he might consecrate
thee with heavenly virtues. And he adds; Very miraculously he gave himself
for us al, that he might declare that he so loved us all, that he gave his
well-beloved son for every one of us. For whom therefore he that gave that,
which surpasses all things, is it possible, that in him he shall not also give
us all things? For he excepts nothing, who has given the Author of all things.
There is nothing therefore, that we may fear shall be denied us; there is no
cause, why we should doubt of the continuance of this bountifulnes of God
toward us, whose goodness has been so long in continuance, and so liberal
toward us, that first he predestined us; then he called us, and those whom
he called, them he justified; and those whom he justified, also he will
glorify. Can he forsake those, whom he has bestowed so many benefits upon,
even till he crown them? Amongst so many benefits of God, shall we fear any
of the wiles of our accuser? but who dare accuse any of those, whom he has
chosen in Gods judgment? can God the father, who has bestowed them, call his
gifts back again, and dismiss those from his fatherly favor, whom he has
adopted to be his children? But perchance thou fear least that the judge
will be severe: consider who shall be thy judge. To Christ has the father
committed all judgment: can he condemn thee, who has redeemed thee from
death? for whom he has offered himself? whose life he knows to be the
wages of his death? shall he not say, what profit is in my blood, if I condemn
him whom I have saved? Again, thou considerest him as a judge, and not as an
advocate: can he pronounce sharp sentence, who cease not to request, that
the grace of his fathers reconciliation may be bestowed on us?

Here Ambrose first teaches, the exceeding great love that God has toward
his children, and that he gave his son for every one of us: And shall not
then every particular man embrace this so merciful and gracious a gift in his
own arms, that is, by the faith of his own soul? And lastly, the great
assurance that every Christian ought to have of his salvation. Our Judge is
our advocate, and shall we fear the sentence of condemnation?

6. Of the reading of the Scriptures, and of their sufficiency.
STaphilus a Papist, Counselor to the Emperor, Staph. of translating the
Bible into the vulgar tongue.
whose Apology was translated by Thomas Stapleton student in Divinity, in his
Apology writes thus: Surely I could never yet find in holy Scripture, that the
common people ought of necessity to read the scripture: but that of the reading
thereof, much Schism, and the destruction of many souls has proceeded,
daily experience teaches us; and holy writ warns us, where our Savior
thus speaks: It is given to you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God,
but to the rest in Parables, that seeing yet they see not, and hearing they
understand not. Who are those unto whom our Lord says: To you it is given?
etc. Surely the Apostles, and their successors, the rulers of Christ's flock.
And Who are they that should learn by parables? Surely such men, as were
better not to know ye mysteries, least misusing them, they procure to
themselves a greater damnation. For precious stones ought not to be cast before
hogs: and such of al likelihood, are the Lay ignorant people. Thus far
Staphilus.

Let all true Christians mark what commendations the papists yield unto the
scriptures, that daily experience teaches, that the destruction of many
souls have proceeded thereof: when as Gods spirit calls the scripture
always, The word of life, Ioh. 6.68. 1. Tim. 1.10.
and the wholesome doctrine of Christ. The one mark were sufficient to descrie,
of whose spirit they are, that write this of the scriptures.

But it is also worthy the marking, Lib. 2. ca. 21. de offic. bon. patr,
how in this point the papists disagree among themselves. Viuiennus a Papist
writes thus: I counsel thee and all other, which have not as yet purchased to
themselves the sound knowledge of the holy scriptures, that they eschew that
book of his ( meaning Ovid:) and in the mean while, that they read the
Bible, and other godly men's works. For it is not possible, that he which is not
very expert in the scriptures, should not stumble very dangerously, and that
his faith should not by some means be shaken and weakened.

Hector Pintus also a Papist, of the holy scripture writes thus: But amongst
all other, they bear the bell, who being guarded with the furniture of virtue,
give themselves to the study of the holy scriptures, that they may behold with
the eyes of their mind, the hie mysteries of God, clearer then the sun it
self: for the knowledge of the holy scriptures is that heavenly philosophy,
wherewith the souls of men are refreshed, and are nourished to everlasting
life. This is the finder out of virtues, and expeller of vices, which eases our
souls, takes away vain cares, delivers us from wicked desires, and gives us
tranquillity of life: wherefore the course of a man's life being well passed
over, and according to the precepts thereof, is to be preferred before all the
prosperity in the world. The divine and Kingly prophet foreseeing that in his
mind, calls Him blessed that studies in the law of God day and night. For as
the same in another place testifies: The law of God is an undefiled law,
converting the soul, and the Testimony of the Lord is faithful, and gives
wisdom even to children. For such is the excellency of Gods law, that it
conuerts the minds of men from an evil custom, to an honest kind of living;
and to those men which wander and go out of the way, it shows the right path
to obtain everlasting glory. Thus far Pintus. The which his saying if it be
true, (as it is most true) then is Staphilus and Master Stapletons sentence
false, that the reading of the scriptures should lead many souls to
destruction: it leads them the way to everlasting life, which wander and go
out of the way, says Pintus.

Pintus pro ^em. in Dan.
And of the authority of the scripture also he yields this excellent
Testimony. The most part of the Papists say, that the Scriptures take
authority of the Church: but Pintus of them writes thus; Even as (says he)
that same strange precious stone called Draconites, is not polished, nor admits
any art or cunning about the dressing of it; but of it self is very beautiful
and bright: so the divine scripture is not adorned with child^sh eloquence of
words, nor stands need of the skill of man's Rhetoric; being famous and
excellent by her own majesty and proper brightness. Thus far Pintus.

As this precious stone of it self caries a Majesty and glory with it, it
needs not the help or skill of man to polish it: So much less the
scriptures. They glorify themselves: their authority is their own majesty.
And no doubt, as in the handling of them (of which Pintus seems here to
speak) so also in the discerning of them. Who requires a witness to prove
that the sun shines? Here the thing it self is a sufficient witness: So the
scriptures by their own Majesty especially bear witness to themselves. To
Infidelles perchance, which never knew nor read the Scriptures, the authority
of the Church may be an Introduction to believe them, as that woman was to
the Samaritanes, to believe in Christ, etc. But after they shall have once read
them, and having also well meditated upon them day and night, and laid them up
in their hearts, Ioh. 4.42. Luk, 2.51.
as Mary did the words of Simeon and Anna; they will then say, as the
Samaritanes also said to the woman: Now we believe, not because of thy saying:
For we have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed that Christ,
that Savior of the world: So they will also say of the Churches Testimony.

Pintus of reading the holy scripture writes thus: Pintus in 3. cap. Ezech.
All holy Scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable to teach. In
all men's Books may errors be found, be the Author thereof never so wise, nor
never so learned: for even as in a fruitful field, sometimes amongst wholesome
herbs, grow those that be hurtful; so men's wits, sometimes amongst
wholesome counselles, yield also many errors. The heathen Philosophers,
although setting apart all private and public actions, they gave themselves
wholly to search out truth, yet they have committed to writing their own vain
devises, and innumerable vanities. For, All men are liers, as the Psalmist
says. What shall I speak of the unprofitable fictions of the Poets? The
Poets sing of strange, but not credible matters. If sometimes they affoorde us
any thing that is good, they mingle it with a thousand lies. But all the holy
Scripture is true, all to be read, all to be searched, all to be devoured. As
they which dig mettalles, do not lose the least scrappes; but if so be that
they find any mine of gold, they diligently search after every vain, and they
take out the earth also with the Gold, and they are very circumspect: so we
must do in the holy Scripture, we must pass over nothing, we must not make
light account of one word of the holy Scriptures; yea we must be much more
desirous and diligent in searching out this treasure, and we must endeavor to
bring all to light. For here is no earth mingled with gold, it is all most pure
gold, tried to the uttermost; yea as the Psalmist says, Above thousands of
gold and silver. In the holy Scriptures, because God is the author of it, Who
can neither be deceived, nor deceive any, whatsoever is written, is truth;
whatsoever is taught, is virtue; whatsoever is promised after death, is
immortality and everlasting felicity. The word of God gives light, and directs
us the way to heaven: for the divine Psalmist says: Thy word is a lantern to
my feet. Therefore all that love God, desire to hear it: therefore says
Christ our God: He that is of God, hears Gods word. And in Saint Lukes
Gospel: Blessed are they which hear the word of God and keep it. O
wonderful relics, being so precious, and in the world so little esteemed!
If we make great account of the garments of the saints, and if we reverence
some parts of their garments, and that rightly, because they touched their
bodies: how much more ought we to esteem the words of Christ, which issued
from his heart, by his most blessed mouth, and touched both his tongue and his
lips? They are all heavenly, full of holiness, breathing heavenly mysteries.
Moses began his book from the generation of the creatures: but Saint
Matthew began his from the generation of the creator saying: The book of the
generation of Jesus Christ.

And after: This book is the Chronicle of Jesus Christ, this is his testament:
what son will not read the Testament of his father? who is it that will not
give good heed to his fathers last will? This new Testament is an infinite
treasure, which can never be spent, of heavenly wisdom and celestial treasures.

And after: The word of God ought to be in our hands, that we might never
forget it: but it cannot be in our hands, unless it be first in our heart: and
therefore before God says, My words shall be in thy hand, he says, They
shall be in thy heart. He that will not fall into sins, let him keep Gods
words in his heart. The holy Prophet would teach us this in these words; I have
hid thy words in my heart, least I should sin against thee. He loved the word
of God so greatly, that as a most precious treasure, and most excellent
Iewelles, he kept them laid up in the closet of his heart. And Solomon in the
Proverbs, speaking of the law of God: Bind it (says he) always in thie
heart, and compass it about thie neck, and when thou walk, let it go with
thee. As in the arc of the Testament, was the law of God and manna, as the
holy scriptures do record in many places: So in the soul where the word of God
is kept, Christ that hidden and heavenly manna is there by his grace; of whom
Esaias says: Truly thou art a hidden God. And the same Christ in Saint John's
Gospel says, I am the lively bread, that came down from heaven. In that
soul, which is refreshed with this heavenly food is the law of God written,
not with ink (that I may use Saint Paul's words) but with the Spirit of the
living God; not in Tables of stone, but in the fleshie Tables of the heart.
Saint Paul says, That those which have the law of God imprinted in their mind,
that they show the work of the law written in their hearts. And these obey and
love GOD, whereof the truth it self says in Saint John's Gospel; If any man
love me, he will keep mie saying: And in Saint Lukes Gospel; Blessed are they
which hear the word of God and keep it. For as saint Paul in the Epistle to
the Romans says: Not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the
doers thereof shall be justified: And saint James says in his Canonical
Epistle: Be ye doers of the word, not hearers only, deceiving your own
selves. Even as he which will make an assault upon his enemies, or defend
himself from them, stands need of a sword, the which being taken in his hand,
he may strike them, that he may obtain the victory: So he that will triumph
over the world, the flesh, and the devil the most cruel enemies of the soul,
he must carry in his hands, that is, in his works, the word of God. For the
word of God is the sword of God, whereof saint Paul speaks to the Ephesians;
Take unto you the Sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, etc. Thus
far Pintus.

The scriptures are most pure gold, and shall we not earnestly labor for
them? They are our fathers will and testament; and shall we not read them?
They are the only sword to have in our hands against the world, the flesh,
and the devil our most deadly enemies, and shall we go unarmed amongst so
many and so cruel enemies? Or shall Priests only have this sword, as the
Papists teach, and not Lay men? As though these enemies only assaulted them.

Granatensis also takes away Master Staphilus his objection: Lib. 1. de.
ora^. and med. cap. 1.
Thou will say peradventure (says he) that this exercise of praying and
meditating of the holy Scriptures, belongs only to religious men, and to
Priests; and not to men that are occupied about worldly businesses. It is true
(says he) that that belongs chiefly unto them by reason of their estate and
office; yet the men of the world cannot be excused, if they have not also a
certain manner of prayer (although they be not in that degree of perfection,
which the other be in:) if so be that they desire ever to live in the feate of
God, and not to sin mortally. For it is necessary, that worldly men have
faith, hope, and charity; humility, and the fear of God; contrition also and
devotion, and the hatred of sin. And therefore as all these virtues, for the
most part, as we have said, proceed of the affection of the mind, which must
necessarily flow from some consideration of the understanding; if the worldly
man have not these considerations, how can he preserve these virtues? How can a
man continue faithful, unless he often meditate on those things which faith
commands? How can he be inflamed with charity, strengthened in hope,
brideled through the fear of God, be moved to devotion and contrition, and
the contempt of himself, wherein consists the virtue of humility, which
belongs to all these virtues; if he do not frame himself to meditate upon
those things, by which those affections (as we have proved before) are wont to
be kindled?

And a little after: Hitherto may be added the dangers of the world, and that
great difficulty which man feels herein, that he can hardly keep himself
free from sin, in such a frail body, in such a dangerous world, and amongst
so many enemies which we have. Therefore although thou be not a religious man,
and thy condition do not bind thee, yet look that the greatness of the peril
thou art in, do bind thee. I confess truly, that the state of a religious man
is very hard and great; but thy danger is greater, then his. The religious man
is looked unto of his superior; he is kept in of his cloister, he is fenced as
it were, and walled about with his attendance, with his obedience, with prayer,
with fasting, with saying his service, with the strictnes of his order, with
good company, and with all other exercises and businesses, which belong to the
monastery. But the man that lives in the world, besides that he is naked and
destitute of all these helps, he is compassed about on every side with Dragons
and Scorpions, he walks ever upon serpents and Cocatrices, both at home and
abroad, both in himself, and without himself; in his doors and windows
night and day, a thousand kind of snares are set in his way, amongst all which
he is bound to keep a pure heart, chaste eyes, and a clean body, ever in the
midst of the flame of his youth, and of the evil companies and examples of
this life; wherein he sees or hears nothing that tastes of God. Wherefore if
the religious man (who is a Soldier by profession) ought ever to go armed,
how much more behooves it, that a man of this world should ever go armed; who
is not so safe as the other, not so much for the strict bond of the state of
his perfection, then as for the greatness of the dangers, wherein he is. Those
which have some enemies, whom they do fear, do go no less armed then
Soldiers: those for their oath wherewith they are bound; these for necessity.
Amongst these weapons, we put not only prayer, but fasting also, and silence,
and reading and hearing of the word of God, the receiving of the Sacraments,
the eschewing of the occasions of sin, and other corporal exercises, which
all are as it were a Salsitudo quaedam.
brine (as we call it) which preserve this our carnal nature prone to vices,
least it putrify, and worms be ingendered in it. Thus far Granatensis:
wherein he plainly proves, that Lay men, as well as clergy or religious
men, are bound to study and read, and meditate upon the Scriptures. For how
else can they have faith (says he) or hope, or charity, without which none
can be saved? how else can they withstand their enemies? amongst the midst of
whom we daily walk. They have been traitors to their brethren, that have
spoiled them of this spiritual Armor.

Again the same Granatensis, De Deuot. li. 1. ca. 9.
of the reading of the Scriptures, very excellently writes thus: The devout
reading of heavenly Books profits to this guard and purity of the heart: for
as Saint Bernard says, our heart is like to a Milne, which never rests but
ever grinds that which is put into it; if Wheat, it grinds Wheat; if Barlie, it
grinds Barlie. Therefore it is very profitable to be occupied in the reading of
holy Books, that when the mind would think or meditate of any matter, it
might meditate on those things wherewith it was occupied. For this cause Saint
Jerome does so greatly commend the reading of the holy Scripture in all his
Epistles, but especially in that which he wrote to Demetriades the Virgin: in
the beginning whereof he says thus O thou daughter of God, I will commend this
one thing unto thee, and one above all other things: and repeating it, I will
give thee counsel thereunto again and again; that is, that thou occupy thy
mind with the love of the reading of the holy Scripture, neither that thou
receive into the good ground of thy heart, the seeds of Darnell or Oats. And
in the end of his Epistle he repeates the same counsel again, saying: I join
the end and the beginning together: neither I think it sufficient to have
admonished thee once; love the holy Scriptures, and wisdom shall love thee;
love her, and she shall preserve thee; honor her, and she shall embrace thee.

Here we may plainly see, how that Granatensis, Bernard, and Jerome, are
not of Staphilus and Stapletons mind, that the reading of the holy Scriptures
do not hurt the souls of the faithful; which thing if it had done, as some
of our latter Papists think, then these men would never have so earnestly
persuaded all men unto it.

In 2. Act.
Ferus also in this matter is of the same opinion: first that only the
Scriptures are of force to prove and persuade: Hitherto (says he) Peter
has preached Christ's resurrection, by his own testimony, and of the other
Apostles very lively: now he proves the same out of the Scriptures, that he
may give us to understand, from whence, and with what Testimonies we ought to
confirm our sayings in our Sermons: for it is not enough for us to say; we
think thus, unless we can also justly affirm, that the Scriptures do agree
with us. And therefore by the testimony of David, Peter here also confirms the
resurrection of Christ.

Fer. in 3. c. act.
Of the knowledge also of the Scripture Ferus writes thus: It behooued them,
which from their Cradles were brought up in this wholesome doctrine (as the Jews
were in times past and we are now) to be so expert and cunning in Gods words
and works, that at the first sight they could judge what God spoke or did:
therefore they are greatly to be blamed, which say now of the words of the
Gospel and of the holy Scripture; we never heard these things: Why then have
thou been a Scholar so long in Christ's School? Ibidem.
And after upon these words of the Acts; (I know that of ignorance ye did it,)
Mark here (says he) that every wicked man, is an ignorant man: for he
knows not what he does. Mark also how dangerous a thing it is, to lack the
knowledge of God: for then we fall into most grievous sins. Mark also how
foolishly they do, which fly from the word of God, by which they might get the
knowledge of God; nay they will not hear any thing of God. Thus far Ferus:
he makes ignorance of the Scriptures the mother of destruction; and not the
reading of them, as Staphilus does. Again, he takes away that common
excuse, that many simple souls will make, who when they are reproved for
their gross ignorance in the time of popery; they will say, In cap. 9. Act.
they had a good meaning in those days, they meant well. But we must mark here
( says Ferus) that zeal pleases not God, without knowledge. Saul thought he
did God service, when as of all others he offended him most grievously. So did
Saul, so did the Jews. Therefore it is a dangerous thing to lack the
knowledge of God. Therefore my people is led into captivity, because they had
no knowledge. And he that knows not, shall not be known. A good meaning
suffices not, unless it agree with the word of God.

And a little after: The faithful called themselves the Disciples of Christ,
for they knew no other master. I would to God all Catholics would call
themselves by that name, Disciples. This is an ancient name: it would put them
in mind to look on Gods Book.

And speaking of Paul, he writes thus: These things are very excellently set
down here, which are required to Christian righteousness. First he hears the
word of God. Secondly, he sees. Thirdly, he arises by faith from sin: he
rouseth up himself under a heavy burden, but only through confidence of the
mercy of God. Fourthly, he is filled with the holy Ghost: fifthly, he is
baptized: and sixthly, he is comforted with meat. And after is conversant among
the Disciples of God. The first step therefore that Ferus makes here of
Christianity, is to hear the word of God.

And again after. To the true Saints of God there is nothing more precious,
then the word of God, which the counterfeit Saints do loathe. Would thou
then be a true Saint? let the word of God be thy chiefest Jewel.

And of Tabitha he writes thus: First she is called a Disciple: by which word
is signified, that with great desire she heard the word of God. I would to God
our women also would all be Disciples.

But let us a little consider the ground of Master Staphilus his assertion, he
says, that Unto the Apostles and their successors it was given, Mat. 13.10.11.
that they should know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God. But he does
greatly mistake the Text: for it is thus written: His Disciples coming said
unto him. Why do thou speak in Parables unto them? And he answering, said
unto them. Because to you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
God: but to them it is not given. For to him that has shall be given, and he
shall abound and he that has not, even that which he has shall be taken from
him. Our Savior here plainly speaks to all his Disciples, not to his
Apostles only.

Now all Christians are the Disciples of Christ, are his scholars: And to all
these he said a little before: He that has ears to hear, let him hear.
And of these he says also in these words: He that has shall have more given
him. So that here our Savior Christ makes a difference between his scholars
and Disciples, which do believe in him, and the Infidels which do not believe
in him: but like the deaf Adder stop their ears. To these it is not given to
know the secrets of the kingdom of GOD: but to all the other, not to his
Apostles only, as Master Staphilus expounds it, it is given. And they shall
daily have more given them, and shall increase in knowledge.

Hom. 31. Oper. imperf. in Mat.
Chrysostom also is of the same judgment, and expounds that place thus: All
understanding (says he) is of the holy Ghost, and is the grace of God: yet
there is one grace, which God gave to all men in creating them, and another
grace which he gives not to al men; but to the more worthy and excellent, and
to those whom he has chosen. Even as a housekeeper having many servants, to
every one of them he gives a simple coat and simple fare, because he is their
master; for he could not be his servant, unless he were clothed and fed of him;
but to certain which are more faithful and trusty about him, he gives a
better livery and better fare, not because he is their master, but because of
their good conditions: So God gives his general grace, that is, the
understanding of good and evil to all men, in that they are men; for
otherwise, we should not seem men created to the Image of God, unless we had a
divine understanding; but to the more worthy he gives a special grace, that
is, of knowing his mysteries, not for the necessity of nature, but as it were a
reward of their good will, or of their good works. Here we may plainly see,
that he restraines not this gift of God of knowing the mysteries of the
Kingdom of heaven, to the Apostles and their successors, as Staphilus did;
but also to all his faithful, and most trusty servants.

And concerning that place in the Gospel: Give not that which is holy to
Dogs: The Jews in the beginning, thought by all likelihood that the Gentiles
had been those Dogs: but Ferus says, Our Savior Christ calls them not
Dogs or Hogs, Fer. in cap. 11. Act.
which are Gentiles, but such as despise the word of God, and do slander it,
or do use it to cloak their unrighteousness withal. These only are hogs by
his judgment. And that of great likelihood Staphilus affirms the Lay men to
be those hogs our Savior meant: Ferus also in another place teaches the
contrary; Fer. in cap. 7. Mat.
By an outward example (says he) he teaches how and to whom the Gospel
ought to be preached. There is none so mad, which will throw a precious Pearl
before Hogs or Dogs. For first precious stones are not fodder for brute
beasts: A Swine had rather have dirt and mire, then gold: and a Dog had
rather have a rotten Carrion, then all the holy things in the world. Again, the
things themselves should be lost. After the same manner, says Christ, ye
possess those things which are holy indeed, and which far surpass all
precious stones, be they never of so great price; therefore give not to Dogs,
etc. I would have you willing to do good to all men, bearing with those, which
do you wrong, having compassion on those which fall through man's infirmity; yea
even toward the froward, I would have you carry that mind, that you had rather
have them corrected and amended, then perish: Yet in preaching the Gospel to
those which openly despise wholesome doctrine, and in whom there seems to be no
hope of amendment; yea by occasion of your preaching which shall seem to be
worse then they were before; to such I will not have you impart the secrets of
the heavenly doctrine, least that befall you which happens, as if one should
throw pearls before swine, or should give dogs that which is holy. For even
as a dog by eating a holy thing, is not made holier, but prophanes the holy
thing; and a swine is not made more beautiful with precious stones, but
defiles their brightness: so men that are past grace, do not only scoff at
and slander wholesome doctrine; but are made worse thereby, and do persecute
those who have delivered it to them. Thus far Ferus. Whereby we may plainly
see, how he calls not lay men swine, as Staphilus did, but obstinate and wicked
men; men past grace, of whose amendment there is no hope. And to such he says,
that our Savior would not have his Gospel preached. How injurious is
Staphilus and Stapleton to their brethren, and to Gods Church, that say: of all
likelihood they are those swine, Ioh. 21.15.16. 1. Cor. 6.15. 1. Cor. 16.1.
Phil. 1.1.
which our Savior means: What greater injury can there be, then to liken the
Lambs and sheep of Jesus Christ; nay his very members, and those whom he
calls his brethren, and the Apostles often call Saints, to filthy swine and
dogs? Is not this to dishonor the Saints of God? And yet they slander us, as
though we did not honor the saints. But let all men judge hereby, whether we
honor the Saints of God more then they or no?

Granatensis also of the secular arts, and liberal sciences, whereof they
have made so great account in times past, and have spent most of their age
before they would come to study the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Lib. 1. de de^ot.
cap 38.
writes thus: The which studies, although for the alteration of times and in
the importunity of heretics do seem as it were in some sort to be
necessary: yet in truth they are to be accounted plagues of our life, when as
they steal away from us such a great part of our time, and make us as it were
outlawes so many years, from the sweet and loving embracing of Jesus Christ;
especially when as we shall consider, that all the doctrine and writings of the
Ethnicks, as Nazianzen witnesses, to be as it were the scourges and plagues of
Egypt, which for our sins have comed into the church. But now, because the
estate of our miserable life has driven us to this necessity; we must wait
for a convenient time to be employed to this kind of study: that is, first of
all we must take care, that our works have a sure foundation, and that virtues
houses be first built surely, especially in young Scholars; that they may be
able to sustain the weight of this study without any damage. But when as yet
our works are raw, and the youth is nursed with the milk of Christ, to have
him called away from his breasts to the pease coddes of the heathen
Philosophers, where nothing is to be found but subtilties and sophistry, it
is a lamentable thing. For tell me, I pray you, if we mark this thing well,
what is it else but to do as Pharaoh did, that he might destroy the people of
God, when as he commanded all the males, as soon as they were borne, to be
cast out and drowned in the waters of Egypt? And what else do we see in these
our days, then that there is scarce any one, as soon as he is regenerate in
Christ, before he begin to grow, and to receive the strength of the new man,
but that he is thrown over the ears into these waters, that he may be choked
and loose again the spirit he has received? Granatensis in this his discourse
plainly proves, the Popes kingdom to have been that spiritual Egypt,
whereof saint John makes mention in the Revelation. For who knows not how in
those days, not only their children, but also even their old fathers, spent
most of their time in studying Aristotle and their Dunses commentaries, which
wrote upon him: So that their youths (as Granatensis here witnesses) were not
first noursed with the milk of Jesus Christ. They knew not the scriptures,
with Timothy, from their childhoode. But they were even drowned as soon as
they were borne in these waters of Egypt; and so in them continued most of
their life after: And shall we not say that these follow the steps of
Pharaoh, even as Granatensis confesses it?

And the same Granatensis also of the reading and studying the scriptures
writes thus: Gra. de ration. been viuend. ca. 10.
A good resolution is much furthered by reading of godly and profitable books:
For this is a thing most profitable; as contrariewise, the reading of vain
matters is most pestilent and dangerous: For the word of God is our light, our
physic, our meat and our guide. The word of God filles our will with good
desires, and it gathers together the distracted senses of our minds, and
kindles devotion in us, when as it seems now quite to be smothered in the
ashes of our infirmities, and as it were quite put out. Besides this also, this
reading drives away idleness which is the original of all vices, as we will
teach hereafter. To conclude, as corporal food is necessary to the
preservation of natural life; so the word of God is necessary to preserve the
spiritual life: And therefore Saint Jerome says, It is the food of the soul
to meditate day and night in the word of God. For by this exercise, the soul
is fed with the knowledge of the truth, and the will with the love and
sweetness of it. And when as the understanding and the will are as it were, two
principal wheels of a clock, that is, of a life that is rightly governed, if
they move in order, and as they ought, all the whole work and whatsoever
dependes thereon, shall be perfectly ordered. In this holy reading a man sees
his wants: he resolves his doubts: he finds remedies to keep in store
against tribulations: there are good counsels also afforded him: there he
learns many mysteries; he is strengthened by the examples of virtues, and he
learnes the profit that comes by them. And therefore Solomon so highly
commendes it in his Proverbs: Keep (says he) my son the precepts of thy
father, and forsake not the law of thy mother. Bind them in thy heart
continually, and knit them about thy neck. When as thou walk any whither,
let them go with thee; and when thou sleep, let them preserve thee: and when
thou awakest talk with them, because the commandment is a lantern; the law
a light, and the nurture of discipline the way of life. Thus far Granatensis.
Where he plainly condemns that position of other Papists, that the reading
of the scripture is dangerous: Nay he condemns that which in their blind
kingdom, when as Gods word was banished, they allowed, that is, the reading of
vain Histories; as of Beuis and such like. That (says he) is most dangerous.
The author also of that book, called the Resolution, agrees with Granatensis
herein. Who is there now adays (says he) which makes the law or
commandment or iustifications of God (as the scripture terms them) his
daily meditation: Part. 1. ca. 2.
as king David did? Neither only in the day time did he this, but also by
night in his heart; as in another place he testifies of himself. How many of
us do pass over whole days and months, without ever entering into these
meditations: Nay God grant that there be not many Christians in the world,
which know not what these meditatio^s mean. We believe in gross, the
mysteries of our Christ a^ faith: as that there is a Hell, a Heaven, a reward
for virtue, a punishment for vice, a judgment to come, and an account to be
made and the like; but for that we chew them not well, by deep consideration,
and do not digest them well in our hearts, by the heat of meditation, they
help us little to good life, no more then a preservative put in a man's pocket,
can help his health, etc.

This author, besides that he commends the continual study and meditation of
the scriptures, seems to mislike with that general faith and knowledge, which
the Church of Rome teaches we must not believe in gross (says he) but we
must particularly muse upon and apply the things to our selves.

Ferus also of the princely authority of the scriptures writes thus: And here
thou feast the great boldness of truth. Only truth can say, Fer. part. 2. pass.
I fear no man: No other doctrine is so perfect that it can say so, besides
that which God has revealed in his word.

And after he writes thus: That Christ suffered all other injuries with
silence; besides this blow on the face, which the high Priests servant gave
him. He replies to that (says Ferus) least that he should think that it were
not lawful to reprove princes with the word of God: whereas the word of God
spares no body. It is the judge of all men; etc. If the word of God be the
judge of all men; then of the Pope: he must submit himself unto it; he cannot
dispense with it.

The same Granatensis also, De deuor. Lib. 1. cap. 44.
of the authority of the scriptures writes thus: The controversies that arise
about trust or credit of bargains between man and man, and of
ecclesiastical decrees and commandments, the Masters and Doctors of that
faculty know best. And those same spiritual matters also are diligently to be
examined; that we may see if they agree with the rule of the divine scripture:
He makes the holy scripture the rule of spiritual matters.

Granatensis also in another place yeeldes this excellent testimony to the
scriptures. Med. 7. vitae Christi. Mat. 2.
And as these men (speaking of the wise men) made no account of this wisdom,
and of the arguments of the flesh, after that they saw a contrary witness
and testimony given them in heaven; so neither must thou think, that the
judgments and opinions of the world to be of any force, when as thou see the
word of God, and the most holy gospel to teach the contrary. Let the world
reprove; and let it gainesay, as much as it lists, the words of God; let all
the wise men of this world storm against it; let them allege old customs;
let them oppose the examples of Kings and Emperors: all these are but vapors
and smoke; neither are they of any force against the word of God, and his holy
gospel, and his heavenly wisdom. And after. Where art thou which art borne
King of the Jews, the law of all devout men, the captain of all miserable
men, the sight of all blind men, the life of the dead, and the everlasting
salvation of them that shall live for ever. And a fit answer follows: In
Bethlehem Judah: Bethlehem is expounded to be the house of bread, and Judah
confessing. For there Christ is found, where after the confession of our
faults, the bread of the heavenly life, that is, the doctrine of the gospel
is heard mused upon, and kept in a devout mind, that it may be practiced in
deed, and also may be declared to others. There the child Jesus with his mother
Mary is found, whereafter sorrowful contrition and fruitful confession, the
sweetness of heavenly comfort, is tasted: sometimes amongst streams of tears,
where prayer him, whom she found almost in despair, now leaves rejoicing and
presuming of pardon, etc.

And in another place he writes, As concerning the first we must consider that
it ought to be the chief and most principal exercise of a christian, that he
should meditate in the law of God, and in the doctrine of the commandments:
And therefore among the commendations of a just man this is one of the
chiefest, that he should meditate in the law of God day and night. Med. 11.
vitae Christi.
And the kingly Prophet in his Psalms does almost every where make his boast
of the love, which he had to the law of God; and that he daily meditated in it:
And that the words of God were more sweet to him, then honey and the honey
comb. If it were so delectable and pleasant to that most holy King to read,
meditate and study the words and precepts of that old law, how far more
pleasant should the reading and meditation of the words of the Gospel be to
us? All the commandments of that were for the most part corporal; but the
commandments of this are spiritual: the commandments of that were temporal,
but of this, are eternal: that was the law of servants, this of children: that
was given by the hand of man, though a holy man; this by the hand of the word
it self of the eternal father and wisdom of God. By the excellency of the
lawgiver appears the excellency of the law. The best wine of the feast was
reserved for that Lord, whose duty and office it was to turn the cold water
of the law, into the precious wine of the Gospel, etc. This study of the law
of God and especially of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, should be the chief
study of all christians, by Granatensis judgment: and it is of very many
their least and last study: Naie the church of Rome has hidden them from her
children as a sharp knife, least they should cut their fingers therewith. But
she should not have done so, by Granatensis his judgment.

In 6. cap. Luc.
Stella upon these words, And they came to hear him: writes thus: As the soul
of Christ was the instrument of the Deity to work miracles in the bodies of
men: so the words of Christ were the instrument of the same Deity to work
miracles in their souls. And as it was a wonderful thing, that Christ's hand
should give sight to the blind, and should cleanse the Lepour; so it was far
more wonderful, that his very word should give life to dead souls. For the
words of Christ did not only stir up the minds of his hearers, neither did
only persuade them as other preachers are wont to do, but they had also such a
virtue and power, that they seemed even to compel the hearers, that they should
do that which he preached. Therefore the words of Christ gave grace also,
without the which the mind cannot once move her self to that which is
righteous before God. And a little after: He that is of God hears Gods word:
therefore you hear them not, because you are not of God. Every one is glad to
hear the noble acts of his countrymen. If any be a Frenchman, he delights
to hear any man tell the noble acts of Frenchmen: but if one in the presence
of a Frenchman should tell of the noble acts of the Hungarians, he would make
no account thereof, he would give no ear: So by nature every one delights to
hear of the famous acts of his kindred, and of his ancestors, because he
comes of them: But if men chance to talk of those things which belong not to
his, he makes no account of them, but he goes away. So they truly which are
Gods children, delight to hear those things which are of God: but they which
are not of God, but have the Devil to their father, as obstinate children they
delight not to hear Gods word: And therefore the Lord said unto them;
Therefore you hear not, because you are not of God. Whose are they then? You
(says he) are of your father the Devil: and therefore you delight to hear
his words, and communication; as murmurings, blasphemies, filthy and
dishonest words. One of the chiefest signs whereby it may be known, whether
one be predestinate or no, is this: whether he delight to hear the word of God,
and sermons? For if he delight and take pleasure to hear the word of God;
surely it is a great argument that he is elected, and of the householde and
family of God. O what a great company is there, which are weary of hearing
sermons, and have not tasted or sipped of the words of life! So there is a
great company of them that go to hell. They will have leisure enough to read
profane and filthy books, wherein is nothing handled, but of the world and the
flesh: but they cannot abide a holy and devout book in their hands, no not
half an hour; yea if a sermon last above half an hour, how will they go
home murmuring and grudging? That now that saying of Paul may be verified of
our miserable and unhappy time: There shall come a time when they shall not
endure wholesome doctrine, but they shall heap to themselves teachers, according
to their own lusts, having itching ears, and shall turn alwaie their ears
from the truth, and shall be given to delight in fables.

Oh that all Christians would acknowledge this mighty power of Gods word which
Stella here teaches. It is as forcible and mighty even now to heal souls,
as Christ's hand, when as he was here, was of force to heal bodies. And that
if they would apply it often to their souls, it would heal all their
infirmities. Secondly, that they would delight to hear Sermons. It is the
chiefest sign to know whether one be predestinate or no; and who would not
gladly be assured hereof?

In 6. Luc.
And after, speaking of the ground of Gods Law, he writes thus: Wherein (O
good Christ) is thy law founded? Not in power. For thou have compelled no man
to receive thy faith, neither have thou forced any to embrace thy law. Neither
is it grounded on natural reason: for although it be not against natural
reason, but does presuppose it; yet it is above it: for it surpasses all the
bounds of reason, and goes beyond all the wit of man, be he never so quick
witted, and subtle. In what thing therefore is this law grounded? Surely only
in his Authority: for only because Christ has spoken this, therefore we must
believe it. His word must be our only and sufficient warrant in all our actions.

2. lib. de Abraham Pat. ca. 5.
S. Ambrose very excellently writes of the daily reading of the scripture:
And that thou may know that it is good that the beginning and the end
should agree together, good Jesus him self has said: I am Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the end: Therefore let our mind be ever with him, let it
never depart from his Temple and from his word, let it ever be occupied in
reading the Scriptures, in Meditations, in Prayers, that the word of him who
is in deed, may ever work in us, and that daily we either going to the
Church, or giving our selves to prayers at home, we may begin with him, and
end with him: So the whole day of our life and the whole race of the day,
shall begin in him and end in him. For even as in the beginning of our life,
to believe in God and to follow him, is our salvation: so perseverance to the
end is necessary. And it is the best care that a soul can have, that marking
well the word of God, it do nothing against reason, wherewith it may be made
sad, that ever knowing well what she does, she may keep the joy of a
good conscience. Here Saint Ambrose puts down the whole course of a Christians
life, daily to study the Scriptures and to direct all his actions according
unto them.

De Jacob. and beat. vita. 2. lib. cap. 2.
And again he writes in another place thus: Blessed is that man that has not
walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit
in the chair of pestilence. The Scripture meaning this: That he is blessed
that has separated himself from the fellowship of the wicked (for this is the
part of ungodliness to acknowledge no author of life, nor parent of salvation)
or that has not dwelt in sin, or that has not continued in Riot and
wantonness. But that he studying in the law of God day and night, shall be
like a tree that shall yield his fruit in due season. The former are merits
of rewards, but this is a reward of merits. Let us mark here how Ambrose
prefers the studying of the word of God to all other good works.

But some Papists perchance will object, Stel. in Luc. 21.
that our Savior Christ taught his Apostles many things privately, and in
secret: And that therefore the Scriptures are not to be known of all men: for
these secrets are contained in them. To this objection Stella answers: All
things (says he) which Jesus revealed to his Apostles, although he told them
to them never so secretly, they ought to preach them publicly: for they were
(as it were) the conduit pipes, by which the water of the doctrine, which
Christ the lively spring preached unto them, should come to all the faithful
of the Church. And therefore the Lord said unto them: That which I say unto you
in darkness, speak ye in light: and that ye hear in the ear, preach ye in
the houses.

And here I cannot but marvel, 2. Tim. 3 16. Psalm. 12.6. Reu. 22.18.
that seeing the Scripture is inspired of God, as Saint Paul testifies, and is
silver purified seven times in the furnace, as David affirms, and as to Saint
John's Revelation; so no doubt to any other book of the holy Scriptures; he
that shall add, or diminish, or alter any thing shall be plagued of God: that
the Papists in their allegations of the scriptures maintain their old
translation, against the verity of the original of the Greek and Hebrew:
whereas it differs from them. As for example, Philippus de Dies alleges a text
of Saint John's gospel to good purpose, following their old translation. But
in the Greek original it is not so, as he alleges it: speaking of the
careful bringing up of children, he writes thus: Phil. de Dies Summa praed.
titulo adolescens.
The diligence of parents is not only necessary to this purpose, but also the
great care and watchfulness of pastors or prelates, which thing our Lord
Christ does advertise us in Saint John's gospel. For when as he committed his
Church to Saint Peter, and made him universal pastor, he said twice to him
feed my Lambs: but after he says but once, feed my sheep: wherein, the
heavenly Master taught that a prelate, although he be bound, both to feed
Lambs and sheep: yet he ought to have more care and attendance of Lambs then
of sheep. That is, greater care of children then of parents etc. The scope of
this doctrine is not amiss, but it is not well grounded on this place, for it
is in the Greek twice repeated, (...): That is to say, feed my sheep, feed
my sheep. And but once said, (...). That is, feed my Lambs. And yet the
common translation, which Philippus de Dies follows, has twice to gather in
the first places pasce agnos meos, that is, feed my Lambs; and after, but once
feed my sheep: where as in the original ((...)) which signifies a Lamb, is
but once used: and ((...)) which signifies a sheep is twice, what great
presumption is this, to dare to go from the original?

7. Of the sufficiency of the Scriptures.
THE Rhemistes first upon the gospel of Saint John note, In cap. 16. v. 12
that the scriptures are not sufficient: and expound that place of the
gospel: I have yet many things to say unto you, on this manner: This place
conuinceth, that the Apostles and the faithful be taught many things, which
Christ omitted to teach them, for their weakness; and that it was the
providence of God, that Christ in presence should not teach and order all
things, that we might be no less assured, of the things the Church teaches,
by the holy Ghost, then of things that himself delivered. How contrary this
their exposition is, to the exposition of Ferus upon the same place, which
hereafter follows; Let every true Christian judge, and see who comes nearer
to the mark and truth.

Andradius also writes thus; That the scriptures are not sufficient, when as
God would help the frailty of man's memory, Lib. 2 Orthodox. Explicat.
by the working of his Gospel; yet he would but so have such a short abstract,
or abridgement of his matters committed to writing: that the greatest part,
Lib. 4. de verbo dei non scripto cap. 4.
as a treasure of great price, should be left to be enclosed or kept in the
mind of man. And M. Bellarmine plainly affirms: that the scriptures without
tradition, neither to have been simply necessary, nor sufficient. So that by
his judgment, the wants of the scriptures, must be supplied by traditions. But
first saint Jerome of the scriptures writes otherwise.

It was impossible ( says Jerome) that she which brought forth the man child,
and was in childbed, should lack abundance of milk, In cap. Es. 66.
for the bringing up of that people, and of those little ones, that were borne
at once, that she might give them her two pappes, not as before in Egypt,
swampt (as we say) or bruised, but with virginal beauty, now full and strowted
out, that is, the old and new Testament, to give that reasonable milk. The
old and new Testament are by Ieromes judgment two pappes, full fraught with
sufficient milk, to the nourishing of all the children of Gods Church.
Serranus also a papist, Serranus in 47 cap. Ezech.
of the sufficiency of the scriptures writes thus: Every part of scripture
contains truth alike, and is alike absolute and perfect, in the Revelation of
mysteries: even as the number of a thousand, is whole and perfect: so all is
plainly revealed, and through faith showed, that pertaines to our redemption,
salvation and instruction. Wherefore we must go forward, the scripture
being our guide: But to go about, to search the reasons of it, to examine the
causes of the articles of our belief, and with the finger of reason, to teach
all things, and preach the incomprehensible judgment of God, and to have a
will to know that vnsearchablenesse, which Paul wonders at; is to pass the
bounds of the angel the Prophets guide; and to endeavor to pass over that
sea, which no man can pass over, whereat the angel himself makes a stop:
is devilish presumption. Wherefore, commending these things, to be worthy
everlasting consideration and memory, that, heretics and proud persons, which
will examine all things at their own pleasures, without the faith of the
Church, may pluck in their combs, he adds, have thou seen these things?
Who deny the sufficiency of the scripture? but the Church of Rome: who will
teach all things with the finger of reason? but that synagogue: As their
doctrines of the supremacy, freewill, real presence, invocation of saints, do
plainly declare.

Jerome of the scriptures writes thus to Eustochium: In praef. Esai.
Thou compellest me (O Christian virgin Eustochium) to pass over now to the
Prophet Esaias, and to perform that to thee, which I promised to thy mother
Paula, while she lived: Therefore I pay both to thee and by thee, to her, that
which I do owe, obeying the commandments of Christ, who says, search the
scriptures. And again: seek, and ye shall find: least I should hear with
the Jews, you err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God. For if
according to the Apostle Paul, Christ be the virtue of God, and the wisdom of
God; and he which knows not the scriptures, is ignorant both of the virtue of
God, and of his wisdom: the ignorance of the scripture is the ignorance of
Christ. Eustochium a virgin, was so in love with the scriptures, that she
compelled Jerome to write his commentaries upon the Prophet Esaias: And shall not
our women study, know and love them? The ignorance of the scriptures is the
ignorance of Christ, as Jerome here plainly avouches: how can it be then the
mother of devotion, as the Papists affirm?

In cap. 16. Io.
Of the sufficiency of the scriptures, Ferus writes thus: I have as yet many
things to say unto you: That which he said before seems contrary to this:
Whatsoever I have heard of my father, I have declared unto you. But they are
not contrary: For first that which he says, I have declared unto you; he
takes the preterperfect tense, for the future tense, for the certainty of this
doctrine; which is a familiar thing in the writing of the prophets: As, when as
Esaias says, He was wounded for our iniquities, which notwithstanding chanced
long after. Compare this doctrine with the Rhemists doctrine.
Then, Christ also in truth has revealed all things unto us, necessary for
our salvation, because he has preached the Gospel, which is the fountain of
all truth: For whatsoever the spirit hereafter has revealed to the Church,
proceeded our of this fountain. So that truth, which the holy Ghost revealed
in the first council of the Apostles, that is, that circumcision and other
legal ceremonies, were not necessary to salvation; came not from any where
else, then from the gospel; where Christ plainly shows, that we have
salvation through faith in him, and not of the works of the law. So that
truth, that the son is consubstantiall to his father, which appeared in the
Nicene Council against Arrius, issued out of the gospel: for although that
word Homousion or consubstantial, be not found in the Gospel; yet there are
found there other words of as great force: as I, and my father are one. Here
we may note first, that that place: I have many things to say unto you: by
Ferus a papists judgment, makes nothing for traditions, or unwritten verities.
Secondly that the holy Ghost reuealeth to the Church no new or strange
doctrine, but that which is contained in the scriptures: whereas other papists
affirm, that the holy Ghost does reveal doctrines to the Church, besides the
scriptures, which are as firmly to be believed, as those which are contained
in the scriptures: Lastly, that that same doctrine of Christ's equality with
God his father, Ferus acknowledges to be gathered out of the scriptures.

And after upon the same words, he writes thus. I have as yet many things to
say to you: The Apostles had forgotten many things; and many things they did
not understand aright; many things also Christ had spoken obscurely, the which
might be drawn into a wrong sense; the which after chanced in the heretics.
Therefore the holy Ghost was necessary for them, which might bring into their
memories those things they had forgotten, and should lighten those things they
understood not, and should give the true meaning of all obscure sayings.
Therefore this word may be referred to the whole gospel, as though he shoul
say: although I have taught you many things, yet you need further
instructions, for the causes now mentioned. He shall speak all things which he
shall hear; that is, which truly are, and indeed stand fast, and have
authority in the scriptures; devising nothing of his own, perverting or
misconstruing nothing: here we may learn, what is to be preached, and taught
in the Church, or else we shall hear that: I speak not to them, and yet they
prophesied.

Here we may plainly see, what doctrine Ferus would have taught and preached
in the Church, only the scriptures, and such as the holy Ghost does draw out
of them, In cap. 14. Ioh.
not any unwritten verities or traditions of the Church, or inventions of man.

And in another place, he writes thus of Christ: I am the way of life, the
truth of doctrine, and the life of salvation: all men desire the way, the
truth and the life. These are not any where found certain or sure, saving in
Christ. In cap. 2. Mat.
And of the excellency of the scriptures, he writes thus. As in the latter
days, the word of God came clad with flesh into the world; and it was one
thing that was seen, and another that was understood; the sight of the flesh
in him was apparent to all men, but the knowledge of his divinity, was given
but to a few and to his elect: so the word of God, and the spirit is covered
with the veil of the letter: The letter is looked upon, as the flesh; and the
spirit lying hid within is perceived, like the deity. And as the sheepheards
being taught of the Angels, knew Christ in his rags and simple swathling
clothes, who otherwise would never have believed that, that child was Christ,
although they had seen him a thousand times, his clothes were so base and of
no great cost: So the letter of ye Scripture is plain, and it seems often to
speak, of matters of no weight: Therefore unless we be lightened from above,
it does not seem, that we should find Christ in them. Ferus here does not
make the Scriptures a bare or dead letter, as some other Papists do, but a
living letter; under which (being read and studied) Gods spirit lies hid, even
as under Christ's flesh his divinity.

Oh wonderful force and majesty then of Gods words! Oh that all Papists would
confess thus much, and believe it! It would make them read the scriptures.
And herein Ferus agrees with the doctrine, Ioh. 6.63.
even of our Savior himself, who says: That the words which I speak are
spirit and life: which saying of his, is to be referred to all the Scriptures
of the Gospel. For he does not say the words I have spoken, a little before;
but the words I do speak, are spirit and life: and therefore are my flesh.
For even as that which contains a man's spirit and life, is his flesh; even so
(says our Savior) that which contains my spirit and life, is also my flesh.
So that by this short sentence, he exhorts all men to the reading of his
word. Would thou be partaker of Christ's life and spirit? then eat his
flesh; that is, read his word, muse and meditate therein day and night. And no
doubt, believe the saying of thy Savior; his words he has spoken shall be
spirit and life unto thee. Thus we may see how Ferus doctrine most manifestly
agrees with the doctrine of our Savior. Many for want of eating of this
flesh, which feed their bodies daintily with the flesh of fishes, and fowls
at this day, have faint and pined souls; nay dead souls, void of the life
and spirit of Jesus Christ.

In Mat. cap. 7.
Ferus also of the certainty of our salvation, and of the sufficiency of the
Scriptures, writes thus: What (says he) do men so greatly desire, as
security? How much would the Emperor of Rome give, that he might be safe from
his enemies? How much would every just man rejoice, if he were certain of his
estate; if he knew, that he should never fall? how greatly would every sinner
rejoice; if safety were assured him, against death and hell? But all these
things, do Christ's words only perform. This says Ferus. But the Roman
Correctors in their copy do command to put out only. They are loath that so
much should be attributed to the Scriptures.

Of the sanctification also of the sabbath, In cap. Mat. 22
Ferus has this notable lesson: The chiefest work of the sabbath (says he)
is to cease from thine own works, and to give place, that God may work his
in thee: that is, faith, charity, patience, longanimitie, chastity. The
second work is, that we apply our selves to do good works, and to meditate
in the Law of God, to hear the word of God, to pray in spirit and truth.
Especially therefore the word of God is to be heard, without which, there is no
hallowing of it: know that this is commanded thee of God, that thou hear his
word and keep it: and of this, he will require an account of thee, in the day
of judgment. Neither is it enough for thee to hear it once or twice, unless
thou hear it often. The Devil is ever assaulting thee, and thou must ever by
the word of God resist him, by which alone he is overcome. Again, thou must
meditate of the word of God, or else thou hear in vain. And two things
especially are to be meditated out of the word of God, that is to say, our
sins and Gods goodness. And by these two, as in Jacobs ladder, sometime we
must descend into our selves, and sometime ascend unto God. Thus far Ferus.
If this be true, how hallowed they the Lords sabbath, in the days of our
forefathers, when Gods word was never, or seldom preached to them? If this be
true, that we should meditate on this Law of God, then must we know it. And
here the Roman addition to Ferus, detractes from the word of God again, that
dignity, which Ferus gives to it: By which alone (says he) the Devil is
conquered: but they blot out alone.

Of voluntary religion Ferus writes thus: Then, In cap. 4. Ioh.
their worshippings had not the warrant of the word of God, and how can then
they be certain or sure to please God, for they only followed their own
reason, and the examples of the fathers. For thus they reasoned with
themselves: If an earthly or fleshly calfe pleased God, offered at Jerusalem:
how much more shall a calfe of gold, seeing it is more precious, and lasts
longer. Also if it were lawful for our holy fathers to worship God in this
mountain, why is not the same lawful for us? But in the worship of God,
neither man's reason, neither the examples of the fathers, but Gods word, are to
be followed. Thou shall not do (says he) that which seems good in thine
own eyes, but that I command. Here Ferus sets down the only true, and
certain ground of Gods true worship, that is, the word, and commandment of
God. Here the reason of man, or the examples of the fathers are denied to be
sure grounds of Gods worship: and yet the Papists do build their faith on
these.

Dom. 1. Sexag.
Of the Scriptures also, Philippus de Dies writes thus: The matters which faith
teaches, are so excellent, that no man's wit, be it never so sharp and
subtle, can attain unto them: for if it could, then it were no faith. And
therefore to obtain this faith, we must hear the word of God: as the Apostle
exaggerates saying, how shall they believe in him, which they have not heard?
And after he concludes, saying: Faith is by hearing; and hearing by the word of
God. And so it appears how to the obtaining of faith; it is necessary to
hear the word of God. Behold how God, which is the fruit which we hope for, is
not obtained without charity; and charity is not obtained without faith; and
faith is not obtained, without the preaching of the word of God. And therefore
for the very great agreement and likeness that it has; the Lord called his
word seed. What other doctrine do we teach, at this day here in England, of
the necessity of hearing and knowing the word of God?

In 3. cap. ad Col.
Theodore also upon that place of the Apostle to the Colossians; Let the word of
God dwell plentiously among you, writes thus: The old law also commanded the
daily meditation and study of Gods word: Thou shall meditate in them (says
the Law) sitting at home in thy house, rising up also, and lying upon thy bed,
and going in thy journey. This thing the Apostle commands; that we should
also carry about with us, the doctrine of the Lord; and that we should praise
him, and that we should sanctify him with our tongues, with spiritual songs.
That phrase also (in your hearts) is as much to say: As not in your mouths
only. That same note, which the Hebrew text yields in that same Psalm we use
daily to repeat, is worth marking: Psalm. 95. v. 7.
In the Hebrew it is thus; Because he is our God, and we are the people of his
pasture, and sheep of his hands; If to day, you will hear his voice. Here is
the full point in the Hebrew text; and here ends the verse: and not where the
common translation appoints it to end. So that then we are his people and
sheep of his pasture. Here are great privileges; and such as none could be
wished greater; such as every man would desire to be partaker of. But as every
one desires to be partaker of these privileges and blessings; so let him as
well mark the infallible, and most plain condition annexed unto them, that
is, If so be we to day hear his voice. Oh let every good christian hear his
voice to day, that is, with all speed possible, that God may be his God, that
he may be one of the people of his pasture, and a sheep of his hands. The
doctrine is plain, the contempt thereof is very dangerous. Who now will be a
Recusant?

The Prophet David, discoursing excellently of the corruption of our nature,
does thus unfold the sins thereof: Psalm. 53.5.
Have they no knowledge? Here is the root of all sin, to be ignorant; to
lack knowledge: now follows the branches: Working iniquity, eating my people
as though they would eat bread; they have not called upon God; they feared
where no fear was. These are the fruits of ignorance, to do wickedlie, to
deal cruelly with Gods people; not to call upon God; and to be fearful and
superstitious. These are the works of darkness: these are the works of the
servants of the prince of darkness: these are the fruits, which proceed of
ignorance of the Scriptures. And I pray God for want of this root, the like
fruits of doing wickedly, of dealing cruelly, of praying idolatrously, and of
fearing superstitiously, be not in many at this day.

Stella writes thus of the blessed Virgin: Stell. in 2. cap. Luc.
The most wise Virgin had not a fools heart, of which the wise man says; It
is like a broken vessel, and can hold no wisdom: But she was like the Arc
of the covenant, wherein both the tables of the new law, that is, of the
Gospel, and of the old law also, were contained or laid up. For whatsoever
things were spoken before of our blessed and mighty Savior; or what things
himself our Savior, opening his mouth, taught his Disciples and the rude
multitude; all those things the pure Virgin without weariness kept in her
faithful heart, and did ruminate or meditate upon them. Let us learn
therefore, being stirred up by the blessed Virgins example, to meditate upon
heavenly things, and to carry in our minds those things which God teaches:
the which we shall excellently do, if we shall daily meditate upon Gods
mysteries. In the old law, those beasts, which did not chew the cudde, as
swine and such like, were accounted unclean, and by Gods commandment the
people of Israel might not eat of them: So do thou always meditate, and as
it were chew the end, as concerning those things which the Lord God the creator
and maker of all things, has done for thee: how for thy sake he took the
shape of a servant, how he suffered most bitter death for thee a miserable
sinner. etc. Thus far Stella.

Where we may note, that he wishes all Christians to be like the blessed
virgin, Heb. 9.4.
in this, that she had both tables of the Testaments laid up in her heart: And
how can they be like her herein (which seem otherwise very devoutly to honor
and reverence her, Reu. 22.9.
even more then she requires, even as Saint John did to the Angel) which will
scarcely take the tables of the Testaments, that is, the holy scriptures, into
their hands? How can they have them in their hearts? nay surely if this be the
only mark of clean beasts to chew the cudde (as Stella affirms) that is,
to meditate upon the word of God; then they surely which think they are not
bound to know the scriptures, and so cannot meditate upon them, and therefore
do not chew the cudde, are even as swine and unclean beasts before God; how
religious or holy otherwise outwardly they appear.

Ferus of Marie writes thus: when she saw Christ: Mark here the good works
of Marie; Ferus in 11. ca. Io.
nay thou shall see here the root and true order of good works, When as she
did see Jesus (says he:) This is the root of all good works, the knowledge
of Christ. For he which sees him not, that is, does not know him, will never
fall down before him, nor pray unto him. Afterward she fell down at Jesus
feet. For the throwing down of our selves, immediately follows the knowledge
of Christ. He falls down happily, that falls before the Lord. And again, he
stands upright unhappily, which before God does not humble, but advance
himself: As did that chief Angel, and that Pharisee in the Gospel, who
standing not only in body, but in mind did brag of his good works. Here
we may learn, that Ferus affirms, that knowledge is the root of all good
works: and if this be true, how could they do any good works in popery, in
their great blindness and ignorance? Surely it could not be but that they erred
often: and if they did any, it was by chance rather, as a blind man may do a
thing rightly, then by any certainty.

In 2. ca. Luc.
Of the excellency and sufficiency of the scriptures, Stella also writes
thus: The giving of us the law, wherein we should live, should most of all
move us; and even force us to love God with all our heart, and to serve him
faithfully. For although the gift of our creation to his own image and
likeness, and that he would make us capable of that heavenly inheritance:
although I say this were a great and an excellent gift; yet notwithstanding, if
God had not given us his law, wherein he should declare unto us his will,
showing unto us also, what we should do, that we might obtain that same
blessedness, for which we were created; without all doubt our life had been
sorrowful and miserable. If a King should say to any one: if you shall do
that which pleases me, I will advance you to great honors; so that none in my
kingdom shall be compared unto you: but contrariwise, if you shall not do
that which pleases me, you shall not escape unpunished; yea being fast bound
in chains, and as it were buried in a dark dungeon, you shall die miserably.
What think you would this man do, what would he chiefly care for? Certainly
to know the Kings pleasure, and then with all his endeavor to do it. For by
this means, he should gain the greatest good thing in the world: and
contrarily if he did not this, he should purchase himself everlasting
confusion. But if the King would not declare to this man his pleasure, and what
thing he delighted in, or what he hated: surely this man must needs live a
miserable and sorrowful life, until he could come to the knowledge of the
Kings pleasure. So Nabuchadnezzar commanded his wise men upon pain of death,
that they should show him the dream he had dreamed. But now if the king should
declare to this man al his pleasure, and should disclose to him faithfully his
very heart; how glad would he be, and how greatly would he rejoice; because now
he saw plainly the gate of his pleasure opened unto him. We know assuredly,
being led not only through faith, but also by reason, that there is one only
God in the world, and there is no man doubts, but that he is good, merciful and
just. We know also assuredly, that they which obey the will of this most holy
God, to be crowned with most excellent rewards in that heavenly kingdom; and
again, that those which offend him impudently with sins and offenses, shall
be thrown with great shame and reproach into that miserable and dark dungeon of
hell. If now God had not given us his law, wherein he had declared to us as well
those things which were to be eschewed, as those things which were to be
embraced, sorrowful surely and most sorrowful and heavy had been the life
of man. For although we had known that we had bin created to everlasting
felicity, yet we should have been utterly ignorant, how we should have
obtained it: Therefore that great God and parent of all things, has bestowed
upon us a singular and most excellent benefit, when he did proclaim his law,
by which all Christians may plainly understand, what was necessary to obtain
everlasting life, and what was also required to eschew that dark dungeon of
hell.

So the notable Psalmist speaking to God says: Because of thy law I have
endured thee patiently: If thou had not given me thy law, I could never have
endured this life. So the same Psalmist says again: Thy word is a lantern to
my feet, and a light to my paths. That benefit was no small benefit, by which
God bound all men to him, when as he gave them his law; to the square and
level whereof, they should frame and apply all their actions, etc.

What can be said more in the commendation of Gods word, then this? It makes
known to us, Gods pleasure and will: It is a rule and square to frame all our
actions by: It is Gods lantern, to direct our steps in the dark night of
this world: and what need we then any other? Is not this sufficient?

And after he writes thus: Will thou know how excellent, and of what great
force the law of God is? consider with thy self but a little this one thing,
that God himself did not disdain to submit himself unto it, and to obey it.
O then a most excellent and princely law! and shall not man submit himself
unto it, and obey it? Nay shall any man say, that he is above it, and has
power to dispense with it? Ibid.
as the Pope now does. Of man's will, the same Stella also very excellently
writes thus: The beginning of our misery and undoing, was the pride of our
first parent, when as he refused to keep that commandment, which he ought to
have kept. He had rather do his own will, then Gods will: Therefore when God
came to redeem us, it was necessary that he should come humble, to cure our
pride; and obedient, to cure our disobedience; which disobedience was the
fountain and cause of all our evils. There is nothing burns in hell, but man's
own will; the which man had rather fulfill then the will of God. So the Lord
God himself witnesses: Of old times thou have broken the yoke, and burst my
bonds, and have said I will not serve the Lord, but will walk after mine own
devises. From the smallest to the greatest, all will fulfill their own wills:
every one is ruled by his own judgment, and does that which seems good to
himself. Thus far Stella. Where we may learn, that we must not do our own
wills; Mat. 16.24. Psalm. 119.115. Io. 15.15.
we must deny our selves, as our Savior teaches in the gospel; and that
especially in Gods service. we must do the will of God. And his will is
revealed to us in his word.

To the same effect the same Stella writes thus again, in the same Chapter: In
these few words (says he) the Evangelist says thrice. According to the law
of God: first: According to the law of Moses: Secondly, As it is written in the
law of the Lord: And thirdly. As it is said in the law of the Lord. Wherein the
Evangelist would signify unto us, how studious our thoughts ought to be, and
our words and works, how greatly they ought to be conformable to the law of
God. Because Christ, whatsoever he did, he did it according to the law of God.
The which thing David also declared in the Psalm saying: What love have I unto
thy law, O Lord: All the day long is my study in it. If this be true, what
degenerate Christians be they, which think they ought not to know the law of
God? which all their life never care for it? These follow not David's steps nor
the holy steps of Jesus Christ. And after, let us also wonder at Jesus Christ
believing those things steadfastly, not which appear outwardly, but which the
holy scriptures and the Catholic says do testify: according to that: when
thou entrest into the house of God, stand fast and draw near, that thou may
hear: for we cannot see the majesty of God with our eyes, neither comprehend
it with all our wit, but with our faith, and hearing only, without any more
search or inquiry. Beware of that. He that searches the Majesty of God,
shall be confounded of his glory. So many Jews, Philosophers, and Heathens
were confounded, erred, and were deceived, who because they would not captiuate
their understanding into the obedience of Christ, and according to their
knowledge worship him, fell into many errors and heresies. For even as in
Isaake now being old, all his senses were deceived, when he blessed his son
Jacob, besides his hearing: so about the understanding of our Savior Christ,
all man's senses are deceived, besides hearing. The voice (says he) is the
voice of Jacob: In this thing only, he said truth: but he was deceived in
that he said, thy hands are the hands of Esau. So thou (O faithful
Christian) when thou hear Simeon confessing Jesus Christ to be the light and
salvation of the world, and Anna confessing that he is the King of Israel, and
that the redeemer which was so greatly looked for is comed: believe that these
things are true: for Isaackes hearing was not deceived, etc. I would to God the
Papists would observe this rule in their worship of God; their invocation of
Saints; their Latin prayers; their images have no warrant in the word of God:
where hear they that these are commanded? That which he says after, of
hearing the Church and the Martyrs, is true, if they shall speak that which
they have heard from God: for they may not speak of their own heads, Gal,
1.8.

Again, of the excellency of the Scriptures, he writes thus: The word was
upon John (he says) because it descended upon him. For Esaias says; Even as the
showers and snow do descend from heaven, etc. so shall the word be that
proceeds out of my mouth. For that word (upon) signifies an excellency,
because the word of God does not ascend up into the heart of man; but the word
does descend to the heart; and the heart ascends unto the word. So holy David
calls all his Psalms, by the Hebrewe article Lamed, which is the sign of the
Dative case; as though they were given to David from above: and not David's
Psalms, with the sign of the Genitive case: as though they were of his own
making or invention. So saint Paul says: 2. Tim. 3.16.
The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God. And saint Peter says:
Pet. 2. ep. 3.15. James 1.5.
As our beloved brother Paul, according to the wisdom given to him, wrote to
you. And saint James says: If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God,
etc. Hereof is the majesty of the holy scriptures and word of God: it
descendes from above, all men's hearts must climb up to it: no man nor Church
is above it: so that we may justly say thereof, as David said: Psalm. 138.2.
Thou have magnified thy name and thy word above all things.

Osor. lib. 3. de Sapientia.
Of the authority of the scriptures, Osorius writes thus: If thou be afraid
to walk in darkness, and desire to be filled with the light of salvation;
do not search for those causes and reasons of things thou can never attain
unto: but only give credit to the heavenly testimonies; and be content that
thou may be sure, that those things which thou beleeuest, are confirmed by
Gods ^^ne word and sentence. This is the rock of all Christians: ^^at they
know, that those things which they do believe, are ratified by Gods own
word. The words of all the Angels in heaven, nor of all the men and Churches in
the world, without this word, could not quiet and assure our consciences.
Therefore we believe and are assured, because we know God has spoken it: and
whatsoever he has spoken, we doubt not of, though he have but once spoken it:
as Balam did, Number. 22.11.20.
after Gods answer he went to ask him the second time.

Again, of the excellent commodity, which is reaped by studying the
scriptures, he writes thus: And that we may begin, Lib. 5. de Sap.
from hence it is evident, by Gods own mouth, that true wisdom consists in
true obedience, and keeping of the law of God: For thus it is written: This
shall be your wisdom and understanding before all people, that they hearing
these commandments may say: Behold a wise, and an understanding people. As
though he should say: let others love the studies of the Mathematiques; let
them search out with all their endeavors, the hidden secrets of nature; and if
they think good, let them measure out the heavens, and let them endeavor to
bring to light that which is shut up in the bowels of the earth; let them
brag of their wisdom, and vaunt of their wits; let them walk with the
titles of great learned men, and let them intrude themselves every where, as
correctors and amenders of common wealths: But you, keep firmly with you one
kind of wisdom only, that is to say, study you in the Law of God day and
night: let that never slip out of your minds. Other studies can neither save
you, nor advance you, nor deliver you out of perils; nor to conclude, can bring
you any fruit or commodity in adversities. Nay it may so fall out, that that
same false opinion of wisdom, may oftentimes bring you into the danger of
your life, and may throw you headlong into everlasting destruction. For he is
not called blessed which is skillful in the arts which man's brain has
devised; but he that studies earnestly in the law of God day and night. And
after he concludes thus: This Oration plainly declares, that all wisdom is
contained in the studying of the law of God. If this be true, why then are not
all men in the Popes kingdom exhorted and pricked forward to this
blessedness? why are some kept back from it, and forbidden it? If all
wisdom be contained therein, what state have they been in, which never knew
it?

And Ferus herin also agrees with Osorius: Fer in c 9. act.
As unreasonable beasts are guided and holden in with a bridle; so to man is
given reason, and to Christians the word of God, by which they may be governed.
He accounts Christians lacking the knowledge of the word of God, like bruit
b^astes without a bridle, or like men without reason. And again: The word of
God is that sharp and piercing sword, wherewith the Devil is repelled, and
put to flight. He therefore that will live without care and danger, let him
take into his hands this sword. Thus says Ferus: but the Pope says not so; he
will not have every one meddle with this sword.

In cap. 20. act.
And again: These are the weapons, wherewith the enemies have hurt the Church,
that is to say, perverse doctrine: and all doctrine is perverse and wicked,
that agrees not with the rule and square of Gods word. Ibidem.
And a little after, upon these words, And to the word of his grace: He adds
this, as though he should say: If any thing as yet be wanting, let it be taken
out of the word of God: For Gods word is a Lantern unto our feet. Above all
other things, chiefly in all adversities, the power and authority of God and
the word of truth do comfort us, and do defend us against all invasions of
heretics, the Devil and the world. He does not say, as some Papists do now
say, that the wants of the Church must be supplied by traditions; but by the
Scriptures. It is able to supply all wants. And again upon these words,
Saying none other things then those, Fer. in act. 24.
which Moses and the Prophets did say should come: The doctrine of Christians
must be agreeable to the Scriptures: And if Paul were not ashamed to preach
the Scriptures, how much less we? And after, speaking of Paul's Navigations: Let
us use all fit means (says he) but especially let us trust in God. In Act. 27.
If we cannot escape ye danger of our body, yet let us have a care that our
soul may be safe. And mark here, that the longer we are on this sea (meaning
the world) we do sail the more dangerously. Again: There is never more
dangerous failing, then where there is famine of the word of God. If we would
then not suffer shipwreck, Col. 3.16.
let us have the anchor in our houses, as Saint Paul counsels us.

And a little after: As these men in so great dangers had nothing else to
comfort them, but the words of Paul: so also now the word of God only comforts
us, which God gives us abundantly. But woe be to our unthankfulness, which
despise it. The hour shall come, when we shall desire to hear the word of
God, and it shall not be granted us. Woe to him that despises it: for he shall
be despised. Let all Recusants mark this.

Mark diligently also (says he) that Paul spoke but thrice in the ship:
first he warned them that they should not sail: secondly he comforted them.
And here thirdly he forewarneth against imminent dangers. So the Apostles teach
three things: first the law, that is, what we must do, and what we must
eschew. Secondly the gospel. Thirdly, they bring remedies against perils. But
he especially counsels them, that they should take meat: for there is nothing
more necessary to the^ that be in danger, then the bread of the word of God.
No man can swim out and escape from death, unless he first strengthen
himself with the bread of life. Would thou escape death? then follow Ferus
his counsel; strengthen thy soul with this bread.

8. Of Pilgrimages.
FIrst concerning Pilgrimages, Ioh. 4.21.
the Gospel teaches us these lessons. And Jesus said unto the woman of
Samariah: Woman believe me the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this
mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship the Father, etc. No nor in any other set
place. But the hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and truth: that is in every place. Mal. 1.11.
And this is that which Malachie also prophesies of Christ's kingdom: From the
rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, my Name is great among
the Gentiles: and in every place incense shall be offered in my name. Here are
two things of us to be considered. First that Gods name alone shall be great
among the Gentiles: and of it shall proceed incense: that most sweet smelling
sacrifice unto God in every place. And what is this else but prayers to be
made in all places in the name of Jesus Christ? The same lesson also grounded
no doubt of this Prophecy, Saint Paul teaches al christians: I will therefore
that men pray every where, 1. Tim. 2.8.
lifting up pure hands without doubtfulnesse. No doubt this prayer in all
places is that sacrifice and most pleasant incense, whereof Malachie spoke
before. But that place of Saint Paul most manifestly overthrows all
Pilgrimages. The word is near thee, Romans 10.8.
even in thy mouth and in thy heart. This is the word of faith which we preach:
for if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the
heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses unto
salvation. The word of faith, the word of salvation is nigh thee says Saint
Paul: thou needs not go to Rome or to any other place for it. For if at home,
in thine house, thou shall believe in the lord Jesus, and confess him with thy
mouth; thou shall be saved: thou needs not make any great long journey for to
obtain thy salvation. Nay our savior Christ himself most manifestly makes it
a sign of heretics to teach this doctrine of pilgrimages. There shall arise
false Christ's (says he) and false prophets etc. Mat. 24.
Wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold he is in the desert, go not
forth: behold he is in secret places, 23.
or in their cells and cloisters, believe them not. For as the lightning comes
out of the East and shines into the West: 27.
So shall also the coming of the son of man be. Not only in his coming to
judgment, but also to every faithful soul, as saint Luke seems to expound
this: For as the lightening that lighteneth out of the one part under heaven,
shines unto the other part under heaven: Luke. 17.24.
so shall the son of man be in his day. Where as that which saint Matthew
calls his coming, saint Luke calls his day, And saint Luke before calls the
light of the Gospel, the day of the son of man, which in the thick
darkness of Antichrist, he says, Verse. 22.
Men shall desire to see but one of them, and shall not see it: Christ in his
kingdom as the true sun of righteousness, to illuminate and to quicken
things now dead through sin, shines not only at Rome, but through the whole
world.

Of Pilgrimages to Rome, or to other places.
Concerning this matter Ferus writes thus. By this word he shows, Fer. in ca.
4. Io.
all controversies of the prerogative of places are to be taken away: for in
the new Testament the worship of God is tied to no one place: but in all
places of his dominion God is praised of the faithful, as it was foretold by
Malachie. This is our great comfort that we may find God in all places. For
otherwise if we must all go to Jerusalem, who seeks not how few should
have been saved, therefore he left not one stone upon another in the Temple of
Jerusalem; that we might all know, that that law of worshipping God in one
place, was now abrogated, as concerning external things; for spiritually we
all do worship and sacrifice now in Christ the true Temple of God.

Fer. in pass. Part. 4.
And again of the same matter in another place he writes thus; To conclude
says he, no man knows where Moses grave is, neither makes it any great
matter. But Christ's grave is known to all men: and so also it was necessary;
that of it, we may learn our burials and resurrection: for as Christ's passion
is ours, so his burial is ours also, that we are buried with him in baptism
to death, etc.

It makes no matter for Moses his grave (says Ferus) and the chief end of
Christ's grave, why it is known where it is, is not to go to see it, but to
believe, that as he was buried, and rose again; so shall we also. But how
contrary is all this, to that which the Rhemists in their Testament, have
noted upon the second chapter of Saint Matthew, upon these words: Came to
adore, they write thus: This coming so far of devotion to visit and adore
Christ in the place of his birth, was properly a pilgrimage to his person: and
warrants the faithful, in the like kind of external worship done to holy
places, persons or things. But this follows not: they came to worship Christ:
therefore the faithful may go a pilgrimage to worship holy places or things:
when as God is only to be worshipped. Then they had a star to direct them,
but we have none now: therefore their fact cannot warrant us.

9. Of Traditions and ceremonies.
AS concerning traditions and ceremonies, Deuteronomy. 16.1.
and what account to make of them, that shadow of the law may seem to teach:
Thou shall keep the month of Abib or new corn; as Jerome translates it, that
is, when as corn grows to be eared: Reave. 11.1.8,
And thou shall celebrate the Passover unto the Lord thy God. For in the month
of Abib the Lord thy God brought thee out of the land of Egypt. The coming out
of that corporal Egypt, was a sign no doubt of the coming out of the
spiritual Egypt, as S. John teaches us in the Revelation. And amongst many
other resemblances, Romans 15.4.
that the one of these has to the other, this is not the least, and to be
observed of us: that they came out of the land of Egypt in the month of Abib:
when corn waxed ripe and began to be eared. And this God wills them here to
remember. And surely no doubt, for our learning and instruction, That we also
should come out of Egypt in the month Abib, when as the Lords corn shall wax
ripe; when as the doctrine of the Gospel shall grow to perfection; when as
the seed of the Gospel shall not now be new sown, as it was in the days of
the Fathers, but now shall be eared and be comed to perfection, Mat. 13 26.30.
Mar. 4.28.
and be ready for the reapers to thrust in the sicle and reap it into the
Lords barnes: As our savior teaches: The earth brings out of her self,
first the blade, then the ear, and after the full corn in the ear: Such like
is the growth of the seed of the word in the Church. I would to God all
Israelites, which now amongst us belong to the Lord, would remember this
month Abib; when we shall come out of the spiritual Egypt, as the other
Israelites came out of that corporal Egypt: the Lords corn shall wax ripe,
and shall grow to perfection. Many Israelites observe not this. They will
have the ceremonies and rites which the Fathers observed, even now to be
observed still: as though corn being green and like grass had not the hoses
or husks belonging to it, which (it being now ripe) do wither away and fall
down as nothing, which in the beginning grew aloft and flourished. Surely this
lesson, the month Abib must teach us: the Lords corn is now waxen ripe: and
therefore we must not look for those rites and ceremonies, those hoses or
husks which in the beginning, when as the Lords corn was green, the Fathers
tolerated, or perchance made great account of, that part of the corn which in
the spring flourished most and grew aloft, is now become withered, and quite
fallen to the ground: The true worshippers (as our savior teaches) worship
the father in spirit and truth. Io. 4.23.
And the name of the whore of Babylon is a mystery as saint John shows us:
Reave. 17.5.
that is, she is full of ceremonies and mysteries.

We are made partakers of Christ, if we keep and hold fast, (...): Heb. 3.14.
That is, the beginning of our confidence, our underpropping; that is, of our
faith, as Chrysostom expounds it, even unto the end. That is, as much to say,
as if we keep fast the faith in the beginning taught and preached. They that
hold not the beginning of their firmitie and first faith, have lost their part
in Christ. The traditions of men will not warrant it them: as saint Paul also
writes to the Galathians: O ye foolish Galathians, Gal. 3.1.
who has bewitched you, that you should believe another Gospel? Even then,
Satan began by little and little to change the Gospel of Christ, and to
bring in his traditions, and so to make the first Christians to loose their
benefit in Christ: let us being warned by their example beware this his
slight.

Ferus of the marks of the true Church, writes thus. In 2. cap. M^^
That also is the true Church, which the star declares, that is, where the
word of God is taught and reigns, and where they live according to the word
of God; and where all things are done according to the word of God and of
Christ, in what corner of the earth soever it be. The new Testament (says
Ferus) is nothing else but a manifestation of those things which were sealed up
in the old, under the rude letter and under diverse figures. The which thing is
excellently declared under the figure of a book sealed, which none could open
but the Lamb that was slain: and hereof it came to pass that the Apostles in
their preachings opened the scriptures; and hence it is, that Christ wrote
nothing, but preached by word of mouth, that which was contained in the old
law. And also sewe of the Apostles wrote any thing: And if any of them did
write, they would only teach things that were contained in the old. If this
be true, then the scripture, which the Papists call traditione^, is not of like
force with that which is scripta, or written. Secondly, then the traditions
which we are to believe, are commended to us in the word of God: and are the
same, that are contained in the written word of God.

For such traditions only, the Jews were commanded to observe. As we read in
Jeremy; Stand by the ways, Ier. 6.16.
mark and enquire of the ancient ways, which is the good way, and walk in
it, and you shall find comfort for your souls. But the traditions of the
fathers, besides the word, were utterly forbidden them as we read in Amos: Thus
says the Lord, for three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not
turn: Am. 2.4.
but because they have cast away the law of the Lord, and have not kept his
commandments. Their lies caused them to err, after which their fathers have
walked. See how the following of their fathers steps could not justify them,
neglecting or making light account of the law of the Lord: no traditions of
fathers besides, are warranted them. So saint Paul writes to the Thessalonians,
That they should keep the traditions, which they had learned either by word or
by Epistle. 2. These. 2.15.
That is, no doubt such traditions, as either were written in other parts of
the scripture, or were agreeing to the word written. How greatly soever the
nature of man delights in traditions, in the service of God; yet our Savior
tells all men plainly: They worship me in vain, Mat. 15.9.
teaching the doctrines and commandments of men. God will be worshipped of all
his, according to his own commandments. All other worship be it never so
stately or costly, is vain worship, and displeases God.

Then by Ferus judgment, that doctrine, which is not contained in the old
Testament, under some type or figure, is not to be believed in the new. And
then, as the old Testament condemned all traditions, besides the law written:
so that from that the Jews might not depart, neither to the right hand nor to
the left, so does also the new Testament.

In cap. 4.30.
The same Ferus of the worship of Christians, writes thus: The true worshippers
shall worship the father in spirit and truth. Way (says he) our worship
according to this rule; and see whether it be not more like Jewish, then
Christian worship. Nay be sure that thou art not as yet a true worshipper,
although thou observe al outward things never so exactly, unless thou worship
God in spirit and truth. How many evil worshippers were then, in the days of
our forefathers, by his judgment, in the midst of Popish darkness. In. cap.
16. Mat.
Also Ferus writes thus of this matter: There is nothing more pestilent then
evil doctrine, and therefore Christ does shadow it, by the name of Leven: and
that not unfitly. For first, as Leven is added outwardly, and is of another
nature; so it is false doctrine whatsoever is added to the word of God, or is
mingled with it, as either an external or a contrary thing: for the word of
God is pure bread, not mingled with any other thing, to which nothing must be
added, or put to of man: according to that, thou shall add nothing to my words.

In cap. 4. Mat.
And in another place, he writes thus: Then our works please God, if they be
done of the spirit, that is, if they be agreeing to Gods commandments, and
the Scripture: for all that is not good, which seems good to thee. Thou have
an example hereof in Saul, who of Amelecke reserved oxen for the sacrifice of
God, to whom it was said: Does God delight in burnt offerings? They are like to
him, to whom those things seem better, which they choose themselves, then Gods
commandments: yea, they despise Gods commandments, for their own inventions.
To conclude, there is nothing good, that is contrary to Gods commandments:
for the will of God is the rule of righteousness: and his commandment is a
sign of his will: therefore do not that which seems good in thy own
judgment. Thus much Ferus. And yet such like were many of their works, they
did in Popery; they had no commandment in the word of God to warrant them.
And all such works by Ferus judgment, could not please God, no more then Saul's
sacrifice of the sheep of the Amalekites did: and yet many Catholics will
use such works still.

And in another place he writes thus: Fer. in 11. cap Mat.
So it is also a staff of reed, whatsoever is taught or delivered besides the
word of God. It is only the word of God, the which we may safely lean upon;
that hereby thou may learn what kind of froward deceivers they are, which
give us for the word of God, only their own dreams: that is, a staff of
reed. This sentence is quite left out in the copy of Ferus printed at Rome.

The uncertainty also of Traditions should cause any good Christian to doubt,
to build his faith upon them. Augustine says, That their (...), or love
feasts, Gagneius in cap. 14. ad cor.
which the ancient Christians did commonly use at their communion, were ever
made before their communion; as Christ did first eat the Paschall Lamb before
he celebrated his sacrament: but Chrysostom says, that these love feasts
were ever made after the communion: which of these traditions should we believe
now?

Master Bellarmine also of the sign of the Cross which Constantine saw,
writes thus: De laicis lib. 3 cap. 40.
That Eusebius himself in the life of Constantine writes, that he saw it in
his journey, and that Constantine himself told him so. But in his
ecclesiastical History translated by Ruffinus, it is recorded, that he saw it
in his sleep. And that Angels stood by him, and said to him: In this sign
thou shall overcome. It is very likely says Master Bellarmine, that this was
added of Ruffinus. If there were additions in those days, even by May.
Bellarmines judgment, and forgeries against the truth: what shall we look for
in our days?

Ierom also of Origens books writes: In pref. in E^.
That in his days many were lost, and some were under his name forged. That
subtle Satan, who durst be bold to corrupt and forge Origens works, would not
stick also to forge other fathers.

Stella also, of customs and old rites writes thus: Christ (says he) and his
Parents were very careful in keeping godly and holy customs: but we quite
contrary, dissent from Christ; In 2. cap. Luc.
keeping the old custom and wont, as we say, in our garments, vsuries, and
unlawful bargains; we ought in this matter consider this, whether that such
customs agree with the Gospel or no? The which if they do not; then they are
to be forsaken of us: but if they agree with it; then they ought to be
followed. For the law of God ought to be a rule and square, by which every
rite and custom is to be exemined. For an evil custom is no law, but a
wicked abuse of the law, etc. So no doubt all customs, not only of
bargaining, but of worshipping God, by this rule and square are to be examined.

But it is objected of the Papists, that Saint Basil speaks very earnestly
in the defense of Traditions. He does so: but nothing for Popish Traditions.
Almost all the fathers do make mention of Traditions, and outward Ceremonies,
which were used in the Church in their days, which they did reverently
observe and keep: but they were not such unwritten verities, as the Papists
now, Lib. de Spirit. Sanct. cap. 27.
under the name of traditions, do teach men to believe. Basils Traditions are
almost all external things, and no points of doctrine: As signing those which
are baptized, with the sign of the cross: to pray toward the East: to dippe
the child baptized, thrice in baptism. That form of prayer which is used in
the Lords supper, is not written, says he: and the anointing of the baptized
with oil, Amb. lib. 1. de faer. cap. 2.
of which Ceremony also Ambrose makes mention. These are all outward things,
neither are they substantial points of doctrine: And of these, our church has
retained some, which seem not repugnant to the Scriptures, and others she has
refused. The fathers surely in their days through their overmuch devotion and
zeal in religion, considered not that Antichrists kingdom should be a
mystery, 1. These. 2.7. Reu. 17.5. Mark. 15.38.
and that Christ now suffering, the veil of the Temple did rent asunder; to
teach us, that the true Son being now comed into the world, all shadows
should vanish away; but they began again, even then to load the church with
outward ceremonies, and observations; in so much that Austen complained in his
days, Ep. 119. ad Ia.
that the church and the religion, which Gods mercy would have free, with the
ceremonies and mysteries in her services of God, and as plain and as few, as
might be; some did now oppress again with slavish burdens; in so much that
the Jews were in better case then we. Austen then perceived, whither this
immoderate devotion would grow unto: he urges that liberty, whereinto we are
brought by the mercies of Christ, and in the which Saint Paul wills us to stand,
Gal. 5.1.
and to maintain.

But although S. Basil do urge the observation of these outward things,
besides the express commandment and warrant of the scriptures: yet concerning
doctrine, about the which, between the Papists and us is the greatest
controversy, he writes plainly, that he would have that tried by the
scriptures.

For speaking of Heretics, he says: Ep. 80.
That they might blame us thus: they say that it is against their custom, and
that the Scripture does not agree thereunto. But what do we answer to this?
We think it not meet, that that manner of speech which has obtained the name
of a custom among them, should be accounted for a rule and canon of true
doctrine: Let us both stand to the judgment of the holy scriptures, inspired
by God; and amongst whom are found opinions agreeing to the divine Oracles,
let the sentence of truth be pronounced on their side. What can be plainer
then this? Custom must not be the canon and rule of truth in doctrine, but
Gods word; and they which have that on their side, let them have the victory.
The like offer now we make to the Pa^^^ts.

But that book of S. Basil is of Erasmus suspected to be forged, and that not
without just cause: as the most Reverend Father in God, the L. Bishop of
Winchester, in his book called, The difference between Christian subjection
and unchristian rebellion, has very learnedly proved.

Of Christ's doctrine, Ferus writes thus; Fer. de pass, part. 2.
and he quite overthrows the very ground of Traditions: Christ proves
(says he) the truth of his doctrine by two arguments: First that he never
taught secretly, but openly: For he that does evil hates the light: but he
that does the truth, comes to the light. Secondly, he gives his hearers leave
to judge, I (says he) spoke openly in the world in secret I spoke nothing,
that I would have kept secret, or not come to light: yea, he plainly commanded
his Apostles; That which I tell you in darkness, preach you in the light: He
told his Disciples many things alone, but for no other cause, then that others
were not able to comprehend them. For whatsoever Christ has taught, he will
have it published, and made known to all, least any should excuse himself.
And hereof Saint Paul says: If our Gospel be hid, it is hid in those that
perish. For in truth Christ speaks openly in the world, even now wisdom
cries in the streets. Therefore no man can justly excuse himself of ignorance.

And this also is most true, that he taught in the Synagogues and Temple of the
Jews, where all were wont to assemble themselves; yea and not only in the
Temple and in their Synagogues, but in ships and hills, Luke. 6.
and plain fields: That is, publicly, where men most commonly met together:
therefore they can have no excuse. Therefore at another time he said unto them;
If I had not comed and spoken unto them, they had had no sin, etc. This quite
overthrows the Popes Religion: Christ will have his doctrine known to all;
and the refore he frequented common places. They go about to keep it in
secret, and think it not convenient that all should know it. Again he
delivered all things openly, and nothing by tradition secretly.

Lib. 5. Eccles. Hist. ca. 2.4.
Eusebius also of Traditions writes thus: Not only (says he) of the day of
Easter is the controversy, but also of the manner of fasting: for some think
that the fast ought to be kept but one day; some other but two days; other more
days; some forty days: so that counting the hours of the day and night
together, they make a day; which variety of observations began not in our
times but long before us, of them (as I suppose) who holding not surely that
which was by tradition delivered in the beginning, have either by their
negligence, or unskillfulness afterward fallen into another custom. Here we
may learn, that traditions are no safe and sure keepers of truth, as the
papists would make us believe. How soon had they lost the true tradition of
fasting which the Apostles practiced, even in Eusebius days: And shall we
now in the end of the world, ground our faithes upon traditions?

Ier. de ord. Eccle. part. 3. c. 9.
Saint Jerome also concerning the authority of Bishops, and Elders in the
Church, writes thus: If any of us could know the custom of the time past, I
would prove that which I say, to have been observed ever, and to have been
observed when as the Apostles preached in the Church. And after: by the spite
of certain, some things were corrupted, and some things were presumed. Here
Jerome affirms, that what was done in the Apostles times, he could not then
certainly learn, much less we now. Such an uncertain rule in matters of
faith tradition is.

And Austen also of Antichrist writes thus. But what is the cause of the delaie
that he may be revealed in his time, you do know: De ciu. del lib. 20. ca. 19.
that which he said that they knew, he would not utter. And therefore we which
know not, which they knew, desire to come to the knowledge of that which the
Apostle meant, with great labor; neither can we attain unto it: because that
those things which he added have made the sense also more obscure: for what
means this; now the mystery of iniquity works; let him only that now
holds, hold till he be taken out of the way, and then that wicked one shall
be revealed: I plainly here confess my self to be ignorant what he has
said, yet I will not keep close the suspicions and surmises of men which I
have read or heard concerning this matter.

In Austens days, that tradition which was delivered by saint Paul to the
Thessalonians concerning Antichrist, a most great and weighty matter, was
forgotten: and do we think that till our days the Church has kept
traditions of lighter matters inuiolably?

Irenaeus to Florinus an heretic writes thus: I saw thee, Eusebius lib. 5. Eccle.
hi. ca. 19.
when as yet being but a child, I was with Policarpe in Asia, who then did
very well, whilst as yet thou remainedst within the Emperors palace, and
did study to please Policarpe. For I remember far better the things which
were done then, then they which are done now, because those things we learn
when we are children, grow up in us with our mind, and do cleave fast unto
it. Wherefore also I can tell thee, the place wherein Policarpe did sit, when
as he did dispute; and also his manner of going, his countenance, the manner of
all his life, and also his apparel; and also his sermons and discourses he
made to the people; and also how he lived with John; and how he was wont also
to tell of others which had seen the Lord; and also how he remembered all the
words which the Lord spoke, which he had heard of them; and of his miracles and
doctrine: and yet notwithstanding, he reported all these, agreeing to the
scriptures: the which things I then of the mercy of God, which he vouchsafed
to bestow upon me, hearing attentively and diligently, did write not in papers,
but in my heart, and which things (by the grace of God) I yet keep
faithfully, and do as it were chew them over again with my self, without
ceasing. I take God to witness, and in his sight I affirm unto thee, that if
that blessed and Apostolical man Policarpe had heard any such matter, as thou
now teach, he would by and by have cried out, and would have stopped his
ears: and as his manner was, he would have said: O good God, into what times
have thou reserved me, that I should hear these things? Would not he also, by
and by have fled from the place, where sitting or standing he should have heard
such words? Here we may plainly see what manner of traditions they were, which
the fathers kept, and in the commendations whereof, they wrote: that is, such
traditions as were agreeable to the scriptures, and no other. And this one
place of Eusebius, may be a rule to square all other places of fathers
whosoever, when they highly commend traditions. To teach all Christians that
they mean no other traditions then Policarpe and Irenaeus, that is, such as
are agreeing to the scriptures.

Among the Jews, that old and subtle serpent Satan, had sown tares amongst
the Lords wheat: Munster. in annot. in cap. 1. Genesis
as appears by the manifold dreams and strange opinions of the Rabbis,
besides the scriptures. As that before the world, God had created seven things,
that is to say, paradise, the law, the just men, the throne of majesty,
Jerusalem, and Messiah. Again, they say that the moon was in the beginning
created equal in light with the sun: but that this her light was diminished,
In annot. in 7. cap. Genesis
for her pride. Again, All the Rabbines of the Hebrews think generally, that
the waters which increased in the flood, were hot, and that so the fishes
also perished. What are all these; but satan's plants? so ouershadow the Lords
truth. So likewise amongst us Christians in the time of the Gospel, he has
not been idle: He has mixed his dross amongst the Lords gold: as appears in
the Popes Legend and other Histories. Longinus was a certain Centurion, who
standing with other soldiers (says their Legend) by the commandment of
Pilate, Legend. aurea de sancto Long.
thrust the Lords side through with his spear. And after: seeing the signs
which then happened, that is, the sun to be darkened, and the earthquake, he
believed, but especially for this cause (as some say) that when as his eyes
were dimmed, either by some infirmity, or by age, by chance some of the blood,
which ran out of Christ's side, running down his spear, touched his eyes,
and presently he saw most clearly. This is one of their traditions. But
Granatensis as should seem not liking this fable, in his meditations of
Christ's passion: I thank thee (says he) O Lord Jesus, Orat. 6. parad. prec.
that thou would suffer thy side to be pierced of a certain soldier: He
names not Longinus, but agrees with the scripture, and goes no further, that a
certain soldier pierced him to the heart with his spear.

So likewise they have added many things to the other scriptures of God: as in
an old printed book in verse, made in those days, I read thus of Putifats
wife and Joseph.

He said (Madam) I will be true to my Lord; Traitor will I never be to my
Sovereign: Therefore believe me at a word, Rather then do so, I had rather be
slain. With that loud did she cry and brake her lace in twain, And smote
her nose that it gusht out all on blood: And rent down her serket that was of
silk full good: She told the Knights that Joseph would by her lain, And that he
tare her robes all asunder. And help had not come the thief had me slain.

Here is no mention made how she kept his garment, when he fled away from
her, whereof the scripture makes mention: but of dashing her self on the nose,
and rending her robe, whereof in scripture there is no mention.

Of the first original of bonefires in their Legend, Leg. aur. in Not. Ioh.
bap.
thus we may read: The bones of dead beasts being out of all places gathered
together, are burnt of some upon this day, whereof there is two causes, as
John Beleth says: one an observation of an ancient custom: for there are
certain beasts called Dragons, which do fly in the air, and swim in the
water, and go on the earth: and sometime when as they go on earth, they are
inflamed with lust, and do throw their seed into springs and floods, whereof
followed a plaguie and unwholesome year. Against this, this remedy was found
out, that a fire should be made of the bones of beasts; and this fire would
drive them away: and because this chanced about this time; therefore yet this
of some is observed. Another cause is, to signify unto us that the bones of
Saint John Baptist were burnt, in the City called Sebasta of the infidels.
Also then they carry in their hands burning firebrands, because John was a
light shining and burning. And they turn about a wheel, because then the
sun declines in his circle, to signify that the fame of John, who was
supposed to be Christ, did descend and diminish. What preservatives against
Dragons; what doctrines for their souls, were these? Io. 5 35.
Especially when as they never then heard in the scriptures read, that John was
a burning light.

But that fable of Formosus is notable, Fasc. Tem. 6 aetate. Christi. an* Dom.
9 14.
which Fasciculus Temporum makes mention of. This Sergius (says that book)
when as he came to Rome by the aid of the French men, took Christopher the
Antipope, and sat in his steed. And to revenge his repulse, he drew the body
of Formosus out of his grave, and being clothed like the Pope, he commanded his
head to be chopped off in his pontifical chair, and to be thrown into Tiber.
But the fishers brought him into the Church, the Images bowing themselves unto
him, and saluting him reverently, as all they did see which were present. This
is reported in that history. And after, Fulbertus Bishop of Carnotensis, in
his sickness was visited of the blessed Virgin Marie, and restored again with
her most blessed milk. Also of the visitation of Elizabeth, they say in their
Legend, that the blessed Virgin carried with her Cousin three months, waiting
upon her, and that she took the child being borne in her holy arms from the
ground; as it is written in the Scholasticall history; and did most diligently
the duty of a nurse carrying him about. This teaches their Legend. Whereas
the Gospel says, that she abode with her three months, and after returned to
her own house: Luc. 1.56.
and that when Elizabeth's time was comed, that she should be delivered, she
brought forth a form; and her neighbors and Cousins reioiced with her. But
this as should seem, was after Mary's departure. And this Stella affirms also
in 2. cap. Luc. Thus they err not knowing the Scriptures.

That miracle is strange of Germanus the Bishop of Antisiodore, Fasc. temp.
Fol. 50.
which is written of him, that he restored three dead men to life again; and
also his Ass. That he would show a miracle upon his ass, seems very
strange. But to conclude this matter (for of miracles I shall have an occasion
to speak hereafter) Ludouicus Viues a Papist writes thus of Legenda aurea.
Lud. Viu. de cause. corr. art. lib. 2.
The French men (says he) write of the French, and the Italians of the
Italique, and the Spaniards of the Spanish, and the Germans of the German, and
the English men of English affairs; and some others, to please some other
country. And the Author thinks, that he has sufficiently played his part, if
he have commended as much as he can that nation: he respects not the truth of
the matter, but the glory of the country. Neither in the writings of the acts
of the Saints is there any greater regard of truth, in which all things ought
to be exact and absolute. Every one wrote their acts, as he was affected
toward them: so that the Authors affection indicted the history, and not the
truth. How unworthy of the Saints and christian men is that history of the
Saints, which is called the Golden-Legend, which I cannot tell why they call it
golden, when as it was written of a man having an iron mouth and a leaden
heart: what thing can be named more dishonorable then that book? Oh what a
great shame is it to us christians! that the most famous acts of our Saints
are not more truly and sincerely committed to memory, either for the
knowledge or imitation of so excellent virtues, as were in them? when as the
Greek and Roman writers have written so diligently of their captains,
Philosophers and wise men. Thus much Ludouicus Viues affirms. He smelled Satan's
sleights in these matters. He was not ashamed to confess his blackness: and
that even the most part of their Legends are lies. I could wish that all true
Catholics would do the like, and mark well what S. Paul teaches, that
Antichrist shall come by the working of Satan, 2 Thessalonians 2.9.
with all power and signs and lying wonders, in all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness among them that perish, because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved. Let all true Catholics hate all lies
whatsoever, though they be in their Legend; and love Gods word, which is truth
it self. Psalm. 119.142.


Osorius of the Jews writes thus: De Sap. ^. lib.
We have not as yet touched the greatest evil, wherewith they are afflicted:
and what (I pray you) is that, you will say unto me? their raging madness, by
which they having forsaken the study of the law and the Prophets, they have
gotten unto themselves other learned helps. Search the Scriptures (says the
Lord himself) for they bear witness of me. That this thing, which Christ
commands, the Jews might not easily do; Satan by his slight and subtlety
devised, that they despising the study of the holy Scriptures, might spend all
their life in studying of poisoned and hurtful doctrines. The Greek and
Latin Poets feign many things, but yet wittily and finely, not to deceive any
but to delight; from whose fables many things may be very fitly applied to our
manners and to our life: but the Jews invent and coin such things which have
no delight in them at all. For they are very absurd and foolish, not
beautified with any eloquence of words or of speech, which they have committed
to writing; not that they might delight the minds, but that they might
entangle them with errors. For they say that God did not make perfect the
heavens, and that the light of the Moon was diminished for her pride and
envy. And that our first father Adam before Eve was created, had copulation
incestuously with all other beasts: and that all other trees, when as he had
transgressed the Law of God, did lift up aloft from him both their leaves and
fruits, least he should take any commodity by them; and that only the fig
tree, because she was guilty of his offense (for it was the fruit thereof
(they say) which our first parents did taste against Gods commandment) did
yield to them her leaves, wherewith they might cover their privy parts, etc.
Such vanities Satan devised for the Jews, to keep them occupied withal,
when as they forsook the study of the Scriptures. And has he not done the
like in the Popes kingdom? When the study of the scriptures was neglected, as
before has been showed. This Osorius confesses, and we have by experience
proved true.

And after he writes thus: Thus much only I will say; when as Mahomet in his
Alchoran has fained many things not only impudently and wickedly; but also
foolishly and blockishly: yet in many places the Jews in the monstrousnes and
impudency of their fables, have gone beyond Mahomet. So that Mahomet being
compared to them, may seem to be some body: And yet these Masters of the
Rabbines are read and learned, and with these wicked disciplines (as Esaias
prophesied) their youths are entangled, and these are imprinted into them in
their tender years, as Gods testimonies. Surely the like may we say of the
monstrous lies and fables which Satan devised in time of Popery, and were
given to be taught children in steed of Gods word: as were the fables of Beuis
of Hampton, Valentine and Vrson, Houleglas, Clyme of the Clough, and such like.
Surely all these like apples grew of the same tree, came no doubt from that
father of lies, and from that prince of darkness Satan.

And being (says he) delighted with these studies, they despise the study of
the law of God, and they very seldom take the Prophets into their hands, and
they place the chief wisdom now in this shop of madness, rashness, and
wickedness. And do not many even so amongst us, who will seem religious? They
will delight to hear a play, or to read some vain history: but the Law of
God they will not take in their hands.

But (says Osorius) as concerning the manners and dealings of their lives, with
what errors and wickedness do they pollute the purity of the law? For that
they expound the law, that it is necessary, that he which is condemned of the
greater part of the judges, shall suffer punishment: But he that is condemned
by the sentences of all the judges, shall be acquitted. And he that shall go
about to kill a Citizen, by false witness, shall die; but he that shall kill
one shall be absolved. As though the purpose of hurting, without taking effect,
were worthy of punishment; but having obtained his purpose, were worthy of
praise. It is also lawful for them by the decrees of their Rabbines to
defraude Christians of their money; to take their lives from them; to beguile
any nation; to invent crafts and deceits; and to wish a plague day and night to
the innocent, etc. With such corruptions and false expositions of the law is
that doctrine stuffed, which they call Talmud; which professes that it
observes the letter of the law very diligently.

And does not the Pope so expound Gods law, that yet if any man kill another,
he may dispense with him: Nay that it may be lawful for the subject to
rebel; nay to kill the Prince: what is this but in expounding the law of God
to imitate the Jewish Talmud?

But what shall I speak of the other part of their law, which they call Cabala?
what great matters does it take upon it? and about what trifles is it occupied?
what great promises does it make? And how evil does it perform them? It
promises men heavenly things, and it leaves not miserable wretches scant those
things which concern man. For this it undertakes, that it will expound the
inward meaning of the law, and that it will search out, not the outward letter,
but the inward hidden mystery: And it judges that we must lead our lives
according to the meaning and not according to the letter of the law, etc. What
can be greater, what more stately then this promise? But in the end what more
vain or frivolous? They spend their whole life in expounding the name of God,
which they cannot attain unto, etc.

With one of these two knowledges, the Jews which are desirous of learning,
being greatly delighted; read the scriptures carelessly, and they think that
they are not to be expounded: but by the judgment either of the Talmudists or
Cabalists: And do not the Papists follow their steps? They have bin altogether
occupied in reading and studying the Master of the Sentences and the
Schoolmen: they have read the scriptures carelessly or not at all; and they
have thought that they were to be expounded according to their judgments. And
whereas (says Osorius) that it was established by Gods law, that soothsayers,
which whisper in their incha^tments, should not be sought unto; but that all
the dealings of our life should be referred to the square of the law of God,
and to the testimony: the Jews in steed of the holiness of the law of God,
seek to the dregs and corruption of the law, and place the art of magic
which they call Cabala, in Gods place. What can be said or imagined more
heinous then this? And have not the Papists likewise done so, for all things
almost? For their diseases, for their things stolen or lost, for the mischances
of their cattle in seeking to witches and coniurers? This is too manifest.

But to concide; as Osorius writes to the Jews; the same petition I would make
to all true Catholics. I request (says he) but two things at your hands; the
one is, that you would detest that poisoned learning, which came now from no
place else but even from the bottomless pit of hell to the plague of mankind,
and that you would only ask counsel of the law of God, and of the
testimonies of the Prophets. The other thing is, that you would not come in
your prayers and requests to God, bringing any thing with preiudicate minds
from your forefathers, but with a simple heart you would earnestly desire of
that most high fountain of love and mercy, that he would vouchsafe to open to
you mercifully, that which is necessary for your salvation. The which if you
shall do, I do not doubt but that he will lighten your minds, with the
brightness of his holy spirit, that then at length you may see, what Godhead
and power lies hid in Christ, nailed upon the cross. These two requests I
would also make to all Catholics, that they would now loath the intricate
doctrines of the schoolmen, 2. Cor. 11.3. Reave. 9.2. Psalm. 19.3.
and love the simplicity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ? Surely, this is that
smoke that came out of the bottomless pit, which darkened both the sun and
the air, that is, Jesus Christ, who is the true sun of righteousness; and the
air, that is, the word of God, which is the air and life of our souls. And
of this air David says: I opened my mouth and drew in my breath, Psalm.
119.131.
for I loved thy commandments: And that these would only in matters of
says and religion now ask counsel of the law and word of God: and that
they would lay aside that preiudicate opinion of their fathers; that because
their fathers believed so; that therefore they also will believe so. Osorius
tells the Jews this is no sure argument, and so most I tell them: and that
they would pray unto God with a single heart, to show them which is the right
way: and then they should see what power remains in Jesus Christ? so that they
need not the merits of any saints, but his alone; nor the mediation of any
Angels, but his only to their salvation.

10. Of the Popes Supremacy.
MAster Bellarmine, of that place of our Savior in the 16. of Matthew, writes
thus: Upon this rock. Bellar. de To. Pontifice. li. 1. cap. 10.
Of the first question there are four opinions. The first is, that common
opinion of all Catholics: That Peter was that rock (upon which Christ said he
would build his Church) that is, that person which was called Peter: yet not as
he was a particular person; but as he was Pastor and head of the Church: After
he reckons up three other opinions: the second of Erasmus, who says upon this
place, that every faithful Christian is this rock. The third of Calvin, who
says that Christ is this rock: and the fourth of Luther, who says, that
faith, or the confession of faith; to be the rock which our Savior meant. But
he concludes, that the first opinion which is truest, is plainly gathered out
of the text: for that pronoune (this) when it is said, and upon (this rock)
declares some rock, which the Lord had spoken of a little before. But
immediately before the Lord had called Peter a rock: for he spoke in the
Siriake tongue, and in the Siriake tongue Peter is called a Cephas, as we read
in the first of John: and Cephas signifies a rock, as Jerome teaches, upon
the second Chapter of the Galathians: so that Master Bellarmine would have
Peter to be that rock whereon Christ did build his Church: and that because his
name which Christ gave him in the Siriake tongue, signifies a rock. But he
might as well consider, that his name (...), which no doubt the holy Ghost gave
him, by the Greek interpretor of S. Matthewes Gospel, properly signifies a
stone: So that whereas Cephas in the Siriake, signifies either a rock or a
stone; (...) in the Greek, does seem to restrain it and to expound it.
(Zonah) in the Hebrewe signifies an vachast woman, or a victualer; by which
name Rahab was called in the Hebrewe: Ios. 2.1. Heb. 11.3^
but the Greek restraines the ample signification of that word, and calls her
(...): which is an harlot.

But if it be granted, that Christ spoke of a rock, mentioned a little
before; why may it not be then of that rock which Peter confessed; which he
might call that rock? And so a greater man, then Master Bellarmine, even
Gregory the great, and sometime a Bishop of Rome expounded it: and shall we
not believe him, rather then Master Bellarmine? he writ thus of our Savior
Christ: In. 5. Psalm. penit.
I am A and O, the first and last; the beginning and the end. In this
beginning, was the earth founded, because in him is the Church founded: and
therefore the Apostle says, No man can lay any other foundation, besides that
which is laid already, which is Jesus Christ. So does Theodoret also expound
it.

This foundation Peter laid or rather the Lord himself. Theo. 1. Cor. 3.


And therefore the mediator of God and man said to the prince of the Apostles:
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church. For he is that
rock, from which Peter took his name, and upon the which he said he would
build his Church. (And after.) But the Church founded upon the strength of that
rock, whereof I have spoken (meaning Christ Jesus) neither is shaken with the
storms of threats, nor moved with the waves of persecution. Here we may note,
that Gregory affirms, that the rock, upon which the Church must be built,
must be strong and firm, which no storms nor no waves can be able to move:
but such strength is in no mortal man. Secondly, that Christ is that rock,
and that no other can be put. This was the Catholics doctrine in his days.
And hereby we may plainly see, how now the common and received opinion of
Catholics dissents from him.

And although some other of the Fathers have called Peter the rock, upon which
our Savior said he would build his Church; and M. Bellarmine says, that
saint Austine, when as he had also sometime affirmed the same, retracted it
after, because he understood not the Hebrewe tongue; and thought that Cephas
did not signify a rock, but some thing derived from a rock: as if we should
say: rockish, or of the nature of a rock. I answer, that Austine understood
the Greek tongue, which plainly expounds this word Cephas to be Petra; as
appears not only by saint Matthewes Gospel, Io. 1. 42.
but also by saint John, where our Savior himself says: Thou shall be called
Cephas, which is interpreted Petrus, or a stone: no doubt the holy Ghost
foresaw how some would go about by this word Cephas, to make Peter the rock,
whereon the Church should be builded. And therefore, to stop the mouths of all
such expositors whosoever, it self has expounded, that Cephas is by
interpretation not a rock, but a stone. And this interpretation of the spirit
of God is sufficient, to settle any true Christians conscience, against any
other man's interpretations whatsoever. And Austin himself distinguishes Peter
far otherwise then M. Bellarmine does: Tract. in Ioh. 133.
Forasmuch (says he) as belonged properly to himself, Peter by nature was one
man; by grace one Christian, and by his more abundant grace, Primus. Apostolus.
that he had more then others, one and the same * first Apostle. But when it
was said unto him, I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and
whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, etc. he signified the whole Church, and
not one person. M. Bellarmine distinguishes Peter as one person; and again,
as he was head of the Church. But S. Augustine distinguishes him as he is one
person, and in that consideration he says, by that abundant grace he had more
then others: he was not head of the Church, as M. Bellarmine says, but only
the first Apostle. And in his second consideration, he represented the whole
body of the Church, when he received the keys, which is tossed with many
waves and is built upon the rock; so in this consideration, Peter himself was
built upon the rock.

But to make the matter without all doubt, not all the Catholics, as M.
Bellarmine affirms, do avouch Peter to be that Rock whereon the Church was
built. For Ferus expounds Cephas to be taken for a stone, and not for a rock,
when it was given to Peter his words: are these; Thou art Peter: (...) (says
he) in Greek, Cephas in the Chaldee tongue, in Latin is a stone. Ferus in 16.
cap. Matthew.
Therefore we must search out the reason of this name; for he did not without
cause call him Peter, which before was called Simon. We read in John, when as
Andrew had brought Simon his brother to Christ, by and by as soon as Christ
saw him, he said: Thou art Simon the son of John: Thou shall be called
Cephas. At the very first sight of him, he foretold that he should have
another name, and that not any name whatsoever; but such a name as should
signify a stone: neither did he notwithstanding give a reason of that name in
that place, neither in any other place of the Gospel, as hitherto ye have
heard, why he is called Peter, but only in this place: for when Peter had said;
Thou art Christ the son of God: he heard by and by: Thou art Peter. As though
he should say: Hitherto thou have been called Simon: and thou have been
called the son of man, now thou art the son of God, and thou art Peter: now
thou art worthy of this name, now thou art truly a stone, because thou stand
upon the rock. Thou see that Peter was so called for the confession of the
faith. And this changing of the name also concerns us: For thus it is
prophesied of the believers: For Sions sake I will not hold my peace And thou
shall be called by a new name, because the mouth of the Lord h^th spoken it. It
is not a new name, that one should be called Peter, that is a stone. It is not
for man, that he should be a rock; even as Job says. My strength is not the
strength of stones. Nay on the contrary, All flesh is grass, and every man
living is altogether vanity It belongs only to Christ, that he should be a
rock. And he gets this new name, who is built upon this rock, as thou see
in Peter. Thus far Ferus: Where we may learn evidently that he agrees not with
M. Bellarmine, who expounds Cephas to be a rock: but he agrees with us, and
with the interpretation thereof set down in the Gospel, and calls it a stone:
and so also makes Peter himself to be. Nay, he adds farther (which quite
overthrows M. Bellarmines assertion) that all Christians which are built upon
the rock, which is Jesus Christ, get to themselves this new name: why then, if
Cephas signify a rock, then all Christians should be rocks; and upon them
also, as well as upon Peter, should the Church be builded? But to put the
matter out of all doubt, he says plainly, that it is not for any man to be
called a rock, no not for the Pope then, if he be a man. And yet to make it
more evident, if it were possible; what was his opinion and judgment
concerning this matter, he adds: It belongs only to Christ to be a rock:
What can be more manifest then this? Therefore all Catholics, as M.
Bellarmine affirms, do not affirm Peter to be the rock, whereupon the
Church was built; or if they do, they do err, as here Ferus forced with truth,
does very manifestly prove and confess.

And here I cannot let pass a slight, which some Catholics have used to
salve this matter: whereas in a copy printed at Paris 1594. after Ferus death,
we read thus as I have alleged: It belongs only to Christ that he should be
the rock. In a copy printed at Rome 1597 it is thus read: It belongs to
Christ that he should be the first and chief rock: where the word Only is
quite left out, and the word first or chief is put in or added. What dealing
is this; to add or put out at their pleasures? and that to maintain the Popes
supremacy. Ferus in his first copy says, that It belongs only to Christ to
be a rock. And the Catholics in their copy printed at Rome say, It belongs
to Christ to be the chief rock: and put out only and add chief, because
they would have the Pope joined with him. And Ferus himself did not alter this
during his life, for both the copies were printed after his death. That at
Paris by Philippus Agricola, preacher at Moguntia; and as it should seem,
Ferus successor. But howsoever they would salve the matter, with the word
chief or first, Ferus has so plainly put down his judgment herein, as all
the world may see and perceive their iuggling: for he said before: It belongs
not to any man to be a rock. Therefore he takes away plainly all secondarie
rocks of Peter's successors, which they would establish.

But to declare plainly what Ferus meant by the chief Rock, which perchance
sometime he uses, he adds after, upon these words, And upon this rock I will
build my church. What the Church is (says he) we have declared else where: but
now we must search out, what is the rock upon which the Church is built. The
scripture sometime takes a rock for strength, firmity and security, as in the
Psalm. He has brought me out of the lake of misery, and has set my feet upon
the rock: By which words he means nothing else, then that he was placed in a
safe and sure place, that is, in safety. So also in another place he says.
Set me upon a rock. When as Christ therefore says: I will build my Church upon
this rock, he means nothing else, then he will build his Church upon a sure
and immovable foundation, against which all the assaults of his enemies can
be able to do nothing. By this it is manifest, that Christ built not his
Church upon Peter, as a chief foundation For we are built upon the foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner
stone) or upon any other man: for no man is so firm or constant that he cannot
be moved, as we may also see in Peter: Therefore another rock is to be sought
for. And truly in the Scriptures Christ himself is often called a rock or
stone, as in Esaias, I will put in Sion a corner stone, approved and chosen,
whosoever believes in him shall not be confounded And in the Psalm. The same
stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner. And
Peter coming to Christ, as to a living stone is to be built upon him. Thou
hear what Peter says, that Christ is that stone: then he wills that we all
should be stones, which then is done, when we are built upon Christ. And he is
built upon Christ, that believes in Christ, and trusts upon those things which
Christ has, and is able to do. Christ therefore is principally the rock upon
whom the whole Church is built, according to that: Another foundation can no
man lay besides that which is laid, Jesus Christ. Then because, by a true faith
we are joined to Christ: we also, after a manner (if we may so speak) as it
were become rocks. All Christians are secundarie rocks.
And therefore the Christian faith it self, and the truth of the Gospel, is
that firm and immovable rock, on which Christ has built his Church. Thus
far Ferus.

And here we may note first that the rock, whereon Christ will build his
Church, must be firm, sure and immovable, against which the assaults of no
enemies can prevail. Secondly, he says that Peter was not such a rock, as we
may manifestly perceive. Again, whereas he says, that he built it not upon
Peter, as on a chief foundation, he adds. For we are builded upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Amongst whom he reckons Peter. And
lastly he concludes, that principally or chiefly Christ is the rock, upon
which the whole Church is built. And secondly, the Christian faith or truth of
the Gospel, is that firm and immovable rock, upon which Christ built his
Church. So that where Ferus does say that Christ is the chief rock, he means
not to make Peter or his successors the second (as the Papists do conceive)
but Christian faith and the truth of the Gospel. But afterward he also
declares most evidently what was given to Peter, To thee (says he) I will give,
etc. he promises that he will give him the keys; he gave them not in this
place: therefore let us seek where he gave him the keys indeed. And we shall
find in no other place, but that which is in John, Receive ye the holy Ghost,
whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven them: and whose sins you shall
retain, they shall be retained. The keys therefore of the kingdom of heaven
are power to forgive or retain sins. The which also is proved out of this
place: For Christ forthwith added; Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, etc.
But what means this here, to Peter only the keys are promised, and yet they
are also given to the other Apostles? Here I will allege the sentence of S.
Jerome: For the ordinary Gloss alleges him. The other Apostles have (says
he) power of Jurisdiction, to whom it was said after the resurrection, Receive.
Every Church also has this power in her Bishops and Priests: but therefore
they are promised specially to Peter, that all men may understand, that
whosoever shall separate himself from the unity of the faith, and from the
fellowship of the Church, which is but one; neither to be loosed from his sins,
nor can enter into heaven. Thou have heard what be the keys and what is the
ecclesiastical power: let us mark the use of the keys, and the execution of
this power. Thus far Ferus. Here we may note most manifestly, both by Ferus and
Ieromes judgment, that the power and authority here promised to Peter alone,
was afterward given indeed to all the Apostles, and that every Church, in her
Bishops and Priests has now the same power: what then can the Bishop of Rome
Peter's successor, or the Church of Rome brag of, more then any other bishops
or Church? Every Church (say Jerome and Ferus) has this power, which was
promised to Peter, in her bishops and priests; and not the Church of Rome or
Peter's successors only: as now the Patrons of the Church of Rome teach. But
wherefore were they then promised specially to Peter, if he alone received them
not? Jerome answers: For a mystery, not for any superiority, to signify that
there should be but one faith and one Church: from which unity, whosoever did
swarne should not be partaker of this remission. Agreeing herein with Cyprian,
who plainly affirms that the other Apostles were the same that Peter was,
Cypr. de simp. praelat.
endewed with the same power and authorititie: but to him alone this was
spoken, to declare the unity of the Church. In this weighty matter, if
authority be sought for, here is the authority of the scriptures, one place
expounded by another: here is the consent of the ancient Fathers, and even of
Ferus, a friend of the Roman Church; and yet in this so evident a matter of
truth forced to join hands with these.

I would to God all other favorers of the Roman Church would do the like, and
would not seek by indirect means and fraudulent dealings to pervert and
obscure the truth, as is most manifest that they do, even in this very matter.
For whereas Ferus in his copy printed at Paris, and published by Philippus
Agricola the Emperors Chaplain, and dedicated to him; and therefore no doubt,
being the very true copy of the Original, alleging that place of John for
the explication of Matthew, says, that it cannot be found in any place else,
where th^s promise was performed: And the ordinary Gloss citing this place of
Jerome for the explication of that pl^ce of John: the copy printed at Rome
after A^no Dom. 157^. (...) out both that place of John, and of Jerome: belike
they think that the promise was not performed then, as Ferus most evidently
affirms it was; or else Ieromes exposition pleases them not. And yet they
would make the world believe, that both Fathers and the Scriptures are on their
side, and do make for them. If this be true, why should they then purge out,
as some loathsome thing, this saying of the scripture, and this exposition of
Jerome, for so they say in their copy printed at Rome: Commentaries of Ferus
at Rome perused and purged. Do they use to purge such things out? By this we
may learn what account they make of the scriptures and Fathers. But this their
corrupt dealing is not only in this place, but follows very often after in
this matter of Peter's prerogative, as shall appear.

It follows thus after in Ferus in the true original: Neither can they
simply, at their own pleasure and will remit sins or retain them, but by
certain means. Let us seek therefore what they be: And truly in Matthew and
Mark, they are most manifestly expressed; for so we read in Matthew, Go teach
all nations and baptize them: and in Mark, Go you into the whole world, and
whose sins you remit, they are remitted unto the^: He that believes and shall
be baptized, etc. Behold these are the means by which the Ecclesiastical
power of forgiving sins is executed, that is to say, the preaching of the
Gospel, and administration of sacraments: neither do I find any other thing
else given to the Apostles, by which they may execute their power, then these
two things. Here are the means Ferus plainly set down, by which this
ecclesiastical power promised to Peter, and given to him with the rest of the
Apostles, is executed: that is, the preaching of the Gospel, and the
administration of the sacraments. And in these two the bishop of Rome has no
more authority then any other bishops or pastors of any other church. So
that Ferus still keeps his former judgment, that he cannot find but that
which Jerome also avouches, that every church has in her bishops and priests,
that which was promised to Peter: and that this power is executed no
otherways, then by preaching and administration of the sacraments. Then
plainly by Ferus judgment, he cannot find that the bishop of Rome has any
power left him to execute this ecclesiastical authority granted to Peter and
to other bishops, in making of pardons; the which is a principal means by
which he executes this autthoritie. Ferus can find but two means in the
scripture, by which this power is executed; the preaching of the Gospel, and
the administration of the Sacraments. The making of Pardons is a mean devised
to enrich the Pope, not found in the scriptures. Nay if this be true, he makes
in effect the Pope to be Antichrist: for if ye power of the true keys consist
in preaching the gospel, and in the administration of the sacraments, then the
Pope himself which never uses any of these, but is altogether occupied in
other matters; as in making of pardons, in confirming and deposing kings, uses
counterfeit keys in the house of Jesus Christ, and uses not the true keys:
and therefore himself is a counterfeit servant, Luke. 11.23.
and even Antichrist himself. For our savior has said, He that is not with
me is against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad. But our
Savior Christ, when he was on earth here, gathered his sheep togther by
preaching, as is most apparent in the Gospel: Therefore the Pope which does
not by this means gather with him, scatters abroad, and is not a faithful
shepherd, but an hireling; not a ^atherer, but a scatterer; not a favorer,
but a destroyer of Christ's flock. This doctrine of Ferus is manifest and truly
grounded on the scriptures.

But now let us see how the Popes Patrones have corrupted and perverted it.
Ferus (as I have before cited him) has thus plainly declared his judgment in
the copy printed at Paris: but in his copy printed at Rome, thus there they
have perverted his doctrine. When as they count simply, or at their own
pleasures, or at their own wills forgive or retain sins, but by certain
means, let us search them out; and they truly in Matthew and Mark are most
manifestly expressed: for so we read in Matthew* Go teach all nations, and
baptize them. And in Mark; Go into the whole world, he that believes, and is
baptized, etc Behold these are the means by which the Ecclesiastical power of
forgiving of sins is executed: that is to say, the sacraments, which if he
receive, now the kingdom of heaven is opened unto him, now his sins are
forgiven him: Neither find I any other thing given to the Apostles, by which
they ought to execute their power and authority. Thus says the Roman copy,
where they leave out the principal means of executing this power, that is
preach ng the Gospel, to confirm no doubt and maintain their dumb Pope and
his Clergy: and whereas Ferus can find nothing but these two, they leave out
the preaching of the Gospel, and these words (then these two) and they say,
neither can I find any thing else given to the Apostles to execute their
authority: meaning the sacraments. What dealing is this, thus to mangle his
words? what truth, to take away the principal means of the power of forgiving
sins from the pastors of Christ's Church? And whereas Christ has given them
as it were two keys, to steal one from them: what is this else, but to throw
Gods people into hell? and this dealing to be at Rome, which calls her self
the mother Church, the mistress of all piety and religion; what a sin is
this?

But as Ferus goes on further in setting forth the truth; so do they also in
their corrupt dealing. The execution therefore (says Ferus) of the
Ecclesiastical power consists in these two, that is to say, in preaching of
the Gospel, and administration of the Sacraments: Neither do we read that the
Apostles did any other things. To which Jerome agrees upon the 14. of Esaias. The
Apostles (says he) loose by the word of God, the testimonies of the
Scriptures, and exhortations of virtues; and as they loose by the word of God,
so also they loose by the sacraments, which are adherents and appendants to the
word. Here the Roman copy leaves out Ferus drift: The execution (says Ferus)
of Ecclesiastical power consists in these two, that is, in preaching the
Gospel, and administration of the sacraments: Neither do we read that the
Apostles did any thing else. This sentence they leave out, which is the sum
of all. They after allege Ierom (as Ferus does) That they loose by preaching:
But that the execution of the power Ecclesiastical consists only in these two
points; that they leave out, which overthrows all their Popish pardons. And
after Ferus says: These things therefore I alleged in this place, that thou
might see, that my opinion wherein I said, that the execution of the power
ecclesiastical did consist in the preaching of the word, and administration of
the Sacraments, to differ nothing from the saying of the saints. This sentence
in the Roman copy is quite left out. That conclusion of Ferus they do not like.

Of these things which have been spoken (says he) is that question dissolved
easily, which troubles some, how Priests can forgive sins, when as that only
belongs to God, according to that, I am he that does blot out thine iniquities.
And also that Christ alone has the keys of death and hell. To which thus it
may be answered: That only God forgiues sins by power of dignity and
excellency: but the Apostles and their sucessours, like servants, apply these
things, by which God forgiues sins, and gives grace, as are the word of God
and Sacraments. Here we may learn plainly by Ferus judgment, the power and
authority of forgiving of sins remains only in God: the pastors and
ministers, like poor and humble servants to this great cure, do but apply
those medicines and remedies, by which God cures. There is no power nor
authority in them: that is in God alone. Here the Roman copy leaves out,
that only God forgiues sins by power of dignity and excellency: It is
likely they would have that power in their priests: They say that God alone
remitteth sins, but they leave out these words, by the power of dignity and
excellency.

To conclude (says Ferus) these keys of the Church are nothing else then
power of binding and loosing; of forgiving sins, and retaining them. But the
Roman copy leaves out, are nothing else: To conclude (say they) the keys of
the Church are power of binding and loosing, of remitting and retaining of
sins. Ferus proceeds, To thee will I give the keys. Some labor to prove,
that this was said only to Peter, because he said, To thee I will give. Others
say the contrary. But lest I should determine any thing rashly, I will show
not mine own but Augustines opinion, Aug. in Io, tract 120.
who in the 120. Tract. upon John, says thus: Peter (says he) bare a figure
of the Church. For properly as much as belongs to himself by nature, he was
but one man, and by grace one Christian, and by his more abundant grace but
one and the same first or chief Apostle. But when it was said to him, To thee
I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, he signified the whole Church.
Also in his book of Christian doctrine, the first book and eight chap. he
teaches plainly that the keys were given to the Church. Here we may plainly
see by Austines and Ferus judgment, what Peter was in his greatest
excellency, but one and the first Apostle, giving him no more prerogative,
then the Gospel yields unto him, who in the numbering of the twelve Apostles,
says, the first Simon Peter. He was as it should seem most ancient, therefore
in order to be preferred before the rest. Thus much concerning his own person,
Austine and Ferus attribute to him: but the keys were given to him in another
person, that is, in the person of the Church: and therefore in her name he
received them, not in his own name, or for himself and his successors. So
that by Austines judgment, these keys were not given to Peter alone, but as
Jerome before also professed, that every Church in her Bishops and priests
receives that which was given to Peter.

This is Ferus opinion in his true original: but the Roman copy has thus
mangled him. Some (say they) labor to prove that this was spoken to Peter
alone, because he said, To thee I will give, etc. to whom others are contrary.
Thus far they go in the Roman copy, but they leave out Ferus opinion
concerning this matter, and that grounded upon Saint Austine. Here we may see
again, how little they do esteem the fathers: and how little in truth they
do make for them. In this weighty matter of the Popes authority, they have
rejected both Augustine and Jerome. If they had liked their sayings, why should
they have purged them out? And after where Ferus declares how the Church, and
also how Peter received ye keys. I answer (says he) that both is true, that
the keys are given to the Church, as to the mystris or spouse, but to Peter
not as a Lord or master, but as to a minister. And to this belongs that which
St. Paul says. Let a man so esteem us as the ministers of Christ. And the
same says again: I am a debtor both to the wise and foolish. And hereunto
belongs the names of the Apostles who in the scriptures are called pastors,
watchmen, laborers. To conclude, says Ferus; hear what Bernard writes to Pope
Eugenius in his second book of Consideration. Thy predecessors (says he) the
Apostles heard that the harvest is great and the laborers few: challenge
therefore the Fathers inheritance; be watchful in this, and be not idle, least
it be said unto thee, why stand thou all the day idle? much less it
becomes thee to be either found dissolute through pleasures; or effeminated
with pomp and state. The will of the testator gives thee none of these. But
what? If thou be contented with that which is contained in them, have a more
care of the inheritance and of the work, then of glory and riches: For what
did the holy Apostle leave thee, that which I have, says he, I give thee. And
what is that? not gold nor silver, when as he had none of that, but what? care
over the Church. But what did he leave thee? a Lordshippe. Hear what he
says, not ruling as Lords over the Lords inheritance, but being made a
pattern of the flock. And that thou may know that these things are so in
deed, Christ says in the Gospel. The kings reign over the nations: but you
shall not do so. Of these it is plain that Lordships are forbidden the
Apostles, the which whosoever do challenge to themselves, are of the number of
them of whom God complains thus: They have reigned but not by me. And after:
they are the ministers of Christ, and so am I, and he adds, I speak as
unwise, I more, being in many labors. O excellent ministry: if thou must
glory let the pattern of the holy Apostles be set before thine eyes,
acknowledge thine inheritance in Christ's cross, in many labors: happy is he
that can say, I have labored more then they all. Thus far Bernard: let them
mark well this (says Ferus) that glory in their authority. To Peter
therefore were the keys given, but as to a minister. This Ferus alleges out
of Bernard to beat down the Popes idle pomp and pride: and to extol the
excellency of the ministry of the gospel. The name whereof now to be
called a minister. the catholics cannot abide. All this sentence of Bernard
and Ferus, have they of Rome in their edition left quite out: they like not
that Peter should receive the keys as a minister, that he should be matched
with other pastors, as he both ioineth himself, 1 Pet. 1. Gal. 2, 9.
and Paul ioineth him. They like not that Bernard gives him not a Lordshippe
or dominion over Christ's Church, which Christ only challenges to himself,
John 23.3.
I am says he your Lord and master: but a ministry or service, and
therefore impaires his authority: that he should not be Christ's vicegerent
here on earth. Ferus repeates that twice that to Peter were the keys given,
but as to a minister. This they leave out in both places; It pleases them not
that Peter should be a minister. Thirdly that is also to be marked says Ferus,
that it is expressly said, I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven:
he does not say of the kingdom of the earth. These words belong nothing to
earthly jurisdiction, which notwithstanding they go about to establish on
these words, affirming that Peter not only in spiritual, but also in
external and worldly affairs to have received fullness of authority.

The which thing Bernard to Engenius does manifestly reprove: Ber. lib. Io. d^
consid.
your authority (says he) is in trespasses not in possessions, because for
those and not for these you have received the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
It follows, whether power seems greater to thee, to forgive sins or to
divide lands. These earthly and base things have their Judges, the kings and
princes of the world: neither do you enter into another man's bounds: why do
you thrust your sickle into another man's harvest? why will you be greater then
your master, who being requested of one saying, speak to my brother that he
may divide the inheritance with me: Answered, who has ordained me a Judge
between you? Thus far Barnard.

Here most manifestly both Bernard and Ferus, take one of ye Popes swords from
him: that he has nothing to do in worldly matters: that he cannot translate
kingdoms at his pleasure, which has been a gainefull sword to the Pope, which
sword gat him both his Peter pence and his popes power, while by this sword, he
made all Christian Kings to be at his commandment.

This third note of Ferus and assertion of Bernard is thus perverted in the
Roman addition. Thirdly say they, that is to be marked that it is expressly
said. And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, as though
he should say, the keys are mine: therefore use them according to my
pleasure. They quite leave out, that it is expressly said that to thee, I will
give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and not of the kingdom of the earth,
as also all the sentence of Bernard which confirms the same.

Ferus also alleges Jerome. To conclude (says he) that is to be marked
which he says: I will give thee the keys. Thus (says he) Jerome writes on
this place in the 16 Chapter of Matthew, Bishops (says he) and Priests not
understanding this place, take some thing unto them of the pride of the
Pharisees, that they think they may either condemn the innocent or loose the
guilty, when as with God not the sentence of the priests, but the lives of the
offenders are required. Christ therefore willing to reprove this presumption,
says, I will give the keys, as though he should say, The keys are mine,
therefore use the^ according to my pleasure, and not acccording to thine own
pleasure.

This saying of Jerome also is omitted in the Roman editions: It seems to give
to Bishops and priests interest in that saying of our Savior, and I will give
to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, which they would have belong to
Peter: It quite overthrows the Popes pardons. The Pope cannot pardon whom he
list, nor sell his pardons to those, whose lives he knows not, as he uses
commonly to do: For with God says Jerome, not the sentence of the priests: but
the life of the penitent sinner is respected. All the pardons in the world
without true and hearty repentance are nothing available to any man. And true
and hearty repentance, with a lively faith saves without all popes pardons.
If all men knew this, it would make the Popes pardons less saleable.

To conclude, Peter (says Ferus) received power, but not any earthly power,
that he might give or take away or alienate kingdoms and governments, nor
such power that it might be lawful for him, to do what he list (that which
many dream, he did) but he received power of binding and loosing, of remitting
and detayning sins, of openning and shutting: neither that according to his
own pleasure, but as a servant or minister doing his masters will. This
sentence also in the Roman edition is quite left out.

And here all men may see that will not wilfully shut their eyes, whose
kingdom they maintain, that deal thus deceitfully: Even Satan's that prince
of darkness, who was a lier and a deceiuer from the beginning. Truth needs no
such shifts.

And here also every faithful christian may observe another slight, which
the Papists use to maintain their Popes authority. Hect. Piu^. in Dan. Ca. 1.
Hector Pintus a verse learned papist cites out of Eusebius Clemens, that that
Cephas, which Paul reprehended in the 2. of the Galathians, was not Peter the
Apostle: but another, one of the 72. Disciples, who was also called Cephas, as
he proves out of Dorotheus and Hippolytus. And he seems to be himself of the
same opinion; for says he, After the coming of the holy ghost upon the
Apostles, it is not likely that the pillar of the Church should have fallen into
so great a fault, and have erred in so great a matter of faith, that is,
concerning the abrogation of the legal ceremonies: To whom Christ committed
his Church, and appointed him general pastor, and teacher, and master of the
faithful, and left him his Vicar upon earth etc. And again, It was not meet
that the high Bishop and Prince of the Apostles should be reproved of Paul so
publicly and sharply. But this his smoke manifestly obscureth the truth: for
what is the drift of Paul in that place by the judgment of other learned
papists themselves, but that he conferred ye gospel with the Apostles, not
that he should learn any thing of them, whom he witnesses to have added
nothing unto him: but lest they should not have allowed it, of whom only he
received the ministry of gathering of alms. And he shows himself in so much
not inferior to the Apostles, that he feared not to reprove Peter their
prince, as it were compelling the gentiles to Iudaisme. And after he shows
that we are Justified by says and not by the Law. Gal. 2.16.
This is Gagneus opinion in his argument of the second chap. to the Gal. So
that if Paul conferred not his gospel with Peter and the rest; if he rebuked
not Peter even to ye face, as he there writes: neither his own authority, nor
the authority of his gospel which he preached amongst the Galathia^s, had
been of such great authority, Gal. 2.1.
as he there goes about to prove unto them. And again he writes that he went
to Jerusalem where the Apostles abode: and he reckons up by name those that
were chief amongst the Apostles, James, Cephas, and John: and if James and
John were the Apostles he conferred with; so also was Peter no doubt, the
Apostle he after reproved: nay he calls Peter also Cephas, by both his
names, lest he should seem to forget the privilege given him of our savior.
Nay he called them pillars: and is it likely that any of the 72 disciples
should be called by that honorable name? Nay he adds, that they gave him
right hands of fellowshippe: now what great matter had it been, if any of the
72 disciples had made Paul equal with them. And he adds after (no doubt of
the same Peter and not of any other) that when as he was come to Antioch he
withstood him to his face. We may note here that the Papists are so blinded
with the love of their Pope, that they will not stick to discredit S. Paul,
and to diminish (as much as in them lies) his authority, and the authority
of the gospel which he preached, to maintain their Popes authority.

But this their exposition is not only against the scripture: but also against
the Fathers. Jerome and Augustine had soon been agreede, if they had
credited any such matter, who so earnestly wrote one against the other, Aug.
epist. 9.
concerning this reprehension: when as Austin said, Peter erred in deed: and
Jerome, that he dissembled only, and that Paul did not justly reprove him. But
Jerome in his commentaries upon the Galathians makes mention of this opinion
and reiects it. Hanmer: in trans. Dorothei de 70. discip.
Nay also in Dorotheus latin copy there is no such Cephas numbered amongst the
72 disciples, although in the greek, such an one is named. This diversity of
copies, argues some of Satan's subtilties. And here may be a true and forcible
argument drawn, against the Popes supremacy: If Peter had been head of the
Church, he ought not so publicly and sharply to have been reproved of Paul,
says Pintus: but as Gagneus and Austen and almost all the ancient fathers,
and truth it self, does witness Paul did so openly and sharply reprove him;
therefore he was not head of the Church.

Ferus how resolute he is in this his opinion, concerning the Popes authority,
it is worth the marking: how plainly in other his works, as occasion offers,
he shows his judgment herein: If therefore (says he) we will have the
Church safe, let us especially pray for the holy ghost: for it is he wherein
the Church is united, governed, spread abroad and preserved. He alone is the
only tutor, governor, teacher, and comforter of all the faithful. To the
unity of the church, as other papists do, he requires not the unity of a
ministerial head, to govern the church, but ye unity of the holy spirit. And
after speaking of Peter he writes thus: He stood in the midst of his brethren.
In which word the humility of Peter is commended. For he did not alone by
himself puffed up with vain arroga^cie dispose the ecclesiastical affairs,
according to his own pleasure: but in the midst of his brethren he dispatched
all things, which were to be done. For it is not lawful that the
ecclesiastical affairs, and what things belong to the whole Church, should
be ordered by the pleasures of a few: but rather that those things should be
disposed to the glory of God, according to the rules and appointment of the
scriptures, by the mutual consent of good men. Neither is that fit that any
one shall take upon him any office whatsoever. For the Apostle says, Let all
things be done decently and according to order. Therefore it was necessary,
that one of the Apostles should orderly do those necessary affairs: and
therefore Peter stepps forth who had been ever hitherto both more zealous, and
more apt, and luckie in dispatching businesses. Peter alone like the Pope,
presumptuously dealt not in ecclesiastical affairs. And after speaking of
Peter: He calls them brethren, though he were the first in order amongst the
Apostles. For others are not to be disdained because of our higher estate above
the^: lastly, he begins his oration of the holy scrip u^es: Neither does Peter
this by man's fancy, but by the moving of the holy scriptures. And if the
chief of the Apostles did this: what think we that we ought to do? Therefore
let civil matters be discussed by civil, just, and equal laws: And those
things which are divine, let them be weighed in the balance of the scriptures.
For there ought nothing to be established, or decreede in the Church, but
first of all we should ask counsel of the holy scriptures. The which thing I
would to God had been observed till now: but now that is commonly put in
practice of many: So I will have it: This I command to be done: my pleasure is a
sufficient warrant. Surely Ferus in these words touches the Popes peremptory
authority. And after upon these words: Let another take his Bishopric, he
calls his bishopprick, his Apostolical office or function, not an empire or a
Lordship. And not without cause: for they expound a Bishoppricke to be a
watching, or an ouerseeing; the which is the proper office of the Apostles. But
the Pope will not only have an Empire, but be above Emperors. And after. But
what constant and true witnesses needs Jesus Christ? He that is one of Christ's
witnesses needs not to the execution of his office an external sword, and
weapons, but rather a ready and exercised tongue, by which he may do and
exercise faithfully the charg committed unto him. For it is the duty of an
Apostle, to excel in tongue, and word. And again, The authority of the
christian faith is great, which is declared to us of witnesses, which have
declared unto us not only things heard; but things seen and most assured.
Peter and John the chief amongst the Apostles, have witnessed this unto us
most assuredly. Here we may note how he ioines John with Peter, as two
principal or chief amongst the rest of the Apostles. If Peter had had this
prerogative to him committed alone of our savior, Ferus had done him wrong,
to have joined John with him in this primacie. And again: Speaking of the
election of Matthias, none of these although now very skilful in the gospel
by himself, cares for, procures or goes about this business, but being all
called together without preferring themselves, or disdaining one of the other;
they all wait for indifferently the sentence of the holy ghost. They waited
not for Peter's sentence, but for the sentence of the holy ghost, as Christ's
vicegerent in his Church: And the same as he was Christ's vicar general (as
they term him) in the beginning, so shall he be for ever: so the Apostles
after in their council place him in the first place. It seems good (say they)
to the holy ghost and to us, not to Peter and to us. And again Ferus says, It
is no marvel though we teach diverse doctrines, F^r. in ca. 4. Act
when as we all are not governed and do not speak with the same spirit. The
spirit here, by Ferus his judgment, keeps the unity of the church, and not
the Pope. Again: Fer. in 2. Act.
In Peter we are to mark the example of a good shepherd: the people being in
an vprere, Peter steps forth into the midst, not that he should with violence
stay the murmurers, but that out of the scriptures he might reveal, and teach
the will of God. Peter stood not only in body but in mind. And he took to
him the other eleven, least he should seem to exercise tyranny among the^. He
was the first in order of the Apostles, and he was the first that ought to
speak, whensoever the matter required an evangelical teacher or preacher.
These things of Peter are to be imitated of all pastors. There are other things
read of Peter: as that he dissuaded Christ from his passion; Let that be far
from thee o Lord, says he, etc. Also that he slept in the garden, when as
notwithstanding he had promised Christ that he was ready to go to pr^son and
to death with him. And also that being overcome through man's frailnes, he
denied Christ at his passion: also that he used the material sword, when
Christ was taken. But these things of Peter are not to be imitated of pastors:
for in these he was always chidde^ of the Lord: Although in these in our days
he has more followers, then in that, wherein he chiefly is to be followed.
Ferus here plainly teaches, that Peter was but first in order amongst the
Apostles: and he n^ppes privily the Pope and his clergy, who rather follow
Peter in his sleeping and in his material sword, then in his diligence, and
preaching. And after he writes thus upon these words, In 3. ca. Act,
Peter and John went up to pray: Behold (says he) the chief of the Apostles
go before. A good shepherd must go before, and then his sheep do follow
him. He makes here again Peter and John the chief amongst the Apostles, as he
had done also before. And again, Fer. in ca. 6. Act.
The Apostles of all thing account this the chiefest that belongs to their
office, to preach: but of this now some are ashamed. No doubt he means the
Po^e, who never preaches himself. And a little after: The highest office in
the Church, is the ministry of the word: To this we ought to employ our
chiefest care: for unless the word of God be purely and diligently taught,
all things else whatsoever are corrupt: therefore Paul after here in the 20
chapter does notably express, what is the chief part of the office of an
Apostle, or Bishop. You know (says he) how I have kept nothing back from
you, but that I might declare unto you all the counsel of God etc. If the
ministry and preaching of the word of God, be the highest office in the
Church, by Ferus judgment; then the Pope is not the highest officer and person
in the Church, as other Papists would have him, who never executes this office.
And if this be the office of an Apostle, he is not the successor of the
Apostles, who never does his office.

And after he writes thus to the same effect: The proper duty of an Apostle,
is to pray and preach. For prayer obtaines of God what is to be taught, and
that by and by the fruit of the word heard may follow the preaching. And hereof
Paul says: I make mention of you in my prayers, etc. Therefore they are not to
be accounted in the number of the Apostles, which neglect either both these, or
either of them; much less they which give themselves to ease and pleasure.
Thus far Ferus. And after in another place speaking of religion, which is
maintained by fighting, and not by preaching; by the sword, and not by the
word; Fer. in 10. ca. Act.
as now a days ye Pope goes about to maintain his: O miserable religion
(says he) which cannot be defended otherwise, the^ with the weapons of
desperate villains, and by the injuries and spoils of tyrants. And after he
nippes in another place the Popes covetousness: Here we see (says he) that in
the beginning of the Church hyprocrisie and covetousness crept in; In ca. 8. Act.
(speaking of Simon Magus) but Peter very diligently withstood both of them:
whom I would to God his successors had followed. And after: Peter never spoke
more bitterly then against Ananias and Sapphira: for no plagues are more
hurtful in the Church then hypocrisy and covetousness: So Christ threw out of
the temple those which sold. If he stroke them with such a terrible sentence,
which would have bought: what would he say of our sellers, which open and shut
heaven for money, which kill souls and quicken them again for a handful of
barlie? Thus far Ferus. No doubt he touches here the Popes pardons.

And after he makes the holy ghost teach Peter this lesson: Thirdly, In ca.
Act. 10.
Whom God binds, do thou not loose: and whom he loses, do not thou bind:
for thou have not power at thy pleasure to place souls in heaven or hell; but
according to the word of God. For all souls are mine, says the Lord.
Fourthly, whom I have served, let it not grieve thee to serve them also: for
the disciple is not above his master. I have been a servant to all, do thou so
also. Fifthly, whom I have not as yet condemned, do not thou judge rashly or
condemn least thou be condemned thy self. He glaunceth at the Popes
authority, in pardoning and condemning whomsoever he pleases.

And he is no changling: as in his Commentaries upon Matthew; In ca. Act. 10.
so here also he quite writhes ye Popes temporal sword out of his hand, upon
these words: Arise Peter: By an excellent metaphor (says he) the office of the
Apostles is described, whose office is to rise, not to take their ease, and to
watch and take care for their flock; and then to kill, not with the material
sword, (for that was forbidden Peter) but with the sword of the spirit, which
is the word of God: which sword the Apostles are commanded to buy, if they
sold their coat for it. And they kill, when they preach the law and show men
their sins, and do teach that our stre^ght and righteousness is nothing; yea
that we are nothing, but even damned and miserable sinners.

And after also he makes Peter subject to the Church: In ca. 11. Act.
Peter (says he) an Apostle, and the first and chief of the Apostles, is
forced to yield an account to the Church: neither does he take this
grievously, as a thing not agreeing to his authority. For he knew well enough
that he exercised the office not of a Lord or master, but of a servant of the
Church. The Church is the spouse of Christ; and she is the Lady of the house:
Peter is but a servant and minister. The Church therefore has authority not
only to ask account of her servants; but also if they be not fit, quite to
put them away. So heretofore it has been often done in general councels. But
now wicked Bishops will not be reproved nor ruled by the Church: as though
they were Lords and not servants. Therefore by the just judgment of God, they
are despised of all men. Ferus agrees here with Austen, and the ancient
Fathers, that the Church rules: she is Christ's vicegerent: she calls to
account and deposes whom it pleases her. The fathers called this, the
College of priests: and hereof Cyprian called Cornelius Colleague. This holy
College of priests ruled through the world, not any one prelate, as now the
Papists teach. Every one severally even Peter and the Bishop of Rome are but
a servant the Church is ye Lady, as Ferus terms her. They are wicked Bishops,
sons o^ perdition, that will not be ruled by the Church: this is Ferus
judgment.

And again he writes thus, upon these words: In cap. 9. Act.
He went through every City; confirming and stablishing that which the other
had taught; or adding to that, which they had not done sufficiently: he carried
that scrole imprinted in his heart, which Christ last of all commanded Peter
saying: Feed my sheep if thou love me. In Peter thou see the office of B
shops, that is, to visit all: according to that saying: Heal that which is
weak, and bind up that which is broken, etc. They which are Bishops, and
do sleep, and are idle, do not know in what a dangerous estate they are; nor
do not think that the blood of all that perish, shall be required at their
hands. Here he makes Peter a pattern for all bishops to follow, and not a
type of the Pope, and his successors And after upon these words, Behold three
men, etc Mark (says he) that these words spoken to Peter do belong to all
pastors. For so it is said to every one of them: Behold men: as though he
should say: These sheep committed to thy charge do require care, and help;
the sinner succor; the weak, strength; those which go astraie, doctrine; the
unruly, correction; those which are tormented through afflictions, comfort;
the whole church now dispersed, peace. Secondly, Arise: thou art not a Lord,
but a servant: this is not a time of ease, but of labor: hitherto thou have
done nothing: through thy negligence the Wolf has entered in, that is, the
Devil. For he is a Wolf, how greatly soever he show the face of a friend
etc. Peter's lessons Ferus attributes to all pastors. And again: In ca. 10.
Act.
In Peter thou see expressed what becomes Bishops, that is, to go up
aloft, to fast, to pray. Thou see the contrary in wicked and evil
Bishops, they only take care of temporal things themselves; they commit
spiritual things to others. They live like Princes, not like shepherds, they
never pray, they give themselves to pleasures. And after he writes thus: In
this Chapter, Luke does prosecute the history of Paul and Barnabas
pilgrimage, and he names certain countries which in their preaching they
passed through, Fer. in Act. ca. 14.
that here al men may see how courageously these two Apostles preached to al
men the word of salvation to the great shame of those, which brag themselves to
be the successors of the Apostles: when as they are nothing else but slothful
and unfaithful servants, sharply to be reproved of the Lord, nay justly to be
condemned. No doubt he condemns here the Popes proud and idle state. And after
he writes thus of the first general council, of the authority of James:
James confirms the sayings of the three Apostles, and pronounces sentence as
Bishop of Jerusalem. If Peter had been dead of the universal Church, he should
now have pronounced sentence and ratified the council, as the Pope does now:
But then this one thing very evidently proves, that there was no such
authority acknowledged of Peter, seeing that in the first general council,
in his presence, James pronounces sentence and as it were confirms the
council.

And after: Mark, that he says not, that thou shall have much people; but I
have much people in this city. As though he should say; the people is not
thine, but mine. So he said to Peter: Fer. in Act. cap. 18.
Feed not thy sheep, but my sheep: As though he should say; they are mine; I
have redeemed them with my blood; I love them; I take care of the^: therefore
thou shall not rule over them at thy pleasure: thou shall play the part of a
shepherd and not of a Lord. If Peter had Christ's authority committed to him,
and were his vicegerent; then he had a kind of Lordship over his sheep: But
this Ferus denies. And writing of Apollo, he says thus: Mention of him is made
in this place very fitly, for he was such a great man, and the Corinthia^s made
him equal with Peter, and Paul: I (say they) hold of Paul: I of Apollo: and I
of Cephas. If yt Corinthia^s had been taught this principal point of religion,
which now the catholics account the chiefest point of all other, that Peter
had been ordained of Christ his Vicar general, they would never have matched
Apollo with him. By this it is likely, ye there was no such superiority among
the Apostles taught in the primitive Church. Fer. in 21. Act.
And again upon these words; Thus says the holy Ghost: the Lord as a most wise
governor of his does foreshew the cross which is appointed to his; but
sudden destruction falls on the wicked. He makes the holy Ghost the
governor of the Church. And in another place: No congregation can conti^ue
without order: Therefore it is a great matter in the reformation of the Church,
that order be kept. Therefore they offend grievously, which in the Church of
God disturb, rent asunder and quite take away all order. Fer. in 23. Act,
Christ himself ordained an order: some Apostles some Prophets some doctors.
He makes in this order appointed of Christ no one visible head. And after
speaking of the Apostles he writes thus: It is the office of the Apostles to
be servants, or ministers, and witnesses of Christ. They have all one office by
Ferus judgment.

The same Ferus also of the supremacy, writes thus: The servant (says he) is
not above his Master. Fer. in pass. part. 1.
By this word therefore Christ does bridle all the pride and ambition of
ecclesiastical persons: for admit whosoever they be, whether Popes or
Bishops, or Cardinals, or Doctors, what are they else but servants? And if
they be servants (as no man will deny) they ought to behave themselves so, as
that they should not climb above their master: how this is done among them,
let them look to it. For here is not a place (as we say) to rake in this
filthy fenne or lake. Their own consciences will tell them, in what things
they are unlike to Christ: nay wherein they endeavor to climb up above Christ,
etc. Here Ferus is loath to meddle with the Popes pride, as should seem: but
for all that, he glaunceth at it, and gives him, as we say, an Item.

And a little after he discouers some parts of this pride. In worldly affairs
no man dare prefer himself before his master, or will seek to take more
ease then his master does: but in spiritual matters we see it far
otherwise. There is no man but coueteth and wishes to be in better estate the^
Christ was in, Christ when as he was in the shape of God humbled himself: we
vile wretches cannot abide humility. Christ ministered to us, who were his
servants: we think scorn to minister or do service to any. Christ did good
even to the simplest: we think much to do good even to our brethren. Christ
labored and took pains: we seek our own ease. Christ although he were the
brightness of his fathers glory: yet patiently endured the reproaches of men; we
are of a contrary mind. Christ being the judge of all men; notwithstanding
suffered himself to be judged: we disdain to be judged or reproved of any.
Christ by the cross and death entered into his glory: we think to come
thither, by riot and pleasure. What therefore do we else, but prefer our
selves before our master, and desire a better estate then he had? Therefore
not without cause he urges this word so often, and so vehemently unto us: He
will have us know that we are servants. Again, that we should consider what
he has done and suffered: he that marks this diligently will be most ready
to do all good, and most patient to endure all evil. He seems here also to
glaunce at ye Popes pride and pomp. Again, how Peter was chief among the
Apostles, he writes thus, of the washing of the Apostles feet: It is most
likely that he began at Peter, who was the first or chief among the
Apostles, not in calling; for Andrew followed Christ before him: but in the
election of the Apostleshippe, for there Peter is placed in the first place,
etc. So that by Ferus his judgment, Peter was the chief among the Apostles,
because when as Christ chose his xij. Apostles, he first chose Peter: he was
the first in order; the first chosen of the twelve.

And again, that the Pope ought not to have both swords, Fer. Part. 2, pass.
he writes thus: Christ speaks thus to Peter: Hinder not my death; but rather
study to imitate it. Away with thy sword which kills men: my sword which I
have committed unto thee cuts off vices; but saues men. Therefore put thou that
material sword into thy sheath again, or as the other Evangelists said,
into his own place. The proper place of the material sword, is the ordinary
power, that is, the civil magistrate. Put thy sword therefore into that sheath:
let the civil magistrate use it, and not thou.

In this place as in many other places alleged in this discourse; Ferus
plainly teaches that the Pope ought not to have both swords, because Peter
had them not: and therefore he quite overthrows the Popes supremacy. This is
the very foundation thereof: that the Pope has the right of both the swords.
And after: Again he teaches by this word, that the gospel is not to be
defended with worldly weapons; nor with man's aid: but the defense thereof is
to be committed to God. So says Paul: the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal: so Christ never used any sword; nor his Apostles are ever read to have
been girded with swords. They taught the word: and the word it self fought
with his own power: And the Apostles went ever away conquerors. So Christ in
Luke says, I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which your enemies shall not
be able to resist. Therefore Christ, especially by this word, forbiddes his
Apostles the external sword: for they have, and they ought to have the sword
of the spirit, which is the word of God. And hence Esaias prophesies; that the
battle of the Apostles shall be as in the day of Madian, that is, as Gedeon
overcame the Madianits, not with weapons, but with trumpets and breaking of
pitchers: so should the Apostles do spiritually, that they should subdue the
whole world to Christ, by the trumpet of the word of God, and by suffering
afflictions, etc.

Here also Ferus plainly teaches, ye the gospel must not be maintained with
arms and swords, with fire and fagotte, as the Pope seek now to maintain
his kingdom. And Ferus of Christ's kingdom, Part 3. pass.
writes thus: My kingdom is otherwise governed then a warlike kingdom: for
this is governed with a material sword, but my kingdom stands in no need of
that sword, for the sword thereof is the word of God. The kingdom of the world
has Cities, Castles, Towns, Villages, Arms, Weapons: but my kingdom only
requires the hearts of men. The world reigns over men's bodies and goods: but I
over men's hearts and consciences. The world reigns with fleshly power, but it
obeyes the spiritual power; but I make no account of fleshly power, but I
reign spiritually against fin, death, and hell, etc. The Popes kingdom is far
unlike this.

And of Christ's crown of thorns he writes thus: The crowns of the kings of
this world, Fer. part 3. pass
are some of iron, some of silver some of gold. By which is declared, that the
kingdom of the world consists of fleshly power, glory and nobility. But
Christ's crown is a crown of thorns; that by this token thou may know
that Christ's kingdom consists of thorns and afflictions. And what kind of
king Christ is himself, such like kings he makes us, that is, subject to
afflictions: No doubt then the Pope was never made king by Christ: he is far
unlike him, as he was here in this world. Nay this his thornie crown plainly
condemns that his triple crown of gold.

In cap. 16 Mat.
Titilman a Friar also upon these words: Upon this rock I will build my
Church; writes thus: Upon this rock, upon this truth of faith which thou have
confessed, and have uttered saying: Thou art Christ the son of the living
God: and also upon my self a most sure rock, which in thy foresaid speech
thou have confessed; I will build and found my Church, etc. So that all
catholics as M. Bellarmine affirms, do not expound Peter to be that rock.

Cyril. in Io. ca. 5.6.
Cyrill of the authority of all the Apostles writes thus, upon these words:
And he breathed upon them. When as he would make his disciples famous and
excellent for the great dignity of their apostleshippe, and would ordain them
the holy guides of his mysteries, he forthwith sanctifies them with his holy
spirit, which by breathing he bestowed upon them. Here is the authority
common to all the Apostles. And although he affirm that, Christ built his
Church on Peter, as it were upon a rock or stone; yet of Peter he writes thus,
and of that his threefold love. Peter ever went before the rest: for being
especially in love with Christ, he was ever most ready both to do any thing
and to make answer: therefore even now a little before seeing the ship came
slowly to the land, he girding his coat about him, leaped into the sea. Cap.
64.
And when as our Savior asked his disciples saying, who^ do men say that I
am? When as again after their answer, he demanded of them again: But whom
do you say that I am? as the principal and head of the rest, he first cried
out: Thou art Christ the son of the living God, He also smote off Malchas
ear, thinking by this means that he should ever cleave to his master.
Therefore of good right Christ asked him if he loved him more then the rest,
and that thrice. Peter also confessed that he loved him, and he calls none
other to be witness of this his love, but Christ himself. And in every one of
his confessions the words being a little altered, he heard that he must have a
care of Christ's sheep. But this speech does bring to light a h^gher matter:
for because Peter with the rest was adorned by Christ with the name of an
Apostle, and he denied him thrice at his passion: by good right now the
confession of his three-folde love is required, that his three fold denial
might be requited with the like number of his confession. So that which was
committed by words, was cured with words. He asked of him if he loved him more
then the rest: for he which had tried the greater cleme^cie of his master
toward him, by good right ought to have loved him more. And although all the
Apostles generally were stricken with great fear, when the Lord was betrayed:
yet Peter's fault was the greatest, that in so short a time denied him thrice.
Therefore seeing by the mercy of our Savior he obtained forgiveness of a great
sin, justly of him greater love is required. All pastors of the Church hereby
learn: that they can no otherwise be beloved of Christ, then if so be that
they shall study with all their maine and might, that his sheep be well fed, and
like well. Such a one was Paul, etc. He proves that Peter had his Apostleship
common with the rest of the Apostles, and that by this place it was restored
him again, and no primacie granted him over all the church: And that all
doctors here have received a charge, not Peter only: He concludes thus. By
Peter's threefold confession, his three fold sin of denying is done away. And
he said to him; feed my Lambs: restoring to him again the dignity of his
Apostleshippe, least through his denial which chanced by man's frailty, it had
seemed to have been disanulled. Here is a restitution of Peter: here is no
prelation, as the Papists teach, of the supremacy. Jerome writes thus: The
arc of Noah was a figure of the Church; Ierom. contra lucifera nos.
as Peter says: In the arc of Noah a few, that is, eight souls were saved
by water; As now also baptism saves us. As in that were all kind of beasts;
so in this are men of all countries and conditions. The arc had her nests: so
the Church her mansions. Eight souls of men were saved in the arc: and
Ecclesiastes biddes us give part to seven, and part to eight; that is, believe
both the testaments. And therefore some psalms are written for the eight; and
by eight verses, which are put under every letter. And in the 118. psalm the
just man is instructed: and the blessings by the which the Lord signifies his
Church in the mount, are eight, etc. A Crow is sent out of the arc, and
returns no more; and after the Dove shows the peace of the earth: So in the
baptism of the Church, that black bird being expelled, that is, the Devil,
the Dove of the holy ghost declares the peace of our land. The arc beginning
of 30. cubits is built, by little and little decreasing into one cubite: So
likewise the Church consisting of many degrees, at length is finished with
Deacons, Priests, and Bishops. Here we may plainly see that Jerome makes the
whole order and brotherhood of Bishopps, to be that one cubite, in which the
arc was finished; and not any one Bishop, no not the Bishop of Rome. For in
the same book he alleges thus Cyprian, writing to the Bishop of Rome: He
ends (says he) his discourse which he had made to Stephen Bishop of Rome
after this manner: We have showed these things to your conscience (most
well-beloved brother) both for our common honor, and for my sincere love I bear
unto you, hoping that those things please you for the truth of your faith and
religion, which are both true and religious. But we know some that will
hardly refuse that which they have once tasted; nor chang their resolution
easily: but the knotte of peace and concord, being kept safe among their
fellow Bishops, will keep some private opinions to themselves, which they have
once liked of. Wherein we will not urge nor prescribe a law to any man, when
as every one in the Church has free power and authority to govern, as he
will; and every one is set over the Lords flock, being to give account to the
Lord of his doing. Here is plain by Cyprians and Ieromes judgments, the common
honor of all Bishops, that one of them cannot enforce another: And that they
have every one of them free power of government in their several charges,
whereof they are to give account to the Lord. And of the authority and
necessity of Bishops he writes thus in the same book: If at the prayer only
of the Bishop, the holy ghost descended; then they are in a lamentable case,
who being baptized by priests and Deacons in villages, towns and far distant
places, have died before ever they were visited of the Bishops. The health of
the Church consists in the dignity and reverence of the chief priests, to
whom if a peereles and chief authority be given of all men, there will be so
many schisms in the Church, as there^ are Priests, etc. Here we may plainly
see first, the jurisdiction of Bishops over many villages and country towns,
in which only Priests and Deacons were placed, in Ieromes days: And that
even then, as some now a days think, every pastor was not a Bishop in his
flock. Secondly, what ye authority of every Bishop was, it was Exors, it
was peerless, he had none above him in this world in his charge; noe, not the
Bishop of Rome. And lastly, that whereas M. Dorman in his book against M.
Nowell, does allege this place to prove the Bishop of Romes authority, and
would prove that S. Jerome in this place meant him, Marianus Victorinus Reatinus
Episcopus, who has corrected S. Ieromes works and newly imprinted them, being
a great Papist, affirms, that this place is meant of every Bishop in his
Diocese. He calls (says he) the Bishop the chief priest; whose
authority also to be greater the^ the other priests, he does otherwhere
plainly and manifestly avouch. So the Apostles whose room the Bishops now
occupy, and succeed in, were above the 72 disciples, whom as blessed Damasus
the Priest does witness, the Priests do now succeed. So Aaron and the other hie
priests, were ever above the Levites. So that by his judgment, by this chief
priest is not meant the Pope, but every Bishop: And that every Bishops
authority is peereles. And this unity of Bishops makes Jerome to be the unity
of the Church.

Augustine writes thus: The scribes and Pharisees sit upon Moses chair, do
what they say: but do not as they do. You see that in the chair of Moses,
to which has now succeeded the chair of Christ, that also evil men do
sit, and yet notwithstanding the good things which they are about to teach,
do not hurt their hearers. Wherefore do thou for the wicked men's sake,
forsake the chair? Return again to peace, return again to unity, which
hurt thee not. If I speak well, and do well, follow me: But if I do not as
I say; thou hear the counsel of the Lord; Do what I say; but what I do,
do thou not. But yet depart not from the catholic chair. Here we may see
that this chair of Christ was in every country, and that every Bishop sat
in it, not the Bishop of Rome only. Austen himself sat in it, and to the
unity of the chair he exhorts schismatikes, that they would return. Secondly
we may note, how this chair then was called, Christ's chair, not Peter's
chair; As the Pope now calls his.

Of the strickt unity that is betwixt Christ the head and his Church ye body,
Aug. in psalm. 37.
he writes thus: When as Christ speaks, sometime he speaks in the person of
the only head, because he is a savior borne of the Virgin Marie; sometime in
the person of his body, which is the whole church, dispersed through the whole
world. And we are in his body, if our faith be pure, our hope sure, and our
love inflamed. And after where he says: The words of my sins; there is no
doubt but that it is the voice of Christ. But how come sins, but of his body
which is the Church? because both the body of Christ and the head speaks. Why
speaks he alone? because they shall be two in one flesh. This is a great
mystery (says the Apostle) I mean of Christ and of his Church. And a little
after, If he has said: now they are not two, but one flesh; what marvel is
it, if one flesh and one tongue utter the same words, as of one flesh, one
head, and of one body? let us hear them as one; but yet the head as the
head, and the body as the body. The persons are not divided, but there is
a difference of their dignities; because the head does save, the body is saved:
The head shows mercy, the body bewailes her misery: the head is to purge
sins, the body to confess sins: and yet one voice of them both. Here we
may see the narrow union between Christ and his Church. They are one flesh:
he is an adulterer that intrudes himself between these. The Church sins,
even the Pope himself, if he be a member of this body, by Augustines judgment;
and the head alone saves: Christ alone is the head; and all the rest are
members.

Quaest. ex vtroque testa^. quaest. 101.
Augustine of the Deacons of the Church of Rome, which esteemed themselves
better then the order of those, whom they called presbyters, writes thus: But
because they are the ministers or deacons of the Church of Rome: therefore they
think themselves more honorable then in other Churches, for the statelines of
the City of Rome, which seems to be the head of all other Cities. Let us
mark here what privilege Austen gives to the city of Rome, and why the
Deacons thereof might perchance advance themselves above other Deacons, because
the City of Rome (says he) Was the head of all other Cities. If it had been
accounted the head of all other Churches: no doubt Austen would have here given
it that commendation; but he says no such thing thereof: but that the
magnificence thereof consisted in that it was ye head of all other Cities. What
can be plainer then this? Shall we not believe Austen? And in another place of
the foundations and bulwarks of the Church, he writes thus: Epist. 56.
Heretics go about to undermine, or overcome the most sure foundations of
the Church by the show of reason: but that merciful Captain of our faith,
has as it were with a most strong tower defended his Church, by the solemn
assemblies of all nations and people, by the seats of the Apostles, and by
certain excellent learned, godly and spiritual men, and also he has fenced
it with the plentiful furniture of invincible reason. These are all the
visible bulwarks and towers of defense of the Church, which S. Austen knew in
his days. First general counsels: then the apostolical seas (no one
apostolical sea more then the rest, no not Rome) and lastly some especial
godly learned men, with their invincible arguments and forces of reason. Where
also we may note: that as he prefers no one apostolical sea before all the
rest, so that he does prefer general councels before them all. So that by
Augustines judgment a general council is to be preferred before the Church of
Rome. And here Augustine declaring the bulwarks of Gods Church against
heretics, had showed himself to be a very unskillful Captain of the Lords
army, if so be that he had quite forgotten the chief bulwark above all the
rest against them, that is, that the Pope cannot err. This had been the
forciblest bulwark that the Church could have had against all heretics. But
Austen in his days knew no such, and therefore no doubt he makes no mention
of it.

And also in another place of Peter's prerogative, he writes thus: As some
things are said which seem properly to belong to Peter himself: and yet they
are not rightly expounded, In psalm. 108.
unless they be referred to the Church, of which he is acknowledged in a type
to have borne the figure, for the primacie that he had among the Apostles: As
this, To thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and other
speeches of our savior to him like to this; so Judas likewise as it were
sustaineth the person of the Jews, that be enemies unto Christ: which then
hated Christ, and now also their wickedness continuing, as it were by a
succession do hate him still. Here Austen acknowledges a primacie of Peter
amongst the Apostles. But for all that by this his primacie by Austens
judgment, he gains nothing to his successor, or to the Bishop of Rome: but
to the whole Church, whose Image he sustained because he was ye chief among
the Apostles. He plainly affirms: that Peter was a type of the whole Church,
and to it conveyed that privilege given to him; and not to his successor the
Bishop of Rome, as yt papists now would have him. And to expound that saying of
our Savior: To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, (as the
papists do now) to Peter himself, is not rightly to expound them, what can
be plainer then? As Judas sustaineth the persons of all the wicked Jews, so
does Peter not of the bishop of Rome, but of the whole Church. This is Austens
judgment concerning this matter: and he overthrows the papists exposition of
these words. To thee will I give the keys, which refer them to Peter
himself and his successors.

And to Austen agrees Chrysostom both concerning the authority of Rome and of
Peter, he manifestly preferres Antioch before Room. Ho. 17. ad pop. Ant.
What (says he) is the dignity of our City? it chanced first (says he) that
the disciples at Antioch were called Christians, this dignity has no city
else that is in the world, no not Romulus his city. And therefore she, that is
Antioch, may lift up her eyes and ouerlooke all the world beside, for this fire
of her love toward Christ, for this her great confidence and boldness, for this
her valiantes. He calls Rome but Romulus his city: if she had been then
accounted the catholic mother church, as the papists now affirm that she
is, he would not have been too bold with her: he would have given her some
more honorable style, then to call her Romulus his city; nay he would not have
preferred Antioch before her: yea and not only Chrysostom but the Emperor
himself yields that same privilege to Antioch. Ho. 21. ad pop. Ant aeditione
Harma 21.
And have I not (says he) always preferred that city before all other, and
have I not accounted it dearer to me, then mine own native country? The
Emperor preferred Antioch before all other cities in the world, and therefore
before Rome: and it is not likely that he erred in judgment.

And after, of the Emperors authority in the same homily Chrysostom writes
thus. Oh how great is the force of Christian religion! It restrained and
bridled a man (...), that on earth had none to be compared with him, that Lord
that can overthrow and destroy all things and taught him such heavenly
philosophy, as a mean man would never have embraced, etc. He plainly here
affirms that the Emperor is the chief man here upon earth. And that there is
none equal to be compared with him, no not the Pope.

Victorinus an ancient father upon the Revelation concerning ye church,
writes thus: These seven stars, are seven churches, Victor. in 1. cap. Ap.
which he calls by their names, and to whom also he writes his Epistles: Not
that they were the principal Churches of all other; but that which he speaks
to one he speaks to all: for there is no difference, as when one does
prefer the standerd of a few soldiers to a greater number. Paul taught
first, that all the churches of the world were but seven, and those seven,
which he named, to be that one catholic Church. The which thing that he might
observe him self, he exceeded not the number of seven Churches: but he wrote
to the Romans, Corinthians, Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Collossia^s,
and to the Thessalonia^s. And afterward he wrote to particular persons, least
he should exceed the number of seven Churches. And briefly knitting up
together the whole sum of his preaching he says to Timothy. That thou may
know how thou ought to behave thy self in the Church of the living God. We
read also that this type was declared by the holy Ghost, by the prophet Esaias,
of seven women, that should lay hold of one man. Christ is that one man, which
was not borne of man's seed: the seven women are the churches, taking their
bread, and with them (that is their garments) they are covered, who desire that
their reproach may be taken from them, and that the name of the Lord may be
called upon them. They take their bread, which is the holy Ghost, which
nourishes into his eternal life, promised them by faith, and their garments
also, which are promised the^ which desire that they may be clothed. Of which
S. Paul speaks, this mortality must be clothed with incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality. And they desire that their reproach may be
taken away: their reproach is their old accustomed sin, which is taken away in
baptism, and a man then begins to be called a Christian: which is as much to
say, as let thy name be called upon. Therefore in these seven churches it may
be that of one Church is made seven, etc. Victorinus here plainly makes but one
catholic Church, and the Roman church (being one of the seven whereunto S.
Paul wrote his Epistles) a member thereof.

In psalm. 99. in praelat.
Austine writes thus: Either our Lord Jesus, does he not now and ever govern
the world with his Father? and whether to this matter, does he call any man
making him his imitator or follower, that with him he should govern heaven and
earth and all? Christ by S. Austines judgment, calls no man to be partaker
with him in his government of heaven and earth: therefore not the Pope.

Primasius also S. Austines scholar writes thus: Let no man glory in men, in
false Apostles, no nor in any either king or priest, for all things are yours,
In 1. ep. ad Cor. cap. 3.
either Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life or death, we are
yours: you are not ours etc. Now if Peter had been Christ's vicar, then the
saints had been his as they were Christ's, whose place he sustained: But
Primasius says plainly that the Corinthians were Christ's; they were not
Peter's: Therefore Peter was not in any respect their head, but their servant or
minister.

That Christ alone is the head of the Church, Theodoret writes thus: Theod. in
2 ca. ad Col.
Again (says he) he calls Christ the head, and the congregation of the
faithful the body: And he has put down all this place metaphorically; for
even as in the body, the brain is the root of the sinews, and by the sinews
the body has feeling: so the body of the Church, by Christ our Lord receives
both fountains of Doctrine and matter of salvation. And that thing which
sinews are in the body, that are Apostles, prophets, and teachers in the
assembly of the Church. Thus much Theodoret: the Apostles are but ligaments or
sinews by his judgment: now it is monstrous and against all reason to make a
sinew a head. In 1 ep. Co. 10
And in another place he writes thus: This is required of Stewards that they
be found faithful, not that he should take unto him the honor o^ dignity
of his master: but that he should keep his masters good will. In 1 ep. ad
Cor. cap. 9.
And in another place of S. Paul he writes thus: Am I not free? that is as
much to say: I am under no man's jurisdiction, I am not in the place of a
disciple: But to whose credit the whole world was committed, because he was
called after Christ's assumption. And the same prerogative he yields also to S.
Paul in another place upon these words (whereof I am made a minister.) The
salvation of the Church was committed to me, meaning S. Paul, and to me was
committed the office of preaching, that I should fill you all with heavenly
doctrine. And that word (you) does not only mean them, but also the faithful
that are in the world.

Gregory also writes thus: In 5. psalm. penit.
Christ is one person with his whole Church, which either now is conversant
here on earth, or is in heaven now with him: And as there is one soul, which
quickens the diverse members of the body; so one only holy spirit quickens
and lightens the whole Church. And as Christ which is the head of the church,
was conceived by the holy Ghost; so the holy Church which is his body, is
filled with the same holy spirit, that it may live: and by his power is
strengthened, that it may stand in the ioining or coupling together of one faith
and charity. By which the whole body being ministered unto and built by ioints
and couplings, grows to the increase of God. Gregory here makes plainly
Christ and his Church, whether in heaven or in earth, to be but one body. And
that by the holy spirit he quickens, strengthens, and gouernes the same; even
as our soul quickens and gouernes our bodies: And that by ioints and
couplings, not by any ministerial head, as the papists do imagine: nay he
says, that his triumphant and his militant Church is but one body. So that
then if they will make Peter ye head of the militant Church, he must also be
the head of the triumphant, which I think they will not grant.

Lastly to conclude, to make the matter more plain, and to show how far
Gregory was from imagining Peter to be the head of the whole Church, he
writes thus in another place: In psalm. penit. 3. and 5.
The Apostles were called feet, because that as feet carry the body; so the
Apostles carried Christ into the knowledge of al nations, which were moved,
when they doubted that he whom they saw did suffer, was the son of God. In
the body of the Church he compares Apostles to feet, not to heads; and that
very fitly; alleging that place of the Apostle: To. 10.15.
How beautiful are the feet of the^ which bring glad tidings of peace? And of
the government of his Church, by his holy spirit, our savior most manifestly
speaks himself: And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; Io. 14.15.
even the spirit of truth: As though he should say, you are discomforted,
because I go from you; but I, in my stead, will send you a comforter, which
shall never forsake you, but shall abide with you for ever. And after: I will
not leave you like Orphans without a guide or governor, but I will come unto
you (meaning by his holy spirit.) The holy spirit then is the governor, and
guardian of Christ's Church here on earth: we are not orphans. And the same
lesson he taught al his Apostles again immediately before his ascension: It is
not for you to know the times and seasons which the Father has put in his own
power: Act. 1.7.8.
But you shall receive the power of the holy ghost when he shall come on you.
Here is the authority, here is the power, and the government of the Church.
And you shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. Here also is the estate and
condition of all the Apostles put down; no one of them is made better then an
other. They are all appointed witnesses of him: no one of them Lord or Judge.
And this authority and office of government in the Church, to declare that it
was of God given to the spirit of God, the spirit of God expressly oftentimes
executed: As when Peter doubted what the vision meant, Act. 10.19.
the spirit said unto him: Behold three men seek thee: Arise therefore and get
thee down, and go with them, and doubt nothing: For I have sent them. What
can be more plain then this? The holy ghost sent those three men from
Caesarea to Ioppe; and also sent Peter with them. Is not this to govern? If
Peter had been head appointed by Christ under him, he might have gone by his
own authority; but here he is namely sent of another: to declare that the
authority was not in himself. And when Peter came again to Jerusalem; Act.
11.3.
They of the Circumcision contended with him about this matter: And he
alleges this commission and commandment of the holy spirit for his warrant.
Now this same disputing and reasoning taught, that Peter was not their head:
The brethren make him yield account of his doings to them, Act. 8.39.
as to his equals. So the spirit caught Phillip away from the Eunuch, and
placed him at Azoto, and he walked too and fro, preaching in all the cities,
till he came to Caesarea.

The like practice of this authority and government of the holy spirit in the
Church, we read in the Acts c. 13.2: Now as they ministered unto the Lord and
fasted, the holy ghost said: separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the works
whereunto I have called them.

And after they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they let
them go: and they, after they were sent forth of the holy ghost, came even to
Caesarea; and from thence sailed to Cypris. Is not this to govern? Amongst a
number, to elect out certain men, and to send them to certain countries.

The like testimony of this government in Gods Church of Gods spirit, yields
S. Paul to a great number of pastors in a solemn synod: Act. 20.28.
Take heed therefore unto your selves (says he) and to all the flock;
whereof the holy ghost has made you overseers.

To place pastors in the Church, is it not to govern? And this S. Paul
attributes here to the holy ghost: and as he affirms this of the pastors of
Ephesius, so no doubt of the pastors of the whole world. They are placed in
their cures by the holy Ghost.

All the Apostles likewise attribute this power and authority to the holy
Ghost: In that great controversy about circumcision and observing the law of
Moses, Act. 15.28.
do they not conclude thus? It seems good to the holy Ghost and to us: Here
is the holy Ghost first put as head and governor, and decider of this great
controversy; and they themselves, all alike, but as assistants unto it. And is
not this to govern?

And as the holy Ghost did then expreslie show his government in the
beginning; so no doubt, by his most mighty power, and secret inspiration, he
gouernes the same still: and as ye Apostles acknowledge him the governor of
the church, and no one of them; but him as the head commanding works and
placing ministers, and deciding controversies, and themselves all as hands and
feet, as Gregory makes them; fulfilling his will

Philippus de Dies writes thus out of Ambrose, of the authority and pleasure:
so let us and no other. (...) of all the Apostles: Dom. 2. posi. pasc. conc. 1:
To this end S. Paul does confess that himself and his fellow Apostles
received grace and Apostleship; we have received (says he) Grace and
Apostleshippe, that all nations might obey the faith: That is, that all nations
might obey those things which faith teaches. For his name, which S. Ambrose
expounds, as Christ's Vicars, occupying his room in the Church: And this is
that which the same blessed Apostle said before. We are Ambassadors for
Christ. But Theophilact expounds it thus: For his name; That is, for the
advancement of the name of Christ, that the virtue of his name might be spread
through the whole world. Thus far Philippus de Dies. Ambrose and he makes
all the Apostles Christ's vicars, and not the Pope only: and Theophilact
testifies that it is the chief part of the apostles to teach, that the virtue
of Christ's name might be spread through the whole world; but the Pope has
dyminished the virtue of this name, by adding other names unto it, even as when
many herbs in a medicine are mingled together, one hinders the operation of
an other: what needs any more, if one be sufficient?

Of Antichrist.
Fer. in cap. 4. Io.
OF the succession of place, how little it avails, Ferus writes thus: As the
Jews bragged of the city of David, and of the Temple of Solomon: so the
Samaritanes had the dwellings of the former patriarchs; who dwelt in those
places. And by reason of these places, they defended and comforted themselves
against the Jews, when as they had nothing of Jacobs religion; as also the
Jews nothing of David's holiness. Thus far Ferus. The like may be said of the
succession of the Roman Bishop. Succession of place without faith is nothing.

Ferus of the preaching of the Gospel thorough all the world, before the end
of the world, writes thus: The gospel came before the destruction of
Jerusalem, even to the very end of the world: but it shall be fulfilled more
perfectly, before the end of the world. Let us mark how (he says) that the
gospel shall be preached further and more perfectly now, In cap. 24. Mat.
then in the Apostles days. And after: Behold the goodness of God, he might
justly condemn us, and yet he deferreth his judgment till all be called to
mercy. Before he destroyed all men with the flood, Noe admonished them an
hundred years; before he destroyed Egypt, first he sent Moses* Even so before
the universal judgment, first he calls all to mercy, by the gospel. And
after: To the good the gospel is to their salvation, but a testimony against
the wicked. Let all men take heed then now, that make light account of the
gospel, and mark not the doctrine contained therein, least it be a testimony
against them, to condemn them.

And again, he writes thus: Mark that that Jerusalem, on whom Christ
pronounced the sentence of destruction, signifies the world; and the Temple of
God in the world is the Temple of the faithful: Therefore in the Church he
foretold, that there should be an abomination before the end of the world. To
abhor, is to execrate, to loath, to disdain, not to suffer; to throw a
thing away, with disdain or indignation. Hence an abomination or a thing
abominable that is called, which engenders an abhorring, loathing, or
detestation: But no outward uncleanness God does loath, but our sins. Hereof
very often, and for the most part, they are called abominations in the
scripture, as for example: The way of the ungodly is abomination unto the Lord;
but the greatest abomination of all other in the scriptures, is Idolatry,
impiety, heresy, and falling away from God. Therefore after this manner,
Christ does say, that there shall be abomination in the Church, that is, an
apostacy or departing from God; And that not any mean departing or falling
away; but such a one as shall bring desolation with it: that is, shall utterly
go about to overthrow christian religion. And this abomination, S. John means
in the Revelation, sometime by the beast, to which the Dragon has given his
power; sometime by the woman sitting on the beast and making all Nations drunken
of the wine of her fornication. Of which S. Paul speaks more plainly,
unless (says he) that a departing come first and that, that man of sin be
reueiled, etc. Therefore this abomination is nothing else, then the kingdom
and tyranny of Antichrist, or the falling away from god, which shall be under
his kingdom. And see how evidently, in these few words he describes this
kingdom of Antichrist: first, It shall be nothing else but an abomination.
Secondly, it shall make a desolation of true faith and religion. Thirdly, it
shall sit in the Church. This abomination shall rest in the hearts of men,
that externally they shall seem the temples of God: but inwardly in stead of
Christ, an Idol shall sit: That is, this abomination shall polish it self,
with a fair show; that it shall be able to beguile the saints, unless they
were by Gods power preserved.

What can be more manifestly said then this? that there shall be in the Church
of Christ such an abomination, that shall quite overthrow all true religion;
and shall polish it self with a great show of holiness? Does not this plainly
paint out popery: who will venture the health of his soul upon the name of the
Church, wherein his abomination shall rest, and that with such a great show of
holiness? But he goes forward: When you shall see the abomination, that is, when
that son of perdition shall make himself manifest, (For he shall be made
manifest.) Although his kingdom begun by and by in the Apostles time, as Paul
says, Now the mystery of iniquity works: And John says. Now there are
many Antichrists: yea even as Christ's kingdom began from that just Abell; so
the kingdom of Antichrist, from that wicked Caine yet in the end of the world,
that impiety shall manifestly discover it self: and of this Christ here puts
us in mind. And Christ has added: He that reads let him understand: By
which word he gives us to understand, that that abomination and apostasy shall
creep in so secretly, that none unless he be very atte^tiue and watchful,
shall be able to perceive the same. The which is most worthy of marking,
otherwise the same thing shall happen to us with Antichrist, as befell to the
Jews, with the true Christ: for they only looked for in Christ promised an
earthly kingdom, worldly jurisdiction and peace: This they gaped after, and
do as yet gape for. In the mean while, they knew not Christ being present
among the^: yea they condemned him, as a wicked man to death: who, if they had
compared Christ's doctrine and miracles to the scriptures, might easily have
known him. So it falls out, for the most part with us; we mark only those
things which are externally spoken of Antichrist, which as long as we see not,
we live careless. And in the mean time, no man marks that this abomination, in
many things is fulfilled daily, which one shall easily perceive, that
compares Christ's doctrine to our times. Mark therefore, that as Christ came
first secretly; so that he was known, but of a few, neither did it appear who
he was, before that he had overcome the Devil and Death; but these being
overcome, when as he reigned, then at last, he appeared to the world, by the
preaching of the Apostles; All power (says he) is given to me, go ye
therefore and teach, etc. So the kingdom of Antichrist enters in secretly;
neither shall it be perceived, till he has gotten possession of the temple,
and then shall Antichrist himself appear. To conclude, if Christ at the first
had showed who he had been, all men would have received him: So the Devil, if
in the beginning, he should have showed his wickedness manifestly, all would
have fled from him. Again, as Christ's kingdom began, before he appeared in
the flesh; for all the elect from Abel, even to the worlds end, belong to the
kingdom of Christ, and are one body with him: So Antichrists kingdom began
before he appeared himself, as S. Paul says, the mystery of iniquity
works, which shall be reueiled in his time: yea all the wicked from Cain, even
to the last of them, do belong to the kingdom of Antichrist, and are one
body with him. Let every body now consider himself, and search the Temple
of his heart least peradventure he find any thing of Antichrists kingdom and
abomination, that is of Idolatry in himself. Which that thou may the better
do: Take with thee the first commandment, wherein we are taught, to have
but one God. If thou find any thing in thy self, wherein thou trustest,
besides God, whether it be any external thing, as to trust in thine own
righteousness and merits, now thou have that abomination in thy heart and that
true Antichrist: For Christ teaches contrary things. If thou hear or
see any thing in the Church, which is repugnant to the doctrine of Christ and
to his life, that truly belonges to the kingdom of Antichrist: for this is a
true saying, He that is not with me, is against me.

Thus far Ferus. And secondly here we may not, that Antichrist shall come in
closely and privily, that he shall possess ye temple, that is the heart of
man; and that the only way to discover him, is by the scriptures; that all
doctrines contrary to them are Antichristian: And that this is a principal
branch of antichristian doctrine (to taste of one for all) to trust in our
own merits, or righteousness. And is not this most evidently to affirm, that
the Church of Rome is the seat of Antichrist, who has taught, and does teach
this doctrine?

Again upon these words; Behold here is Christ, or there, Ferus writes thus:
Do the false prophets preach Christ? yea verelie: for to preach Christ, is to
preach righteousness, sanctification, forgiveness of sins, and redemption. For
Christ is become al these things unto us. And these things the false Prophets
preach, how we may obtain righteousness and redemption: But they teach not that
we must look for and seek these things only from Christ, and only by
Christ. Yea they neglecting Christ, do teach to seek for righteousness and
forgiveness of sins in other things: Behold say they: here or there is
Christ, which in deed is to seduce, and lead out of the way. For these
things are found no where else but in Christ. There is no other name under
heaven, by which we must be saved. Thus far Ferus. If this be true, then let
all the world judge, who be false prophets, whether the Papists or we, who
teach all men to trust only in Christ, and by his means only, to seek for
all good things at Gods hands: when as they teach men to trust in their own
works, and to hope for remission of sins, by the merits of their friars:
which things only are to be found in Christ, says Ferus, and in nothing
else. This doctrine Ferus taught, and we teach. But the latter edition of Ferus
printed at Rome, has thus corrupted Ferus. To preach Christ, is to preach
righteousness, sanctification, remission of sins, and redemption; for Christ
is become all these things unto us. These things also the false prophets
preach, how we shall obtain righteousness and redemption, but they teach not us
to obtain these things by Christ, and his sacraments, and following his steps:
yea they neglecting these, do teach us to seek for righteousness, and remission
of sins, through a vain and rash confidence. Behold (say they) here and
there is Christ: The which is in truth to seduce: for these things are to be
found no where else, then in the Catholic Church his spouse by Christ. Thus
the Roman edition enterlaceth and adds to Ferus. They do mislike, that
righteousness and remission of sins should be obtained from Christ, and by
Christ: They will have (as should seem) our own works, and their sacraments
of pardones joined with him, and their Church: For that they mean by the
Catholic Church. This they would force Ferus to teach, which he never taught.

But Ferus in his true original concludes this matter thus: Christ therefore
means in these words, that we should hope or look for no other Christ, but
him, that is, that we should seek for righteousness, salvation, remission of
sins, of him alone; nothing regarding if the false prophets taught any other
thing. Secondly, of these words thou have taught thee that Christ is tied to
no place, outward show, peculiar kind of worship or state of men, that he
should be found there alone, and no where else; otherwise all men must be
forced to go to one place, or to be of one trade. He is not bound to
Jerusalem nor to any other City, that there all men should find him: neither
that he should be found of any other, but of him that went thither: Christ
may be found in every City, and in every state and trade of man's life, which
is not repugnant to the word of God. There are two things, to which he has
bound himself, and wherein he has foretold that he may be found, that is to
say, his word, and his sacraments annexed to his word. There thou shall find
Christ in deed, neither is he a false Prophet that sends thee thither.

Thus far Ferus. Where we may note, that to teach men to seek for
righteousness, in any other thing, then in Christ, is to look for another
Christ: is to deny Christ to becomed in the flesh: And therefore is to be a
disciple of Antichrist. Though they seem never so much to reverence Christ
with their toongs, if they believe not with their hearts, that he is such a
Christ, as the gospel teaches, that he alone is our righteousness: they are of
Antichrist. Secondly, if we will have Christ, we must seek him in his word:
He is tied to no place but to it. How greatly then did they beguile our
forefathers, which taught them to go a pilgrimage, to undertake great iournies
to seek Christ at Jerusalem, and other places; and in the mean time negelectd
and never regarded his word? Surely they taught men the wrong way to find
Christ, if this be true that Ferus taught; which is most true. No nor if Christ
be not tied to any one state of men more, then to another: then not to their
Friars (as they brag he is) more then to any other kind of men. If this
doctrine had been taught our forefathers, I think they would not have bestowed
their lands upon Frieries and Monasteries, as they did. Lastly, whereas Ferus
says, that Christ is only tied to his word, and sacraments annexed to his
word: the Roman edition leaves out (Annexed to his word) as though there might
be sacraments not annexed or grounded upon the word of God: As in truth many
of their sacraments are.

Again, Ferus upon these words (Let them that be in Iewrie fly unto the
hills) writes thus: But whither must we fly? To the hills, to the higher
places, As he did which said, I have lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from
whence comes my help. And also, In thee O Lord, have I put my trust, I shall
never be put to confusion: And, I have lift up my soul unto thee. Happy is
he that has fled to the hills, he shall be safe in deed. Ferus here by these
hills, means heaven, and that we must trust only in God: as is most
manifest by the scriptures he alleges. The Roman edition adds, We must
fly unto the hills, that is, to the Catholic Church And to the superior
places, as he did shall said: I have lift up mine eyes unto the hills, etc.
They would have men trust in their Church, as should seem: And so they abuse
both Ferus meaning, and the Scriptures he alleges; which cannot be referred
to the Church, but to God alone.

Gagneius upon that place of S. Peter (Babylon Coelected) writes: That the
Greek scholia, and al other interpretors do interpret Rome to be Babylon,
which he so calls for the confusion of their Idols. Where we may note first,
that Peter makes himself equal with other elders, calling himself
Compresbyterum, that is, a fellow elder, in his former epistle. And in this
his second epistle (If Babylon be Rome) as Gagneius seems to affirm, he makes
it equal with other Churches, calling it Coelected, that is, equally chose^ of
God with other Churches. And what prerogative then can either Peter's
successors, or the Church of Rome challeng? Secondly, if by all interpretors
judgments, as Gagneius affirms, by Babylon Rome is understood; then no doubt
this seems to give a light to S. John's Revelation, foreshewing where that
Babylon should be, which he should prophecy of. For all the scriptures are as
a golden chain, one linked within another; and like that strange wheel
Exechiel saw: A wheel appeared on the earth by the beasts, having four
faces. The fashion of the wheels and their work was like a Chrisolite; Eze.
1.15.
and they four had one form, And their fashion and their work was, as one
wheel in another wheel. This strange wheel, no doubt, represented the
gospel: The scriptures agree altogether: S. Peter and S. John did mean one
Babylon. And that former is Rome by Gagneius and all interpretors judgments:
And surely the second also. Who will now then, if he do but mark these two
places conferred together, (for in scriptures one place expoundes another)
look for any good from thence?

Again: if Peter had been made head of the Church, by our savior; he had
sinned in not taking that power and authority upon him, in debasing himself
and making himself equal with other pastors. In 1. cap. Luc.
Stella says; That it is humility to accept any honor offered of God: And it
were pride to put any let or hinderance unto it. How then did not Peter here by
Stella his judgment, offend in pride, in putting a stop or hinderance to that
authority, which our savior had given him; when as he makes himself equal
with other pastors? That place of S Paul, which they allege for the
authority of the Church of Rome over all the world: I thank my God, through
Jesus Christ for you all; because your faith is published through the whole
world: In 2. cap. Luc
Stella expounds, That is, in many places. Stella also of the obedience to the
civil magistrate, writes thus: That we are taught in this place, first by
this fact of our Savior, that the authority of a king is of God, which is
both worthy of honor and reverence. So he paid tribute to Caesar, and to
the tol gatherers of Caesar, he would that tribute should be paid of Peter:
and being asked whether tribute should be paid to Caesar; he answered: Give
to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. He would be subject to laws even from
the beginning of his birth, least he which should be to others an example of
life, and holiness, should trouble the common wealth; which also came to
amend that was amiss, that he might also insinuate, that a just Empire has
laws acceptable to all me^, while the common wealth is maintained in peace and
justice. And for this cause no man ought to resist the higher powers, when as
Christ the example of humility would be subject unto them. Thus far Stella.
He excepts none from that subjection, and obedience, and paying of tribute,
neither Pope nor clergy. And whereas the Papists say that one ministerial
head is necessary for the government of the Church, August. in psalm. 56.
and that such a head is the Pope; S. Austen concerning this matter writes
thus: Because all Christ is a head, and a body, which I do not doubt but that
you know well enough, our Savior himself the head, who suffered under
Pontius Pilate, who now after he rose from the dead, fitteth at the right hand
of his father: The Church is his body, not this Church or that Church, but
that which is spread over the whole world; nor that only which is among men,
which now presently live, but they also belonging to her, which were before us,
and those also which shall be after us, to the worlds end. For the whole church
consisting of all the faithful, because all the faithful are members of
Christ, has now that head which is now placed in heaven, which gouernes his
body. And although he be separated from sight, yet he is not separated from
love: Therefore, because all Christ is a head and his body, therefore in all
Psalms, let us so hear the voice of our head, as we also hear the voice of
his body: For he would not speak severally, because he would not be
separated. Saying: I am with you even unto the end of the world: If he be
with us, he speaks in us; he speaks of us; and he speaks by us; because we
speak by him. And therefore we speak truth, because we speak in him. For if
at any time we shall speak in our selves, and of our selves; we shall
continue liers. Thus far Austen: where he says plainly, that Christ himself
is a head, governing his Church: And that which is the chief part of a
governor, he speaks unto it; and that not by any one, but by all his
ministers: Fer. in 14. ca. Ioh.
To whom he has promised, He will be with to the end of the world. And how
this government is executed, that is by his holy spirit, Ferus very
excellently declares: Christ always (says he) does the part of a most
faithful Father. For even as a father his children being yet young, does not
only leave them his inheritance, and all the goods he has, but also places
Tutors and guardians over them, that may keep that inheritance for his
children, and may resist those that would injury them; which thing the
children themselves and orphans could not do. So Christ here being not
content by his testament to leave us his inheritance and his goods but moreover
he promises and appoints the holy spirit to be our tutor and guardian, who
should take upon him the care, and guardianshippe of his Orphans, and should
in every court before any Judge, King, or tyrant, defend by his lawful
pleading, the inheritance of the father bequeathed them in his testament; nay
written with his own blood: and should have a care, least the children by
their own negligence should lose their inheritance: Thus far Ferus. Now to
be appointed tutor or guardian of the church; what is it else but to be
appointed governor of the Church?

Ieron. in 4. ca. Mal.
The Papists do teach, that before Antichrist, Elias in his own person shall
come. Concerning which thing, Jerome writes thus: The Jews, and heretics
following the Jews, before their Messiah think that Elias shall come, and
shall restore all things: And hereupon in the Gospel this question was made to
Christ: Why the Pharisees do say, that Elias shall come? To whom he answered:
Helias truly shall come; And if you believe, he is comed already, by Elias
meaning John. Thus much Jerome: Where we may note, that Jerome calls them
Jewish heretics, that look for Elias: And yet the Papists at this day
look for Elias. If this had been a point of Catholic doctrine, in the Church
in Ieromes days, no doubt, he would not have been ignorant of it: neither
would he have called the professors thereof, heretics. So that it should
seem, the papists opinion concerning Antichrist, was comed since Ieroms days:
whereof this coming of Elias, is a principal branch. And that the Papists
are of this opinion, Gagneius writes thus: Neither in this place, a mystical
exposition of the number, Gag. in cap. xx. Apoc.
can fitly be applied, when as in deed in the time of Antichrist, that Elias
shall come and preach, according to the testimony of Malachie, we hold for a
surety. Master Bellarmine also affirms the same: De Romans pont. lib. 5. cap.
6.
The third demonstration (says he) is drawn from the coming of Enoch and
Elias, which as yet live; and live to this end, that they may oppose
themselves against Antichrist when he comes, and should preserve the elect in
the faith of Christ, and at the length should convert the Jews. These are the
causes why Master Bellarmine says, that Elias and Enoch shall come.

But these causes have no ground in the scripture, and therefore the effect of
them shall not follow. For S. Paul says, Ephesians. 6.17.
that the word of God is the sword of the spirit; with which sword, no doubt,
all Gods enemies, amongst whom Antichrist is chief, must be wounded and
confounded. And S. Paul says plainly, that Antichrist must be consumed, with
the breath of Gods mouth: 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
that is, no doubt, with this sword. And as our Savior Christ fought against
Antichrists father the Devil, saying: Luke 4.48.
It is written; and not saying, thus it is taught by tradition: so must all his
soldiers fight against his son, the son of perdition Antichrist himself,
saying, Thus it is written: Every Christian armed with the sword of the
spirit, that is with the word of God, must oppose himself against Antichrist.
This sword is able to confound him and cut off his head. There needs not Elias
and Enoch to come to oppose themselves against him. They blunt the edge of this
sword, which teach this doctrine. And with this sword also Saint John arms
every Christian against Antichrist: These things have I written unto you, 1.
Ep. 2.26.
as concerning those that deceive you: and the anointing ye have received of
him, abides in you; so that no man needs to teach you any thing, no not
Elias nor Enoch. We may note here, how that he armeth the faithful only with
the Scripture, and the holy spirit, against Antichrist; and that they need no
other armor. And again: I write unto you children, Verse 14.
that you have known the father; I write unto you fathers, that you have
known him that was from the beginning; I write unto you young men, that you
are strong, and the word of God dwells in you. The word of God, is the
knowledge and light of old men, against Satan and his son Antichrist; and
the strength also of young men, to wrestle and encounter with them both: and
with this they being strengthened, they are able to overcome them.

Saint Paul also speaking of Antichrist and of his members, which by and by
after his departure should succeed in the church, says thus: Act. 20 24.
I know this, that after my departure, shall grievous Wolves enter in amongst
you, not sparing the flock: and from amongst your selves, shall men arise
speaking perverse things, to draw away the Disciples after them. Therefore
watch ye, remembering how by the space of three years, night and day, I have
not ceased to warn every one of you. And now brethren, I commend you to God,
and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you further (then I have
as yet builded you) and to give you an inheritance amongst all those which
shall be sanctified. Here Saint Paul teaches, that Wolves shall succeed in
the Church: and no doubt these were the members of Antichrist. Against these,
as a faithful Pastor, he commits his sheep to God, and to the word of God,
which is able to build them further; naie to preserve them safe and sound from
all errors and dangers in the wilderness of this world, and to bring them
even to heaven, if so be that they shall follow only the direction of it. And
here also, we may learn an excellent commendation of the word of God; it is
a bottomless pit; no man can ever come to the depth thereof: so that of it,
that saying of Saint Austen is verified. So great is the depth of the holy
Scriptures, that I should every day profit in the study of them, Aug. ep. 3.
if from mine infancy till I were a very old man I should learn them,
having never so much leisure, studying never so earnestly, and having never so
good a wit: they are still able to build further. This testimony Saint Paul
and Saint Austen yield to the word of God; and what needs Master Bellarmine
then, to add the coming of Elias and Enoch, as necessary to preserve the
elect in the faith? as though the word of God were not sufficient. Our Savior
himself in the Gospel teaches the same doctrine, and that it is dangerous to
believe any rising again from the dead, whosoever they are, in points of
salvation: Luke 16.31.
They have Moses and the prophets says Abraham the father of the faithful; if
they will not believe them, neither will they believe if any arise from the
dead again; no, if it were Enoch and Elias. This lesson Abraham by our
saviors testimony, has taught all his children; and yet by Master
Bellarmine his judgment, the faithful must look for Elias and Enoch to come
to preserve them in ye faith Esaias also opposes the word of God against all
doctrines of dead men whatsoever: Esaias 8.20.
Should not a people enquire of their God? From the living to the dead (will
you seek?) To the law and to the testimony. Psalm. 119.105.
The law and the testimony must be a light to our feet; our counselors in
all controversies and doubts, as also they were David's.

Chrysostom upon Matthew, writes thus of Antichrist, and of the only way to
bewray him: Then, that is, Chrysostom. Ho. 49. in ca. 24. Mat.
when Antichrists kingdom shall come, they which are in Iewrie, let them fly
unto the hills. These things are to be understood spiritually thus: Then when
you shall see the abomination of desolation, sitting in the holy place, that
is, when you shall see a wicked heresy, which is the host of Antichrist,
standing in the holy places of the Church: at that time, they which are in
Iewrie, let them fly to the hills, that is, they which are Christians, let
them get them to the Scriptures. For as the true Jew is a Christian, as the
Apostle says, not he which is a Jew openly, but he which is a Jew in secret:
so christendom is true Iewrie, whose name signifies confession or
thanksgiving: and the hills are the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, of
which hills it is said, Thou wonderfully give light from the eternal
hills. And again, of the Church he says, the foundations are upon the holy
hills.

And why does he command all christians at this time to get them to the
scriptures? Because at that time since that heresy has taken place in the
Church, there can be no other proof or trial of true christianity; nor any
other help for christians, which the^ would know which is the true faith, but
the holy Scriptures. Before by many means it might be showed, which was the
church of Christ, and which was the heathenish Synagogue. But now, they which
will know which is the true Church, can know it by no means else, but only by
the Scriptures. And after, Therefore the Lord knowing what a great confusion of
all things should be in the latter days; therefore he commands, that
Christians which would be sure to know the true faith, should fly to nothing
else but to the Scriptures. Here we may first learn, what Antichrist is, not
a Devil incarnate, as the Papists imagine; but a wicked heresy, which shall
take possession in the Church: nay in the beginning of that Homily he says,
That when as all heresies are as it were the host of Antichrist: yet especially
that, which shall take upon it the face and room of the Church, Quae obtinuit
ecclesiae locum, and stetit in loco sancto, ita vt videatur quasi verbum
veritatis stetisse; cum non sit verbum veritatis, sed abominatio desolationis,
id est, exercitus Antichrists, qui multorum animas reddidit desolatas a Deo:
which has borne the show of the Church; so that it seemed to have continued in
the holy place, as the word of truth; when as it is not the word of truth, but
the abomination of desolation, that is the host of Antichrist, which shall
make many men's souls destitute of God. And dare any man then venture his
salvation upon the bare name and show of the Church? He says here plainly,
that Antichrists heresy shall have the room and show of the Church.
Therefore it is dangerous only to rely upon the Church, as many do now.
Chrysostom (or whosoever he was that wrote this book) a very ancient and
learned Christian was of this judgment long before Antichrist came: and shall
we now not believe it, seeing it with our eyes? And he adds, that the only
way now to try the truth, is by the Scriptures: This is his counsel. And the
Pope herein by dissuading men from reading the scriptures, declares plainly,
that he is Antichrist: for as the Gospel teaches, He that does evil hates
the light, and will not come near it. Why should the Pope debar men from
reading the scriptures, but that he fears they would discover his darkness
and false doctrines? Neither is the coming of Elias and Enoch necessary for
the conversion of the Jews. The scriptures do teach us other means of their
conversion: Even to this day (says Saint Paul) when Moses is read, 1. Cor.
3.15.
there is a veil put over the hearts of the Jews; but when they shall return
to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away. It is God alone which must take
away the vailes from their hearts, and then they shall be converted. Psalm.
119.18.
As David also prays: O Lord take away the veil from mine eyes, and I shall
behold the wondrous things of thy law. And in another place saint Paul writes
thus: If the rejecting of them were the reconciliation of the world, To. 11 15.
what is the resumption and taking them again, but even life from death? The
conversion of the Jews then, and their resumption is even as it were of dead
men to make living men. And this is the work of God alone. And this work does
he work even in a moment as many histories do prove. That hereof then, no
Christian may dream of any long continuance of this world, because the Jews
are not as yet converted, when as their conversion is of the hand and power of
God, as saint Paul plainly teaches, and not of the coming and preaching of
Enoch and Elias; and is as it were putting life into dead men, which God can
do in a minute.

And of the overthrowing of Antichrist, 2. These. 2.8
Saint Paul also writes thus: That he shall be consumed by little and little,
by the Spirit of Gods mouth, and shall be quite abolished by his glorious
appearance. Jesus Christ himself by his word, and by his own presence shall
consume and quite destroy Antichrist: he shall not need the ministry of
Elias and Enoch. The prophet Zachary also prophesying most manifestly of the
conversion of the Jews, attributes it to Gods extraordinary mercy, and not to
the preaching of Elias and Enoch: And I will power out (says God) upon the
house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and
prayers, or of mercy. (For the hebrew word may signify both. Zach. 12.10.
) And they shall look upon him who^ they have thrust through, and they shall
lament over him as one does over his only begotten, and the whole land shall
lament family to family by themselves; the family of the house of David apart,
etc. And here in this weighty matter concerning the fulfilling and explication
of this prophecy, to let all men's interpretations pass, the holy ghost it
self, by whom the prophet spoke, is the best interpreter of this prophecy,
and teaches us most plainly in whom, and when it shall be fulfilled. As
concerning the first, in whom it shall be fulfilled, saint John in his gospel
tells us plainly: That it shall be fulfilled in those Jews that put Christ to
death, and caused him to be pierced with a spear. Io. 19.37.
For he says that therefore, one of the soldiers thrust him through with a
spear, that that scripture might be fulfilled. And they shall behold him, whom
they have pierced. That was done then, that this might be fulfilled hereafter:
So that of the persons, upon whom this prophecy shall be fulfilled, it is
plain, that by Saint John's interpretation, they are the true natural Jews;
and not as some have here allegorically gone about to expound this place, the
spiritual Jews, that is, us Christians. And if S. John here do plainly
affirm, that this latter branch of Zacharias prophecy shall be fulfilled in
the true Jews; I will add that then likewise the former branch of this
prophecy, that is, That God will power upon them the spirit of grace and
mercy, shall be fulfilled in them. We may not dismember the prophecies of God:
If the latter part be verified in them; then surely it necessarily inferres,
that the former is verified also. And at what time all this shall be fulfilled,
the same saint John in another place declares. Behold (says he) he comes in
the clouds, and all eyes shall see him, Reave. 1.7.
yea even they which have pierced him, and all the tribes of the earth shall
lament over him. Amen. That this shall be fulfilled in the day of judgment,
here saint John plainly affirms: and he also ads that weeping, whereof
Zachary makes mention, to make the matter more plain.

And that this weeping which Zachary speaks of, shall be of such as shall be
saved, is manifest hereby: first, that the prophet says, That God will power
upon them the spirit of grace and mercy. This pouring this abundance of grace
and mercy, argues, no doubt, the hainousnes and the miserablenes of their
estate, wherein they are even now: also it argues their favorable acceptance
and pardon at Gods hands. And that also it shall be of such as shall be saved,
appears hereby, that the prophet declares the manner thereof so apparently,
even twice together. They shall lament him (says he) as one that lamenteth
bitterly for his only son, and they shall be sorry for him, as one that is
sorry for his first borne. No doubt this argues that this their repentance
shall be sincere, Gen 34. Heb. 12. Mat. 27.4. Luke. 7.3. Mat. 26.7 8.
even from the bottom of their hearts: not like Esaus or Judas his repentance;
but like Marie Magdalens, and Peter's. So that to expound this place of us
Christians, who are spiritual Jews, seems not to agree naturally with the
text, and also to gainsay saint John's exposition. Who says, that Christ was
pierced with a spear, that the scripture might be fulfilled in them: and that
not then, but hereafter: And they shall see him whom they have pierced. Neither
do we read of any such general mourning required or practiced of the
spiritual Jews, that is, of us Christians when we were converted. In the Acts
of the Apostles: Act. 2.37.41.
They were pricked in their hearts we read; and of their baptism: but of the
tears of any, we read not.

Neither was it fulfilled in those women, which when Christ was led to his
passion, came weeping after him. Luke. 23.27.
For these were but certain women: neither do we read that they wept apart,
but altogether, neither that any men wept with them, but women only. And
those women wept before he was pierced; but this which Zachary speaks of,
shall be after. Neither was it fulfilled in the destruction of Jerusalem, as
some other have expounded it. Because the incredulous Jews, having now quite
forgotten the death of Christ, when as Jerusalem was destroyed, never thought
of Christ: neither that they suffered all those evils for his sake, but rather
for the sins of some seditious persons, and of some other that then were in the
city, as Josephus himself thought: I will not refuse to speak that (says
he) which sorrow enforces me to speak: I suppose, Lib. 6. de bell. Iudaic.
cap. 16.
that if the Romans had not comed against those wicked persons, that either the
city should have been destroyed by some earthquake, or ouerflowed with some
Deluge, or should have been consumed with thunder and lightning from heaven,
as was Sodom. For she then had brought forth a far more wicked brood then
ever Sodom did. To conclude, together with their wickedness, past all cure, the
whole people also perished. So that this prophecy is to be fulfilled in the
true natural Jews, and as yet it has not been fulfilled in them.

And no doubt our blessed Savior himself in the Gospel had relation to the
prophecy of Zachary, Mat. 24.^0.
who speaking of the day of judgment, says: Then shall appear the sign of
the son of man in heaven, and then shall all the kinreds of the earth weep:
And they shall see the son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power
and great glory. What other sign can any man judge here to be meant, then the
sign of the cross? the glory and brightness of Jesus Christ going before him
cannot be that sign, for of that he ads a little after: Then shall they see
the son of man come in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. But
before this great glory, shall this sign appear: So that, it cannot be
properly this great glory. They are two distinct things. Let us mark
diligently here also, how the Evangelist calls it the sign of the son of man,
and not the sign of the son of God. And therefore shall be an humble and not
a glorious sign. All the whole life of our Savior was humble: but especially
in his death on the cross he declared this his humility. That he touched
leapers: that he talked so familiarly with that sinful woman of Samaria: that
he was baptized of John: Mat. 8.3 Io. 4.7 Mat. 3.15. Ioh. 13.5. Phil. 2.6.
nay that he washed his Apostles feet: but above all other signs of his
humility, this was the greatest, that he died upon the cross. And therefore
saint Paul says, who when he was in the shape of God, and thought it no
robbery to be equal with God: but he made himself of no reputation, and
took on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was found
in shape as a man. He humbled himself and became obedient unto the death, even
the death of the cross. Wherefore God has also greatly exalted him, and given
him a name above every name. On the cross appeared his greatest humility. So
that the cross in this respect, may very fitly be called the sign of the
son of man. And this also the speeches of the Jews spoken to our savior,
may insinnate. If he be the king of the Jews let him come down from the
cross: And we will believe in him. It was the cross that they stumbled at:
Mat. 27.42. Gal. 5.11. Es. 9.6.
that to this day is that that offends the Jews: And that is Christ's greatest
glory; His principality is upon his shoulder, as Esaias says. Nay it shall be
such a sign, as shall make all the tribes of the earth to weep, which believe
not in Christ. And surely what other sign can this be, then the sign of the
cross? What other sign in heaven could make the Jews to weep, but the sign
of the cross? No doubt the sight of this will even break their hearts, and
make them burst out into tears: and to fulfill this prophecy of Zachary.

Dom. 24. Post. Pent. Conc. 1.
To this effect Granat. has a notable sentence, and to the confirmation thereof
he cites Eusebius Emissenus, and he writes thus: Before the coming of this
heavenly king, the triumphant sign of the cross more clear then the sun
shall appear. And then says the Lord, all the tribes of the earth shall
lament: because in that sign all the wicked shall manifestly see their
condemnation. The infidels, because they have blasphemed the cross of Christ;
the faithful which have lived wickedly, because they have made no use of such
a great benefit and remedy. For as Eusebius Emissenus says, So far more
greater shall be the sinners of men, how much more Gods benefits have stretched
forth themselves unto them. Therefore (says he) it is to be believed, that the
Lord will pronounce and speak to the vessels of iniquity at his judgment,
that same voice which he spoke at his resurrection, declaring the precious
prints of the wounds, which he received on his cross. Put thy finger in
hither, and behold my hands, and bring hither thy hand, and thrust it into my
side: and acknowledge (O wickedness of men) what for thy sake, and of thee I
suffered. For those same signs of his nails, healthful to the godly, but
terrible to the wicked, which shall not be done away until the day of judgment,
no doubt are reserved to cast men in the teeth withal. Thus far he. Neither
shall that cross condemn only our ingratitude, and make it void of all
excuse: but our slothfulnes also and our idleness, for by what means possible,
can a wicked man excuse himself, when as he sees the cross of Christ, which
is a most forcible remedy against that excuse of our infirmity, and all other
our evils? Wherefore to all other crimes, wicked man may have something to say,
but to these (that is his slothfulnes and ingratitude and infirmity) nothing
at all; for if it shall be laid to his charge: Thou have been an extortioner,
an adulterer, thou have cursed, forsworn and blasphemed: He may answer
perchance, I am a frail man; conceived in sin; I was prone to sin, I was
compassed about with sinful flesh. But when the Judge shall reply: Is there not
Rosine in Gilead, and is not there a physician there? which is, as though he
should say, were there not medicines in my Church, were there not sacraments
which flowed out of my side? Was there not confession there, a remedy of
former sins, and the Eucharist a treacle and preservative for those which were
to come? was there not in my cross, most vehement procurements of charity and
most clear examples of most great humility, patience, obedience, and of all
virtues by which thou might have carried thine infirmity, wherefore then is
not the wound of the daughter of my people healed? That is, wherefore have thou
not healed thy wounds with these medicines? which the heavenly physician has
bought for thee with the price of his blood, and has bestowed freely upon thee
what to these things shall those most miserable men answer? what shall they
say for themselves? what shall they do? surely even that which our Savior
even here says. Then shall all the kinreds of the earth lament, etc. Thus
far Granatensis.

But here some will say; all the infidels in the world shall weep at the
beholding of this sign: And shall they all be saved? I answer. The scripture
says not that all those which then weep shall be damned: And therefore where
the scriptures hold their peace, let man take heed, how he pronounces
sentence. Let us leave them to the mercy of God: God may among those weepers
save some if it please him; as among two thieves he saved one on the cross.
Luke. 25.43. Hab. 3.1.


That saying of Abacucke may then be fulfilled; When thou art angry thou will
think upon mercy. And David says; I will sing of mercy and judgment. Psalm.
101.1. Luke. 16.9.
Judgment excludes not mercy, even in that terrible and great day of account.
Mercy must save all Christians: Io. 2.13.
and why may it not at that time save some Jews also? Especially seeing God
promises here by his prophet, that he will power upon them the spirit of grace
and mercy, and then they shall weep. This weeping thall proceed of grace: and
therefore shall be healthful.

This pouring forth of the spirit of grace and mercy, and this having respect
then to him, whom they have pierced, and this weeping, belong all to one kind
of people, and are fruits and effects the one of the other. The former, the
pouring out of the spirit of grace and mercy, does belong to the elect; and
this latter, the beholding of him whom have they pierced, and these tears, to
the reprobate: As Ribera would have it, on that place of Zachary. And that the
cross was taken for the sign of the son of man, in the primitive Church,
Eusebius testifies: Rib. in za. c. 12.
For so when as the Christians admitted unto their society one Basilides, he
says they gave him the Lords sign. And the next day he was martyred. And he
that translated Eusebius adds in the margin, that by the Lords sign he
understands the cross. But if we shall not admit his exposition, Eus. lib. ca
5.
let us hear what Sibylla an ancient Prophetess, prophecieth of Christ's
coming to judgment, and of this sign.

Sib. lib. 8. Orac fol. 383.
(...),
(...),
(...).
Which Verses are thus turned into English.

Unto all men a famous sign, whereby they may be known,
In those days shall be given even by the wood a trumpe most dire
Of all the faithful much esteemd, but to the worlds state
Reposing trust in earthly things, a cause of great offense.
Here Sibylla in her Achrostickes, as she does most truly and plainly paint out
unto us Christ's name and his merits: This King (says she) whom we have
described in the first letters of our verses, is our God and our eternal
Redeemer and Savior, who suffered for us: And of his coming again to
judgment, why should she not also say the truth in ye appearing of this the
sign of the cross? It is a great argument to make one be trusted, if he shall
have borne true witness often before in other matters: The true faith of Sibylla
in the former, may also win her credit with us in this latter. And to confirm
the authority of her prophecy, Cic. lib. 2. de Divine. Au. de ciuit. dei lib.
18. ca. 23.
that it is no new thing forged of late since Christ's passion, Cicero makes
mention of this her Achrosticks who was before Christ; and Lactantius in his
book often cites her verses: And saint Austen says; That a certain noble man
called Flactianus, who was the Emperors Lieutena^t, when as they two talked
together of Christ, showed him a Greek book saying, that they were the verses
of Sibylla Erithrea, and that he showed him in a certain place of that book
in the beginning of every verse, letters set in such an order, that these
words might be read therein; Jesus, Christ, Son of God, Savior. This account
all these famous men made of Sibylla her verses, and shall we discredit them?
Gualter also a learned man of our days, of famous memory, so expoundes that
place of saint Matthewes gospel, and by the sign of the son of man,
understands the sign of the cross. These be his words: Most of the
ancient fathers expound the cross, to be this sign, whose image (as Eusebius
witnesses with this inscription, In this sign thou shall overcome) appeared
to Constantine, when he made war against Maxentius, that he might help the
Church, which seemed then forsaken. In cap. 24. Euan. secun, Mat,
For because Christ by the merit of the cross, overcame all the power of the
enemy; the sign of the cross appears most fitly before any other to our
victory, and by it also we shall overcome. And it is very profitable for us
often to muse upon this: and it is a shame for us, to fear any misfortune,
when as the very name of the cross promises us most certain victory. Thus
far Gualter. Wherein he does not only declare his own opinion, but also the
opinion of the fathers concerning this matter. That same learned father also
Thomas Cooper sometimes Bishop of Lincoln, in his visitation there, agreed
with Gualter in this his exposition, who spoke to this effect to his clergy
in Latin in my hearing: all the rest of his Sermon being in English: Annon
potestis far fratres mei, Anno Dom. 1583.
signum illud formari hic in terra, quod ante aduentum iudicis erit conspicuum
in coelo? Can you not abide (my dear brethren) that that sign should be made
here on earth, which shall appear manifestly before the judge come in heaven?

In cap. 4. Ioh.
Ferus also of the conversion of the Jews, writes thus: Allegorically as the
foresaid woman of Samaria was a figure of the Church of the Gentiles: so this
noble man's son was a figure of the Jews. And it makes much to the purpose,
that the woman came to Christ at the sixth hour, but he was healed first at the
seventh hour. For the Church of the Gentiles believed, the true son of
Righteousness Christ Jesus ascending into heaven: but when as he shall begin
to come down again, that is, when he sends before him the signs and
wonders of his coming to judgment, then shall the people of the Jews
believe. Ferus thinks that the very signs and wonders, which shall
immediately precede Christ's coming to judgment, shall cause the Jews to
believe; and not the preaching of Elias and Enoch. And it is very likely that
he means among those signs, which shall appear immediately before the
judgment, which shall convert the Jews, shall be the sign of the Cross.

And of this conversion of the Jews, and of this their weeping joining hands
as it were with the Prophet Zachary, Ier. 50.1.
the Prophet Jeremy prophesies thus also, saying: The word, which the Lord
spoke concerning Babylon, and the land of the Chaldees, by the hand of Jeremy
the Prophet: Declare among the nations and publish it; set up a standarde and
conceal it not: say, Babel is fallen, etc.

And in those days and at that time (says the Lord) the children of Israel
shall come, they and the children of Judah together going and weeping, they
shall go and seek the Lord their God.

And that this destruction of Babel shall be in the end of the world, Saint
John witnesses, who out of Jeremy cites this Verse: Go out of her my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, Ier. 50.8. Reu. 18.4. and 21. Reu. 18.21.
and that ye receive not of her plagues.

And after, A mighty Angel took up a great stone like a millstone, and cast
it into the sea, saying: With such violence shall the great City Babylon be
cast, and shall be found no more.

And this is also Ieremies conclusion of his prophecy, concerning Babel: Ier.
51.6^.
And when thou have made an end of reading this book, thou shall bind a
stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates: And shall say, Thus shall
Babel be drowned, and shall not rise from the evil I will bring upon her, and
they shall be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremy. So that this
destruction of Babylon, and this weeping and conversion of the Jews, shall be
at one time; no doubt in the very latter end of the world, immediately before
Christ's coming to judgment. The Babylonians shall still strive to maintain
their kingdom, but they shall not prosper: they shall be weary. I would to God
that all Seminaries and Jesuits, that take such great pains to establish the
Popes kingdom, would mark but this one word, and the last of Ieremies
prophecy, it would make them cease from their vain labors.

And that testimony also which Saint Paul cites out of Esaias for the conversion
of the Jews, Romans 11.26. Esaias 59.17.
plainly proves that they shall be converted in the very latter end of the
world, and even by Christ's coming to judgment. For thus says the Prophet: He
shall put on righteousness as an habergeon, and the helmet of salvation upon
his head, and he shall be clothed with the garments of vengeance for
clothing, and was clad with zeal as with a cloak: As to make recompense, as
to requite the fury of the adversaries with a recompense to his enemies: he
will fully repaie the Islands. So they shall fear the name of the Lord from the
West, and his glory from the rising of the sun, when the enemy shall come
like a flood. But the spirit of the Lord shall chase him away, or shall lift
up a standard (that is, Gods word) against him; as it is in the Hebrew. Is not
here a most plain and evident description of Christ's coming to judgment?
Phil. 2.7.
In his first coming he came as a savior, clothed in his apparel like a man:
but now he comes like a judge, to requite his enemies; now he comes clothed
with the garments of vengeance: And shall he not come thus at his second
coming? Does not now also Antichrist and enemies assault the Church of Christ
like a flood? and does not the spirit of God put them to flight? does it not
raise up the standard of Gods word against him, 2. These. 2.8.
as Saint Paul also prophesies, that by that means Antichrist shall be
overthrown? And then next after this, follows in Esaias that prophecy, which
Saint Paul alleges for the conversion of the Jews: And the redeemer shall
come unto Sion, and he shall turn iniquity from Jacob. So that by the coming
of Christ to judgment, the Jews shall be converted, and not by the coming of
Elias and Enoch.

Acts 3.20.
The same lesson also Peter taught the Jews: Amend your lives, and turn, that
your sins may be done away when the times of refreshing shall come from the
face of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus Christ who has been preached to you
before: Thus far Peter. This refreshing, no doubt, argues the great heat of
afflictions the Jews have endured. And these comfortable times shall come to
them, but not from the face of Elias and Enoch, (which they now dream of) but
from the face of the Lord himself, when he comes to judgment. For before
that time now after his ascension they cannot see his face: For Saint Peter
there says, that the heavens must contain him till all things be restored,
which God has spoken by the mouth of all his prophets, since the world began.
This Sermon of Peter may seem to be a perpetual lesson to the Jews for ever.
David also in the Psalm most evidently declares the sin of the Jews against
Christ; Psalm. 59.
their dispersion; and also the manner and time of their conversion. Verse. 2.3.
Deliver me (says he) from the wicked doers, and save me from the bloody men.
For lo they have laid wait for my soul: the mighty men are gathered against
me, not for mine offense, nor for my sin, O Lord. Here is first Jesus Christ
painted out most lively unto us, who alone might say; The mighty men are
gathered together against me, not for my sin, O Lord: who ever could say so
else? Now verily here is the sin of the Jews, they conspired against him,
they sought his life being a poor innocent. Verse, 11.
Slay them not, least my people forget it, but scatter them abroad by thy
power, and put them down, O Lord our shield. Here is their dispersion, and
continual and grievous punishment like Caines; whose posterity they are, for
their bloody and heinous offense against their brother. Genesis 4.12.
And thou O Lord God of hosts, O God of Israel, awake to visit all the heathen:
Verse, 5.
and be not merciful to those that offend maliciously. Is not here plainly the
last judgment? What is it else, for God to awake and to visit all the heathen,
and not always as it were to be a sleep, and to keep silence, as it is in
the 50. Psalm, but to come to judgment? And then follows the time of their
conversion: Verse, 6.
They go to and fro in the evening; they howl or bark like dogs, and go about
the City. Their conversion shall be in the evening: they shall weep or howl
like unto dogs: Is not this plainly to agree with Zachary? that they weep
and lament woefully one by one even as dogs use to do. And after, their zeal
follows: And in the evening they shall go to and fro, howl like dogs, Verse,
14.
and go about the City: they shall run here and there for meat, and surely
they shall not be satisfied, though they lie without doors all night. This
declares the great zeal that they shall have, and the love to Jesus Christ,
when as they are once converted: they shall be like Marie Magdalen, as zealous
of him at his second coming, as she was at his resurrection. Peter and John,
when as they had come to the grave and found not his body there, went home
again by and by; Ioh. 20.10.11.
but Marie tarried still by the grave weeping; she loved him better then so:
so zealous of Christ shall the Jews be, when as he shall arise also to them.

And here also is insinuated to us a good lesson: why God will then show them
such mercy, and to make us beware least we fall from Gods mercy: Oh says
David, Psalm. 59.5.
be not merciful to those that offend of malicious wickedness. Romans 10.2.
As though he should say: those that offend ignorantly, yet zealously, but not
according to knowledge (as Saint Paul witnesses that the Jews do now) be
merciful to those, O Lord. But be not merciful to those that offend
maliciously, which knew their masters will, Luke 12.47.
and yet will not do it: such shall be beaten with many stripes. And this
lesson concerns us: those sins are the sins which David calls the greatest
sins: sins of presumption. Psalm. 14.13. 1. Tim. 1.13
And so Saint Paul also writes of himself, that he obtained mercy, because
that he sinned ignorantly through unbelief. And so also it seems here by
David's prayer, that the Jews also shall obtain mercy.

The man also that appeared to Daniel, Dan. 10.14.
that was clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold of vphaz:
tells Daniel that he is sent to show him what shall come to his people in the
latter day: but yet the vision is for many days. And Daniel thus is instructed
of this man very manifestly of the calling of the Jews: Cap. 12.1.
At that time Michael the great prince shall stand up, who stands for the
children of thy people: and there shall be such a time of trouble, as there was
never since there was any people, till this time; and in this very time shall
the people be delivered, all that shall be found written in this book. And
many that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake; some to everlasting
life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. Thus much this heavenly man
reueiled to Daniel; that the Jews shall be called in that troublesome time.
And our Savior referres this troblesome time both to the destruction of
Jerusalem, and also to the end of the world: as we may plainly see in Saint
Marks Gospel, Chap. 13. v. 20. and 24. And those days shall be shortened for
the elects sake, or else no flesh should be saved. Therefore by this prophecy of
Daniel, it may be very necessarily collected, that seeing this troublesome
time shall immediately precede Christ's coming, and that in that time they shall
be converted, and that those days shall be shortened, that they may be
converted even immediately before the coming of Christ. For he adds the
Resurrection, as the next thing that should follow their calling: and what is
that else, but the very appearance of Christ himself?

Ier. 30.7.
Jeremy also agrees with Daniel, both concerning the day and the Jews
deliverance: Alas for this day is great, none has bin like it; it is even the
time of Jacobs trouble: yet shall he be delivered from it. Jeremy seems here
to come nearer then Daniel: and to say, that not only in that troublesome
time, but in the latter day thereof, which no doubt is the day of judgment,
that then Jacob shall be delivered: What great day is this, then the which
none has been like, but the day of judgment? And so the Prophet Joel also
describes that day: A day of blackness and of darkness, Joel. 2.2.
a day of clouds and obscurity. And Zachary also of this strange day writes
thus: Zach. 14.7.
And there shall be a day (it is known to the Lord) neither day nor night, but
about the euentide it shall be light. In this strange and great day, (says
Jeremy) shall Jacob be delivered.

Thus we may plainly see, how that all the other Prophets almost do agree with
the prophet Zachary; that the Jews shall be called at the day of judgment.

But to let pass the scriptures and to come to the fathers, Just. ^. apol.
and to show what some of them have thought concerning this matter; Iustine the
martyr affirms, that this general weeping the Prophet Zachary speaks of,
shall be at the second coming of Christ, who writes thus: The prophet Zachary
has foretold what words the people of the Jews shall say, when as they shall
see him coming in his glory, I will command the four winds (says God) that
they may gather together my dispersed children: And then in Jerusalem shall be
great mourning, not mourning of countenance and face, but of heart. And then
they shall not rent their garments, but their minds: And they shall lament tribe
to tribe. And they shall see him whom they have pierced. Thus far Iustine.
And he plainly referres this prophecy of Zachary to be fulfilled in the end of
the world.

To whom agrees also Theodoret who writes thus: Theo. in ca. 12. Zach.
And it shall come to pass that at that day, I will destroy all nations that
fight against Jerusalem; and I will power upon the house of David and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and mercy. etc. Upon these words
Theodoret writes thus: I have even laden them with all kind of benefits, I
have killed their enemies by diverse means. And contrariwise, to them I have
opened the fountains of my mercy, and have filled them with all kind of
graces. But they have betrayed me coming into this world into the hands of
mine enemies, and having nailed me, and lifted me up upon a cross, they have
thrust me to the heart with a soldiers spear, and have railed upon me, and
have laughed me to scorn: but notwithstanding, when as within a little while
after, they shall see me coming in my divine majesty, then they shall bewail
and lament this their madness.

And a little after, speaking of their lamentation, he says: Lastly, he
inferres that all the other tribes shall also severally weep and lament. This
self same thing the Lord in his gospel also has foretold. Then they shall
see the sign of the son of man in heaven, and then all the kinreds of the
earth shall lament. It is most certain that all they which have not received
the preaching of the gospel, shall lament, looking for nothing else but utter
destruction. But these things shall be fulfilled in the time of the very end;
yet I will defend them (meaning the Jews) although I am not ignorant how they
shall crucify me, and kill me coming into this world, for my benefits
bestowed upon them, etc.

He referres the fulfilling of this prophecy plainly unto the end of the
world, and that God will defend the Jews, for all this their ingratitude.

De ciuit. Dei. lib. 20. ca. 30.
Saint Austen also referres this prophecy of Zachary, to be fulfilled in the
end of the world: It shall repent (says he) at that day the Jews, yea even
those which shall receive the spirit of grace and mercy, hat in this passion
they have triumphed over him: when as they shall have respect unto him coming
in his majesty, and shall know, that this is he, whom being humble before, and
of no account among them, they have laughed to scorn in their parents:
Although their parents, the ringleaders of that most heinous offense, rising
again shall see him also, but to be punished, not to be pardoned. Therefore in
this place he means not them, whereas he says: I will power out upon the
house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and
mercy, and they shall now have a special regard of me, for that they made a
jest of me: but only those which come of their progeny, which at that time
shall believe by the means of Elias. Thus far Austen: where he also thinks,
that this prophecy of Zachary shall be fulfilled in the end of the world, and
in the offspring and progeny of those Jews, which put Christ to death.

But Austen here says that Elias shall come. But what then? Jerome denies it,
Ier. in cap. 4. Mat.
and calls them heretics that say so. And whether of these now shall we
believe? The Angel also taught Zachary, that in John Baptist that prophecy
of Malachie was fulfilled, and he repeats the very words of that prophecy,
that he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, etc. least any
one should doubt, Luke 1.17.
whether he meant that prophecy or no. And our savior also in the gospel
plainly teaches that Elias was the^ come, and that they had done to him,
whatsoever they would: Therefore he is not to come, and to be killed again of
Antichrist, as the papists teach. Luke 17.12.
Likewise also (says he) shall the son of man suffer of them: They may as
well say that Christ shall come and suffer again, as to say that Elias shall
come and suffer again: for Christ himself compares both their sufferings
together. And speaking of the prophecies which should be fulfilled: All the law
and the prophets (says he) prophecy, but unto John: Mat. 11.13.14.
And if ye will receive it, he is Elias which was to come. What can be more
planly spoken? The prophecy of Malachie is fulfilled, and John is not a type
or figure of Elias, as the papists would have him: but he is Elias, which was
to come, says our Savior. And shall we not believe the Angel that taught
Zachary, alleging the very words of the prophecy of Malachie, that John
should fulfill it; nor our Savior, who agrees with the Angel, and says, that
that prophecy is fulfilled: Nay, who says plainly, that John is Elias which
was to come? In this matter being so plain, to doubt, surely is great
incredulity. Nay our Savior adds yet more, to make us very well to mark and
believe this: Verse. 15.
He that has ears to hear let him hear, (says he). And yet for all this,
shall we not hear this doctrine of our blessed Saviors own mouth? shall we
not believe it? So that then the prophecy of Malachie is fulfilled already:
And what neds then Elias to come again to fulfill it? But they will say, Elias
never died: but all men must die: And therefore, he must needs come again to
suffer death. 1. Cor. 15.51,
Must all men die? Those that live when Christ comes again to judgment shall
not die, unless you call that their change to be a death: 2. Cor. 5.4.
They shall not be unclothed, but clothed upon; which thing saint Paul
himself desired. And so no doubt Elias and Enoch have died already, and are
changed. And therefore their bodies now, unless God should create them new
bodies, cannot suffer death: And therefore for this cause they need not, nay
they cannot come.

Now if Austen, Gal. 1.8.
nay if an Angel from heaven shall teach any thing contrary to the gospel,
let him be acursed, says Saint Paul. neither does Saint Austen affirm this
out of the scriptures; but rather by tradition: No man (says he) will deny
the judgment, but he that will deny the scripture. But we have learned that
at the day of judgment or about that time, these things shall be, meaning
Elias the Thesbite, the conversion or the faith of the Jews, that Antichrist
shall persecute, Lib. 20. de ciui. ca. 30,
that Christ shall come to judgment, that there shall be a resurrection of the
good, and a spoil of the wicked, a consuming of the world by fire, and a
renewing of it again. All which that they shall come, we must believe, but in
what manner and what order they shall come, experience shall then better teach,
then now any man's wit can perfectly comprehend. Lib. 20. ciu. ca. 29.
But I think that they shall come in order, as I have said. And of Elias
coming thus he writes in another place: By this great Elias and wonderful
prophet, that the Jews shall believe in the true Christ, that is, in our
Christ, before the judgment, by Elias, who shall expound the law unto them, it
is a very common thing in the mouths and hearts of the faithful. It was as
should seem a common speech among the Christians in Saint Austens days, that
Elias should come; but we must ground our faith upon the scriptures, and not
upon speeches. To these fathers, Rup. lib. 5 in Zac.
Rupertus a latter writer agrees: And it shall come to pass that in that day,
I will destroy al nations, which come against Jerusalem. This (says he) needs
no favorable exposition: for although this word conterere may sometime
signify mercy, yet no man doubts, or is ignorant, but in that day of
judgment, God ought to break in pieces, or destroy al nations, which come
against Jerusalem, which have shed so many martyrs blood and have not repented.
But before this the remnant of the Jews are to be converted. And therefore he
says; And I will power upon the house of David, and upon the dwellers of
Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and prayers, that is, the spirit of the rem
ssion of their sins, which is the chiefest and greatest gift of grace. And it
shall come to pass, that they shall be the house of David, and the inhabiters
of Jerusalem. And after, this shall be the great day of judgment of which he
said, In that day I will seek to break in pieces all nations which come
against Jerusalem. And therefore by and by he adds: and they shall behold me
whom they have pierced, and they shall lament over him, as over their only
begotten son, etc. Here is Rupertus judgment, that God will power upon the
Jews the spirit of mercy and grace, and even then by and by after shall
follow the judgment.

Lumnius devicinitate extremi iudicii lib. 1. cap. 15.
Lumnius a Papist concerning the coming of Elias and Enoch writes thus: That
although they shall preach but three years and a half; yet that the day of
judgment shall be nevertheless uncertain to the world. Although (says he)
we believe that Elias shall come, and although the remnant of the Jews be said
to be converted, when as the fulness of the Gentiles shall have entered in: yet
we must think that this must be done secretly, and by little and little. So
that all the world shall stand in doubt of the person of Elias, and of the time
of the conversion of the Jews, even as the world stood in doubt of the persons
of John, and of our Savior Jesus. Thus far Lumnius.

But this his exposition agrees not with the rest of the papists, Reu. 11.6.
for they expound those two witnesses in the Revelation literally to be meant
of the persons of Elias and Enoch. And that they shall have power in the days
of their prophecies, to open and shut heaven, and to turn water into blood. If
they shall do these evident signs, surely no man can say that they shall come
secretly. These signs also are so manifest, that no man can doubt of their
persons.

Nay Saint John there says, Verse. 9.
that all people and nations shall see their bodies lie dead in the city that
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, and that they shall be glad of their
deaths, and shall send presents one to another, because they were slain: For
they shall vex the people of the earth; and not convert the Jews, as they
imagine. These prophets then shall not come secretly when they come, as Lumnius
imagines, but all the world shall hear of them and hate them. They shall be
enemies to their carnal mirth and spiritual fornication. How angry will the
adulterer be, to be deprived of his pleasure; so pleasant also is spiritual
fornication to flesh and blood. These two witnesses then are the preachers of
the gospel, Mat. 24.12.
which shall preach the gospel to all nations In testimonium, and not in
patrocinium, for a testimony of their condemnation, and not for a help of
their salvation, as the same Lumnius alleges out of Hilarie: Lum. ca. 14.
Reave. 10.11.
Which under the type of John in the chapter going before, have received the
little book yea from the hand of the Lord, to preach again to nations,
peoples, tongues and many kings, not Elias and Enoch.

Ferus also of the uncertainty of the day of judgment writes thus: If you
enquire of me the day and hour, I will not tell you: In 24. ca. Mat.
but if you will know the seasons and beginnings, I will hide nothing from you;
I have showed you in many words, how that that day is not unknown unto me: But
I have brought you to the gates only thereof: for he had said before, know ye
then that it is even in the very gates. But it is for your profit, that I will
not open the gates unto you, least you should wax careless. For so it is
written of me: I am thy God, teaching thee profitable things only: as much as
might profit you, I have taught; but that which might engender in you a false
security, I conceal from you. Here therefore thou see the cause, why he
would have both the day of our death, and of judgment unknown unto us, least
we should be more slothful: but being always uncertain of this, we should
ever live in fear, and should ever watch, being careful, as though we should
be judged the next day; and that we should look for him every day, who^ we
know not when he will come. Thus far Ferus.

Here is then a Christians life, every day to look and wait for Christ, and
so to live as though he should not live til to morrow; according to that saying
of the heathen Philosopher. Who being bidden to a feast against to morrow:
Surely (said he) I never thought that I should live til to morrow, these many
years. And it is reported that Saint Jerome, that in all his doings he thought
he heard that last trumpet sounding in his ears: Then Elias coming shall not
give Christians warning thereof, three years and an half before it come; as
the Papists do teach.

In ca. 11. Mat.
Ferus also, writing upon these words, And if ye will receive him, he is Elias
which is to come; says thus: As though he should say, that you may plainly see
that there is no other prophet to be looked for of you, who should show you
that Messiah should come; John is that very same Elias, which Malachie
promised under the name of Elias. And in these words he makes answer to a
question covertly: all men were persuaded, that Elias should come before
Messiah came, whom because they saw not, they doubted of Christ: And therefore
the Apostles, when they saw the Lord transfigured, said: Wherefore do the
Pharisees say, that Elias must first come? To whom he answered, Elias is come
already. But who this Elias was, here he signifies; John himself is Elias,
not in person, but in spirit and power. For as Elias with great zeal was
zealous, that he might bring the people of Israel to the true God, and for this
cause he spared not kings: so John, by the same zeal, endeavored to bring the
people unto Christ. After John therefore no other thing is to be looked for, but
that great and terrible day of the Lord. The which also follows in the same
prophet. Thus far Ferus. If after John nothing is to be looked for, but that
terrible day of the Lord; then not Elias and Enoch according to master
Bellarmines assertion.

Cuthbert Tunstall Bishop of Duresme thus writes in a Sermon put in print,
which he preached before king Henry the eight on Palm sunday, upon this text:
Let the same mind be in you, that was in Jesus Christ: These many years past
(says he) little war has been in these parts of Christendom, but the
Bishop of Rome either has been a stirrer of it, or a nourisher of it; and
seldom any compounder of it, unless it were for his ambition and profit.
Wherefore seeing, as Saint Paul says in the four- 10. chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthia^s, That God is not the God of dissension but of peace,
who commands by his word always peace to be kept: we are sure that all
those that go about to break peace between Realms, and to bring them to
war, are the children of the devil, what holy names soever they pretend to
cloak their pestilent malice withal; which cloaking under hypocrisy, is
double diuellishnes, and of Christ most detested, because under his blessed
name, they do play the devils part. And therefore since Christ is on our side,
let us not fear the^ at al: but putting our confidence in Almighty God, let
us cleave fast to the Kings Majesty our supreme head in earth, next under
Christ, of this Church of England; as faithful subjects, by Gods law ought to
do. Though they go about to stir Gog and Magog, and all the rauenours of the
world against us, yet we trust in God verily, and doubt not but they shall have
such a ruin and overthrow, as is prophesied by Ezechiel in his 39. chapter,
against Gog and Magog going about to destroy the people of God: whom the people
of God shall so vanquish and overthrow on the mountains of Israel, that none of
them shall escape, but their carcasses there to lie, to be devoured by kites,
and crows, and birds of the air. And if they shall persist in this their
pestilent malice, to make invasion into this Realm; then let us wish that
their great captain Gog (I mean the Bishop of Rome) may come with them, to
drink with them of the same cup, that he maliciously goes about to prepare
for us, that the people of God might after surely live in peace. Thus far
Bishop Tunstall. By whom we may learn these notable lessons: that the Pope
has been no peacemaker, but a maker of wars, these many years; and therefore
he is the child of the devil, by his judgment. Secondly, that all true
subjects ought to trust in God and their Prince: and not to fear any
invasions, he shall devise against them. Thirdly, that he is that Gog, that
hidden and hypocritical enemy of Christ, of whom Ezechiel prophecieth, and
that he and all his shall be destroyed, and all their attempts against Gods
Church shall not prosper. Tunstal a man of great learning and judgment saw
thus much in his days, when the day of the gospel began but to shine: and
shall not we now in the clear sunshine thereof, acknowledge so much.

But to return to Master Bellarmine again: he answers to the former place,
De Romans pont. lib. 3. ca. 6.
that I have alleged out of Jerome upon Malachie: That although Jerome in
this place was of this judgment: yet in his Commentaries upon Matthew he
taught the contrary. But Master Bellarmine does mistake Jerome: For Jerome
himself does not say upon Matthew, that Elias shall com before the second
coming of Christ, In Mat. ca. 11.
but he there shows the opinions of others. These be his words. There are some
(says he) which think that therefore John was called Elias, that as in the
second coming of Christ, according to Malachie, Elias must come before, and
must show the coming of the Judge: So John did in his first coming. And so
they both are messengers either of his first coming, or of his second. Jerome
shows here the opinion of others, and not his own, why John was called Elias,
which he had set down before in these words. That John was called Elias, not
according to the opinion of some foolish Philosophers, and certain heretics,
which bring in transmigration of souls from one body to another; but because
according to another testimony of the gospel, he came in the power and spirit
of Elias, and that he had the same grace or measure of the holy spirit, which
Elias had. And also, the austeritie of life, and courage of mind, both of Elias
and John, were equal. He was in the wilderness; so also was he: He was
girded with a girdle of a skin; so also was he: He because he rebuked Ahab
and Iezabell of their wickedness, was compelled to fly; he because he reproved
the unlawful marriage of Herod and Herodias lost his head. These are Ieromes
considerations, why he thought John might be compared to Elias. Then he adds.
(There be some others that think, etc.) As though that which follows, were
not his opinion, but the opinion of some others, whom he also makes mention of
in that other place of Malachie, which I have before alleged. And there he
calls them plainly Jewish heretics. And the same opinion of others concerning
the coming of Elias, Ierom alleges in other places, and he inueieth against
all such followers of Jewish fables. Johannes Viualdus a Papist (in opere
regali de duodecima persecutione ecclesiae Dei) affirms plainly, that Ierom
thought, In explic. orat. Ier. in cap. 29. Ezec.
that Elias should not come in his own person: but that the virtue and power
of Elias should come. But he himself says, that he follows rather Austen,
Thomas and Vincentius. So that Ierom in this matter is not contrary to
himself, as Master Bellarmine would have him: but all one: Nay he is so far
from being of the Papists opinion concerning Antichrist, that although the
book were sealed and this matter concealed from the fathers, and by degrees,
and not all at once opened to the church (as we may note in the Revelation:)
yet even by that small light of Gods word, Reu. 5.2. and 6.1.
which at that time was given the Church of this matter, he aiming at the
truth, does quite overthrow the Papists opinion.

For upon the second Chapter of Malachie, he writes thus: The Jews (says he)
understand that which is spoken here of the prophet (Behold I will send my
Angel) of Elias the Prophet: and that which follows (The Lord whom you seek
for, shall by and by come to his temple, and the Angel of the testament whom
you would have) they refer to their Messiah; that is, to their Christ, who
they say shall come in the end of the world. But I marvel how that the very
experience of the things which have chanced, has not taught them the truth:
for what temple shall their Lord find, which is overthrown to the very
foundation? Or is it to be builded up again, of any other before Christ's
coming? What shall their Christ do more? when as all things are restored to
their former state of another. Our Lord in the Gospel, expounding Elias to be
John Baptist, says: If you will understand, he is Elias which is to come, of
whom also this same Prophet, whom we now expound, speaks of in the end of his
prophecy: Behold I will send you Elias the Prophet before that great and
fearful day of the Lord come. But how John also might be called Elias, he
gave us also to understand, saying, that he came in the power and spirit of
Elias. Thus far Jerome. Where he plainly out of the scriptures, refutes the
Papists opinion concerning Antichrist: Whom they teach shall be borne in
Babylon, of the tribe of Dan: and when he shall come to Jerusalem, circumcising
himself, he shall say to the Jews, I am Christ promised unto you. Then all
the Jews shall flock unto him: and they shall build again the temple
destroyed of the Romans. And he shall sit there, saying that he is God: and
shall kill Enoch and Elias. This is the Papists opinion concerning Antichrist;
as it is set down in their Catholicon, by Ioh. de Ianua a Friar. And this
their opinion Jerome in this place manifestly refutes, who says, that the
temple shall not be built again, and that Elias in his own person shall not
come, but that in John the prophecy of Malachie was fulfilled, and that all
things are restored already, which is the end for which our Savior says,
that Elias shall come. And John Baptist shall turn the hearts of the fathers
unto the children, and the unbelievers to the wisdom of the just, to make a
perfect people to the Lord, as the Angel teaches, which is the end also why
Malachie says, that Elias shall come. So that then both the ends and offices
of Elias being fulfilled already, by the testimony of an Angel, and of Saint
Jerome in this place, what need is there, why Elias should come. And in that
other place, which I have cited before, Jerome in this point calls them Jewish
heretics, which teach that Elias in his own person shall come: he would never
have changed his opinion, and embraced that doctrine which himself before had
called heresy, without some great and weighty reasons: and also he would have
set down the reasons.

In explic. orationis Ierem.
And this opinion of Fathers (as should seem) he often mentions in other places,
but never as his own. For thus he writes: In that he says, renew our days
as from the beginning: he says it, to desire this, that as in the beginning he
made the first Patriarchs devout unto him through perfect faith and charity;
so he would vouchsafe through the same his grace to make them faithful and
devout unto him. The which thing many think is promised them by Malachie the
Prophet by the coming of Elias. And I will send you Elias the Prophet before
that great and terrible day of the Lord, etc. Many says Ierom, think thus:
but he says not that he does think so: he is the same still that he was
before.

And upon the 29. of Ezechiel, he inueies against those, which follow and
believe Jewish fables. But to make this matter yet more plainer, that Ierom did
never change his opinion concerning this matter: Let us hear the opinion of
Rupertus, Rupertus in Malac.
a great learned Papist, who touching this matter writes thus: Of the coming
of Elias, I dare determine nothing, because some of the Doctors, to whom we
almost all agree, do believe that he shall come in deed, and that he shall
restore all things, and that he shall be put to death. Others think the
contrary: to whom S. Ierom that famous man seems to agree, saying: Although
also there be many amongst us, that think he shall come in deed, and that he
shall restore all things, and that he shall suffer death: yet our Lord being
asked of the Apostles, concerning the coming of Elias, answered: Elias is now
comed already, and they knew him not; but they have done to him whatsoever
pleased them, willing them to understand John in Elias. And therefore by and by
after be adds: If ye will receive him, John is that same Elias, which is to
come.

Here we may plainly see that by Rupertus his judgment, Ierom never changed
his opinion; as Mast. Bellarmine would make us believe, that he did. Again, we
may note here Ieroms bulwark against all the sayings of the fathers in this
matter, which must be ours also, not only in this; but in all other doubts and
controversies whatsoever. He alleges the authority of the Gospel against all
the sayings of the Fathers: and so must we do, not only in this, but in all
other controversies whatsoever: If all the fathers seem to teach that which is
contrary to the scriptures, we must here with Ierom forsake them all, and
cleave to the authority of the scriptures. No doubt Ierom had read Tertullian,
and Iustine, and Ambrose, and Austen, which all seem to say, that Elias
himself shall come: but he preferres, as we may here plainly see, the
authority of the Gospel before all these.

That resolution also of Theodoret, concerning this matter, Theo. in Genesis
quest. 45.
is worth the marking, who upon Genesis writes thus: He makes this question:
Into what place did the God of all things translate Enoch? He answers, that
we are not to enquire for those things, which are committed to silence: but we
are to reverence those things which are written. I think that the God of all
things has done this, to comfort his valiant champions. For when as Abel the
first fruit of righteousness, being as yet unripe, was cut up by the roots;
and then no hope of the resurrection did comfort men. The God of all things did
translate Enoch, who was most acceptable unto him, and did separate him from
the society of men, that whosoever did determine to live godly, might perceive
what great account God made of him; when as the God of all things, who is just,
and does justly govern all things, did thus honor Enoch, nor suffered not
Abel to want an ornament. For for this cause, he beheld him when he was slain,
and he also translated Enoch, that by him he might declare to all men the
resurrection, that should be. For he which in this life has not obtained the
reward of his virtue, shall most assuredly obtain it in the life to come. I
would to God all Christians would here follow the counsel of Theodoret, and
not be curious in searching for the coming of Elias, or other such hard
points, which the scripture has not reueiled unto us: but reverently meditate
upon those things which are plain and are written. Ierom also takes away that
same offense, whereat many at this day stumble, which is the outward name and
show of the Church. Many think, that so long as they embrace the Church,
which has continued so many hundredth years, they are safe enough. But of the
Church Ierom writes thus: Ier. in 2. cap. Soph.
Of the Church it seems at the first sight a blasphemous thing to say, that
she shall become a wilderness, and that no man shall walk in her, and that
beasts shall dwell in her. And that hereafter, how scoffingly it shall be said
unto her: This City is plagued with all evils, which dwelt in hope, which said
in her heart, I am, and there is none other besides me any more. How is she
become a wilderness, a pasture of wild beasts? But he that shall consider
that saying of the Apostle, wherein it is said: In the latter times shall be
perilous seasons, men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, arrogant, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, wicked, etc. and also that
which is written in the Gospel; that iniquity being increased, the charity
of many shall wax cold; in so much that at that time shall be fulfilled, But
the son of man when he comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? will not
marvel at the last desolation of the Church: which (Antichrist reigning) shall
become a wilderness, and be given to wild beasts, and suffer all things which
the Prophet here now describes. It appears here by Ieromes judgment, yt the
Church shall not continue always in one state: and therefore they, who do build
their faith upon the Church, build upon no sure foundation. Master Bellarmine
also concerning Antichrist agrees with their Catholicon, and writes thus: Add
this also (says he) that as we have showed before, Antichrist shall be a Jew,
and shall be Messiah and King of the Jews: And therefore without all doubt
shall make his seat in Jerusalem, and shall go about to restore Salomons
temple. For the Jews dream of nothing else, the^ of Jerusalem and the temple:
neither do they seem that they will ever acknowledge any for their Messiah,
which sits not in Jerusalem, and after some sort repaires again the Temple.
Thus far Master Bellarmine.

But Stella contrary to this assertion of M. Bellarmine writes thus. If God
promised by Aggee, In ca. 2. Luc.
that Messiah should come to that Temple while it remained, and that Temple now
is overthrown, neither is there now any such Temple, nor one stone thereof
left upon another; how mad are the Jews, that will look yet for a Messiah?
To what second Temple shall he come, if it be utterly overthrown, if no sign
thereof remain? Neither can the Jews say, that they shall have another
temple, to which their Christ should come. For Aggee their Prophet speaks of
that Temple which then was built in Jerusalem, and not of any other, as his
words plainly testify: nay he says plainly, that there shall never be any
other. Thus much Stella out of Aggee. And where is then Master Bellarmines
temple, which he affirms after a sort Antichrist shall restore? Where is his
Antichrist, which shall lack a seat, by Stellas judgment. Nay unlikely is
this to common experience: Julian the Apostata, Egnat ca. 6.
when he came to Jerusalem and saw the temple quite ouerthrown by Titus, in
despite of Christian religion he commanded Philip of Antioch that he should
make fit the place, and should lay such a foundation of the temple, that it
might be compared with the former in stateliness. The which things pleased
Iulia^ and the Jews wonderfully. But suddenly there were heard terrible
rorings in the earth, and hot burning firebrands rose up among the foundations,
which in a moment dispersed all things and consumed both the workmen and their
tools, and the sign of crosses appeared in many men's garments which could not
be put out. If God so resisted then Julian, do we think he will now suffer
Antichrist to build the temple again?

But the seat of Antichrist, the seat of the Babylonish whore, Who shall make
all men drunk with the wine of her abominations; Saint John says, shall be a
city with seven hills. And what other city in the world can that be else but
Rome.

And what other heretic can this be, then Antichrist? who shall make the
chaste spouse a whore, Re^. 17.4.
and that by wine of fornication: what religion more pleasant or like wine,
then the Romish religion? As their ordinary music, of singing and Organs
playing, of censing their precious Robes and Ornaments they used, wherein not
the least part of their serving of God consisted; do declare: besides their
guilds and feastings, their fraternities of every trade and occupation. But to
let all these pass: All things amongst them were pardonable for money, And what
more pleasant wine could be then this, to flesh and blood?

But as this their wine, wherewith they made all men drunken is manifest: so is
also their fornication no less manifest. It is spiritual fornication to trust
in any, to call upon any, to reveal the secrets of the heart to any but to
God. Honest matrons know thus much: For so they behave themselves toward their
husbands. Hos. 2.16.
And God is the husband of his Church, as he oftentimes protests. But the
Church of Rome has taught men to trust in others, to call upon others, to
reveal the secrets of the heart to others, then to God: And can this be any
thing else, then spiritual fornication? But they did this to saints: and
therefore it was no sin, neither can it be rightly judged fornication. Psalm.
73.25.
Thus they say. But let all true Catholics mark what David says: Whom have I
in heaven but thee? and I have desired none on earth with thee. Here is the
true spouse declared and the true Catholic religion grounded. Now follows the
whore: 27
for lo, they which withdraw themselves from thee (or as it is in the Hebrew,
go far from thee) shall perish, thou destroiest all them, that go a whoring
from thee. To have any other, yea in heaven, to trust in, to give our hearts
unto, but God; is to commit fornication: And therefore let all true
Catholics, that mean to be saved, take heed how they call upon, or repose
their trust in any, no though he be in heaven, but in God alone, Reu. 14.8.
as did David, lest they commit fornication against him, and so be destroyed
all. The same doctrine plainly, the angel cries out To all nations, kinreds,
and people, against the kingdom of Antichrist: and shall we be deaf? will we
not hear him? Ibid. 6.7.8.
Then saw I another Angel (says Saint John) fly in the midst of heaven,
having an everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell on earth, and to
every nation and kindred, and tongue, and people; saying with a loud voice;
Fear God, and give glory to him: For the hour of his judgment is come:
worship him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of
waters. And there followed another Angel saying: It is fallen, it is fallen,
Babylon that great city, for she made all nations to drink of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication. Here first is the everlasting gospel preached, with
a loud voice of an Angel (which is) fear God, and worship him that made heaven
and earth, and not any creature or saint whatsoever. And shall we not embrace
this gospel? shall we not believe this Angel? this no doubt, is the true
Catholic faith, this is the everlasting gospel, whatsoever all the Jesuits in
the world, teach to the contrary. And Babylon the mother of fornications,
which taught a doctrine contrary to this, is fallen. What can be more plain,
then this? To worship any, but him that made heaven and earth, is fornication.
This David and the Angel teach: And Babylon, who has taught the contrary, is
fallen.

And as the wine of this whore is manifest; so is her seat also, as I noted
before: so that as he is deaf, that will not hear the crying of the Angel
concerning her poisoned wine; so he is blind wilfully that will not see her
seven hills, whereon she is situated.

Neither Saint John only, but other prophecies have taught the destruction of
Rome, and have by these seven hills portraied her out unto us; Vae tibi
septicollis etc. Vaticinium Leonis.
Woe to thee O City built on seven hills, says a prophecy going under the name
of Leo the Emperor, printed lately in Briscia, Anno Dom. 1596 For when as the
twenty letter of the Alphabet with great shouts shall be received within thy
walls, then thy ruin and utter overthrow is at hand. Let Rome take heed of
this letter Cappa, which in numeration stands for twenty; when as it shall
be capped unto and honorably received into Rome, Rome shall not reign long
after: Rome therefore shall be overthrown. And some Cardinal may fitly
fulfill this prophecy. And of the destruction also of the world, and of Rome,
Sibylla prophecieth thus: That when as a fiery Dragon shall come upon the waves
of the sea of this world, having her belly full to nourish her children, Sibil.
orac. lib. 8 ol. 368.
in a time of death and civil war, that then shall the end of the world
draw near. (...).

But first (says Sibylla) shall be the inexorable wrath of God against Rome. O
wicked Rome then, whose sins shall be so grievous (as it should seem) that if
all the saints and angels in heaven, which now thou makes so great account of,
should entreat for thee, they were not able to appease the heavy and grievous
wrath of God against thee. Repent now therefore whilst thou have time and
space, being admonished here by Sibylla. And let all true Catholics which are
wont to reverence antiquity, herein believe Sibilla, agreeing with Saint John;
and in time forsake this wicked and sinful Rome, least they perish with her in
her sins.

Michael ab Isselt, of the great affliction that our Savior prophecieth of,
Epist. nun cup. ad Torren Episc. Antw.
which shall come upon the world before the end thereof, writes thus. It is
comed already as should seem by his writing: and it is not marked. And the
poor feel it; and the rich look for it, when it shall be. His words be
these. But we, upon whom I may justly say, that the ends of the world are
fallen, have happened into those days; wherein though all histones and all
ancient books hold their peace, yet the world it self cries out, that it is
now set to revenge the sins of men. How often of late years have we seen the
heavens inflamed, as it were with terrible firebrands? how many blasing stars
have been seen threatening evils to the earth with their terrible shapes, and
foreshewers of great calamities? Leu. 26.
We have had the heavens over our heads like Iron: we have not had rain enough
in winter to nourish the corn, nor in summer the accustomed heat to ripen it.
The earth as the scripture has foretold, is become like brass unto us. Our
labor is employed in vain, the earth brings not forth her buddes and
blossoms, the trees bear not their Apples. The earth is as it were parched
with drought, and her mould brings forth withered herbs: the hail hinders the
vines: we sow our lands in vain, which the enemies devour. How many
ouerflowings of the sea have we seen? how often her fortresses being broken,
have we beheld the shepherd to swim with his sheep, the mother with her
children; and the house and the heard, to swim together with their masters; and
the huge sea flowing into the pleasant meadows, to have destroyed al things?
Hereof we have had of late the famine of Saguntum, which has so afflicted not
only cities, but whole provinces, that it turned the pity of mothers into
madness, who gave their dear children poison to kill them, least they should
hear their miserable crying. Others (as in Hungary this last year) sold
their children to the Turks and Barbarians for bread: others (I know not
whether more pitiful) least their children should serve such tyrants, threw
them into the water and drowned them. What shall I speak of wars? which within
these twenty years have so shaken both other kingdoms, but especially our
Flauders, (in times past the paradise and pleasantest country in the world)
that now towns being burnt, cities sacked, the stately Churches of the saints
pulled down, and being robbed of their riches, holy and profane things being
now accounted all one; she has not any sign almost remaining of her former
glory. That now her mighty provinces being given for a pray to the Germans,
Frenchmen, Englishmen, Scots, Irish men, and to other foreign enemies, obey
now their insatiable and wicked pleasures. Neither is here an end of our
evils: But that all evils might come upon us at once, most grievous plagues,
new and strange diseases have taken away those, whom the sword and famine had
spared, and have made such great overthrows of men, that skant the living
sufficed to bury the dead. So that all the elements, and all the miseries in
the world may seem to have conspired against us altogether.

Again, when as every living creature loves his like; only now one man is
afraid of another. For there are now so many public periuries of nations, so
many truces broken, so many underminings, thefts, deceits, slanders, wiles,
that now not unfitly one man may be called a devil to another. And if here
were an end of our misery, all were well: but it goes further. For those evils
which we have hitherto recited, are outward evils; and do neither add any
thing, or take ought away from man's felicity, if his soul within him were
sound and free from these dangers and miseries. But the evils which are within
us, are far greater then they, which are without us. Our understanding is
blind; our will is prone to all wickedness; our memory pliable to al earthly
things. And there is such a disorder and a diversity and contrariety among
themselves of our desires, that there was never any more troublesome kingdom
seen in the world: In so much that if all the creatures should fawn upon man,
and should do him service; yet he should suffer the greatest persecution of
himself, and himself should be to himself the greatest tormentor. What shall
I make many words? The times we live in are such, that we may truly say that
saying of Silenus: The best thing is never to be borne; and the next to die
quickly. Thus far Michael of Isselt.

And can there be any greater affliction then this? What shall I add the
dangers of princes, the heart burnings amongst noble men, the discontented
minds of gentlemen, the decaie of artificers, the oppression and poverty of the
husbandman, the laborers want of food, work, and wages. Every member is
sick, Es. 1.6.
every member is afflicted; so that we may now truly say, that of Esaias. From
the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there is no health.

What shall I add that greatest persecution of all other of Antichrist, who
has his inquisition in Spain, and in other countries, where his authority
can prevail, to persecute most cruelly all those that profess the gospel:
Who daily labors for nothing else, by his seminaries in all places, with all
Kings and Princes to make war, to stir up rebellions against them which
profess the gospel in any country. No doubt his hand has helped our rebels
in Ireland. Who persecutes kings in their own palaces, in their chambers, in
their closets, as the secret murders of many Princes and Kings by his
favorers in our memory plainly testify.

There lackes nothing but this, that when as he sees that all his privy and
secret practices can do no good, that he with open war come into the field
himself, and with his riches and treasures, wherein he abounds, and with all
the friends that he can make, proclaim open war against that great day of
the God almighty, of which great day of battle both the prophet Joel and
Zachary, and also Saint John in his Revelation may seem to spoke. Joel. 3.9.
Zac. 14.13.14. Rev. 16.14. Aust. de ciu. de lib. 18. ca. 52.


S. Auste^ says, That some in his days thought, that the last persecution of
Antichrist should be like the eleventh plague of the Egyptians, in which, while
the Egyptians fiercely persecuted the Israelits in the red sea, the people of
God going through on dry ground, they themselves perished. But Saint Austen
does not think that, by those ten plagues of Egypt, these ten persecutions of
the Roman Emperors were prophetically signified. Although (says he) of those
which think thus, these are wittily and exquisitly compared the one to the
other, but not by the spirit of prophecy, but by man's conjecture, which
sometimes proves true, and sometimes false. Saint Austens chief reason against
this opinion is, because of the number: For that there have been, and may be
more persecutions, then ten or eleven against the Church of God. But to let the
number go, the matter of this exposition may seem fitly to agree with the
other prophecies of the scripture: If Antichrists kingdom be spiritually
Egypt, as saint John calls it; then Pharaoh was a type of Antichrist, and
fitly may we conjecture that he shall both deal in Gods Church, persecute, and
also perish, as he did. Is not the Pope like Pharaoh? Pharaoh killed the
infants in the water: And has not the Pope done so with Christian children? 2.
Tim. 3.15. 1. Ioh. 2.14.
Timothy knew the scriptures from his childhood. And saint John says, You
young men are strong because the word of God dwells in you. And David, how
shall a young man cleanse his ways, (that through the filth of sin he perish
not) but by keeping thy word? But the Pope has taken this word from children,
from young men, from all men: Therefore he has taken away their strength, and
in them he has defiled and polluted their ways. And therefore he has as much
as in him lies killed them: For God has testified, that the soul that sins
shall die. And as also that other Pharaoh burdened men's backs and bodies; so
has he burdened all men's consciences with the observations of his
superstitious laws. And is he not then rightly Pharaoh? This persecution of
Gods Church coming out of Egypt, makes also the same most manifest: Since the
first day that Gods people began to forsake his blind superstition, he has
never ceased to persecute them. And as in his doings he is a Pharaoh; so he
shall be Pharaoh in his end.

And here the papists opinion concerning Antichrist how absurd is it, and
against all reason; that another Antichrist should be borne in Babylon, and
should come with such a power, that he should persecute the Church of Christ
more then ever it has been persecuted. I think, they think that Antichrist
when he comes, shall not be able to overcome their Pope; and yet this he must
do, if their opinion be true. The Turk has not been able to overcome
Christendom, for all his might, riches and power: and do they think that ever
any shall arise mightier then he? Ians. har. Eu. ca. 22.
After the affliction of those days the sun shall be darkened, etc. which
without all doubt, says Iansenius, belongs to the coming of Christ; to the
which coming shall go before the most grievous persecution of the faithful
by Antichrist. But surely it is not likely that ever any shall come more
mighty then the Turk and Pope: and therefore let us think surely that this
persecution is begun already, and that Antichrist is comed. The Pope has
taught thus much himself: For he decreed that none should preach of the day of
judgment, nor of Antichrist, Council. Lat. ses. 11.
although he had a Revelation: unless he first examine him. What need he have
feared if he had not been guilty, especially seeing we are commanded to
preach the judgment?

2. These. 2.8.
Nay how contrary to the very plain and manifest text of the scriptures, is
their opinion of Antichrist? Saint Paul tells us plainly, that the Lord Jesus
shall consume Antichrist with the breath of his mouth; and shall quite abolish
and destroy him with his glorious appeara^ce. What can be plainer then this?
that Jesus Christ by his second coming shall quite destroy Antichrist? But
they teach, that Michael the Archangel shall destroy him with a thunderbolt.
And that Antichrist being thus dead and slain by Michael, Christ shall not by
and by come after: but that there shall be granted to the elect 45. Iohes
Vinaldus opere regali de 12. persecut. Eccles.
days after to repent in. And that then after those 45. days no man shall
know the time when Christ shall come to judgment. And that then there shall be
silence as it were in heaven and peace in the Church, that tribulation ceasing:
And that then Antichrists disciples shall rejoice, and shall begin to marry
and to make feasts, saying, although our master be dead: yet now we shall have
rest and security: And so that day of the Lord shall come upon them unawares,
etc. How this and saint Paul's doctrine do agree together; let every one in
this great and weighty matter judge but indifferently. And yet this they dare
avouch even contrary to the judgment of Austen, whom there the same author
alleges, who writes thus, concerning this matter in his Epistle to
Hesichius. I dare not number the times as concerning the coming of our
Savior, which is looked for in the end: Neither do I think that any of the
prophets have set down this number: but that rather ought to be of force
amongst us which our Lord himself said. Act. 1.7.
No man can know the times, which the father has put in his own power. Thus in
their opinion the papists do dissent both from S. Paul and Saint Austen But
thus much of Antichrist.

12. Of Miracles.
FErus of this matter writes thus: Unless you see you will not believe. In 4.
cap. Io.
This word condemns us, for we also require signs: That is, we will be
otherwise certified then by the word: For when as we hear the forgiveness of
sins and other promises of God; then we think we would believe, if we were
assured by any sensible signs. But if thou be one of the faithful, the word
of God ought to suffice thee, without any signs: for God has sufficiently
yielded to our infirmity, that in the beginning of the law and gospel, he
adjoined to his word certain signs, as seals, by which we might be assured,
that they were the word of God. But now he will not at our pleasure, give any
more signs: but he will have us believe his word. For we walk not by sight,
but by faith. And hereupon he says to Thomas, Blessed are they which have not
seen, and yet have believed. Therefore not without cause he condemns those,
which as yet seek for signs. For first not to believe without signs, is
against the nature of faith: For faith is a substance of those things which are
not seen: but are hoped for. Secondly, not to believe without signs, is
injurious to God; as though he could either deceive or be deceived. Thirdly, it
is dangerous to give more heed to signs, then to the word of God it self:
for the devil can show signs, the which thing we see in the enchaunters of
Egypt. Hereof also Moses forbids that no credit should be given to the
Prophet doing miracles, and in the mean while teaching against the law:
because miracles cannot make the false word true, but seduce rather; but if
they be annexed to the true word, they confirm and seal us the more in the
truth. Lastly, faith conceived by miracles is not so constant; for they which
believe not, because of the word but by reason of miracles, oftentimes fall
into incredulity in the time of tribulation, neither continue steadfast in
faith; as we may see in the Israelites, who very often, when as the miracles
ceased, fell a doubting.

Again he writes thus: Then we may safely believe miracles if the doctrine
agree with the word of God which they teach, that they are done in Christ.

And again, of the ends of miracles he writes thus: God has annexed miracles
to his word, Fer. in 3 ca. act
as it were certain seals, by which we should be assured, that they were not
the words of man but of God, which we see confirmed with such great signs,
which belong only to God to do: for which cause Christ did not only miracles
himself; but gave his Apostles also power to do the same; as also in times
past to Moses and the Prophets. Thus much Ferus. Therefore miracles of
themselves (if they be separated from the word) are of no force to establish
any doctrine.

13. Of Apparitions of spirits.
AGainst Appearing of spirits, Jerome writes thus: Ierom. in 8. ca. Esai.
This you ought to know, that every nation asks counsel of their own Gods,
and enquires of the dead for the living, but to you he has given his law for
to help you, that you may say: The divination of the heathen is not such;
which often deceives the worshippers: And not like ours which without any gift
is drawn out of the law of God. And after. No marvel if you follow your
traditions, when as every nation asks counsel of their Idols (speaking of
the Scribes and Pharisees following the traditions of their fathers:) Therefore
we will not ask counsel of you being as it were dead, concerning the living;
God has rather given you a law, and the testimony of the Scriptures, which if
ye will not follow, you shall have no light: but ever darkness shall oppress
you. May we not say the like of the Papists, who followed the apparitions of
spirits and the traditions of the elders?

Saint Bernard also asks a question of the blessed Virgin, of whom it is
said that she cast in her mind what that salutation should mean: Oleast in 2.
ca. Genesis
And why she should suspect, talking with an Angel; and he answers: will thou (O man) be in danger, without care? fear then security it self. Will thou be safe and sure from the devil? then fear Angels from heaven: Thou have
heard that Satan has transformed himself into an Angel of light, that he
might deceive man. Thus much Oleaster alleges out of Bernard. I would to God
they themselves had followed this holy fact of the blessed virgin, who at the
first suspected the Angel that appeared to her; and that they had not given
credit to the apparitions of Angels, nor of the Saints: No nor to the blessed
virgin her self, or of the souls of any departed; of whom they have learned
most part of their religion. Satan may seem a saint, the blessed virgin; nay
even an Angel of God. Beware therefore how thou at all beleeuest such
apparitions, least thou be deceived. Look rather to Moses and the prophets;
according to thy Saviors counsel, then to these doubtful apparitions. And
after: Why (O woman) do thou lie, saying God has forbidden, both to eat and
touch the tree, when as God only forbad the eating thereof? Note here, that
he calls it a lie to add to the commandment of God, though it seem
religious; as not so much as to touch the tree. This Eve might seem to have
said of a devotion that she bare to the commandment; that she would not so
much as touch the tree: But that had been superstition, that had been more
then God commanded: she might lawfully have touched the tree. And many such
superstitions, beside the word, Eve the mother Church of Rome, upon a good
intent for devotion, brings now into the Church.

Stella also of Revelations writes thus: Simeon believed the scriptures, which
spoke of Messiah, and after he had Revelations. Stell. in 2. Luc.
Hereby we are taught that they are worthy to have Revelations showed them,
which believing the scriptures obtain those things which they believe, and do
them. Secondly, that those Revelations are certain which do not dissent from
the Scriptures: Thus far Stella. I would to God they had examined all their
revelations, and apparitions by this rule of the scriptures: then the papists
by lying spirits had not been so often deceived, as they have been.

Of the nature and sleights of the devil, In orat. dom.
Ludouicus Viues has very excellently written thus: Thou (O Lord) art only
good, and whatsoever thou have created are good, because thou art the creator
of them. But he that is thy continual enemy the devil is naught and wicked:
He is thy enemy, and therefore also ours; because thou accountest us for thy
children. He can hurt thee by no manner of means, but he can and is willing to
hurt us diversely, and he is ever ready to destroy us, never sleeping his
opportunity. And which of us in any respect is able to resist him? for if we
deal with him in strength, he is most strong; neither is there any power found
upon earth ( as Job says) that may be compared unto him. If by policy, he is
most crafty, he will counterfeit love and favor to thee, whose destruction
above all others he longs for; and to whom every minute he imagines
mischief: Nay also he will seem to bear a fair show, as that he allows
truth and virtue, which he hates most deadly; and he will profess himself a
schoolmaister of good dealing and integrity, condemning all evil actions,
whereof he himself is the author and principal actor. That thing which he
greatliest desires, he will make a show as that he could in no wise abide it;
and that thing which he abhors and detests, he will seem greatly to long for
and desire, that he may more easily take us at his pleasure. This is another
point of his cunning, by urging thy justice, to make the mind sorrowful, and
to persuade desperation: and again, by showing thy mercy and clemency, to
make the mind presumptuous and slothful. Again, of the consideration of
every ones dignity, to make them proud and arrogant. Again, he will procure
hatred against thy law, that is, even against thine own self, as though thou
wast an enemy to the lawful desires of the flesh. It were to be wished that
these sleights of satan were known to all Christians: It would make coniurers
take heed how they trusted Satan: It would make simple christians also take
heed how they believed any apparition of spirits, or vain fables, although it
had a smock or some savor of truth or virtue. For this is one of satan's
sleights, as here we may learn, to season his lies sometimes with some show of
virtue and goodness, that he may beguile simple souls, and draw them on, and so
cause them to believe lies. But here all those that are wise in Jesus Christ,
must know that all is not gold that glistereth: And no doubt this was the root
of that golden Legend, which the Papists make so great account of, and wherein
are many fables tending to virtue and religion: but they are but satan's lies,
burnished over with a show of truth and virtue: As Ludouicus Viues here
teaches all Christians, that satan can do cunningly. 2 Cor. 2.11.
And saint Paul also says: We are not ignorant of his sleights or devises.

Of Apparitions and Revelations, Granatensis writes thus: Gra. de Deu. lib. 1.
cap. 53.
If we ought not (says he) to seek for spiritual comforts and delights that
we may wholly give our selves unto them, and delight in them, much less are
revelations, visions, inspirations, and such like to be desired: for they truly
are the beginnings of devilish illusions, neither let any man fear that herein
he is disobedient to God, if he shut all his gates against these. For God
knows if he mind to reveal any thing to man to find an entry to come in
at, and to open the gates so, that men need not doubt, but know assuredly that
God is there. So he dealt with Samuel being yet a child, whenas he called once
and twice, and the third time, and he told him all things which he would that
he should know, so plainly, that there now was no cause of doubting left, nor
the Prophet now should doubt of his embassage.

Granatensis here suspects revelations, and he plainly affirms, that they are
the very beginnings of satan's illusions. Therefore true Christians must not
easily give credit to such, but examine them always by Gods word. If he agree
not with that, it is satan which appears, though he appear like an Angel of
light.

14. Of Invocation.
THe common received opinion of the Papists is, that we may invoke the
saints in heaven. Poligranes a papist writes thus: Polig. de com. sanctorum.
If they forsake Christ their advocate and mediator in heaven, which call upon
saints; then much more they forsake him, which do require the prayers of saints
on earth. The which thing Christ has not only forbidden, but commanded. He
makes no difference between invocation and a request: men may request one
another to do any thing; but to call upon any man is idolatry, and forbidden
by Gods word. But I would not have them ignorant (says he) that it is one
thing to be a mediator of salvation, and another of intercession: only Christ
is the mediator of salvation, but there may be more of intercession etc. As
though Christ had said, only for your salvation if you begin it in my name,
you shall obtain it; and not generally of all things: Whatsoever you shall
ask the father in my name, he will give it you. If he be a Mediator, then he
is a mediator of all things: There is no exception in his most bountiful;
large promise made to us. But after as should seem, not being bold to give
invocation to saints, he partly reclaimes his former sentence; so says he:
After some sort man's name may be called upon. For Jacob s^ith to the sons of
Joseph. Let my name be called upon them, etc. That is, I account them as my
children, though they were borne in Egypt. Does this place prove that they
should in their prayers call upon Jacob? but rather that they should of men be
accounted the children of Jacob. It makes nothing for invocation or prayer.
Other papists more sound have defined prayer far otherwise. Granatensis
defines prayer thus: That prayer rightly made, is nothing else then a drawing
near of man to God, De orat. lib. 2. cap. 5.
and an union of both their spirits. If this definition be true, then the
prayers we do make to saints are no prayers: Stella in 5. Luc.
And Stella defines prayer thus: Prayer is a climing or flying up of the soul
that lives in this world to God. And it is as it were a suit which we offer to
our God, and to our King. Our God as he is a most mighty; so he is a most
merciful and bountiful prince. He will have all suits to be made to himself
alone: Psalm. 68.19.
He himself will bestow all his benefits; to make us praise him alone: Praised
be the Lord, even the God of our salvation, which ladeth us daily with
benefits, says David. And Vocabularium Scholasticum, defines invocation, to be
calling of a thing into it self by effects, and divine worship. But Stella
teaches: That the devil cannot take any thing from our understanding or will,
because the operation of the devil cannot directly reach unto the substance of
our soul: Stella in 8. ca. Luc.
no nor any Angel can do that, because it is only God which can enter into our
soul and is truly in it; which also can work in it: So that then God is only
to be inuocated, who can enter into our soul, and not any Saint or Angel.
Leu. 10.1.


First of all, that terrible example of Gods judgment upon Nadab and Abihu
Aarons sons, should terrify all Christians, They offering incense to the
Lord, with a good intent, no doubt, with strange fire, and not with that which
came down from heaven (through their own blind devotion breaking and
transgressing Gods most holy commandment) were suddenly of God consumed with
fire sent from heaven. And are not our prayers now incense, and sacrifices of
God, Psalm. 141.2. Heb. 13.15.
as both David and saint Paul do plainly teach? and dare we presume to offer
them to his majesty otherwise, then he has commanded? shall we not alone
kindle them with that fire, Luc. 12.49. Psalm 119.105. Ier. 20.9.
which Christ came to cast down from heaven upon earth, which no doubt is the
fire of his holy word, which lightneth and inflameth all men, the which fire,
his will is, that it should burn and flame? dare we prsume to fetch fire at
any other, be he never so holy or ancient? Surely, if Nadab and Abibu, through
their negligence, were thus severely punished in the shadow; we in the light,
being also taught most plainly, and admonished concerning this point, how shall
we escape unpunished? Deuteronomy. 13.8. and 14.32. 1. Sam. 15.22.
Let no man's good intent or blind devotion herein beguile him: It excused not
them; neither shall it excuse us. do that only which I command thee, says
God. And obedience is better then sacrifice.

Ferus a Friar, to exhort all Christians to call upon the name of Christ, very
excellently writes thus: Fer. in ca. 13. Io.
He kneeles down at their knees, he begins not to wash their hands, which
had been a more honest service, but their feet, which of all other is a duty
most abject and most filthy: And he does all these things alone, he alone
powers out the water, he alone washes, he alone wipeth. Who will not here cry
out with the Prophet: I have considered thy works, and I have been amassed? I
beseech thee consider with thy self, who did this? even Jesus. And whose feet
washed he? Of the dignity of Christ we have heard already, who were more base
then the Apostles? they were all poor and of no reputation: besides all this,
one of them was a traitor: another of them should deny his master: yet for all
this, he did this service so lovingly unto them. What can he deny us; who so
greatly humbled himself? And the same Ferus writes thus: The scripture does
ever describe Christ unto us, loving and courteous, having no bitterness or
sharpenes in him, In cap. 2. Mat.
but altogether seeking our commodity, that we might be the more drawn to his
bountiful goodness to embrace this king. So Zachary describes Christ in the
ninth chapter: Behold thy king comes to thee meek and gentle: And Esaias:
Behold thy God feeds his sheep as a shepherd: And again especially for this
cause he would be made a child least any man should be afraid to come unto
him: he is altogether gentle and courteous, there is no sharpnes or
discourtesie in him. Therefore woe to him that deferreth to come unto him: how
dare he behold the high Judge, that has despised his lowly Savior? Let us
therefore come to him while there is some time of Grace: Let us call upon him
while he is near: In cap. 4. Io.
Let us seek him while he may be found. Again, What is it to worship the
father in the spirit, but to have received the spirit of Adoption, by which we
cry Abba father? and what is it to worship God in truth, but abiding in his
son, which says, I am truth, to call upon the father, and to pray in the name
of the son? It is the same, as though he had said: The true worshippers by a
true and necessary distinction of the persons, shall worship one God the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: yea they shall worship the father by the
son, in the holy Ghost. This is an excellent and brief sum of true worship
and Christian religion.

The Jews did so despise the Samaritans, yea and all the Gentiles, that they
would not vouchsafe to speak to them. Therefore this woman, seeing Christ to
be a Jew, durst not have spoken to him, unless Christ had first spoken to her.
So when as we all have sinned, and know that God is offended with our sins,
and therefore displeased with sinners; none of us durst have spoken to God,
unless he had spoken to us first: But now we speak to him safely and boldly,
and we can open to him all our necessities; as this woman afterward durst
speak boldly to Christ: but in this also that he spoke unto a woman being a
heathen and a sinner; he declared that he despised no man. God does not only
speak to us first, as Christ did to this woman; but commanded us to call and
speak to him: and if his only speech did thus encourage the woman to speak
to him, though she were a sinner, shall not his commandment much more
encourage us? Fer. in 3. ca. Io.
O we of little faith? And again the same Ferus says in another place: This
is that true Joseph, whom God has exalted over all Egypt, and has commanded
that all should bow their knees before him: This is that true Joseph, which
has his great barnes full of corn, to be given forth to the hungry: To him
the father sends us, even as Pharaoh sent back the Egyptians from himself,
to Joseph; Go to Joseph (says he) and whatsoever he shall say that do: So our
heavenly father, this is my beloved son hear him: This is he alone who in
famine can save. To him therefore let us run with the Egyptians, saying, we
are thy servants, our salvation is in thy hands. Thou only have regard unto
us, and we will serve the king willingly.

Jerome also of prayers writes thus: Ieron. in 1. ca. Mal.
That sacrifice of the soul is blind, which is not lightened with the light of
Christ, nor has an eye looking from the gospel: the prayer of him that
prays is lame, which comes to God with a double mind, which hears that
said unto him which the Jews heard said unto them: How long will you halt on
both sides? That prayer is faint and altogether weak, which has not Christ
the power of God, and the wisdom of God: such like prayers, which are made
without the light of the truth, and have no sure footsteps, and are as it were
faint with diverse infirmities; if they should be offered to any one that
bears rule in the Church, to any other learned man or Teacher or Doctor,
would they not be rejected and turned to his shame and discredit, that offers
such prayers? This is Ieromes meaning, we would be ashamed to offer to any
learned man doubtful suites or requests, and not understood: and shall we
presume to offer such to God?

Philippus de dies a Friar of this matter writes thus: Conc. 4. incarnat.
All the time, before the coming of Christ, may be called an empty time: but
Christ was borne in the fullness of time; because God, to become man, was to
communicate himself more to us then ever could have been. Even as one having
often distributed his riches, at last to show the top of his liberality,
gives his chest and all his Jewels: So God before very liberally had bestowed
on the Jews; but on us, he has bestowed the riches, and chest and all; that
is, his son: In whom are all treasures of wisdom hid.

And therefore among other causes, for this, the time of grace is called the
fulness of time. And for this cause, the son of God is called the hand of the
father, because as by the hand things are wont to be distributed: So the
eternal father, by the son, has given his heavenly gifts. This hand David
prayed so earnestly for: send out thy hand from above, etc. If we lack any
thing, we are wont to receive it at men's hands, and not at their feet: So here,
let us receive all things at the hands of God Almighty: let us not seek any
thing at Saints or Angels, which may resemble Gods feet.

In ca. 19. Esa.
Jerome writes thus upon these words: And they shall not remember the former
things. Although this may be said, that in the new heaven, and the new earth,
all the remembrance of our conversation shall be quite blotted out; least this
should be some piece of evil, to remember our former griefs and necessities.
As the saints shall not remember their former anguishes or griefs, to impair
in any respect their joy: so no doubt, much more not the griefs of others.
And again: In all their trouble there shall be no trouble. And the Angel of
his face shall save them: that is, Jesus Christ, who is the Image of God, and
appears before God now for us: or else who is like to us, and is perfect man.
Psalm. 118. v. 27.
In times past as David witnesses, The sacrifices were bound to the horns of
the Altar, not to the posts of the house of God, though they were never so
holy and gilded: So now we must bind our sacrifices, that is our prayers, to
the Altar Jesus Christ, not to the posts of the house, that is, to the Saints.

In cap. 3. Io.
Ferus also writes thus: Afterward John expresses the conditions of those that
be Christ's friends: he stands (says he) as ready to do whatsoever is to
be done: he hears what the bride groom talks with the bride; and he
rejoices in the glory of the bridegroom. These are those three conditions of
all the friends of Jesus Christ, which were bidden to the marriage, by Ferus
his judgment; and of all Gods Saints. And no doubt, as they performed the two
former, while they were here in this life; that is, they stood all ready to
do his commandments, and they gladly heard his words: so likewise in heaven,
they rejoice in his glory: his glory is their glory. They all with Saint
John here, do put away all glory yielded unto them, and attribute it unto
him. And after, he must increase; I must decrease: we are taught by this
sentence, that all the authorities, dignities, offices, righteousnesses,
wisdoms, powers of all men are to be made no account of; that only Christ's
authority, dignity, office, righteousness, wisdom, power, may be
established. To conclude, it belongs to him to be exalted, it belongs to us to
be humbled. If this be true, what means all those hymns, and songs, and
prayers to the glory of Saints, which the Church of Rome uses?

In the council of Rhemes cap. 2. celebrated under Charles the great, An. dom.
913. we are taught, that it is not lawful for a christian not to know without
book, the Lords prayer, or not to understand it, or not too often use it. If
this be true, how many thousand Christians in the time of Popery were
transgressors of this law, who understood not the Lords prayer?

Theodoret against prayers to be made to Angels, writes thus: They which
defended the law, In 3. ca. ad Col.
persuaded them to worship Angels, saying, that the law was given by them. And
this fault remained long in Phrygia and Pisidia: wherefore also the synod,
which met at Laodicea, which is the chief City of Phrygia, did forbid by law
that they pray to Angels. And even unto this day, we may see amongst them and
amongst their borderers, houses of prayer of S. Michael. They gave men counsel
to do this, using humility: saying, the God of all things could not be seen
nor comprehended, nor that any man could come unto him, and that they must get
them the good will of God, by the means of the angels Is not this plainly the
papists doctrine at this day? they build Churches to Angels; they teach that by
the means of Angels, we must procure the favor of God.

And after upon these words, Do all things in the name of our Lords Jesus
Christ; because (says Theodoret) they commanded to worship Angels: he
commands the contrary, that they should make glorious or acceptable to God
both their words and deeds, by the remembrance of our Lord Christ. And (says
he) send forth your thanksgiving to God your father by him, and not by Angels.
The council of Laodicea following this law, and having a mind to cure this
old disease; decreed, Conc. L^od. cap. 32.
that they should not make any prayers unto angels: and that they should not
leave out the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Here we may note that we should
not make any prayers unto Angels: and that we should never leave out of our
prayers the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, but that we should do all things in
his name: and that he alone makes our prayers glorious in the sight of God, and
procures us Gods favor.

Stella also of the great mercy of our Savior writes thus: Secondly he
touched the leaper, In 5. ca. Luc.
that he might move us boldly to come to him, and that he might take away all
occasion of fear: let no man be afraid: let all come to him. Christ does not
loathe our Leprosy nor filthy corruption: but he pities us more then any
father does his children, because he knows whereof we be made. If a leprous
sinner may come boldly to Christ; what sinner shall be afraid to come? Also
upon the first of Luke, he asks a question why God sent an Angel to the
virgin, could not God himself have revealed this mystery to the virgin? he
could truly: but he would send an Angel first, that he might declare the love
and charity he bears unto us: so that he procures our redemption even by the
ministry of Angels. So Paul says: Are they not all ministering spirits for
those which shall receive the inheritance of salvation? Out of which place man
may draw an argument, that he may magnify or think well of his own estate,
because Angels are sent to minister, and serve unto him. And after: If any
prince or noble man should prostrate himself on the ground, that he might
gather up the crumbs which fell from thee, were he not despised and no account
made of: So thou which art a noble and excellent creature of God, when as thou
have Angels to be thy servants, oughtst not to bow thy self to these earthly
things, which are vile and of no reputation. Thus far Stella.

The same reason we make against praying to Angels: If God have so exalted us,
that Angels are our servants, why should we abase our selves to kneel down to
them, or pray to them? who will kneel or pray to his servant? This reason the
Angel himself used to S. John, Reu. 22.9.
when he would have fallen down, and worshipped him: he answered him, see thou
do it not, I am thy fellow servant, worship God.

In 2. ca. Luc.
And in another place of angels writes thus: Now peace is reformed by Christ's
incarnation between men and Angels: and therefore he said very fitly, that
the Angels stand by them, as their friends and familiars: and in this he shows
and equality or familiarity; he stood not about them as before the exaltation
of man's nature in Christ; because Angels then suffered themselves to be
worshipped: as Abraham did and others. The which they did not, after the word
took our humanity upon it: for John the Evangelist being banished into the
I Will of Pathmos, being willing to worship the Angel which appeared to him: The
Angel said unto him: See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and of
thy brethren. Angels honored the nature of man after the divine incarnation.
And after, Angels are of a more excellent nature then we; yet the Lord loves us
better then them. If a man's right or left hand were cut off, and another should
be given him of gold, or set with precious stones; would he choose this second?
No man would be so mad, that would desire his own hand to be cut off, that
he might have another of gold or silver given him. For although the hand made
of gold or silver be more worth; yet the hand of flesh is his own substance,
strengthened with his veins, sinews, and blood: so we are members of Christ,
and his hand of flesh; but Angels are as it were a hand of gold or silver. And
although that kind of metal be more precious; yet God loves us more, as his
own hand of flesh.

Ferus yeeldes this reason amongst other, why our Savior Christ prayed: Fer.
in 11. c. Io.
That our prayers might thereby be the more forcible. For then (says he) our
prayers are effectual when as they are grounded upon Christ's prayer, as upon a
foundation. But to encourage us to make our prayers unto Christ, and to no
other, Stella writes thus: Stel. in 2. c. Luc
My delight is amongst the children of men. He would be handled of us: For, for
this cause he was made man. The bride knew well the nature and qualities of
this bridegroom, when she said, who will give me my brother sucking the pappes
of my mother, that I may kiss thee, and embrace thee? Our God is not like the
men of this world. For to dispatch any business, thou must come a thousand
times to their houses, and that (which is worst of all) thou shall be so far
off from dispatching thy business, as that they will not so much as hear
thee. But what a good God have we, how loving, how easy to be spoken to, how
courteous? He takes away that objection which many make; that we must have
intercessors to Jesus Christ.

Osorius declares how Christ is said to pray for us. Lib. 3. de sap.
His prayer is the execution of his perfect and absolute office, that is, that
he is our advocate with great willingness: the offerings of his most precious
blood, the religion of his most holy and pure sacrifice once done for us, which
all do cry out ever to the father for us, and do desire our pardon of him,
and do earnestly crave for us the gifts of the holy spirit. If these things
do ever appear before the Majesty of God for us, what need we desire any
thing else? If Christ continually with his most precious blood and most bitter
passion, do most willingly make intercession for us (as Osorius here
affirms) what need we (if we believe this) the intercession of an other? Is
not this sufficient? That were nothing else, but to light a candle before the
sun.

Lib. 4. de sap.
And after he writes thus: When as men imagine God after their own nature, and
therefore conclude his power within narrow bounds, and do measure his
goodness after their own wit and capacity; it comes to pass, that they
often doubt of the power of God, and that they give no credit to many of Gods
works, for the wonderful and strange example of his great goodness. And
hereof all the pestilent opinions that ever man's wicked mind conceived had
their beginning: for men either doubt of the power or of the goodness of God,
etc. And surely this is also the ground of Popery, they measure not goodness
and mercy according to his most holy and infallible word, but according to
their own fancies and reasons: as in many other points, so especially in this
point of invocation.

In 6. ca. Luc.
Stella of Jesus Christ writes thus: Come thou now unto Christ: for he is as
able now to heal all thine infirmities, as he was then, when so great virtue
went out of him: for if thou be pensive and sorrowful, if thou be poor, if
thou be sick, if thou be overwhelmed with sins and wickedness, if thou lie
like a bondslaue in the miserable captivity of the Devil: Come to Christ,
fear not, because he is able (who has borne all our infirmities) to heal thy
wounds. If these may boldly come to Christ in their own persons without
fear, who shall be afraid to come to him?

But some other papists have not had this assurance to come to Christ in their
affairs and businesses, and those that have seemed to be great in the Popes
kingdom. Campion, when as he should come into England to sow the Popes
Darnell, committed this his business and journey to S. John Baptist very often
(as it is written in an Epistle that goes about in his name) as to his peculiar
Saint and patron, and being before the Mayor of Dover he prayed to God,
desiring also Saint John to pray for him. And another Papist does plainly pray
for, Fran. Euia direct. confit.
and invoke the grace of the holy virgin, and of all the blessed Angels, and
Saints of that heavenly court. But Master Campion should here have remembered,
that David teaches him another lesson: Commit thy way unto the Lord, and he
shall bring it to pass; and to none else. And in another Psalm he says: whom
have I in heaven but thee? speaking of God. And our Savior teaches all
christians this lesson also in their prayers: Father, I thank thee, Ioh. 11.42.
because thou have heard me, I know that thou hear me always, but because
of the people that stand by, I said it, that they may know, that thou have
sent me. We must pray to none but to him, that we know hears our prayers. And
when we have prayed, we must have this faith in our prayers, which our Savior
here teaches us by his example: for, for our learning he spoke this, that
after our prayers we must say; Father, I thank thee, that thou have heard me.
When we pray as in another place he teaches us, we must believe verily, that
we receive the things we pray for, and then they shall be done unto us. So he
himself prayed here, and we in all our prayers must also follow his steps.
S. John also teaches us: this is our great trust that we have in Jesus Christ,
that when we pray, 1. Ioh. 5.14.
we know he hears us: we have not this assurance in any other. And David
says: Thou that hear the prayer, to thee shall all flesh come. Psalm. 65.2.
and 86.7.
And in another place: I will call upon thee in the time of my trouble: for I
know that thou hear me. And therefore God is called only (...) the searcher
of the heart. Reu. 2.23.
To make Saints and Angels hear our prayers, is to make them Gods: no man is
sure whether they hear our prayers or no. And therefore seeing our prayers
must not waver, but must be a thing certain, Iam. 1.6.
as S. James teaches us: we may not pray unto them. David knew that the
Angels pitched their tents round about the faithful, Psalm. 34.7.
and guarded them, even as well as the Papists do now; but for all that he
never called upon any of them, but only upon God: and shall we now, having
our Savior Jesus Christ ascended up into heaven, to this purpose to be our
mediator, who is the beloved son of the father?

Saint Austen might have taught also Master Campion this lesson, that the
Saints do not know what things are done here on earth; neither that (which they
object) do now perfectly behold the face of God; and therefore do not know
all things, Aug. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 12. cap. 35.
who writes thus: It is not to be doubted, that the soul being taken by the
force of death from the senses of the body, and after death having now put off
the flesh, and having passed from all the shadows of corporal things, that it
cannot behold that immutable essence of God, as the Angels do, either for some
other hid and secret cause, or else for this cause, that there still yet
remains in it a natural desire of governing the body, by which desire it is
as it were hindered: so that it cannot climb up with her whole desire to that
high heaven, as long as she lackes the body; by the ruling whereof that desire
may surcease. Furthermore, when as the body was such a thing, as it were very
hard and troublesome to govern, even as this flesh, which corrupts and
burdens the soul, coming from the offspring of sin and transgression; much
more is the soul quite turned away from the beholding of that most high
heaven, wherein God dwells: therefore it was necessary that she should be
plucked away from those senses of the flesh, that it might be showed her how she
might be able to attain unto that. Therefore when she shall receive again
this body, not fleshly, but by exchange made spiritual, being now made equal
with Angels; then both the master and servant shall have the perfection of
their nature; both the quickner and that also which is quickened, with such
unspeakable facility, that that now shall be a glory, which before was a
burden. Here S. Austen plainly teaches, yt the souls of the faithful
before the day of judgment, do not perfectly behold the face of God; and that
they are hindered, by a certain love and desire which they have to their
bodies: and therefore that he quite overthrows here that same common ground of
Popish invocation, That even now they behold the face of God, and therefore
know all things. No, Saint Austen says plainly, that that shall be fulfilled
at the day of judgment, and not before, no not in any Saint, no not in S.
John Baptist: and therefore we are not sure now that they hear our prayers.
And that then shall be verified that saying of our Savior: That then the
Saints shall be equal to the Angels; at the day of judgment, and not before;
because still they naturally love the body, they cannot climb up to that hie
heaven, where God himself dwells. O that all catholics would learn this
lesson of S. Austen! It would make them pray more to God, and not so much to
the Saints, as they do. Who would venture but earthly treasure, but he will
know how he bestows it? Our prayers pass all the treasures in the world. And
therefore David says: Psa. 69.30.
I will praise the name of God with a song, and magnify him with thanksgiving.
This also shall please the Lord better, then a young bullock that has horns
and hoofs. And S. Bernard says: Ser. 5. de quadrages.
Let none of you (my brethren) make a light account of your prayers. For I tell
you, that he, to whom we pray, makes no small account of it. For before it goes
forth of our mouth he commands it to be written in his book. And shall we
pray to them, whom we are not sure whether they hear us or not? What is this
else, but as it were to cast our gold in the streets? Let us offer our gold to
God, we are sure he is ready to receive it. As for Saints and Angels, we are
not sure whether they receive our prayers, and whether they hear us or not.

But to make the matter more plain, Aug. de cura pro mortuis agend. cap. 13.
Saint Austen in another book writes thus of his mother, to the same effect
which he wrote before: Let every one (says he) take this that I write, as he
list (Belike he thought he should offend some with this his doctrine: there
were some then that began to trust in them which were dead.) If the souls
which are dead, knew what we did which are alive, surely then they would speak
unto us, when as we see them in our sleeps. And that I may let others pass,
surely my loving mother would never a night forsake me, which followed me both
by sea and by land, that she might live with me. God forbid, that now having
obtained a more happy life, she should become cruel, and should not now
comfort her son, whom she loved so dearly, whom she could never abide to see
sorrowful. But surely that which the holy Psalm sounds in our ears is true;
because my father and my mother have forsaken me; but the Lord has taken me
up. If therefore our parents have forsaken us, how know they our cares and
affairs? And if our parents know not this, what other dead men know what we
do, or what we suffer? Esaias the Prophet says: Thou art our father, for
Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not. If such great Patriarchs
knew not what became of the people which sprang of them, to whom (believing in
God) God promised that a people should spring of their stock; how shall other
dead men be present and intermingle themselves to help and know the actions and
affairs of theirs? How shall we say that God dealt well with them, which died
before the evils came, which followed after their death, if after their death
they also feel what things happen in the miserable life of man? Do we
peradventure err in saying these things of them? And do we account them to be
at rest; whom the disquiet life of the living grieves? etc. This doctrine
Austen does not only affirm; but also proves by the example of his mother;
and also by many other testimonies of the Scriptures: and shall we not believe
him? Surely if the Saints departed know not our affairs here in this world
after their deaths, much less do they know and hear our prayers. And
therefore as S. John says of our works, Let us not lose our works: so say I
of our most excellent work, that is prayer, let us not lose our prayers.

But here some may object that Austen does say in the same book, Cap. 4.
that he that buries his friend nie the grave of a Martyr, reaps this
commodity thereby to his friend, that he commends the same soul to the
Martyr, by his devout prayer and affection: and that therefore Austen allows
prayers made to Martyrs. But how doubtful in this his assertion he is, let all
men judge. This is his opinion, Cap. 16.
which I have noted before: That Martyrs ordinarily and by their own proper
natures cannot be present to the affairs of the living, nor know what they
do; but by Gods power (says he) they may; as Moses and Elias appeared to
Christ. But how shall we know this; that as often as we pray unto them, God
gives that grace extraordinarily unto them, that they may hear us: no man
living can ascertaine us hereof. And of the miracles that are done at their
very toombes, where if they be in any place present, they should be most
present, Austen writes thus: Although this question passes my capacity to
know how Martyrs help them, whom it is certain are helped by them; whether
they themselves are present at one time in so many places, and so far one
from another? or whether they may be present at all, where their memories are;
or whether they may be present every where, where their memories are not; or
whether they being in places correspondent to their merits, and being quite
removed from the knowledge of all affairs; and yet praying generally for the
necessities of such, as do pray unto them: As we also pray for the dead, whom
we see not, neither know where they are, or what they do: God almighty who is
present every where, neither being mixed with us nor yet separated from us,
hearing ye prayers of Martyrs by the ministry of Angels, which are spread
abroad here and there, yield unto men these comforts, which he knows they
stand need of in this life, and so does commend unto us by his wonderful and
unspeakable power and goodness, the merits of his Martyrs where he pleases,
when he pleases, and how he pleases; but especially at their memories,
because he knows this to be most profitable for us to edify the faith of
Christ, for the confession of which, they have suffered. This matter is a
greater matter then I can reach unto, and more deep then I can search.
Therefore whether of these two be true, or perchance whether they both, that at
sometimes these things may be done by the presence of the Martyrs, or at some
other times by the Angels, taking upon them the persons of the Martyrs: I dare
not determine, I had rather learn these things of those that know them.

Austen here plainly affirms, that Martyrs by their own natures ordinarily
know not what we do here, but by Gods power they may. Again, that we praying
for the dead, do neither know what they do; nor where they are: so the saints
may pray for us generally not knowing our estates.

And here, although he seem to allow prayer for the dead (as he does also in
other places of that book) yet he declares here in what sense they then prayed
for them; not knowing what they did, nor where they were: and therefore this
their praying for the dead, makes nothing for the popish purgatory. They knew
not where they were, for whom they prayed: therefore they prayed not to help
them out of purgatory, as the papists teach. Therefore their prayers for the
dead, Cap. 1. ciusd. lib.
which S. Austen says was used of the whole Church in those days, makes
nothing for the praying for the dead, which now the Papists use. They had
another meaning in those their prayers, then they have now. They prayed as it
were of a certain Christian duty; declaring thereby their affections and
love to the departed; but they pray now to help them out of purgatory. And
in this sense also S. Austen prayed for his mother, Li. 9. conf. c. 13.
which the Papists allege to confirm their prayers for the dead, which is
nothing to the purpose. I believe (says he, praying to God for his mother)
that thou have done already that which I pray for; yet O Lord accept the free
will offerings of my mouth. Austen believed verily, that God had already done
that which he prayed for; yet to declare (as should seem) his devotion, he
also wished the same. Such were the prayers which the Church and the Fathers,
in those days made for the dead.

And as concerning these prayers for the dead, this is his private judgment,
that not for all in general, but for those alone, who when they were alive here
deserved that those prayers might help, such prayers are available. But how
contrary is this to the saying of the wise man? Eccles. 11.3.
That the tree lies where it falls: after it be once down there is no remoouing
it. And how contrary is this to that which S. Austen else where writes
himself: Epist. 86.
That every one ought to be careful of the last day of his life? For in what
state soever, the last day of his life shall find every man, in the same shall
the last day of the world also take him: because what kind of one he now dies,
such a one at that day shall he be judged. If this be true, there is no hope of
profiting any man after he be dead. And herein he seems to agree with S. Paul,
Gal. 6.2. and 5.
who says, that now we ought to bear one another burden, as long as we live
here. But after this life, every one must bear his own burden: then there is
no bearing one another burden, no easing, helping, or relieuing one another.
So that this opinion of S. Austen, of working here in this life, that he may
be helped hereafter, is both against the doctrine of the scriptures, and also
contrary to that, which himself has taught in other places.

But to return again to the Martyrs: S. Austen in that book writes; Cap. 18.
That Martyrs or dead men appear to us after their deaths, as we appear to
others that dream of us, we not knowing that we do appear. Nay he thinks
that those apparitions are of Angels, which appear sometimes to men, and
command that their bodies should be buried, when as they themselves whose
bodies they are, know no such thing. If Austen smelled thus much in his days,
concerning burying of bodies of Saints, that they were not the saints
themselves that appeared, but angels (the saints never knowing) we may suspect
that they were also evil angels, that did appear then, because they lied: but
if they were good angels, as Austen thought, yet we may judge of the like thus
much, that those apparitions which were in time of Popery, which often
appeared and craved to be helped out of purgatory, in the likeness of men's
souls; were not their souls, nor perchance the souls of such never knew any
such thing, but were lying angels.

Of the knowledge also of them which are dead, Austen in the same book writes
thus: Those which are dead, Cap. 15.
may know some things here, which are necessary for them to know: and again
not know, what is not necessary for them to know: both things past, present,
and also things to come, the spirit of God reue^ling it unto them: as also not
all men; but the Prophets, while they lived here, knew. Neither knew they all
things; but such things, as Gods providence judged fit for them to know. So
that by S. Austens judgment first it is uncertain, whether the Saints know
any thing at all of our earthly affairs or no. And again, if they know,
they know not all things; but such things as God reueales to them, and thinks
meet for them to know. And now in this uncertainty of their knowledges, who
will make their prayers unto them, and not be sure whether they be heard or
not? especially when as the same S. Austen in another place writes, If faith
want, prayer dies: De verb. dom. secund. Lucam ser. 36.
for who will pray, that believes not? Wherefore the blessed Apostle, when as he
exhorted to prayer, said: Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall
be saved. And that he might show faith to be the fountain of prayer, neither
that the stream can run, where as the head of the water is dried up; he
added and said: But how shall they call upon him, in whom they have not
believed? Therefore that we may pray aright: let us believe, and let us pray
also that faith fail not, by which we pray. So that without certain faith
that our prayers are heard and obtained, prayers by S. Austens judgment in this
place are naught: but such prayers can no man make to saints.

Again, Ser. 120. de temp.
he teaches that prayers are now the sacrifices of christians: Therefore God
commanded the Jews to leave the whole land, and to offer sacrifices in one
place, and to pay their vows, because then all the land was unclean with the
smoke of Altars, and with the savor of graves, and with other pollutions,
which from the sacrilege of the profane Gentiles were brought upon it. But to
us now that Christ is comed, and has purged the whole earth, all places are
become places fit for us to pray in. And therefore S. Paul exhorts and commands
to pray without ceasing, and in every place, etc. So that now in stood of all
Jewish sacrifices, prayer is the Christians sacrifice: and in steed of their
one place Jerusalem, where they were bound to offer their sacrifices only, we
may now pray in all places. And again, De ciu. lib. 10. cap. 4.
he that sacrifices to gods, but to God alone, shall be destroyed: for that I
may say nothing of other things (which belong to the service wherewith God is
worshipped) as concerning sacrifice, there is no man dare say, but that it
belongs to God alone. And again, Who ever thought, that he ought to offer
sacrifice but to him, either whom he knew to be God, or supposed or imagined to
be God? So that prayers being now Christians sacrifices; and sacrifices being
due only to God: therefore prayers by Austens judgment, should be due to God
also only.

Lib. 22. ca. 10.
And in another place of Martyrs he writes thus: We build not so our Martyrs
Churches, as to gods; but memorials, as to dead men, whose spirits do live
with God: neither there do we erect Altars, upon which we may sacrifice to
Martyrs; but we ofter all our sacrifices to our only God, and also the God of
the Martyrs. At which sacrifice as men of God which through the confession of
his faith have overcome the world, they are named in their place and order: yet
they are not called upon of the priest, when he sacrifices: for he offers
sacrifice to God, and not to them; although he offer sacrifice at their
memorials: for he is Gods priest, and not theirs. And the sacrifice he offers,
is the body of Christ, which he offers not to them, because they are it
themselves. Here S. Austen does teach us most manifestly, these three things:
That sacrifice belongs only to God, and that invocation is sacrifice; and that
the body of Christ which the Priest offers, is not Christ's natural body (as
the Papists teach and would have us believe, that S. Austen taught, when he
speaks of the oblation of Christ's body in the Eucharist) but his mystical
body: and the sacrifice of that body, I think the Papists will not say, any
thing profits the dead. And if invocation be sacrifice, as S. Austen here
plainly teaches; shall we invoke martyrs and saints? If the priests in
those days did not invoke them: shall we now? This is S. Austens resolute
judgment. His speeches in his other book of the care of the dead, are but
doubts.

Romans 8.26.
Saint Paul of prayer writes thus: Likewise also the spirit helps our
infirmities: for we know not what to pray as we ought: but the spirit it self
makes requests for us, with sighs which cannot be expressed. But he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of the spirit: for he makes
request for the Saints, according to the will of God.

We must always pray in the holy Ghost, Jude v. 20.
as S. Jude teaches us: but only God, which searches the hearts (as S. Paul
here teaches) knows and understands the sighings of the spirit, and no
angel or saint else: therefore we must make all our prayers to God alone, and
not to any saint or angel.

Prayer is a talking with God: and therefore David says; Psalm. 5.1.
Hear my words (O Lord) and understand my meditation. But are we sure when we
speak to a saint, that he hears us? And who will speak to any, that he is
not sure whether he hears him or no?

And Ferus also yields this reason, Fer. in cap. 12. Act.
why we should invoke only Jesus Christ: Christ (says he) was present in
the congregation at Antioche, according to his promise: Where two or three be
gathered together in my name, I am in the midst of them. And he was at the same
time present with Peter at Jerusalem. For he fills heaven and earth. And this is
the comfort of the godly, that God is present with them in all places; and
therefore in all places they may call upon him: for he is nie unto them that
call upon him in truth. Here is a forcible reason why we should call upon God
alone, because he alone fulfils heaven and earth, and therefore in all places we
may boldly call upon him. So are we not sure of the presence of any creature
else; so that when we pray to them, we may perchance pray to the walls.

Ferus, speaking of the woman that powered the precious ointment on Christ,
writes thus: Fer. de pass. part. 1.
Mark with what confidence this woman comes unto Christ, whom notwithstanding
that same holy man John was afraid to touch at Jordan: She conceived this
confidence by no other means, then of the often tried and approved goodness
of Christ: therefore it was not rashness in this woman, but great charity and
exceeding love. So also the faithful, although they be not now altogether
without sin; yet they dare boldly say unto God, our Father. Ibid.
Of Peter's refusal also to Christ to wash his feet, he writes thus: Again
in this Peter also erred, that as should seem, because he would have
reverenced Christ: therefore he refused this his service. Even as in another
place also he repelled Christ from him, when as he said; Depart from me Lord,
for I am a sinner: yea, but if thou shall think thy self to be a sinner; yet
thou must not put the Lord from thee. This seems to be a kind of reverence:
but it is a preposterous reverence proceeding of flesh and blood. As many for
their unworthiness think that they dishonor God, if they pray unto him, or
receive the sacraments: But faith thinks far otherwise; that is, that he
dishonors God, which sins; and not he which craves pardon, and uses the
means ordained of God to heal his sins: so he dishonors God, not which
endures his service, but he that refuses him, and preferres his own judgment
before the will of God. It is a good thing to confess our own unworthiness:
nay we ought to do it. It is a good thing also to reverence the Majesty of
God: but this goodness turns it self into superstition, if we exclude the
service of Christ for out unworthiness. Therefore let us not fear to come unto
God, because he commands us to come unto him, and to call upon him: Come to me
(says he) all ye that travel, etc. And again, Call upon me in the time of
thy trouble. Nay thou yeeldest to God the greatest honor, if thou shall call
upon him faithfully. And again, thou dishonourest him with the greatest
dishonor that may be, if he calling thee unto him, and promising thee help;
thou despise him, by not coming unto him: so also thou yeeldest greatest
honor unto Christ, when as thou endurest his service toward thee. Hence it
is, that Marie sitting as it were quietly and idly at Jesus feet, and enduring
Christ's ministry which he yielded unto her by preaching, is far more
honorably commended, then busy Martha. To conclude, if thou would have
health, thou may not put away the Physician from thee; yea come thou so much
the more boldly to him, as thine infirmity or unworthiness is the greater. So
also in our necessities concerning these our temporal and worldly things, we
respect neither our own unworthiness, not the dignity of any other; so that
we may be helped and relieved. So he that is hunger-bit, and almost famished,
will not fear to speak to any, be he never so honorable, being forced with
the extremity of hunger: do thou so likewise, etc.

And after, Also he covertly shows his Apostles, by what means, and as it
were greeses or steps, they must climb up to God: For we cannot come to the
father, but by Christ; for he is the way. And we cannot come unto Christ,
unless we receive his Apostles, that is, their words: therefore we must begin
to climb up to God, by the hearing of his word. He that receives this,
receives Christ: and he that has Christ, has the Father: and he that has
the Father, has all good things, etc. So that to hear Gods word is the first
step to climb to God: and then in what case are they, that refuse to hear
Gods word preached. Secondly, by hearing Gods word, we are taught the next
step, that is, to make our prayers to Christ only (for Gods word teaches us
to make our prayers to God, by the means of no other) And therefore the
invocation of saints is no step of this heavenly ladder, by Ferus his judgment.

Ferus of Christ being whipped and spit upon, writes thus: Fer. part 3. pass.
Think these things with thy self, O Christian: behold Christ in this form
and plight, and thou shall never despair of his grace: for he will never
forsake thee trusting in him which suffered so great things for thee, deserving
nothing at his hands.

And of Christ's mother the blessed virgin, he writes thus: For at other times
Christ seemed to use hard speeches unto his mother: that is, when as the work
of God was to be done: Fer. de pass. part. 4.
as in the 2. of John, Mat. 12. Luke 12. For when as Gods business is in hand,
all man's affections must cease and give place. But here on the Cross he
acknowledges his mother most faithfully and courteously, etc. In Gods affairs
all motherlie affection must cease, says Ferus: but the forgiveness of sins
and such like, are Gods affairs; therefore in these matters, the blessed
virgin medleth not.

Of the first word that our Savior spoke on the Cross (Father forgive them;
Fer. part. 4.^
for they know not what they do) Ferus writes thus: When as the Lord Jesus was
made now a true sacrifice, and now he was come to the fulfilling of our
redemption and salvation, although he were oppressed with unspeakable
torments: yet remembering wherefore he suffered such things; that is, for our
sakes: therefore forgetting all his griefs and pains, he begins to encounter
with his fathers anger with his prayers, and now he begins to execute his
office, he begins his priesthood, he is become a mediator between God and man,
an intercessour and a defender of us, and he sets himself wholly, as an
invincible wall, against his fathers anger: for he could not forget his
natural goodness. Therefore whereas others would have cursed, blasphemed, and
rayled, he prays, and that not for himself, but for others; and not only for
others, but for his most deadly enemies, and his crucifiers; who
notwithstanding had been worthy, either to have been devoured with fire from
heaven, or to have been swallowed up of the earth.

And a little after, If Christ prayed so earnestly for his crucifiers, how much
more now does he make intercession for those which call upon him and believe in
him, etc. This great zeal and love of Christ toward his very enemies in the
midst of all his torments; must needs work an assured confidence, that he
will now hear us which believe in him. And therefore we need not fly to any
other in our prayers, but only to him. If he so willingly (says Ferus) forgave
the sin done against his own person: he will no doubt far more easily
forgive us. Therefore we come boldly and without all fear to God, having so
loving a patron and advocate.

Fer in 4. cap. Mat.
Ferus also of Invocation, that it is a part of Gods honor, writes thus: Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God. This adoration consists not in bowing of the
knee, or such like; but in spirit and truth. To worship God, to believe in him,
to serve him, to call upon him: without these thou art an Idolater, whatsoever
thou do, if thou love or fear any other thing more then God; if thou in thy
necessity call not upon him: for, for this cause he sends thee adversities,
that thou should call upon him: And they have not inquired after the Lord,
but have trusted in the help of Egypt. And so many of us do. Thus far Ferus.
Here we may plainly see first that Ferus makes this Invocation of God, a
special part of Gods worship, or Latria: and that to this end, to make us to
call upon him, he sends us afflictions. Secondly, how he reprooues them that
trusts in Egypt, that is, in man, either living or dead, or in what thing
soever.

Dom. 23. post pent. conc 2.
Philippus de dies also of prayer writes thus: Whosoever does knock at the
doors of the tender mercy of God, with his prayers, with faith and reverence,
with humility and sure confidence, with all which, this woman was furnished;
he truly touches the Lord, and draws his virtue and spirit to him. Therefore
happy is he, that truly can say with the Prophet, I will offer the fat burnt
offerings. He offers to God fat burnt offerings, which offers him prayers full of
humility, assurance of obtaining them, and devotion. And he offers prayers
without marrow, which offers prayers without love, devotion, or attention. And
these, whether they be Clergy or Laymen, although they pray a great number of
Psalms or of other prayers, as a task, without any intention of the mind,
blessing God with their mouths, but with their hearts giving themselves to
pleasures and delights, in the streets: these truly thrust the Lord, they
touch him not, because they only touch him with their bodies, and not with
their spirit. And therefore they receive from him neither any virtue or grace.
What must we do then brethren? Truly that of Saint Paul, I will pray with my
spirit, I will pray with my mind; I will sing with my spirit, I will sing with
my mind. Thus much Philippus de Dies: Wherein he condemns all the Latin
prayers, made of the ignorant and simple people, which understand no Latin.
And such were almost all their prayers in the days of our forefathers, because
they lacked this marrow of truth, and confidence of the assurance of obtaining
their prayers at Gods hands, they lacked this mind and understanding which S.
Paul speaks of. And as Dies truly affirms, they that pray so, thrust and
throng Christ, but they touch him not.

Stella also to the same effect writes thus: In 1. cap. Luc.
My soul does magnify the Lord ( says the blessed virgin Marie.) And that
very fitly: for God is to be praised rather in heart and mind, then in voice,
according to that of S. Paul: Sing to God in your hearts. And after, My soul
(says she) does magnify the Lord, because my tongue stambreth: neither can it
number all the benefits bestowed upon me. Therefore I offer the inward
affection of my mind in giving of thanks. And again, Where we are taught that
God is to be praised rather in mind and heart, then in body. But many have the
prayer of the voice only and mouth, and not of the heart, to whom the Lord
says: This people honors me with their lips, but their hearts are far
from me. And of our Savior Jesus, he writes thus: In that they led Jesus with
them to Jerusalem, Idem in ca. 3^ Luc.
thou ought to learn, that in all thy iournies and in all thy trauailings
most sweet Jesus ought to accompany thee. Have him always before thine eyes:
let no worldly matter enter into thy mind, but in all thy affairs direct all
thy thoughts to him, as it were to a mark. If we ought to have him always
before our eyes, why should we have then any other? And that Jesus Christ is
so loving toward us, that we need not have any other, he writes thus after,
preferring his great love toward us before the love of John the greatest saint
in the world, and so by a consequent before any other saint whatsoever:
Therefore (says he) John preached in the wilderness, because in the City
there are so many sins, and abominations, that John could not abide them. John
was grieved at the heart: neither could he digest so many sins. But when as
he saw the Pharisees, he could not abide them, but he burst out saying: O ye
generation of vipers, etc. But Christ has a better stomach to bear with our
iniquities, and to cure our infirmities, as one that loves us with all his
heart, and with all his affection, and winkes at the sins of men, that they
might repent. And for this cause John would not enter into Cities, that he
might not see the lying of artificers, the usury of merchants, the vanity and
pomp of noble men, etc. Thus far Stella.

But quite to overthrow all invocation of Angel or Saint whatsoever, Coloss.
2.18.
does not S. Paul most evidently write thus? Let no man make you shoot at a
wrong mark or defraude you of your price at his pleasure, through humility in
worshipping Angels, intruding himself into those things he knows not, puffed
up vainly by the conceit of his own flesh. As though he should say: If any
man teach you this doctrine, that it is humility to worship Angels, and that
you may not presume to come in Gods sight; such a one beguiles you, he makes
you lose your price, lose your reward. For he that runs in a race, must obey
his pleasure that makes and appoints the game and masterie. If you pray
never so much, and fast never so often, if you do not these according to Gods
word, in the name of Jesus Christ, you lose your price: and he that teaches
contrary, is puffed up of the pride of his own mind, he follows his own
reason, and not the light of Gods word; and therefore in these matters is
stark blind, and knows nothing: As S. Paul teaches of all such; If any man
(says he) teach any other doctrine, and gives not heed, respects not the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that doctrine which agrees with
religion, he is puffed up and knows nothing. And both these places of S. Paul
teach one doctrine, that he which besides the light of gods word, of his own
natural reason teaches this worshipping of Angels, is puffed up and knows
nothing: and intrudes himself into those things he knows not. For who knows
any thing of the will of God, but he, which was in the bosom of the father;
and has now made us his friends; and has reueiled the same in his word? Nay
that which follows, quite overthrows the invocation of Saints or Angels. And
not holding the head (that is, Coloss. 2.19.
Jesus Christ) by which all the body furnished and knit together, by ioints and
bonds increases to that increasing and perfection which God requires. Do not
all the members seek for all things from the head? Even so should all
Christians from their head Jesus Christ; and from none other: and by that grace
they shall draw from him, they shall grow to the increasing of God, that
which God requires. And who will have any more? Let us therefore cleave only
to our head, as S. Paul here teaches plainly, and look and hope for all good
things from him: and not worship any Angel or saint whatsoever. We shall
receive from him sufficient graces to grow to the increasing of God. And what
need we any more?

Granatensis prays thus: Orat. 1. de vita Jesus.
Give me grace (O Lord) that in all the storms of my persecutions, and in all
my tribulations and temptations, that I may fly unto thee, I may seek thee, I
may only call upon thee. And yet in other places he makes his prayers to
Saints. And again, of Angels and Saints he writes: That is the joy of Angels,
and the desire of the Saints, In med. in ora^. dom.
and the rejoicing of just men, to serve thee perfectly, to be conformable to
thy will in all things; and whatsoever they do, to refer it ever to thy
honor. I know (O my God) that the Angels and souls of Saints in heaven, do
rejoice more for the glory and magnificence of thy name, then for their own,
and to be more careful for the excellency of thy honor, then for their own:
And that their will is so intermingled with thy will, that their will is this,
that thy will may be pleased in all things, and by all things. If this be the
will of the saints, as Granatensis here affirms, why do we not honor God
alone with these; and surcease to honor them, seeing it pleases not them?
they look not for it at our hands: nay it displeases them. Again,
Granatensis very excellently and finely writes thus: O the soul of my soul!
2. Orat. pro conc. Dei.
O the life of my life! I desire thee wholly, and I offer my self wholly unto
thee: the whole, to the whole; one to one; and one only, to only one: O that
that had place in me, which thou praiedst to thy father! O holy father grant,
that they may be one as we are one, and I in them, and thou in me: that they
may be made perfect in one. This unity should be betwixt all Christians and
Christ: They should offer themselves; as they are one, so only to him alone.

15. Of Prayers in a strange language.
THe Papists at this day, condemn their old superstition of their private
Latin prayers, and as should seem, are ashamed of it. For Master Stapleton
our countryman, in his book against M. Jewel writes thus: That in our
country whatsoever they did fifty or forty years ago, in the late reign of
Queen Marie, the people had their common Mattines books both with Latin and
with English. Thus far M. Stapleton. He confesses that the people were
bereaved of the great benefit of their private prayers, forty or fifty
years; but he might as well have said five hundredth years or more. For they
confess that the peoples private devotion should be in a tongue which they
understand. So that then to teach English men to pray in Latin, is to defraud
them of the fruit and benefit of their prayers, as they did many hundredth
years, till the Gospel began to shine in the world. And yet also in their
reformation, as should seem, they are loath quite to banish all private Latin
prayers, but they add Latin prayers and English together: as though those
former Latin prayers not understood were not hurtful, and might safely be
used still: so loath they are to forsake their former superstition. Whereas
other Catholics do account such prayers, but lip labors and chatterings,
as hereafter shall be showed.

And here if they will grant, that private devotion ought to be made with
understanding, why ought not our common prayers to be made so also? No doubt
all common prayers are grounded upon that promise of our Savior: Mat. 18.19.
Again, verily I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree in earth upon
any thing, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be given them of my father
which is in heaven. And so have the Papists themselves expounded this place.
Har. Euan. c. 72.
Iansenius upon this place writes thus: But it shall be very truly said that
the Lord by this sentence would signify, how great the power of the Church,
that is, of the congregation of the faithful is, to which above he would have
the unrepentant brother to be manifested, that is to say, that if two of them
only agreeing together, they shall obtain whatsoever they will, much more the
judgment of any whole congregation is to be feared. And no doubt, that thing
which she will, shall be allowed of God. Thus far Iansenius. The force of
Excommunication lies in the consent and communion of the prayers of the Church.
Take this common consent away, and take away also excommunication. And after
he writes thus: Or else therefore he says that he is in the midst of them, that
he should signify unto them, that he would fulfill those things which they do
ask, and that he would help all their enterprises, that that which he
attributed unto his father in the former sentence, now he should be understood
to attribute to himself. For Christ is said to be in the midst of any that do
agree, not only by reason of the presence of his divinity, according to which
he is every where; but by reason of his special grace and assistance, by which
he makes their prayers acceptable to God his father: as though also they were
powered out of him, or as though he did accept them and perfect them. By these
sentences therefore he does two manner of ways commend christian concord, both
for the great force thereof in obtaining with God the father, and then that it
is adorned and beautified with his presence. Hereof may be learned how much we
ought to attribute to synodes and general councels, gathered together and
assembled in the name of Christ for the observation of the faith and manners.
Thus far Iansenius. The consent and unity of the Church adds force to her
common prayers, says Iansenius; as also to general councels; and therefore
not only private devotion (as Master Harding and Master Stapleton teach) but
common service ought to be in a tongue known, and with consent of the people,
if they mind to have those prayers of any force with God.

Ferus also upon that place teaches the same doctrine: Fer. in 18. cap. Mat.
If (says he) one being in some great extremity or in some great danger,
should hear some such like word of him that could help him, as thou hear
here of Christ, how gladly would thou receive it, how diligently would
thou do that he commanded. But we have not one or two promises, but many; and
yet we doubt to call upon God, and yet we see all things full of perils and
dangers, the which is a certain sign, that greater plagues remain for us.
For what good thing can we look for at Gods hands, of whom we will not
vouchsafe to bestow so much honor, that in our present perils and dangers we
will not seek for his help? O nation, void of counsel and wit! I would to
God thou would be wise and understand, and would foresee thy latter end.
For they which are made more obstinate by the scourges of God, what do they
deserve else, then greater scourges? We may note here, how Ferus makes our
common prayers understood, the only means to turn away Gods rods from us,
and a chief part of his honor. And after upon these words: I say unto you
again, that if two of you, etc. As though he should say, If you be able to do
so much with God, who can do all things, that he will perform that which you
desire, if only two of you shall agree among themselves; how much more will he
ratify the sentence of the whole Church: yea I am in the midst amongst them,
condemning the wicked; if so be that they seek not revenge nor the death of
their brother, but the glory of God and the salvation of their brother, that
is, if they condemn in my name. Again, Christ here teaches us how we ought
to deal with him that is excommunicate. For he is not to be accounted as an
enemy; but through the same charity wherewith nothing is omitted for his
amendment, we must also pray for him, that God would convert him, whom man by
all his diligence and by doing what he could, could not convert. And Christ
here promises that he will grant whatsoever we shall desire for our brother,
if we shall continue in charity. Thus far Ferus. Here we may note, that the
sentence of excommunication must be done by common consent and knowledge of the
Church, and likewise their common prayers to God for his amendment. Their
common Latin and blind prayers they made in Popery, quite overthrew this
order of Christ's Church, and took this help from the congregation of
succouring their brethren, who had fallen into any grievous crime. And here,
who marks not Satan's sleights, who as he is the author to make silly souls
fall into grievous sins; so no doubt he was the counselor of hindering the
means of their recovery, as much as in him lay, in stopping all those means
which after their sin, might do them good. And what greater harm could he
devise against the frail sinner, whereof no doubt every congregation has
great store, then to take away this forcible and healthful remedy of the
common prayers of the Church, made by consent to heal their deadly wounds? To
which Christ has annexed this notable promise: That whatsoever two or three of
them agreeing shall ask, he will most assuredly grant. Mat. 18.19.
This most bountiful promise was made to common prayers, and not to private
devotions: And therefore Satan bendes his most force to hinder this mutual
consent, this understanding in common prayer. He is content to let men
privately in their private devotions pray, with their understandings. That
cannot so much hurt him, as the other.

Upon this promise and ground, no doubt the common prayers of the faithful in
the primitive Church were grounded: As appears in the acts of the Apostles,
where saint Luke thus describes the estate of the primitive Church,
immediately after Christ: Act. 1.14.
These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the
women, and Marie the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren. Their common
prayers were made with one accord not only their private devotions, as the
Papists would make men believe: And why should not all Churches follow the
example of this Church? Ferus upon this place writes thus: Though they had
(says he) a certain promise of the holy ghost, yet without ceasing they
continued in prayer: For there is no Church where there is no prayer. Again,
they prayed with one accord. There is no Church where there is not unanimity.
The prayers are not acceptable, where there is no concord. Lastly, they
continued in prayer: for he is not worthy to be heard, which does not continue
in prayer. And this was the chief work which Luke left in writing of the
Apostles. Such was the first Church, but now the matter is altered; now there
is another state of the Church. The brawles and quarrels which are in the
Church Ferus mislikes. He would have prayers be made of brethren agreeing and
consenting together: As were those in the Primitive Church. And after he writes
thus: Thou learnest here who received the holy Ghost: and what they did. They
were all of one accord; they dwelt aloft, they prayed, and to these came the
holy Ghost: Therefore it is no marvel if the holy Ghost do not fly unto us;
for where the heart is tainted with quarrels, anger, and envy; there is no
place left to the holy ghost. For the author of unity and concord requires
not any or a common unity or agreement: but a most straight and heavenly
consent.

The like form of common prayers we read in the Acts, when the Apostles were
forbidden to preach in the name of Jesus: Act. 4.24.
As Soon as they were let go, they came to their fellows, and showed all that
the high Priests and Elders had said unto them: And when they heard it, they
lift up their voices to God with one accord and said etc. Here is the form of
common prayers the Apostles used, they lift up their voices to God altogether:
no doubt they understood their prayers. So when Peter was cast in prison of
Herod, it is written, Act 12.5.
that earnest prayer was made of the Church of God for him. These were common
prayers. And no doubt all the faithful understood the prayers, and gave their
consents. And this is that which saint Paul teaches to the Corinthians: 1.
Cor. 14.15.16.
What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray with the
understanding also. I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing with the
understanding also. Else when thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he which
occupies the room of the unlearned say, Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing
he knows not what thou say? Thou verily give thanks well: but the other
is not edified. S. Paul here speaks manifestly of common prayer in the Church,
both of praying and singing of Psalms, and not only of private hymns, or some
particular songs, which some Christians made to their own comforts, and to
praise God: as Master Bellarmine expounds this place. Saint Paul's doctrine
agrees with the promise of our savior, Lib. 2. de verb. dei cap. 16.
and with the practice of the Church before recited. The same doctrine he
delivers to Timothy a Bishop, to be delivered to the whole Church: I will
therefore (says he) first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions and
giving of thanks be made for all men: for kings, 1. Tim. 2.1.
and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life,
in all godliness and honesty. No doubt he means here common prayers: And he
puts down the benefits which are reaped thereby, which being known and
understood of the Church, should as it were whet on this their desire of
praying. These benefits they should know assuredly, they did reap by their
prayers: and that they were to obtain them by no other means but by prayer.
And therefore seeing they are such things, as no man can be without, and all
men greatliest desire, it behooves them especially to pray for these: and as
they know and understand the price of them, to be so much the more earnest by
their prayers in begging them of God. The like doctrine he teaches all men
after in their private prayers: I will (says he) that men pray in all places
lifting up pure hands, without doubtfulnes. They must have faith joined with
their prayers, and believe verily they do receive that which they pray for,
according to our saviors doctrine; or else they shall obtain nothing at Gods
hands. But this faith of receiving the things they pray for, argues a
knowledge. They cannot believe they receive the things they pray for, unless
they know what they pray for: so that by saint Paul's doctrine, both common and
private prayers must be made with our understanding. The same teaches saint
James: Is any sick amongst you? Let him call for the elders of the Church,
and let them pray for him. Ia. 5.14.
And anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith
shall save the sick. Here are common prayers set down; but they must be done
in faith, and in the name of the Lord Jesus: S. James agrees with the gospel.
Our common prayers must have these two conditions, which the gospel teaches:
they must be made in faith, and with knowledge, as is before repeated: And they
must be made in the name of the Lord Jesus. They must not be barbarous prayers
without understanding, as saint Paul terms them, but Christian prayers framed
according to the doctrine of Jesus Christ. The same doctrine saint John
teaches: 1. Io. 5.14.15.
And this is the assurance which we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hear us,
whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we have desired of
him: Saint John ioines the same two conditions to common prayers which saint
James did, that is, faith and assurance that we shall obtain our petitions;
and knowledge. And this is that which our savior himself also teaches all
his: Io. 16.24.
Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: Ask and ye shall receive, that
your joy may be full. What can be greater joy to a man, then to have his suit
granted of a mortal man, even of a king: but to have it granted at the hands
of God, is the cause of the greatest joy in the world. Prou. 13.12.
The hope that is deferred (says Solomon) is the fainting of the heart: bu^
when the desire comes, it is a tree of life. But how shall w^ know that our
suits and prayers be granted us or not, unless we know what we pray for?
Therefore they take from us this tree of life, which teach us to pray in
Latin, and not to understand our prayers. They take from us the greatest joy
we have in the world: And what kind of enemies are they? 1. John. 5.16.
The same doctrine saint John gives of private prayers: If any man (says he)
see his brother sin a sin not unto death: let him ask, and he shall give
life for them which sin not unto death. All Christians ought to pray for
their brethren, when they see them offend. They should pray God to amend them:
And should they not then understand their prayers? I would to God all
Christians would attentively mark this forcible effect of prayer: they shall
by their prayers give life to their brethren offending. To restore a dead man
in body to life again, what a great commendation would we account it: but it
is a far greater matter to restore a dead man in soul to life again. And
this most assuredly does faithful prayer. Oh that all Christians would
remember this, and practice it, and cease in their brothers sins, as most men
do now a days, either to backbite them, or slander them; but rather as saint
John here counsels, pray for them.

Neither were the common prayers only in the Gospel, but in the law also in
a known tongue. Before the captivity David says: O come let us sing unto the
Lord: Let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation. This
exhortation had been in vain; if the people then had not understood what had
been said. And in another Psalm he concludes thus: Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel for ever and ever: Psalm. 106.48.
And let all the people say Amen: prase ye the Lord. And again, speaking of
the Church of Christ, Psalm. 47.7.
he says: God is king over all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding.
All Christ's subjects must be children to maliciousnes, but not in wit: they
must be men in understanding: And they must praise God with their
understandings. He requires only the heart: He will be worshipped in spirit and
truth; John. 4.23. Esaias. 29.13.
as our savior teaches. And again, We must not now worship him, as the
wicked did in Esaias days: This people honors me, with their lips; but
their heart is far from me. This kind of worship God condemned in the
Jews, and do we think that he will allow of such like amongst christians? Of
the common prayers also of the Jews after ye captivity, Neh. 8.6.
we read thus in the book of Nehemiah: And Esdrah praised the Lord the great
God; and all the people answered, Amen, etc. No doubt if they had not
understood his praises, they could not have answered, Amen. So that contrary
to M. Hardings and Mast. Stapletons assertions, both private and common
devotions ought to be in a tongue known, and understood of the common people.

But M. Bellarmine in this weighty matter of prayer, which is as it were the
very key of heaven, and the only means for the poor sinner to refresh and
comfort his soul, is quite contrary to himself: For in one place he writes
thus: That he is not worthy of the thing he asks, which does not acknowledge
that he stands need of the thing he requires. And therefore we must be poor
and miserable wretches in our own eyes, if so be that we will obtain mercy
and grace. And again, he deuides prayer thus: There is one kind of prayer
(says he) only mental: Another both mental and vocal. Neither ought there
be added the third member, vocal only: for that is not only profitable to
please God, but rather to provoke Gods anger: according to that saying: This
people honors me with their lips, Esaias 29. Mat. 15.
but their hearts are far from me. Here he plainly affirms, that only
vocal prayers (such as are all prayers not understood) obtain nothing at Gods
hands, but rather provoke his anger. If this be true, then their masses, which
many of their priests scant well understood, and their other Latin prayers,
which commonly the people made without understanding, pleased not, but rather
displeased God.

And again he writes thus: Lib. 1. cap. 9. de oper. bonis in particular. Esaias
29. Mat. 15. Ierem. 48.
The fifth condition of prayer is devotion. And devotion here is called a desire
of praying attentively, carefully, diligently and fervently: for the Lord
reprooues the people that pray only with their lips. And he is pronounced
accursed that does the work of the Lord negligently. This condition, as also
the former do spring of faith. For he which attentively and with a strong faith
considers how great the majesty of God is, and how great is our vileness, and
how great the matter is which we require at Gods hands, it is not almost
possible, but that he should come to pray humbly, reverently and fervently.
Thus far M. Bellarmine. Where he makes the consideration and knowledge of the
thing we beg at Gods hands, a means to make Christians devout in their
prayers. But they which pray in Latin, lack this consideration: therefore
their prayers cannot be made but without devotion. So that here M. Bellarmine
seems to require knowledge in prayer, that their prayers may be devout and
please God. But in other places he goes about to prove, that prayers not
understood may please God. And he alleges arguments to confirm the same:
The priest (says he) in the old law prayed for the people in the Tabernacle,
and the people tarried without, and neither understood nor knew what he
prayed. First here ye priest was a shadow of Christ, who alone entered into the
tabernacle, and the people might not enter in with him: and therefore could not
understand his prayers: but his prayers were such as if they had bin present,
they might have understood. And therefore this makes nothing for their Latin
service, where priest and people are both present together. Secondly, he
alleges, that the Church prays for infidels and wicked men, which would not
that she should pray for them: and yet no doubt her prayers do them good. But
here the Church does understand her prayers. The question is not, whether he
that reapeth good by a prayer, should understand it or not. But whether he that
makes any prayer, either for himself or for any other, ought to pray with
understanding, and to know the prayer he makes? Surely he that prays for
another or for himself, and knows not what he prays, shall neither do
himself nor the other any good. As they which in times past said de profundis
for them which were dead, did no doubt not profit them: naie if they had
understood what they had said, they would never have said it for the dead,
which was made of one living for himsefe: neither are the dead so much as once
named therein.

Thirdly, he alleges some sayings of the fathers, as of Origin and
Chrysostom: That as charmers by words not understood do drive Serpents out of
their holes: so the word of God being read, and yet not thoroughly understood, is
of much more force against the Devil. But these fathers speak not of the
Scriptures, read in a strange language of the people, that they should be of
any force; but only of some dark and obscure places, which being read and
passed over, although not thorowlie understood, with some other plainer places,
might yet profit the soul, and daunt the enemy: as did the Eunuchs reading of
the Prophet Esaias, who no doubt understood the words he read (as they do not
of their Latin prayers) although he understood not the meaning of the words.
For he could say, Of whom speaks the Prophet, of himself or of another?
But these places make nothing for prayer, which speak of reading the
Scripture. Lastly, he alleges Austen, That one praying the prayers which
heretics have made, not knowing them to be heretics prayers, may reap good
by them. But this is nothing to the purpose: So the prayer be good, and prayed
with understanding and a lively faith, it makes no matter who made it.

Basil very excellently of the common prayers used in the Church in his time,
writes thus: Hexam. hom. 4.
If so be that God account the sea good and beautiful and commendable: how
much more is not that wise decree of the Church more glorious, in which a mixed
noise of men, women and children (as it were of the water beating against the
shore) of their prayers, rebounds unto God with the depth of peace and
tranquillity, and preserues it firm and immovable (all those wicked spirits
being put to flight) which were not able with their heretical doctrines so
much as once to move her. He calls these common prayers consilium, the
wisdom or policy of the Church. The old enemy of our salvation Satan, has
banished this policy out of the church. Of all other, this most preuailes
against him. Let the true Church use it again, and judge who she is which
uses it not. But it is worthy our consideration, how other Papists have
condemned prayers in general, being made without our understanding. Viuiennus
a Papist concerning this matter, Lib. 3. de offic. boni patrisfam. cap. 25.
writes thus: Therefore if any man (says he) seek the means how he may
obtain the grace of God, let him give himself to prayers, which are the
weapons, by which all the power of the Devil is overthrown. Therefore the
wicked spirits sometimes when we pray, cast stumbling blocks in our ways, that
either being slothful we may be weary of praying, or being terrified we may
quite give it over, or being carried away with vain thoughts, we may pronounce
negligently those words, which we should pronounce with great discretion; being
like to drunken men, who oftentimes talk many things, neither do well know
what they say. Let us now discover such sleights and crafts of the enemy, and
let us also consider the diligence of the Saints in eschuing them; that by
imitating them we may set light by and make no account of those, who can
overcome none but such as willingly yield them selves unto them. By these
things which have been spoken the saying of Aggathon the Abbot may be proved
true, who being asked what spiritual exercise of all other was most painful:
answered, prayer: because while we pray that evil spirit does trouble us,
sometimes assaulting us openly, sometimes secretly laying siege against us, and
by all means endeavoring that he may confound, and trouble the minds of them
that pray, being not ignorant what a forcible matter with God is the constant,
continual, and perseuerant intention of the mind of him that prays with
humility. This Papist confesses that when we pray, we must not rashly power
out our words, but with discretion: that we must not be like drunken men when
we pray, praying we cannot tell what. And were not such like, all the Latin
prayers, which without understanding, the simple people made in Popery? He
confesses that amongst all other our spiritual works, Satan labors
especially to hinder our prayers, or to pervert them, which thing he need not
do in Popery: he had framed them (as the common proverb is) the bow to his
own bent. They in those days prayed ignorantly, without faith, with wandering
minds, being fixed on nothing, even as he would have them. The same Viuiennus
also of prayer writes thus: Lib. 2. de offic. boni patrisfam. cap. 25.
With what kind, and how great an affection of his mind, David prayed, he
himself testifies saying: I have made my supplication before thy face with my
whole heart. And again, I have cried with my whole heart, hear me (O Lord.)
He has cried unto the Lord with his heart, who has prayed earnestly, not they
which do make a chattering with their words, and do not conceive with their
mind that which they post over with their lips And after him Solomon the
most wisest king of all the kings of Judah, in that book (if it be his) which
is entitled the book of Wisdom: I gate me unto the Lord, and I made my
prayer unto him, and I spoke from the very bottom of my heart. He is to be
prayed unto with our whole heart, who is commanded to be loved with our whole
heart. But they which pray carelessly, do seem to make light account of him,
of whom they do request any thing, and therefore they do not obtain their
requests: They do but chatter like Parats and Pies, by Viuiennus his judgment,
that know not what they do pray for. And such like chatterings were all the
Latin prayers in popery, which the common people daily did make.

Caietane also agreeing with him, of prayer writes thus: Prayer (says he) with
a good intent, without attention, that is, Sum. Caieta^
diligent marking or understanding, is unlawful; for the want of devotion or
reverence that is joined with it. Thus far Caietane. He that prays must
mark what he prays, whether he pray himself, or give his consent by saying,
Amen, to the prayers of another. And therefore the simple Christian and
unlearned, must as well understand the common prayers of the Church, as his
own private prayers. Shall he say Amen, and give his consent to that he knows
not what it is? That were an absurd thing; even in our trifling worldly
matters, no man will do so: and shall we do so in heavenly matters; matters of
great weight and importance? But in the darkness of popery, the most part
neither understood their private nor their public prayers, and how then could
they have that attention which Caietane here requires?

Bernardus de Frenesda another Papist, In praef. 2. par. Granat. de devot. and
med.
of prayer also writes thus: It is the general doctrine received of all the
Saints, that there are three things necessary to a just man, which bring him
inestimable commodities: and that by these three the just man is preserved in
his righteousness. And these are, praying, reading, and well-doing. In these
should a wise man daily exercise himself; and so discreetly with Christian
zeal, measure and divide his time, that he should be ever occupied in one of
these. Prayer gives light, purges, comforts, makes merry, kindles zeal,
lightens afflictions, nourishes devotion, ingenders confidence (if our own
spirit do not reprove us) expels slouthfulnes, terrifieth the devils and
ouercomes temptations. These are the most excellent fruits and commodities of
prayer. But now the same author teaches us also the true manner of prayer.
Then (says he) we do pray truly when as we think on nothing else, and when
all our thoughts are bent on heavenly things, whenas our heart is inflamed with
the fire of the holy Ghost. His prayer is perfect, whose cause, and tongue, and
deeds, and speech, and life, and thoughts, cries.

And he adds, that the third effect of prayer is the spiritual refreshing of
the soul. And that to this effect of prayer, is necessarily required the
attention or marking of the soul, not that which is spent about the material
words of the prayer, nor that only which is about the meaning of the words, but
that which respects the end of the prayer, which is God, and that thing for
which a man prays. We may learn here by his judgment, that he which will
reap this last and most principal fruit, and effect of prayer, which is the
spiritual refreshing of his soul, must not only mark the meaning of the
words of his prayer, but chiefelie the Majesty of God, and the thing he prays
for. If this be true, then the papists have bereaved their brethren of this
chief fruit of prayer, which is the spiritual refreshing of their souls,
when as they taught them to pray in Latin; when as they neither understood the
words of their prayer, nor the thing they prayed for. And so by this authors
judgment, though they prayed many and long prayers in those days, and did
rise up early to prayer; yet the poor silly souls, for lack of
understanding these their prayers, were famished and received no spiritual
refreshing, or comfort thereby.

De orat. and med tract. 7. ca. 8.
Granatensis himself also of prayer, writes thus: Even as one that is sick
takes more profit of the meat he eats and chewes himself, then of that which
being chewed of another is given him, like abroth or some pottage: so the
prayer a man makes himself of thos^ words which the holy ghost ministers unto
him; is more profitable, then that which is framed and made by other men's words
which are often repeated, as of some that know not what they mean, without any
attention or devotion. Thus far Granate^sis. We may note here how he also
condemns prayers without understanding. And because that when we repeat
prayers made of others, though we do understand the meaning of the words of
them; yet oftentimes carelessness and forgetfulness will creep into our
minds; therefore he preferres the prayer which a good Christian is able to make
of himself, by such words as the holy ghost shall put in his mind, before
any such prayers made of others, Cap. 4.
be they never so devout. And the same Granatensis writing of certain hymns
made by one Ieronymus Vda, says thus: These three hymns of the trinity are
to be commended to every person in this kind: and his other hymns to others:
which being well understood, and de^outly repeated and considered, are as it
were most sweet Mann^ to our souls, making them fit to taste heavenly things.
So that the^ all their hymns being not understood, by his judgment, are worth
nothing. And again of prayer, he writes thus: In the power of this Lord
(meaning Jesus Christ) let us come to the throne of grace, with great
confidence, being assured that whatsoever we shall ask in his name, we shall
obtain it. This is the chief condition: which our petition or prayer ought to
have joined with it, that it may be of force with God ( as saint James says)
that is to say, faith and sure confidence, which ought chiefly to be grounded,
not in our selves or in our own works or merits, but in the merits of Christ
Jesus, and also in the infinite goodness and mercy of God, which can be
overcome by no kind of wickedness; and chiefly on the truth of the word and
promises of God, who through the whole scripture promises, that he will never
forsake them, which turn to him with their whole heart, call upon him, and
have all their hope most assuredly reposed in him. Although thou have been
hitherto a most grievous sinner; yet thou must not therefore be discouraged:
for as Saint Jerome says, sins that are past do not condemn us, if now they
do not please us. By which words we may plainly perceive, how greatly they are
deceived, who waighing their own wants and infirmities, do despair of the
mercy of God: as though God would not hear them, if so be they pray unto him.
And they do not consider, that the principal foundation of this confidence, are
the merits of Christ, the mercy of God, and the truth of his words, which is
as it were a shield, as the kingly Prophet says: Compassing about all them
that trust in him: No sinner, by his judgment, ought to despair, though his
sins be never so grievous; but ought boldly to come to the throne of grace:
and what needs then the intercession of saints? Therein he erreth that he
makes the mercy of God and the merits of Jesus Christ, but the principal, and
not the only foundation of our confidence, when as David says: Thou O Lord
alone makes me dwell in safety, and securely: what foundation can man have of
confidence or security, beside this? Again, of the excellency of the name of
Jesus in another place, he writes thus: Thy name is like oil powered out:
without all doubt there is a great resemblance betwixt oil and the name of the
bridegroom; and therefore the holy ghost not in vain, has compared the one of
them to the other. And I say for three properties of oil, because it gives
light, it feeds, and it makes soft; if you can yield no better reasons then
these. It feeds the fire, it nourishes the flesh, and it asswageth pain:
Therefore it is light, meat and medicine. Behold now the same things in the
name of the bridegroom: It gives light being preached, it feeds being studied
upon; and being called upon, it lenifieth and asswageth. And let us briefly
run over every one of these: Whereof I pray you sprang so great and so
sudden a light over all the world, but by the preaching of the name of Jesus?
Neither is the name of Jesus only light, but also meat: are you not so often
comforted as you think upon it? what makes so fat the mind of him that museth
often thereon, as it does? what makes our senses so quick? strengthens the
powers of our souls: makes lively or good and honest our conversation:
cherishes our chaste affections? All the meat of the soul is dry, if it be
not basted with this oil: It is unsavory, if it be not seasoned with this
salt. If thou write any thing, it does not please me, unless I read Jesus
there: If thou dispute or confer, it pleases me not, unless Jesus sound
there. Jesus is honey in the mouth, music in the ear, and joy in the heart:
but it is also physic. Is any amongst us sorrowful? let Jesus come into his
mind, and let it leap up into his mouth, and behold as soon as you shall name
him, light shall spring, all clouds shall be dispersed, and fair sunshine shall
appear. Does any man fall into sin? nay does he run by despair into the
snare of death? If he shall call upon this name of life, shall he not by and by
begin to breath again, and recover life? What ever accustomed heardnes of
heart, fainthearted cowardlines, cancred malice, or slothful idleness was ever
able to abide to appear before this glorious name? who had ever the fountain
of tears dried up, and calling on the name of Jesus did not burst out again
more plentifully and flowed more sweetly? Who ever now quaking and trembling in
dangers, this name of power being called upon, did not by and by receive
courage and repel all fear? Who ever wavering and boiling in doubts calling
upon this glorious name, received not forthwith most assured resolution and
certainty? Who ever discouraged in adversity and even now fainting, if he
once but named this name of help, lacked strength? And to this thing the Lord
himself inuites us, when as he says: Call upon me in the day of thy trouble,
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Nothing so bridles the
rage of anger, asswageth the swelling of pride, heales the wound of envy,
stoppes the stream of riot, quenches the flame of lust, slakes the thirst of
covetousness, and vanquisheth that tickling itching of all uncomeliness. For
when I name Jesus, I set before mine eyes a most meek man, humble and lowly in
heart, courteous, sober, chaste, merciful, and famous in all virtue and
holiness; and the same also God omnipotent, who heales me with his example,
and strengthens me with his arm. Therefore I take from him examples to follow,
as he is a man; and help to lean and trust unto in all my troubles, as he is
God: these as Apothecaries stuff; this as the strength and virtue of them. And
I make thereof such a confection as no Physician in the world is able to make.
This electuarie thou have, O my soul, hid and laid up as it were in the box of
this name Jesus most wholesome truly, which is of power and force against all
thy plagues and infirmities. Let this box be ever in thy bosom, ever at hand,
that all thy thoughts and actions may always be directed to Jesus. For to this
thou art also invited of the bridegroom in the Canticles, when he says: Let
me be as a signet in thy heart, and as a signet on thy arm. Thus much
Granatensis cites out of Bernard. A discourse worth the marking; who knowing
these virtues of the name of Jesus, will not call upon it? or will call upon
any other name? This must be an electuarie ever in our bosom and ever in our
hands, says Bernard and Granatensis, two skillful Physicians of souls, and
shall we not follow their counsel?

Of prayer in the Church he writes thus: Med. 10. vit. Christi.
It is an usual thing that if we will find any thing, we will seek it in his
proper and natural place. If therefore the Church be the proper place of God, it
is meet that the son of God and God be sought and found there. The church is
the house of prayer; and where prayer is heard, there God is found. Wherefore
my brother, when as thou art afflicted, destitute of comfort, distracted with
cares, lean, luke warm, and without any fatness or spark of devotion, enter
into the Church, continue in prayer. For if thou shall continue praying with
faith and humility, without doubt thou shall find Christ who is God: and this
shall be a sign to thee that thou have found him, if thou shall after find
devotion, pleasure, refreshing, and joy in thy soul.

Med. 16.
And after that, in the Church and in all other places that we should pray
only unto Christ, he alleges this notable saying out of Austen: Austen
says, that so great mercy and courtesy shined in the person of our Savior,
in all his words, works, and in his whole life; and that there was such a
report through all that country of his courtesy and mercy, which sprung of
the works which he wrought daily amongst them, that the malicious hearts of the
Jews thought, that so courteous and merciful a man could not speak the word
of condemnation, or pronounce sentence of death against any; no, not although
the law condemned him: and therefore they brought unto him the woman taken in
adultery, that hereby they might take an occasion of slaundering him and of
accusing him, as a transgressor of the law. So that the greatness of the
clemency, and mercy of our Savior gave opportunity to those wicked persons,
of accusing him. But the wisdom of God overcame the malice of man, and Moses
Serpent devoured the Serpents of the Soothsayers: For the Lord judged so
wisely, that the woman was absolved, her accusers being put to silence and
confusion. If the malicious Jews had such an opinion of the great mercy of
our Savior; shall not Christians have the like? And if they have, will they
direct their prayers to any other?

And after, speaking of the woman of Chanaan, he writes thus: Med. 17.
First we are taught here in all our tribulations and necessities that we must
run unto God, as this woman did, who (as Origin notes) was an infidel and a
worshipper of devils: yet she neither went to men nor to devils, to seek
remedy of them; but she came to the true Savior and redeemer of the world. For
this is the property of prayer, that it is a general remedy against all
evils: and in this respect the virtue thereof was commended, as Theodoret
witnesses of one of the ancient fathers, who was wont to say: That physicians
for diverse diseases, had their diverse medicines, and that they cured this
disease with this medicine, and that, with another: but Christians against all
manner of evils have but one medicine, and that is continual and devout
prayer, which never returns empty. If this infidel, naie being also a
worshipper of devils, as Origin affirms, were not repelled of our Savior,
why should any Christian distrust?

And of ye conditions which are required in our prayers he writes thus: The
first thing that is required in our prayers, is faith: For which this woman is
commended, to which especially ye obtaining of her suit is ascribed of the
Lord: according to the word of Christ himself, saying: All things whatsoever
you ask, praying; believe that you shall receive them. The reason hereof among
other is this, because this bond of faith, which ever brings with it assured
trust of the mercy and goodness of God, is one of those things which do most
glorify and honor God: whose nature is to honor those again of whom he is
honored, and to glorify those of whom he is glorified. The which that we may
better understand, we must know that there are two manner of ways of praising
God: One with words; another with works. The physician with words commends
the treacle he has made, and says that it is of great force against all
poison: but he commends it in deed, who being stricken of a Scorpion, takes his
treacle and is healed by it. Thou see how this second kind of praising is
better then the former. The one praises it in hope, the other in deed: the
praise of the one consists in words; but of the other in works: and therefore
as much difference as there is between saying and doing; so great difference
is there also between those two manner of commendations.

But faith praises the goodness and mercy of God, after the second manner,
when as she being in the midst of perils and temptations, she is secure and
triumphs. Through this assurance she undertakes great and hard matters; and
she distributes to the poor that she has, without any care, hoping with
assurance in the mercy of God, which never forsakes them which trust in him,
and which enter into perils and troubles for his name sake. There are very
few, although perchance otherwise good men, who have attained to this step
of faithful assurance; but happy and thrice happy is he, that has attained
unto it: to which this woman seems to have climbed up; who being so often
repelled and rejected of the Lord; yet for all that did not distrust of his
goodness and mercy. Therefore not without cause the Lord commends her faith,
saying: O woman, great is thy faith! Be it unto thee even as thou will.

And this is diligently of us to be marked here, that through the whole Gospel
there are only found but two such exclamations of our Savior, and both of
them to the same purpose: One is in the words now recited; the other is, when
as Christ reproouing a man not believing, cried out: O froward and incredulous
generation! How long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? These
two exclamations do very manifestly declare, how grateful and acceptable to
God that faith is, which has this hope and assurance ever joined with it; and
how greatly incredulity and distrustfulnesse displeases him. Faith brings
with it ever assurance and confidence: and therefore cannot abide wavering and
doubtfulnesse. And such a faith only is acceptable to God says Granatensis.
But how can then that be a faith acceptable to God, which other papists teach,
which brings with it uncertainty of their salvation? And of the certainty and
full assurance, that we ought to have in obtaining our prayers when we pray,
Ibidem.
he writes thus out of Bernard: Of the first fruit or rather effect of prayer,
Bernard thus speaks: As often as I speak of prayer, me thinks I hear in
your hearts, but as it were some ordinary talk betwixt man and man, which
also I have heard very often of others, and sometime tried in my self. For
what a matter is this? that although we never cease from praying, yet at any
time scarce any one feels what is the fruit or commodity of his prayer. As
we come to prayer; so we depart from prayer: as though no man answered us
again, or gave us a word: as though no man minded any thing, but as that we
have seemed to have labored in vain. But what says the Lord in the Gospel:
Judge not (says he) according to the outward appearance; but judge ye the
righteous judgment. And what is the righteous judgment? but the judgment of
faith; because the just man lives by faith: Therefore follow thou the judgment
of faith; and not thine own experience; because faith is true, but thine
experience is oftentimes deceitful. And what is the truth of faith? but that
the son of God himself has promised whatsoever ye shall desire in prayer,
believe that you shall receive it, and it shall be done unto you. Let none of
you (O my brethren) make light account of his prayers: For I say unto you, that
he to whom we pray, makes no small account of it. For before it go out of our
mouth, he commands it to be registered in his book: And one thing of these two
we may without all doubt hope for; that he will grant either that which we
desire; or that which he knows to be more profitable for us. For we know not
to pray as we ought to pray, but he has compassion of our ignorance, and
receiving our prayer courteously, gives us not that which is not either
profitable for us, or is not necessary to be given us so soon. And again,
When we ask that which is not profitable for us he hears us not, but he gives
us that which is more profitable: even as the carnal father is also wont to
do, who when his child desires of him both bread and the knife, he will give
him the bread, but not the knife.

This assurance we should have when we make our prayers, that God answers us,
and grants us our requests, or else that which is far better for us: and
with this trust and assurance whenever we pray, we should return from
prayers, not as though we had prayed to a wall, or that we were not better then
we were before: naie when we return from speaking to that bountiful and rich
king, we must believe assuredly that we return not again empty; but
enriched with many great and heavenly treasures. This assurance in popery how
could they have which knew not what they said, nor for what they prayed. And
again, of Gods great willingness to hear our prayers, he writes thus. It
would very greatly delight and please the mercy of God, if men were so ready
to hear his voice, as he is to hear theirs: For it is most true, that we are
a great deal more slack in our duties, then he is in his. Can. 6.12.
Therefore when as he calls his spowse in the Canticles, he calls her four
times, and he repeats the same word four times: Return, return (says he) O
Shulamite, return, return. But she when she calls her bridegroom, calls him
but once, And behold he is at hand: Return (says she) my beloved, be like a
Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether. Can. 2.17.
And is God thus willing to hear our prayers: and shall we not pray unto him?
shall we pray to any other?

Of the great mercy of God, Granatensis writes thus: David said: O Lord, say
unto my soul, I am thy salvation: Par. psalm. 50.
As though he should say, I have my ears now full of thy terrible names and
titles, O let that time come, wherein by thy new name thou have promised
salvation to my soul! And that is truly, when as thou shall be called Jesus,
that is, a Savior. This David said in times past in the person of us all. But
after that thou remembering the mercy and promises made to our fathers, that
the time should be that thou would take upon thee our humanity and misery:
When as I say, thou came out of thy hall of power and justice, and coming to
us thou wentest to thy palace of courtesy and mercy, thou fulfillest then
whatsoever thou before had promised to all men. That same chief and great
follower and Apostle of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord, first began to call
thee then father of mercies and God of all consolation: Father, that he might
declare unto us, that as a father, thou would help us; and God, because
thou can help whom thou will. So that now sinners seeing thee to have comed
out of thy hall of severity into thy palace of mercy and comfort, seeing
thee altogether clad now with their apparel, and becomed now one of their
family; now they will no more run wandering up and down, they cannot tell
whither; but being knit to thy most holy Church, with sincere faith and sure
hope, they do come to thy throne, asking pardon of their sins. Thus far
Granatensis. He declares to us now, that this faith every Christian must have,
that now God himself is become like one of us: and therefore we may boldly go
even to his throne our selves; we need no intercessors to him, yea although we
be sinners: And even of himself on his throne our selves crave pardon for our
sins.

And this doctrine is not his own, but it is grounded on saint Paul's. Heb.
4.15.
We have not an high Priest (says he) which cannot be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort; yet without
sin: Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may receive
mercy and find grace to help even in the time of need: We have a most
merciful high priest tempted in all things like to us. Never man so tempted,
who may say as that Poet makes Queen Dido to say to the Troianes: I my self,
who have felt sorrows have now learned to pity all such as be in sorrows;
none may evermore truly say this, then Jesus Christ. And therefore boldly we
may go even to his throne, even to ask mercy, not only to beg spiritual
graces or blessings: And mercy argues sins; where there is mercy and pardon
craved, there as sin; even such miserable sinners may come boldly to this
throne of grace to crave pardon for their sins. Granatensis, nay the Apostle
Paul tells all Catholics this: and will they not believe them? And if they
believe them, what need they go to any other? The same Granatensis writes thus
of himself: Ibidem.
And surely the errors of my life and sins are so many and so great, that
some men being in the same state of damnation, as well as I, and not
considering (O Lord) thy omnipotency, but measuring, according to their own
frailty and wavering minds, with their forward thoughts, have entered into
judgment with thee, saying: Mine iniquities are greater, then that they may be
pardoned: and giving no credit to thy words and promises, imagine that as some
angry or cruel man, thou think upon punishment and revenge, and not upon
grace and pardon. And such (O my God) when they shall see that thou will
forgive me my sins, shall be overcome and ashamed of their judgments: And
they shall acknowledge that which thou spakest by thy Prophet; that is, As high
as the heavens are exalted from the earth; so are thy ways far above the
ways of men, and thy thoughts above their thoughts. Therefore (O Lord) have
mercy upon me and blot out mine iniquity. Thus far Granatensis.

He confesses himself to be a damnable sinner: Here is no merits then; and
yet for all that, he hopes for pardon, and comes to the throne of Gods mercy:
nay they which think God to be an angry God, so that he will not hear
sinners, he plainly teaches that they have a wrong opinion of God. And do not
the papists teach this in their doctrine of intercession to saints and Angels?
This faith all the scriptures teach us, that when we pray in the name of Jesus
Christ, God does most assuredly hear us. And so we ought to frame our words
when we pray, as though we were in the presence of God; and our hearts after we
have prayed, that God in whose presence we have prayed, has granted our
requests. This faith the gospel teaches. They which believe not this, deny
the faith of the Gospel.

And the same Granatensis, that he may the more deeply imprint and fasten
this love of God in our hearts: which is the very root of the assurance which
we have in our prayers, in another place let us mark how excellently he
commends and expresses this exceeding great love of God toward us. Can
there be any greater argument of the goodness of God wished or desired, then to
consider that a God of such infinite Majesty, Granat. de perfect. amor. dei
cap. 28.
who not for any need, but only of his own goodness, does stoop down and
humble himself so greatly, that as a steward and purueyour of birds, fishes
and worms, he prouides all things necessary for their life. Neither being
content with this alone, he does humble himself so far, that he gives them
also pleasant things, wherewith they may delight themselves, stirring up in
them also certain motions of pleasures. That even as thou, O Lord, have not
only an essence or being; but also a most happy and blessed essence: so also
thou would have all thy creatures, be they never so vile and base, in their
kind, to participate of thee; and to enjoy both these, that they should have
both an essence, and also a most happy and joyful essence.

Who is not now amassed to see such a miracle, who hereby acknowledges not the
infinite kindness, nobility, and liberality of Gods heart, who shows himself
so loving and courteous to so vile creatures, which if a man meet withal, he
will make no account to trample under his feet? Which of us is it, that thinks
it concerns him any thing at all, whether a Fly or Pismire have food or not;
or whether she be merry or sad? Who therefore will not marvel that a God of
such great majesty; in comparison of whom, all the world is no bigger almost
then a little Pismire, not only to have special care of the lives of these
small vermin; but also of the delights and pleasures, wherewith every one of
these is delighted; when as he looks at the hands of these, neither for praise
nor thanks? O wonderful goodness! O inestimable sweetness! O my God how great
and incomprehensible are those things, which in the bosom of thy glory, thou
have reserved for thy faithful friends, when as thou have such a special care
of vile worms? How can I distrust of thy providence and mercy toward men,
whom thou have bought with thy precious blood, when as that is not wanting even
to the beasts of the field? Thus far Granatensis. This only consideration
should make us pray to God alone.

Chap. 29.
And after of the prayers of the faithful, he writes thus: What shall I say, O
Lord, of thy readiness in hearing the prayers of the just; what of thy speedines
in fulfilling their desires? how often do thou promise us this in thy holy
scriptures, that thou might take away our infidelity and distress? In a
certain place thou say, which of you asks bread of his father, and will he
give him a stone? our asks fish, and will he for fish give him a serpent? or
if he ask an egg, will he reach him a Scorpion? If ye therefore when as ye
are evil, know to give good things to your children: how much more shall your
heavenly father from heaven give his holy spirit to them which ask him. And in
another place: Ask and it shall be given to you: seek and ye shall find,
knock and it shall be opened unto you. But the words of our Lord which are in
S. John's Gospel, do declare the same much more manifestly: by which it is
manifest, that God has at once opened to his friends all the gates of his
mercy, when as he says, If you abide in me and my words abide in you, ask
whatsoever ye will, and it shall be done unto you. Could the heart of man (if a
wish were given him to wish whatsoever he would) have wished a more large or
greater benefit? when as in these words he has leave given him, to ask
whatsoever he will. And he gives his word also that whatsoever he asks, he
shall obtain.

These are the promises of the Gospel: from which they also disagree not which
are found every where amongst the Prophets. The Psalmist says in a certain
place, he will do the will of them that fear him, and he will hear their
prayer, and will save them. And in another place: The eyes of the Lord are upon
the just, and his ears are open unto their prayers. And in another place, he
says: He has regarded the prayer of the humble, and has not despised their
petition. Esaias also sings the same song to us. For after he had showed with
what good works, God is especially served, by and by he adds the reward that
shall be given to them that serve him, saying: Then he shall call, and the Lord
shall hear him: he shall cry, and the Lord shall say: Behold, here am I. And as
though this were but a small thing; thou thy self O Lord, addest a far
greater, and more bountiful promise in the same Prophet, saying: And it shall
come to pass, that before they shall call I will answer, and while they yet
speak, I will hear. He must needs be very hard hearted and stark blind, who
is not moved with such words and promises, that he may consider and perceive
the great mercy and goodness, which thou use toward thy servants. And who
would not willingly suffer any thing that he might be accounted in the number
of them, etc. To make intercessors to God, what is it, but to doubt of these
promises, both of the Prophets and of the Gospel? then to doubt of this
readiness of God, which Granatensis here teaches to hear our prayers? If
this be true, we need no intercessors.

Cap. 33.
And after, Great is the love wherewith fathers love their children, and yet
the fathers tender heart will not suffer that the son that has married
against his will, or has done any such like fault should once come into his
sight. But yet the tender mercy of this our heavenly father, although a man
have done unto him, all the injuries that can be devised, if he return to him
with all his heart, does not despise him, but receives him as he did the
prodigal son, forgiving all his trespasses and faults. The prophet knew this
when as he said: O Lord thou art our father, Abraham is ignorant of us, and
Israel knows us not: but thou O Lord art our father, and our redeemer, and thy
name is from everlasting. This thy love O Lord springs of thy goodness: from
which proceed two most profitable streams, that is, thy mercy, and thy love:
the one that our infirmities might be cured; and the other, that thy good
things might be imparted to us. If therefore this thy fountain be infinite;
what shall the flood of love be, that proceeds from it? Therefore I neither
fear, nor am afraid, nor distrust: although I acknowledge my self to be a
sinner, and so unworthy to be beloved. For how froward soever I am, he that
loves me is good; and so good, that he will not reject sinners: yea he calls them
unto him, he receives them and eats with them. To all these tokens and works
of thy love, another is added: O Lord, because thou art love it self, thy
Evangelist witnesses this, when as he says: God is charity, and he that
dwells in charity, dwells in God, and God in him. O truly sweet and
wonderful thing! to have such a God who is altogether love, and whose nature
is charity, etc. Such a faith should all Christians have of God, and such a
confidence in him. And this faith the Gospel teaches. And what needs then any
intercessors to so loving a God and merciful a father?

Cap. 28.
And again he writes thus: The greatness of thy goodness (besides all these)
thy mercy does most of all testify, which thou use toward sinners, bearing
with them with so great kindness; looking for them with such great patience;
yea being offended of them, yet calling them to grace and pardon; and being
iniuried by them, even drawing them to reconciliation. Nay to conclude,
offering them satisfactions, and opening to them the rich treasures of thy
merits. How easily art thou found of them, how soon do thou hear them, how
merciful art thou in receiving them, how liberal in pardoning them? I am
greatly amazed, O Lord, when I remember the mercy which thou use toward
Manasses that king of Judah; to whom after his strange idolatry; after the
blood of thy Saints shed so plenteously; after so great and horrible
iniquities: when as he asked pardon of thee, thou did not only forgive him
all his sins, but also did deliver him from most cruel bondage, and did
restore him again to his kingdom: not denying salvation to him, by whose
wickedness so many souls had perished, and for whose heinous acts, that noble
City of Jerusalem, with that most famous and holy temple was overthrown and
become desolate. Thus far Granatensis. And this is to declare the name of
God: John 27.26.
I have declared thy name (says our Savior) and will declare it: that the
love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them and I in them. This is to
declare the name of God: how merciful, how kind, how loving God is: how
ready he is to hear sinners and willing to pardon them. For otherwise God
has no proper name, that Christ declared unto us. And this every Christian is
bound to do. And hereof depends a great reward; that God will love such
preachers and declarers of his name: that is, of his mercy and goodness, even
with the same love, that he loved Jesus Christ. And here then let all
Christians take heed, how that they do derogate any thing from this name.

Titilman a Papist in his exposition of S. John's Gospel, expounds this place
thus: These places of Granatensis I have rehearsed thus at large both for the
excellency of the matter contained in them, and also to declare how resolute
he is in this matter. The same Granatensis, as in his whole book of devotion
he does highly commend prayer, and would that no other business or study
whatsoever should hinder that, affirming prayer to a Christian to be like
Sampsons hair; which when it was cut away, he was no stronger then another
man: even so (says he) the strength of a Christian consists in his prayer.
Take that away from him; and he shall be of no strength at all. So he declares
most excellently how we should pray. De deuot. li. 3. cap. 42.
Christians (says he) that pray are in this place to be admonished, that
making their prayers they do that, with as great devotion and marking, as lies
in their power. For hereof depends all the force and fruit of prayer: for in
Gods ears, as Bernard witnesses, an earnest desire is a great crying; and a
cold or slothful mind and intention, is a low voice: for his ears are open
rather to the voice of the heart, then to the voice of the body. By this it may
be plainly perceived, how barren and fruitless the prayers of some men are, as
well clergy as laymen, which with such haste and speed run over their
devotions and Psalms, that they seem not at all to talk with God. For they
would not deal so negligently and carelessly with man, if they had any thing
that they would earnestly obtain at his hands. For as Solomon testifies. The
poor man beseeches, but the rich man speaks roughly. For he that feels his
own want and misery, and couets earnestly to be relieved in these, as he
desires this from the bottom of his heart; so he prays with all his heart, and
with as great earnestness as he can, saying with the Prophet: I have cried
with my whole heart, hear me, O Lord. I would to God men would understand and
remember when they pray, with whom they speak, and about what businesses they
speak. For if they knew that they talked with that same great majesty, at
whose presence the Angels do tremble, and that they make suite unto him,
concerning that weighty matter, that is, the forgiveness of their sins, and
the salvation of their souls: then they would open their eyes, and they would
perceive what an unseemly, nay what an unreasonable thing it were, that they
should speak to such a Lord of so weighty matters, so negligently; yea to
talk with him so, as they would not talk with their servant, if they would
have him do any thing.

Saint Bernard reprooues them covertly when he says, I say this (to be brief)
that some find in their prayers when they pray, a certain lumpishnesse and
dullness of the mind, that praying only with their lips, they neither mark
well what they speak, nor with whom they speak; because they come to prayer
as it were of custom, Ber. in Epist.
with small reverence or care. Therefore as it behooves us to be watchful in
all our actions; so especially in our prayers: For although ( as the same
Bernard says) the eyes of the Lord do behold us at all times, and in all
places, but especially in our prayers. For although we be seen ever, but then
we present our selves before the majesty of God, and do talk with him as it
were face to face. And in another place he says: It is dangerous if thy
prayer be fearful, without faith; more dangerous if it be rash, without
reverence; but the third and most dangerous, if it be key cold as we say, and
come not from a lively affection. For a fearful prayer cannot pearce the
heavens, because over great fear restraines the mind, that the prayer cannot
ascend, nay not come out. A key cold or faint prayer vanishes away and
perishes, when it should ascend, because it lacks force. A rash prayer
ascends truly, but it rebounds back again: for God resists it; neither does it
obtain grace, but deserves punishment. But that prayer which is faithful,
humble, and fervent shall, without all doubt, pearce into the heavens. And
therefore it is most certain, it cannot return empty. Thus far out of
Bernard.

Granatensis in this long discourse teaches, that all our prayers must be
fervent, with a feeling of the things we do want, which feeling engenders this
feruencie: and therefore must be made with our understandings. We must know
what we pray for; what a great matter we beg at God his hands; and that
(says he) will make us to be earnest suitors. Secondly, they must be devout, we
must remember to whom we speak, to the God of infinite majesty and power. And
with what fear and reverence should we poor wretches come before such a God?
What reverence will we use when we come before any mortal Prince: And shall
we not use much more, when we appear before the immortal God?

Stella also of Prayer writes thus upon these words: Knock, Stella in ca. 11.
Luc.
and it shall be opened unto you. God will have nothing idle in us, but he will
have us ask, seek, and knock, with our mouth, with our heart, and with our
hands. For even as a singer changes his voice, according to the notes: so he
that prays must feel diverse effects in himself: first devising in his heart
that which he thinks; so that he first begin to feel before he think: and so
he shall present mysteries to the majesty of God, rather by works then words,
even as Simon Machabeus placed in the City, which he had conquered, men that
did the law and were skillful in it: so thou must be wise and diligent, and thy
soul must be endewed with such wisdom that it may do in deed that thing
which it thinks, so that thy heart and thy tongue may both say the same thing
together: for otherwise it would smally advantage thee to praise God, with thy
mouth, and to have thy heart distracted about many other things. For thou
shall be like those, of whom the Lord speaks. This people honors me with
their lips, but their heart is far from me. And a little before Stella thus
distinguishes these three. These things (says he) may thus be distinguished,
that to ask, may respect the action of the mouth; to seek, the action of the
heart; and to knock, the action of the hands. So that by his judgment, our
mouth, our heart, and our hands, and words ought al to agree together. And as
after he teaches, we should lift up in our prayers pure hands, full of good
works, and with such hands we should knock: and then God assuredly would hear
us: and our hearts should also understand the meaning of our prayers. And after
he writes thus: Fourthly, when as he says, that we should ask of him: he
shows himself to be our help, and succor, that in all our necessities we
should fly unto him, Psalm. 45.11.
because he is our refuge and strength, a helper in troubles, which have
greatly assaulted us. When God took upon him our nature, he became all things
unto us that were necessary for us, that he might relieve the necessities of
men. If Paul became all things to all men, how far more better Christ. What I
pray thee do thou stand need of which Christ has not to relieve thy
necessity? If thou shall say, I stand need of life; he by and by answers,
I am life: if thou shall say, I stand need of truth; he says, I am truth: If
thou lack both the eyes of body and soul, which are twice precious eyes, and
can be bought neither for money nor gold; he is such a shining and bright
light, that it is said, no man can attain unto it. But if thou lack wit,
which is the most miserable thing of all and most to be lamented, he will by
and by offer himself and say, I will give thee understanding: To conclude, if
thou lack the service of bread and wine, he will be present with thee saying,
I am the bread of life, I am the true vine. So that in all things and for all
things, Stella would have us have recourse to Jesus Christ.

Basil of common prayers in his time writes thus: I beseech you of what kind
are our prayers: Ser. 3. in diuit. auaros.
how do we pray? All men, except a few, are abroad about their merchandises:
And their wives as their servants wait upon Mammon at home. A few are left to
pray with me, and they soon weary and negligent, and tossing themselves
hither and thither, and marking when he that sings the Psalms, will end the
verses, that they may be let go from the Church as from some bonds or from
some prison. It seems by this that the people understood the Psalms which
were sung.

And after, The innocent infants, who feel not our grief and misery (speaking
of a great dearth by means of a great drought which they then endured) come to
Church to make a confession; and they are no cause of these our miseries;
neither can they deliver us from them, when as they have no knowledge nor
ability of praying to God. Thou come and show thy self: thou (I say) who art
laden with sins, fall down on the ground, cry and sigh etc. Here we note
again, the manner of their common prayers, that they made a common confession.
And again, that children could not pray because they lacked understanding.

Augustine, of the common prayers now in Christ's Church, August. de mirab.
scriptur. lib. 1. ca. 9.
writes thus: Also after this division of tongues by Gods appointment it came
to pass; that the mystery of the holy scriptures til the fulness of time,
should be kept in the proper language of one people chosen out of many; until
the time appointed, when as he would make manifest unto all nations the
mystery of his divine pleasure, he sent down from above the holy Ghost,
bringing with him that knowledge of all languages, having also before ordained
preachers of that his heavenly will and pleasure. The which spirit before had
sung the great and mighty works of God, till that time, but in one language;
but now as it were to consecrate and make holy all languages, at his first
coming preached by the Apostles (in all languages) so they, which as it were
to confirm this matter, God had gathered together in Jerusalem at that time
out of all nations, said: We have heard them speak in our own tongues the
mighty works of God. Thus far Austen: Before Christ the holy Ghost sang the
praises of God in one tongue; but since his coming in all tongues: All
languages are sanctified.

Michael ab Isselt describing the estate of the primitive Church writes this of
prayer: In times past (says he) there was great zeal of prayer in the Church:
in so much that no hour passed without the praises of God, without prayers,
without thanksgiving. In this one thing they were occupied day and night. Saint
Jerome says that ever after prayer they gave themselves to reading, and after
reading again to prayer; whithersoeuer one went he should hear the plowman
holding his plough, singing Alleluiah. And the sweating shearer comforted
himself with Psalms, and the vinedresser pruning his vine with his sharp
hook did sing some of David's Psalms. The mariner at his stern, the waterman
at his oar, the digger among his clods, the shomaker in making his shoes, the
weauer at his loome, the fisher among his nets, every one of these obtained
good success, increase and Gods blessing to his works by prayer. The wife
sitting at her rock, the boy playing with his ball, the servant sent about his
masters business, all these commit themselves and their health to God by
prayers. All these like Bees, says Epiphanius, having in their hands the wax
of their work, but in their mouth drops of honey, when as with their own
singing voices they did praise the Lord of all things, and did pray unto him.
Thus far Michael ab Isselt. This was the estate of the Primitive Church. Thus
they occupied themselves, now with reading, now with praying, but in all these
with understanding; quite contrary to the ignorance, which of late reigned in
the popish Church. And of such prayers may most truly be verified that which
the same author adds after: what shall I (says he) make many words? By
prayer, we may do all things: and without prayer we can do nothing. It is the
general instrument or tool of Christians, without which they can work
nothing. For even as a soldier without his sword, or a scriuener without his
pen, or a smith without his tools: so is a Christian without prayer. What
marvel is it if devils which never before have been heard of, have now
invaded all sorts of men? The cause is, that now prayer amongst all is
perished.

In 4. cap. Act.
Ferus of prayer writes thus: These things are required to an effectual prayer:
first that thou believe that which God has promised: Faith in the word and
promise of God. Secondly, that with an ardent and earnest affection, thou do
offer something to God, which thou couetest to obtain. Thus far Ferus. So
that then we must know what we pray for.

Ferus of the invocation of the name of Jesus in our prayers, writes thus. In
5. cap. Act.
It proves (says he) the divinity and power of Christ, that the invocation of
his name performs that which we request. Peter healed the lame man, not with
any superstitions: but by calling on the name of the Lord Jesus. So use
corporal medicines, that the chief hope may be in humble prayer. Thus far
Ferus. They diminish the virtue of Christ's name and derogate from his deity,
by his judgment, that use other names in their prayers. It is superstition to
call upon others.

Iacobus de Valentia a Papist, of the name of Jesus writes thus upon these
words, O God save me in thy name: In psalm. 53.
But here (says he) a doubt may arise, because this name Jesus seems not to
be the name of the father, but of Christ his son: How therefore does the
son say to the father, O God in thy name save me? It should seem that he
should have said: In my name. To this it may be answered, that the name Jesus
belongs principally to the father, and was given and communicated to Christ
himself of his father. For whatsoever Christ has, he has it of the father:
wherefore this name Jesus is the name Adonai and Tetragrammaton, as we have said
in the prologue of the Psalms, and in the 7. psalm: which is as much to say,
as to be omnipotent, salvation and to be perfect. And that this name does
properly belong to God: therefore it is communicated and given of the father to
his son: as the Apostle says of the Philippians: He has given him a name,
which is above all names, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow,
etc. Therefore not only we do ask of the Father by this name Jesus in all our
prayers: but also Christ himself, as he is man, asks in the virtue of this
name, bestowed on him of the father: Because this name contains in it all
virtue and omnipotency, and an infinite sea of merits. Therefore Christ says
to his father, O God my father save me in thy name Jesus, which name thou have
imparted and bestowed upon me: and deliver me and my members by thy virtue, and
omnipotency, which is contained under this name Jesus. For there is no other
name, in the which the world must be saved, but in this thy name. Thus far
Iacobus de Valentia: Where he excellently describes the dignity of the name
of Jesus. It is the name of God himself: in the virtue of this name Christ
himself prayed: it is a sea of infinite merits: and shall we then use any
other? Shall we doubt whether this name alone will serve our turn or not?

Ludouicus Viues of the Lords prayer writes thus: Praefat. ora^, dom.
As of our religion, so also of our prayer which is a chief part of our
religion, he may be the author and master, who knows perfectly both the
divine nature, and our nature; who understands what is profitable for man, and
also what God requires of us, both worthy of God, and him also that asks. And
also with what words, not so much fit for God (for he knows the meaning and
force of all words) as for the mind of him that speaks, that he may not be
ignorant, how he ought to think of God. And of this his understanding the love
of God may spring in him and be confirmed.

And after, There is no prayer which ought so diligently and attentively to be
said and meditated upon of us, as this (meaning the Lords prayer) every part
of it, nay every word, every letter, every prick of it are to be weighed of
us. He would have this prayer especially of all to be understood: and not to
be said in Latin, as they used in Popery.

16. Of Auricular confession.
De Baptis. ad Io.
CYprian writes thus of that place in the 20. of John: Whose sins ye remit,
etc. It is manifest, where and by whom remission of sins may be given, which
is given in baptism: for the Lord gave first that power to Peter, upon whom
he built his Church, and from whom he ordained and showed the original of
humanity, that that should be loosed on earth, that he had loosed. And after
his resurrection he speaks also to his Apostles saying: As my father sent me,
so send I you: when he had said thus, He breathed upon them and said to them:
receive ye the holy Ghost; whose sins yet forgive, they are forgiven to him;
whose ye retain, they are retained. Whereby we perceive, that it is lawful
in the Church for the governors thereof, and those that are appointed by the
law of the Gospel and the Lords ordinance, to baptize, and to give remission
of sins: and that without, neither any thing can be bound or loosed, seeing
there is no body that can bind or loose any thing. Neither do we set down
this (O brother) without the authority of the scriptures. So that we said,
that all things are set in order, by a certain law, and by his own
appointment. Neither that any man may take upon him any thing, against the
Bishops and priests, which is not in his right and power. For Chore, Dathan and
Abiram, against Moses and Aaron took upon them authority to sacrifice;
neither did they that without punishment, which they attempted unlawfully.

Here we may learn first, that the fathers works either thorough malice or
ignorance, have been corrupted: for what sense should this have (for God first
gave this power to Peter, from whom he showed and ordained the original of
humanity) no doubt it should be of unanimity or unity: as appears by the
other place of his book of the simplicity of prelates. So we may see, how
that old cousoner Satan has not kept back his fingers, from the fathers
works: he has been doing with them. And therefore, who dare safely build his
faith upon them. Secondly, that the Church was built upon Peter, to declare the
unity that should be amongst all pastors; not to declare any superiority of
Peter in power, or authority of binding or loosing above the rest; for there
hereafter he adds: That all the rest received like power with him of binding
and loosing. And that the heretics rebelling in the Church, and breaking the
unity thereof, do not rebel against any one, but against the Bishops and
priests; even as Chore, Dathan, and Abiram did against Moses and Aaron. And
lastly, he expounds plainly where this power of binding and loosing is
executed, which he affirms to be in Baptism, and not in auricular
confession, as our late divines of Rome teach, who attributes the very
strength, and power, and force of that place to auricular confession, and to
their priests, then either forgiving or detaining sins.

Cyrill also, as has been alleged before, agrees herein with Cyprian, and
expounds this authority of forgiving sins which the ministers have to be
executed in baptism or in repentance of notorious sinners. Austen also
expounds that place of S. Matthews Gospel: Aug. Tract. in Ioh. 123.
To thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, thus: that Peter when
this was said unto him, signified the whole Church. And of Christ's coat which
was without seame he writes thus: Tract. in Ioh. 118.
The coat without seame least at any time it should be ripped in sunder, came
unto one; because he gathers all into one: even as amongst his Apostles, when
as the number was twelve, that is, three times four, and they were all asked:
Only Peter answered: Thou art Christ the son of the living God. And it was
said to him: To thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, as though
he alone had received power of binding and loosing, when as he being but one,
answered that for all, and received this withal, as a figure of unity:
therefore one for all, because unity is to them all. And therefore this when
he had said: wrought about, he adds through out: the which if we refer to
that which it signifies, no man lackes it, who is found to pertain to the
whole, from which whole, as the Greek tongue shows, the Catholic church is
called. This is Austens judgment, that Peter answered for all; and received
like authority for all.

But M. Bellarmine says: There was no cause, why Christ should so particularly
say to Peter, To thee I will give the keys: and feed my sheep; and that for
his singular faith and love; if he should receive nothing besides the rest. He
plainly dissents from Austen; and so their new Catholic faith from the old:
Austen and Cyprian affirm that this speech of our Savior was to him alone, to
declare the unity he would have amongst all his ministers: and in this he made
him a mirror and not a master. Cyrill in Io. cap. 64.
And Cyrill says, by his threefold commission he comforted him again, for his
threefold denying: this he gained by it.

Franciscus de Euia a Papist, of auricular confession writes thus: Direct.
confess.
I counsel thee also (dear brother) if thou will confess thy sins often,
that thou get thee a proper confessor, and such a one as is well experienced in
that matter, a wise man, and of a good and commendable life: to whom thou
may safely commit thy conscience; and to have now even in the steed of the
Lord God, to whom thou may surely reveal all thy secrets both inward and
outward, and all thy sins. Herein he plainly discouers the corruptions of
their Church. Should a sheep go from his shepherd? This is an absurd thing.
But such has been their doctrine and practice, that the pastors of
congregations need not preach themselves, but friars in their rooms: and
thereby were all their Frieries maintained: and that the sheep may go from
their pastors to seek some other, to reveal their sins unto. 1. Pet. 5.1.
Whereas S. Peter exhorts all elders and pastors to feed their flocks
themselves; and our blessed Savior enioines this thing to Peter, Ier. 23.2.4.
Ezec. 34.16.
as his principal duty: to feed his flock. The true shepherd is to bind
up the wounds of his flock, and to heal them himself: He that does not so
is that idol shepherd, Zach. 11.16.
whereof Zachary prophesies; He shall not look for the thing that is lost,
nor seek the tender lambs, nor heal that which is hurt, nor feed that that
stands; but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and shall tear their hoofes
and claws in pieces. And have not the shepherds in popery done thus? Psalm.
119.105.
whereof many of them never preached. Is not the word of God the lantern and
candle in Gods house to lighten our paths, and wherewith also to seek that
which is lost, Luke. 15.8.
which candle that wise woman which was a figure of Christ's Church lighted, and
therewith sought for her lost groat; which the foolish woman the Popes Church,
has quite put out and hidden under a bushel. Matt. 5.15.


Is it not the leaves of that tree of life Jesus Christ, which serve to heal
the nations: Reu. 22.2.
as Saint John shows us in the Revelation? Are not the scriptures those
fruitful trees also, whereof Ezechiel prophecieth, that by the river of Gods
spirit (which is our only comforter in this life, as our Savior does teach us)
do grow on the brinke thereof, on this side and on that side, whose leaf shall
not fade, neither shall the fruit thereof fail, and it shall bring forth new
fruit according to his months, because their waters run out of the sanctuary,
and the fruit thereof shall be meat, and the leaves thereof shall be for
medicine. Is not here a lively description of Gods spirit, and of the
scriptures? The one is a well, a stream springing into everlasting life: a
comforter, that only like water comforts in all the heats and broils of this
life: as our savior teaches. And the other as trees, that grow on the brinke
of this heavenly river (The word of God and his spirit are never separated)
which ever have their leaves and fruit; no winter can make their fruit fade,
nor frost cause their leaves fall: Nay, because they are watered from the
sanctuary they do not only like other trees bring forth still ye same fruits,
but new fruits every month. And their fruits are meat, and their leaves
medicines. If this be true, then the papists, in whose coasts in times past
these fruitful trees were not seen growing and flourishing, lacked also that
heavenly and comfortable river, that proceeded out of the sanctuary. They had
in those days worldly comfortes enough, like to that rich man; but they
lacked the comfort of Gods spirit, and their souls were famished for the want
of these trees, whose fruits are the only food of souls. And their sins
and wounds of their souls were putrified and festered, for lack of these
leaves to heal them: which are the only plasters for spiritual sores; as
the prophet Ezechiel and Saint John do plainly teach. If we will live we must
apply these leaves to our hearts, as the preacher does teach us. It is better
(says he) to go into the house of mourning then of feasting because this is
the end of all men. Eccl. 7.4.
And the living will lay it to his heart. And Abacucke says, that the just
shall live by faith. Abacuck. 2.4.
And Saint Paul, that faith comes by hearing the word of God. Therefore what
life could be in that Church, where Gods word was seldom, or never taught? It
is written of the blessed virgin Marie, Luke 2.19.51.
that she laid up her sons words, Jesus Christ's words, and the words of the
shepherds in her heart: So must all good women that mind to be blessed, that
love the blessed virgin, follow likewise these her holy steps, and lay up
Jesus Christ's words, and their pastors words in their hearts, and the words of
no others. They must not seek strangers to confess their sins, and to lay
open their sores unto, as the popish Church teaches.

Nay even now when as these trees begin again to flourish in the world, many
are not thankful to God for such a great blessing, that now has made these
wholesome and fruitful trees to spring again in their coasts; but do find
fault with them and do despise them. They will have nothing but old fruit:
They can abide no new fruit. But here they must learn, that these trees bring
forth new fruits every month. They must not be so wedded to antiquity, as to
contemn and condemn all nouelty: but rather let them mark well what every
thing is: Let them say, if it be a fruit of the tree of life, if it have a
root and ground in the scriptures: 1. These. 5.21. 1. Io. 4.1.
I will receive it most thankfully, and joyfully. Let every one of us, Try
all things, and keep that which is good: as Saint Paul counsels us: and
examine the spirits whether they be of God or no, as S. John also commands:
and not wilfully shut our eyes, or straight way cast it out of our hands (we
will none of it) because it seems new. Let us remember how that these fruitful
trees of the Lord, which are watered with the water that comes out of the
sanctuary, bring forth new fruits every month. They diminish the dignity of
these trees, and are enemies to their own health; nay to their own only true
and greatest joy and pleasures, that they can have in this world, that believe
not this, and will not taste of these new and most pleasant fruits.

And here also we must mark another singular smacke, or relish, and another
special commendation or privilege, which these fruits, which the word of God
has, beyond all other fruits and writings of men whosoever. Psalm. 12.6.
The words of the Lord (says David) are pure words, as silver, purified to the
Lord of the whole earth, and fined seven times. And no silver else whatsoever,
nay all the gold of man, yea of the fathers whosoever, is but dross to this
silver. And so must all Christians account of the fathers: and yet I cannot tell
how it comes to pass, that in many men's mouths, the writings of the fathers
have a better relish, and pleasanter taste, then the word of God. But let all
men here learn, that even the gold of the fathers, even the purest doctrine
they teach, is impure in comparison of the doctrines of the scriptures. They
have only this commendation, that they are silver purified seven times to the
Lord of the whole earth. And in the repairing of the Church of Christ, which
now in our days is in hand, which Antichrist had defaced; Re. 11.1 2.3.4
Saint John in the Revelation borrowes this testimony of David: where after he
had declared how much of Gods house should be repaired again, and how far
the builders should proceed in that work, he adds, what testimonies God will
have, and what witnesses in his Temple, what trees in this his new Paradise,
and what candles in his house. Exodus 25.31.
The old Tabernacle had but one Candlestick in it with seven branches, to
lighten it; 2. Pe. 2.5. Heb. 3.5.
and the old world but one Noah, to testify to them the will of God; and the
house of Israel but one Moses, as a servant; to testify those things which
should be spoken after. As our Savior also told the Jews: Do not you think
that I will accuse you to my father: Io. 5.45.
there is one that accuses you even Moses, in whom you trust. But in the
Church of Christ, shall be two witnesses. The Law and the Gospel. Besides this
former testimony of Moses: The gospel also shall be preached to all nations
for a testimony, Mat. 24 14. Mat. 18.16.
(says our Savior) and then shall the end come. Out of the mouth of two or
three witnesses shall every word or matter be confirmed: Before his judgment
God will have his truth firmly ratified to the world. And therefore of these
two witnesses, and of these two testaments of the Law and of the Gospel, in
our days in the repairing again of the Temple which was profaned and defaced
by Antichrist, Saint John says, These are two Olive trees, and two
Candlestickes, standing before the God of the earth: Alluding, no doubt, to
David here in the Psalm. The word of the Lord is purified to the Lord of the
earth: and these Olives and Candlesticks stood before the Lord of the earth. As
though the word of God and these Olives and Candlesticks were all one. The word
of God the two testaments, are the Lords two Olives, able not only to
sustain: Psalm. 104.15.
but to cheer and make merry all Gods household servants. They are also the
Lords two great lights, like the Sun and the Moon, which are sufficient also
to lighten his whole house, in all obscure and dark points of Religion, and to
show us the perfect and ready way to heaven. Now let all his faithful
servants have an eye only to these.

De Mirah. scrip. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Let us mark what authority saint Austen himself yielded to the fathers and
expositers of the holy scriptures, which were before him, who speaking of the
doors of heaven which were opened, and of the fountains of the deep at Noah
his flood, writes thus: We cannot (says he) for the slendernes of our wit, and
knowledge, unfold the hardness of this matter, with a grounded or ratified
opinion that that is truth which we teach; notwithstanding we will without any
partiality show what in these matters the studies of our former masters could
find out, in their diverse opinions, yielding no more authority to one then to
another, of whose judgments, and of whose particular choises, we give every
man leave to allow or disallow at his pleasure. This opinion Saint Austen had
of the opinions and judgments of those, which before him expounded the holy
scriptures, whom he calls Masters: he himself was bound to none of them, nor no
more would he have any other. And so no doubt by this his own example, he
has taught all men what opinion (if they will not be wilful) every one should
have of his writings and expositions. So that then in the time of popery, the
shepherds the pastors of congregations, in not giving this meat unto their
flocks, in not healing their wounds and sores, with the leaves of these trees,
in not preaching the word of God, they have declared themselves not be Christ's
shepherds; Io. 10.10.
but to be Antichrists hirelings. Nay to make this matter more plain: They
have not only not fed them, but torn in pieces their hoofes, as Zachary
prophecieth: wounding their consciences and weakneng their faithes, in teaching
that unless they sang masses for them after their deaths, their faith in
Christ did not profit them: And that they were damned if they brake one of the
least of their ceremonies, and traditions. Is not this quite to tear in pieces
the very hoofes and claws of the poor silly lambs? whereby they began now
to go and to lay hold on Christ.

Secondly, this same Author says: That now one having gotten such a faithful
and holy confessor, let him account of him even as of God himself, and reveal
to him boldly all his secret sins and all the secrets of his heart. And is not
this plainly to say that the Pope is Antichrist? He shall sit in the Church
showing himself as God, says saint Paul. And does not he here confess the
same? What is it else to be God? Psalm. 7.9. Ier. 11.20.20.12. Reu. 2.23.
but to search the hearts and raines, as the scriptures often teach. This thing
they attribute to God only. And yet the Pope and his clergy arrogate it to
themselves. And is not this to sit in the Church as God? Saint Paul writes to
the ministers of the Church of Corinth, that they should judge nothing before
the time, 1. Cor. 3.5.
until the Lord come, who shall lighten things that are hid in darkness,
and make the counsels and secrets of the hearts manifest, 1. Ti. 5.24.
and then shall every man have praise of God. And to Timothy. Some men's
sins are open before hand, and go before unto judgment; but some men's
follow after. But the papists by this their doctrine contrary to saint Paul's
doctrine in both these places, do make their confessors to take upon them that
knowledge of secrets which belongs to God, and that no sins are to be
reserved unto the day of judgment. Their confessors (if men will not be
damned) (as they teach) must know them before.

This author here himself confesses: that to know the secrets of the heart
belongs only to God. And that therefore every one is to account of his
confessor even as of God himself. And is not this plainly to affirm, that the
Pope shall sit in the Church as God? Let us never look that any other shall
ever come into the Church, and challenge or take upon him more of the divine
Authority then this.

And therefore let us acknowledge that this prophecy of saint Paul is already
fulfilled in him. And that the Pope and his clergy sit now in the Church of
God.

17. Of Purgatory.
Psa. 40.1.
FIrst concerning Purgatory: that vehement and comfortable Sermon which God
commaundes Esaias, and in him all ministers, to preach to his Church, is as it
were a double cannon to beat down the paper walls of Purgatory, Comfort,
comfort my people (says the Lord your God) speak to the heart of Jerusalem
and cry unto her, that her warfare is now at an end, and that her iniquity
now has obtained pardon. For she has received at the Lords hands double for
all her sins. This is a sermon of comfort: and this must be preached to the
heart of Jerusalem, and of all Gods Church, and cried out in their ears, that
their warfare now is finished, that is no doubt, when they shall end this
life. For as Job teaches us and saint Paul: Job. 7.2. Ephesians. 6.10.
Our life here is a warfare. And saint Paul not only says so, but gives
every Christian the armor that belongs to it. Verse. 13.
Now when this warfare is ended, Gods ministers are to preach to his people,
that then their sin has obtained pardon: Nirtse as it is in the Hebrew, that
is, is made now well pleasing to God, and that they have now in this their
warfare, In this life received double punishment, that is, sufficient for all
their sins. And therefore they need fear no punishment hereafter. And this is
that lesson which Peter also teaches all Christians: God our most loving
father, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ according to his abundant mercy,
1. Pet. 1.3.
has begotten us again unto a lively hope of an inheritance, immortal,
undefiled, that withers not, reserved for us in heaven, etc. wherein we
rejoice; though now for a season (if need require) we are in heaviness through
manifold temptations. Peter herein agrees with Esaias, that in this life (if need
be) we receive sufficient punishment for our sins. This is Ierusalems comfort
at her very heart. And this is also that which saint Paul says: But when we
are judged, 1. Cor. 11.32
we are corrected of the Lord, because that we should not be condemned with the
world. God judges his saints in this life, because he will not condemn nor
punish them in the life to come. And the same lesson saint Paul teaches in
another place: My son despise not ((...), Heb. 12 5.
as it is in the Greek) make no light account of the correction of the Lord,
but account it as a most precious ie well. For whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth, and he scourges every son which he receives. And he after
speaks very manifestly of the afflictions of this life: as these words
import: Verse, 12.
Wherefore lift up your hands which hang down, and your weak knees. And Saint
Peter likewise: Now is the time that judgment shall begin at the house of God:
1. Pet. 4.17.
Whereas S. Paul said before, that God in this life scourged all his sons, S.
Peter to the same effect says, that judgment now begins at Gods house. The
one names the inhabitants, and the other the house. And S. Peter also to the
great comfort of all Gods children, seems to aim at the continuance of this
correction: and he calls it (...), which is an opportunity, or a very short
time, and not (...), which may signify some longer space of time. 2. Cor.
4.15.
And S. Paul himself also in effect says the same in another place, calling
the continuance of our afflictions momentaneam leuitatem, a small light trifle
in comparison of the joy that hereafter we shall receive: and that which
endures but for a minute of an hour.

Of purgatory Jerome writes thus: In 2. cap. Mat.
He shall purge or melt the sons of Leui, that is, their understandings and
words. So truly the words and judgments of all pastors stand need of this
Gods purifying: his gold only is most pure, purified seven times in the
furnace. Our gold how pure soever it seems to us, stands need of this melting
and purifying. And hereupon Jerome adds of all Christians: That they shall
reprove their wicked brethren, and they shall be to God as a precious jewel,
for he shall spare them in that terrible day, which he shall make: because
every man is under sin. Jerome will have this melting, and this judgment to
be in this life, alleging that saying of Peter, now the time is, that the
judgment began at the house of God.

And of that place to the Corinthians he writes thus: In 6. ca, Esaiae.
And that stone which only the Septuag inta do translate a Carbuncle, may
signify, not a dead or burning coal, as some have expounded it: but a
Carbuncle stone which for the likeness it has to the color of fire, may be
called fiery: whereas we learn, that the altar of God, is full of Carbuncles,
that is of fiery stones and hot burning coals, purging sins; whereof we read
thus written of God: That coals were kindled of him: and of God himself it is
said, that he is a consuming fire: and our Savior says in the Gospel, I came
to send fire upon earth. And that he might baptize with the holy Ghost, and
with fire: for fire shall try every man's work what kind of one it is. And
he that shall be saved, shall so be saved, as though he had gone thorough the
fire. And this is to be marked, that even to Jeremy to whom it is said: before
I fashioned thee in the womb, I knew thee: and I sanctified thee in thy
mothers womb, because he had not unclean lips. But yet he said, I am a
child, I cannot speak. The Lord himself stretched out his hand and touched
my mouth and said: Behold, I have put my words into thy mouth: but to Esaias who
said; I am a man of unclean lips; and I dwell in the midst of a people that
has unclean lips, Gods hand was not retched; but Seraphim was sent of God,
or he did fly unto him of his own accord. Because he is appointed to his
service: and he has a stone in his hand, which after the Septuaginta and
Theodotion, he took with a nipper, but after Aquila and Symmachus which follow
the Hebrew, he took (Melachim) that is, with a pair of tongs, that therewith
he might touch his mouth, and might purge his old and accustomed sins. Here we
may plainly see, that either God himself with his own hand, or else Angels
with those carbuncles, according to the word of God do purge sins, and that
Jerome expoundes that place of the Corinthians of this heavenly fire, and not
of any infernal fire, purging sins. But that indifferent m^n shall endure
the fire of purgatory, seemed not to Jerome to be grounded manifestly upon
this place, who expounds it of a contrary fire.

In cap. 66. Es.
And in another place Jerome writes thus: God is called a consuming fire, that
he may consume in us whatsoever is hay, wood, or stubble and thorns: that is
cares of this world which the barren ground brought for good seed. Jerome here
affirms that God himself is the fire, that burns up all our chafe, stubble
and wood, and not any fire of purgatory. And that by the fire of his word and
his spirit he works these effects: For here he adds: for of this fire the
Lord speaks in the Gospel: I came to throw fire down upon the earth. And
after: This fire I supposed to have sitten upon the tongues of the Apostles and
all the faithful, when they spoke with diverse tongues, and drove away all
ignorance, and lightened the hearts of them that received the word of God.

And after most evidently he writes thus: If any man therefore have tares,
which may be burnt, which the envious man did sow whilst the householder
slept, these shall the fire burn, these shall be burnt; and in the eyes of all
the Saints, their punishments shall be made manifest, which in steed of gold,
silver, and precious stones, have built upon the foundation of the Lord, hay,
wood, stubble, food of that everlasting fire. And after: As of the devils and
all them that deny God and wicked men, which say in their hearts there is no
God; we believe their torments are everlasting fire: so also of sinners. Alas,
even of Christians, whose works are to be proved and tried with fire, we
think that there shall be a merciful sentence of the judge, mixed with
clemency. This fire and this purging, and this sentence; Jerome plainly
affirms, to be at the last day.

Also writing of that hard place of the Psalm; Pardon me before I go hence, he
writes thus: Lib. 18. in Es.
He truly which while he lives in this body, and has not obtained pardon for
his sins, and so shall depart out of this life, perishes to God, and cease
to be any more: although as concerning himself, he remain in punishments.

Of purgatory also Ierom in another place writes thus: Ier. Epist. 135. ad
Damas.
God will not punish twice the same fault: and he that has once received evils
in this life shall not suffer again ye same torments at his death, which he
has suffered in his life. But if need be, al Gods children are chastened in
this life, says S. Peter. Again, 1. Pet. 1.6. and 4.27.
now the time is, that judgment begins at the house of God. Therefore none of
Gods children shall be punished hereafter. If need be, they shall be punished
now. Ephesians. 4.5. Iam. 4.12.
And S. Peter seems to make but as there is one God, and one law, and one
lawgiuer: so also but one judgment concerning all the transgressions of this
law. And he affirms that it is begun already in Gods house among Gods
children, but it shall be perfited and consummated, at that great day of
judgment of all the wicked and damned. And in another place he writes thus:
Tract. 1.2 par. Epist. 3. ad Dar.
Do we therefore seek where this healthful burning shall be? No man doubts,
but in the holy Scriptures. By the reading whereof all the sins of men are
purged. These three purgatories Jerome seems to avouch unto us: the purgatory
of Gods word, the purgatory of afflictions, and the purging fire of the day
of judgment, which (according to the opinion then received of many in the
Church) he thought, should purge the Lords gold, without impairing it or
hurting it, from his dross, that it might shine the brighter. Although S.
Peter do refer this purging to the afflictions of this life. 1. Pet. 1.7.


Cyp. de mortalitate.
The common received opinion of the Church was in Cyprians days, that all
Christians departed were with the Lord, as at large he proves: first by a
vision: secondly by the scriptures. He writes thus: When as one of his
fellows, ministers, and priests, being now weary with sickness and afraid
of death approaching, desired deliverance from death, there stood by him thus
desiring and almost dying, a young man of majesty, of honor, to be
worshipped, of great dignity and glory, whom no mortal eye could almost
behold, but that he was able to see him, being now ready to die. But he not
without grief of mind and voice, groned out and said: Are you afraid to
suffer, will you not depart hence: what shall I do to you? Our brother being at
the point of death, heard what he should say to others: for he which heard it,
being now dying, heard it to this end, that he should show it to others: he
heard it not for himself, but for others, etc. And after he writes thus: To us
our selves, the least and basest of all others: how often has it bin reuolued,
how often and plainly by the grace of God commanded: that I should diligently
and humbly preach and protest, that our brethren are not to be lamented, that
by the Lords calling are delivered out of this world; when as I know that they
are not lost, but sent before; and departing from us, that they go before us.
And that as going a journey or sailing, we should long for them: we should not
lament them: neither that we should here wear mourning garments for them, when
as they there have taken white garments. And that we should not give occasion
to the Gentiles, that they may justly and rightly reprove us; that we should
lament those as extinct or perished, whom we affirm to be alive with the Lord,
and that we should reprove, with the testimony of our heart and minds, the
faith which we profess with our tongues and voice. We our selves sin against
our own hope and faith: all the things we say, seems but feigned, forged and
counterfaited: It avails nothing in words to tattle of virtue, and with
deeds to destroy the truth. S. Paul also reprooues, and chides, and blames
those, that are sorry for the departure of their friends. He affirms that
those are sorry for their friends departure which have no hope: but we which
live through hope, and believe in God, and believe that Christ suffered for us
and rose again: we believe that those that remain in Christ Jesus shall rise
again by him and in him. Why will not we our selves depart out of this world,
or why do we deplore and lament our friends departing, as though they were
perished? Our Lord Christ admonishing us and saying, I am the resurrection: he
that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. And all that lives
and believes in me, shall not die for ever. If we believe in Christ, let us
believe his words and promises, and we shall not die for ever: that we may come
to Christ joyfully, and without care; with whom we shall live and reign. That
in the mean time we die; by death, we pass to immortality: neither can
immortality succeed, unless we depart hence first. Death is not a going out
of the doors: but a passage from a worse place to a better. And an earthly
journey being ended, as an arrival to things eternal, who will not hasten to
obtain these things which are better? Who will not wish the sooner to be
changed and to be made like the form and shape of Christ, to come to the
dignity of eternal glory? as S. Paul preaches, our conversation is in
heaven, 3. Philipp. And that we shall be such as our Lord Christ promises,
when as he prays to his father for us, that we might be with him.

And that we may live with him in eternal dwellings, and may rejoice with him
in the heavenly kingdom: O father, those that thou have given me, I will that
where I am, they be with me; and that they may see my glory which thou have
given me before the world was made. He that is about to go to the dwelling
place of Christ, to the glory of his heavenly kingdom, ought not to weep or
lament, but ra^^^r according to the promise of the Lord, according to the faith
of truth in his passage and translation to rejoice.

Here we may plainly see, the faith and hope of all Christians at their deaths
in Cyprians days. They died joyfully without fear and care, in as much as
they were sure they went to God. This was the common received opinion of the
Catholic Church then. This doctrine Cyprian by revelation was commanded to
preach. The latter revelations which the Papists brag of, which teach a
doctrine contrary to this, it is likely they were not of God.

And after Cyprian writes thus: We must consider (beloved brethren) and often
think, that we have renounced this present world, and that we live here as
strangers and pilgrims, let us embrace that day which appoints every man to
his home, which taking us hence, and delivering us from the snares of this
world, restores us again to paradise and to the kingdom of heaven: who being
placed in a far country, will not make haste to return into his own
country? who making haste to sail to his friends, would not wish for a
prosperous wind, that he might sooner embrace his dearly beloved friends? We
account now Paradise for our country, we begin now to have the Patriarchs for
our parents: why do we not make haste and run, that we may see our country?
that we may salute our parents?

In 1. ad cor. c. 3.
Primasius also S. Austens scholar, upon that place of S. Paul writes thus: And
every man's work what it is the fire shall prove: If any man's work shall abide
that which he has builded upon; he shall receive a reward, that is (says he)
either the examination of the last judgment, or present affliction, which is
compared often to fire. He makes mention here of no fire of purgatory; which
if it had been the faith once given to the Saints, he would not have been
ignorant of, nor upon the exposition of this place here omitted it.

In cap. 9. Mat.
Iansenius of that place of S. Marks Gospel writes thus: The Lord said, that
the eye or hand offending, is to be cut off: but because that cannot be done
without pain, he adds, every one of Gods elect and chosen which will please
God, must be seasoned with the fire of afflictions.

And after, Because we have need of wisdom, circumspection, and discretion,
it is necessary that one may beware of offenses, that he never give any
offense or take any: he adds: And every offering must be seasoned with salt.
And after he concludes thus: As no oblation according to the prescription of
Moses is lawful, unless it pass through the fire and be seasoned with salt:
so whosoever will be a spiritual sacrifice, which is acceptable to God, it is
necessary, that he be purged and tried with the fire of tribulations, and as
it were preserved to salvation, and that he also be seasoned with the salt of
the wisdom of the Gospel, lest he be corrupted with the contagion of the
wicked, or by his own infection he infect and give offense to others: but that
rather by his soundness, he may take corruption from others. Here we may
learn how that Iansenius expounds that fire and falt whereof Saint Mark
speaks, of the doctrine of the Gospel, and of the fire of afflictions in
this life: and not of the fire of Purgatory: To which fire some other Papists
would wrest that place.

Petrus Berchorius writes thus: Where Christ buildes his Church, the sound of a
hammer or hatchet is not heard, Berch. moral. in 3. lib. Reg. ca. 4.
no punishment or grief is felt: because for a surety, the stones, that is,
the saints, which are the matter of the temple, are first in this world hewn
by tribulations and engraven and made square by virtues. Therefore when they
ascend thither they shall be troubled no more: but shall be placed in Gods
sanctuary in rest. This world by his judgment the quarrie that is the
forest: here all the stones and timber for Gods heavenly temples, are squared
and hewed: after this life, they are placed in the building, and they do rest.
Ferus also writes thus: Furthermore, therefore also faith is said to save,
because by it we are incorporate into Christ, and are made his members and one
body with him: In 3. ca. Io.
but Christ's body and members shall not be judged, neither can be judged or
damned, yea they shall judge others. No not into Purgatory: For is not
Purgatory a sentence or judgment?

Gregory also teaches the same that Berchorius has taught, Salomons temple
(says he) bare an image of this city, In Psalm. 4. penitent.
meaning the Church. In the building whereof with stones, there was not the
noise of a hammer heard without. For we, which shall remain in these holy
buildings, we are knocked as yet without doors by afflictions, that hereafter
we may be placed in the temple of the Lord, without any correction of
discipline. In as much as whatsoever is superfluous or crooked in us, is now by
hammering as it were, and knocking cut off. And then in that heavenly building
the only bond of truth shall couple us. Whatsoever says Gregory is
superfluous in us, or not squared or straight, is now in this world cut away
from us by tribulations, that we may be fit stones for the heavenly buildings,
and in them to remain for ever. What needs then that squaring and making fit
in purgatory? whereof Gregory seems to make mention in the third Psalm. 3.
Psalm. peniten.
Both these sentences cannot stand together, and the latter seems to be the
truer.

Greg. lib. 9. ca. 33. in Job.
Gregory also of the afflictions of this life writes thus: God judges man two
ways in this life. For either by the evils which he presently suffers, he
begins to inflict the torments to come: or else, he quite extinguisheth the
torments following with these present afflictions. For if so be the just Judge
(their sins requiring it) did not both correct some here, and also hereafter,
the Apostle Jude would not have said; he destroyed them the Secundo.
second time or twice, that believed not. And also the Psalmist would not have
said of the wicked, let them be clothed with shame as with a dubler. Now we
call a dublet a double garment: Therefore they are clothed with shame as with a
dublet, which according to the guiltiness of their deserts are punished both
temporally and eternally. For punishment in this life delivers them only from
pain to come, whom it changes and makes new men. For those whom the
calamities of this present life do not amend, they bring them to those which
are to come. But if so be that the afflictions of this life present did not
defend some from everlasting punishment, Paul would never have said: When as we
are judged of the Lord, we are corrected, that we should not be damned with the
world. And therefore John was taught by the mouth of an Angel, Whom I love I
chasten and correct. And therefore also it is written, Whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth, and he scourges every son that he receives. Here Gregory
seems to refer that saying of the Apostle, but to some. And it is true in
respect of the reprobate, but in respect of his chosen all that he judges here
he will not condemn with the world: Reu. 3.19.
And so the Angel taught Saint John indefinitely, that al whom he loves he
corrects; and Gregory expounds this correction of the punishments of this
life. And of the same punishments he expounds that place of S. Paul. And then
S. Paul says that every son that he scourges, that is in this life ( says
Gregory) receives, and therefore not in Purgatory.

Theodoret upon that place to the Corinthians, If any man shall build upon
this foundation gold, In 1. ad co. ca. 3
etc. writes thus* Some think that the Apostle speaks thus concerning
opinions in doctrine, but I think he speaks it of exercises of virtue and
vice. And that he makes as it were a way to the accusation of him, who had
committed fornication. Furthermore, he calls gold, silver, and precious stones,
the kinds of virtues: and wood, hay, and stubble those things contrary to
virtue: for the which hell fire is prepared. And these things do not depend of
the fault of the teachers, but of the intent and purpose of the scholars. They
truly teach them heavenly doctrines, but amongst them which hear, some make
themselves gold, some silver, some precious stones, by diligently marking such
things as are taught them. Some other living slouthfully and idly, choosing
that which is naught; resemble the nature of wood, hay or stubble, which may
easily be burned: and the difference of these matters, not this present life,
but the life to come shall reprove; for this thing, that means: the day of the
Lord shall make manifest: That is to say, the day of judgment.

And a little after upon these words: Every man's work what it it is, the fire
shall try. The teachers (says he) teach heavenly things, the hearers
according to their pleasures, choose that which they think is to be done. But in
the day of the coming of the Lord there shall be a sharp and vehement
examination, and those which have lived well, as gold and silver, the fire
shall make more bright. And it shall burn them which have lived evil, like
wood, hay, or stubble. The teacher also which has taught such things as became
him, shall not suffer punishment: but shall be accounted worthy of salvation
(for this he says) but he shall be saved: that is the teacher. The work shall
be burned: that is as much to say: they who have made themselves as evil
work. And after.) If any will not apply that (as it were by fire) to the
work: but to the teacher, let him so understand it that he shall not suffer
punishment for them: but he also shall be and saved tried by fire, if he have a
life agreeing with the doctrine. Thus much Theodoret, whereby it appears
plainly that he expoundes this place not of any purgatory fire before the day
of judgment: but of the fire which at that day shall be revealed. And shall
then try and purge not the works of any middle sort of men: but of all men.

And again upon these words of Malachie: Behold he comes: Theodoret in cap. 3.
Mal.
Of this second coming Zachary also prophecieth: and they shall behold him
whom they have pierced, etc. So also the blessed Apostle Saint Paul; because it
shall be revealed in fire: And the fire shall try every ones work, what
kind of one it is, etc. And I think also of these fires that the Prophet
means, not only this (that is the fire of the day of judgment, or of the
second coming of Christ) but the purgation of the holy Ghost. For by this
mystically they which come unto him (the Lord does purge) with the fire of his
spirit: So therefore that great Prophet John said; He shall baptize you with
the holy Ghost, and with fire: and also by his heavenly grace, as it were with
a certain herb, he washes away the filthiness of sins.

Theodoret here as it were making a survey of purgatories, finds but three.
And in none of them the Popes Purgatory fire: but first the fire of the second
coming of Christ: then the fire of the holy Ghost; and lastly the heavenly
grace and mercy of God. These were all the purgatories which Theodoret could
find out, as this place teaches. And he referres manifestly that place of the
Corinthians to the day of Judgment.

1, Cor. 3.13.
The text it self seems to prove manifestly, that by this fire is meant
afflictions. For thus we read: Every man's work shall be made manifest: for
the day shall make it manifest: for through fire it shall be revealed: and
every ones work what kind of one it shall be the fire shall try. No doubt
fire in all these places is taken in the same signification. But it is manifest
that as Christ said of the seed of his word, the Sun arising, that is, the
heat of persecution tries whether the seed had taken deep root or not: so
fire here reueales every ones work, that is, persecutions and afflictions.
This fire shall disclose and make things hid, manifest; which the Apostle here
speaks of: it shall try works: but such a fire is not the fire of purgatory.
It discloseth nothing: nay it is hid it self. Neither does it try works, as
this fire the Apostle here speaks of does: but it purges souls, as the
papists teach. And therefore this place can make nothing for their purgatory
fire. The very text it self refutes it. M. Bellarmine and Poligranes expound
that place of Matthew. Agree with thine adversary, of purgatory. Whereof
Poligranes writes thus: There are many other places of scripture, Polig. de
suffrag. defunct. De Purg. lib. 1. ca. 4.
out of which as concerning this matter the fathers say nothing; yet our later
writers being stirred up by heretics, and searching the scriptures more
diligently, do from them confirm purgatory, of which sort is this: Agree with
thine adversary. And Master Bellarmine affirms that they all agree that the
prison is hell. But yet there are many mansions, some for the damned, and some
for them which shall be purged.

Again, almost all agree, that by the last farthing are meant small sins.
Again, that until thou have paid the last farthing, cannot seem rightly to
be said, unless there were an end of payment. Neither Saint Austens examples
are sufficient to prove the contrary. For when it is said, he knew her not
until she had brought forth; we may not hereby gather that he knew her
after; but we may well infer, that she should sometime bring forth: So
likewise when it is said, Sit thou on my right hand till I put, etc. it may
very well hereof be gathered, that all Christ's enemies sometime shall be put
under his feet; otherwise, that until were unfitly said. So also when it is
said; Thou shall not go out till thou have paid the uttermost farthing, we may
very well infer: Therefore sometime he shall pay the uttermost farthing and so
consequently shall go out from thence.

But Stella of this place writes far otherwise then M. Bellarmine: The judge
shall give thee to the Iaylor. In 12. Luc.
The sentence shall be pronounced of Christ the judge, and the wicked man shall
be delivered to the Iaylor, that he may punish him; because the sinner shall be
delivered to the Devil to be punished. For the Lord says to the wicked: Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his angels,
etc. And the Iaylor cast thee into prison, that is, into hell. Of which prison
Esaias speaks: They shall be shut in prison. And lest he should despise this
prison thinking it to be a light matter, he adds the grieuousnesse of it,
saying: I say unto thee, Thou shall not go out thence till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing. Think not that he shall sometimes come out: For this word
until in the holy scriptures signifies eternity of times: whence we have it
thus written in the Psalm. The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou on my right hand
till I put thine enemies, etc. And yet it is most certain, that Christ our
Savior sits in the excellent good things of his father for ever and ever.
Secondly, this place may be expounded properly, as it foundeth: Because thou
shall not go out till thou have paid the uttermost farthing, and yet after
thou shall go out. But thou shall never go out: For one can never come to the
end of a thing that is without end. But the punishment of hell for continuance
of time is without end: and therefore a man can never come to the end of his
payment. So is meant that of the Psalm, Justice shall spring in his days, and
abundance of peace as long as the moon endures; that is, till she shall cease
to be in heaven, and yet she shall never cease to be in heaven: therefore that
peace shall never fail: So the wicked shall be in hell until they have paid
the uttermost farthing. The which because they shall never pay, it is most
certain that they shall be there for ever.

Ferus upon these words: After these things I will return, writes thus: In cap.
15. Act.
This saying is taken out of Amos. As long as we are here, God does not quite
cast us away; but he returns to us again: for God has not forgotten to be
merciful, but even in his anger thinks of mercy. And hereof David says: As
a father is merciful toward his own children; so God is merciful toward them
that fear him. But after this life, he is either angry for ever; or merciful
for ever. Ferus here seems to make no mean nor middle place of Gods wrath.

Med. 10. vitae Christi.
Granatensis of afflictions writes thus: As with a file iron is purged, and by
filing is polished and made smoothe, all the rust being done away; so the
spiritual file of tribulations does wipe away all the rust of sins, and makes
the soul pure and bright from all the dross of vices.

In 6. cap. Luc.
Stella writes thus: If he which did no sin, nor there was any deceit found
in his mouth, nor he stood need of any purgation of afflictions; yet for our
sakes would suffer so great things before he entered into his glory: Shall we,
who are guilty of so many grievous sins, and to whom many and grievous
punishments are due, refuse to be afflicted, that we may enter into that glory?

Ferus also yields the same effects to the tribulations and afflictions of this
life: Affliction (says he) does not only not hurt us, but does us much good.
For it shows us what we are, and then it purges the evil which we have
gotten; then it leads us to God. Fer. in 4. cap. Act.
To conclude, the Cross is Gods school house, the nurture of our manners, the
praise and meditation of our blessedness; the shop of the holy Ghost, and
the treasury of all good things. So that by his judgment, in the
schoole-house of afflictions in this life all Gods children are beaten for
their faults. In this shop of the holy Ghost they are purged, filed, and
made bright. In 7. cap. Act.
And again, of the fathers he writes thus: Mark that the fathers of the old
testament were by no other means brought to salvation, then we are, that is, by
faith. Therefore if by our faith we pass from death to life, as our Savior
teaches in the Gospel; then also by Ferus judgment even so did they.

Those same phrases in Beda of the faithful departed; Bed. lib. 2. eccles.
hist. Aug. cap. 1.5.7. and lib. 5. cap. 23.
He went out of this life to the true life, which is in heaven: and he went
unto the Lord, which he uses of Gregory, Egbertus and others; quite overthrow
purgatory.

Olympiodorus upon that place of Ecclesiastes: Olymp. in 11 cap. eccl. v. 1.
In the place where the tree falls, there it lies, he writes thus: Trees in
the holy Scriptures signify sometimes good men, sometimes sinners. The South
is also taken for a bright and clear place, or else for that true light, which
is Jesus Christ our Lord God, Contrariwise, the North is taken for an obscure
place, and full of darkness; and for the devil himself who dwells in
darkness. In what place soever therefore, either light or clear; or obscure
and dark: that is, either in the filthy state of sins, or in the commendable
state of works, a man shall be found when he dies; in the same degree and
order he shall remain for ever. For either he shall rest in the light of
eternal felicity, with the just and Christ our Lord; or else he shall be
tormented in darkness with the wicked and the Devil, prince of the world.
Thus far Olympiodotus. He makes but two places after death. Into either of
which, who soever shall fall at his death, there he shall abide. There is no
help after death. In his time it is likely that purgatory and pardons were
not known.

Master Bellarmine alleging many authorities to confirm purgatory out of
the old testament, Lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 3.
as that place of Esaias cap. 4. ver. 4. and Mal. 3. v. 2.3. adds the
expositions of the fathers unto them: that they expound these places of
purgatory. And after of that place of Ierom upon Malachie, he co^cludes thus:
Ieroh. in cap. 3. Malac.
Although ye pain of purgatory is not that of which we speak of now: for that
shall purge them that live, but we entreat of the punishment of them that are
dead. For therefore a great tribulation shall go before, and afterward fire
shall descend and shall quickly purge all the relickes of sin in just men.
For as Ireneus notes in the end of his fifth book, Then suddenly the Church
which is on earth shall be taken to her spouse. Neither then shall be any time
of purging any more, as there is now after death before judgment.

Here is purgatory and no purgatory, for those fathers in deed speak of a
purging which shall be at the day of judgment by fire, but not of those only
that then shall live, as M. Bellarmine here seems to expound Ierom: but of all
men in general, as appears by the words Ierom there uses: Peccatores
quosque flumina ignis ante cum traehent voluentia. The rolling streams of fire
shall draw before him all sinners, not those that be living, as Master
Bellarmine expounds him. And the Lord is called a fire, and a consuming fire,
that he may burn our wood, hay, and stubble: alluding to that place of Saint
Paul; That if any man have built upon Jesus Christ, wood, h^y, or stubble, the
day of the Lord shall try every man's work, not the works of them that live
then only, but every man's work.

And after he adds, That according to the saying of Ezechiel; whatsoever in
our gold and silver, that is, in our understanding and word is mingled with
brass, iron, or lead, in the Lords furnace may be Percoquitur.
thoroughly fined, that pure gold and silver may remain. Here Jerome speaks of
all sinners, not of those that shall live then. And he adds: That our gold
and silver, that is, just men's works as well as sinners dross shall then be
examined. And in another place (which has been alleged before) he
manifestly confirms this exposition: As we believe (says he) that the
torments of the Devil and of all them which deny God, and of wicked men which
say in their heart there is no God, Ieron. in 66. ca. Esaiae.
are everlasting: So also (woe is me) of sinners, yea of Christians, whose
works shall be purged and tried with fire, we suppose that the sentence of the
judge shall not be extreme, but mixed with mercy. This place against M.
Bellarmines exposition proves, that all Christians works which are sinners,
shall be tried and purged at that day: and not those only that then are
living, in steed of the purgatory they should have endured.

Saint Augustine also says, which place Master Bellarmine there also has
alleged for purgatory, Aug. de ciuit. lib. 20. cap. 25.
of these things which have been spoken it seems to appear most evidently,
that in that judgment there shall be some purgatory punishment of some: but
he names not who they be. It should seem he means those whom Ierom meant
before.

Neither does that place of Irenaeus which alleges, make any thing for his
purpose. For Irenaeus there first writes thus: The day of the Lord is as it
were a thousand years: Iren. lib. 5.
And in six days were all things finished that were made: And therefore it is
manifest that the sixth thousand year shall be the consummation of all these
things. And therefore in all that time, man being made in the beginning, by the
hand of God, that is, of the Son and of the Spirit, that he may be according
to the image and likeness of God, the chafe being cast away, which are
Apostacy, and the corn being taken into the barn, that is, they which bring
forth fruits to God through faith. And therefore tribulation is necessary for
them that shall be saved, that being as it were broken in pieces, and made into
small powder, and sprinkled here and there, through patience by the word of God,
yea even been all a fire, they might be fit guests for the kings banquet. And
as one ^ our Christians, who being judged to be cast to wild beasts, to be
torn in pieces of them for his martyrdom toward God, said Because I am the
corn of Christ, I am grinded by the teeth of these wild beasts, that I might be
found fine manchet of God. And after: The nations are so far profitable and
fit for the just, in as much as the stubble is profitable for the increasing of
the wheat, and the chafe thereof to burn for the purifying of Gold: And
therefore in the end when the Church departing hence shall be taken aloft,
there shall be (says he) tribulation, such as never was nor shall be. That
shall be the last combat of the just, wherein the conquerors shall be crowned
with incorruption. Thus far Irenaeus.

And here M. Bellarmine mistakes a word, and for repetente Ecclesia, as it is
in Irenaeus printed at Basil, Anno Dom. 1526. which is as much as to say, the
Church repairing again to a place: he puts in (repent, that is suddenly.) As
though this sodainnesse of her departure should be the cause of that her
purging by fire; because she could not stay to endure the fire of Purgatory.
It may seem of that one word he grounds this his exposition. And if he do, it
is but his collection, it is not Irenaeus assertion, as he says: and that also
of a false foundation; taking repent for repent, which is in the ancient
copy. And if so be that the word were repent, so dainly: yet there needed not
any Purgatory fire to the end that they might attain salvation. For even
suddenly God is able, and has also saved sinners: as Elias is called of Saint
James, A man (...), subject to like affection and perturbations even as we are,
Iam. 5.17.
and therefore a sinner: yet was he translated into heaven suddenly. And our
Savior himself speaks thus of Zacheus (who before was a Publican) as soon
as he believed on him: This day is salvation come unto this house. Christ also
healed very many both of their bodily, Luke. 19.9. Mark 5.34. Luke. 7 50.
and spiritual diseases suddenly: saying, thy faith has saved thee. No doubt
if these had then died they should have been saved even suddenly without
enduring any Purgatory. There is a place in saint Paul where the word
suddenly is used: 1. These. 5.3.4.
For when they shall say peace and safety; then shall come upon them sudden
destruction, etc. But you brethren are not in darkness, that that day should
come on you as a thief in the night. But that sudden destruction or
punishment respects the wicked, not the faithful that shall then live at that
day, more then them that have lived before that day. Here is not one word of
any purging; but of the purging of afflictions. And that shall be, all the
time of the continuance of the world, says Irenaeus. And that shall so clean
purge us, as it shall make us fit guestes for the Lords banquet: and what other
purgatory then shall the faithful stand need of? Here is not, that those
that live at the day of judgment shall be purged with that fire, because they
shall not go into purgatory; as M. Bellarmine seems to affirm. And so these
authorities of the old Testament, of scriptures and Fathers, which M.
Bellarmine alleges in that place, with this his shift prove nothing.

Master Bellarmine also would confirm purgatory out of that place of saint
Paul. De Purg. lib. 1. ca. 4.
What do they, which are baptized for the dead, if the deadrise not again, why
are they baptized for them? This place (says he) plainly proves that, which
we would desire, if it be rightly understood. And (he says) that there are
six expositions of this place. And he concludes thus: That the sixth exposition
is true, and the natural meaning of the place, that the Apostle speaks of the
baptism of tears and repentance, which is a accomplished by praying, fasting,
and giving of alms, etc. That this may be the meaning, what do they which are
baptized over the dead, if the dead rise not again? that is, what do they
which pray, fast, sigh and afflict themselves for the dead, if the dead rise
not again? And so do Ephrem in his testament, and Petrus Cluniacensis in lib.
contra Petrobrusianos, Dionysius, Hugo, Gagneius and others expound this place.

But Gagneius of this place writes thus: Gag. in 1. Cor. cap. 15.
Diverse men of this place bring diverse judgments: I think that there may be
two meanings of this place. The first, whereunto Chrysostom agrees: If the
dead rise not again, what do they which are baptized for the dead, that is,
for the hope of the dead? For as Chrysostom says, in the primitive Church
they which were to be baptized, repeated the whole Creed, wherein is this
place: I believe the resurrection of the dead: In which hope of rising again
from the dead, they were baptized, which otherwise would never have bin
baptized, and have changed their old life; unless they hoped that they should
arise to an immortal life. And this is that which Paul calls to be baptized for
the dead. Or else because that Paul taught the faithful, that to be baptized,
was nothing else then through the spirit and water to die with Christ, and to
be buried with him, that being buried with him they might also rise again with
him, if after the manner of his death they were grafted into him, as he teaches
in the sixth to the Romans: And therefore he says, what do they which are
baptized, that is, which die in Christ to the old man, and their accustomed
delights are buried with him for dead, that is, for the hope which they have of
rising again from the dead. Me thinks also there may be another sense of this
place, that baptism may be taken for affliction and punishment: As Christ
says to the sons of Zebedee the 10. of Mark: Can you be baptized with the
baptism that I am baptized withal? that is, suffer the punishment which I
shall suffer. By this means then this should be the meaning: what do they
which are baptized, that is, which are afflicted for the dead, that is, either
for the hope of the dead, and of rising again to a life immortal; or for the
dead, that is, for the testifying of the resurrection of the dead, for the
which the martyrs did not doubt to suffer death. This is all that Gagneius
says. And in neither of his two latter expositions, he affirms that which M.
Bellarmine would have him, that they afflicted themselves to do the dead good
in purgatory, but rather to do themselves good, in hope that there should be a
resurrection, or else to suffer death for the truth of the doctrine of the
resurrection, as the martyrs did.

Master Bellarmines exposition also seems to be against the words of the text:
For the text says what do they which are baptized for the dead; and again, why
are they baptized for them? He speaks in both places passiuely, as though
they should suffer this baptism of others. If baptism here were taken for the
works of repentance, done for the salvation of them which are in purgatory, it
should have been used rather actiuely: And S. Paul should have said; what do
they which baptize themselves, which pray and fast for the dead, and not what
do they which are baptized of others. This cannot properly be applied to
prayers and fastings, as he would have it.

Lyra also refutes their exposition, which think that some were baptized for
them which were already dead, In 15. ca. ad Cor.
and says, that it is not likely that the Apostle would confirm his doctrine
of the errors of others: And he expounds to be baptized for the dead, that is,
for mortal sins which are dead works, for the washing away of which baptism
is received: which were to no purpose if there were no resurrection. Glos. ord.
in cap. 15. Cor.
And the ordinary Gloss expounds it after the same manner, they are baptized
for the dead, that is for to blot out their sins, or else to mortify
themselves according to the similitude of Christ's death: what mean they doing
this, if they shall not then live? Neither Lyra, nor the Gloss, nor Gagneius
agree with Master Bellarmine in this his exposition. But that exposition which
some of the Fathers, Phil. Mor. lib. 3. de sacrif. Missae. ca. 7. Aegid. Niemus
in 1. ep. Cor. ca. 15. Eus. Eccl. hist. lib. 7. ca. 11.
and some also of our latter writers have made of this place, seems to me
most probable: That to be baptized over the dead, is to have baptism and
other ecclesiastical prayers ministered and executed at the Toombes of the
martyrs. And so had the first Christians, as appears by Eusebius, who writes
thus of Galienus: There is reported also another decree of Galienus, which he
granted to other Bishops, by which he granted them full authority of going to,
and possessing those places, which were called Churchyards. And again, of
Maximinus he writes thus: Lib. 9. ca. 2.
He left nothing unattempted, that he might quite overthrow our peace. And
first of all, under a certain pretense, he goes about to take from us our
freedom and liberty in assembling our selves together in our Churchyards,
etc. By this it appears, that the first Christians made their common prayers
at the toombes of martyrs. And it is likely, that as they celebrated there
their prayers: so also their sacraments. And that by occasion of the place,
they made all the baptized to make a solemn profession of the resurrection.

18. Of Jdolatrie.
STella speaking of the abuse which some use in their Churches, In 21. Euang.
Luc.
who respect more the outward decking and adorning of the Church, then the
spiritual and inward; declares after their opinion of Images: I do not say
this (says he) Vt honorem and adorationem damnem imaginum.
that I might condemn the honor and adoration or worship of Images, but I
reprove those that do so greatly make account of those outward things, that
they do not lift up their hearts to pray to him, whom that Image or picture
represents. Here is their opinion plainly set down, that Images are to be
adored and worshipped, and that we must lift up our hearts to him whomsoever
the Image represents. Is not this to give Latria to creatures? David says to
God: I lift up my heart to thee. Psalm. 25.1.
This is a part of his honor; and shall we give it to any other? And God
himself says: Thou shall make thee no image of any thing, Exodus 20.4.
in heaven above, nor in the earth beneath; thou shall not bow down to them,
nor worship them. No doubt the first branche of this commandment is as large
as the second. As by this all Images of earthly things are forbidden: so by the
other the Images of all heavenly, even of Angels and of Saints; yea of God
himself. And yet Stella here affirms that we may worship Images: and is not
this Idolatry?

Esaias also seems to expound this commandment thus: Esaias, 40.18.
To whom will ye liken God, and what likeness will you make for him? The
workman has made an Image, and the goldsmith has covered it with gold, and
melts chains of silver for it. The poor man also for an oblation chooses a
tree that will not rot, and he will seek for a cunning workman to make him a
graven Image that cannot move it self. Will you not know? will ye not hear?
has it not been showed to you from the beginning? will ye not understand it by
the foundations of the earth? He that sits upon the sphere of the earth, and
the dwellers thereof are like Locustes, stretches out the heavens like a
web, and spreads them out as a tent to dwell in: God, who brings the rulers
of the earth to nothing, and makes the judges like a thing of naught; yea they
have not been planted, they have not been sown; yea he has not suffered their
stock to take root in the earth, and he has but blown upon them with his
spirit and they have withered away, and the whirlewinde does take them away
like stubble. And to whom will ye liken me, and I shall be like to him, says
the holy one? The Prophet here seems to expound the commandment: and
therefore he says, has it not been declared to you from the beginning? will
ye not yet understand that same old and first commandment? And here he
condemns not only poor men's Images, made in the honor of God of wood, but rich
men's also of gold: naie by the wonderful works of God, he proves that they
can make no Image like to him. And therefore their Images are not only against
the commandment, but also against reason. And yet for all these speeches and
reasons, the Papists will not know thus much at this day. They which paint God
like a judge sitting in judgment, or like a king sitting upon his throne, do
dishonor and disgrace the Majesty of God. All the judges and kings of the
world are nothing unto him; as the prophet Esaias here teaches us: and yet thus
have the papists painted him.

And yet Stella in another place plainly affirms, that Images distract many
times the minds of men, In cap. 2. Luc.
and hinder devotion, and that to take any part of Gods glory from him, is
flat sacrilege: he would feign defend their Images, and yet in truth he
condemns them. For thus he writes: Mark (says he) that oftentimes it
chances, that men going into houses or Churches, are distracted and let by
pictures and Images, and such like: but Christ being borne in a base cottage,
would have no pomp, that we should mark and behold him alone. For external
trimming and decking is wont to distract the minds, that sometimes it looks
here, and sometimes there, that being neglected, which most chiefly was to be
looked unto. But Christ in his nativity was poor and base, because that he
would have nothing but himself to be considered. Stella here plainly
confesses, that images oftentimes distract men's minds, and hinder devotion,
and that in Bethleem where Jesus Christ was borne, there were no images or
pictures, because that Jesus Christ alone ought to be considered and marked. I
would to God our Catholics and Jesuits at this day, would also observe this
lesson, that in Bethleem in the Church, where as now also Jesus Christ is daily
borne, they would have no images, 1. Cor. 4.15.
and that they would consider and mark Jesus Christ alone.

And again in the same place upon these words: Glory to God on high, he
writes thus: By which place we must learn, in all things and chances
whatsoever, to give glory to God alone: neither let that thought ever come
into thy mind, that thou would violently take that from him, because that
then thou shall be most grievously punished. For in every good thing thou
do, two things are to be considered: the praise or honor, and the profit:
whereof God chooses the honor as due to himself; but the profit or gain, he
reserues for thee. Therefore if thou shall with a wicked and violent hand, take
away the honor due to God; God will also take from thee the reward, which also
was thine. Therefore if thou shall do this heinous act, thou shall not only be
worthy to have no gift given thee of God; but he will most severely punish thee.
So the Angel struck Herod, as we read in the Acts, because he gave not the
honor unto God. For it is plain theft and robbery not to give God his proper
honor; no less then to steal any vessel of silver from thy neighbor.

And a little after: That same holy Joseph, when as his unchaste Lady did entise
him to sin, said thus: My Lord has given me al things besides thee, which
art his wife: how then dare I sin against my Lord? So God has given thee all
things besides his glory, which is as it were his wife; how then dare thou
sin against thy Lord God, in taking from him his glory? Thus far Stella. It is
of all sins a most heinous sin, in any part to impair Gods glory. The saints
of God have learned this lesson here on earth: and shall we think, that they
have forgotten it in heaven? Shall we now worship the^? or kneel to the^? or
call upon them? when as now they cast down all their crowns before the lamb
and give him the glory? In one of the first miracles, Reu. 4.10.
that ever was done after our Saviors ascension, I would to God all true
Catholics would mark what a lesson Peter gives them, when as he had healed
that lame man: Act. 4.12.
Ye men of Israel (says he) why marvel you at this, or why look you so
steadfastly on us, as though by our own power and godliness, we had made this
man go? The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the God of our fathers, has
glorified his son Jesus, etc.

It was not the power or holiness of Peter that healed that lame man, but it
was the power and might of Jesus Christ. And so no doubt the same power wrought
all miracles after in the primitive Church. The glory of all those miracles
belonged to Jesus Christ: For so Saint Peter here testifies; The God of our
fathers has glorified his son Jesus. No part of the glory of them
appertained, either to the Apostles, or Martyrs following: as Peter here
plainly teaches.

But as the Jews then looked upon Peter and Paul; so in the age succeeding,
the people began to reverence the Martyrs, and to acknowledge that by their
virtues partly, these miracles were wrought. Aug. de cura pro mortuis agenda
cap. 1.
And a proof hereof is, that a widow burying her son near to a Martyr, asked
Paulinus judgment, and he S. Austens counsel: whether such a burial were not
profitable to the soul of her son or no. And this question (as should seem)
gave an occasion to S. Austen of writing that book. And S. Austen himself,
reasons (as we say) pro and contra; and cannot well tell what to make of that
question: as in that book more at large appears. They had forgotten as should
seem, that lesson of Peter, that even he by his own godliness and power did
not work that first miracle: but by the power of Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ is
even now as he was then, Heb. 13.8.
and shall be for ever, that same only fountain, from which all virtue and
power of doing miracles does proceed. Luc. 8.43.
Who says even now as he said then (when as that woman, that was sick so
dangerously of a desperate bloody issue, which passed all the Physicians cures
that she could meet withal, when as she had with a lively faith touched him,
Verse, 46.
and now was healed) who has touched me? For I feel virtue to have proceeded
from me. All other miracles whatsoever proceed from the same fountain. It is
not the touching of Peter or Paul, much less of any other Martyr, or to be
buried nigh them, that can profit any man, but only the touching of Jesus
Christ by a lively faith; as it did that woman. This touching, after his
resurrection, our blessed Savior taught Marie Magdalen. Ioh. 20.17.
Touch me not: For I have not yet ascended to my father. As though he should
say: Heretofore you have touched me corporally; but henceforth touch me no
more so: but touch me spiritually, touch me with a lively faith, and be sure
that ye shall find virtue to proceed from me. If this first lesson had been
taught and firmly observed in the Church; so much superstition, and reverence,
and invocation of the saints departed, would never have crept into the Church,
as has done. And afterward they began to believe that when miracles were done
at the toombes of the martyrs, that they, by their holiness and power, had
wrought them. And so it grew by little and little from glorifying Jesus Christ
alone, which Peter here teaches, that men glorified ye martyrs also with Jesus
Christ. And so they became thieves, as Stella here calls them, by robbing God of
his glory.

Granatensis of the greatness of this sin writes thus: Med. vitae Christi. 19.
The whole world was nothing else but a temple of Idolatry, a Castle of
thieves, a den of Cockatrices, and Serpents; a market of wiles and deceits, a
house of confusion, a gulf of darkness; what shall I use many words? The world
was almost become a hell of devils incarnate: From the East to the West, in all
Isles, Kingdoms, and Countries, both by sea and land, the devil was
worshipped for God: and in the honor of such monsters most stately Churches
were built. Their Altars yielded their smoakes to these; to these they burned
their incense: to these they offered sacrifice. And because Idolatry is the
mother of all vices, there reigned also with her, all the filthiness,
abominations, wickedness, and faults of the whole world. So that the devil, who
is called in the Gospel the strong man, that is, armed, obtained the dominion
of the whole earth in great peace, the obedience and service thereof (which was
due to the true and lawful Lord and owner) being quite taken away. Such an
ugly monster is Idolatry; she is the mother of all filthiness and abominations,
and sins, and therefore carefully to be taken heed of, of all true Catholics.

Ferus expounds the first commandment thus: In Mat. ca. 22
I am the Lord thy God. As though he should say, I even I, I say, and no other:
I am the Lord thy governor, thy God and thy Creator also, who as I have
created thee; so I govern thee: not thou thy self by thine own wisdom,
strength or righteousness, etc. I bestow benefits upon thee, I redeem thee from
evils, sin and damnation. In my power are all things, which made all things.
And how great soever I am, I am wholly thine; and in whatsoever I am able: Only
remember thou, that only thou acknowledge me to be such a one, and suffer me
to be thy God, that is, that thou look for all good things of me; in all thy
evils, thou look upon me; neither that thou turn thine eyes any other way or
apply thy heart. Thou shall have no other Gods: that is, have nothing besides
me, in which thou may trust: use the creatures; set not thy heart upon them,
etc. Here is an notable platform of Christianity to believe that God is wholly
ours, to look for all things from him, in all dangers to fly to him, never
to turn our eyes from him. Thus says Ferus. Agreeing here with David: Psalm.
123.
Even as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their masters; and as
the eyes of a maiden to the hands of her mistres: so our eyes wait upon the
Lord our God till he have mercy upon us. Servants must not have wandering eyes:
they must steadfastly attend upon their masters, that they may be ready to do
their pleasures; so must all Gods servants have their eyes fixed upon him;
neither turn to any other in his service in their afflictions and dangers,
even until he have mercy upon them. If this platform of Christianity were
printed in every Christian heart, they needed no Images to put them in mind
of God: God should be ever before their eyes: They need no intercessors to God:
God is wholly theirs: who then dare doubt of his love?

Ferus of the honor of the saints writes thus: There be some which attribute
too much to the saints: Fer. in Mat. ca. 11.
And again there are some which attribute nothing unto them. But here thou
may see that Christ praises John, and that excellently, even to our
instruction: but he praises John so, as he preferres himself before John. So
I say, the saints are to be praised, who are worthy of praise both in their
lives, and also in their deaths; and that which is worthy of praise in them,
is to be highly commended, to the edification of others: but yet they are so to
be praised as that they be neither preferred, nor made equal with Christ, but
that they be subject to him. They are to be praised as members of Christ, as
friends, as servants, as vessels, and instruments of the glory of God. It is
praise enough to be a member and servant of Christ. The blessed Virgin was
content with this: Behold (says she) the handmaide of the Lord. And in her
song she says: My soul does magnify the Lord. Neither will she have any
thing commended in her then Gods favor and gifts. So Paul in all places brags
of this: That he is the servant of Christ. So also John Baptist witnesses of
himself: He that has the bride, is the bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom rejoices to hear the bridegroom speak. As though he should say;
that is not to be attributed to me, which belongs only to Christ. I am very
well contented, that I am the friend of the bridegroom: neither do I attribute
any other thing to my self; neither will I that any other attribute any other
thing to me. Thus far Ferus. Where he touches those that give too much to
saints: And who be those; but the papists? And he covertly expounds what he
means by giving too much to saints: That is (says he) In making them equal
with Christ; in joining them together with him in his office, either of
redemption or saving us, or of his mediation; in making them means between
God and us: As some Catholics have done and taught; joining the blood of
Thomas to Christ's blood, in their salvation. This no doubt Ferus liked not, and
we must learn here, least we do honor the saints too much, which here by
Ferus judgment we may not do, as some even now do. The very heathen were of
this opinion, that all glory was to be given to the Gods. And therefore the
Athenians wondering at, and honoring one called Pytho, because he had slain
Cottis: Plut. in Polit.
Oh (says he) we must thank the gods, who are the authors of this noble act,
they have only borrowed my help and hand. If a heathen confessed thus of his
works, much more ought a Christian.

And even Diogenes condemned Images. Plut. de tranquillitate animi
I judge that saying of Diogenes worthy of al memory, who when he saw in
Lacedemonia, a stranger adorning himself upon an holiday: What (says he) to
a good man every day is an holiday: nay if we were wise a great holiday. For
this world is a most holy Church, and most meet for God: And man when he is
borne, is admitted into this Church, not to behold Images made with hands and
void of sense; but rather the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars; from which the
beginnings of life and motions do proceed, which Gods providence has given us
to behold, that these sensible things should be Images of those things which
are understood, and imitations or patterns of them as Plato said. The very
blind Philosopher aimed in the dark, at that which the Apostle teaches. That
the Invisible things of God are seen being understood by the creation of the
world, Romans 1.20.
and by those things which God has made. These are the liueliest Images of
God. And herein this blind Philosopher came nearer the mark, then the papists
who make stocks and stones (which he condemned) Images of God.

Of the honor due to the saints, Ferus writes thus. It is the holy Ghost
(says he) that by the saints works all good things; Fer. in ca. 7. act.
yea (says he) the holy Ghost speaks by them, as by an Organ or instrument:
wherefore so the saints are to be praised, that in the end all the honor may
redound to God. And therefore the kingly Prophet said, Praise God in his
saints. The praise belongs to the musition, not to the instrument.

Fer. in 19. ca. act.
And again in another place: It is expressly put down here that the Lord did
miracles, etc. least any should attribute them to saints, or least that any
should have respect only to the saints, and not to God himself: As the Jews
did, who more wondered at Lazarus, who was raised from the dead again, then
they marvelled at Christ, who raised him up again. Mark here also, that by
the garments and handkerchiefs of Paul, God did work miracles: against those
which do attribute all the miracles of saints unto the devil. That which God
is said to have done here, he could also, and has often done at the toombs
and relics of martyrs. Let us be thankful therefore to God with mouth and
work: Let him do good unto us, by what means soever pleases him: yea let us
embrace and wonder at his goodness, who does us good by so many means. God
does the miracles, and not the saints, says Ferus.

Ferus of the honoring of saints writes thus. It is not evil to behold and
look upon the Apostles and other godly men. For Peter said to the lame man
look upon us, Fer. in ca 3. act.
etc. but that is evil, to stick only in the saints; and to attribute to
them those things which belong to God. There be some which think that they
cannot honor the saints too much; but thou see here how Peter refuses that
honor, that derogateth any thing from the honor of God: Why look ye on us?
Behold here the minds and wills of all the godly, they cannot abide that they
should be extolled for the gifts of God, but they attribute all things to God,
and so they move God to bestow greater things upon them. So all floods
springing from the sea, flow thither again, that they may plentiously flow
back again. God truly makes his Saints glorious and wonderful: but
contrariwise they ascribe all to God. So the Angel says to John, which was
about to worship him: See thou do it not; worship God. So the mother of God
the virgin Marie, when she was magnified of Elizabeth: My soul (says she)
does magnify the Lord. Furthermore, when it is manifest by the scriptures that
God works many and wonderful things by his Saints, learn by this text how we
are to deal in these things. First, mark diligently what God works in them.
Secondly, when as God vouchsafes to love them and to dwell in them, despise
not, nor rail on them. Thirdly, mark most diligently of all, that they are
Gods instruments, which can do nothing of themselves, but do all things from
God and by God. Therefore especially mark the chief workman and yield the
work to him, give him the glory, praise him in the Saints, and reverence them
chiefly in God and for Gods sake: whereby it shall come to pass, that thou
shall not altogether make no account of the Saints as many do, neither shall
thou make them equal with God, nor shall prefer them before him, which no
small company do; but both acknowledge only God by the mean of the Saints
and in the Saints, and acknowledging him, glorify him. Thus far Ferus.
Wherein he does teach us many notable lessons. First, not to give to Saints
those things which belong to God. Secondly, that we may honor the Saints too
much; which some I think at this day do not believe. Thirdly, what is the
mind of all Saints: they cannot abide that they should be extolled for any of
Gods gifts. Fourthly, that they are but Gods instruments, and do nothing by
their own power: as has been taught and believed most commonly in the
darkness of Popery; when as men went a pilgrimage and offered to them; as if
they of their own power could help them. Fifthly, let all men in all wonderful
works acknowledge God the chief workman: and give him all the glory and
praise, and magnify him in his Saints: as the first Christians did in Paul;
they did not magnify Paul. Gal. 1.24.
Neither that they make any of them equal with God.

The same Ferus manifestly refutes that same objection, which the Papists make
commonly for their pictures and images of God. Fer. in 2. Act.
God (say they) has appeared often times in many forms and shapes: and why
may we not then paint him according to that form he appeared in? Here first
besides that this their picturing of God is manifestly against the second
commandment; and against the doctrine of the prophet Esaias, where God as it
were even reasons with these idolaters, Esaias 40.18.
and says; To whom will ye liken me, etc. Ferus yields another reason of these
appearances of God. God (says he) in himself is invisible, yet we read that
he has oftentimes appeared. And all such his appearances are for the most
part, as the matters required for the which he appeared. So Esaias saw God
sitting as a judge: for the judgment of Israel was at hand. He appeared to
Moses in a bush burning and not consuming: For then such like was the state of
the people of Israel in Egypt: for they were in the fire of adversity, and
were not consumed. Also he showed himself to the eyes of man at ye giving of
the law in thunder, lightning, cloud, and an earthquake, to declare that that
law should be a fearful law, and should cause wrath. So the Angel having a
sword drawn in his hand, showed himself to Iosuah now ready to fight; whereby
he declared that he would fight against the enemies of the Jews. So to
Zachary Angels appeared like horsemen: for it was a time of fear and
trembling for the invasions of the Persians. So the holy Ghost was seen upon
Christ in the shape of a Dove, that he might declare that singular and rare
innocence, purity and mildness, which was in Christ: For a Dove is a gentle,
simple, and plain creature, without any gall. So in the transfiguration of our
Lord, which is a type of the resurrection, the holy Ghost appeared in a bright
cloud, that he might declare, that at the last resurrection shall want no
comfort not glory. Here also the holy Ghost appeared in toongs and fire: for
the state of the matter then even so required it. The Apostles stood need of
toongs; but both of fiery and heavenly toongs. So Ferus gives these reasons of
these apparitions: and not that we should by them make images of all these
things.

Ferus also concerning images quite dissents from M. Bellarmine. Bellar. de
imag. lib. 2. cap. 12.
M. Bellarmine writes thus: We with the Church affirm, that the images of
Christ and the Saints are to be honored, if so be that as it is declared in
the council of Trent, Sess. 25. we put no trust in the images: neither that we
ask any thing of them: neither that we think that there is any divinity in
them.

And again, answering after the objection of the golden calfe, which the
Israelites made, he answers, Cap. 13.
that the Israelites thought verily that they had received their deliverance
out of Egypt, not of the God of Moses, but of Apis the god of the Egyptians,
which they had seen in Egypt worshipped of the Egyptians: and therefore to him
they made the image of a calfe.

But Ferus is of another and better judgment, upon these words, Make us Gods,
etc. he writes thus: Fer. in 7. c. Act.
He shows that they were not only rebellious against Moses, but also against
God. By gods here they mean (says he) some worship of God, by which they
might purchase his help. For they were not so blockish that they believed that
Aaron could make them a god. And this proves that which Aaron said: Tomorrow
is the holy day unto the Lord: therefore they worshipped ye true God with this
worship. The which thing is evident also by their own words: These are the
gods, etc. For they knew well enough that that calfe was not then, when they
came out of Egypt: therefore no worship whatsoever pleases God, which he
himself has not appointed. Therefore they sinned herein two ways. First, in
that they made an image against the first commandment of God: Secondly, in
that they worshipped him with a worship devised of themselves. The true worship
of God is in spirit and truth. He worships God which believes in him, trusts in
him, loves him, fears him, praises him, and obeys him. This worship is to
be preferred above all others, nor any other are auailable without this. Images
are therefore tolerated and borne withal in the Church, that they may put us
in mind, not that they should be worshipped: otherwise they cannot at all be
excused. Here Ferus quite dissents from M. Bellarmine. First he plainly
affirms, that the Israelites, as we do teach, did worship the true God under
the image of the golden calfe, and not Apis the God of the Egyptians, as M.
Bellarmine affirms. Secondly, that images are not to be worshipped at all.
And that their worship cannot be defended: and yet M. Bellarmine goes about to
defend it. Thirdly, he teaches, that no worship whatsoever can please God,
which God himself has not ordained.

Contrary also to M. Bellarmines exposition, Bell. de Imag. lib. 2 cap. 4.
who expounds that place of the second to the Colossians thus: I say secondly
that (...), voluntary worship; does not signify any voluntary worship
whatsoever not commanded of God, or devised of man: but only superstitious
worship, as our interpreter has rightly translated it; or false religion, as
S. Ierom expounds it in his Epistles in his tenth question to Algasia. Therefore
(says he) Calvin must prove the worship of relics to be superstitious, or
false, if he will have it reproved here of Paul. Thus far M. Bellarmine. He
affirms that some worship of God devised of man, or besides that which God
has commanded, so that it be not superstitious, may please God. But Ferus
plainly condemns all worships of God whatsoever, besides those which he has
appointed himself. And to this purpose he writes thus after upon these words:
Fer in 7. Act.
Ye have taken the Tabernacle. Moloch (says he) was an Idol of the Ammonites.
The Jews oftentimes desired to serve God with strange worships. So they
yielded unto the true God the worship wherewith Moloch was worshipped of the
Ammonites; in the mean while omitting that which he had commanded. So Jeroboam
appointed calves; as though that had bin a more acceptable worship to God, then
that which Moses had prescribed: so Achaz in the Temple placed an altar like
that which he had seen at Damascus: so Achab besides Ieroboams calves, brought
in the worship of Baal. In that thing therefore wherein they thought greatly to
please God, they greatly offended him. Therefore in the sacrifices of God, a
good meaning (as they say) is not sufficient, unless it agree with the word of
God. Ferus herein teaches us two things: first that under the worship of Baal,
the Jews worshipped the true God. And to this his exposition seems to agree
that place of Osea: Osea 2.16.
At that day (says the Lord) thou shall call me Ishi, and shall call me no
more Baali. And that speech of Rabsake: 2 king, 18.22.
But if you say unto me, we trust in the Lord our God: Is not that he whose hie
places and whose altars Ezechias has taken away, and has said to Judah and
Jerusalem, ye shall worship before this altar at Jerusalem? Secondly, that all
worship be it never so austere and sharp in pinching themselves, as was Baals;
or so costly of gold and silver, as was Ieroboams calves; or so stately in
building, as was the high places, which no doubt, of their stateliness took
their name, can please God, if it be not commanded in his word, and by
himself ordained.

And after Ferus declares unto us the greatest thing that the Devil takes
pleasure in, and what he labors most about: I would to God all Catholics
would mark his lesson, and not further the devil in his work: Behold (says
he) the devil has ever gone about and goes about yet, that the glory of God
omnipotent may be yielded to creatures: As on the contrary, Fer. in ca. 8. act.
the holy Ghost counsels us to give all glory to God.

Of Idolatry and what it is, the same Ferus writes thus: As God abhorres no
other sin more then Idolatry: In cap. 17. act.
so thou shall find the saints of God to have been moved to anger with no sin
more then with Idolatry. Moses is a witness hereof, who for this sin brake
the tables written with Gods own finger: Helias is a witness hereof, who for
this sin slew many hundreds of the sacrificers: Josias also, and Matathias is
a witness hereof, who slew Antiochus servant, compelling the Jews to Idolatry:
so also Phinees, etc. For a godly man cannot patiently endure and see the
contempt of God: And surely, he that can behold and endure this has no
religion in him: So Paul was greatly moved when as he saw the city most famous
for learning and religion, to be wonderfully given to Idolatry. Paul had
traveled through many cities, yet it is reported of none of them, that they
were altogether given to Idolatry, but of Athens, where learned men were. So
the old proverb was verified: The more learned, the more wicked. So amongst
all the Jews, the inhabitants of Jerusalem were the worst: So is it also now
amongst us. And after he shows what is Idolatry, thus: Ye men of Athens. It
may be gathered out of the text, that the Athenians were studious of Gods
honor: for so it is said before that Paul saw the city given to Idols: And
after that they erected altars to unknown gods. But Paul calls this worship not
religion but superstition. Then he proves that they are not to be called Gods,
which dwell in temples made with hands and stand need to be helped of others.
Religion is one thing, and superstition is another; yet many think it comes to
pass, that they which seem religious to themselves, before God are accounted
nothing but superstitious.

To the unknown God. This was the title. To the Gods of Asia, Europe, and
Africa, strange and unknown Gods. Paul amends this title, putting in the
singular number, for that which they put in the plural: And he applies that
title to the one true God, who truly is the God of Asia, Europe, and Africa,
and of all the earth: but to that day unknown to the nations: The which you
ignorantly worship. This is most truly said: For the Apostle did not preach
any new God (that which the Gentiles thought) but they showed the same God
which all the Gentiles worshipped, not knowing him: for although they erected
Images to themselves: yet their mind was, to worship the true God.

Here we may learn what a horrible sin Idolatry is. Men account it as
nothing: but of all sins it is most grievous. And let us take heed that we
incur it not again now by satan's persuasions, with the old Paganes. They
worshipped in their hearts the true God, to whom they made their images. But
that was Idolatry says Ferus. And shall we commit the like? The grieuousnes
of the sin should make us very careful, least by any means we should come
near it. And of that foolish pity, which mooues many simple men's hearts, when
they see great buildings pulled down, or golden images defaced, Fer. in 19.
ca. act.
Ferus writes thus: They which practiced curious arts came and burned their
books. True charity respects not the price nor loss of any thing, when she
sees that it is contrary to Gods commandments. So Ezechias and Josias
destroyed the Altars and Temples, although they were builded with great cost.

Again, a little after he writes thus: For the overthrowing of Idolatry, of
all other things, the Apostles most suffered persecution. Diana was the Moon,
which the Ephesians worshipped for her special influence, which she has
toward these earthly things. The Temple of Diana the Goddess of the
Ephesians was 220. years in building of all Asia. It was 425. foot in length,
220. in breadth: It had 127. pillars in it, every one of them built of a king,
threescore foot in height; whereof 36. were engraven. To conclude, this Temple
was built in a marrish ground that it should not fall with earthquakes. Here I
beseech you mark how ungodliness spares no expe^ces and costs in an evil and
superstitious matter; when as she is most niggardly to give any thing to a good
work: there are very many so superstitious amongst us. That famous Church
being so long in building, and built with such great cost, Paul pulled down in
two years by the word of the gospel. Therefore great is the glory and force of
the gospel.

Fer. in act. 28.
And again upon these words: They said he was a God: They said this of the
vanity of the Gentiles, and of their false opinion they had concerning the
Gods. The world can keep no mean: for it either overmuch despises a man, or
else it attributes too much unto him. But a Christian does not judge any man,
be he never so miserable; and be he never so holy, he does not match him with
God.

Clemens Alexandrinus writes thus: Numa the king of the Romans was one of
Pythagoras scholars, Lib. 1. stromat.
and therefore being helped of those things which he had received from Moses,
forbad the Romans, that they should make any image of God either like to man
or beast. Therefore in the hundredth and seventy years wherein they builded
their temples: they made neither carved or graven nor painted Image. For Numa
did secretly teach them, that it is not lawful for any man to approach near
that which is the best thing of all other, but only with his heart and mind,
etc. Thus Numa out of Moses taught the first Romans. But now our Romanists will
not learn this out of Moses, nor Numa, nor Clemens, who all do teach them
this same most ancient and true lesson.

Ferus also seems to take away the very foundation and ground of all
idolatry and images. Fer. in pass. part. 3.
This custom of letting one loose at Easter (says he) sprang of their
deliverance out of Egypt, which was done on Easter day, and this custom had a
show of pity, and religion; but indeed it was against the law of God which
commands to punish the offenders. Neither had the Jews any need that by this
deliverance of a man out of bonds, that they should be put in mind of their
deliverance out of Egypt: for God himself ordained them a sign of the
remembrance hereof, that is, the paschall Lamb and all that feast. But they
being not content with that sign which God had ordained, appointed another
also themselves; and that against the law: So hypocrisy is not content with
the word of God; but ever adds and prefers her own devises before the word of
God. And thus far Ferus.

And have not the papists themselves done thus by erecting their Images, to put
us in mind of Christ's death, and his benefits? He has ordained the sacrament
of the holy communion, to be a continual remembrance unto us of that most
excellent benefit. But this memorial, by their Latin prayers not understood,
they have defaced, and devised new signs and remembrances thereof of their
own, that is, images, and that against the law. Deuteronomy. 27.15.
Where as God accurseth the making of any molten Image, and setting it up
secretly, much more publicly, Secondly, another sign of remembrance of his
goodness and graces toward us, and an Image truly and lively representing unto
us his Majesty, has God appointed, and that is his most holy word, and he
commands us all, to study and meditate therein day and night. Psalm. 1.3.
He that does fulfill this commandment needs no Image to put him in mind of
God, nay all the images in the world, are not able to represent unto us the
majesty of God so lively; nor to put us in mind of his benefits so
effectually, Ier. 10.8.
as this can do. In comparison of this, all Images are lying teachers and
schoolemasters, as the prophet calls them. And this sign of remembrance also,
have they quite taken away from Gods people, and against his commandment in
steed thereof, Psalm. 1.2. Col. 3.16.
have erected them Images: which they call lay men's books. But God appoints
them another book to hearken unto. Moses himself who gave the children of
Israel the law against Images, Heb. 11.27.
observed the same. By faith (says saint Paul) Moses forsook Egypt, and
endured all things patiently, as though he had ever seen him, which is
invisible. A lively faith must ever represent God unto us, as it did to Moses,
and not any Images. In Deuteronomie also God expressly forbids any such
remembrances of Images. Deuteronomy. 17.22.
Thou shall not erect to thy self Ma^sbah, which, as Mercerus notes, signifies
any thing, that is made in remembrance, or signification of any other thing,
which thy Lord thy God hates. God hates such remembrances; and shall we think
to honor him therewith?

But the insufficiency of the teaching of these their Images, a papist
himself teaches us. Michael ab ^ssel^ in prafat Gran.
Those painters and caruers (says he) are most commended, whose pictures do in
every respect agree with them, of whom they were taken. And that was the
cause, why Alexander would only be painted of Apelles, and formed of Lysippus.
But these with their Images show only the members portraiture and colors of
the body: but they cannot show the manners and acts of a man. No nor they
which write another man's life, in their oration, can so lively paint him out,
as a man does set forth himself in his own writing. For not another man's, but
a man's own speech declares what he is. And therefore every one may see of
Ludouicus his works what kind of man he was, inflamed and lightened with the
heat and light of Gods spirit, etc. All images therefore are insufficient
lively to paint out any man. And the same reason which he alleges here for
Granatensis, stands good in Christ Jesus himself. No painter can so lively
paint him out unto us: as his own word does. I would to God the Church of
Rome would allow the people this Image of Christ and God to look on, and let
their other wooden and carved Images go.

Franciscus Euia in his direction to confessors: In direct. confess.
how they should examine those that come to confession, in the breaking of
every one of Gods commandments, never speaks word of the making or
worshipping of Images, or of the sin of Idolatry; as though that were either
a light, or else no sin at all: Whereas God adds to that commandment that
most terrible threatening, Exodus 20.5.6.
that he will punish the third and fourth generation of them that hate him. And
S. John in his Catholic Epistle biddes all Catholics beware of Idols. 1. Ioh.
5.21.
It is the last commandment in his Epistle. And as a special cave at above
all the other commandments; added as his commandment also in the end, and as
it were the farewell of his Epistle: and shall we make no account of it? Nay S.
John in the Revelation says, Reu. 9.20.
that some were dead that did worship not only devils, as infidels: but also
images of gold and silver, as superstitious Christians: yea, and that there
were some living which should be so addicted to this vain superstition, that
although they heard out of Gods own mouth, that all such idolaters should die,
yet they would not repent. If S. John plainly say, that to have Images of gold
and silver be a sin, whereof we ought to repent; I marvel that in their
penances the popish confessors will inioine no penance for this sin. They are
not of S. John's mind.

19. Of Charming and enchanting.
AS concerning charms and exorcismes, Ferus writes thus: The Jews said, Fer.
in 19. c. act
that Solomon ordained charms or exorcismes, but some deny that: because no
man of himself can ordain any thing, by which the devil may be put to
flight; for he is so mad, that he fears no man. This victory belongs only to
God: as Ezech. says in the 28. chap. under the name of Tyrus. And although
there be no power upon earth which may be compared to the power of the Devil,
as we read in Job the 41. chap. yet in Christ's presence, all their power is
cowardlinesse. But that the Devils sometimes yield at the words of Coniurers,
that plainly they do to beguile men. If Solomon ordained exorcismes, surely
they were such, wherein Gods praises and works and promises were recited, which
the Devil being not able to abide, was cast out by the power of the word of
God. So David played on his harp before Saul, and he was better in his mind:
but these did no such things, but used certain words and magical characters,
and forms. And he very excellently describes them. They were Jews (says he)
who had a special commandment given them, that they should not abuse the name
of God, and that they should make no account of their magical arts. Then they
were the sons of a priest, who ought to have been furthest off from
superstitions; but the more learned, the more wicked they were. (I conjure thee
by Jesus) mark here that the wicked use good words, against those that
hereof excuse themselves of their superstitions, because they say, that they
use none but good and holy words; yea, so much the more they sin the more
grievously, because they abuse Gods word. They used the same words which the
Apostles used; but they could do nothing by them, because they used exorcismes
and charms, not of faith, unto the glory of God; but only of curiosity unto
their own gain.

Jesus I know] A notable testimony of Christ and of his Apostles, the Devil
knew truly the power of Christ, and he was afraid of the power of the
Apostles granted to them by Christ, for of Christ himself the prince of the
world the Devil was ouercomed, and cast out of doors: see the 12. chap. of
John. But you, who are you? That is to say, you are my bondslaues. I would that
all priests and clergy men, would mark this one word well.

And leaping on them] Mark here, how Christ is good to the Godly: but very
terrible to the wicked and desperate. Ferus here gives an Item or privy nippe,
to all priests and clergy men. These are like those priests sons, they
should be furthest off from this sin, and they are the chief practisers of
it. This is their gain, this is their physic. In our Church we have found
this true by experience. And after he adds: Learn out of this history, the
virtue and power of the name of Christ, that thou may trust in it. Secondly,
take heed least thou think or go about to drive away the Devil, by thy own
strength. For thou can not do that; unless thou be helped with a
stronger then thy self, that is, through faith in Christ. Thirdly, be very
careful, least thou take in vain the most holy name of God, abusing it to
thine own gain or curiosity. By this example also he would declare, how
grievously he would punish, and be revenged upon the contemners and prophaners
of his name. Faith in Christ only vanquisheth the devil: and in deed, no other
man's devise else whatsoever. And this, even the very witches have confessed,
that they have not been able to hurt many, whom they meant to have done harm
unto: because they had such a strong faith in Christ. The Papists in their
dark and blind kingdom, have had many external things: which as they
supposed were of force to drive away the Devil. But Ferus tells all true
Catholics, that it is only faith in Christ, that in truth has that force,
and nothing else: though he seem to shun and fly from many other things. This
he does but to beguile men.

A golden porch or entry, into the true Catholics house.
MIctham an Hebrew word, signifies a crown of gold, or a wedge of most fine
gold: which I have placed at the entrance of this house (as David prefixed the
same word at the beginning of the xvi. Psalm, which contains the resurrection
of our Savior Christ; and our entrance into heaven) taken out of the
Canticles; which likewise contains in it, a most excellent and doubtful
question, which troubles many at this day: and even an heavenly and most
certain answer unto the same. O (says the Spouse) show me whom my soul
loves, Cant. 1 6.
where thou feedest: where thou restest at noone in the heat of the day? This
is a question, which even now every true christians soul without all doubt
makes unto God. Now is the heat of the day. The sunshine of this world makes
many sunburnt (as we say) and their covetous dealing is a slander to the
gospel; and the burning heat of persecution, Mark. 10.30. 2. Tim. 3.12.
which as ever, even so now also follows the Gospel; makes many doubt where
to rest, and to quiet their souls and consciences in this hot sunshine, and in
the heat of persecution. And therefore here now the Spouse prays the
bridegroom to show her in these dangerous times of offenses and of persecution
where he rests; that she may not be like one in this wilderness, who
wandering along, Psalm. 18.1. Esaias, 32.2.
should join her self to some of his companions; but that she may rest with
him alone. And here we may note the love of the true Spouse of Christ: she
will not rest her self nor repose any confidence in any of Christ's
companions, that is (no doubt) Saints, Romans 8.17.
whom S. Paul calls fellow heirs with him; but only in Jesus Christ alone:
she acknowledges no vicegerent: she will rest with none, but with the Spouse
himself.

And this is that which S. John, one of Christ's chief companions, Ioh. 3.29.
teaches also all Christians: He that has the bride, he is the bridgroome,
but the friend of the bridgroome which stands by and hears him, reioiceth
greatly at the bridgroomes voice. Here is the duty of all the faithful only
to hear the bridegroomes voice, to hear him talk with the bride. This is all
their joy; they have nothing to do with the bride. Of them all it may be said
as the queen of Saba said of Salomons servants, Happy are thy men, 2. King.
10.8.
happy are these thy servants which stand ever before thee, and hear thy
wisdom: So all Jesus Christ's Saints are servants; they attend on the bride
and the bridegroom. And this is their happiness, that they may hear the
bridgroome speak: they have nothing to do with the bride, as I said even now.

The bridgroome now thus lovingly answers his loving Spouse: Verse, 7.
If thou know not for thy self (as it is in the Hebrew) O thou fairest
amongst women, go out thy self after the tract of those sheep; and feed thy
younglings (whether Goats or lambs, for so Gedithaik the Hebrew word signifies)
nigh unto the tents of those sheepheards. Here is that heavenly Oracle: first
she must know for her self: Habac. 2.4. Heb. 8.10.
The just man must live by his own faith. And this is now the new covenant that
all shall know me says the Lord from the smallest to the greatest. They which
lack this knowledge no doubt are without the covenant. And this is life
eternal (says our Savior) that they know thee to be the only true God, and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Io. 17.3.
They which know not thus much shall never have eternal life.

But how now shall we attain this true knowledge, and be sure not to go astray
in so many by ways as now are in the world? The answer is plain and easy:
Follow the tract of those sheep, Hatsoon (says the spouse) as it is in the
Hebrew, that is, of the first Christians, and not of every common sheep, as
the Papists would have us. The sheep will make a tract or way, by which it may
appear, which way they have gone: Even so let us follow the steps of the
ancient Christians: Let us believe to be saved, as they believed; let us live
as they lived; and then surely we shall rest with Jesus Christ. For as saint
Paul says, The Corinthians wanted nothing, 1. Cor. 1.7.
but were even now ready to look for the coming of our Lord Jesus to
judgment. What things then they had not as necessary to their salvation; what
need we the^? And S. Peter says and testifies: that that was the true grace
of God wherein the Christians stood in his days: 1. Pet. 5.12.
And shall we believe to please God now by any other new devises? And this is
that which saint Paul teaches the Corinthians: For this cause have I sent unto
you Timothy, 1. Cor. 4 17.
which is my beloved son and faithful in the Lord, which shall put you in
remembrance of my ways in Christ. Saint Paul would have the Corinthians follow
his tract, follow his ways. And again in the same Epistle: Be ye followers of
me, 1. Cor. 11.1.
even as I am of Christ. And again to the Philippians: Brethren be ye
followers of me, and look on them which walk so, Phil. 3.17.
as ye have us for an example. And to Timothy he writes thus: 2. Ti. 3.10.
Thou have fully known my doctrine, manner of living, purpose, faith, long
suffering, love, patience, etc. And to the Hebrews: Remember them that have
the oversight of you, Heb. 13.7.
which have declared to you the word of God, whose faith follow, considering
what has been the end of their conversation. No doubt these are those sheep,
which the bridegroom here counsels his spouse to follow. And feed thy
younglings. Verse. 2.
Here all Catholics must learn another principal mark of Gods Church, that
is, to instruct their young children in the law of the Lord: as David teaches
them also: Wherewith shall a young man redress his way? even by taking heed
thereunto according to thy word. Psalm. 119.9. 1. Ioh. 2.14.
And saint John also in his Epistle: I write to you babes that you have known
the father. Even young infants must know God the Father, and then Jesus Christ
the Son also, who makes God to be our loving father; Luke 2 14.
and then the holy Ghost, by whom this love of God is shed into our hearts. And
saint Paul writes of Timothy: Romans 5.5. 2. Ti. 3.15.
that he knew the scriptures of a child. And shall we not believe all these,
and instruct our children in the law of the Lord?

By the Tents of those shepherds; that is, of the Apostles, who^ Christ made
pastors of his Church: not of every common shepherd, nor also of any one of
those shepherds, no not of Peter. Ephe. 4.11.
God has given Apostles and Prophets, and Evangelists to the building of his
Church: and no one Apostle. Embrace therefore all the Apostles writings and
feed on them, and not on Peter's only: embrace and follow all the Apostolical
Churches as the fathers did; and not the Roman Church only. And here I cannot
but give a lift at that great rock (which being derived from that rock,
whereof our Savior Christ speaks in the 16. of Matthew) the Papists oppose
for the defense of their Church: that because hell gates have never prevailed
against her, Mat. 16.18.
as they have done against others; and because that now only of the Apostolical
Churches she remains: therefore that she is the true Church. But I answer,
that if by hell gates be understood Heresies (as some of the Fathers have
expounded them: Epiphan. in ancorato. August. de symbolo ad Catechum. lib. 1.
ca. 6 Bellarm. de To. Pont. lib. 4. ca. 3 D. Reinolds against Heart. ca. 7.
deuis. 8.
and as Master Bellarmine seems to affirm) neither have heresies prevailed
against any of the other Apostolic Churches. For Artius, though he assaulted
the Church of Alexandria; and Nestorius the Church of Constantinople: yet they
prevailed not, but had the repulse in the end. Nay in the Church of Rome, there
have bin Bishops that have been heretics, as has been of late very
learnedly proved. Neither has hell gates at this day, that is, heresies,
prevailed against those Churches of ye East, which now the Turk possesses, but
rather his sword and power: And that partly for their own sins, and partly for
the sin of the Pope: as may appear by that prophecy of Zachary. Zach. 11.17.
O Idol shepherd, which leauest the flock, the sword shall be upon his arm,
and upon his right eye. His arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye
shall be utterly darkened. Which prophecy I have handled else where in a
Treatise of the Epistle of saint Jude. Har. euang. ca. 66.
But if by the gates of hell be meant the kingdom of the devil, as Iansenius
does expound them: surely then also the gates of hell have prevailed against
the Church of Rome, as well as against other Churches. For from what monstrous
sins has she been free? as appears by their own histories.

But the true meaning of this promise, Read Platina.
that hell gates shall not prevail against the Church of Christ, and against
that faith which Peter professed, is, that although Satan assault it with all
his power and might with sin, heresies, persecutions etc. yet it shall never
be quite overthrown, Mat. 24.2.
as is now that stately Temple of Jerusalem, which though it were builded on an
earthly hill, has not now one stone left on another: but shall remain ever
unto the worlds ind. Nay even the relics of those other Apostolical Churches
professing Christianity, remain yet under the Turks tyranny: so that Rome
cannot brag that she alone remains. God shall have at the least two witnesses
to confirm his truth for ever. Revel. 11.3.
So that whereas the bridegroom bids his spouse to feed her young ones, by the
Tabernacles of those sheepheards; he means not any one of the Apostolical
Churches, but them all. And what these Apostolical Churches taught, we may
learn by Chrysostom, Cyrill, Clemens, Gregory, Athanasius, and others which
succeeded in them; whose works we have at this day. Again we have now the
Ethiopian Church which professes Christ, where Prester John gouernes: and the
Greek Church, founded no doubt by the Apostles; which in many points of
religion differ from the Roman Church; which Churches also we are here by the
bridegroomes sentence to embrace and feed our younglings by. Lastly, that
correlation or mutual respect, which the bridegroom here uses between those
sheepheards and those sheep, may plainly declare what sheep he means,
whose tract we are to follow. For by those sheepheards, no doubt he means the
Apostles. And then by those sheep, he means likewise those Christians which
lived in the days of the Apostles. This is that heavenly and manifest
answer, which the bridegroom himself makes unto the bride, of this weighty
and doubtful question. I would to God all true Catholics would mark it well,
and by it be resolved. It is plain. And this is the effect of this treatise
following: It teaches first the faith of the Church, and her true marks: and
next the tract of the Lords sheep, the manners and conuersations of the former
Christians, which here the heavenly bridegroom counsels his spouse to follow.

The true Catholics house, or the notes and marks of the true Church, taken
out of the holy Scriptures.
THe true Church began in Paradise: And God himself as he was the Creator of
man; so was he the founder thereof. For thus we read in Genesis immediately afer
man's creation: And God commanded Adam saying: In eating thou shall eat: Genesis
2.16.
that is, thou may freely eat, of every tree of the Garden: But of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat thereof; for in the day
wherein thou shall eat thereof, thou shall surely die. Here is the foundation
of the Church, the preaching of Gods word: God himself being the first
preacher thereof. Now follows Satan's synagogue: But the Serpent was craftier
then every beast of the field, which the Lord God had made. Genesis 3.1.
Here is first craft and subtlety, in the foundation of the false Church. Gods
Church is builded upon a plain, sure and hard rock: but Satan's Synagogue on
a moorish, deceitful, and unstable marsh or fenne. And to this saint Paul
alludes, writing to the Corinthians: I am jealous over you (says he) even with
the zeal of God: I have made you fit for one husband, 2. Cor. 11.2.
to make you a chaste virgin to Christ. Here is first saint Paul's great love to
the Church of Corinth, he is as jealous over them, even as God is over his. No
greater love can be, then wherewith he loves them. And as a token of this his
love, as loving Parents are wont to bestow great cost upon their children to
prefer them in marriage: so he has made the^ a fit spouse for Christ: He has
adorned the^ with all heavenly Jewels, that he might set them forth, as a
chaste virgin fit for Christ, and all this he has done by the preaching of the
Gospel. But as lovers are ever careful and fearful of them whom they love,
and especially parents of their children: So S. Paul fears one thing, least
that as the Serpent by his wiliness beguiled Eve in Paradise, and caused her
to depart by his subtilties and wilines from Gods plain word and commandment:
so now also, least he should corrupt their understandings, from the simplicity
and plainnes that is in Christ. As Gods commandment was plain to Adam, that
in what day soever he did eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, he
should die the death: so in the gospel, he has as plainly taught, that
whosoever with a lively faith believes on his son Jesus, Mark. 16.16. Ioh.
3.16.
and now by faith eats again of that true tree of life, shall be saved. So
that as that corporal eating of the tree of knowledge condemned them, even so
now the spiritual eating of the tree of life shall save us. But the Devil as
he did then, so he does now seek to draw away men's minds from this
simplicity; and subtillie to mingle things of his own devise, to this plain
means of our salvation: so that now to be saved by his doctrine, is the most
intricate, hardest, and grieuoust thing in the world. So many observations of
his own, besides Gods word (as he did then) so has he now forged and added to
this plain word of our salvation, by faith in Jesus Christ. And that which S.
Paul then feared, we see now plainly come to pass.

And he said to the woman: yea, Genesis 3.1.
and has God commanded you that you shall not eat of every tree that is in
the garden? Here secondly is another corner stone of Satan's house, to depart
from Gods express word. Whereas God had commanded Adam plainly, that he
should eat of every tree: now Satan comes and preaches quite contrary,
that God had commanded, that they should not eat of every tree. And so he
does preach still, if we do mark well. Whereas God does command, that we
should make no graven Image, Exodus 20.4.
and that we shall not kneel down to it, nor worship it; Satan says, that
we may make Images and kneel down to them and worship them. And whereas
God says, Psalm. 50.14.15.
that in the time of our trouble we shall call upon him, and he will deliver us:
Satan persuades us then to make other intercessors and spokesmen for us. And
whereas God says, herein we shall glorify him: Satan says, that this
invocation is not Latria; it is no part of Gods honor, but he communicates it
to Angels and creatures. Thirdly, Eve by giving ear to this crafty serpent,
and by communing many words with him (as should seem) as satan's first w^^d
does seem to import, whereas he says, yea, and has God, etc. She adds a
stone or two more, to further satan's building, by adding, Genesis 3.2.
detracting, and doubting of Gods word. And the woman said to the Serpent, we
shall eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden: but of the fruit of that
tree which is in the midst of the garden, said God, ye shall not eat of it,
nor shall ye touch it, least peradventure ye die. Here Eve ioines hands with
satan, to erect his synagogue. First she detracts from Gods word: whereas God
most amply had commanded them, that they should eat freely of every tree of
the Garden; Genesis 2.16.
she leaves out every tree, and says only, of the fruit of the trees of the
Garden. Again she adds, that that tree, which was forbidden them, stood in
the midst of the Garden: Genesis 3.2.3.
that was more then God told them. And that they might not touch it: And this
also was more then God commanded them. They might no doubt have touched that
tree without sin, if they had not taken and eaten of the fruit thereof. Genesis
2.15.
For Adam before was placed of God, to dress the Garden, therefore no doubt he
might have pruned and touched any tree in the garden without danger. And here
that fault in religion first sprang, which men call superstition. The which is
thus defined, Vocab. scholast.
to be a fault opposite to religion in excess, when a man will be religious
more then needs, and more then God commands. Lastly, she doubts of the truth of
Gods word, And she says, G^n. 3.3. Genesis 2.27.
least peradventure ye shall die: whereas God had said; In dying, ye shall
die, as it is in the Hebrew: that is, ye shall most assuredly die. Here are
then the notes and marks of the false Church, to use subtlety, to depart from
the plain and express commandment of God, to add any thing (though it seem
religious) superstitiously unto it, and to doubt of the truth of it. And by
these, the notes and marks of the true Church, by the contrary, may be
gathered: to use plainness in her doctrine, to cleave to the word of God, to
add nothing to it, neither to doubt of the truth of it.

And that these are infallible and undoubted marks of the Church, 1. Sam.
15.20.21. 1. King. 13.18.
the histories of King Saul, and of the man of God that came to Bethel, and
prophesied against Ieroboams golden calves, and S. Paul's protestation twice
uttered, plainly prove. Gal. 1.8.9.
Whereof the first teaches: that Saul being a King, might not dispense with
Gods word, to save the life of another King, no nor to save fat sheep, and
oxen, which (as man would have thought) it had been pity to have killed, no
not for sacrifice, and for Gods own honor and service. No pretense of man's
brain may dispense with Gods word: it must be obeyed.

The second also teaches the same lesson. The man of God being a Prophet,
doing a miracle, healing the kings withered hand; again being beguiled by
another Prophet, who was an old man, and therefore not likely to be a liar,
and pretending also the revelation of an Angel: yet this Prophet, this man of
God going beyond his commission, who transgressed Gods word (being drawn and
persuaded by all these fleshly reasons) and that but a little, to a thing which
in man's judgment, would seem but necessary, even but to refresh himself;
escaped not death, for this his contempt: but was killed of a Lion. Neither
King nor Priest here can dispense, they must obey. If any excuse might serve
the turn, surely then we would think that both these were excusable; but
their excuses would not save them harmless: therefore no other lesser
pretenses or excuses can warrant us, can secure meaner men, if Kings and
Prophets by these escaped not. And to these histories, as it should seem, S.
Paul alludes when as he says: Gal. 1.8.9.
If an Angel from heaven, or we our selves preach to you any other Gospel
(that is any other means of salvation) then that ye have already received,
let him be accursed. And he says the same twice, no doubt because some men
should not mark this, or hardly believe it: and that they should believe
Angels from heaven, naie even devils from hell in the shape of men, teaching
doctrines and means of salvation, which the gospel teaches not. Oh that all
true Catholics which rely so much of the name of the Church, would mark
diligently this lesson iterated of the Apostle; and would accept no other
ways or means of salvation, besides those only which the gospel teaches! They
are worthily accursed which will not believe this doctrine, which Saul a king
teaches them with the loss of his kingdom; which the man of God teaches
them with the loss of his life: and Saint Paul himself the Doctor of the
Gentiles, twice together, 1. Tim. 2.7.
most evidently, and that under the pain of a curse. David also teaches us
the same lesson: Psalm. 95.7.
For he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his
hands. To day if ye will hear his voice, etc. for so this verse is pointed in
the Hebrewe. So that then, would we have God to be our God, would we be his
people and sheep of his foulde, that is, members of his true Church? what
then, let us hear his voice. This is an evident and plain mark of his true
Church, and of all his sheep. Our Savior also in the gospel, agrees with
David: My sheep (says he) hear my voice, Ioh. 10.27.28.29.
and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish; neither shall any pluck them out of my hand: my
father which gave them me, is greater then all, and none is able to take them
out of my fathers hands. Here is the true brande of all Christ's sheep, they
hear his voice; and they know him. And here is the benefit they reap, by
being his sheep, here is his most pleasant and sweet pasture, which passes
all the pleasant meadows and pastures in the world: That he knows all his
sheep not in general, but every one particularly.

And of this must every one of his sheep be most assuredly persuaded, Exodus
33.12. Luke 12.32. Romans 6.23.
that he knows him even by name, as he knew Moses, and he gives them eternal
life: it is his free gift. Oh how are all men bound to love and serve such a
loving Lord and shepherd, that bestows on them such a gift! This
bountifulness passes all the bountifulness in the world, and this gift all
the gifts in the world. Luke 17.10.
And all that ever we can do; are but duties and humble services to such a
mighty and bountiful prince. Oh proud Pharisee! that wilt think here thou
can challenge, or bast deserved any part of this gift. It is a most free
gift: it is no desert. And thou art sure of it; thou shall never perish: none
is able to take thee out of Jesus Christ's hands. And this, because men are
fainthearted, and it is the principal mark that satan shootes at to take
this assurance of salvation out of men's hearts, and to make them doubt of Gods
love toward them (as he did Eve) it is twice repeated here of our Savior;
1. Pet. 2.22.
in whose mouth is no deceit: His sheep shall never perish: and none is able
to pluck them out of his fathers hands. And will thou not believe him? will
thou doubt?

The same mark of Gods Church, and of all his children our Savior teaches in
another place. I am the vine (says he) and ye are the branches: he that
abides in me, and I in him, Io. 15.4.
the same brings forth much fruit. For without me can ye do nothing: If a
man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and withers, and men gather
them up, and cast them into the fire, and they burn. Here is the root, and
here are the branches: here is Christ and his Church. Here are those dry
withered branches, that are none of the Church, but hell fire brands. Here are
those fruitful branches, that bring forth much fruit. But you will say, this
is true and plain: but how shall we know whether we be grafted in this vine or
no, whether we be members of the Church or no? The manifest mark whereby this
thing also is known (which troubles so many at this day) follows, that he
that will not wilfully blindfold himself may see it. If ye abide in me (says
our Savior) and my words abide in you, Verse. 7.
ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you. Here is the means and true
mark of them that abide in Christ: They have his words abiding in them. The
knowledge and obedience to the word of God, is the only means to engraft us
into Christ, or to break us off. As saint Paul teaches us by the example of
the Jews. Romans 11.20.
For their incredulity they were broken off: and we by faith were grafted in
their place: Would thou then be grafted into Christ; would thou be sure
that thou art a member of his Church? Let his word abide in thee: Psalm. 119.11.
Col. 3.16. Deuteronomy. 6.7.
Let it be hidden within the closet of thy heart, and dwell plenteously within
the roof of thy house, as S. Paul commands. Talk of it by thy fire, teach
thy children and thy servants it: And then thou shall surely abide in the vine,
and be a member of the true Church. And that thou may have an evident token,
and sign hereof, although now signs and miracles are ceased; yet God will
give thee a sign to strengthen thy faith: Ask what thou will, and it shall be
done unto thee. This is the dignity of Gods children: that they which hear
him speaking by his word to them: he also will hear them, when by their
prayers they talk with him.

And to this Solomon agrees. Pro. 28.9.
He that turns away his ears (says he) from hearing the law, his prayers
are abominable. Though they make never so long prayers, and pray never so
devoutly: yet if they refuse to hear the law of God; their prayers, be they
never so devout, are abominable with God. Surely by this it may seem, that
their much praying in Popery did them little good; because they heard not the^
Gods word. And that even now all the good blessings we enjoy in Gods Church
far above our deserts; we may attribute to our prayers, and to our hearing of
the law of God. Let all Recusants mark this well, and be diligent to hear the
law of God, if they mind to have their prayers heard. Solomon and Jesus Christ
teaches them: That if Gods word abide in them, then let them ask what they
will, and they shall obtain it: Otherwise, they shall obtain nothing at Gods
hand. This mark of Gods Church also was prefigured in the law. Deuteronomy. 15.17.
That servant that would not go from his master which had sold himself, at
the sixth years end, because he loved his master, and because he is well with
him: Let him take an nawle (says Moses) and pearce his ear through against the
door, Io. 13.13.
and he shall be his servant for ever. Jesus Christ is the best master in the
world: they that will not depart from his house, must have their ears bored
through with an nawle: they must be diligent hearers of his word: And such shall
be his servants for ever. And to this alludeth David in the Psalm: Psalm. 40.6.
Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire. For mine ears have thou dug
or bored through (as it is in the Hebrew) burnt offering and sinne-offering have
thou not required: Then said I, lo I come. For in the volume of the book it
is written of me, Io. 4.34.14.31
I desired to do thy good will O my God; yea thy law is within my heart. David
here prophesies of Jesus Christ, that his ears were not bored through only
but even dug: he was so obedient to all his fathers commandments; his law
was in his heart: and so must all Gods servants ears be, they must follow
Jesus Christ. They must have their ears not bored, but dug through; they
must be diligent and obedient hearers of Gods word; and this is a principal
mark of the Church: a true cognizance of all Gods servants. To this also
agrees the first Psalm, which teaches the very first step to blessedness,
which only is in Gods house. That man is blessed (says the Psalm) whose
delight is in the law of the Lord, and he meditates therein day and night. Who
would not be blessed? That is, the mark that all men aim at. The plain way
to attain it, is here set down: To delight in the law of God, and to meditate
therein day and night. This is the faithful man's delight: this is his glory,
this is his badge. He that does this is most assuredly Gods servant, is a
member of the true Church. So that then the first mark of Gods Church, is the
true knowledge and obedience of his word.

The second mark is invocation of his name. Genesis 4.25.
For thus we read, And Adam knew his wife and she brought forth a son, and
called his name Seth, because God (says she) has given me another son for
Abel, because Cain slew him. And also Seth had a son borne unto him, and he
called his name Enoch, and then men began to call on the name of the Lord. Here
is as it were the petigree of the Church: here was first Abel slain, the first
begotten son of this mother, and then after succeeds him as his heir Seth;
and after Seth Enoch. And then men began to call on the name of the Lord. Here
no doubt was typically, eue^ then the very platform of Christ's Church drawn
out. Abel the first begotten son of the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. Romans 8.14.
was slain of his own brother: and so was Jesus Christ, who is the head of
his Church and the first begotten among many brethren. After Abel, Seth
succeeds, which signifies in Hebrew, put, set, or placed, as a foundation, or
an ornament, or a comfort: and therefore Eve gives her son this name. And
this Seth may very fitly resemble faith, Mat. 16.18. 1. Cor. 1.30. Io. 14.1.
which is put in our hearts by the holy Ghost as a foundation, and our only
ornament and comfort among the manifold sorrows and troubles of this life. Let
not your heart be troubled (says our Savior) believe in God, and believe in
me. Seth begets Enoch, which in Hebrew signifies calamities, or miseries: And
this does faith beget in man. True faith makes him confess his frailty, his
misery, how that there remains no goodness in him. And then follows true
invocation of the name of God, which is the second mark of the true Church:
How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed (says the Apostle)
The sense and feeling of miseries and calamities will make a man call for help.
Romans 10.24.
And thus we may plainly see, how by an excellent order our faith is portraied
out, even in Adams children, and the true Church described. In Seth his days
(as should seem) was no public invocation of the name of God. True religion
would not so soon take root, though he labored no doubt very earnestly
about it; or else being planted of Adam by Cains posterity it had been
defaced. But in his sons days she sprang up, and put out her head again:
And then men began to call on the name of the Lord. Here is another principal
mark of the true Church, to call upon the name of the Lord. For the holy ghost
does mean the whole here, by the principal part. No doubt they offered
sacrifices then, as Abel and Cain did, and they did meditate of that promise of
God made unto them of the woman's seed. Genesis 3.15.
But this was a special note of Gods Church: They called on the name of the
Lord. To commend the excellency and necessity of prayer, Mark. 11.17.
our savior also says: That his house shall be called a house of prayer to
all nations, and not a house of preaching.

As tectum the roof of the house in Latin is put for the whole house: so
invocation of the name of the Lord, is here put down for the whole service of
God. Exodus 20.1.
And this service of God, he commands in his first commandment, thou shall
have no other Gods but me: That is, thou shall trust unto, shall call upon no
other, but me: for on them whom men trust in, they call upon. Psalm. 50.15.
And in the Psalm more plainly, call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I
will deliver thee, and thou sholt glorify me. Where are added two notable
reasons, to make us willing, and even to bind us to this service: first, that
God promises that he will deliver us: and who being in trouble will desire
any thing else? Secondly, we shall hereby glorify God. This is such a service
and duty, as belongs to him alone; we may not yield it to any other. This
was also Abraham's religion, which no doubt he had learned of his ancestors.
For thus we read of him. Genesis 13.1.
And Abraham came out of Egypt, and his wife with him, and all that he had,
and Lot with him, toward the South. And Abraham was very rich in cattle and
in silver, and gold. And he went on his journey from the South to Bethel, to
the place where his tent had been in the beginning, between Bethel and Haie,
unto the place of the Altar, which he had made there at the first. And there
Abraham called on the name of the Lord. Here is Abraham's religion and worship
of God set down in one word, Romans 4 12.
he called on the name of the Lord. As he is the father of the faithful in
believing (as saint Paul teaches) so he is their father in this point also.
All his sons must follow his steps. This is a mark of the true Church. If
they do this they cannot err. And here we may also note, that Abraham changed
not his religion, though he had been in Egypt: Travelers must not alter their
religion: they must not be like wethercocks, turned about with every blast of
vain doctrine. Ephesians. 4.14.
And though also he was now waxen rich; yet he kept the same religion he
professed in the beginning. Religion must be always one, no time may alter
it, no wealth make it waver. Abraham being now wealthy comes a great journey
to worship, even there where he did worship before, when he was poor. So must
ye rich men of this world do: riches must not choke their religion, their
zeal in Gods service; as many times they do. They should now be more zealous,
not more slack in Gods service, then they were before. The Philosopher could
say, he that found out benefits, found out fetters: And shall not Gods
benefits bind them; as they did here Abraham, more firmly unto him?

Again, here Jesus Christ is portraied out unto us: He comes to the altar
between Bethel and Hai. Bethel in Hebrew signifies Gods house; and Hai,
desolation, or a disordered heap and mass: and may fitly represent the
world. Betwixt these is Abraham's altar, that is Jesus Christ, that all may
have access unto him, he is placed betwixt Bethel and Hai: Even as God placed
Jerusalem in the midst of the world, as a fountain of lively waters, that all
people that would, might repair thither, Esaias. 55.1.
and freely quench their thirst. And Abraham there called on the name of the
Lord.

The same lesson no doubt he taught Isaac his son, who went out at the
euentide: Lashnak, as it is in the Hebrew, Genesis 24.63.
to meditate or to pray in the field. He called on the name of the Lord as his
father did. And in this one word, his religion or service of God is put down
also.

Thus also is Enochs religion described, he walked with God; Genesis 5.^2.24. Heb.
11.27.
and he was no more seen: for God had taken him away. He walked with God, not
only praying, but also even living. He lived so, as though God had been
always present with him: Psalm. 9.17.
as he was indeed; and is with every man, although the wicked forget God, and
think not so. As Moses also walked. Verse, 22.24.
And it is twice said, that he walked with God; as a special commendation.
This is that great promise which our Savior Christ has given to his Church:
Ioh. 16.23.
That whatsoever they shall ask in his name; they shall obtain it. And who
that believes this, will desire any more? if prayer in the name of Jesus
Christ give us all things; who will pray for any thing, in the name of any
other?

And this is the mark whereby christians were known in the primitive Church.
Acts, 9.14.
Ananias said unto Christ, Saul has authority to bind all that all on thy
name: and after Paul's conversion, Verse, 21.
all the people that knew him said. Is not this he that persecuted all that
called on this name? To call on the name of Jesus Christ, was the badge of all
christians in the primitive Church, by this Cognizance they were then known.
And Saint Paul himself by this mark points out all christians, when he writes
to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1.3.
and to all that call on the name of the Lord Jesus, as well in their places as
in ours. That is, even in all places through the whole world.

Psalm. 50.5.
And David in the Psalm against the day of judgment, when as all Gods sheep
shall be gathered together, gives this general mark of Gods Church, and this
common brand of all his sheep: Gather my Saints together (says God) that have
made a league and a covenant with me with sacrifice. All true christians must
learn that lesson that Naaman the Syrian being now cleansed of his leprosy
had learned, 2. King. 5.17.
that he would now offer sacrifice to no other Gods, save to the Lord.

As they are all Naamans by nature; even lepers through sin, 1. Cor. 6.11.
and now pure by cleansing by water: so they must be Naamans also in
profession, that they will offer sacrifice to no other gods but to the Lord. He
confessed that sacrifice was a service due to God, and that he now detesting
all other vain gods, would only do this homage to the Lord: and shall not
christians know and profess as much? No doubt he was a figure of christians:
let the truth surpass the shadow in cleerenesse. As many as do offer
sacrifice to any other, are more leprous in soul, then ever Naaman was in
body. And are not payers sacrifices? Does not S. Paul teach all christians,
that now the Jewish sacrifices being ceased, Heb. 13.15.
that they must offer to God the calves of their lips? And does not David
say, even in the shadow; Psalm. 141.2.
let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incense, and let the lifting
up of my hands be an evening sacrifice? Then if we will be Gods sheep, we must
have this brand: if we will be his Saints, we must make this vow, that we will
sacrifice or make our prayers to none other, but to him alone. And at the day
of judgment, such only shall be gathered into Gods sheepfould, and such God
shall account for his Saints, howsoever man, and the Pope now do canunise
others. This word shall stand sure, this word shall be approved true at that
day: Gather my Saints together, who have made a league and covenant with me
with sacrifice. Would thou be a Saint then, most assuredly canonised: not in
the Popes Calendar, but in heaven? make a firm covenant and league with God
only, with thy sacrifices and prayers. Would thou be at that day a sheep
gathered into Gods sheepfolde, and stand on his right hand? while thou live
here then, praise him alone, call upon him alone, and upon none other.

On the contrary, Psalm. 79.6.
David describes the Malignant Church thus: Power out thine indignation (says
he) upon the heathen, that have not known thee, and upon the kingdoms which
have not called upon thy name. Ephesians. 6.12.
Here are two marks of Satan's synagogue, ignorance, and idolatry. Satan is
the prince of darkness: his house shall be a dark house: it shall lack
light: It shall be like Egypt; his children shall not know God: Exodus 10.22.
and therefore, neither shall call upon him. Psalm. 103 11. Esaias. 65.24. Psalm.
139.7. Genesis 17.1. M^t. 11.28.
For he that knows what God is, that he is most merciful, most ready to
hear, that he is in all places, that he is of all power and might alone, that
he calls even sinners unto him: he that knows this I say, cannot choose, but he
will call upon God. These are they then, which shall have Gods wrath powered upon
them, which have not known God, nor called upon his name. Ose. 2.17.
The Idolaters call upon Baal and other names: Acts, 4.1^.
but there is no other name given to men in the which they must be saved; but
only the name of Jesus Christ. Peter teaches this, and I would to God, he that
would be Peter's successor would learn this lesson, and teach it also: if no
other name, then not of Saint or Angel. And S. Paul makes plain this lesson of
Peter, Col. 3.17.
and takes away all the wiles and sleights of Satan, all Popish cauils and
distinctions: They say that there is no other name of salvation; but there
may be other names of invocation, or intercession. But Saint Paul says
plainly, do all things in the name of Jesus Christ. Thanksgiving, prayers,
intercessions, inuocations, all requests whatsoever must be done in the name of
Jesus Christ: and therefore in no other name. Let all Gods servants mark well
these two marks: they are the marks of the false Church, to be ignorant of
God, and not to call upon his name: let them take heed. If they be signed with
these marks, God will not be angry with them only: but he will power out his
wrath upon them. O fearful sentence! And do we make no account of this matter?

When as God would renew to Abraham the promise made to Adam of the woman's
seed, to take away the curse that Adam by his sin had deserved, and was
justly inflicted upon him, he added, that in his seed should all the nations
of the world be blessed. Genesis 12.3.16.
So that now here we may learn another plain mark of the true church; to
have her blessedness consist only in that one feed of Abraham, Gal. 3.16.
not in many, no nor in any thing beside. God also describing the blessed
estate of his church by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 54.17.
writes thus: Every vessel (it is Celi in Hebrew which signifies properly a
vessel, that is made to hold any thing) against thee shall not prosper, and
thou shall condemn every tongue that strives against thee. This is the
inheritance of the servants of the Lord: that is, this for ever is as it were,
an inheritance which shall succeed in Gods true Church; that all those great
learned men, that shall stand up against it, shall not prosper, and all those
eloquent tongues that thall speak against her, shall be condemned. Here is a
special privilege of Gods church, which we may see fulfilled in all ages.
The Prophet Esaias here agreeing with our Savior, Mat. 16.18.
that hell gates may impugn, but they shall never prevail against the Church:
as Arrius, Nestorius, and other gerat learned heretics have testified.

This is the dignity of the true Church: now follows her cognizance. And
their righteousness is from me, says the Lord; not of themselves. And this is
that which Jeremy also teaches: Behold the days are coming (says the Lord)
and I will raise up to David a righteous branche, Ier. 23.5.
and a King shall reign, and he shall have understanding, he shall deal
wisely, he shall do judgment, and justice upon the earth. Here is most
evidently our Savior Jesus Christ described: he shall be a branch of David,
coming of his Ioynes: he shall be righteous, Io. 8.46. 1. Cor. 1.30. Col. 2.3.
even his very enemies shall not be able to accuse him of sin. He shall do
wisely: he is the wisdom of God the father, he shall set up judgment and
righteousness upon earth; he shall judge and condemn that old Prince of this
world Satan, Io. 12.31.
and cast him out of doors, and shall teach all men the way of true
righteousness, that is faith in him. And in his days salvation shall be to
Judah and Israel; they shall dwell safely. And this shall be the name wherewith
they shall call him: The Lord our righteousness. Psalm. 4.^.
And thus also David calls him, hear me O God that art my righteousness. And
this also then is another true mark of the true Church: to call and account
Jesus Christ their righteousness. And if this be his name, it must not be given
to any other: he must have his name alone himself. They deny him his name,
that attribute their righteousness to an thing else in this world what soever?
And this name have al Gods saints always attributed unto him: Genesis 18.27
I have begun to speak unto my Lord (says Abraham) which am but dust and
ashes; thus basely he thought of himself: what glory, what beauty is in dust
and ashes? And O Lord (says Jacob) I am not worthy of the least of all thy
mercies, Genesis 32.10.
and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant. As though he
should say, I can challenge nothing, no not the least grace which thou have
bestowed upon me.

And Job says: Job. 9.2.
How should a man compared to God be justified? If he would dispute with him,
he could not answer one thing, for a thousand. And to Job agrees David:
Innumerable troubles (says he) are comed about me, my sins have taken such
hold upon me, that I am not able to look up. Psalm. 40.12.
Yea they are more in number then the hairs of my head, and my heart has
failed me. Even David himself, thus many in number accounted his sins, Act.
13.22.
being a man according to Gods own heart. And who dare then account his sins
fewer? And our Savior likewise teaches all his, when as they have done all
that is commanded them (if they were able to do it, Luke 17.10.
as there is none able) even then to say and to account themselves in deed,
unprofitable servants: Much more then, when they shall not be able to do
perfectly even the least of that, which is commanded them. Nay if the Apostles
themselves shall say they have no sin, 1. Io. 1.8.
they were liars: Much more then any other Christians whatsoever. All true
Christians account their works, do they never so many and so excellent, but
duties, not deserts; as saint Paul teaches them. For the love of Christ now
(says he) pincheth us or constrains us to do all things. 2. Cor. 5.14.
For we thus judge, that if one be dead for all, then were all dead. And he
died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto him that died for them and rose again.

Here is the end and cause of all good works. They are but duties which we are
bound to do for Jesus Christ's sake, that died for us, if so be we could do
even a thousand times more the^ we can do. Mat. 5.16.
They are light, they are not fire: Let your light so shine before men (says
our Savior) that men seeing your good works, Luke. 12.44.
may glorify your heavenly father. But he deserves the praise of this light
that kindled ye fire. And that is he which said, I am come to send fire upon
the earth, and what will I now, but that it burn? Io. 2.18.
The light is his, that owes the fire: our works are not ours, they are but
the light of faith. The Apostle Paul calls them fruits of righteousness, Phil.
1.11.
they are not causes thereof. They proceed from it. When we are justified, then
we bring forth good works: Heb. 11.6. 2. Cor. 3.5.
Before we can do nothing that is good; no not so much as think a good
thought. He that owes the tree, may justly challenge these fruits. Ephesians. 1.13.
After (says saint Paul) that the Ephesians believed (which is their new life
and justification) they were also sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which
is the earnest of their inheritance until the redemption of the possession
purchased, unto the praise of his glory. God bestows all his gifts upon us,
our faith, whereby we live and are justified; the holy spirit, whereby we are
sealed and assured, that we are Gods children, whereby we are sanctified and
enriched with all good works; yea and preserved even till the day we shall
obtain that glorious kingdom of heaven, purchased for us by Jesus Christ; for
this only end, that we should be to the praise of his glory. A Christian
must, in all things, and for all things, all his life long glorify God. This
is the mark he must shoot at; the thing he must do daily. And for this cause
God bestows his benefits; yea even all the good works he does daily upon him.
Gal. 1.23.
So the Saints magnified God in Paul being now converted. So in the Psalm, all
the saints protest, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us: Psalm. 1 15 1.
but unto thy name give the glory. And in the Prophet; Esaias. 26.12.
Thou have wrought all our works in us. We challenge nothing our selves, but
only glorify thee, that by us vile earth, blunt tools, unfit instruments,
thou would vouchsafe, of thy abundant mercy, wisdom and power, to work
such excellent things. So that this is another mark of the true Church, to
attribute and ascribe all her righteousness, to the Lord Jesus Christ.

Another evident mark of the true Church, to be cunning in the Scriptures; to
have Gods law in her heart. Heb 8.8
And this is that which saint Paul alleges out of Jeremy, that out of the
mouth of two witnesses, Deuteronomy. 19.15.
this truth might be confirmed to us: That he that should now doubt thereof
might justly be condemned. Behold the days will come (says the Lord) when I
shall make with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah a new
testament: Not like the testament I made with their fathers, in the day I took
them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt. For they continued not
in my testament, and I regarded them not says the Lord. For this is the
testament, that I will make with the house of Israel after these days, says
the Lord: I will put my laws in their minds, and in their hearts I will write
them: and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall not
teach every man his neighbor, saying, know the Lord: For all shall know me
from the greatest of them to the least of the^. Here we may note a notable, yea
and a principal mark of the true Church. God calls this his new testament or
covenant: Why then, they that have not had this, or have it not, are not within
the covenant of God, are none of his heirs, are not partakers of his testament.
But what is this covenant? They shall have Gods law written in their heart; they
shall al know God from the greatest of the^ to the smallest. Psalm. 19.7.119.110.
They shall now be all cunning in Gods word, that thereby as David says, the
very simple shall get understanding, that they shall be by it wiser) as he
himself was) then the aged. By Gods word, the holy Ghost shall so teach every
one of them, that now as saint John says, they shall need no other teacher. 1.
Io. 2.27. Esaias. 11.9.
Then shall be fulfilled that which Esaias prophecieth: The earth shall be filled
with the knowledge of the Lord: even as the waters that cover the sea If this
be the mark of the true Church: then every one that is not to too partial,
or will not shut his eyes wilfully against the light of the sun, need go no
further, but may here plainly discern which is the true and false Church; and
may decide that great doubt, which at this day troubles so many men's
consciences. Has this knowledge been in the Popes Church? Have they thus
known God from the greatest to the smallest? Speak truth herein whosoever
thou art: And if it be most apparent, that this knowledge has been wanting
therein; be not afraid to say with the Prophet Jeremy, and with S. Paul and
with Esaias, that she is none of Christ's spouse; that she has no part in his
testament. This same only mark bewrays her, and condemns her. The same
mark has God put down again of his house and true Church, by the Prophet
Esaias, least we should doubt thereof. Esaias. 59.20.21.
The redeemer shall come unto you, and unto the^ that turn from iniquity in
Jacob says the Lord. Here first is Jesus Christ; now follows his Church. And
I will make this my covenant with them, says the Lord: My spirit which is upon
thee, and the words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of
thy seed (says the Lord) from henceforth eue^ for ever. Here is first a
covenant: Secondly, here are the spirit and Gods word united and knit together:
So that even as the winds accompany the waters, so does Gods spirit the
waters of comfort: Romans 15.4.
that is, the waters of the scriptures. And these words, as they have been in
Christ's mouth; for he spoke not of himself, but as his father gave him
commandment (so he spoke) so they shall be in the mouth of his seed, Io.
12.49.
and of his seeds seed for ever.

If these be the true marks of the Church, the Popish Church which lacks these
marks, is not the true Church: Nay she has broken this covenant most
apparently. And therefore no doubt she is that whore of Babylon, which saint
John speaks of in the Revelation. Reu. 17.2. Io. 6.63. To. 8.9. Genesis 1.2.
Act. 10 44. 2. Cor. 3.6.
Nay she is not only a trucebreaket but a murderer; she has debarred Gods
people of his word, and so also of his spirit, which is the very life of the
faithful, and without the which they are but withered branches. For the word
and the spirit are knit together, as the Prophet here teaches us: and
therefore she is guilty of murder. And of such living and spiritual
murderers, of whom the civil laws of magistrates take no hold, Saint John
says also, Cap. 9.11.
that they will not repent of these their murders, but still maintain them
and practice them; even as the Papists do at this day. They which will be
accounted Gods seed and his children, let them see that they have Gods word in
their mouths, even as Jesus Christ had: Let it never depart, neither from
their mouths nor hearts: let it alone direct all their works: let them in all
their works say as he said: As my father has commanded me, so do I. John,
14.30.


David also thus pictureth out Gods Church: Psalm. 87.1. A paraphrase of the 87.
psalm. 1. Cor. 15.3.
Her foundations are upon the holy hills. What other holy hills are these but
the scriptures? Gods Church is built upon the scriptures; upon them she
groundeth all her doctrines: God loves the gates of Sion, more then all the
dwellings of Jacob. Here is next her glory, her beauty, her strength, her
felicity. God loves now the meanest christian, better then the best Jew,
even the gates of Sion, before the stately palaces of Jacob. Ier. 9.23.
So that now let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nor the strong man
in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches; but let him that reioiceth,
glory in this, that he knows me, says the Lord. 1. Cor. 1.31.
And wherein this knowledge consists, S. Paul teaches; that is, to know that
Jesus Christ of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification and redemption. That according as it is written (says S. Paul)
let him that reioiceth, rejoice in the Lord, for these things, for this
wisdom of Gods word, for this strength of faith, for the riches of Christ
merits, which all are ours. And therefore he says so often to the Philippians:
Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord, and again I say rejoice. And why? because God loves
thee. If thou be a christian even whosoever thou art, though thou be never so
mean a christian, though thou be but a gate and no stately palace; yet the
Lord loves thee more then all the palaces of Jacob. Though thou be but a
little one in Christ, Mat. 18.10.
yet thy Angel, thy servant that attends upon thee, beholds the face of God in
heaven. And this love of God is another mark of Gods Church. Glorious things
are spoken of thee O thou city of God. The Church is called here the city of
God: Reu. 22.17.
she is called also the Spouse of Christ.

And again Esaias writes thus of her: Esaias. 54.10.
For a moment in my anger I hid my face from thee for a little season: but with
everlasting mercy have I had compassion of thee, says the Lord thy redeemer.
And again, O thou afflicted and tossed with the tempest, that have no comfort:
Behold I will lay thy stones with the carbuncle, and lay thy foundations with
Saphires. And I will make thy windows of Emerauds, and thy gates shining
stones, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. And thy children shall be
taught of the Lord, and much peace shall be to thy children. In righteousness
shall thou be established, and be far from oppression, for thou shall not
fear it: and from fear: for it shall not come near thee.

These are great blessings even in worldly affairs, in things that concern
our bodies; but in those things which concern our souls, how far more
excellent are they: such glorious things are spoken of Gods Church. But the
Romish Church, by their placing of peblestones, and stones that lie in the hie
way, in the windows of Gods church, that is, simple and unpreaching Prelates,
and also by teaching the doctrine of the uncertainty of salvation, has
obscured this glory. I will think of Rahab and Babylon with them that know
me, etc. Here is another mark of the church. She shall now be spread over the
whole world; not tied to any one place, as the Jewish church was. The Papists
would now make their Rome a second Jerusalem; and all the churches of
christendom bound to her: as all the Synagogues of the Jews were bound to
Jerusalem. And they would make their Pope like to the hie priest of the Jews.
But these Jewish shadows are vanished away: and now that mystery of
Antichrist (which they by their shadows would maintain) is come in steed of
them. And no doubt this was that mystery which began to work in S. Paul's
days, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
Gal. 5.1.
of which he speaks: some did not stand then in the liberty of Christ, but
brought in Jewish shadows. Again, Rome is not the daughter of Jerusalem, but
Sion: as David here avouches, whose gates, and children, and singers, and
trumpeters, and fresh springs are not now in any one place, but through the
whole world. Rome if she will needs have a mother, is the daughter of Babylon,
2. King. 25.7.
putting out the eyes of kings, that she might make them serve her, leading
Gods people from that good freedom wherein Jesus Christ had placed them, into
a miserable bondage again, Ier. 5^.58. Psalm. 137.8.
having her thick and stately walls reaching unto heaven. Of whom David
speaks: O daughter of Babylon which shall be sacked, happy shall he be that
rewards thee as thou have served us. Happy shall he be that spoileth thee
even as thou have spoiled all nations. And their spoils are in thy palaces;
yea happy shall he be that takes thy young children, thy young impes, and
dasheth them against that rock, that is, Jesus Christ.

Images in the beginning were lay men's books only to admonish and to put them
in remembrance, but now they are become lay men's Gods to worship. Prayers for
the dead were testimonies of the good will and affection men living owed to the
dead: now they are become means of their salvation. Such impes must now be
dashed against that Rock Jesus Christ: they impair his merits: they are
repugnant to his Gospel. Behold Palestine, and Tirus with Ethiopia; there was
he borne: In all these countries and kingdoms where Jesus Christ now
reigns; where the Pope never set his seat, shall Jesus Christ have children,
shall he have subjects. The Lord shall count where he reckons up the people,
that he was borne there most gloriously. Those that be regenerate and made Gods
children by spiritual regeneration, shall God number and account for his: and
therefore one Jews a king of France, Zmuger in Theatro. page 2840.
when as he had conquered many countries, one asking him of which of them he
would take his name: he answered, he would be called Jews of Poicters,
because there he was christened, and had gotten there the greatest victory of
all other his victories, even of the Devil the Prince of this world. He
accounted that birth most glorious, better then to be borne the Emperors son
and heir, here in this world. And here every poor and simple christian may
rejoice greatly in the Lord, that he is known of God, and that God himself
keeps a Register of his nativity: and therefore he cannot perish, he cannot
be lost, he cannot be forgotten. By this Register God reckons up and numbers
all his: and he shall reckon up as well singers, as trumpeters.

Of the people which praise God, God makes account of, as well as of the
trumpeters which preach him. 2. Pet. 1.1.
S. Peter writes his Catholic Epistle to all the dispersed brethren, who had
obtained like precious faith with them: Our Savior Jesus prays not only for
his Apostles, Ioh. 17.20.
but for all those also which should believe through their preaching. Oh happy
are all those whom Jesus Christ prays for! 1. Cor. 3.22.
All are yours (says S. Paul to the Corinthians) even Cephas, and Paul, and
Apollo, and the world and death, and life, and things present, and things to
come; you are Lords of all these, and all these are your servants. And you are
Christ's, he is only your Lord, and Christ is Gods. Christians are Lords of
life, and of death of this world, and of the world to come, by the means of
Jesus Christ; they need not fear, nor care for any of these; they may
trample them under their feet; they may command them. O excellent dignity of
all christians! And here by this one place, the Popes supremacy which he
challenges, falls down even to the ground: only Jesus Christ is here set
down, as Lord of christians. And Paul, and Cephas, and Apollo joined
altogether, and the pope also (if he be Peter's successor) are made equal, and
accounted but as servants of Christians. Peter and the Pope here, and Paul
also, are but servants: all christians are their Lords, even as Jesus Christ
again is the only Lord of all christians. Here is the Lordship of being
Christ's vicegerent committed to Peter, no more then to Paul: naie all
christians are his Lords, and he their servant.

Lastly, all my fresh springs shall be in thee: O fruitful soil! O plentiful
church! To have one of Gods springs in it, were a great blessing; but to have
all Gods fresh springs in it, far passes man's reason. Where such plenty of
springs are, who would debar any to dig for water: who will complain of
drought? as the church of Rome has done, who has forbidden the people to
read the scriptures, who has made a pretense that they lacked water, they
lacked judgment. But herein the Prophet David agrees with our Savior, in the
gospel. Who says, Job. 4.14.
that whosoever drinks of the water that I will give him, shall never be more
a thirst, but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water
springing up into everlasting life. Our Savior means here of the abundance
of his holy spirit, which every one that believes in him, has received: and
therefore has this fresh spring in him. And why should we suffer it to be
stopped with earth? why should not we dig this spring, and draw water out of
these wels of salvation with joy, Esaias, 12.3.
as Esaias prophecieth? why should we suffer this water to putrify in us for
lack of drawing, that is, for lack of reading and meditating on the holy
scriptures? Gods people are so ignorant in them, because they will not do
their endeavor, they will not delight in reading of them. Every one has a
fresh spring in himself springing to everlasting life, to water and comfort
himself and others to, by the holy scriptures; if he would keep it open, if
he would use it.

These marks of the true Church, I have briefly run over: although I have
handled some of them elsewhere, because Gods words are compared by the preacher
to Nails: Eccles. 12.11.
and must therefore be fastened by many strokes. Mat. 13.31.33.
And our Savior in the gospel does iterate his parables: As also these two
marks of the Church which follow, although I have handled in some other place:
yet for their plainenes and excellency, I cannot here pass them over. Heb. 3
6.
But Christ as the son is over his own house, says Saint Paul; Whose house
are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of our hope, even unto
the end. Here are two plain marks of the Church: we are Gods house; we are
Gods Church, if so be we keep and hold fast these two things, that is, our
confidence in our prayers; 1. Io. 5.14.
as saint John expounds it: And our rejoicing of the certain hope of our
salvation unto the end. This is our confidence we have in him (says saint
John) that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And if
we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask we know that we have the
petitions that we have desired of him. This ought to be every Christians
confidence and assurance; that whatsoever they ask in the name of Jesus
Christ, (which is agreeing to the will of God) they are sure they shall obtain
it. And they know that Jesus Christ hears them; they know that their petitions
are granted. This is the first mark of Gods Church: no doubt every Christian
ought to have this confidence whenever he prays, that he may say as our
Savior said when he prayed to God his father. I thank thee father that thou
have heard me: I know that thou hear me always. Io. 11.41. To. 15.4. Io.
17.23. Psalm. 56.9.31.22.118.5.68 3
This is written for our learning, God loves us now as he loved him. This the
world must know, much more every Christian himself. This confidence David had
in all his prayers, as appears in his Psalms.

And the second mark also saint John, agreeing with saint Paul, has put down
in the former verse, which is the ground of this. Verse. 13.
These things have I written unto you (says saint John) which believe on the
name of the son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that
ye may believe in the name of the son of God. All Christians must know that
they have eternal life. And that this their knowledge might be sure and
certain, Saint John a faithful witness, writes thus unto them. Who will not
believe in our affairs the deposition of a faithful and honest man? and shall
we not believe the testimony and writing of saint John? And again in his
first Chapter he writes thus. The life appeared, and we have seen it and be
are witness, 1 John. 1.3.
and show unto you the eternal life, which was with the father, and appeared
unto us. This I say that we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye
also may have fellowship with us, and that our fellowship also may be with the
father and with his son Jesus Christ. And these things write we unto you,
that your joy may be full. Who would not read such a comfortable letter? who
durst ever have presumed to think thus much in his heart? That we vile
wretches and miserable sinners should be fellows with the Apostles; nay should
have fellowship and a communion even with God the father, and his son Jesus
Christ, and the holy Ghost, if saint John had not written it? And now that he
has written this unto us, who dare doubt of it? Oh the fellowship with God the
father, and with his son Jesus Christ, and with the holy Ghost? the ioyfullest
letter that ever was read. Will God, nay does God even now account us as his
friends; as those whom he sets most by? Who reads this, and rejoices not even
from his heart? whom will not this glad tidings cause to rejoice daily, as
often as he thinks thereon? Nay, who will ever now cease to think thus, and
let all other matters be forgoite^, I have fellowship with God the father, and
with his son Jesus Christ, and with the holy Ghost: What do I care for else?
He that walks in the sun, the exceeding great light thereof so daseleth his
eyes, that when he comes into his own house, though it be richly furnished, ^e
sees nothing: So should this exceeding great joy drown all our other joys
whatsoever. This rich fellowship with God the father, and his son, and the
holy Ghost, should so dasell our eyes, that we should now make no account of
these our earthly riches. And this joy of this rich and certain hope, being
thus certified us by a faithful witness Saint John, is the mark of the true
Church. They which lack these marks, are none of the Church; what fair shows
soever they have besides.

And this is the very scope of saint John's Epistle, I write unto you (says
he) these things, not that ye may rejoice only: but that your joy may be full.
And this he writes to all Christians: who will then doubt of his salvation?

And here I note, how the Church of Rome does take quite away saint John's
knowledge and assurance: I write unto you (says he) that you may know that you
have eternal life. And again, this is our confidence, that when we pray, we
know that he hears us. We know that we have the petitions that we ask of
him. This certainty, this knowledge, the Church of Rome cannot abide. She
teaches that no Christian can say, he knows that he shall be saved; and
therefore she teaches men to doubt of their salvation. She teaches that we
are not sure whether being hindered by our sins, Jesus Christ will hear us,
or no: And therefore she teaches to make mediators unto him: As though any
thing could be added to his love toward us. Nay his mother the blessed Virgin
Marie, nor all the saints, and Angels in heaven do not love us so dearly, as
he does; if the love of all these were put altogether. And whereas they urge
our sins, to discourage us, and to weaken this our confidence: 1. Ioh. 1.
verse. 8.
Saint John in his first chapter does confess also so much, that we are all
sinners, or else (if we deny that) we are liars. And yet for all that, in this
chapter he teaches us this joy of our salvation, and this confidence and
assurance of our prayers. And is the Church of Rome the true Church? Is she
Gods house, that holds not fast this confidence in her prayers, and this
certainty of the hope of her salvation? Let all men of indifferency judge.

Saint Jude in his Epistle, having foretold of heretics that should trouble
the Church, briefly knits up as in a little bundell the marks of the true
Church: being the same in substance, which saint Paul and saint John have
taught us. Jude epist. Verse. 20.
But ye beloved (says he) edify your selves in your most holy faith: That is,
study, read, meditate, and be expert in the scriptures: So shall you be sure
to be within Gods league and covenant, and be a sheep of Jesus Christ's fold, as
has been noted before. Secondly, pray in the holy Ghost, that is, with
knowledge, with sighing and groaning, To 8 15.16.26.
with faith and assurance: For all these are the fruits of the holy Ghost.
Thirdly, keep your selves in the love of God, that is, be sure that God loves
you: Be sure and know that you have eternal life. Let not that subtle serpent
ever persuade you to doubt of Gods love toward you, as he did Eve your
grandmother: And who goes about still teaching the same lesson to them that
will believe him. Genesis 3.5.
And lastly, look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life. Do
not trust in your works, challenge nothing of desert: Confess that you are
unprofitable servants: Trust only in his mercy. Luke. 17.10.
These are the marks of the true Church by saint Iudes judgment. And they
which lack these are Satan's synagogue, are the false Church: what marks
soever else they do brag of. Psalm. 119.142
For Gods word is the word of truth. And the marks of the Church that are in
it set down, are only the true marks.

But to conclude, although many other clear and manifest marks of the Church
might be gathered out of the scriptures, yet these marks are especially to be
marked of us, which saint John puts down in the Revelation: For they concern
our days, and they are those marks of Gods house, which Babylon had defaced,
and Antichrist had raced out, so as in man's judgment, it seemed impossible
that ever they should have been brought to light again. Antichrist here
dealt so cunningly, even as Pharaoh did in murdering the Israelites children,
intending to destroy their posterity; Exodus 1.14
and Herod in murdering the young innoce^ts, Mat. 2.16.
thinking thereby also to have murdered Jesus Christ. But God that dwells in
heaven laughes all these their counsels, all this their wisdom to scorn.

And therefore saint John saw an Angel fly in the midst of heaven, Psalm. 2.4.
Reave. 14.8.
having an everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell on the earth, and
to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. Here is the first mark
of the Church, the preaching of the gospel: This mark Antichrist had quite
abolished. And although in his kingdom, that he might not seem to be quite
opposite to Jesus Christ, and utterly to disallow preaching, he had his Friars
that preached: yet the pastors of congregations, Luke 12.42. 1 Pet. 5.2.
whom Jesus Christ and Peter also commanded to feed their flock themselves,
in those days seldom preached. And these Friars preached not the Gospel, but
their legends of Saints commonly. And therefore the second mark of the true
Church, is to preach, not legends or old wives tales, but an everlasting
Gospel, that which was from the beginning; not a new faith devised of man's
brain in the succession of many ages. Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and
to day, and for ever. Heb. 13.8. Iud. 1.3.
And all Gods true Saints must strive to maintain that faith, which was once
given to the Saints: in the beginning by Christ Jesus himself and by his
Apostles. That gospel which the Church of Rome now teaches, is not such a
gospel.

And this gospel must be preached to the inhabitants of the earth, to every
nation, and kindred, and tongue and people. Antichrist had seduced all these:
Reu. 17.2.
all these were drunken with the pleasant wine of Babylons fornication.
Antichrist had not seduced the nation of the Jews, as the Papists think he
shall. What need the Devil go about that? they are his already, they are
already seduced as much as can be: but he shall seduce all nations, tongues,
kinreds and people: he shall pervert the gospel of Jesus Christ. And therefore
to them it behooves, that this everlasting gospel should be preached again.
The plaster must be applied to the sore.

And here that mark, which the Church of Rome would make men believe is a
true mark of the true church, is quite overthrown, and approved to be a
false mark. Shall all nations be made drunken with Antichrists poisoned and
pleasant wine? why then Universality is not a sound and a true mark of the
Church. Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, Reu. 14.7.
and give glory to him, etc. Now follows the doctrine and chief points of
this everlasting gospel: as also by the contrary, most evidently may appear
the points of Antichrists doctrine: for contraries make one another more
manifest and clear. So that then, if this be the everlasting gospel, to fear
God and give him the glory: the gospel which Antichrist preached, was
contrary to this: Not to fear God, and not to give him glory. Deuteronomy. 10.1^.
And now Israel, what does thy Lord thy God require of thee (says Moses) but
to fear thy Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to
serve thy Lord thy God, with all thy heart and with all thy soul? And God
himself speaks thus by the Prophet Jeremy: Ier. 5.21.22.
Hear now this, O foolish people and without understanding; which have eyes
and see not, which have ears and hear not. Fear ye not me, says the Lord?
or will ye not be afraid at my presence? which have placed the sand for the
bounds of the sea, by the perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: and
though the waves thereof rage, yet can they not prevail: though they roar;
yet can they not pass over it. And of man the Prophet Esaias says: Esaias, 2.22.
Cease you from the man whose breath is in his nostrels. Mark, 7.7.
And our Savior says of the Pharisees: They worship me in vain, teaching the
doctrines and commandments of men. For ye lay the commandment of God apart,
and observe the traditions of men, as the washing of pots, and of cups, and
many other such like things ye do. Such fear to break man's laws and
commandments, they had also most manifestly in the time of Popery.

As concerning Gods glory also, the Prophet Esaias writes thus: Esaias, 42.8.
I am the Lord, this is my name, and my glory will I not give to another:
neither my praise to graven images. And after: Behold I have fined thee, Esaias,
48.10.
but not as silver: I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction. For mine
own sake, for mine own sake will I do it: for how should my name be
polluted? Surely I will not give my glory to another. And so Jeremy counsails
the people: Ier. 13.16.
Give glory to the Lord your God, before he bring darkness and or ever your
feet stumble on the dark mountains. And David says: Psalm. 65.1.
To thee, O Lord, praise keeps silence, or upon thee it waits in Sion.

So that whereas God by his eternal word commands to fear him; and to be
afraid to break his commandments, and to give all glory to him: the gospel
of Antichrist was to fear man, and to keep his commandments, and to give
glory to creatures. And did not we see this fulfilled in the time of Popery?
how did they then keep Gods people in awe? how afraid were they then, to
break any of the Popes or his cleargies commandments whatsoever? And as for
God, the most part of his commandments they knew not: and those which they
knew, were so corrupted by them, that they had as good almost not to have
known them at all. They did, as the Pharisees did teach the people Gods
commandments; but the keeping of them after their expositions was a breaking
of them? Matt. 23.16.17.18.
So they taught in those days, as may seem, not to swear by God, but by
creatures, by cock apie, and such like, they made no account to swear by;
which was horrible blasphemy against the majesty of God, to give his glory to
a vain thing, to cock apie or a mouse foot. For to swear by God, Deuteronomy.
10.20.
is a part of his honor: and therefore even as he that should set the crown
of a king upon a swineheards head, did more hainously offend against the
majesty of the king, then he that should put it on the head of some of his
nobles in any rebellion: so did they more grievously offend, in giving gods
honor to these base creatures; Psalm. 63.11. Ier. 5 7.
whereas it is a most heinous offense to give it to any creature. So they
taught to keep holy the Sabbath from bodily labors: but to do the works of
the Sabbath, they regarded not, as to hear Gods word, and such like. They gave
also Gods glory to creatures, by calling upon Angels and Saints; naie even to
stocks and stones, by kneeling down and putting off their cap^ unto them:
Psalm. 76.11.
nay by their offerings and making their vows unto them. And in these consisted
the chief part of Antichrists religion.

And this lesson concerns us, for it follows: For the hour of his judgment
is come. There be some that shall err in these points even immediately before
the day of judgment. But let such take heed; for, as I have noted before,
God at the day of judgment shall command all those his Saints to be gathered
together to him, Psalm. 50.5.
that have made a league and covenant with him with their sacrifices. And David
commands all Gods Saints to bind their sacrifices with cords, Psalm. 118.27.
Heb. 13.10. Psalm. 82.1.
to the horns of the Altar: now the Altar is Jesus Christ; as who knows not?
This is that which that Psalm teaches also, Sing we merrily unto God our
strength, make a cheerful noise unto the God of Jacob: for this is a statute
to Israel, and a judgment of the God of Jacob. This he ordained in Joseph for
a testimony, when he came out of the land of Egypt. This law of God must we
observe also coming out of the spiritual Egypt, where also we heard a
language that we understood not. To the horns of that Altar Jesus Christ, and
to the mighty promises of this Altar, must al Gods Saints bind all their
sacrifices, and all their prayers. The hour of his judgment is come; now
worship him that made heaven and earth, the sea, and the fountains of waters.
Here is an Antithesis or contrariety between God and his works. As though the
holy Ghost should say; Worship now ye creator, and no creature whatsoever: no
not Saint or Angel. Let al true catholics obey this commandment, and go no
further. Let them worship him that made heaven and earth: let them worship the
creator. Thus far the passage is sure. If they shall go any further, they
have no warrant, the passage is dangerous, 1. Sam. 15.23. 2. Sam. 6.7.8. 1.
King. 13.24 and 22.28.
they may perchance be drowned in the sea of disobedience with king Saul and
others, which durst venture further then they had commission. These are then
the marks of the true Church reformed from the corruptions of Antichrist: To
preach the Gospel, and the everlasting Gospel, to teach men to fear God, and
to fear to offend to break his commandments, and to give all glory to God:
and to worship him that made heaven and earth. Lay this rule to the Church of
Rome, and every one may see, how far out of square she is.

Reu. 14.8.
And another Angel followed, saying, it is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the
great City: for she made all nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication. Here now follows Babylon: here follows the false church, that
has doctrines contrary to those* which was alofte, as should seem, before,
and in great glory: Oh let not this her great glory beguile any. For it is
fallen, it is fallen; she shall come to the ground: she shall not always be
alofte, how sure and firmly soever in man's eyes she seems to be underpropped:
and therefore her fall here is doubled. And although her doctrine might
sufficiently have been gathered, by the contrary of those, which have been
taught before: yet here also are some principal parts thereof manifested and
declared, least that Gods people should be deceived: and that in two words.
Here doctrine is called wine, because it was pleasant to flesh and blood: as
their Church service, their guildes, their pilgrimages do most plainly
prove. Secondly, it was wine of fornication. She withdrew men's hearts from the
only love of ye service and worship of God, by this her wine: and so made man
to commit fornication, even as Israel did, by joining ever some Idol or devise
of their own, with the true worship of God. David says in the Psalms: Psalm.
73.25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, meaning to worship, to trust in, to call upon.
For thou have destroyed all them that commit fornication against thee: That is,
that trust in, worship or call upon any other, yea though they be in heaven,
besides thee. Exodus 20.3.
And this also is the meaning of the first commandment: Thou shall have no
other Gods but me.

And the third Angel followed them saying, with a loud voice. If any man
worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand, Verse. 9.
the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God; yea of the pure wine
that is powered into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tormented with fire
and brimstone, before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb. Now the gospel
being preached, it is a dangerous thing to follow Antichrist: now light being
come into the world, still to embrace darkness is death. So that here follows
a third Angel, that threatens a most terrible sentence against all such. And
here also are put down marks of the false Church: the first is, to worship the
beast, and the image of the beast. This beast is the Roman Emperor, as
appears in the chapter going before, whose deadly wound the beast that came
out of the earth, healed; Reu 13.12.
and to him it was permitted to do wonders in the sight of the beast saying to
them that dwell on the earth, that they should make the image of the beast,
which had the wound of the sword and did live, it was permitted him to give
spirit to the image of the beast, so that the image of the beast should speak.
Do not these two beasts lively represent the Pope and the Emperor? whereof
the one does confirm the other. Has not the Pope healed the Emperors deadly
wound in Christendom, which the Turk has given him? So that by his means
all nations do yield a kind of obedience to him, who no doubt, but for him,
would have forsaken him. Has not he taught that men must make an image to the
beast? That as there is one Monarch in the world: so there must be also in the
Church. Has not the former beast suffered him to do wonders in his sight, even
what him pleased? Has he not brought to pass, that as many as would not
worship the Image of the beast, that is, which would not knowledge his
supremacy should be killed? Has he not made both great and small, rich and
poor, bond and free, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their
forehead, and that no man might buy, nor sell, save he that had the mark or the
name of the beast, or the number of his name. That is, he was hated of all men,
Io. 16.2.
and accounted an heretic: Nay that even to kill such, was high service done
to God, which had not the number of his name in their right hand, that is, his
Latin primers and portuises, and his characters, that is, his ceremonies; in
their foreheads; that is, that professed them not manifestly (whereof his
religion was full: and in truth was nothing else, but a huge heap of
characters and ceremonies) he that refused to do any of their ceremonies which
were then used, might neither buy nor sell: all men hated him. But now the
sun shining of the gospel, he that cleaues still to these shall die
eternally. These are the marks of the false Church.

The figures and types of the Church may also teach us, which is the true
Church. It is reported that Hercules his stature after his death was found out
by the length of his foot: God has made nothing in vain: even the very
shadows of things may teach man wisdom. First therefore the Arc of Noah may
be a figure of the Church. And God said unto Noah: make thee an Arc of Pine
trees. Genesis 6.14.
And the arc is called in Hebrew Tabah, of Bauah which signifies to build,
because the Church of God must ever be in building. The building thereof (is
not like to other buildings) it never has an end. As long as this world
lasts, it shall ever be in building. And therefore saint Paul says, that
Jesus Christ has given some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, Ephesians. 4.12.
and teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry, and for the building of the body of Christ, till we meet
altogether in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the son of God unto a
perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ. Neither
without a mystery do the Grammarians call a word Tiba with Iod; because no
doubt this Arc of Gods Church must be builded with his word.

Genesis 6.14. Exodus 2.3.
Secondly, this word Tabah, is but twice read in all the scripture. That is, the
Arc that Noah was in and saved him: and the Arc that Moses was in and saved
him. For that is called also by the same name. And this may teach us the two
Churches of the Jewish synagogue, which was but like a basket made of twigges
and bulrushes, in comparison of the Arc of Noah; that is, the Arc of Jesus
Christ; Es. 60.17.
of which the Prophet Esaias prophecieth, that God promises that for brass God
will bring gold, and for iron, silver. The Pastors in Christ's Church, in
comparison of the Priests in the Jewish synagogue, are as it were great Cedars
of Libanus to small twigs. Again this (Tabah) is never found, but where water
is: To signify no doubt, that the Church of God (as well the synagogue, as the
Church of Christ) shall be always in this world afflicted. It shall ever be
on the water: It shall be like to Christ's ship not only tossed with waves,
but also in danger of drowning. Thirdly, it is called an Arc, and not a ship,
Mat. 8.24.
because it must keep Jewels: or else it is none of Gods Church. Psalm. 1.3.
Blessed is the man (says David) that has not walked in the counsel of the
ungodly, etc. but his delight is in the law of the Lord, and therein will he
meditate day and night.

And in another Psalm he says. Thy words have I laid up: I have hid them
within my heart, least I should offend against thee. Psalm. 119.11.
And it is said of the blessed virgin Marie: that she laid up those words she
heard of the shepherds within her heart. Luke 2.18.
Such Arks both men and women, both Kings and Inferiors must Christ's Church
be. It must not be a ship to traffic for gold, to seek earthly riches here
in this world. For no doubt as it were in a mystery hereof, and to teach us
this lesson, 1. King. 22.48.49.
God brake the ships of good King Iosaphat, which he sent to Ophir for gold,
who was as should seem a little covetous, and would not suffer the servants of
Ahaziah his friend, to go with his servants. Covetousness will have all her
self: She cannot abide that any should have any thing with her.

And God commanded Noah to make his Arc of Pine trees, Genesis 6.14.
that is, of such wood as would swim above the water, as would not be rotten
or corrupted. To teach all Christians that as many as call upon the name of the
Lord Jesus, 2. Ti. 2.19. Ephesians. 4.1. Gal. 6.14. 1. Pet. 2.11.
should depart from iniquity: And that they should walk worthy of their
calling: and that they should be crucified to the world, and the world to them,
that is, that they should live in the world like pilgrims, and swim above the
water like Pine trees; and not sink down therein like Oaks of Basan; and not
be drowned with the love and pleasures thereof like worldlings. And thou shall
make nests or cabbins in the Arc; That is, resting places. Here the Hebrew
word is (Kinnam) which may fitly be derived of Kanah which signifies to buy or
purchase Gods Church is called Jerusalem, Psalm. 51.18.122.2.3.6.
a vision of peace. It must have nests, resting places in it: But they are
purchased, they are bought. That great price of Jesus Christ which he paid, not
of gold or silver, 1. Pet. 1.18.
but of his own blood, has made these nests, these resting places. Now we
being justified by faith (says saint Paul) we are at peace with God. To. 5 1.
And then if we be at peace with God, what need we fear all the wars,
persecutions, or enemies of all the world besides; let the devil, and all his,
do what they can against us. We rest our selves most securely in the Kinnam, in
this nest or cabin, purchased with such a great price for us. And this nest
our Savior Christ himself shows us saying, John. 14.1.
let not your hearts be troubled, believe in God, believe in me. In my fathers
house are many resting places, (...), if it were not so, I would have told
you. I go to prepare a place for you.

Genesis 6.14.
And thou shall pitch it from within the house, and from without, with pitch.
This pitch, wherewith the hoords of the Arc were pitched, both from within and
without, signifies christian charity: We must love our God: we must love our
family: we must love our neighbor. We must love all these within in heart, and
without in work. This pitching must be from within, and from without; it must
proceed to others. Charity is called an other man's good: It must not be all
for it self, that is no charity, that is self love, that is Satan's tar
which will not fasten or join things together; it is not Gods pitch. And here
we may note, that pitch and not pinnes, or nails must join all the boords of
Gods Church together: we should all be joined together through love, and not by
force; not by compulsion; by word, and not by sword. The pitch of charity
should bind every true Christian more, then any bond of parchment. But now
this joining together of pitch and of Christian charity is clean gone: now
men seek and study how to join men to them by nails, by force, by
authority, by obligations, by hard dealing, and not with love, not with
charity, not with courtesy. But such joining is not Christian like, it will
never continue. Paper joined together with pitch or glue, will sooner rent,
then be severed: such is the joining together of charity. Now even in that
holy league of marriage: they trust more to parchment bonds, then to this bond
of charity: bonds of parchment must assign women their dowries and portions
after their husbands deaths: they distrust that bond of charity; but in truth
it is surer and stronger. For in truth, men will rather die then for sake them
whom they love: And what do we doubt then of their goods? But the joining
together with nails, and other things may be easily separated, and the things
never the worse: And such are all the ioinings and counterfaited loves, which
are made with force, and hard dealing, and authority, rather then by charity.

And thus thou shall make it, Verse, 15.
the length of the Arc shall be a hundredth cubits, and the breadth of it
fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits. Here is the portraiture of
Christ's church: it is longer, then it is either broad or high. Here are faith,
charity, and hope. The mystery of faith is three hundredth cubits; it is very
deep, it is unsearchable. Ephesians. 3.18.
And therefore Saint Paul prays for his Ephesians, yt they may know what is
the height, depth, length, and breadth: he meant no doubt of the cross of
Christ, and of faith in him crucified. He had relation to some thing, and it
may fitly be applied unto this.

Secondly, charity is fifty cubits, having relation to the year of Iubile,
which was every fiftith year: Leu. 25.11.
wherein was forgiveness of all debts, letting loose of all that were in
bondage, as well lands, as servants, and a joyful and general freedom and
liberty proclaimed: even their fields that year had also their Sabbath. Such,
naie far greater should be christian charity every year: that shadow is
vanished away, and the true sun has shined Jesus Christ, Col. 2.14.
and has freed us from the great debt of our sins, that we did owe unto God,
Heb. 2.14.
and has delivered us out of the hands of that mighty and cruel tyrant
Satan, and has freely given us the kingdom of heaven. Luc. 12.32.
So that now in his kingdom every year, every thing should rejoice. No man
considering what Jesus Christ has done for him, and remembering that he has
commanded us to love one another, Ioh. 13.34.
as he has loved us; should now in any matter deal hardly with his brother.
Who will now deny him light trifles, either in giving, or in forgiving; who
has received such great gifts, such a great pardon? who now will not
liberally deal with this earth, that has so freely received heaven? Mat.
18.24.28.
Who will not forgive a hundredth pence, that has forgiven him a hundredth
talents? Who will not now lend freely, Luke 6.35. 1. Cor. 4.7.
even hundreths if he be able, that has lent him all that he has? What have
thou that thou have not received? These considerations, if we were not stony
hearted, should make our Iubile eternal: Luke 6.38.
it should make us give, that we might have given us again. It should make us
forgive, when as our debtors being our brethren, be not able to pay us.
Considering how we our selves one day, Luke 7.42.
being bankerupts, and not able to pay any thing, must crave forgiveness, not
only of injuries and blasphemies against the majesty of God; but of debts,
in not using well these talents we have received at his hands. Luke 16.1. Mat.
25.25.12.36. Luke 18.9.14.11.


Thirdly, the Arc was but thirty cubits in height, to teach us humility. Our
hope must be humble, we must not trust in our selves: we must not be proud of
our works: we must not be proud at all. Our hope must be but thirty cubits
hie; it must be limited in three, Mat. 28.19. Mat. 5.3.
that is, in the Trinity. It must not exceed that, Blessed are the poor in
spirit (says our Savior) It is the first blessedness amongst those so many
beatitudes; as it were the root and mother of all the rest. To be proud is
like a poison, or venom, that marres all the rest. As also there is no
blessedness so often repeated, Psalm. 2.12.4.6.5.12.
as Blessed is the man that puts his trust in the Lord.

Genesis 6.16.
A window shall thou make in the Arc, and in a cubit shall thou finish it from
above. The Arc of Gods Church is a lightsome house, Tsaher in Hebrew is a
window, and Tsaharim is noone.
and not a dark dungeon. It has a window in it to give it light. And the
window is compared to the sunneshine at noone, to declare that all our
knowledge in this life, although it be but small in comparison of that we shall
have hereafter; 1. Cor. 13.12.
yet it is most pure and clear. Now we know as it were in a dark speech, then
we shall see face to face. And this window is but one, Ioh. 1.9.
no doubt to signify Jesus Christ, who is the only window that gives light,
and all other heavenly graces to his Church.

And the roof of the Arc is finished in a cubit: as some think, or else the
eaues were round about the Arc a cubit in breadth, to put away rain from the
window, and from the arc it self. This may teach us mortification of the
flesh; If we would judge our selves, 1. Cor. 11.31.
we should not be judged of the Lord. Fasting and prayer from a lively faith,
are that narrow roof, that repelles al storms from Gods Church: 1. King,
21.27.
Under this narrow roof Ahab, when God threatened him vengeance for his sins;
and Queen Hester, Hest. 4.16.
when Haman like a mighty cloud and huge tempest did hang over her head and
the heads of her people, did shroud themselves. So did Nineveh at the preaching
of Jonas. Jonas 3.7.
Would thou escape the storms then of Gods wrath? let the Roof of thy
house then be narrow. Whosoever thou art, judge thy self, and God will not
judge thee: as S. Paul counsels all christians.

And the door of the Arc shall thou set in the side thereof. Verse, 16.
Here is also Jesus Christ described very lively unto us; Ioh. 10.9.
who is the very door into the church; who suffered his very side to be
opened with a spear for our sakes, Ioh. 19.34.
that we might have an entrance into heaven. By this door we enter boldly
into heaven, and appear before the majesty of God. In this wide wound, as in
the clift of a most safe rock, Cant. 2.14.
we hide our selves from all the persecutions of the enemy. And this door is
but one: there are not many doors into his house, Ioh. 10.9. Acts, 4.12.
as our Savior himself tells us; I am the door. The same also Peter
testifies. There is but one way to salvation, and that is, Jesus Christ: there
is but one seed, Gal. 3.16.
in whom all the nations of the world shall be blessed, and that is Jesus
Christ: Ioh. 3.14.
there is but one brazen Serpent lift up in the wilderness, which cured all the
Israelites from all the stingings of the Serpent whatsoever, and that is Jesus
Christ. Acts, 4.12.
There is no other name under heaven given to men by which we must be saved,
but only the name of Jesus Christ. He is that one door, that was made in the
side of the Arc.

And thou shall make it with the low, second and third Room. Verse, 16. To.
12.6.13.1 1. Cor. 7.25. 1. Pet. 4.1.
There are degrees in Gods church of many estates and conditions, of Kings,
and other inferior magistrates, and subjects; of Bishops, Pastors and their
flocks; of virgins, married folks, and widows: and therefore God commanded
Noah to make hie roumes, and middle and low roumes in the arc: Every one of
these have their proper places in Gods Church. There are also in the church
children which stand need of milk, 1. Cor. 3.1.2.
there are also strong men which can digest stronger food, which are doctors in
christianity; Heb. 5.12.
and some others to whom the rudiments and principles of christian religion
appertain: and all these do belong to Gods church.

Verse, 17.
And behold, I will bring a flood of water upon the earth to destroy all flesh,
wherein is the breath of life under heaven, and all that is in the earth shall
perish. But with thee will I stablish my covenant, and thou shall go into the
Arc, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons wives with thee. Here
is the flood a sign and type of Gods wrath and just judgment, for sin. Here
is the only means of salvation: Gods free mercy. For it is said before; That
when as God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and all the
imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil continually; and it
repented the Lord that he had made man in the earth, Verse. 5.
and he was sorry in his heart, etc. That Noah yet found grace in the eyes of
the Lord. Noah his salvation was the free mercy of God, and his most gracious
covenant. They only which do observe his covenant, do escape this his fierce
wrath: as here appears. And this covenant Noah preached unto those wicked men
in his days: but they would not believe him, but every one followed his own
wicked ways, and so in the end for lack of faith were drowned. Mat. 5.7. Mar.
16.16. Luke 6.37.38. Ioh. 16.27.
The like covenants God has made with us: let us read them and mark them,
and believe them, if we mind to escape this deluge of the wrath of God, least
we perish with those men in the days of Noah. The obedience of Gods covenant
is the only way of salvation: no devise of man can save else whatsoever.

Verse, 21.
And take thou with thee of all meat that is eaten, and thou shall gather it
to thee, that it may be meat for thee and them. God will not have his pined;
he will have meat in his house: and therefore Jesus Christ was borne also in
Bethlehem, Mat. 2.1.
which in the Hebrew signifies a house of bread. And Noah is commanded to
gather to him all manner of meats. There are variety of meats in Gods house.
Exodus 12.9.
There is the head of the lamb, the purtenance and the feet. Genesis 30.14. Psalm.
51.7. Prou. 31 6. Psalm. 75.8. 2. Tim. 2.15. Luke 12.42.
There are sower lettice; there are mandrakes, which make fruitful; there is
purging Isope; there is precious balm. There is wine and strong drink, for
the afflicted: there are dregs for the wicked. And here is required the
wisdom of all Gods ministers. They must be stewards: they must not give all
meat at once; but every kind of meat in his proper time. Neither all kinds
of meat to every Christian; but every condition or state has his proper
food: even as in Noah his Arc every kind of living creatures had also. The
doctrine of Kings and Magistrates, is not to be set before the people; 2. Ti.
2.15.
nor the doctrine of the people to be taught the Magistrates; this were lack
of discretion: This were not rightly to divide the word of God.

Noah therefore did according to all that God commanded him: even so did he.
Here is the conclusion and sum of all: Verse. 22.
Noah did all according as God commanded him. Even in this material work of
making the Arc of wood and timber, he missed not an Inch of that length,
breadth, or height, or of any other thing, which God commanded him: much more
then in the spiritual building of the Church, the same is to be observed. The
master builders may not go a hairs breadth beyond the commandment of God,
Mat. 28.20. 1. Cor. 11.23. Gal. 1.6. 2. Pet. 1.16.
though that which they do, seem in their own eyes never so convenient, or
profitable, or necessary, or stately. They must learn this lesson of Noah
their good predecessor, and their Schoolmaster: As God commannded, so did Noah
according to all things: he adbed nothing of his own. Again hereby it plainly
appears, that the word is the rule and square of the Church, by which it is
to be builded and governed, and not the Church of the word; as the Papists
would have it: And that is, Psalm. 138.2.87.1. Ephesians. 2.20.
to bear rule in the Church, and that the Church is not to rule it. By this
also that great pillar, which the Papists do object for the defense of the
Church, falls to the ground. The Church (say they) is the pillar of truth: and
therefore whatsoever the Church teaches, must of necessity be believed: The
Church cannot err. But they must mark here, that as the Church is called a
pillar; 1. Ti, 3.15.
so the word of God is also called truth. Thy law is the truth (says David)
And therefore if she keep not the word of God, Psalm. 119.143. Genesis 19.26.
she may err, she may be a pillar of salt without it, as was Lots wife; but a
pillar of truth without it she cannot be.

Now if this be the true Church, which hitherto under the type of Noah's Arc, I
have described: let us a little compare the Church of Rome to this, and see how
they agree together: Who brags that she is this Arc of Noah, and that whithout
her there is no salvation. And first to begin with the name, she is not
Tebah: She is not a building, she has not taught her children one to build
another in the common and holy faith, as saint Jude counsels. Iud. ep. verse.
2. Ephesians. 4.12.
Her Pastors have not built the body of Christ, as saint Paul teaches, they
should do. They have accounted their chief office to be, to sing mass: and
not to preach the gospel. And in her building, when she did build, she has
not builded Tebah, that is, the Arc, with the word of God, Ezech 13.10. Mar.
7.7.
but with the clay and mortar of man. Also she teaches and thinks, that this
work of building is finished already. But saint Paul teaches, that the word
of God is able to build further, Act. 20.32. Fer. in 1. c Act.
and to give an inheritance among all them that are sanctified. And Ferus says
very excellently; That if all the things which our Savior Jesus did, should
be written; all the world could not contain the books which should be
written; Contain (says he) that is understand. For if (says he) the world
cannot, nor all the men that ever shall be in the world contain: that is
understand that which is written already, being so small in volume: how were
it able to understand if all things that Jesus did, were written? Jesus our
Savior his works were many in number, Psalm 36.7. 1. Pet 3.18.
and profound in mysteries, Gods word is a bottomless pit, no man can ever
come to the bottom of it. We must grow and may grow in the knowledge thereof
daily: And therefore many at this day are deceived in this point. They will
believe no more they say, then the fathers believed: and that which they saw
not, they will not see. But if God lift up his cloud and give light, true
Israel must go forward in their pilgrimage. They may not say, Exodus 40.38
because we have stayed in this place thus long: therefore we will stay here
still.

Lastly, the Church of Rome is not this Ark of God; she keeps not these
Jewels of Gods word in her heart; she as a ship rather, 1. King. 22.48.
she sails with Iehosaphat under pretense of religion for gold. She is
wealthy. The Pope cannot now say as Peter said: silver and gold have I none;
or as Ferus notes on that place, I will have none if I might have it, the
custody of greater Jewels and treasures is committed unto me. Act. 4.6.
She deuoures with the Pharisees under pretense of long prayers, Mat. 23.14.
widows houses: causing the husband to give his house unkindly, even from his
wife a poor desolate widow, that they might pray for him. And thus they are
become great landlords here upon earth: whereas Christ says plainly, my
kingdom is not of this world. John. 1^.36
But they have gotten Christ now by their praying, and massing, even an
earthly kingdom here in this world.

The Arc was made of Pine trees that would never be rotten, and is the Church
of Rome built of such timber? Look but a little into the lives of her Popes,
and you shall see most evidently the contrary. Their Popes have been
notorious in all kind of wickedness: Some of them sorcerers and coniurers, as
Fascic. temporum. Homagium fecit Diabolo. An Do. 1004.
Siluester secundus: Some proud, who have made and compelled Kings and
Superiors to stoop unto them, Baleus in vita Pontificum.
as Adrianus quartus: Some envious, who have not only overthrown the acts of
al their predecessors, but even unburied their bodies again, as Fascic. temp.
An. Do. 904. Pontac. Bur. in Chron. An. Do. 1159. ex Platin^.
Sergius tertius: Some ambitious, insomuch that there have been three Popes at
once, Fasciculus temporum, Anno Domini 1034. The pride of Alexander the third,
Pontacus Burgedalensis a Papist in his Chronicle reports thus: At his feet
Frederick the Emperor fell down desiring the absolution of his
excommunication: And they say, that two Pontac. ibid.
kings, Jews king of France, and Henry 2. king of England, did wait upon him
a foot as yeomen of his stirtope, holding his horse by the bridle on his right
hand, and on his left, and to have conducted him through the city Totiacum,
with great pomp. Of Pope Joan the woman, Fasc. temp: An. Christi, 954.
Fasciculus Temporu^ writes thus: This was called Joan English by name, but by
country was borne at Moguntia, and is reported to have been about this time.
And she was a woman that went in man's apparel: And she so greatly profited in
the holy Scriptures, that there was none like to be compared with her: and she
was chosen Pope. But after being gotten with child, as she went solemnlie in
procession, she traveled and died. And this seems (says he) to be the sixth
Pope, that hitherto had the name of holy father without the thing: and was
plagued of God as the rest were. And she is not placed in the Catalogue of
Bishops. Some here make a tale and say, that for this cause no German is
chosen Pope, which is most certain that it is a lie. So that if this woman were
no Pope, yet there were five Popes by his judgment, that had the title of
Holiness given them, which were wicked.

Of Bonifacius the eight the same Author writes thus: Anno Christi 1294
This Boniface in matters concerning the Popes courts, was most expert. And
because he had none that might be compared to him in wisdom, he became so
arrogant that he called himself the Lord of the whole world, as well in
temporal as in spiritual causes. And he did many things very stately: who in
the end vanished away very miserably. And he gave an example to all Prelates,
not to be high minded, but being rather a pattern to their flock, that they
would desire rather to be loved of their subjects, then to be feared of them.
This is he of whom it is said, that he entered as a Fox, lived as a Lion, and
died as a Dog.

But not to make many words concerning this matter, which has been so largely
and learnedly handled of others: I will but note the general complaint which
that author makes about that time, Fascic. temp. Anno Christi. 874.
wherein the Popes began to climb up into their chair of pride, and into
Antichrists seat. Charity (says he) waxed very cold about these times in all
degrees, and heresies for the most part now ceased. But ambition, covetousness
and other vices, being now set at liberty, persecuted the Christian says more,
then any heresy. Then Adrianus tertius decreede that the Emperor should in no
wise meddle with the election of the Pope. 884.
Here we may see how Satan after persecutions were ended, persecuted the
Church a fresh with pride and ambition* And here the Popes pride began to
sprout and show it self. A little after the same Author writes thus: Oh good
Lord how is the gold waxen dim! the glittering gold now is changed! what
offenses do we read to have chanced about this time, even in the holy sea
Apostolic, which hitherto thou have preserved with so great zeal. What
contentions and emulations, sects, enuies, ambitions, intrusions, persecutions:
Oh wicked time! wherein there was not one godlly man left, and truth was
decayed from among the sons of men. But after these times there were some
holy popes, but not so in order, nor so many, as in the former times. And a
little after: These eight Bishops following one after another, 904.
did sit but a short time. I can say nothing worthy of commendation of them.
For I found nothing but scandalous things of them, for the strange contentions
which were in the sea Apostolic one against another, and all of them every
one against another. etc. These were not Pine trees, but elder trees, savoring
not pleasantly, even as we may see, in the noses of their friends.

But to come nearer to our days: since their pride began, such has been also
their manners. Paulus Iouius writes thus: Tom. 1. lib. 1. Hist. sin. temp.
The people of Rome being divided into two parts, followed either the Colummans
or the Vrsines. The Sabellians mighty both for the antiquity of their family,
and for the multitude of their petigree and valiant youths, took the Colummans
part: and the Grapessians being Earls, both for nobility and power (as good
as they) took the Vrsines part. On the Vrsine faction were famous then (who
became afterward both at home and abroad notable soldiers) Verginius and
Nicholas Vrsinus: on the Columman faction, Prosper and Fabritius were famous,
and Iacobus Comes, Antonellusque Sabellus. The Bishops (of Rome) as either the
times, or wars gave occasions, were ever enemies, and against the wealthy
powers of both these, and they never studied for any thing more, then to
maintain the one faction, and to nourish their quarrels, that when both their
powers were consumed with mutual slaughters and domages; they themselves
(having also extinguished the remainders of them) might enjoy their towns
near unto the City. This Iouius reports of the Bishops of Rome: Here are
peaceable and not covetous prelates (as they would make the world believe that
they are) whom one of their own friends reports, that they maintain a faction
in Rome, to the end to obtain their towns and lordships, when as they had one
killed another by their means. And after he writes: The Romans also either
mindful of their old worship and ancient liberty, or else as they are
troublesome and fierce of nature, cannot with quiet minds endure the rule of
Priests (meaning the Popes) because many of them rule not with moderation, but
couetously. He confesses that Popes are covetous.

And again, writing of Alexander the sixth, he writes thus: At this time
Alexander the sixth was Pope a Spaniard, Tom. 1. lib. 1. Histor.
who before was called Rodericus Burgia, who being of a proud nature, and
therefore both crafty and liberal, having manifestly corrupted some of the
chief Cardinals at the time of the election with briberie, when as the better
sort, which would have chosen the most worthy, had taken the repulse, gat to be
Pope. Thus we may see how even latter Popes were ambitious and crafty, as well
as the former.

And writing of Luther, he writes thus: Tom. 2. lib. 20. Histor.
At the same time Charles the Emperor at Vangium near to Rhemes, called a
council of the nobles of Germany, for the report of the sturs about religion,
because Martin Luther a Friar of Saxony had spoken against the Popes
authority. In that assembly Martin Luther had leave given him, to show the
causes why he thought by the law of Christ, he might depart from the censure of
the Pope. And he yielded this cause especially, that certain covetous
ambassadors sent from the court of Rome, taught, that they selling the Popes
pardons, could deliver the souls which were burning in purgatory. The Popes
covetousness kindled Luther against him. Thus we may see plainly, how the
Church of Rome is not built of pine trees, but of rotten, earthly, heavy and
stinking wood of ambition, covetous, seditions, devilish, and most wicked
prelates, even as their own histories and friends do testify. 2. These. 2.3.
That therefore the Pope may be truly called that man of sin, in whose
chair so many and so notorious sinners have sitten: And therefore it is
nothing like to the Arc of Noah, which was built of pine trees. The Church of
Rome has cells in her for the bodies, but no nests for the souls of Christians
to rest in. She troubles men's consciences with her doubtful doctrine of
salvation; and therefore in this respect also she is unlike to the Arc of Noah.

Their Church also is far unlike the Arc of Noah in this respect: she is
higher then she is long or broad. In the mystery of their salvation, how short
was their knowledge in those days? yea and in their charity (whereof they
brag so much) toward the souls of their brethren? No penny, no pater
noster, was a common proverb, and true then: no man reproved the sin of his
brother. Exodus 10.23.
They lived as in the darkness of Egypt for the lack of the light of
knowledge of the law of the Lord: no man saw his brother: no man reproved
his brother: as all christians ought to do as they are commanded, Heb. 10.24.
But their height was hautie, she retched up even to heaven; and took upon her
even more then the son of God did, to dispense with the law of God, to trust
in the works of her own devising, and to promise pardon of sins for them,
even like the proud Pharisees.

She lacked a window in her, she was like a dungeon without any light. Psalm.
1.2.
She teaches not her children to meditate in the law of God day and night,
Col. 3.16.
and that the word of Christ should dwell plenteously in their houses. Her
light is not midday, like the light of the Arc, but midnight. Her Linsie
Wolsie translation of the new testament into English, which she gives some
leave to read, is but a light in a corner (whereas S. Paul excepts none) it
lightens not the whole house: it is but the light of a Rush; it is not the
light of a torch. Psalm. 119.105. The door in her, was not in the side, but on
her top: by the Pope, all entered into heaven for the most part in her. She
had diversities of mansions in her, as the Arc had; but she did disorder
them, that should have been placed in them. She placed her Prelates and
Clergy in the highest roumes: Romans 13.^
and Princes and Magistrates in the inferior roumes.

The only true means of salvation, the covenants of God, she has not taught
the people with Noah: naie she has apparently broken the covenant, in denying
the cup to the laytie (which Christ calls the new covenant) and therefore
belongs to all: as though they had not been in the covenant; or if they were,
1. Cor. 11.25.
to exclude them. That blessing our Savior pronounces to all good Pastors;
Blessed is that servant, Luke 12.42.
whom his master when he comes, shall find giving meat to his family in
due season; She has quite taken away: she has not fed Gods flock, as Noah
did in the Arc; but she has pined them. Matt. 4.4.
For man lives not by bread only (says our Savior) but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. But her pastors have not given meat to the
Lords family in due season: nay they have not given them any meat at all.
They have fed their bodies with bread, as though man had lived with bread
only (as Satan then did seem to instruct our Savior, and would have the
world believe still) and not their souls with Gods word, which food was the
more necessary. Amos 8.11.
And to conclude, the Church of Rome is not built in all points, according as
God has commanded. How many points of doctrine has she in her, which are not
grounded upon any promise; or commandment of God? her invocation of Angels
and Saints departed; her Latin prayers; her worshipping of Images, prove
this. Therefore being so far unlike, she does falsely brag, that she is
the Arc of Noah, as hereby every one may see.

Jericho also is a figure of the world, and of Satan's City; as the name
thereof in Hebrew, derived from the Moon which is called Iarak, proves: which
never continues in one state; but is ever still either increasing or decreasing.
Iosuah 6.34.
The compassing also thereof 7. days about with the Ark of God, and the
seventh day 7. times, plainly declares the same. So after Christ's ascension,
seven Angels blew their trumpets: Reu. 8.6.
and in the days of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to blow, the
mystery shall be finished, there shall be no more time: the walls of Jericho
shall fall down. And surely the day we live in now, is the seventh day. At
this day, Jericho is compassed about with the Ark of God, even seven times,
as much as in all the days before. The plentiful preaching of the Gospel; by
men speaking and writing more then ever before in any age, plainly prove
this. The sun now arising, all the birds of heaven begin to sing: whereas
before the cocks only did sing. Surely this general knowledge of God in the
world, and the profession of his gospel, even of some wicked Kites, and
covetous cormorants and Ravens, declares that the rising of the true sun
Jesus Christ is not far off. And as Jericho resembles the world; so no doubt
the house of Rahab the harlot resembles the Church. God will have a house in
Jericho, Psalm. 87.4. Mat. 8.24.
he will have a ship on the raging sea of this world. And first her name
Rahab; which signifies a street or enlarged, agrees with the calling of the
Gentiles. The Church of God now is Rahab, that is, it is enlarged: Esaias, 54.2.
now is that prophecy of Esaias fulfilled; stretch forth thy cords, and spare
not, etc.

Secondly, her condition of life agrees with the Church. She was Zonah, Heb.
11.31.
which signifies a vittailer, or rather as the Greek word (...) expounds it
and restraines it, she was a harlot: and so is the church before regeneration
an Adultresse, Iam. 4.4. Esaias, 50.1. Ezech. 16.15. Iosuah, 2.2.
separated from God; the Spouse of Satan. As Soon as the men were come into her
house, the king of Jericho had word, and persecutes them by and by: So the
Gospel of Jesus Christ and his true professors shall be sure to be persecuted
in this world. 2. Tim. 3.12.
They cannot be so secret in any place but the king of Jericho, the prince of
this world will hear of them, will spy them out.

And the woman took the men and made them go up to the top of her house, and
hid them in line of that tree, which she had laid in order upon the roof of
her house. Here is a lively Image of the true Church. She greatly honors,
reuerences and makes much of Gods servants and ministers; Romans 10.15. Gal. 4.15.
she exalts them, she would even pull out her own eyes to give them, to do
them good withal, as the Galathians would have done to Paul. And she hides
them in the line of that tree (Bepishbe Hagnets.) This line of that tree, no
doubt, is a figure of the holy Scripture, which was to be written in paper,
which is made of linen cloth. And in the line of that tree (meaning some
notable and especial tree) no doubt signifies Jesus Christ. He is that tree of
life, Revel. 22.2
that whosoever tastes of shall live forever, and he that shrowdes himself
under it, needs not to fear the persecutions of the king of Jericho. In the
line of this tree, the true Church hides her Ministers, with this they are
covered. They are mighty in the Scriptures with Apollo. In these they are over
the head and ears, Acts. 18.24.
as we say.

Again, here we may learn how the true Church esteems of the Scriptures. She
places the line of that tree upon the roof of her house: She has them in
high estimation; according as David says in the Psalm. Psalm. 138.2.
O Lord thou have magnified thy name, and thy word is above all things. And she
had laid her line in order: 2. Ti. 2.15. Psalm 2.10.11. To. 13.1. Ephesians.
5.22.23.6.1. and 5
So the true Church does rightly divide the word of God: She has meat for
kings and subjects; for men and wives; for parents and children; for masters
and servants.

Before the men slept, she went up unto them. Heerof we may learn the zeal
the true Church has of hearing the word of God. She makes no delay, she goes
up to them presently: She is desirous to hear the doctrine of her salvation:
She prefers this joyful news before her sleep.

And she says to the men, Verse. 9
I know that God has given you the land: for the fear of you is fallen upon
us, etc. Here is the confession of a true faith: and here is also first, the
first property of a true faith; not to doubt, to know, to be assured: I know,
says she, that you shall conquer this land: though as yet their walls stand,
and there many and mighty kings (being linked together in leagues) lived and
flourished: All these fleshly arguments could not daunt her faith. I know
(says she) you shall have the victory.

For we have heard how the Lord dried up the red sea before you, when you came
out of Egypt; and what you did to the two kings of the Amorites, which were
beyond Jordan, Sehon and Og whom ye killed.

1. King. 10.1. To. 10.14.
Here is the ground of faith: Faith comes by hearing. She hearing the
wonderful works of God believed: to teach us the means to obtain faith, by
hearing also.

Now follows the confession of her faith: We have heard, and our heart is
quite gone, and there is no courage left in any one of us against you. For your
God is a God in deed, in heaven above and in the earth beneath.

Deuteronomy. 64. Mat. 28.18. Psalm 136.13.14.15.16.
First her faith is grounded on one God, and of his omnipotency, that he alone
is of all power in heaven and earth: he can dry up the red sea, he can destroy
mighty kings, even Sheon and Og kings of the Amorites.

And here also the true Church may learn in her journey out of Egypt, with
what enemies she must encounter. For every true Israelite must now also come
out of Egypt, even as those ancient Israelites did; Reu. 11.8. Ps. 114.1. 1.
Cor. 10.11.
and the red sea must be dried up before him: and those two kings of the
Amorites conquered and subdued. And here first the red sea in Hebrew is called
the sea of Rushes, or the sea of consumption or ending. And surely this world
also for these two respects may fitly be called the red sea. First it is a
sea, never quiet: but in it still one wave of afflictions follows another.
Secondly, it is a sea of Rushes: There is nothing sound in it: Though the
honors, riches, and pleasures thereof seem great and green, and to flourish;
yet they are but rushes, they are not sound within, they are but vanity. As
that great king Solomon, who had experienced all these things, teaches al men
in his book called the Preacher: All (says he) is but vanity. And if that
were all it were well: but he adds further, Eccles. 1.14.
and vexation of spirit: This is worse then the former; that such vain things
should vex a man's heart, should trouble him; should make him hurt his
neighbor; nay even offend his most gracious God. This world also is a
consumption, Ia. 5.4. 2. Ti. 4.10. 2. Sa. 20.10.
a destruction to all that do love it. The lovers of this world are enemies to
God, and he that embraces this world with Demas, it will in the end slay him,
as Ioab did Amasa traitorously and Iudasly.

This Rushie sea God dries up, by the mighty operation of the holy spirit, to
all his faithful servants, 1. Cor. 7 31. 1. Pet. 2.11.
before they enter into his land of Canaan. They despise the world, they use it
as though they used it not. They account themselves here, but as pilgrims. And
to this agrees that which is said in the Revelation, when the first Angel
blew his trumpet, there were hail and fire mingled with blood cast into the
earth, Reu. 8.7
and the third part of the trees were burnt, and all green grass was burnt.
This is not meant literally but spiritually. That is, that in all Gods children
all worldly pomp and vanity is now quite consumed: The world is to them
crucified, and they to the world. Gal. 6.14.
The other two enemies, which also must be destroyed, are two kings, Sehon and
Og kings of the Amorites. Whose names declare their natures: Sehon signifies in
Hebrew a rooter up, and Og signifies fine ma^chet. And they may fitly resemble
our flesh and our spirit, our appetite and our senses. Our senses delight in
vanity: and therefore David says, Psalm. 119.37. Col. 3.5.
Turn away mine eyes least they behold vanity. And our appetites or fleshly
desires must be mortified, which are ye rooters up of all virtue. This Sehon is
king of Hesbon, which signifies Reason: and so in the carnal man is will and
lusts of the flesh. And so also Og, that is, the flesh, that delights in fine
delicates, in manchet, is king of Basan, that is, over the spirit of God, which
is compared to oil and fatnes: the which also Basan signifies in Hebrew. These
two kings must be conquered of all Christians, before they enter into the land
of promise: and Hesbon, that is, reason, now must rule over Sehon, that is,
affections. And Basan, that is, Gods spirit, must rule over Og, that is, Number.
21.23. and 33.
the pleasures of the flesh. And Sehon fightes with Israel in Lasha, that is,
the field of salvation: and Og in Edrai, that is, on the mount of strength.
Man's carnal wisdom thinks it self able to save, Psalm. 20.7. Psalm. 44 3.
Reave. 7.10.
and the flesh thinks her arm of force: But Gods children must acknowledge
another arm to be their strength, even the arm of the Lord; and their
salvation also, not to be of themselves, but of the Lord. And these are two
kings of the Amorites, which signifies rebellious. These two kings are in man,
that do daily rebel against that only and great king God Almighty. And these
two, Romans 7.33.
saint Paul called the law of his members: No doubt, for their kingly
authority, which without Gods spirit they do challenge in us. And these two
kings must be killed: nay, as the Hebrew word which Rahab uses, (Hekeramtem)
signifies, must be even vowed to destruction. Psalm. 119.106 1. Pet. 3.21
And what does this note else, but our baptism? Wherein every one vows
himself a soldier against these kings.

And now swear unto me in the Lord, because I have showed you mercy, Ios. 2.
that you also will show mercy unto my fathers house, and that you will give
me a sign of this truth. And you shall cause to live my father, and my mother,
and my brethren, and my sisters, and all things that they have, and ye shall
deliver our souls from death. Here is another mark of the true Church, all
her doctrines must be (...), 1. Tim. 1.15 3.1 Mat. 5.18 6.2.
as saint Paul terms them, must be faithful sayings: They must be verities,
as our Savior often in the Gospel confirms all his with Amen, which
signifies truly, and verily. And saint Paul says: that all the promises of God
in Christ are yea, 2. Cor. 1.20.
and in him are Amen. They must be so sure, even as though they were ratified
with an oath.

Again, swear to me by the Lord (says she) teaching us that all our lawful
oaths must be made in the name of the Lord, Ier. 5.7 Psalm. 63.11.50.15.
and not by any creatures. And that this is a chief part of Gods honor, to
be sworn by in judgment: as it is also to be called upon in trouble.

Again, that you shall show mercy to my fathers house. Here is the true
means of Christian salvation: By mercy we are all saved, Epist. Iud. 21
even as this Rahab and her fathers house was saved through mercy. To. 15.7.
and 12.10
Here is also Christian charity: she is not only careful for her self, nor
for her father and mother, but also for her brethren and sisters, and all that
belongs to them. And that they should quicken them, or cause them to live. Here
is spiritual regeneration, 2. Cor. 5.14 Io. 3.3. Romans 10.17
without ye ministry: all men are but dead men: The just man lives by faith,
and faith comes by hearing the word of God: and how can they hear without a
Preacher? There is no life of grace and goodness in man. They have tasted of
that bitter fruit, and of Eve their grandmothers apple, they have died the
death. And this is that which she adds also saying: And you shall deliver our
souls from death.

And she required also a sign of the truth. Here is not only preaching the
truth by words, but also by signs. And here are the Sacraments of Gods Church
expressed: Romans 4:1^;
They are signs of the truth: they confirm that to the eye also, which the
tongue preaches to the ear.

And the men said unto her: Our soul shall die for yours; if you shall not
disclose this our business. And it shall come to pass, that when the Lord
gives us this land; we will deal mercifully and truly with thee. Here is the
chief duty of all christians, they must be faithful to God and to their
brethren, 1. Sam. 15.31 Mat. 26.25. Ioh. 1.47.
they may not be traitors like Achitophel, like Judas: they must all be men of
truth, like Nathaniel that true Israelite in whom was no deceit. Ioh. 1.47.
They must not be hypocrites, that is, to show a lambs face, and have a lions
heart: to have sweet words in their mouths, Psalm. 55.21.
and swords in their hearts, as David describes the wicked.

And she let them down by a coard through her window, because her house was
joining to the walls of the town, and she dwelt in the wall. This coard which
let them down and saved them, may fitly resemble the passion of Christ; as a
part may signify the whole. He was bound for us with a coard, Mat. 27.21.
when he suffered his passion. As this coard saved them; so his passion saves
us. Again, as that red coard let them down: Phil. 2.5.6.
so the bloody passion of our Savior lets us down: it makes us humble, while
we remember what he has done for us. What is it now, 2. Cor. 5.14.
that we ought not to do again, for his sake to our brethren?

Christ also is the true wall, Zach. 2.5. Esaias, 26.1.
that defends us from our enemies. And her house was in the wall. So must all
christians dwell in Christ: that is, 1. Ioh. 4.8.
dwell in charity (as S. John expounds it) if they mind to dwell safely.

And she said unto them, Verse, 16.
fly unto the hill least the pursuers meet with you, and hide you there three
days, till the pursuers be returned, and then return your way. Here is also
the state of Christ's church declared. While it remains in this world, it shall
be persecuted: it shall not have an hours rest; Mat. 4.2.
but some or other will assault it. If Christ fast, Satan will assault him in
the wilderness: if he a little take his rest in the ship, Matt. 8.24. Matt.
22.15.
the sea with her waves will go about to drown him: if he go on the land, the
proud Pharisees will lay awaite for him. Mat. 10.24.
So the disciple is not above his master: Luke 9.23.
so every good christian in all places every day shall have his cross; shall
have his pursuers all the three days, of the continuance of this world: in the
day of nature before the flood; as the histories of Abel and Noah: Genesis 4
8.6.3. 2. Sam 15.1. Job. 1.10. Acts, 8.1.
in the day of the law; as the histories of David and Job: and in the day of
grace; as the histories of Christ's church plainly prove. And all these 3 days
all Gods children must hide them in that hill: that is, in Jesus Christ. On
this hill called Moriah (as all the Jews with one consent says Munster,
Munster in annot. in 22. cap. Genesis
do affirm) Abel and Cain offered their sacrifices, and Abraham his son
Isaac, and David his sacrifice also on the threshing floor of Araunah: and on
that hill Solomon built his temple. He is that woman's seed that should break
the Serpents head: Genesis 3 15. Gal. 3 10. Genesis 49 10.
that one seed of Abraham wherein all nations shall be blessed that Messiah
that should come whom Jacob prophesied of, that was all their comforts.

And the men said unto her, we will be free of the oath which thou have made us
swear. Verse, 18.
Behold when we come into the land, thou shall bind this coard of red thread
in the window, whereby thou let us down, and thou shall bring thy father,
and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy fathers household home to thee.
And whosoever then does go out of the doors of thy house into the streets; his
blood shall be upon his head, and we will be guiltless; but whosoever shall be
with thee in the house, his blood shall be on our head, if any touch him. And
if thou utter this our business, we will be quit of thine oath which thou have
made us swear. Here is the preaching of the Gospel that brings salvation.
1. Cor. 11.26. Romans 10.9. Gal. 2 20. 1 Pet. 4.2.3. Gal. 6.14.
We must bind the red thread in our windows; that is, we must believe Jesus
Christ's death and passion with our hearts, and with our mouths also confess
it, and in the windows of all our senses express it. We must be crucified to
the world, and the world also must be crucified unto us. The honors, pleasures,
and riches of this world, must not be our delight: we must not set our hearts
upon the^. Psalm. 62.10. 1. These. 5.14. Heb. 10.25.
We must bring our fathers and mothers, and brethren and sisters home unto this
house. Every one must exhort his brother, we must exhort one another, as S.
Paul commands. Again, 1. Pet. 3.21. Ephesians. 4.4. Iosuah. 6.25. Romans 16.17.
we must bring them all into one house. There is but one Arc of Noah that
saves: but one house in all Jericho that shall escape: but one church of God
wherein is salvation. And therefore we must beware of schisms in the Church: we
must not be more cruel then the soldiers, Ioh. 19.24.
which would not rent in pieces Christ's coat without seame, but cast lots for
it.

He that departs out of this house into the street, Verse, 19.
his blood shall be on his own head. We must keep us within the limits of the
Church; we must also follow her holy precepts, that we go not forth into the
streets. They which shall follow the world; which shall do as the most part
do, Luke 13.24. Romans 12.2.
shall be in danger of death.

But whosoever shall continue within the house, Verse, 19.
shall be assuredly safe: his blood, say they, be on our heads, if any touch
him. The ministers of the Gospel to all faithful and obedient hearers, ought
and may safely warrant them of their salvation; they may even venture soul
for soul: they are so sure thereof; they may warrant their hearers. And they
ought not now to doubt thereof, but to believe their preaching. And lastly, we
must beware of Apostasy, of Reuolting from the faith, when persecution comes
for the Gospel; or when Satan shall with fair promises go about to make us
forsake it, we may not be turnecoats: we must be Peter's, that is, stones, not
reeds: 1. Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 4.14.
unremovable in the faith. Though the king of Jericho terrify us, or our
friends flatter us, Gal. 1 16.
or reason and flesh and blood go about to persuade us: yet we must not be
led by any of them. We must keep the faith with Paul: 2. Tim. 4 7.
we must finish our race: we must not give over (as they say) in the plain
field.

And she said, according to your words so be it. Verse, 21.
And she let them down and they departed. And she tied the red thread in her
window. Here is, to conclude, the last, but not the least mark of the true
Church: according to your words so be it. So Marie the blessed virgin answered
the Angel: Luke 1.38.
Behold the servant of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy words. And
after, when she was purified according to the law: Luke 2.22.23.24
and she presented him to the Lord: as it is written in the law; and she gave
an oblation, as it was commanded in the law: So should the Church of Christ
do all according to the scripture. Gal. 1.8.
But now let us consider a little how unlike Rahabs house the Church of Rome is.

Rahab placed the line of that tree, that is, the Scriptures of Jesus Christ,
in the roof of her house. She makes greatest account of them: but the Church
of Rome does not so; Council. Trid. Sess. 3.
she makes equal all her traditions, and unwritten verities with them. She
couers and hides the spies of Iosuah in them; 2. Tim. 3.9. Acts, 20.32. 1. Pet.
5.2. Genesis 3.7. 2. Tim. 4.4.
the ministers of Jesus Christ should be cunning in the scriptures: but the
Church of Rome has not covered her pastors with his holy line, but has
rather with hurds of her own, with Adams fig leaves, with rags of man's
devises, with the Master of the sentences, and such like. She doubts not of
Gods word: she knows that Jericho shall be destroyed; and that Israel shall be
Lords thereof: The Church of Rome does not teach her children this assurance,
grounded upon Gods promises; neither in their saluations, neither in their
prayers they make to God. She mingles the dross of man's frailty, Iam. 1.6.
with the pure gold of faith: and when as this cold water of doubtfulnesse is
ready enough of it self to creep in at the riftes of our weak ship: she
bids us not to stop it out; but let it have free passage.

Romans 10.11. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Mat. 28.18. Deuteronomy. 10.20. Ier. 5.7. Sophon. 1.5.
Her faith is grounded only upon God, that he is God alone, that has all power
in heaven and earth: and she requires an oath of them in his name; as though
this were a chief part of his honor. But the Church of Rome has usually
sworn by creatures, in her thick and palpable darkness; and her children as
yet can hardly be drawn from it. She dwells in the wall; she reposeth all her
trust in Jesus Christ: 1. Pet. 1.21.
The Church of Rome dwells far from this wall, reposing part of her trust and
confidence in other things.

1. Cor. 11.26. Romans 10.9.
She hangs the purple coard in her window; she is able with her mouth to
confess Jesus Christ and him crucified: the Church of Rome for lack of the
knowledge of the scriptures, 1. Cor. 11.26.
is not able to show forth the Lords death. She brings her father, and mother,
and brethren, and sisters home to her house: but the church of Rome does not
exhort one another, Heb. 10.24.
for the thick darkness that reigned therein no man did see his brother.

And lastly, according to their words, so she did; she added nothing of her
own, when they were gone: Mat. 28.20.
but the Church of Rome has added many things of her own to the
commandments of Jesus Christ, which he commanded his Apostles to go and preach
to all nations; and therefore in this point also, as in the former, she is
unlike to Rahab.

Exodus 25.3.
The Tabernacle also, which Moses builded for the children of Israel, may
teach us as a shadow, which is the true body; and as a type, which is the true
Church of Christ. It was moveable and carried on the Priests backs from place to
place. Number. 4.15. Exodus 25.2.
It was called the Tabernacle of the appointment, because there God promised to
answer them concerning all matters, and in no place else. Verse. 9. and 40.
It was made of the voluntary offerings of the people. It was made according
to the fashion and form that God showed Moses in the mount, according to all
that I shall show thee says God, shall ye make the form of the tabernacle,
and the fashion of all the instruments thereof. And to the building of this his
tabernacle, God admitted as well hair of Goats as silk, as well iron and
brass, as gold.

And here first the consideration of this Tabernacle overthrows the doctrine
of the Roman Church: Exodus 25.3.4.
who teaches that the Church in this world shall be always visible, and that
at no time she shall loose her glory. And therefore they teach all men to
believe the visible Church; and then they shall be sure of their salvation. But
this Tabernacle, which the people of Israel had here in the wilderness, which
was a figure of the militant Church of Christ; never rested in one place; it
was carried to and fro: and therefore it quite overthrows that firm and
uniform state of the Church, which the Church of Rome now teaches. The
Tabernacle was not only assaulted of enemies, but also the Ark of God was
taken of the Philistines: 1. Sa. 4.11.
No doubt an evident argument, how Antichrist should possess the visible
Church of God in our days. The Church is a Tabernacle, it is a Ship: it
never continues in one place, nor in one state: and therefore they are unwise,
Mat 8.24. 1. Pet. 1.25.
that will build their faith on the outward show or name or place thereof. But
we know Gods word endures the same for ever. And therefore the more surer way
is to build our faith on it.

The Levites and Priests carried only the Tabernacle of the appointment of the
Lord: Number. 1.51. Ios. 3.3.
but the Church of Rome has admitted and allowed her Friars to carry it, and
has dispensed with their Priests. Their Friars preached the covenants of God,
and his appointments made with man: Their Priests were bound to say their
service only. Granat. prolog. memor.
Thus much Granatensis confesses: This duty (says he) especially belongs to
the Priests and Ministers of the Church, whom God has commanded that they
should instruct and teach men in his law. And therefore among other ornaments
of the high Priest was his breastplate of judgment which he bare on his
breast; wherein was engraven learning and truth; which two things God would
have in Aaron^ heart, that from him, as from a fountain, all other men might
draw learning and truth. And after writing of the ignorance of the clergy, he
writes thus: But now woe is me, the parish Priests and other Curates think that
they are bound to nothing else, but to minister the Sacraments, and to say
their service in due time, and doing this in Hamlets and villages, or in some
towns they think that they have very well discharged their duty and office.
Thus much Granatensis saw and condemned.

Exodus 25.2.
The Tabernacle was made of the voluntary offerings of the people: The Church
of Rome had vows, no man might be a priest, unless he would vow chastity.
Here was a yoke of necessity laid upon their necks: Verse. 2.
This voluntary offering was quite taken away. In the Tabernacle they offered
only to God: but they in those days offered to creatures. And every one
contributed something toward this building, none was excluded: but the clergy
in the Popes kingdom took upon themselves only the name of ye Church, and
excluded the people. Lastly, this Tabernacle was builded in all points, Exodus
26.30.
according to that pattern which Moses saw in the Mount: Therefore even as in
Noah his Arc; so in Moses Tabernacle, and so in Christ's Church also, all man's
devises and inventions must surcease. But the Church of Rome admits the
inventions and devises of man in her buildings: And therefore as she is unlike
to Noah his Arc; so she is also disagreeing to Moses Tabernacle. And God
commanded also Moses besides this tabernacle, Exodus 25. ve. 10
to make an Ark of Shittim wood two cubits and an half long, and a cubit and
an half broad. And thou shall ouerlaie it with pure gold, within and without
shall thou ouerlaie it: And shall make upon it a crown of gold round about it.
This Arc, as the Tabernacle, did represent the Jewish Synagogue: so may it
represent the Church of Christ, Esaias. 60.17. Verse. 11.
of which as the Prophet Esaias prophecieth: I will give thee for silver, gold;
and for iron, silver. So here it was all covered with Gold, both within and
without: no doubt with the gold of God, 1. Io. 4.8. 1 Cor. 16.14 Phil. 3.12
that is, with charity: For God is charity, says saint John; and let all
things be done with charity, says S. Paul. The length of it (two cubits and
an half) declares that our perfection in this life, is but imperfect. The
crown of gold round about it, signifies that, as saint John and saint Peter
teach, 1. Pet 2.9. Revel. 1.6.
all Christians now are Kings and Priests.

And thou shall cast four rings of Gold for it, Verse. 12.
and put them in the four corners thereof: that is, two rings shall be on the
one side of it, and two rings on the other side thereof: And thou shall make
bars of Shittim wood, and cover them with gold. And thou shall put the bars
in the rings by the sides of the Arc, to bear the Arc with them: the bars
shall be in the rings of the Arc: they shall not be taken away from it. These
four rings do lively paint out unto us, Io. 20.31. 1. Ti 3 15. Ephe. 4.11
the four gospels of our Savior Jesus Christ, which are rings, which are
perfect and absolute, which are fastened to the Arc; which should never be
parted from the Church And the two bars put through them, covered also with
gold to carry the Ark, signify Pastors and Doctors which preach these gospels,
and carry and spread the Church (being gilded with this gold of charity)
through the whole world. And these all must study the gospel: they must not be
taken from it.

So thou shall put in the Arc the testimony that I shall give thee. The
testimony is the law of God: Verse. 16. Psalm. 19.7 Psalm. 119.129 Io. 14.6 Heb.
8.1. Act. 20.31. Nehem. 8.2. Heb. 8.11.
which is not only a rule of our life, but also a covenant and contract
between God and his people. And this testimony must be in the Church of God
continually; this she must witness to great and small: This contract or bagaine
every one must know that will be saved.

And thou shall make a mercy seat of pure gold, Verse. 17.
two cubits and an half long, and a cubit and an half broad. And thou shall
make two Cherubims of gold, of work beaten out with the hammer. Verse. 19.
Thou shall make them at the two ends of the mercy seat. And the one Cherub
shall thou make at the one end, and the other Cherub at the other end (of the
matter) of the mercy seat shall ye make the Cherubims, on the two ends thereof.
This propitiatory or covering, Luke. 22.1^ Io. 13.1.
this mercy seat signifies Jesus Christ. He was pure gold: His only love
toward man caused him to be incarnate, nay to die for us. This mercy seat is
in length and breadth, as much as the Arc; to declare, that all the Arc
stands need of this propitiation and covering. So that now, as David
witnesses, Psalm. 32. ver. 1.
the blessedness of every man living consists herein, that his sins are
covered. And saint John teaches all Christians the use of this propitiatory
or seat of mercy: If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father Jesus
Christ the righteous, 1. Io. 2.2.
and he is the propitiation of our sins. But this propitiatory is but a
cubit and a half: it is limited, 2. Cor. 6.2. Heb. 3.15. Ma. 25.12. Genesis 6.3.
Io. 3.4.
it is not infinite. Now is the accepted time (says saint Paul) now is the day
of salvation. He that comes not to day and hears his voice, but hardens his
heart, if he come the next day, with the foolish virgins shall be excluded. The
old world had a hundredth and twenty years to repent in, and Niniuie forty
days.

Verse. 20.
And the Cherubims shall stretch their wings on hie, covering the mercy seat
with their wings, and their faces one to another. To the mercy seat ward shall
the faces of the Cherubims be. The Cherubims stretch out their wings over the
mercy seat, and so over the whole arc, to teach us that all Angels attend
upon Jesus Christ: are his servants, to defend his Church, as he himself
witnesses to Nathaniel: Io. 1.50.51.
And Jesus answered and said unto him, because I said unto thee, I saw thee
under the fig tree, beleeuest thou? thou shall see greater things the^ these.
And be said to him, Verily, verily I say to you, hereafter shall ye see heaven
open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the son of man: Cyril
in 2. ca. Io Heb. 1.14. 1. Pet. 1.2.
^. as Cyrill expounds it, at his commandment ascending and descending for
the salvation of the faithful, as S. Paul also witnesses: Are they not al
ministering spirits sent forth to minister for their sakes which shall be heirs
of salvation? And they turn their faces to the mercy seat, because as Peter
says, they which have preached the gospel by the holy ghost sent down from
heaven, have preached such precious things, as the Angels desire to behold.

And thou shall put the mercy seat above upon the Arc: and nothing else. Verse.
21.
The true Ark of God then must alone worship Jesus Christ, and for his sake
hope for mercy at Gods hands only.

Verse. 21. Exodus 16.34. Deuteronomy. 10.2.31.26. 1. King. 8.9. Heb. 9.4. Io. 6.33.
Romans 10.9.
And in the Arc thou shall put the testimony I will give thee. Every member
of the true Church must have those three things, which after were put in the
Arc, in his heart: that is, the law of God which was contained in the two
tables: A Gomer of Mannah, that is, Jesus Christ's incarnation; for he is the
true Mannah that came down from heaven: And Aarons rod that budded, that is,
his death and resurrection. So that he that has all these in the closet of his
heart, shall be saved: and is God's Ark, and is no doubt a member of the true
Church.

And there I will declare my self unto thee, Verse, 22.
from above the mercy seat between the two Cherubims, which are upon the
Arc of the testimony, I will tell thee all things which I will give thee in
commandment unto the children of Israel. From this mercy seat proceeds all
Gods speeches with us: Iosuah. 7. Exodus 12.13. 2. Cor. 4.1. Lam 3.22.
here he hears all our prayers. Of his mercy he passed over the houses of the
Israelites, when as he destroyed ye Egyptians. Of his mercy Paul became an
Apostle. It is the Lords mercy (says Jeremy) that we are not consumed,
because his compassions fail not.

The table also, being covered all with gold, Verse, 23. Leuit. 24.5.
being placed in the Tabernacle, whereon the show bread, or as it is called in
the Hebrew, the bread of faces, was set: Verse, 29.
which loaves were changed every sabbath: and the crown of gold round about
the table, and the instruments for the table, as dishes, incense cups, and
gobblets, and the pure incense that was put upon them: what do all these
signify but the ministry and the preaching of the Gospel? The crown about
the table signifies, how glorious the preaching of the Gospel shall be. 2.
Cor. 3.7.
If the ministration of death (says S. Paul) written with letters, and
engraven in stone, was so glorious, that the children of Israel could not
behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance, which glory is
done away: how shall not the ministration of the Spirit be much more glorious.
The word of God also, may fitly be called the bread of faces. For God himself,
sees both his stewards that distribute this bread, and his servants that
receive it. And at that great day of account, he shall pronounce that steward
blessed, Luke 12 4^.
that has given meat to his family in due season. And again, those servants
which have received much, of them shall much be required: Luke 12.48. Esa.
35.11.
not a crum of this bread shall be lost, not one word of God shall return to
him empty: it shall be either the savor of life or of death. 2. Cor. 2.1^.
And this bread was renewed every sabbath. Still bread was set upon the table,
but new bread every Sabbath day: to teach faithful Pastors, that they should
every Sabbath day preach, and break this bread of life to their flocks. Luke
4.16.
So we read of our Savior, that as his custom was, he taught the people
every sabbath day: to leave all faithful Pastors a pattern to follow. And
these loaves were set in order six on one side, and six on another; to teach
us that ye word of God has meat fit for all states and conditions of men; Psalm.
2.10. Psalm. 82.2. Romans 13.1. Iam. 5.13.7. Act. 2.42. Ios. 6.10.
for all times and seasons; for kings, and even for meanest subjects; for the
time of prosperity and of affliction. The pure incense placed upon these
loaves declares, that we must join prayers with preaching, and that our
prayers must be grounded on Gods word. In the overthrow of Jericho the people
should shout, but when Iosuah appointed them: so in their spiritual warfare,
must all the soldiers of Jesus Christ not shout, nor pray no otherwise then he
appoints. The frankincense must be put upon the loaves, because prayer and
hearing the word preached must be joined together. He that turns away his
ears from hearing the law (says Solomon) his prayers be abominable. Prou.
2^.9.
The dishes also and Goblets, and cups, which were made as instruments for
the table, declare the diverse states and conditions of men, which should be in
Christ's Church: and the diversities of their gifts. 1. Cor. 12.4. Matt. 12.4.
1. Pet. 2.5. Reu. 1.6. Exodus 26.31. Romans 15.4.
And that the Priests should only eat of that bread signifies, that all
Christians should be Kings and Priests: and should now be partakers of those
heavenly dainties. And this Table should be placed toward the North: to teach
us, that the Scriptures were written (as S. Paul witnesses) that through
patience and comfort of the scriptures, we might have hope They are the only
table of refreshing, Ephesians. 6.15.
amongst the cold and Northren blasts of this life: We must be shod with the
shoes of the Gospel against the manifold thorns and pricks which Satan here
in this life strewes in our ways, and in our journey to heaven.

Exodus, 25.31.
The golden Candlestick which God commanded Moses to make having one foot and
a shaft, beaten our with hammers, having on every side thereof three branches
coming out of it, and every branch having 3 bowls, like to an Almond upon it,
and one knop and one flower, declares unto us also the ministry in the Church
of God; Act. 26.18. Luke 12.42.
whose office is as well to give light and to teach all, as to give meat and
food; and therefore here they are compared to the candlestick. And as before
there was but one table; so here there is but one Candlestick, to declare the
unity that should be among the ministers and pastors of Christ's Church. They
should all be as one: 1. Cor. 1.10.
There should be no sects or schisms amongst them. They should go out to
battle against their enemies, as the Israelits did, Iud. 20.8.
even as one man. The foot of this Candlestick is Jesus Christ, who alone
sustaines us, Matthew. 28.2^ Reu. 1.13.
who is said to be among the golden Candlestickes.

The shaft thereof is the Apostles: out of which proceed three branches on the
right side, and three on the left side; to teach us, that as there were false
Prophets in the law, as Peter teaches, 2. Pet. 2.1.
so there should be also in the Gospel.

This Candlestick shall have as well left branches, as right branches, every
branch shall have three bowls like Almonds, and a flower, and an apple. The
bowls like Almonds declare ye doctrine they must preach. They must preach the
Gospel, that is, Mark. 16.15.
comfortable doctrine, and glad news: And this is to be bowls like Almond
nuts. Leuinus Lemnius de herb^ biblicis cap. 4^.
For the Almond is comfortable and restoratiue. They must also have an apple
and a flower. They must not have only flourishing words, but good works; that
they may say with Paul: Brethren be followers of me. And again, Phil. 3.17.4.8.
Furthermore brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise: think on these things, which ye have both
learned, and received, and heard and seen in me. Those things do, and the God
of peace shall be with you. By this type, we may learn the necessity of the
ministry in the Church. Who would dwell in a house which lacked light? What
joy can I have (says Tobias) that sit in darkness, Tob. 5.12.
and see not the light of heaven? Such is the estate of all men without the
preaching of the word. verse. 38.
The snuffers also and the vessels to put the snuffes in, do teach first, that
ministers must have a care of their doctrine, that it be clear and pure,
grounded of the Scriptures: Matthew. 15.^.
that no dregs of man's traditions be mingled with it: God will have all his
torches burn clear, Secondly, the vessels wherein the snuffes were put, do
comfort those which have meaner gifts in the Church: Those which cannot be
Apostles, or great Doctors, must not discourage themselves: God had in his
Tabernacle as well vessels to hold the snuffes of the torches, as the torches
themselves. Lastly, this candlestick must be Mikshah, beaten with hammers, not
melted; sound, not hollow: 2. Cor. 2.4.
to teach all Gods Ministers to beware of hypocrisy: They must not make
mercha^dize of the word of God.

The form and fashion of this Tabernacle how unlike is it to the Church of
Rome? In the making of this Tabernacle all things were voluntary: but the
Roman Church commands; she puts a necessity in all her doings. The Arc being
all covered with the gold of charity, 1. Cor. 16.14.
condemns that covetous Synagogue. Let all your affairs be done through love,
says S. Paul: but they do all for money. She has separated those four rings
from the sides of the Arc, and the bars also she has pulled forth from the
rings, which God commanded should not be separated, while she neither suffered
the Bible to be in the Church, neither the Pastors to preach it. Neither were
these rings fastened to the sides of the Ark, neither were the tables of Gods
commandments, and that heavenly Manna, and Aarons rod contained in the Ark;
while the gospel of Jesus Christ, and his most glorious death and passion, was
not plainly taught the people. It was neither in their houses, nor in their
hearts. She taught that the mercy seat covered not all the Ark: but that the
blessed Virgin was without sin. And that not as the Cherubims do, all men
should turn their faces to the mercy seat: but that praying, we may turn our
faces some other way. She has also taken away the table of the show bread from
Gods house, and has not commanded his stewards to give meat to his family in
due season: but has laid this burden on other men's shoulders. Likewise she
has made Gods house a most dark dungeon, by taking from thence the light of
Gods word.

Salomons temple also was a figure of Christ's Church: as first the very author
thereof may teach us. Solomon in Hebrew signifies peaceable: Phil. 4.9.
so the great God of peace Jesus Christ, the true Solomon builded Gods Church.
Ioh. 14.27. Ephesians. 3.14. 1. King. 6.1 Matt. 6.33. 1. King. 7.1. Luk 2.46. 1.
King. 5.13.14.
He is our peace, says S. Paul, He is our Solomon. Secondly, Solomon built the
Temple in the fourth year of his reign; to teach us, that we must first seek
the kingdom of God. Solomon built Gods house before his own house: so Jesus
Christ being but twelve years old began to build his Temple, disputing with
the Doctors. And this example of Solomon proves that kings though they be not
builders themselves: yet they may command the workmen; they may cause the
Lords house to be built. So kings though they be no ministers, yet may deal in
ecclesiastical affairs: they may command the builders; they may by their
authority command and procure that Gods temple be built. The Temple was
builded in the month Zif, which signifies brightness, to declare, 1. King
6.2. 1. Ti. 4.13.15.
that knowledge and learning is required to the building of Gods house. The
which thing Pet. Berchorius in his Moralizations, does very excelle^tly
express: Berch. lib. 11. Moral. super 3. Reg. cap. 5.
Solomon (says he) built the house of the Lord of squared wood and graven
stones, and he divided it into three rooms, in height; and whereof the lower
was divided into the inward oracle, and outward house. And thus it was made,
that all the walls of the lower Temple were covered with boords of Cedar, and
the floor with fur boords: And above the boords all things were covered with
plates of gold round about; so that there was nothing in the Temple that was
not covered all over with gold. And he made sielings and caruings and the
joining of the boords so close, in so much that no rift, or partition could be
perceived. In the middle of the boords he graued Cherubims and Palmtrees
standing out further then the rest: So in the truth, when the true Solomon God,
would build his Church, he built it of graven and four squared stones, that
is, of holy, valiant and sound men. That Temple consisted of four kind of
things: of graven stones, of Cedar and fur boords, and of plates of gold. So
the Church has some men which were graven; that is, Martyrs, which were as it
were carved by their martyrdomes. She had some boords of Cedar also, that is,
professors of Christian religion, which were wholly in conte^plation, and
engraven with virtues. She had likewise some firre-boords, that is, holy
religious men in the world, who were in the lowermost parts. She had also
plates of gold, that is, Doctors, which were famous for the brightness of
their wisdom. In all which were the images of virtues, the Characters of
sciences, and of the holy scriptures, the bonds and ioints of concord: because
in the persons of the Church, as in the boords of the Temple, there was such
close joining of charity, that no rift or partition could appear, where of
Job says: Job. 41.^
One is joined so to another, that no air can come between. Amongst these
also, as amongst other things, there ought to be graven two especial images,
that is, of the Palm tree, which signifies victory, and of the Cherubims,
which signifies knowledge; for Cherubim signifies fullness of knowledge: to
declare unto us, that all the faithful and members of the Church must have a
palm, that is, perseverance in virtues all their life, and victory; and also
Cherubim, that is, discretion, knowledge, and wisdom: whereof it is said in
the seventh of the Revelation, that they were clothed in white robes, and they
had Palms in their hands. And to conclude, there ought to be nothing in this
Temple, but it should be covered with gold of charity and knowledge. So that as
well the roof, the walls, and the floor, that is, as well the superiors, as
the middle sort; as also the inferiors, should shine in faith and manners. In
the 20. of the Revelation, The City is of pure gold.

The Temple had 3. parts, because the Church also has 3. sorts of men, of
superiors, married folks, and virgins, or ecclesiastical persons: which also was
divided again into two parts, into the holy, and holiest of holies: that is
(says he) into the regular Church, and the Church of Friars which live under
their orders; and into the secular Church. He makes the Sancta sanctorum, the
holy of holies, to signify their Church of Monks and Friars: Heb. 9.7.12.
but herein he erres even against the scriptures; who apply that to Christ
only. And after he adds, These are the three sorts of men which shall be saved:
which in Noah the superior, and in Job the married man, and in Daniel the
virgin were prefigured in the 14. of Ezechiel. And therefore hereof may that be
verified Genesis 29. He saw a well in the field and three flocks of sheep lying
by it. And that the Temple was built upon a hill, it signifies that the Church
of Christ must have her heart dwell aloft in paradise, and not to seek here
an abiding city, but rather one, that which is to come, saying that of the
Apostle Philip. 3. Our conversation is in heaven. Thus far Berchorius: Where
we may note that he requires knowledge especially, 1. King. 6.5.
and perseverance in every member of the Church.

verse. 6.
There were galleries made round about the Temple, and every of them one above
another, Psalm. 1.2. Leu. 15.4.
and their beams did not pierce thorough the walls: to declare first, that
Christians should meditate on the word of God: They should be clean beasts:
they should chew the cud. Secondly, The beams of the galleries were not
fastened in the walls, but only rested upon the walls (^he wall being taken
in, 1. Cor. 7.31.
that they might rest on it: to teach us, not to be careful if the beams of
Gods temple were not fastened in the walls there of; verse. 4.
how much less should the beams of our houses, that is, our cares, be
fastened on our walls: We should use the world as though we used it not.

The windows of the Temple were wide outwardly, but narrow inwardly: to
declare, that the Pastors of Christ's Church (which are as it were the windows
thereof) should shine, as great lights, outwardly by their doctrine and life:
but be narrow within; that is, not to be proud of their labors: count
themselves with Paul, the least of al others. Nay, 1. Cor. 15.9. 1. Cor. 9.27.
and with him should tame and pinch themselves inwardly, lest that having
preached to others, they should be reproved themselves.

There was not the noise of an hammer heard in the Temple: verse. 7. Matthew.
5.40. Col. 3.13. Phil. 2.2. 1. Pet. 3.8. 1, King. 6.8.
to teach, what great peace God requires of all Christians: we should have no
suites, nor quarrels amongst our selves: we should all be as one man, and of
one soul.

The door of the middle chamber was on the right s^de of the house, and men
went up with winding stairs into the mi^dlemost chamber, and out of the
middlemost into the third. Ioh. 10.7. 1. Ti. 2.5.
I^ is Christ is this door, the way of perfection, the Mediator betwee^ God
and us. We ascend by winding stairs, because every one must say with David, O
Lord, Psalm. 40.5.
how many are thy though^ to us ward: If I would declare and speak of them,
they should be more then I am able to express. God leads us not the straight
way to heaven, but by a compass, as he did the Israelites; E^ 13 17.18. Iat.
1.2. Eccle 9.1.
through many temptations by little and little, as it were by stairs and
degrees he brings us thither; we not knowing (all our worldly affairs are so
uncertain) we ascend by winding stairs. And all these temptations, as they are
trials of our faith, so they are degrees of our glory, 1. Pet. 1.7. and our
patience in them makes all our works perfect. 1. Iam. 4.

And to the entering in of the Oracle he made two doors of Olive trees, and the
upper post and the side posts were five square. verse. 31.
Ibid.
Petrus Berchorius thus unfolds this allegory. That the Prelates of the Church
are these doors, by whose ministry we enter into the Church, and to the
Sacraments. And they must be two, united together through charity. And they
must be made of Olive trees, because they must give alms. They must have posts
five square, that is, the strength of virtues, able to guide their five senses:
and they must be graven with the grauing of Cherubims, that is, they must have
fullness of knowledge. And they must have engraven in them palm trees, that
is, victory and perseverance. And flowers also engraued in them; that is, the
beauty of all virtues. And they must be covered all over with spiritual gold,
through holiness of their lives: Although now alas (says he) they are rather
gilded with material gold, to their great shame and reproach. And they must
be doors, easy to be turned about: that is, diligent in their office and
ministry. And as (says he) the outward house signifies the laytie: so the
doors thereof may signify secular Princes and Judges; who also must be two,
by the common care they ought to have of themselves, and of others. For they
must not be one, that ^s, wholly their own through covetousness and
illiberalitie, ^nely respecting their own gain: but they must have a care of
^he common wealth of their sebiects. They must also be two, i^ respect of the
love of God, and of Christ: and they must also ^ne maintain another by peace,
love and concord, and join together by mutual helping one of another. Whereof
it is said in E^ech. 41. that there were two doors on either side, and that
they i^yned together. And these must be of fir trees, which are straight: which
also must have posts of Olives, which signifies the sweetness of mercy and
pity; which also must have four corners, that is, the ^ablitie and strength
of constancy and fortitude. For a thing that is four square, will not easily
roll: so truly a wise man will not easily be moved from his word or purpose,
nor will be changed from his straightness; no neither by entreaty nor
briberie; neither by prosperity nor adversity; neither by slanders or
flatteries. And therefore such a door, that is, such a superior, is said to
be made four square, according to a rule or square: to declare, that he must
be four square through constancy, and ruled by temperancie. Therefore it is
said in the 20. of the Revelation, that the city was four square. They are
also covered with gold, that is, with brightness of holy conversation; and
they have the image of Cherubims engraven in them, that is, a fullness of
knowledge: and they are decked with the pictures of Palm trees, because they
must be conquerours of vices. Thus Berchorius applies these doors to the
civil Magistrates. And surely these things creellie teach them their duties.
They must be doors of the Church: they must be good Churchmen by devotion and
protection. They must serve the Lord in fear: Psalm. 2.12.
they must be afraid to offend him; yea even a little, lest they perish in
their way. They must also defend the Church: 2. Chron. 19.6
they must not be one, wholly their own: but now the common wealths also.
They must be straight, whom neither flattery, nor friendship, nor bribes, nor
threats, nor fear may any thing move. Their posts must be of Olives, they
must be merciful: and they must be four square. So that they do their duties,
they must not pass what become of them: they may not fear the losing of
their offices with Pilate, Ioh. 19.12.
and so do injustice.

And in the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the Lord laid in
the month of Zif. 1. King. 6.37.
And in the eleventh year in the month of Bull, which is the eight month, he
finished the house with all other furniture thereof, and in every point. So was
he seven years in building it. The house of the Lord was begun to be builded
in the month, Zif, which answers to our April, when trees flourish; but it
was finished in the month, Bull, which signifies ouerflowing: to declare the
glory of the Primitive Church; and then the many flourishing trees in all
virtues: but now our barrenness, and coldness, Matt. 24.12.
and the ouerflowing of sin and wickedness, which should be in the end of
the world, according to our Saviors prophecy, when the Church should be
finished. Then Christians so despised the world, that as many as had lands
(although it were when as it was as dangerous a time as it is now; yet trusting
upon Gods providence, Act. 4.34.
to help to relieve their brethren) sold them, and laid the price thereof at
the Apostles feet. Now the world is come to that pass, that many will not
relieve their brethren that they know stand in need, by letting them their
lands at reasonable rents, and keeping the possessions of their lands still. So
greatly now is the love of our lands increased, and the love of our brethren
decreased. Many then were given to abstinence, Rom 14.2. Act. 10.30.
that they lived with herbs and such like: Cornelius fasted till the ninth
hour of the day, a Captain and a soldier: And Annah a widow, Luke 2.37.
a Jew served God, with fastings and prayers day and night, being very old.
Few such Citizens now a days, few such Christians and young women, whose
bodies may better endure it.

Philip the Evangelist had four daughters, Act. 21.9.
and they were all virgins. Few now strive for that goal. The Macedonians
above their ability (as Saint Paul witnesses of them) were rich in
liberality toward the poor, even in great trial of afflictions. Origin a
child was so desirous of martyrdom, 2. Cor. 8.1. Eusebius. eccl. hist, lib. 5.
cap. 2.
that his mother was co^trained to hide his clothes, yt she might keep him back
from running with his father to martyrdom. Such flourishing trees there were
in all manner of virtues, 2. Tim. 3.1.
when Christ's Church was planted, but now are they withered: Covetousness and
self love has ouerrunned all.

Thus we may see the plain and evident marks of the true Church, both by the
express word of God, as also by the shadows and types thereof. But the marks
which the Church of Rome gives to the Church, and by the which she would
prove her self to be the true Church, are not sure marks. She makes
Universality, Antiquity, and Succession to be infallible marks of the true
Church: but they are not. For first concerning Universality, Genesis 6.12. Luke
17.26.28
do we not read in Genesis, that all flesh had corrupted his ways? And in the
Gospel, that as it was in the days of Noah and of Lot, so shall it be in the
days of the Son of man. And does not Saint Paul teach us plainly, 2. These.
2.2.
that there shall be a departing away, or an apostasy? and that it shall be
an apostasy from the true faith and religion; and not a secular or civil
apostasy. Does not that which follows evidently prove, that that wicked one
the son of perdition, shall fit in the Church as God? And that to embrace
him, shall be to depart from the faith? Reu. 13.15.
And does not Saint John in the Revelation (speaking of the same Antichrist and
false Prophet) teach, that he shall cause al both small and great, Reu. 14.8.
to worship the Image of the beast? And does not the Angel preach the
everlasting Gospel again at ye fall of Antichrists kingdom, and at the
reedifying of the Church of Christ, to all nations, kinreds, tongues and
people? As though he had corrupted all these. And is then Universality (if
these be true, as they are most true) an infallible note of the Church? The
name also that the Apostle gives to Antichrist, declares who he is; 2. These.
2.8.
he is called (...), without law, whom no law will bind, who will dispense
with Gods word: And he shall sit in a chair, verse. 4.
and not be vexed with Elias and Enoch; as the Papists, following the Jewish
opinion herein, do teach. And has not the Pope of long time done so, till of
late God has revealed him, and taken the vizard of counterfeit holiness from
his face?

Antiquity, which they make the second mark of the Church, were of some force,
if it be sincere and pure. For that saying of our Savior against the Jews,
Matt. 19.8.
is an undoubted Maxim of true Christian religion, From the beginning it was
not so. But as Antichrist counterfeited holiness; so he also counterfeited
Antiquity. He made Gods people believe, yt all his trish trash was from ye
beginning (lying like the Gibeonits to Iosuah of their old bread and bottles)
whereas they were invented but yesterday, and of no great antiquity at all.
Ios. 9.13.
So the blind and superstitious Jews urged antiquity against our Savior
Christ: Art thou greater then our father Abraham, Ioh. 8.53.
whom make thou thy self? And thou art not yet fifty years old, and have
thou seen Abraham? Thus they seem to urge him with antiquity. But he
answered them, Before Abraham was I am. So the woman of Samaria could say to
Christ; Ioh. 4.12.
Art thou greater then our father Jacob that gave us this well? and he
himself drank thereof, and his cattle, and his children? So the old Prophet,
1. King. 13.14.
with his graie hairs beguiled the man of God. But we must cleave to the word
of God whatsoever seems old without this, is not old: it is copper, it is no
gold. The word of God is the true and only touchstone: it only endures for
ever. 1. Pet. 1.25. Genesis 4.26.


Succession also, of how small force it is, the history of Adam teaches:
Enoch began to call upon the name of the Lord. Adams posterity as it should
seem till his days, Genesis 11.15.
had forgotten this. And Heber also teaches the same, which after Enoch his
planting of it was quite again rooted up, and remained in the family of
Heber, who not agreeing to go with those wicked Idolaters to build the tower of
Babel, as some think (his tongue being not divided) gave the name to ye Hebrew
tongue. Iud. 2.10.
After the days of Iosuah, and the Elders which were in his days: how soon
did the next generation forsake the true worship of God? For thus it is
written: And so all that generation was gathered unto their fathers, and
another generation arose after him, which neither knew the Lord, nor yet the
works that he had done for Israel. Then the children of Israel did wickedly in
the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim. And do we think our generations
(without Gods special grace) to be more sound then they? So Manasses the son
of good Ezechias, 2. Chron. 24.2.
became a most notable Idolater.

And even in the new Testament, that we should not look for any better
succession, Act. 20.29.
Saint Paul told the Church of Ephesus, that he knew that after his departing,
should grievous wolves enter in, which should not spare the flock. And Saint
Peter tells all Christians in his Catholic Epistle; That as there were false
Prophets among the people of the Jews; 2. Pet. 2.1.
so shall there be false teachers among the^, and many shall follow the way of
their damnable heresies. That mystery of Peter's death, which our Savior told
him, may have a good spiritual sense, that when he is old another shall draw
him whither he would not. Ioh. 21.18.
And does not the Pope so? Who says, he is his successor; teaching doctrines
contrary to his doctrines in his Epistles.

Ferus describes the notes of the true Church upon these words, Ferus in 9.
cap. Act.
The Churches had rest through all Jury and Galile and Samaria, and were
edified, and walked in the fear of the Lord, and were multiplied by the
comfort of the holy Ghost. He often repeates and beats into our heads, with
what goods and riches the Primitive Church was famous to our shame, which seek
nothing but earthly things: And we think we have very well provided for the
Church, if it abound in riches and riot.

And after upon these words, They entered into the Synagogue. The examples of
Christian life may be gathered out of this Text. In cap. 12. Act.
First, they enter into the Synagogue, they teach not in corners. For he that
does the truth comes unto the light. Secondly, thou see here that the Jews
on their Sabboths came together to hear the law: and for that cause especially
the Sabbath was ordained; And therefore he says not, on the Sabbath thou
shall be idle, but that thou shall keep it holy. For the day is holy in it
self, but it ought also to be holy unto us: which then it is, when we cease
from doing evil works, and give our selves to those which be good; and
especially to the hearing and meditation of the law of God, without which it is
not kept holy at all. Neither is it sufficient for thee to have heard once,
unless thou hear often. For the devil is ever in assaulting thee, and thou
must ever resist him with the word of God; by which alone he is overcome. And
also thou must meditate in the word of God, or else thou hear in vain. Thou
must meditate also of thine own sins, and of Gods blessings: these things
also we must do in keeping and sanctifying our Sabbath. Thirdly, he says, yt
they sat down. Behold also Paul himself sits down amongst others, and
hears the law: he does not intrude himself rashly or foolishly, but with
silence he waits till opportunity was offered to him of preaching. The which
thing makes very much against the despisers of the Scriptures; and haters of
vocal preachings. Fourthly, after, says he, the reading of the law and the
prophets. Thou see here that the word of God, and not man's fancies was read.
Thou see also, that they did not only teach the law; that is, works: but the
Prophets also, that is, faith: for both these are very profitable and
necessary to salvation. Fifthly, they sent unto them Paul did not speak but
being commanded, least he should seem to any to be presumptuous; against those
which cannot hold their peace, as Elihu in the book of Job. Sixthly, he said,
Men and brethren. Thou see that after the reading of the law and Prophets,
that by and by ought to follow exhortation and interpretation thereof: So Paul
says; There is but small profit, if they speak with tongues in the
congregation, and do not also prophecy and expound. Here also mark that
prophesiing is not to be despised, and that the interpretations and judgments
of others in expounding the Scriptures are to be heard.

Here we may see as in a little map, the whole sum of Christian religion;
and the marks of the true Church. The true Church solemnizeth the Lords
Sabbath in preaching and hearing his word. And without this, says Ferus, there
is no sanctifying of the Sabbath at all. And if this be true in the thick
darkness of Popery, where Gods word was neither preached nor heard, nor
meditated on, there was no Sabbath kept: Nay even in our days, there are many
Catholics, which think they keep holy the Sabbath very religiously, and
yet will not come to the Church to hear Gods word: And all such Ferus tells,
that they profane the Sabbath, and keep no sabbath at all. Again, he
teaches that the only weapon to overcome the devil, is the word of God. Then
no doubt the devil was a great conqueror, when as no man almost had this sword
in his hand; he had made as great a conquest of Christians souls, as Sisera
had made of the bodies of the Jews: of whom being now by her conquered,
Deborah sings thus: They chose new gods: then war was in the gates. Iud. 5.8.
Was there a spear or shield found among forty thousand of Israel? So dealt
Sisera with Israel; and so dealt Satan with Christians; he deprived them of
their weapons, to keep them more surely in his obedience. Can he be a man's
friend, that takes his weapon from him in the midst of most raging and cruel
enemies? But this has the Church of Rome done: she has taken the Scriptures,
which Saint Paul calls the sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 5.16. 1. Pet. 5.8.
from the hands of the lay people: and the devil is called of Peter A roaring
lion, seeking whom he may devour.

In the true Church (says Ferus) Gods word is read, and not any fancies of
man. Paul himself sits and hears the word of God, and therefore no Christian
people must think scorn to do it. And that after the reading, preaching ought
to follow; and that not only works, but faith also, must be taught. These are
the marks of the true Church, by Ferus judgment. And whether the Church of
Rome have had these in her or not, let every man judge.

In cap. 15. Act.
Again, of Christian religion he writes thus, upon these words, Why go you
about to lay a yoke? The second reason is; that it is not lawful for the
Apostles to put a yoke upon the consciences of men, which the Lord has not
put: for he that does so, tempts God. It is the duty of the Apostles to
preach the Gospel, that is, glad tidings, and not like tyrants to rule over
men's consciences. Let those Bishops mark these words of Peter, which make our
religion, which the mercy of God would have free in the fewness and
manifestnesse of her services, a bondslaue with their burdens they lay upon
it: so that the Jews are in far better case then we, who were subject to the
ceremonies of the law, and not to man's devises. And Augustine writes thus to
the questions of Iamarus, etc. Every true Catholic may mark here how he
touches the pope, who takes upon him to rule over men's consciences, and even
to load them with his decrees and constitutions.

And because the Papists brag much of their general Councels: let us mark how
Ferus there describes a true general Council upon these words, And when there
had been great dissension. See how wisely they deal in the matter. They do
not rashly pronounce sentence: but they weigh every thing. For in matters of
faith which touch the conscience, it is not enough to say, We will and command.
Mark therefore how the Apostles assembled themselves together. They came
together plainly, they seek for nothing else but the glory of God; they
desire the salvation of others: To conclude, they weigh all things wisely. What
marvel is it then, if the holy Ghost were in this Council, according to the
promise of the Lord, Where two or three are gathered together, etc. We come
together otherwise, with great pomp and state: we seek to maintain our own
glory and estate: and we persuade our selves that we may do any thing by the
fullness of our authority: And how can the holy ghost allow such assemblies
etc? He touches the Popes state and pride. He thinks that the holy Ghost will
not guide such proud and stately assemblies. Again of the conclusion and
doctrine of that Council he writes thus, upon these words: Which neither we
nor our fathers were able to bear. The law is an intolerable burden; because
it requires not only our hand, but also our heart. Secondly, because it
conuinceth us to be sinners: For we do ever more against the law, then
according to the law. And also those things we do according to the law, we do
them imperfectly: but by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we do believe to be
saved. A conclusion and a knitting up of the matter both very godly and
Apostolic, that by the grace of Christ both Jews and Gentiles are saved, and
not of their merits. For only Christ suffices to all: so that the law
profits nothing to the Jews to their salvation: for even they are saved by
grace, and not by the law: so far against all reason is it, that any man
should impose those things to the Gentiles, which profited not the Jews
themselves. And to this end were the Epistles of Saint Paul written to the
Romans, and to the Galathians: And our salvation is called the grace of Christ,
because he has deserved it for us. Let them therefore brag of their merits:
we will seek the glory of God. Thus far Ferus. Here is the true Church put
down, and her doctrine, the milk she gives her children: That only the grace
of Jesus Christ saues, and not merits. She that brags of her merits, and trusts
in them is the strumpet, is the whore, is not the true Church, and the spouse
of Jesus Christ, by Ferus his judgment.

And whereas it is objected of some against the Gospel, that since the
preaching thereof heresies have sprung up in the world, and that before the
Church was in peace: let us mark how Ferus answers that objection upon these
words, Ferus in cap. 13. Act.
And he resisted them. Behold the combat (says he) of truth and falsehood. This
combat ever has been and will be: God spoke but one word in Paradise, and by
and by came the serpent, which resisted it: Moses being sent into Egypt, found
there sorcerers which withstood him. The Prophets ever had false Prophets
opposite unto them. Christ coming into the world, found adversaries. The same
thing chanced to his Apostles. Let us not therefore be troubled, if there be
now great dissension and quarrels about religion. Neither for this cause must we
neglect to go to godly sermons: but rather let us diligently do this. First
call upon God with the kingly Prophet, saying; Show me thy ways, O Lord, and
teach me thy paths. Then compare the doctrines diligently together: and that
which thou shall perceive more forcible to draw thee from the world to God,
from the flesh to the Spirit, from evil to goodness, and from idolatry to
the true worshipping of God, embrace that without any fear, with tooth and
nail (as they say) nothing respecting the gainesayings of others. The devil
has ever gone about this, That good deeds and words might be made none
account of, least men believing should be saved. Therefore by his ministers he
sowes errors; and sometimes also he does work miracles, that by errors he
might make Gods word, and by false signs, Gods works to be lightly set by;
that by this means he may rather draw men quite from the word; or at least
wise, he may make them distrust and doubt of it. God suffers this first, that
the godly may be tried according to that, If a Prophet rise among you, etc.
believe him not, Deuteronomy. 13.1.
for God tries you. And hereof also Christ says, that in the end of the world
so great shall be the beguilings of false Prophets, that if it were possible,
the very elect should be seduced. And hereof Saint John says: Believe not
every spirit, but prove the spirits whether they be of God or no. The doctrine
of the Gospel which we have received, is the word of God which has been
confirmed by many signs: and with the blood of many thousands: Wherefore let
no man doubt of that, although an Angel from heaven should persuade the
contrary. Again, therefore God suffers the devil to show lying signs, that
the wicked may be more blinded: For it is done by the just judgment of God,
that they which will not believe the truth, should be seduced, and should
cleave to lies. Thus far Ferus. Where he plainly teaches, that it is no
marvel, that after the preaching of the Gospel contention and heresies have
sprung in the Church: he says, it has been always so, and shall be ever.
And that for this cause no man ought to refuse to go and hear sermons. And he
loves the doctrine of the Gospel, and not any lying miracles, as the
groundworke of true Christian religion.

And after, concerning the same matter, he writes thus upon these words, The
city was divided. Ferus in 14. cap. Act.
Here thou see fulfilled that which Christ foretold, I came not to send peace
into the world, but a sword. The Gospel teaches not seditions, nor sows
discords; but because it reprooueth their sins, it cannot choose but the
worldlings should repine against it. I came to send fire upon the earth;
marvel not therefore if there spring up and be sects in the world; for it has
been ever so: yea there must be heresies, that the elect may be proved. As
much more as we see sects to arise, so let us strive earnestly to find and
search out the truth, and to stand firmly and immovably in the confessed
truth, and to profess it boldly unto our lives end. And after he writes thus
of ye ground of every true Christians faith. Ferus in cap. Act. 15.
Every Christian ought to be so sure of his faith, that if all the world were
of a contrary opinion, yet he could say: I am sure this is Gods word; let
other men think what they will, God cannot deceive or beguile. Yea if an Angel
from heaven should preach the contrary, let him be accursed. Unless thou be
thus grounded, thou can not stand steadfastly, when the false Apostles shall
teach the contrary. And hereof Christ says, My sheep hear my voice: and
they will not hear stangers, but run from them. Gods word by Ferus judgment
is the only Rock of Christians faith and religion in these doubtful days.
And again in another place he makes these steps of Christianity: Mark in the
foresaid words this order in Christianity: Ferus in cap. 22. Act.
First is the predestination of God. For it is not of him that wills, but of
God that shows mercy. Read the ninth chapter to the Romans. And we are
predestinate not to idleness or wantonness: but that we may know the will of
God, what kind of one he is toward us, and what he requires and wills at our
hands. Then we are sent to Christ, in whom alone we see how God is affected to
us. By him also we receive the holy Ghost, that we may be able to do the will
of God. After we have known Christ, it remains that in our life, manners, and
words we testify his goodness toward us, and that we are his disciples. And
this testimony co^sists in four things: First, that we rise up from our old
conversation. Secondly, that we be baptized, and be partakers of the
Sacraments. Thirdly, that we wash away the sins whereinto we have fallen, by
Christ's blood. Fourthly, that we call upon his name, that is, his righteousness
and merits. Here Ferus does as it were make a perfect anatomy of a Christian
man. I would to God every true Christian would mark well every part thereof,
and see whether himself were sound in that faith or no.

And in another place, of Christian conversation he writes thus: Ferus in cap.
Act 20.
Mark here the manners of Christians: First of all he prays; the Saints
always give themselves diligently to prayers both in the beginning and end of
their work; yea and all their work thorough. For we ever stand need of the
help of God: for without him we can do nothing: We are not sufficient of
ourselves to think any thing that is good. And again, He works in us both
the will, and to finish. And in Osee, O Israel, thy destruction comes of thy
self, but thy help comes of me. Let no man therefore trust in his own
strength Cursed is he that puts flesh his arm. Therefore Paul never took any
thing in hand, nor finished any thing without the help of prayer. Secondly,
he kneeles down; against those which make a jest at all ceremonies in prayers.
He that goes about to make his prayers unto God, must have well profited first
in the school of humility, otherwise he shall not be heard. The prayers of him
that humbles himself pierces the clouds. And hereof it is said by the
Prophet; Upon whom shall my Spirit rest; but upon the humble and peaceble. And
thirdly, he prays not alone, but with all the company. The prayers of the
holy Church is of great force. So when the Apostles continued praying with one
accord and consent, the holy Ghost came upon them, and filled them all. In like
manner after the Jews had threatened them; when they had prayed altogether the
place moved, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost. And this is that
which Christ promised once; If two of you shall agree upon earth, whatsoever
thing they shall ask, it shall be done unto them Ferus would have common
prayers made with the common consent of the whole Church; or else (says he)
they are of no force. Contrary to the common practice of the Roman Church
amongst us in times past.

Again he writes thus of the evil life of the Church, which offends many:
Ferus in cap. Act. 23.
Although it be a great imperfection and defect, where the life is not approved
and virtuous: yet there is less danger, if the faith be right and sound, then
if the life were good, and the faith evil. For without faith it is impossible
to please God: and he that comes to God must believe. Therefore it is of more
force if the faith be pure and good, then if thy works were good. Thus far
Ferus. He preferres that Church which has a right faith, although in some
respect she fail in good works; before that Church which has good works and
an evil faith.

And of the Church, Ferus in Act 21.
and of the sacrifices thereof he writes thus: Paul taught that Gods house was
the Church, and that now the true sacrifice was to be offered in every place;
So Theodoret expounds it in cap 1. Malach. and alleges this place of S Paul
and that of our Savior Ioh 4.23. 1. Tim. 2.8.
the which thing also Malachie prophesied. Ferus seems to expound the
sacrifice which Malachie speaks of, to be Christian prayer: as Saint Paul does
also, who says, I will that men pray in all places, lifting up pure hands,
without wrath or doubtfulnesse. S. Paul here without all doubt alludes to
Malachie: Here is pure hands and that pure sacrifice void of wrath and
doubtfulnesse: Here is in all places. And expounds that place of Malachie of
Prayer, and not of the Eucharist, as some of the Papists do: Jacob. Vshanskus
Guesnensis Archiep. Heb. 13.15. Ose. 14 3.
And for all Jewish sacrifices, for that sacrifice Mincha, which was drawn to
the altar; now Saint Paul puts down in another place the fruit of our lips:
which sentence he takes out of Osee, who calls prayers and giving of thanks the
calves of our lips.

And of religion maintained by wars, he writes thus: He that maintains his
cause by seditions and tumults of the people, Ferus in Act. 21.
discouers and bewrayes himself that he has not a just cause. A good cause
needs not vproares, or man's authority, who has God the favorer and protector
of it. And does not the Pope use these means to further his cause? In this he
declares he is not of God.

But in this weighty matter, to let all men's testimonies pass, which are
light upon the balance, as David terms them, Psalm. 62.9.
yea lighter then vanity it self, and to return to that undoubted fountain
of all truth, ye word of God, with which I began. That is an evident and
infallible mark of Gods Church, which the Angel taught Saint John: Reu. 19.10.
Who when as he would have worshipped him, said, See thou do it not, for I am
thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren, which have the testimony Jesus.
Worship God. Here is an evident mark of Gods Church: she worships only God,
and not Angels. And secondly, here is a reason why we should not worship
Angels: we debase our selves in worshipping them: they are our fellow servants.
And who in common sense will worship his equals? By worshipping Angels, we
forget that great dignity whereunto Jesus Christ has advanced us. We are now
Jesus Christ's, we are his members: 1. Cor. 3.23. 1. Cor. 6.15.
Therefore as he does not, no more should we worship Angels. A second mark of
Gods Church here also we may learn: She has the testimony of Jesus. And what
is that? that is, the spirit of prophecy, as the Angel after expounds it;
that is, the Spirit of God, whereby all Gods children are able in some measure
to understand and expound the scriptures. For as all Gods children have Gods
Spirit; so it is no doubt a fire in them: and therefore it will burn through
Christian charity: it will lighten their knowledge, and disperse the mysts of
darkness. This fire has Antichrist quenched, by taking the wood and matter of
it away, I mean the Scriptures, from the common people. And to this that of
Saint Paul has relation no doubt, 1. These. 5.19.
Quench not the Spirit.

But here they think, that because they worship Saints and Angels, therefore
they shall be blameless: But that shall not excuse them, Reu. 14 7.
because they are plainly taught and commanded to worship him only that made
heaven and earth: And by these words God only is signified, and all other
creatures are excluded. And this Epithet is commonly attributed to God in the
Scriptures: Psalm. 124.8.134.3.
Our help stands in the name of the Lord, who has made heaven and earth.
Here is as it were a distinction put between the works and the workman: all
the works jointly must worship their maker: they must not begin one to magnify
or worship another. Nay, the more to convince them in this their error, all
the Saints and angels have refused this service: Act. 10.26. Act. 14.15.
Peter to Cornelius, Paul to the men of Lystra, saying, We are men like to your
selves, why do you honor us? And the angel twice in the Revelation, whereas S.
John did not forget himself, and would have yielded to the angel the honor
due to God; but even this civil outward honor, which they call (...), the
angel twice refused: alleging my former reason, Reu. 19.10. and 22.9.
that he was one of our fellow servants: and fellow servants must not worship
one another, but only their master. Teaching us to be very wary in
worshipping, yea even angels, least our (...) grow into (...): as amongst the
Papists it has done. These two are easily in words distinguished; but not so
easily in deed. To bow the knee is but a civil honor, but yet to bow the knee
to Baal, Romans 11.4.
God accounts part of his honor. And S. Paul writes thus most manifestly of ye
worshipping of angels: Let none overrule you, Col. 2.18.
or spoil you of your prize (which by the worshipping of God you obtain) by
humbleness of mind and worshipping of Angels, advancing himself into those
things he never saw, rashly puffed up with his fleshly mind. As though he
should say: No man knows the estate of angels, whether they hear our prayers
at all times, and can help us at their pleasures or not: and who will then
pray unto them? nay this shall make us lose our prize. We all in this life, as
Saint Paul teaches, run as it were in a race: 1. Cor. 9.24.
now he that runs in a race, must have his eyes still fixed on the goal he
runs to, that he may run straight unto it, or else he shall hardly win the
prize. So must all Christians have always their minds fixed upon God, Psalm.
123.2.
even as the eyes of servants to the eyes of their masters, as David teaches:
they must ever walk with God, as Enoch did, if they mind to win that prize. A
little looking aside, Genesis 5.22.
will make them lose all, though it be to worship an angel. God only is their
prize, is their mark they must shoot at: They must direct their eyes only to
him. S. Austen very excellently teaches us this lesson: O strange thing, and
greatly to be wondered at! Med. 27.
Of God the Creator of all things, who is incomprehensible and unspeakable (all
doubt set apart) we read, speak, and write high and wonderful things: but of
Angels and souls whatsoever we say, we cannot so manifestly avouch. But let
our mind pass beyond these, and let it pass over all that is created; and let
it run and climb up and fly and pass over; and with all her force, let her
direct the eyes of her faith upon him, which has created all things. Therefore
I will make as it were a ladder in my heart, and by the staves thereof I will
climb up to my soul, and by my soul and my mind, I will climb up to my God,
which is above over my head. Whatsoever is visibly seen, whatsoever is
spiritually imagined, with force let it be far removed from the sight of my
soul and heart, my understanding alone and by it self going forward, let it
fly swiftly to him, who is the creator of Angels and souls, and of all things.
That is a happy soul which forsakes these base things, and seeks after those
which be aloft, which in the highest places makes the place of her dwelling,
and from the highest rocks beholds the sun of righteousness with eagles
eyes. Nothing is so delectable or pleasant, then to behold God alone with the
sight of the mind, and longing of the heart, and after a strange manner inuisibly
to see him, who is invisible: And so to taste of another, and not of this
worlds sweetness, and to behold another, and not this worlds light. For this
our light, which is shut up in houses, which in time ends, which every night
alters, which is common to us with worms and bruit beasts, in comparison of
that most excellent light, is not to be called light, but night Here Austen
plainly teaches that no man knows the estate of souls and Angels: and
therefore we cannot pray with assured faith unto them, but we must climb up
beyond them, even to God the maker of souls and Angels. And herein Saint
Austen agrees with Saint John in the Revelation, and with Saint Paul to the
Colossians: but in some other places of Saint Austen, I know how some have made
him disagree from both these, and from himself also in this place, Cap. 40.
as appears in these meditations.

But our Savior himself does draw out the platform of his Church most
manifestly to all Christians yt will give but a little heed to his words, even
to ye capacity of a simple woman, in John 4. Ioh. 4.20.
And the woman said to him, after that he had told her of her five husbands:
Now I know assuredly, that thou art a Prophet. And upon this ground she begins
to enquire of him, concerning true religion; and the true means of the
worshipping of God. And even here in the very beginning, she overthrows that
Popish Maxim, that it is sufficient to believe as the Church believes: she
desires to be instructed further: Our fathers (says she) worshipped in this
mountain: And you say that at Jerusalem is the place where we must worship. 2.
King. 18.22.
As though she should have said: We follow the steps and religion of our
fathers, in our worshipping of God. But herein she c^red, and all such like
that follow the tradition of the fathers: for it was true perchance that she
said, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had worshipped God in that hill, but now
the law of God coming after, and commanding all sacrifices to be brought to
Jerusalem, they following the traditions of their fathers against the law of
God, erred; as our Savior here teaches this woman, and in her all
posterities. We must not respect what our fathers have done, but what Gods word
teaches. But Jesus said to her, Amos. 2.4.
Woman believe me, because the hour shall come, when ye shall neither in this
mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship the Father. Here Christ teaches her two
principal notes and marks of the true Church: First concerning the place
thereof, that it shall not be tied to any one place no more, as it had been.
And therefore Rome falsely makes her self the mother Church, and a second
Jerusalem as it were. Secondly, concerning the object and end: All religion and
worship must be done to God, and to no creature else. Psalm. 65.2. Matt. 4.10.
This homage of our religion and worship he challenges as only due to
himself: You worship you know not what, we know what we worship. This is a
third mark of the true Church: It must know what it worshippeth: it must not
serve God in ignorance and blindness. Leuit. 21.18. Matthew. 10.16. Luke 17.33.
He refused and condemned in the law as well blind as lame sacrifices. And Gods
people are compared to Doves and Eagles, which both have most clear eyes. And
god himself, although before he had created heaven and earth; Genesis 1 4. 1. Ioh.
5.1.
yet he pronounced nothing good before he had created light. And Saint John
says, that God himself is light, he can abide no darkness. And hereof all
the faithful are called children of light. And David now prophesying of the
Church of Christ after his ascension says, speaking as it should seem of our
Church service: Sing ye praises with understanding. And Saint Austen says, De
mirab. Scripturae.
that the holy Ghost came in all tongues, to consecrate and make holy all
tongues.

And our Savior said to the mother of Zebedees children, Matthew. 20.22.
when she requested that her two sons might sit the one at his right hand, and
the other at his left: you ask you know not what: And do we not think that he
will say the same even now to all Popish Latin prayers not understood of them
which make them? And Saint Peter in his Catholic epistle, 2. Pet. 3.18
writes to all Christians, Grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And again, Join to your faith virtue: 2. Pet. 1.5.
and to your virtue knowledge. And our Savior in the Gospel, Ioh. 17.3.
This is life eternal to know thee the true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ. To know God is true Religion, nay is eternal life: And therefore the
Church of Rome, which did not, nor as yet does not teach her children to seek
for this knowledge, 2. The. 2 3.
was the mother of that son of perdition, and neither taught true Christian
religion, nor yet eternal life.

That salvation comes of the Jews. Here our Savior does teach this woman also
what thee must know: and in her all Christians. They must know their salvation
from whence it comes, and be thankful to God for it. The Church of Rome has
erred in this point also, who has taught, that salvation has not comed of the
Jews, that is, by the means only of Jesus Christ, but by the blood of Martyrs:
She has added here in England, even ye blood of Thomas; which eue^ Ferus
condemns upon these words of Saint John, Ferus in 1. cap. ep. Io.
And the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our sins. Mark (says
he) that he mentions not any blood, but the blood of Christ. For no other
blood can, or ever could do this, Act. 4.12.
etc. There is no other name given under heaven (says Peter) in which we must
be saved. To Jesus Christ alone the people and the children cry, Hosannah,
that is, save us Lord: and as it is also in the Psalm, Matt. 21.9.15.
Hashlikah, and O Lord, send us now prosperity. Matt. 28.18.
He alone blesses the works of our hands; and also saues our souls: He has
all power in heaven and earth. And so must all true Catholics cry also to him
alone, and to none else. This is also a mark of the true Church.

But the hour comes, and is even now; when the true worshippers shall worship
the Father in Spirit and truth. Reu. 22.17.
Here is another evident mark of the true Church. She still waits for the
coming of Jesus Christ: she accounts ye time of this world but an hour, even
then when Christ spoke this: and that now the hour is almost quite run, a
small time or nothing thereof remains. She thinks that this world is of no
great continuance: as the Popish Church does not think, who teaches that as
yet Antichrist is not comed. She thinks that those things which S. John said
should be fulfilled shortly, Reu. 1.3.
are fulfilled already. She thinks not that the greater part of them are yet
to be fulfilled, as the Church of Rome does. She ever stands in the door of
her tent with Abraham, Genesis 18.1. 1. King. 19.13.
and in her caves mouth with Elias, still looking when the Lord will come.

When the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and truth; For
such worshippers the Father now looks for: Here is another mark of the true
Church: Ioh. 4.23.
To worship the Father, God alone; and also the manner how, in spirit and truth.
In spirit, that is, with our hearts: and in truth; that is, without all types
and shadows. John. 19.30.
The law now has an end: the sun shines: all shadows must vanish away: Our
humble hearts now must be those sacrificed bulls: Romans 12 1.
and our chaste hearts those sacrificed Turtles; and our good hearts those
sacrificed Rams; and our bountiful hearts, those sacrificed sheep; and our
joyful hearts, those sacrificed calves, which God requires. Heb. 13 15.
God will not be worshipped now with those Jewish shadows, Col. 2.17.
which he himself commanded; the true son of Righteousness Jesus Christ
being comed into the world: much less with Popish shadows, and mysteries,
and man's devise, Reu. 14.9.
or with Popish Images, Exodus 20 4. Esa. 40 25.
which his Law and Prophets flatly condemn.

God is a Spirit, and therefore he will be worshipped in spirit and truth.
Those external things, 2. King. 12.28.
which seem pleasant to flesh and blood, as Ieroboams golden calves (which he
made, as some think, because that God would more highly esteem golden calves,
Dan. 3.15. 2. King. 10.22.
then calves of flesh) Nebuchadnetzars Psalterie and music; Baals Priests gay
garments and robes, frankincense, and such like things whatsoever, wherein
flesh and blood takes so great pleasure and delight, are an abomination to the
Lord; as our Savior Christ tells us in the Gospel: Luke 16.15.
That which is very highly esteemed amongst men, is abominable before God. He
requires the love of thy heart, the faith and trust of thy soul, Eccle. 9.10.
Heb. 13.16.
the knowledge of thy understanding, the obedience of thy will, the praise of
thy mouth, and the good works of thy hands. And this is that which David
says in the Psalm: Psalm. 50.8.
that at that great day of judgment, God shall not reprove the people for
their burnt offerings of bullocks or goats: but if they shall not have offered him
praise and thanksgiving. Let all true Catholics fear this reproof: God has
foretold us, like a good Master, what he will reprove us for, and what he
will find fault with in his house, when he comes again: and shall we not take
heed thereof? O careless and disobedient servants! Let us offer to him alone
our praise and thanksgiving, and all our prayers; least we be reproved and
condemned of him when he comes.

The true worshippers.] This proves that there shall be false worshippers in
Gods house: Esa. 1 22. Mat. 13.25. and 25 33.
there shall be there copper as well as gold: there shall be tares as well as
wheat; there shall be goats as well as sheep: O let us mark this point well
(here is the brand wherewithal the Lords sheep are discerned: here is the
touchstone whereby the Lords gold is tried from copper: Matt. 3.12.
here is the sieue and fan which tries the Lords wheat from the chafe) that
we may be sheep and not goats, gold and not copper, wheat and not chafe. Let
us take diligent heed of this.

Verse. 25.
And the woman said unto him: I know that Messiah shall come, which is called
Christ, and when he shall come he shall show us all things. This opinion she
had of Christ, that he should teach the^ all things when he came: And shall we
believe less of him? Shall we believe any doctrine which he never taught in
his word? And our Savior himself agrees to this her speech, saying: I will call
you no more servants, Ioh. 15.15.
because the servant knows not what his master does; but I have called you
friends, because I have made manifest to you all things that I have heard of my
father. He testifies here plainly, that he fulfilled her speech, and that he
had told them all things necessary to their salvation: he kept nothing back
to be revealed after by the means of the Church: and therefore he commands his
Apostles to go and preach to all nations, Matt. 28.10.
baptizing them, and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever he had
commanded them, and nothing else. And Saint Paul says, 1. Tim. 6.3.4.
He that teaches any other doctrine, and agrees not with the whole some words
of our Savior Christ, and that doctrine which agrees with godliness; is puffed
up, and knows nothing, how wise so ever he seems to be, and whatsoever he
pretend, either revelations of Angels, or any miracles, to confirm his
doctrine withal. The doctrine of Jesus Christ is the rule and square of all
doctrines, 2. Ioh. ver. 8.
by this place. And Saint John also says, Take heed to your selves, lest we
lose all the works which we have wrought: but that we may have a full reward.
For he that transgresses, or ouerreacheth the doctrine of Christ (for so (...)
the Greek word signifies) and that keeps not himself within the limits and
bounds thereof, but will go beyond it, though that which he does seem in his
own eye holy, religious, and devout: has not God. This is a terrible
sentence: let us beware how in our devotion, and religion, and zeal of serving
God, we do more then the Gospel teaches; we go beyond the doctrine of Christ
and abide not in it: for if we do, we shall have no part with God. This place
condemns all blind superstitious Papists, which did many things of a zeal
and good intent, and not according to the Gospel: nay how many of them never
knew the Gospel; and yet thought that they did well. But all such works, how
painful and costly soever they were; by this place we may plainly learn,
that they were lost: nay more then this, they also sustained a greater loss,
they lost God. God cannot abide servants, Esa. 1.12. 2. Io. 9.
that will do that he commands them not. He will say to such, Who required
this at your hands? But he that abides in the doctrine of Christ has both the
Father and the Son. O happy continuance! And what is this (...), to abide,
to continue? but to believe no more, to do no more, then God commands in his
word, then Christ Jesus taught, not to go beyond this, either in faith or
works, no not an hairs breadth: though the doctrine which is taught besides
this, seem never so old, never so devout, practiced of Fathers, and confirmed
by Councels. Let us remember that the poor silly woman of Samariah could say,
that Messiah when as he should come, should teach them all things: and shall
not we say the same?

And Christ said to her: I am he that talks with thee. Verse. 26.
Surely in all the Gospel Christ did never reveal himself to any so
manifestly as he did to this woman. He said to the high Priests when as they
said, Art thou the son of God? Luke 22.70.
You say that I am: And to the Jews: Before Abraham was I am: And Abraham
desired to see my day, and saw it and rejoiced. John 8.58, and 8.25.
And again to the Jews, which said unto him, Who art thou? And Jesus said
unto them, The beginning. And therefore I speak unto you: No doubt having
relation to that first word in Genesis, Ioh. 1.1.
whence that book took his name (Beresheth) In the beginning, etc. Jesus
Christ is that beginning: 1. Cor. 8.6.
And therefore Saint Paul says, To us there is but one God the Father, of
whom are all things, and we for him: And one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him. Here is the Creator one God: here is the only means of
the creation, Jesus Christ: All things were created by him. And here is the
end of all things, Gods glory. So that Jesus Christ is that beginning, by whom
God created all things. And thus he obscurely taught the Jews, who he was: As
though he should say; Look into the first book of Genesis, and take no great
pains to read it over: but look and mark well the very first word thereof,
and there you shall find who I am: I am the beginning, and therefore I talk
with you. Prou. 8.31.
My delight is to be with the children of men, as Solomon says. The workman
loves his work: even so that excellent workman, the Son of God loves us, who
are his workmanship. De Genesis ad lit. lib. 1, ca. 5.
And therefore Austen says, The beginning of the intellectual creature, is
the eternal wisdom of God, which beginning abiding in it self unchangeable,
never cease by secret inspirations, to speak to that creature, whereof it
is the beginning, that it may be converted to that, by which it is made,
because otherwise it cannot have his form, and be perfect.

Thus our Savior obscurely showed himself to these, but never to any so
plainly, as to this woman: and hereby we may conjecture the excellency of her
faith: no doubt her excellent faith, even as it were, deserved such a great
reward of our Savior. Messiah when he comes (says she) we know shall show
us all things: Who could have spoken more of Christ? No not all the Jewish
Rabbis. And I would to God even now our great Doctors in the Popes Church
would say as much. And therefore she received the greatest answer and reward
that could be in the world. Verse. 26.
I am he (says Christ) that talks with thee: never such an answer, never such
a word spoken in the world before. Let us have the same faith of Christ, that
he may bestow also such like blessings upon us.

And the like definition of true Catholic Religion, and the same marks of the
true Church S. Paul himself also has no doubt expressed, Act. 24.11.
being taken from this stamp: I confess this unto thee (says he unto Felix)
that according to that way which they call heresy, I so worship the God of my
fathers: believing all that is written in the law and the Prophets, having this
hope in God, which they also have, that there shall be a resurrection of the
just, and of the unjust. Here are also marks of the true Church. She must be
able to give an account of her faith, as Saint Paul does here to Felix; and
Saint Peter commands all Christians to do to all men: Sanctify (says he)
the Lord God in your hearts, 1. Pet. 3.15.
ever being ready to maintain and defend if that any shall ask you a reason
of that hope which is in you. We must not only have this hope of salvation in
us, which is by Jesus Christ, but we must be able also to yield a reason, and
an account of it, Luke 12.8.
to maintain and defend it. And our Savior says: He that shall confess me
before men, him shall I confess before my Father in heaven. We must be able to
make confession of our faith, if so be we will have Christ acknowledge us for
his. But this in the Popish Church they were not able to do: and therefore
that Church was not the true Church.

I confess unto thee (says he) that after that way which they call heresy I
worship the God of my fathers. Act 24.11.
Here is another mark of the true Church: To be slaundered, reviled, called
heretics. See here how at this time the true Church of Christ was called
heretical: And therefore let not that name of heresy now discourage any of
Gods children. So did they revile and hate the very names of the true prophets
of God, Luke 6.22.
as our Savior witnesses. So at this day the Papists go about by all means
possible, to defame and discredit the persons of the professors of the
Gospel. But as Saint Paul passed not for the name of Heretic: no more let us.

Believing all that is written in the Law and the Prophets, Here is another
mark of the true Church: here is a ground of a true Christians conscience,
concerning his faith and religion: To believe all that is written in the law
and the Prophets. This was Saint Paul's ground, he believed no more: and
according to that he worshippeth God, and he cares not, let them call him what
they will. Whosoever lacks this ground shall be carried about with every blast of
vain doctrine, Ephe. 4.14.
like children. To confirm and strengthen us in our faith, God has put in his
Church Apostles and Evangelists, Ephesians. 2.20.
and We are built upon the foundations of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone.

The like marks of the true Church Saint Paul sets down in the Epistle to
the Romans; as arrows out of the same quiver of our Savior, to confound the
enemies that would craftily creep into Gods house: Romans 1.9. 2. Pet. 2.1.
God is my witness (says he) whom I serve in my spirit in the Gospel of his
Son. Here also is the platform of the true Church, and a pattern of a true
Christian. God is only my witness (says Saint Paul) not any Saint or Angel.
The true Church must here with Saint Paul attribute this knowledge and
searching of hearts to God alone, and not to any Saint or Angel else
whatsoever. Act. 1.24 15.8.
Secondly, she must serve this God only and none else: for to whom this
knowledge belongs, to him also divine service and Latria (as they call it)
belongs.

Thirdly, Whom I serve in my spirit (says Saint Paul) not with any outward
or external things or ceremonies, like a Jew, but with my heart, as Jesus
Christ now has taught all men to worship the Father.

Fourthly (in the Gospel of his Son) here he describes the manner how the
true Church of God must worship him. Our service of God must be according to
the Gospel of his Son. And hereunto David also agrees in the Psalm, There is
no speech nor language, Psalm. 19.3.
where their voices are not heard: speaking of the preaching of Gods word. And
he adds Kauam, as it is in the Hebrew, that is, their line, their level,
their square, is gone through all the earth, and their words unto the ends of
the world. To teach us, that Gods word is a line, level, and square: to rule,
limit, and square the faiths of all nations by.

But to conclude, Let us mark what Saint Paul also writes concerning this
matter to the Thessalonians, and how he describes the Church and Gods house
there. From you the word of God was spread, 1. These. 1.10.
not only in Macedonia and Achaia: but your faith toward God came into every
place. So that we need say nothing thereof, for they show and declare what an
entrance we had unto you, and how you turned unto the Lord from idols, to serve
the living and true God, and to look for his son from heaven, whom he raised
from the dead, even Jesus, who delivers us from the anger to come.

Here are most manifestly set down the marks of the true Church, and the
Catholic faith which was in Saint Paul's days preached through the whole
world: To turn from Idols, and to serve the true and living God. And here
first that blind distinction of Dulia and Latria (which the Papists make to
cloak the worshipping of creatures) is quite overthrown, not only Latria,
but, as by this place appears, Dulia is due unto God. Secondly, we must serve
the true and living God. These two Adjuncts take away all worshipping of false
gods, and also of Images. We must worship no false nor dead thing: whatsoever
we worship, it must be living and true. And therefore we must worship no
Images, which are dead stocks, nay we must worship nothing but God alone.
Those Images which the Prophet David describes, Psalm. 115. what are they else
but Papists Images? That Psalm follows the 114. Psalm. which contains
Isreal's going out of Egypt, and it may seem to describe the spiritual Egypt.
Thirdly, we must now every day wait and look for the coming of his Son
Jesus Christ from heaven. We must not think that he will not come yet, as the
Papists teach by their doctrine of Antichrist. Fourthly, we must constantly
believe, that Jesus has not only delivered us by his passion from the guilt
of sin: but from the punishment also thereof, and anger to come. And lastly,
if the Papists will thereof conclude, that the Church of Rome is the mother
Church of all the world, Romans 1.8.
because Saint Paul says that their faith was published throughout all the
world. Then the Church of Thessalonica must be her elder sister, 1 Thessalonians. 1.8.
because her faith also was spread through all the world, and that before hers
as should seem. For Saint Paul mentions in his Epistle to the Romans when he
gives this testimony to the Roman Church, Romans 15.26. 1 Thessalonians. 1.8.
the fruits of Macedonia and Achaia which was planted by the Church of
Thessalonica.

And in a word to make an end of this matter, let all men mark that plain
lesson which David teaches them in the Psalm: Kings of the earth and all
people, Psalm. 148.11.
Princes and all Judges of the world: young men and maids, old men and
children, let them praise the name of the Lord. For his name only is to be
exalted, and his praise is above the heavens, and the earth. All Gods servants
must praise his name, and they must praise it alone, and they which praise any
thing else, do not rightly understand as yet the majesty of God: his praise
is above heaven and earth, that is, all heaven and earth is not able to
express the greatness of his praise. And here is the reason, Because he
exalts the horn of his people, he aduanceth to honor, and makes mighty and
strong: which is a praise for all his saints, even for the children of Israel:
Gnam kerovo, a people that draws near unto him, as it is in the Hebrew. Would
you have God exalt your horn, would you be his people? then you must praise
him alone, then you must draw near to him, and not fly from him to any other.
The which God give all grace to do for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom be praise
for ever. Amen.

Certain Prayers, fit for every true Catholic daily to use, both for
himself and his family, taken out of the scriptures, Granatensis, and others.
Matt. 7, 7.
Ask, and it shall be given you: seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be
opened unto you.

Luke 18.1.
And he spoke a parable unto them, to the end that they ought always to pray,
and not to wax faint, and not to give over: saying, There was a judge, etc.

Rejoice evermore. Pray continually: and in all things give thanks. For this is
the will of God in Jesus Christ toward you: 1 Thessalonians. 5.16.17. Ioh. 16.24.24.
Ephesians. 5.20. Col. 3.17. James 4.2.
that is, these are the things that God would have you do: these are the
things that he delights in: so that they be done in the name of Jesus Christ.

Ye have not: because ye ask not.

A Thanksgiving unto Jesus Christ for the benefits he has bestowed on us,
taken out of Granatensis, which may be called the true Catholics Graces.
Genesis 1.26.
I Give thee hearty thanks (most sweet Jesus) for that thou have created me
according to thine own image and likeness; Psalm. 104.30. and 139.15.
for this body which thou have given me with all the senses thereof; and for
this my soul, with all the powers of it, that with them I might both know
thee, Col. 3.5.
and love thee. Give me grace, O Lord, so to serve thee my creator and heavenly
Father, that all my sinful passions and vain affections being mortified and
killed in me, 1. Cor. 3.17.
thy image may be renewed in me again, unto the which I was created, and that
I may be made like thee in the innocence of life.

Psalm. 22.10.
I thank thee, O my sweet Savior, for the benefit of my preservation: for
even thou the same, who have created me, do ever preserve and keep me in
this essence and being, which thou have given me. Moreover I give thee most
humble thanks, because also for this same preservation of mine, thou have
created all things whatsoever are in the world, Psalm 115.16. 1. Cor. 3.22.
as the heaven, the earth, the sea, the sun, the moon, the stars, beasts,
fishes, birds, trees, and in a word, all creatures else: whereof thou have made
some to sustain and feed me, some to heal me, some to refresh and delight
me, some to teach me, and other some to correct me: I beseech thee, O Lord,
give me grace that I may so use all these in this world, as I ought to do, and
according to that right use, whereunto thou have made them, that is, Romans 1.20.
that I may by the^ come unto the knowledge of thee my only true God and Lord,
and that by them there may be stirred up and kinled in my heart an admiration
and wonderful love of thy holy name.

O Lord Jesus, 1. Pet. 1.19.
I thank she for the benefit of my redemption, that is, for that
incomprehensible goodness, and for that exceeding great mercy which thou have
showed toward me.

Also for that most fervent love, Phil. 2.7.
wherewith thou have redeemed me, descending down into the earth, that thou
might lift me up to heaven; being made man, Romans 15.7
that thou might make me God; and suffering most cruel death, that I might
have true life. Ioh. 14.6. Luke 2.7.21. Matthew. 1.14. and 4.2. Luke 6.12. and 9,
58.
I thank thee for the humility of thy incarnation, for the poverty of thy
birth, for the blood of thy circumcision, for thy flight into Egypt, for thy
fasting in the wilderness, for thy watching all night in prayer: and lastly, for
the poverty, humility and misery of all thy whole most holy life. I give
thee thanks for the labors, pains, reproaches, mockes, Luke 22 64.23
33.22.44.54.64. Matthew. 26.67. Matt. 26.21. Luke 22.64, Ioh 19.2. Mark.
15.32.26. Ioh. 20.25.19.24.30. Mat. 11.35.16, 17. Act. 12.28.
and taunts, which thou enduredst for me, in thy most sorrowful and shameful
death. I thank thee for thy prayer in the garden, for thy bloody sweat, for
thy attachment, for thy buffettings, for thy spittings upon, for thy slanders,
for thy stripes, for thy crown of thorns, for thy purple robe, for thy
railings upon, for the gall and vinegar thou drankest: for the nails, for ye
spear for the cross, and for thy death, which for me and my salvation thou
enduredst. I give thee thanks, O sweet Jesus, that even from my cradle thou
have received me into the lap and bosom of thy Church, that thou have
instructed and taught me in the Catholic faith, that thou have made me a
Christian, and that thou have sustained and preserved me both in body and
soul, even till now: I desire thy gracious goodness; grant me thy grace,
that thou only may be the most pleasant and sweet meat of my heart, Ioh.
6.27. Ioh. 7.37.
and that my soul may always thirst for thee, the very fountain of the
water of life, that when the course of this my pilgrimage is ended, I may then
rejoice in thy most blessed happiness and felicity, 2. Tim. 4.7. Psalm. 17.15.
Reu. 22.1.
and taste of that plentiful and euerflowing flood of delights, which comes
from the well of life, and of all good things else.

I give thee thanks, most loving Jesus, who have delivered me from many and
very great perils and dangers, both of soul and body, Psalm. 68.20.
even unto this present day, without all my forecast or wisdom, when as I in
the mean time, was worthy to be neglected and rejected of thee.

I give thee thanks, that when as I lay snorting, and as it were buried in the
filthiness of my sins, that thou have waited for my repentance so long, Romans
12.11.2.4.
and with such great patience, notwithstanding that I have offended thee so
often, and have resisted thy holy inspirations. Act. 7.51.
Grant unto me, O Lord, that hereafter I may follow thee with an humble
affection, and that with all readiness and obedience I may obey and embrace
thy heavenly inspirations and good motions, Psalm. 119.122.
and that I may drive out of my heart the love of all visible things, 1. Ioh.
2.15.
that so being wholly occupied and employed in thy service, I may never be
separated from thee hereafter.

I give thee hearty thanks, O Lord, that (besides all these benefits thou
have done and (...) upon me) thou have instituted and ordained such most
excellent and wonderful sacraments for my salvation, 1. Cor. 11.25. Ephesians. 4.5.
and for a remedy to cure and heal my wounds, and that thou have visited me
with so many good and holy thoughts, and inspirations. Also for the
blessedness of eternal glory, Psalm. 40.5.
which thou have prepared for me, if I make not my self unworthy thereof,
through my manifold sins and wickedness. 2 Pet. 2.22.
These, O Lord, are but thy common benefits, which I have remembered. There are
many other, which I neither remember nor know; for the which I give thee no
less thanks, then for these I have now reckoned up: yea so much the greater
thanks I give thee for them, as the greatness of thy goodness appears in them
more manifestly. For at what time I slept, thou did wake to defend me from a
thousand dangers, Psalm. 121.4.
and even as it were to load me with many graces: for all which (as it is
meet that I should crave pardon at thy hands, Psalm. 19.12.
not only for the forgiveness of these sins which I know, but also of those
which I know not) so it is meet that I should in like sort give thee as great
and bounden thanks as possibly I can, not only for the benefits I know, but
also for those I know not.

And therefore I worship thee, I praise thee, I give thanks to thee, in them,
and for them all. Give me grace, O my Redeemer, that I may so learn to use all
these thy benefits hereafter, Mat. 25.24.
that they be not occasions of pride and slothfulness in me, but of greater
humility and thankfulness, and that they may kindle in me a greater desire
and zeal of thy service. To thee therefore, who live and raignest with the
Father and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory both now and for ever and
ever. Amen.

A Form of Morning Prayer taken out of Granatensis, for Christian families.
O Lord God of Israel, which dwell between the Cherubins, 2. King. 19.15.
thou art the very God alone over all the kingdoms of the earth: thou have
made heaven and earth, thou have made winter and summer, Psalm 74.16. Genesis 1.1.
the day is thine, and the night also is thine. O Lord God our most bountiful,
most merciful, and most loving Father, we most wretched sinners, here
gathered together in thy most holy name, humbly prostrate our selves before
thy throne of mercy, craving pardon and forgiveness for all our sins. And
although we be unworthy through our manifold iniquities, Luke 18.13.
to present our selves before thy glorious Majesty, much less to offer to
thee any oblation of praise, and tha^ksgiuing, considering our own baseness
and demerits: yet we know that thou art a Lord most bountiful, a God most
merciful, a Father most loving, and a savior most sweet and comfortable, Luke
15.20.
whose property is ever to save and have mercy on the humble, sorrowful, and
penitent persons, that come to thee in the name of thy beloved son Jesus
Christ. We confess, O Lord, our wretchedness: Psalm. 32.5.
we acknowledge, O Father, our unworthiness, we are heartily sorry for our
sins, we most humbly crave pardon for them, even for Jesus Christ's sake: Esaias
59.2.
we know that our sins stand before us as great huge heaps, like walls of
iron, and gates of brass, which hinder our petitions, so that they cannot come
before thee: Esa. 1.18.
we do account our sins as red as scarlet in thy sight; we feel our burden
is so heavy and intolerable, that we are not able to bear it: Psalm. 40.12.
we see in our selves to be no free spot from the crown of the head to the
sole of the foot, but all is spotted and corrupted with sores and ulcers: Esa.
1.6.
whose great vengeance (which they worthily deserved) would have fallen upon us
long ago, Lam. 3.22.
but that it was stayed and kept back by thy merciful hand. We give thee, O
most gracious God and loving Father, humble and hearty thanks for this thy
fatherly love in the name of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ,
beseeching thee for his sake to continue this thy love and mercy toward us all
the days of our lives.

Psalm. 84.9.
O most loving Father, look not upon us, but look upon the face of this thy
anointed Jesus Christ, and for his sake have mercy upon us: Remove, O Lord,
our sins as far from us as the East is from the West: Psalm. 103.12.
that they be neither hindrances to let thy mercy for falling on us; or our
prayers, Psalm. 51.7.
for coming up into thy sight. Purge us with Isop, dipped, not in the blood of
the lamb, but in the blood of thy Son Jesus Christ, and we shall be as white
as snow. O good Lord, sprinckle not only the uppermost post, Exodus 12.7. Romans
10.9.
and the two side posts of the doors of our houses, but the whole houses of
our hearts and souls, with that most precious blood, with the Isop of thy
Gospel now preached: and we do believe verily that the destroyer shall pass
over us, he shall in no wise hurt us. Ease, we beseech thee, O sweet Savior,
our burdens, as thou have promised: Matt. 11.28.
who call all to thee, that are heavy laden and burdened. We confess, O
Savior, every one of us, that we carry on our backs the greatest burdens
that ever were borne. 1. Tim. 1.25. Heb. 13.20. Romans 8.33. Ephesians. 5.16,
And grant to us, we beseech thee, O merciful Father, that by the blood of
the everlasting testament sprinkled in our hearts by a lively faith, all the
inditements and accusations of Satan against us may be quite blotted out, and
all his fir is darts quenched. Make this covenant with us, O sweet Savior,
that so long as we serve thee, that thou will be our God, 1. Sam. 2.30 Psalm.
119 32.
our guide, and protector. And grant us ever therefore thy grace, that we may
be able to do thee service, and willing minds to do it with cheerfulness. 2.
Cor. 5.25.


And because, O Lord, Ephesians. 1.6.
the whole course and end of our life should be no other thing, but to delight
to do thy will and pleasure, Psalm. 5.3.
give us grace to begin to praise and serve thee the first thing we do in the
morning, and let us account and make it the principal groundwork of all
other, whereon we should lay all other businesses and affairs whatsoever.

And that we may do it more effectually, give us the holy Ghost the seal of
our salvation, 2. Cor. 1.22.
to seal and shut up the doors of our hearts and minds, from all earthly
thoughts and worldly cogitations. And close, O good Lord, Ier. 9.21.
the windows of al our senses, from the vain appetites of the world, the
concupiscence of the flesh, and the baits of the devil, first of all in the
morning when we awake: so that all these being excluded and shut out of doors,
our hearts and minds may be open only to thee, and to receive and admit thy
Son our Savior Jesus Christ into them, before all things else. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
Reu. 14.4.
That so we may offer unto thee the firstlings of this day, and of all the
days of our lives.

And here we give thee, dear Father, Psalm. 137.2.
most humble and hearty thanks for the quiet rest and sweet sleep, that
thou have given us this night; and for that thou have delivered us from all
vain dreams, and foolish fantasies, and from all the subtle snares, and
illusions of our enemy the devil, Psalm. 91.3.
and for all other the benefits of our creation, our redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30
our election, our justification, our sanctification, that thou have called us
unto the knowledge of thy truth, and faith in thee, Romans 8.30.
that thou have poured into us good inspirations, and good thoughts, that thou
have delivered us from that evil one, Matt. 6.13.
and preserved us from all perils and dangers, from sudden death, burning with
fire, robbing with thieves, and such like casualties, Job. 1 19 Luke 13.4.
wherewith many are suddenly taken in the night unawares: that thou have with
such great patience and mercy stayed thy wrath so long from us, Romans 2, 4.
and given us so large a time of repentance and amendment or life. For these
and all other thy benefits, which thou have bestowed upon us, from the first
day of our birth until now, Psalm. 105.2.
which are mo in number then the hairs of our heads: we give thee, as we are
most bound (O most merciful Father) in the name of thy Son Jesus Christ,
continual and most humble and hearty thanks.

And we offer unto thee, O Lord, all that we go about to do or suffer to be
done, Psalm. 37.5.
all our labors, all our studies, all our exercises; in a word, all that we
are to do, or wherein we shall be employed or occupied this day. And we
beseech thee pour down thy blessing upon them, and prosper and give good
success unto them. Psalm. 90.17. and 118.25.


To thee also we offer eue^ our selves, our souls and bodies, with all ours,
Psalm. 150.6.
that both we and all things else may show thy praises, set forth thy honor,
and declare thy glory. Into thy hands we commit all our affairs, so that thou
may do and work in all things, and dispose of all things whatsoever, as
shall please thy most holy and sacred will, even as though they were thine own
businesses and affairs, and none of ours. Moreover, Matt. 26.39.
for as much as of our selves we are not able to do thee any service, give us
(O Lord) thy grace, that we may be so strengthened therewith, Ephe. 3.16.
that we may think, say, or do nothing, which is not agreeable to thy most
blessed will. O Lord, make our wills always agree with thy will. Psalm. 19.14. 1.
Cor. 3.5.
And we most humbly beseech thee ever to assist us with thy grace, and to give
us power and strength against all kind of sins, especially against those,
whereunto we are inclined of our own natures, as pride, covetousness, envy,
maliciousness, gluttony, uncleanness, vain glory, idle words, and such
like; so that through the power of thy might, Ephesians. 6.10.
we may get victory against these and all sins whatsoever.

Furthermore, for as much as man is borne to labor and travel, as the birds
to fly, and thou have ordained him the day to labor in, Job. 5.7. Psalm.
104.25.
thou would not have him live idly, or spend his time vainlie, endue us all
(O Lord) with thy grace, that we may every one labor and study to serve
thee faithfully in our callings. Ephe. 4.1 2. Tess. 1.11.
And that laboring for the body, and sustentation of this present life, we
may yet cast away the great blindness of our minds, and carfulness of
worldly things, and may always labor without all care joyfully, Matt. 6.33.
1. Pet. 5.7.
even as the birds fly, putting our whole trust in thee, being most assuredly
persuaded that thou carest for us: and therefore, O good Father, give us grace
to cast all our worldly cares upon thee. And give us always only this care,
that we may put our whole study and care in keeping of thy commandments. O
good Lord, 2. Pet. 1.5. Iam. 1.23.
make us not only hearers, but doers of thy word. O Lord, let us not have only
a show of thy religion, but let the force and power thereof shine in our lives
and conuersations, 2. Tim. 3.5. Matt. 18.7.
that we be not offenses and stumbling blocks, but lights and good examples to
others. And that we may daily do this, Matt. 5.16.
O good Lord, as it has pleased thee to make the Sun to shine upon the
earth, to give our bodies light; so we most humbly beseech thee, inlighten our
minds and hearts by thy holy Spirit, 2. Pet 1.19.
that we may be evermore directed in the way of righteousness. Psalm. 90.2.
And as this day adds somewhat to our age, so let thy holy spirit add therein
somewhat to our knowledge and faith, that so growing in the measure of thy
grace daily, Ephesians. 4 15. Luke 1.71.
till we come to our perfection which is in Christ Jesus, we may serve thee in
holiness and righteousness, not only this day, but all the days of our
life. Grant us these our petitions, dear Father, and all other necessary
graces for us and thy whole Church, for thy dear Son Jesus Christ his sake,
our most blessed Savior; to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor
and glory now and for ever. Amen. Amen.

A Form of Evening Prayer for Christian Families.
O Almighty God, our heavenly Father, Psalm. 47.7. and 73.24. and 139.1.
which art the great king over all the world, which gouernest and preseruest
all things, which searchest us out, and know us, which know our sitting
down, and our vprising, and understand our thoughts long before; which art
about our path, and about our bed, and spiest out al our ways: We thank thee
through our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for blessing us this day
past, in all the studies, businesses, and affairs, that we have gone about. We
confess what soever we have brought well to pass, to have been thy great
mercies toward us. Psalm. 108.13.
We thank thee for saving us from all dangers of body and soul: we
confess, our life, our strength, all the good things we have, Iam. 1.17.
wholly and only to depend of thee. And now as the day which thou have made
for labor, is past, and the night is come, Genesis 1.25.
which thou have in like manner created for the refreshing of our weary bodies
and minds; grant us therefore, so to take our bodily rest therein, that our
souls may continually watch for thee, and our hearts be lifted up to love
thee. Cant. 5.2.
Grant that our sleep be not excessive, but only sufficient to comfort our
weak natures. Give every one of us (good Lord) we beseech thee thy grace,
Pro. 6.9.
that before we suffer our eyes to sleep, or our eye lids to slumber, or the
temples of our heads to take any rest, to examine our consciences, and to
judge our selves, and to call to remembrance all our actions, that we have
done this day, whether all our thoughts, words, and works, have been
agreeable to thy holy will and commandments, Psalm. 145.2.
or no. And if we have done any thing well, to give thee in the name of Jesus
Christ, hearty and humble thanks for it: Matt. 6.12.
and if we have omitted any good work, which we might have done, to condemn
our negligence, slacknes, and weariness in thy service, and to crave thy
grace, that we may be more zealous hereafter in all good works. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1
2. Pet. 3.8.
And if we have done any thing amiss, to be heartily sorry for it.

Psalm. 25.7.
And now (O Father) we most humbly beseech thee to pardon and forgive us all
the sins and frailties of our youth, all the offenses of this day, and of
our whole life, which we have committed against thy divine Majesty. And give
us grace to amend our former lives, 2. Cor. 5.17.
and to become new creatures. And we now humbly beseech thee, that as the
night darkeneth and shadoweth all things; so that thou would for thy dear
Son Jesus Christ's sake, cover all these our sins, removing them quite from
thy sight, Psalm. 32.1. Micah. 7.19.
and assure our consciences of thy free pardon and forgiveness of them all,
that as our bodies shall have the rest of sleep: so also our minds ever
through hope of thy mercy may enjoy the rest of a quiet conscience. Esa.
57.19.20.
And so being wholly refreshed, we may awake and rise up to thy service, the
next day and all the days of our lives.

Grant that we laying our bodies down in bed to take our natural sleep,
may be thereby put in mind of that our long sleep of death, and that as we do
now lay down our bodies in bed: 1. These. 4.13
so we may thereby be admonished that hereafter we shall be laid in our grave
to be consumed to dust and earth, Genesis 18.2.7
from whence we were first taken: and give us grace to consider the straight
and narrow room, the hard and cold lodging, the low and unpleasant situation
of that our parlor, and home, and the loathsome fashion, ugly shape, Eccles.
7.40.
and horrible savor our bodies then shall have, that we having these before
our eyes, may be stirred up in our minds to be humble and not to pass for
the pomp, state, Ephesians. 5.15. 1. Pet. 1.17.
pleasures and vanities of this world, but to walk warily in this our
pilgrimage, not knowing when the time shall be of our departure.

And (O good Lord) give us victory against death, 2. Cor. 5.1. Phil. 1.23.
so that when death it self shall come, we be not dismayed or discouraged at
it: ^^om the which it is as easy for thee to raise us, Ioh. 11.43.
as from our bodily sleep: but yt we may ever rest in hope of that most
ioifull resurrection, wherein our bodies shall awake, Phil. 3.20. Reu. 21.23.
Psalm. 119.62.
into that everlasting day, which never shall have any night. And as often as
we shall awake in the night (O Lord) give us grace to praise thee for thy
benefits. O Lord, shake off all fleshly drowsinesse in us, and give us grace,
Ephesians. 6.18. Col. 4.4.
even to watch in prayer, as thou have commanded us.

And (O good Lord) never forget us: Guide us with shine eye all the days of
our lives. In the hour of death help us, Iam. 2.13 Iud. ep. ver. 21. Psalm.
39.5. Psalm. 99.12. Romans 12.11 Ephesians. 5.16.
and in the day of judgment be merciful unto us. We know (O Lord) our life
is but short, not a spanne long: O give us grace to number our days, that we
may apply our hearts unto wisdom, to redeem the time, to omit no
opportunity or occasion of doing good. Oh Lord unless thou give us thy grace;
how many opportunities of doing good will ouerslip us?

And grant us now thy grace we beseech thee, that although our senses be bound
this night with the chains of natural sleep, yet our minds may watch
continually, Luke 16.37. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6.
and look for the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ, that whether he come at
midnight, or at the cockcrowing, Mark. 13.35.
or in the dawning of the day, he may always find us waking, ready, and
prepared with our lamps of a pure faith, Matt. 25 8.
clearly burning in our hands, through the light of good works, that we may
be wise and not foolish virgins, Luke 12.35.
and that the loins of our minds may be girded up; and that as good servants,
that stand with their torches in their hands, still waiting when their master
will return from the marriage, we may be commended and praised of him when he
comes. O Lord give us all grace so to lead our lives, as at that day we may
hear that comfortable sentence spoken unto us: Matt. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundations of the world. And that there we may reign with thee in
perpetual joy together with all thy saints, and elect children, in that most
blessed city, Reu. 21.23.
the heavenly Jerusalem, where shall be no need of candle, neither of the
Sun, nor of the Moon to lighten it: for the glory of the Lord shall lighten
it, and the Lamb is the light of it: where our works shall be nothing else
then with all the heavenly multitude continually to sing praise, and to laud
the glorious Majesty of thee, O Lord God, and heavenly Father through our
Lord Jesus Christ in the holy Ghost. Unto the which most glorious kingdom, we
beseech thee to bring us, even for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Savior and
redeemer: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, one God immortal, invisible,
and only wise, be all praise, salvation, power and glory now and for ever
more. Amen, Amen.

Certain brief and familiar prayers, which every true Christian ought ever
to have in his mouth.
In the Morning.
Psalm. 3.5.
I Laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for the Lord sustained me.

Psalm 5.8.
Lead me O Lord in thy righteousness, because of mine enemies: make thy way
plain before my face.

In the beginning or doing of any work.
Psalm. 118.25.
O Lord, I beseech thee save us now: O Lord, I beseech thee send us now
prosperity.

Psalm. 108.13.
Through God we shall do great acts: and it is he that shall tread down our
enemies.

In temptations of the flesh.
Psalm. 51.10.
Create a clean heart in me (O Lord) and renew a right spirit within me.

In the Evening.
Psalm. 4.6.7.
Many say who will show us any good: O Lord lift thou up ^he light of thy
countenance upon us.

In Tribulations.
O forsake me not, O Lord my God* be not thou far from me. Psalm. 38.21.22
Haste thee to help me, O Lord God my salvation.

I shall find trouble and heaviness, Psalm. 116.4.
I will call upon the name of the Lord: O Lord I beseech thee deliver my soul.

Against the assaults of the enemy.
Thou have thrust sore at me that I might fall, Psalm. 118.13.
but the Lord was my help.

The Lord is my help, I will not fear what man can do unto me. Heb. 13.6.


In sorrow or heaviness.
Why art thou so heavy, O my soul, Psalm 43.5.
and why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy trust in God: For I will
yet give him thanks, which is the help of my countenance; and my God.

The joy of the Lord is your strength. Nehe. 8.10. Romans 15.13


O Lord of hope, fill us with all joy and peace through faith, that we may
abound in hope through the power of the holy Ghost.

When we shall hear the clock strike, let us say:
Blessed be the hour wherein our Lord Jesus Christ was borne, and died for us.

When as we shall have done any thing well, let us say:
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us: Psalm. 115.1.
but unto thy name give the glory. For thy loving mercy, and for thy truths
sake.

When we shall take a journey.
I will go forth in the strength of the Lord God: Psalm. 71.16.
and I will make mention of thy righteousness only.

In a doubtful matter let us pray thus:
In silence and confidence is our strength. Esa 30.15.


In dangers, let us pray thus:
Our help stands in the name of the Lord, Psalm. 124.8.
who has made heaven and earth.

For Faith let us pray thus with the Apostles.
O Lord increase our faith. Luke 17.5*


For the love of God.
O Lord pour thy love abundantly into our hearts, Romans 5.5.
by thy holy Spirit.

For remission of sins.
Have mercy upon me O God, after thy great goodness: Psalm. 51.1.
according to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Psalm. 19.13.
Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret sins!

Psalm. 25.7
O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, but according to thy mercy
think upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness.

For good thoughts.
Psalm. 19.14.
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart be always
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord God my strength and my redeemer.

For good works.
Psalm. 119.122.
Make thy servant delight in that which is good: that the proud do me no wrong.

At the hour of death.
Psalm. 31.5
Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit: for thou have redeemed me, O Lord,
thou God of truth.

For the Church pray thus.
Psalm. 28.10.
O save thy people, and give thy blessing unto thine inheritance: feed them,
and set them up for ever.

Psalm. 80.7.
Turn us again thou God of hosts: show the light of thy countenance, and we
shall be saved.

Psalm. 85.4
Turn us, O God our Savior, and let thine anger cease from us.

In the afflictions of the Church.
Amos 7.2.
O Lord God spare us I beseech thee, who will raise up Jacob, for he is small?

Psalm. 51.18
O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Psalm, 122.6, 7, 8
O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee.

Peace be within thy walls and plenteousnesse within thy palaces: for my
brethrens and companions sake, I will wish thee prosperity.

Saint Gregory his Prayer.
Greg. post Psalmos poenitent.
O good Jesus, the word of the Father, the brightness of the Fathers glory, on
whom the Angels do desire to look, teach me to do thy will, that being led by
thy good Spirit, I may come to that blessed City, where is an everlasting day,
and one spirit of all men, where is certain security, and secure eternity,
and eternal tranquillity, and quiet felicity, and happy pleasure, and
pleasant joy, where thou God live with the Father, and the holy Ghost, for
ever and ever. Amen.

He that shall use these short prayers, no doubt as arrows they shall mount
unto the skies, and enter even into the ears of God.

A View of Gods household, and of all his Servants.
THis is set down by king David very excellently in the Psalm: They have
seen, O Lord, Psalm. 68.25.
thy goings, how thou, my God and king, have walked in the Sanctuary. Here
David teaches us, that the Lord God, as a mighty Prince sometimes as it were,
even walks in his Sanctuary, and among the faithful in the congregation.
Now follows his train: The singers (Sharim) go before, the Musicians
(Nogenim) they which play with the hand on instruments of music, follow
after; in the midst are virgins playing on timbrels or drums. Here is Gods
train: first singers, then virgins, and lastly they which play with the hand.
And these may signify unto us three sorts of men in Gods Church. Singers may
represent Martyrs or Confessors of the faith: Virgins, those that next to them,
though they have not shed their blood for the love of Christ; yet for his sake
they have abandoned all the vain and fleshly delights and pleasures of this
world: and therefore by good right they challenge to themselves the middle or
second place. And lastly, are those cunning Musicians which play with the hand:
Gal. 5.6.
and these are those Christians, whose faith works through charity: Who have
sown plentifully with their hands the Lords talents that he has blessed them
withal; 2. Cor. 9.6.
as Saint Paul exhorts them to do. And they which have done so, do receive
plentifully again, as our Savior witnesses: Matt. 25.34
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundations of the world: for I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat, etc.

And how fitly agrees all these together? Martyrs may be rightly called
Singers: for as Prudentius writes of Romanus the martyr, when as the cruel
persecutor had bored through his cheeks, he spoke thus to him: Prudent. in
Romans mart.
O Ruler fierce I yield thee thanks,
that for one mouth too strait;
Now many mouths thou have me made,
my Christ his praise to speak.


Virgins may be said to play with Drums. For their praise sounds far and
wide. Matthew. 19.12.
Of virginity Christ said: He that can comprehend it, let them comprehend it.
As though he should say, it is a price propounded of me to all my disciples to
run for. 1. Cor. 7.32.
Happy is he that can attain it. And S. Paul erhorting all men to virginity,
I would have you without care (says he) But this thing can only virginity
afford you. The unmarried man cares for the things of the Lord, how he may
please the Lord: But he that is married cares for the things of the world, how
he may please his wife. Yea there is difference between a virgin and a wife.
They are not all one; the one far excels the other. The unmarried woman
cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and
spirit: but she that is married cares for the things of the world, how she may
please her husband. Here is the excellency of virginity put down, weighed as
it were in a pair of balance, and compared with marriage, that every one may
see the excellency and difference of ye one before the other. The virgin cares
only for the Lord: the married person for the world. The virgin is holy in body
and soul. And so is not the married. And for this cause S Paul adds generally
to all Christian parents: That he that gives his daughter to marriage, does well:
but he that gives her not to marriage, does better. Besides the excellency of
the gift of virginity it self, which the virgin shall enioie: yea even the
father the author thereof deserves commendation of God. And so no doubt Philip
the Evangelist had four daughters that were virgins. Act. 21.9.
He followed here the Apostles counsel: And therefore Ambrose on this place
writes thus: To diverse virtues diverse wages are appointed. Amb. lib. 1. de vid.
Neither do we find fault with the one, that we might commend the other; but
all are commended, that those that are more excellent may be preferred. Marriage
therefore is honorable, but virginity is more honorable. For he that ioynes
his virgin in marriage does well, and he that couples her not in marriage does
better. Therefore that which is good, is not to be eschewed. And Saint
Augustine writes also thus: It is good to marie, Aug. de bono coniug. cap. 9.
and 10.
because it is good to beget children, and to be a housekeeper: but it is
better not to marie; because it is better for humane society not to stand in
need of this work. But I know some that murmr: What (say they) if all men
should abstain from marriage, how then should mankind be maintained? I would to
God (says Augustine) all men would do this, only in charity, and from a pure
heart, and from a good conscience, and not from a fained faith: for then a
great deal sooner Gods city should be filled, and the end of the world should
be hastened. For what other thing seems the Apostle to mean, when as he says,
speaking thereof: I would to God that all men were as I am, or in that place?
This I say brethren, because the time is short; it remains that they also
which have wives, be as though they had none: and they that weep, as though
they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they
that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as though
they used it not; for the fashion of this world goes away. I would have you
without care. And after he adds: He that is unmarried cares for the things
that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord: but he that is married
thinks on the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife. Thus
far out of Saint Augustine. And no doubt (as should seem) the same Apostle
Saint Paul having respect to this doctrine, he exhorts Timothy (and in him
all other ministers) to labor to obtain this great gift of virginity: No man
that warreth (says he) entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; 2.
Tim. 2.4
because he would please him that has chosen him to be a soldier. And in the
verse going before, he calls Timothy a Soldier. So yt if Ministers be the
Lords soldiers, by S. Paul's counsel here they ought not to entangle
themselves with the cares of this life. verse. 3.
But those cares follow them that be married, as necessarily as the shadow does
the body; as before he has taught the Corinthians. Therefore a Minister that
will be a good Soldier of Jesus Christ should strive to comprehend that
notable gift of virginity. The Apostle here does teach Timothy and all other
mystically this lesson: for he adds: Consider what I say: The Lord give thee
understanding in all things. Verse. 7.
And in another place he says: Not only pursue love, but with all force and
zeal strive for the greatest gifts. 1. Cor. 14.1.
Every Christian, but especially those that have given their names to fight
under the Lords banner, should strive to obtain the excellentest gifts. As
God himself is the chiefest good thing in the world: so he will have all his
servants as much as is possible to come near to him, and to be singular in
all virtues. Matthew. 5.48.
Chastity is a gift of God, but such a gift is not given to the slothful and
sluggish, but to those that knock and pray to God for it. No doubt that gift
is compreded under that ample and large promise of our Savior: What soever ye
shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you: Even Chastity if it be
expedient for them that pray for it. Ioh, 16.23.
And surely I think I may say of this excellent virtue, as Saint James says:
Iam. 4.2.
You have not, because ye ask not. I think there be few at this day that
once think on it, or once open their mouths to pray to God for it. Again,
this most excellent gift is not given (as I said before) to the idle or
slothful: but to those which use the means to obtain it: which Gods word
teaches us to use, that is fasting and mortification of the flesh. Ministers
say not with Paul: I tame my body and bring it in subjection, 1. Cor. 9.27.
lest that when as I have preached to others, I should be reproved my self: 1.
Cor. 7.7.
And therefore they are not such as he was, and as he wishes not only them,
but all men. Widows follow not Anna her steps: Luke 2.37.
they frequent not the Temple; they are not ever present at prayer: they serve
not God with fasting and prayers day and night: and therefore in our Church we
have so few continue widows, and so few follow S. Paul's counsel, but all
will marie again. They respect not that blessedness which he promises them.
1. Cor. 7.40.
Young maids say not with that blessed virgin Marie, He fills the hungry
with good things: Luke 1.53.
but the rich he sends empty away. They will have their bellies full, they
will not fast, and therefore we have so few virgins. Matthew. 19.12.
Yet our Savior himself said, He that can comprehend it, let him comprehend
it. Every one is to show his force and courage herein: and if infirmity will
not suffer him to obtain the principal or best game, then let necessity make
him bold to use the remedy, 1. Cor. 7.36.
as Saint Paul counsels fathers do with their daughters, whom he would wish to
keep virgins. But to conclude, as none of our works, no not our knowledge, 1.
Cor. 1^.9.
so is not our virginity perfect in this life. What Saint has a clean heart?
or what virgin a chaste eye, Pro. 20.9. Matthew. 5.28. Psalm. 119.37 2. Cor. 12.7.
Greg. in glossa.
that has not beheld vanity? or what flesh so tamed, that has not felt that
prick, which Saint Paul felt? Gregory writes very excellently concerning
virginity and marriage, upon that place of Genesis, Save thy self in the
mountain: Virginity is that high hill, which the Angel exhorts him to fly
unto, and save himself: but he that feels himself that he cannot ascend
thither, let him abide in Segor, that is, in lawful matrimony: for it is
better to enjoy a mean good thing, then to be overthrown among the cragges
and rocks of lusts.

And of the drums of these Virgins may that be verified, which Philippus de
Diez cites out of Athanasius: To. 1. dominica in pass.
Who (says he) affirms that the Idolaters did so wonder at those virgins
which had consecrated themselves to God, that even by force they were
constrained to confess, that they were the living Temples of God; and that
only among the Christians was the true worship of God. Wherefore many of them
being lightened with this divine light (banishing all their idolatry) were
turned to the Catholic faith. Thus far Diez. Such sounding drums had the
virgins in those days, that they did rouse even Idolaters from their sleep of
sin, by the rareness of their virtues.

And as fitly also may the faithful doing good works, be compared to
Musicians. For Musicians have their running points, and those are the sweetest
music: So the faithful are ready to give. 1. Tim. 6.18. Genesis 18 7. 2. Cor.
9.7.
They run to the beasts with Abraham for a tender young calfe, for their poor
strangers. They give cheerfully: and God only loves such giuers. They say
not to their neighbor; Go and come again to morrow, and I will give thee, Pro.
3.28
if so be they have it presently. And these running points be most pleasant
music in Gods ears. They also keep time, which is a chief point in
Music. When there was no rain on the earth three years and six months,
then the widow opens her barrel, and imparts some of her little oil that was
left to Elias. 1. King. 17.12.
When the good Samaritane saw the poor man lie wounded by the high way side,
then he did light off from his beast, and bound up his wounds: and though he
had, as should seem, but two pence in his purse, Luke 10.33.
he gave it him. He passed not by him as the Priest and the Leuite did. And
this is to keep time. This is to be one of Gods Musicians. They which run
very swiftly their running points on their instruments, and keep time very
exactlie, unless also they run here, and observe time also, they please not
God with their music. These are the Singers, and Virgins and Musicians that
wait upon God. And if this be true, it is likely that God now walks in his
Sanctuary very evil attended upon, he has few such Singers, or Damsels, or
Musicians to attend upon him.

But David stays not himself here, to let us have a view of Gods waiting
servants only, but of his Noblemen also. For there is no king, but he has
both these to attend upon him. And first he comes to the general duty of all
these servants, which is this: Bless or praise the Lord God in the
congregations from the fountain of Israel. Psalm. 68.26.
Here is the duty of all Gods servants; to bless and praise the Lord from the
fountain of Israel. And what is that? Surely Jesus Christ, who is the
fountain of Israel. For as S. John teaches us: He is the fountain, Ioh. 1.15.
of whose fullness all we (as empty vessels) have received even all the good
things we have, and that grace for grace. Grace for grace even still all our
life, as we did at the beginning. The case here is not altered, as the Papists
imagine, That the first grace is given us freely: but after, with that grace,
we our selves merit the succeeding graces that we have. But Saint John here
plainly teaches them, that even as at the first, so we still receive grace for
grace. And have we not great cause then to praise God always from this
fountain of Israel? which yeeldes unto us all the good things we have even
daily, and that also freely. Here therefore is that in the Psalm which Saint
Paul teaches in his Epistles: Giving thanks always for all things unto God,
Ephesians. 5.20.
even the Father in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

verse. 27.
Now follow his Noblemen. There is little Benjamin their ruler; the Princes of
Judah their stone (as Arias Montanus translates it) the princes of Zabulon, and
the princes of Nephthali. Here are Gods Noblemen and Princes. And surely among
these, little Benjamin goes the foremost: and that is Christian humility. For
thereof also Christ himself begins his blessings in the Gospel: Blessed are
the poor in spirit; Matthew. 5.3 Matthew. 11.19.
for theirs is the kingdom of God. And, Learn ye this of me, I am meek and
lowly in heart. As though he had even come down from heaven to teach us this
lesson. For we read not of any other virtue that he says, Learn that of me,
as he speaks here of humility. Knowledge without humility puffes up and
profits not. 1. Cor. 8.1.
And if faith have not charity and humility joined with it, it builds not, it
profits not, it is as a sounding brass, 1. Cor. 13.2
or tinckling Cymball: nay, it is nothing.

Then follows Judah their stone: And that is faith. And therefore it may
seem that our Savior as in all his doings, Matt. 4 4. Matthew. 21.1^
he had a relation to the Scriptures: so also after that Peter had made that
same notable confession of our Christian faith, and therefore was Judah: our
Savior also called him a stone, Matthew. 16.18
alluding to this place of the Psalm. He is not called a rock, as the Papists
would have him, but Petrus or Cephas, Ioh. 1.42.
which signifies a stone; and agrees here with the Hebrew word Regem. And hence
also Peter called all Christians, which now were also become Judah, by
confession of this true faith; 1. Pet. 2.5.
lively stones. And surely not without cause are the faithful called stones:
for they must be immovable in the profession of their faith, though even, as
against David, Psalm. 3.6.
the Devil even with ten thousand, come against them; as no doubt he will. And
therefore Saint Paul says, Wherefore my beloved be ye surely grounded, (...),
and immovable: that is, 1. Cor. 15.58.
be even like stones in the profession of your faith, and abounding ever in the
work of the Lord: that is, in that excellent work which the Lord Jesus so
often commanded: that is, Christian Charity. Ioh 13.34. Matthew. 22.39. Ioh.
15.12. Luke 22.31. Cant. 1.5.
For Satan will sift every Christian, even as he did Peter the first
Christian. He will sift narrowly all their words, works, and thoughts. They
shall be like Salomons tents: they shall be set on the tenters; they shall be
tried to the uttermost what they will endure.

The next is, The princes of Zabulon. Now Zabulon signifies a dwelling or
family: and therefore I expound those to be Princes of Zabulon in Gods Court,
who fear God and all their household. When as God would reveal to Abraham the
destruction of Sodom, he says thus: Shall I hide from Abraham the thing which
I do? God does here even as the kings are wont to do also with their Noblemen
and Princes, he imparts with him his secrets and counsels; Genesis 18.17.
Seeing that Abraham shall be indeed a great and a mighty nation, and all the
nations of the earth shall be blessed in him. For I know him that he will
command his sons, and his household after him, that they keep the word of the
Lord to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham
that he has spoken unto him. And is not Abraham here called a prince of
Zabulon by Gods own mouth? He will teach his family, I know, says God. Such a
Prince also was that (...), Ioh. 4.53.
that Nobleman in the Gospel, of whom it is reported, that when his daughter
was cured, he believed and all his household. Such a Prince was Cornelius, a
Captain and a Centurion (who are wont commonly to be most unruly) it is
reported of him, that he was a devout man, and that he feared God and all his
household, Act. 10.2.
which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God continually. Here are
three notable properties of a good housekeeper, to instruct his family, to give
much alms, and to pray continually. I would to God that all housekeepers would
learn but these three good points of husbandry of him: surely they would
enrich them; nay make them Princes even in the Lords Court. But what do I
reckon up these examples in the new Testament? For even Iosuah himself did
profess the same to all Israel. And if it seem evil to you to serve the Lord
(says he) choose ye this day whom you will serve, Ios. 24.15.
etc. I and my house will serve the Lord. It is a shame for Christians (who by
reason of their long continuance in Christ's school, Heb. 5.12.
should now be Doctors and teachers of others, as Saint Paul writes to the
Hebrews) not to learn this lesson, being now taught it by so many examples.
If Abraham our Father did catechize his family, though he were a mighty man:
shall any of his sons think himself too good to instruct his family? If
the Noble man in the Gospel did show himself so kind for one benefit
received at the hand of Jesus Christ: shall not we much more, having now
received so many? If Cornelius a Soldier did this, how shall a Citizen excuse
himself if he do it not? And if Iosuah in the shadow did it, how shall a
Christian in the light not do the same?

In the last, but not in the least place, are the Princes of Nephthalie: and
Nephthalie signifies a Comparison. And such a kind of Prince is he, that dare
compare himself with Gods enemies: nay that goes beyond them in all their
moral virtues. Such Princes of Nephthalie God has had in his Church: such as
neither Roman nor Grecian in any moral virtue ever exceeded, or went beyond.
But now they are dead, they are gone, to the great shame of Christians: Now
Turks exceed them in virtues, to the great shame of the professors of Gods
word. Now many Papists go before them in good works. Saint Paul thus writes
to Titus, Let ours learn, (...), Tit. 3.14.
to excel in good works, to help poor men in their necessities; that they
be not unfruitful. And our Savior says to all his disciples, Matthew. 5.20.
Unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven. And the Pharisees
fasted and prayed often, Matthew. 9.14. Luke 18.12.
as the Gospel teaches us: Nay Saint Luke records that the Pharisie there
said, that he fasted twice in the week: And he is reproved there not of
lying, but of boasting. And many Christians think much now to fast once in
the week. We cannot abide now no set times of fasting, which this Pharisie
observed. This is that most grievous complaint that God makes against
Jerusalem: Eze. 15.48
that after so many benefits bestowed upon her even from her cradle: that
Sodom and her daughters has not done, as Jerusalem and her daughters. Neither
has Samaria committed half of her sins: and that she has justified both
these her sisters. And this is that which God says to the Jews by the Prophet
Jeremy, Ier. 2.10.
Go to the Isles of Chittim, and behold, and send out unto Cedar, and take
diligent heed, and see whether there be such things? God here, as we may see,
uses comparisons, and compares his servants with others. And do we not think
that as he did then, that he does not so even now still also? And are we not
ashamed then that Turks or Papists should go beyond us in good works? Thus we
have seen a brief view of Gods household: now follows their manners.

The lives and manners of all Christians in particular, briefly drawn out of
the Word of God.
FIrst, every Christian is bound continually to meditate upon the word of God:
for so God commanded the Jews. Deuteronomy. 6.6.
And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart, and
thou shall rehearse them continually to thy children, and shall talk of them
when thou tariest in thy house, and as thou walk by the way, and when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up: and thou shall bind them for a sign
upon thine hand; and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes. And thou
shall write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon thy gates. This
commandment is general to all, not to Priests only. And it was commanded the
Jews, much more us Christians.

Deuteronomy. 11.18.
And again: Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart, and in
your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand; that they may be as
frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall teach them your children, speaking
of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

Men should talk of the word of God in their houses, and should teach their
children the same. This is a plain commandment, without any trope or figure:
and yet how has Satan bewitched a great many, that they think it concerns
them not? that will neither know it themselves, nor suffer their children to
learn it.

And not only Moses: but also David teaches all men the same lesson. And it
is his first lesson that he teaches a man to make him blessed. Psalm. 1.1.
Blessed is that man (says he) that does not walk in the counsel of the
wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, not sit in the seat of the
scornful. But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does he
meditate day and night. And as he teaches all men this lesson: so he practiced
it himself, though he were a king: Psalm. 119.44.
My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments which I have loved: And I
will meditate in thy statutes. verse. 9^.
And again, Oh how do I love thy law? it is my meditation continually.

And this commandment also God himself gave to Iosuah, being a Captain, and
a man of war: Io^ua. ^^.
Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth: but meditate therein
day and night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is written
therein. For then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall thou have
good success.

And David no doubt grounded that his great blessing, which every one that
meditateth thus on ye word of God should reap, (that is, that whatsoever he
does, it shall prosper) upon this great promise of God made unto Iosuah. Ephesians.
6.11.1^.
For now every Christian is the Lords Captain against that spiritual enemy
Satan. As Saint Paul does also apply that same other great blessing of God,
made to Iosuah (As I was with Moses, Heb. 13.5. Joshua. 1.5.
so will I be with thee, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee) to every
Christian soldier. Let your conversation be without covetousness (says he)
and be content with such things as God presently sends (what kind soever they
be) for he has said, I will not fail thee, neither forsake thee. So that we
may boldly say; The Lord is my helper, neither will I fear what man can do
unto me.

That same Eunuch of Candaces Queen of Ethiopia, Act, 8.28.
no doubt moved by Gods Spirit, fulfilled that commandment of Moses given to
the Jews, who as he was in his journey, read the Prophet Esaias. If a Barbarian
did this in his journey, why should not Christians do the like? Luke. 24.14.
Our Savior also after his resurrection appearing to those two Disciples that
travailed to Emaus, and talked of him, expounded to them the Scriptures. Hereby
also no doubt, teaching even trauailers what to talk on in their iournies.

Neither was this commandment only given to the Jews: but also it is as it
were, Col. 3.16.
revived again amongst us Christians. Let the word of God (says S. Paul)
dwell amongst you plenteously, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your
own selves in Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in
your hearts unto the Lord. 1. Ioh. 2.14.
And S. John in his Epistle writes generally unto all: I write unto you babes,
because ye have known the Father. I have written to you Fathers, because ye
have known him that is from the beginning. I have written unto you young men,
because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome
the wicked. Young men must know the word of God: and therefore old men. And
this is their strength against that spiritual enemy Satan. And therefore as
all Christians are Soldiers in this warfare against this enemy, Ephesians. 6.10.11
as Saint Paul teaches: so all must be endued with this strength, and armed
with this sword: As our Savior also by his example has most manifestly taught
us, that as he did, so also must we fight against all the assaults of Satan
with this sword. Matt. 4.4.
So that then this is the first duty of all Christians, to know and meditate
upon the holy Scriptures. Kings, Captains, old men, young men, trauailers;
and to conclude, all men in general: All the Lords faithful servants and
soldiers do this.

Secondly, every good Christian must be altogether prayer: as David wills the^,
and as he witnesses of himself that he was; For my good will (says he) they
hated me, Psalm. 109.3.
but I was prayer, Am te phillah, as it is in ye Hebrew. He must pray without
ceasing, as S. Paul also commands him. He must pray without weariness
(although prayer of all spiritual exercises be the, Luke 18.1.
most troublesome, as one notes) as our Savior himself does also enjoin
him. Such earnest practisers of this holy exercise have all Gods servants
been. Daniel, who was a Jew, and bare a type of them, Dan. 6.10.
prayed thrice every day, and that upon peril of his life. He chose rather to
venture his life, then to omit his prayers: But we that are Christians, are to
exceed the Jews in our righteousness, Matt. 5.20.
and in our good works, as our Savior teaches: And shall not we pray so
often? Nay, David also in the person of Christ, and of all Christians, says:
Evening and morning, Psalm. 55.17
and at noone will I pray, and that instantly, and thou shall hear my voice.
Psalm 119.164.
And in another Psalm: Seven times a day do I give thanks to thee, because of
thy righteous judgments. Ge^. 5.22.
That is, no doubt, very often. So Enoch is said to have walked with God, That
is no doubt, by the works of his hands, and by the words of his mouth
especially by praying. He did all things, Col. 3.17
as S. Paul teaches us to do, in the name of the Lord Jesus: So no doubt, in
the sight and presence of God himself, Genesis 24.63.
Isaak is reported to have gone into the fields every evening to pray and
meditate. And Abraham praying for the Sodomites teaches us, his perseverance
in prayer for himself. Genesis 32.28.
Jacob when as he wrestled with the Angel by prayer, obtained a new name, and
was called Israel; that is, mighty with God: They that will be Israel, that
is, of force and great power with God, must be earnest prayers. And of this
force of prayer it was that God himself spoke to Moses: Exo, 32 1^. 1. Sam. 16
1.
Suffer me now that I may destroy them. And again, the Lord said to Samuel,
How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have cast him away from reigning
over Israel? No doubt, this mourning was in his prayers. Such a forceable thing
prayer is, that it seems even as it were, to bind God himself. Ios. 10.13.
So at Iosuah his prayer the Sun stood still. And Iosuah when as he was
overcome of his enemies by Achans sin, 7.6.
he and the Elders of Israel sought with prayer; and so found out the cause of
their overthrow. Elias, as S. James reports, by prayer opened and shut
heaven. Iam. 5.17.
And as Ecclesiastical histories do testify, Saint James was such a diligent
practiser of this holy exercise, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 2. c. 23
that his knees were with often kneeling down to prayer, as hard as brawne.

Neither must Christians only pray: but also even watch in prayer, as S. Paul
often commands them. First to the Ephesians: Ephesians. 6.18.
And pray always in all manner of prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and
watch thereunto with all perseverance. And again to the Colosians, Continue in
prayer, Col. 4.2
and watch in the same with thanksgiving. And that this his watching is
literally meant, no doubt that example of our blessed Savior, from which he
derived it, plainly proves: Luke 6.12.
who is said to have continued all night in prayer. So that good king David
says of himself: At midnight will I arise to give thanks to thee for thy
righteous judgments. And of Anna that holy widow it is said, Psalm. 119.62.
Luke 2.37.
that she served God with fastings and prayers day and night.

And here is another holy circumstance joined to our prayers; that is, fasting.
2. Sam. 12.1^.
This also David joined to his prayers for his child, as we may read: nay even
for his very enemies, when they were sick he put on sackcloth, Psalm. 35.13.
and humbled his soul with fasting, and his prayer returned even to his own
bosom. And shall not we then join fasting to the prayers we make for our
friends, nay for our selves? So Daniel joined prayer and fasting together those
three weeks wherein no pleasant Dan. 10.4.
bread, nor flesh came within his mouth; and therefore his prayers were heard,
as that man sent from God to him teaches us: Dan. 10.12.
Fear not Daniel (says he) for from the first day that thou did set thy
heart to understand, and to humble thy self before thy God, thy words were
heard: and I am come for thy words. No doubt these words were his prayers. So
in the Acts Cornelius a Heathen, Act. 10.30.
and a soldier was praying and fasting to the ninth hour of the day; and he
saw an Angel appear unto him; and Peter was fasting and praying till the sixth
hour (that is, Verse. 9.
till noone) and he saw that heavenly vision of the calling of the Gentiles:
and shall not we follow these holy examples, in this clear light of the
Gospel? Shall we neither watch in prayer, nor join fasting to our prayers? Is
this to profess ye Gospel? Is this to have faith? 2. Tim. 3.5.
This is to have a show of godliness (as Saint Paul prophesies that some
should have) but plainly to deny the force thereof. Oh let us watch in
prayer, and join fasting to our prayers! Let not the Papists herein go beyond
us. These are plain and manifest commandments of the Gospel, and shall we
not obey them? Nay, how often says David, Psalm. 5.3. and 143 8. Psalm. 108.2.
thou shall hear my prayers betimes in the morning? And early in the morning I
will look up, and direct my prayers unto thee. And again, Awake lute and
harp, I my self will awake right early. And yet we will scant now come to
prayers at nine of the clock. Surely the Papists Mattens, if they had been
done with understanding, had been more agreeable to Gods word, then our
slothful and sluggish prayers are which we now use. God will be served
early in the morning: And therefore it is noted as a special mark and
comme^dation of Abraham's faith, that when as he was commanded to offer his son
Isaac, Genesis 22.3.
that Abraham rose up in the morning very early. If Abraham rose up so early to
offer such a sorrowful sacrifice; what should we do, which offer up such a
pleasant sacrifice to God, as our prayers are? Hence it is that the Christians
in the Primitive Church (as hereafter shall be noted) had their assemblies
before day to pray to God, and to give him thanks.

The Scriptures also teach Christians to join another circumstance to their
prayers, and that is weeping and sighing. And so no doubt Samuel prayed for
Saul, as before it has been alleged. And David often mentions these his
tears added to his prayers: Every night will I wash my bed, Psalm. 6.6.
and water my couch with my tears. And again, Away (says he) from me ye
wicked, for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping. verse. 8.
David's tears spoke to God. And again, Hear my prayer, O Lord, and hearken
unto my cry; keep not still silence at my tears. Psalm. 39.12.
And thus it is also recorded of Ezechias, that when as Esaias the Prophet had
denounced to him that heavy message from the Lord: Put thy house in order, for
thou shall die, and not live: 2. King 20.3
that then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed to the Lord, saying, etc.
And Ezechias wept sore. And after Esaias was gone out of the middle of the court,
The word of the Lord came to him, saying: Turn again and tell Ezechias the
Captain of my people: verse. 5.
Thus says the Lord God of David thy father: I have heard thy prayers, and
seen thy tears: Behold I have now healed thee. No doubt, if Christians in
their sickness would use these pills, to purge their heads withal, that is,
their tears (as Ezechias did) God would heal them, as he did him. These
tears are the best and surest purgations in the world. And for lack of these,
it is likely all our other pills and potions devised of Physicians, do many
times so little good. So Marie Magdalene, so Peter, Luke 7.38. Matt. 26.75.
in their sins wept bitterly; as the Gospel teaches us. And who dare say
that he is not as grievous a sinner, as either of the^? No man living knows
his secret faults. Psalm. 19.12.
It is written thus of the people of Israel, that when as they had sinned
against the Lord, that Samuel commanded to gather all the people to Mizpeh, 1.
Sam. 7.5
and that he would pray unto the Lord. And they gathered together to Mizpeh,
and drew water, and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted the same day, and
said there; We have sinned against the Lord. No doubt, these waters they drew
and poured out before the Lord, were tears from their hearts. And here is that
perfect pattern and form of repentance, which Joel teaches: Joel 2.12.
Turn to the Lord with weeping, fasting and mourning. So these Israelits here
no doubt, turned to God. And this is that judgment which Saint Paul teaches
all Christians to use even against themselves. Judge your selves (says he)
that you be not judged of the Lord. For if we would judge our selves, 1. Cor.
11.31.
we should not be judged of the Lord. But now for lack of this judgment many
are sick amongst you, and many sleep and are dead.

Every Christian for the sins he has committed against God, should now be
as it were a judge against himself, and even as it were punish himself by
fasting, weeping, and praying for his sins, and so turn to God, as Joel
counsels. And then as Saint Paul here teaches, without doubt he shall
escape the judgments and plagues of God in this world, as sickness and such
other evils, which his sins deserve. But above all other examples,
especially the example of our Savior, should move us to join these tears to
our prayers; of whom we read thus: Which in the days of his flesh, did offer
up prayers and supplications, Heb. 5.7.
with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death.
If Christ for our sakes offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying
and tears, shall not we do the like for our selves? Let us follow his
example. But what speak I of shedding tears when we pray; some are now grown
so stiff-necked, that they will hardly how their knees when they pray. That
is now accounted of many superstition: they say it is sufficient to bow the
knees of their hearts. But howsoever they say it is superstition; I say it is
lack of reverence to the Majesty of God, and of devotion. O come let us
worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker, Psalm. 9^.6
says David. We say this every day at our prayers with our mouths, and do
it not with our bodies: What is this, but even as it were to mock God? S. Paul
is said to bow his knees to the father of our Lord Jesus Christ; of whom is
named all the families in heaven and earth. Ephesians. 3.14.
Nay, Jesus Christ himself is said to have prostrated himself upon the earth
to God his Father: Matt. 26.39.
And shall we think much to bow our knees to him? Or is it, to stoop a little
with their heads, when they pray, as some use to do, to kneel? Is that
superstition which Saint Paul, and our blessed Savior used?

To conclude then this second duty of a Christian: Thus he is taught
manifestly in the word of God; to pray continually, thrice a day at least.
To watch in the night in his prayers: to pray early in the morning: and to
join with his prayers fasting, weeping and kneeling. And then when he prays,
the Lord shall hear him, as he did David; and endue his soul with much
strength. Psalm. 138.3.109.7.
Without these, let him take heed his prayers be not turned into sin.

A third duty which concerns all Christians, is to exhort one another to good
works: and to reprove their brethren, when they see them to commit sin, and
especially of masters, to catechize and instruct their families. And this is
that which Ecclesiasticus says: And he said unto them, Eccles. 17.12
Beware of all unrighteous things. He gave also every man a commandment
concerning his brother. Every man must have a care of his brother, to exhort
him to goodness, and to keep him from sin. And this is that allegory of a
body, which Saint Paul also uses, and teaches us: Romans 10.4.
We are all members of Christ's body. Now every member will not only labor
for, and help another; but also if it be hurt will have a care to heal it
again: The same care should every Christian have of his brother. And hence it
is that Saint Paul says: Heb. 3.12.
Take heed brethren least at any time there be in any of you an evil heart
and unbelieving, to depart from the living God. But exhort one another daily
while it is called to day, least any of you be hardened by the deceitfulness
of sin. No doubt, for lack of this daily exhortation, so many at this day
amongst us are hardened with sin. No man now adays exhorts his brother to do
good. A man may do what he list: no man will reprove him. And the same lesson
he repeates again, as a lesson worthy the learning: Heb. 10.24.
Let us consider one another to provoke unto love and good works, not
forsaking the fellowship that we have amongst our selves, as the manner of some
is: but let us exhort one another, and that so much the more, because ye see
that the day draws near, etc. The nearer that the day of judgment
approaches, the more we stand in need of this exhortation and provocation one
of another forward to good works. For then, as should seem, Reu. 12.12.
Satan shall labor mightily (as we find by experience) to draw all men to
sin. And therefore all men had need to join hands together, and to labor
against him. We fight against mighty enemies, Ephesians. 6.12.
against principalities and powers, as the Apostle tells us. And yet the
judge being now at the very doors, Iam. 5.9.
and the day no doubt being at hand, and this enemy being so mighty, even
now raging so fiercely because he knows that he has but a short time to
reign: Reave. 12.12.
No man almost exhorts his brother to good works, as love and charity; but
rather unto pride and covetousness, by his evil example. No man reprooueth
the sin of his brother. Men are now become like Caine, who said, Genesis 4.9.
Am I my brothers keeper? What have I to do with my brother? This is a Caines,
and not a Christians voice. The holy Ghost fell upon the Apostles in the form
of fitie tongues: Act. 2.3.
To teach all Christians (that are endued with the holy Ghost) what their
duties are: they must be tongues, they must not be dumb: they must exhort;
they must teach, they must speak: yea they must be fiery tongues; that is,
they must reprove also. But now adays that saying of King David is verified:
Psalm. 94.16.
Who will rise up with me against the wicked? Or who will take my part against
the evil doers? Perchance one (amongst an hundred) endued with this fiery zeal
of Gods Spirit, will rebuke sin, will stand up against the wicked: but no man
will take his part, no man will join with him. And so by that means, his
godly zeal does little good. One man is no man, as the proverb is. And
without many be joined and coupled together, there is no strength, there is no
force.

Secondly, as every man is bound to exhort his brother: so especially every
Master his family, as appears by Gods own speech to Abraham, when as he
revealed to him the destruction of Sodom. Ge. 18.17. etc.
And the Lord said: Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? Seeing
that Abraham shall be indeed a great and a mighty nation, and all the nations
of the earth shall be blessed in him. For I know him that he will command his
sons, and his household after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, to do
righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that he
has spoken unto him. Let us mark here, all that will be accounted Abraham's
children, what God himself pronounces of Abraham: that he will teach his
sons and his family to fear God, do righteousness; and let us follow his
steps: then shall all that God has promised Abraham come unto us. Would we
then be partakers of Gods promises and of his blessings? let us then instruct
our children and families. Here is a condition or limitation prescribed to us
by Gods own mouth. All men condemn Herod that killed the Innocents: and yet
they which catechize not their families and children are more cruel then he:
Matthew. 2.16.
for he killed other men's children, and these men kill their own. Nay, he
killed but their bodies only; and these kill their souls. O cruel Herod's! Let
all true Christians beware of this cruelty; and be rather Abraham's true
children in instructing their children and families, that so all Gods promises
and blessings may come upon them.

The Tiger is reported of all wild beasts to be most swift, Solinus cap. 17
so that they which take her whelps from her, have ships ready; and so taking
ship, she cannot pursue them, nor overtake them; which otherwise could not
escape from her. But when she perceiues that one of her whelps is stolen from
her, and that she cannot recover it again; it is written of her, that upon the
sea shore, for very grief she will throw her self down headlong into the
sea; punishing her own slownesse with such a voluntary destruction. O the
loving nature of this wild beast to her whelps! And shall not Christians show
the like love to their children? If they be wicked, and given to any sin;
not thieves (as those Tigers whelps) but the devil has stolen away and
possessed them: and shall not this grieve them? especially when they see it
with their eyes. Let all Christians be more kind to their children then Tigers:
Let them teach them the fear of Lord, as David teaches: Come ye children, and
hearken unto me, Psalm. 34.11.
and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. And then shall not that enemy
steal the^ from them. The vessel will ever have a taste of that liquor with
which it is first seasoned: Let the first liquor that enters into their
childrens hearts, be the fear of God: and then they will never forget it. So
no doubt Abraham, although he had but one son of Sarah, yet he pampered him not
(as should seem) but instructed him in the law of God. For when he went to be
sacrificed, he could say, Father, here is the wood, Genesis 22 7.
but where is the lamb for the burnt offering? even being so young, he knew
what a sacrifice meant: no doubt his father had taught him. So ought all
Christians after his example to instruct their children in the principles of
Christian religion.

So likewise, Abraham also no doubt catechized and instructed his family;
having in his family a great number (as appears by that rescue of Lot) Who
brought forth 318. that were borne and brought up in his house, Gen, 14.14.
and with them pursued those kings which had taken Lot prisoner. When as God
after commanded him to circumcise himself and all his family that were
males, it is said, Genesis 17.23.
that Abraham circumcised them all the self same day. No doubt, they had been
well instructed before, both in their duties and obedience toward God, and
also their master: or else all of them so willingly, and so readily would not
have yielded to such a painful thing, as circumcision was. So David being a
king had care of his family and servants; to teach all Noblemen and Gentlemen
the like care of their families. Socrates common byword is often proved true:
That most commonly in great men's houses either some great good, Eras. Apoph.
or some great evil is hatched. And first concerning the choice of his
servants, Psalm. 101.6
David writes thus: Mine eyes shall be unto the faithful of the land, that
they may dwell with me, and he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve
me. And then for the keeping and correcting his servants he writes thus: There
shall no deceitful person dwell within my house. He that tells lies shall
not tarry in my sight. No doubt, he did reprove both deceitful and lying
servants, 2. King. 5.25.
and which were like to Gehezi; and also other sins in his servants. And if
they would not be reformed, he would not keep them any longer. I would to God
all Noblemen and Gentlemen would do the like: then we should have a
flourishing Church and common wealth: then so much sin would not be
committed, as is commonly. A Gentleman's or a Noblemans servant will presume to
sin, because of the authority of his master, or because his master he
knows never minds what he does: and sometime will not stick to tell a lie,
to feed his masters humor. Such presumptuous lying, and flattering servants
king David would not keep in his house. Such a care also no doubt of his
family had that good ruler, whose son Christ healed. It is written of him,
that after his son was healed, Ioh. 4.52, 53.
that he believed and all his household. No doubt the good master had a care to
instruct all his family in that faith and way of salvation, which he believed
himself. So Cornelius also has this commendation given him: Act. 10.2.
There was a certain man in Caesarea called Cornelius a Captain of the band
called the Italian band, a devout man, one that feared God with all his
household, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed God continually. Here
is a notable pattern set down of a good householder, for all Christians to
follow. He feared God and all his household; he gave much alms to the people,
and prayed God continually. He is not commended for the building or furniture
of his house: but for his devotion; for his care of his family; for his
almesdeedes; and for his daily prayers. O that we had many such housekeepers!
these virtues should make them more famous, Ier. 22.14.15.
then building stately towers, and high walls, and large windows. This is to
execute judgment and to do righteousness, as Jeremy teaches that Iehoiakim,
that proud king of Judah; and in him all other manner of men. So that good
Emperor Constantine made his palace as it were a Church, in catechizing his
family himself, Eusebius. de vita Constable. lib. 4.
and both commanding them to pray, and also teaching them how to pray, as
Eusebius in his life records. Nay he told the bishops dining at a certain
time with him: you will say, quoth he, that I am a Bishop: and so I am indeed;
but I within, and you abroad: And in his coin, to declare what account he made
of prayer, he caused himself to be pictured with his eyes looking unto heaven,
as it were ever craving or requesting something of God. And these were the
common money or coin that they used through all the Roman Empire, during his
reign. And likewise, he was pictured at the entrance into his palace,
kneeling on his knees, as some suter; and his eyes lifted up to heaven. This
Eusebius reports of him. O noble and Christian Emperor! that was thus
zealous of Gods service, both himself, and also which caused his family and
subjects thus to serve God likewise. How since his days Christians are
degenerated, all men may see. Now they are accounted precise, that so instruct
and govern their families. But this in his days was not preciseness, but
Christianity.

And that all Christians ought to instruct their families, Chrysostom writes
thus very excellently: Chrysostom. ho. 78. in. Matt.
And surely if thou longest greatly to be with Christ; then do his will: and
his will is especially that thou should study to profit thy neighbor.
Will thou have me prove this unto thee out of another place? O Peter do thou
love me? (says he) feed my sheep. And when as he had asked him this thrice,
he confirmed that this was an argument of his love. Which thing was not spoken
only to Priests; but also to every one of us, to whom a little flock is
committed: for because it is a very little flock; therefore it must not be
neglected: for my father has a pleasure in them. Every one of us has a sheep,
let us lead it to fat pastures. When therefore a master of a family shall
rise from his bed, let him care for nothing else, then that he may do and
speak those things, by which he may increase religion in his whole family. The
good wife also, let her have a care of her house; but let her greatest care be
concerning those things which belong to heaven; Let all the whole family do
those things. For if in our worldly affairs we prefer the matters of the
common wealth, before our household affairs; lest for the payment of these
common taxes and subsidies we being brought before the Judge, and being
punished, we should incur blame and reproach: how much more in spiritual
matters ought we to have a principal care of them first of all, which
concern God our creator, and that great king of all kings; least that we be
drawn thither, where is gnashing of teeth? Let us therefore embrace those
virtues, which are profitable to our own salvation, and also profitable to our
neighbors. Thus far Chrysostom. Wherefore as first he teaches us; that
that commandment of our Savior Christ to Peter, Feed my sheep, belongs not
only to him or his successors, as the Papists now teach, but to every
Christian. Every Christian is Peter; and must feed his little flock, his
family that is committed unto him. Origin in Matt. hom. 1. in cap. 6.
As also Origin expounded that saying of our Savior to Peter the 16. of Matthew.
To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven: It seems to be
spoken (says he) to all perfect Christians. For they are all Peter's and
Rocks, and in them all is the Church builded. And if you think that the
Church was built of that one Peter; what do you say of James and John the
sons of thunder, and of the other Apostles? We may note here the consent of
Chrysostom and Origin in expounding these two places, concerning the Popes
primacie, otherwise then ye Papists do now: And yet they would make the world
believe, that all the Fathers were on their side. Secondly, Chrysostom
teaches, that every master is bound to instruct his family; yea more then
to pay his subsidy to the Prince. For this is a subsidy that is due to the
king of heaven, which he requires at all men's hands. And that every Christian
ought to know the Scriptures, and to be able to do this, Chrysostom. ho. 2 in
cap. 1. Matt.
he writes thus in another place: Which of you, I pray you, that stand here,
can say one Psalm without book, if ye were examined; or any other portion of
scripture? Surely there is none. And this is not only the mischief, that you
are slothful and slack to learn spiritual things, but to learn devilish
things ye are more hot then fire: for if any one should ask you any vain
ballads, or any such like foolish and unchaste songs and tunes, he shall find
very many that are skillful in the^, and that also will sing them with great
pleasure and delight. But this is the common excuse of these faults: I am no
Monk (says he) I have wife and children and a family to care for. This is
that which as a common plague, marres all, because you think that the reading
of the Scriptures does belong only to Monks; when as it is far more
necessary for you, then for them. For they which are conversant in the world,
and receive daily wound upon wound; do not they stand more in need of the
salues of God? etc. Let us note here how that Chrysostom would have all men to
read the Scriptures; he excepteth none: they need not seek to the Ordinary
to be licensed to read them, as the Papists now teach. Naie, that this is more
necessary for them, then either for Priests or Monks. And that this is Gods
salve to heal their daily wounds therewith, and then they need not to fear
any harm thereby as the Papists now do.

A fourth duty, which belongs to all Christians is, that they ought to despise
the world, and all the vain pompes and pleasures thereof. And this we have all
vowed in our Baptismes. but alas how smally is this vow amongst many, either
regarded, or almost ever all their whole life after remembered? And this solemn
vow and promise is grounded of the word of God: Love not the world (says S.
John) nor the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, 1. Ioh.
2.15.
the love of the Father is not in him. And S James says. He that is a friend
to the world, is an opposed enemy to God. O dangerous frienship, Iam. 4.4.
which bereaueth us of the favor of God! Nay, which opposes us as open
enemies to God. And yet no man almost fears or cares for it. And least we
should be deceived, Saint John puts down plainly what the love of this world
means: For all that is in the world (says he) as the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.
As though he should say, those things which our flesh desires, which our eyes
delight in, which our life gapes after so greedily, are not of the father: but
are the worlds dearlings. And all these must all Gods children contemn, hate,
and despise. And who is it not now that yields to his flesh all that it
desires? Who is it that feeds not his vain eyes? Who is it that follows
not after the pride and state of this present life? We follow at this day that
rich man, of whom our Savior makes mention, We follow not Christ himself.
Luke. 16.19
That rich man was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared delicately
every day. And there was a poor man named Lazarus, which lay at his gate full
of sores, 1. Ioh. 2.6.
etc. Here is in two words all these comprehended: The lust of the flesh, to
fare daintily: the state of this life, to be clothed gorgeously: and the lust
of the eyes, to be covetous and unmerciful, not so much as once to look upon
poor Lazarus. But these delights and desires (though we read not that he did
any man wrong to maintain and fulfill them) damned him in hell. And here let
all such take heed by his example, that to maintain these, do oppress and
deal hardly with the poor members of Jesus Christ. Christ Jesus, who is the
way, the truth, and the life, John 14, 6.
despised all these, and so must all his Christians.

So did Saint Paul, who writes thus of himself: God forbid that I should
rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; whereby the world is
crucified to me, Gal. 6.14.
and I unto the world. What worldly pomp or delight was there in the cross of
Jesus Christ? but hunger, cold, nakedness, vinegar, raylings, and such like.
In these S. Paul rejoiced. Let the worldlings, with that rich man, delight in
their brave apparel, in their dainty fare, in their state and pomp: S. Paul
with his Savior Jesus Christ will despise all these; and rejoice rather in
nakedness, in hunger, in reproaches, as he himself witnesses in another place:
Even unto this hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, 1. Cor. 4.11.
and are buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place: no place to put our
heads in. This is the cross of Christ, which Saint Paul rejoiced in. Here is a
contempt of all the pleasures of the world. And in another place: We approve
our selves the ministers of God in much patience, 2. Cor. 6.4.
in afflictions, in necessities, in distress. Here is the proof, that S. Paul
was an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and by the same arguments must all Christians
prove themselves to be Christians. For thus our Savior pronounces of his
Apostles, and in them of all Christians: Blessed are ye poor, Luke. 6.20.
for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger; for ye shall be
satisfied. Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye
when men hate you, and when they separate you and revile you; and put out your
name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice you in that day and be glad:
For behold your reward is great in heaven: for after this manner did their
fathers to the Prophets. But woe unto you that are rich; for you have received
your consolation. Woe be unto you that are full; for ye shall hunger. Woe be to
you that now laugh; for ye shall wail and weep. Woe be to you when all men
speak well of you; for so did their fathers to the false prophets, etc.

Here is plainly put down Dives and Lazarus. Dives was rich, was full,
rejoiced every day; was highly (no doubt) commended of all men: and Lazarus
was poor, hungry, despised and contemned of all men. But mark what follows
and befalls to both these: Abraham told there Dives: Son, Luke 16.25.
remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, or good things:
and contrariwise, Lazarus pains, or evil things. Now therefore he is
comforted, and thou art tormented. The same here our Savior pronounces to all
those which embrace the pleasures of this present world: Woe to them that now
laugh; for that they have received their consolation. And again, Blessed are
they which now weep, and that despise the pleasures of this world; for that
their consolation is to come. And here is plainly portrayed out unto us the
cross of Christ, wherein Saint Paul gloried, hunger, weeping, reuilings, and
such like, to which a blessing is pronounced: But a woe and curse to the
contrary.

Let all Christians therefore (hearing this lesson at their Saviors mouth; and
seeing it plainly put in practice of Saint Paul and of all the rest of the
Apostles: nay perceiving the terrible execution of the transgression thereof
verified in that rich man) learn to despise this world, and all the pleasures
and delights thereof: and only to rejoice in the cross of Christ with Saint
Paul: and to remember that solemn vow they made in their Baptismes. Let them
not buy repentance so dear. The money they bestow upon these vain delights
and pleasures, may be far better bestowed (with Cornelius) upon almesdeeds and
works of mercy. Act. 10.1.


Such a despiser of the world was Abraham: Genesis 14.22.
Who told the king of Sodom, that he would not take of all that was his, so
much as a thread, or a shoo latchet; when as he offered him all the spoils. We
would have said, who but a fool would have refused gold, when as it was offered
him? But such a fool was Abraham. We would have bin sure to have taken the
riches, with this flattering persuasion beguiling our own selves, as many do
now adays: Iam. 1.22.
that when we had possessed them, we would have bestowed them well. But Abraham
chose the safer way, not to meddle with them at all. His like contempt of the
world appears in his dealing with his brother Lot, when their heardsmen fell
out. Who though he was the elder, and had the promises of God made unto him,
Genesis 13.1, 9
yet he said; Let there be no strife I pray thee between thee and me, neither
between thine heardsmen and mine heardsmen, for we are brethren. Is not the
whole land before thee? Depart I pray thee from me. If thou will take the left
hand, then I will go to the right: if thou go to the right hand, then I will
take the left. If Abraham had made account of the world, he would not have
yielded from his right; he would not have given Lot leave to have chosen.

The like we read of Moses; who when as he was come to age refused to be
called the son of Pharaohs daughter, Heb. 11.24.
and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God. He reioiced
rather in the cross of Christ with Saint Paul, then in worldly pleasures
with Dives. Some here would have said, though I be in Pharaohs Court, I will
serve God in my heart; I may do both. But Moses thought that Pharaohs
delights and pleasures, and Gods love and favor could not stand together. The
prophet Zachary writes thus of Christ's Church, Zach. 14.16
that every one that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem,
shall go up from year to year to worship the king the lord of hosts, and to
keep the feast of Tabernacles. And they which will not come up etc. upon them
shall be no rain. A strange law, and no less strange punishment, God seems
to renew again the ceremonies of the old law, which by the coming of our
Savior are abrogated. Again, it is very strange, that omitting all the other
feasts, he will have one only to remain, that is, the feast of Tabernacles.
Here no doubt the Prophet teaches us to forsake the letter: For the letter
kills. The feast of Taberbernacles was ordained (as appears in Exodus 23.)
that the children of Israel might remember their abode in the wilderness 40.
years, without any dwelling houses. And this feast though it be abolished
literally, yet God will have the faithful still to observe it spiritually;
that as they travailed in the wilderness those forty years: so we also in
this world should be as pilgrims and strangers all the course of our life; and
that we should know, that we are borne here in the world, no^ that we should
fix our hearts here; but that we should as it were travel to heaven. To this
all Gods creatures do, as it were, exhort us: which show unto us the
excellency of their Creator, that we should seek him alone. And when as the
holy Ghost is compared to Rain, as David says, prophesying thereof: Psalm.
68.9.
Thou Lord shall send a gracious Rain on thine inheritance, etc. Zachary
plainly testifies, yt upon those that do not thus celebrate this feast of
Tabernacles, but are careful of these worldly affairs, that heavenly rain
shall not fall. O terrible sentence! O barren souls that lack this heavenly
and gracious rain!

The like lesson God taught all men by the burning of Jericho, and all that was
therein; which no doubt was a type of this world, and her delights and
pleasures. Joshua. 6.24.
Whereof when as Achan amongst the spoils, saw a goodly Babylonish garment,
and two hundred shekels of silver, a golden tongue (as it is in the Hebrew) and
coueted them, and hid them in his tent: He was stoned to death with stones for
his labor. And here are those three dearlings of the world again plainly
described to us, which S. John mentions, which are not of the father: a
Babylonish garment, which may signify the pride and state of this life: two
hundred shekels of silver, which may signify covetousness, and the desire and
lusts of the eyes: And a golden tongue, which may signify, the lust of the
flesh, which must have a golden tongue, must be daily fed daintily with Dives:
Luke 16.19. Zephanie 1.8. God will visit such as are clothed in strange
apparel.
no mean diet or fare will content it. These things damned Achan. Let all true
Christians despise and contemn them. Let our garment not be in the fashion,
not strange, not Babylonish, but comely, and such as our own country has
used. Let our treasures be not excessive. Let not our tongue be a golden
tongue, but content with simple fare, as was our Savior, John. 6.9.
who is read to have had barley bread and fish for his provision.

Iosuah no doubt was a figure of our Savior Jesus, and that earthly Canaan of
our heavenly inheritance. Joshua 3.17.
But how brought Iosuah the Israelites into that Canaan? The first thing they
did: they went over Jordan dry shod: And what does that teach us? but that we
must also pass over the Jordan of this life dry shod, so that our feet must
not be dipped in the delights, pleasures, honors, desires, and affairs of
this present world. 1. Cor. 7.29.
And hereof the Apostle said: The time is but short, henceforth let them which
have wives, be as though they had none: and they that weep, as though they
wept not, etc. And David: Psalm. 66.6.
They passed through the river on foot: there did we rejoice in him. The true
soldiers of Jesus Christ pass over the flood of this life with dry feet:
but there, that is, in the life to come, we shall rejoice in him, we shall be
as it were drowned in that bottomless sea of pleasures.

The like contempt of the world Iosuah himself declared, who when as he had
conquered all the land of Canaan, was served the last himself: Joshua. 19.49.
When as they had made an end of dividing the land by the coasts thereof, then
the children of Israel gave an inheritance unto Iosuah the son of Nun, amongst
them, according to the word of the Lord: they gave him the city which he
asked, even Tymnah-serah in mount Ephraim; and he built the city, and dwelt
therein. Here he was not his own caruer; but the children of Israel gave him
it; and it was called Tymnah serah, that is, a great image: such an account
made he of his inheritance, but even as of an image, and as of a type of that
heavenly inheritance. The like account made David of this world, Psalm. 119.17.
Psalm. 16.2.3.
though a king. O Lord (says he) thou art my portion. And again: Thou art my
Lord, my goods are nothing unto thee. To thy Saints that are in the earth (or
to the excellent) my delight is in them. All David's account was of God: he made
no account of his riches: and then next upon Gods Saints, that is, upon his
servants, and upon the poor. He set more by the poor then he did by his
riches. O that this mind were in us Christians!

Matt. 9.9 Romans 13.7. Matt. 17.27.
Matthew sitting at the receipt of custom, which was a gainful and a lawful
office (for as Saint Paul says, Tribute is to be paid to whom tribute
belongs: and our Savior paid tribute himself) yet he despised this
gainefull and lawful office, and followed Jesus Christ. But especially that
notable example of Zacheus, and that singular commendation that our Savior
yeeldes to him for it, should teach all Christians to despise the world; As
soon as Christ had entered into his house, Luke 19.8.
he stood forth and said unto the Lord: Behold Lord, the half of my goods I
give unto the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man by forged
cauillation, I restore him four fold. What need he have given half of his
goods to the poor? but that he despised them and this world, and that his
delight was now upon Gods Saints, as David's was? To make restitution was
necessary; but the other was voluntary. And our Savior adds: This day is
salvation come unto this house. Here are evident signs of a lively faith.
This man's faith flames through charity: for as much as he is become the son
of Abraham. Gal. 5.6. Genesis 18.1.
Such a faith had Abraham, which wrought through charity: as appeared by his
sitting in his tent door, even in the heat of the day (which was extreme in
those countries) to wait that he might entertain strangers. As soon as
Christ entered into Zacheus his house, he stood forth, and said thus: Behold
Lord, the half of my goods I give unto the poor, etc. They which lack this
faith, and this charity, it is to be feared that Christ is neither yet entered
into their houses, nor into their hearts: where Christ is, by and by this fire
flameth.

And surely this his liberality to the poor may seem but reasonable; that
a man should give again half to God, Pro. 19.17. 1. Cor, 4.7. 1. Sam. 12.8.
who gave him all that he has; and reserve but the other half for himself
and his children. And it seems to be written for an example, not for us only
to talk of, but for all rich men to follow. Whatsoever is written, is written
for our learning, Romans 15.4.
says Saint Paul: And nothing is put down idly in the Scriptures. Christ
Jesus will feed the fancies or pleasures of no men, no not of kings; no not of
Herod himself. Luke 23.9.
O that our rich men then would follow this so manifest an example! then should
the poor be sufficiently relieved; and they do but their duties, and be
blessed for their labors. Then should they be Abraham's sons, whose son
whosoever is not, Romans 4.11.
is Satan's son, and shall surely be damned.

But to the utter confusion of all worldly minded Christians, Putiphar the
Egyptian may teach them this contempt of the world. Genesis 39.8.
Behold (says Joseph) my master knows not what he has in the house with
me; but has committed all that he has to mine hand. Surely, if this Egyptian
had made account of the world, he would have been more circumspect about his
affairs; he would have known every light matter; who ate and drank in his
house, etc. This Egyptian shall condemn our suspicious Christians, who will
trust no body; and our covetous worldlings, who will look so narrowly to their
affairs; who will not leese the parings of their nails.

Possidon. in vita Aug.
Saint Austen never did wear or carry about either keie, or ring, or signet,
but committed all the care of the Church, and of his household, to some
faithful clergy men: who at the years end, made him an account. And hence
springs two other duties of Christians: They should give to their poor
brethren; They should lend to their needy neighbors. He that despises the
world, and riches, will be liberal to the poor, and will lend to his
neighbor: but he that loves, and sets his mind on these, will neither give,
nor lend freely. Saint Paul wills Timothy to command rich men, that they
be rich in good works, 1. Tim. 6.18.
(...), and ready to give, (...), and imparting and communicating to their
brethren some part of those blessings God has bestowed on them; not keeping
all to themselves. Pro. 5.15.16.
Solomon compares riches to a river. Drink (says he) of the waters of thy
cesterne, and of the rivers out of the midst of thine own well: Let thy
fountains flow forth, and the rivers of waters in the streets. As though he
should say: O thou rich man, God has given thee a pleasant fountain; will thou now keep it wholly to thy self? Will thou damme and stop it up? No, but
rather take so much thereof as will serve thine own turn, and let the rest
flow into the streets: let thy neighbor also have part thereof. And do so
likewise with thy riches. But Saint Paul adds a forceable reason to move all
rich men to this liberality, and readiness to distribute these their riches:
Laying up in treasure (says he) for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, 1. Tim. 6.19.
that they may obtain everlasting life. And here he yields two excellent
commendations to these riches thus distributed: they are first a man's treasure
in heaven. No treasure here on earth shall so delight thee, nor so comfort thee
at ye day of judgment, as these their riches thus employed on the poor shall
do: nay, they are a foundation, that thou may attain eternal life by most
assuredly: Mat. 5.7. Jude 21.
for blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy. Upon this
foundation depends all our saluations, even of Gods mercy. And if we be
merciful, we shall most assuredly obtain Gods mercy: if we be not merciful,
we shall never have Gods mercy. For Saint James has plainly foretold us, Iam.
2.18.
that judgment shall be without mercy to him, that now shows no mercy. So
that our works of mercy grounded upon these promises of God, are a most sure
foundation to us that we may attain everlasting life. They which shall do no
works of mercy, shall have no mercy at Gods hands, and therefore lack the
very foundation of their salvation. In our earthly buildings we will be sure
to lay the foundations of our houses most firmly: Let us do the same in the
foundation of our salvation. Show mercy, and thou shall be sure to have
mercy: this is the only foundation thou must lean unto.

And this also our Savior Christ in the Gospel teaches all rich men: Make
you friends of your unrighteous Mammon, Luke 16.9. (...)
that * when you depart hence, and shall fail in your accounts, they may
receive you into everlasting tabernacles. God calls that last day, a day of
judgment. Now in a judgment there are guilty persons, and witnesses, and
pleaders, or lawyers. So in this great judgment of God, there shall be guilty
persons, Romans 3.19.
even all men living: All mouths there must be stopped: At that day, says
our Savior, make the poor your friends, O you rich men! that when you shall
fail in your accounts, and cannot answer one for a thousand; they may plead
for you, they may witness your mercy to the Judge, Job. 9.1.
that so you may find mercy. Without this testimony of theirs, you shall
never have mercy. In your other earthly actions and affairs you will
diligently seek for witnesses to prove your causes: O do the same in great
matters of your salvation! be sure that you have good store of witnesses, which
may testify your mercy showed upon them, that you may obtain mercy. And
this is that sure foundation, which S. Paul counsels you there to lay, that
you may be sure to obtain everlasting life.

Tremel. in 6. cap. Mat.
And hereof it is also, as I think, that in the Hebrewe and Syriacke, as
Tremelius notes, our alms is called our righteousness. And whereas the
Greek text says; Do your alms; the Hebrew and Syriake text says, Do your
righteousness, because that mercy is our inherent righteousness. Our
righteousness is in pardoning, not in performing: in God his gracious pardon,
not in the works we have performed. Jude 20.
In Gods sight shall no man living be justified: But the merciful shall then
obtain mercy. Mercy must be all our righteousness. And this is that which
Saint Jude teaches all Christians, in a little bundle as it were knitting up
the sum of all Christian religion: But you beloved, edify your selves in
your most holy faith; praying in the holy Ghost. And keep your selves in the
love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

Here is plainly put down the salvation of all Christians, even the mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ. This we must all wait for: this we must trust in,
and not in our own works. But now, who dare trust for any thing, or look
for any thing at Gods hand, but by promise? Now the promise of the mercy of
Jesus Christ is annexed to our merciful dealing with our brethren, as I have
noted before: Therefore they which are not merciful now, may look for the
mercy of Jesus Christ, but they shall never obtain it: because they have no
promise; they have not fulfilled this condition; they lack mercy, which in
the Hebrewe and Syriacke tongue is called our righteousness. This is that also
which we read in the Psalm (for the Scripture is a golden chain; it is all
linked and knit together) He has dispersed abroad (says David) and given to
the poor, Psalm. 112.9.
and his righteousness endures for ever: his horn shall be exalted with
glory. Here also most manifestly to give to the poor, (and that not
sparingly, but liberally, even as when men sow their seed with handfuls) is
called a man's righteousness: and this righteousness shall endure for ever.
Saint Paul alleges this also to the Corinthians. 2. Cor. 9.9.
Christians should be scatterers; but now they are gatherers. Blessed are
they that die in the Lord, Revel. 14.13
even so says the Spirit: for they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them. And here least any one should doubt of the truth hereof; even
the Spirit of God witnesses this unto us: Even so says the Spirit: And woe to
all them that will not believe this witness. And what this righteousness is
that endures for ever, and what these works be that thus follow the
faithful; the Gospel plainly teaches thee: I was hungry, and you gave me
meat. Matt. 25.35.
I thirsted, and you gave me drink, etc. These works follow every good and
merciful Christian; and these shall exalt his home with glory. Here is that
glorious kingdom received, which passes all the glory of the world.

The Scripture to persuade all men to these works of mercy; uses the most
forcible reasons that can be devised: and yet how slack are men in doing of
them? We could not have wished greater promises annexed to them, if all the
men in the world had laid their heads together, and had devised to have some
great reward promised of God to these their works: for does not Christ plainly
say: Verily I say unto you, Matt. 25.40
in as much as ye have done it to the least of these my brethren, ye have done
it to me? O great promise! O most forcible speech! Whom will not this one word
move to be merciful, but even a heart of flint? If he had said, Whatsoever
you shall do to any of mine, I will thank you for it: It had been a great
matter to receive thanks at Gods hands: but to account it to be done to his
own self; what could we have wished him to have said more? Many no doubt,
which are good and loving Christians to Jesus Christ, think often thus in
their hearts: O that Christ were here again in the world! that I might show
some courtesy to him, and entertain him as Martha and Zacheus did, and often
think, Luke 10.38, and 19.5.
O happy Martha and Zacheus, that entertained Jesus into your houses! But let
such think, that they may show even now kindness unto Jesus (if they will)
as they did. Ioh. 12.8.
He is amongst us in his poor members, even as verily as he was in person
present among them. And he accounts all that whatsoever we shall do to any of
these, even as done to his own person. And left we should doubt of this his
word, he has bound it with an oath: Verily (says he) I say unto you. And left
any man's simplicity or unworthiness should hinder this our kindness or
liberality, he has not said; Whatsoever you shall do to any perfect and
excellent Christian, to any that for holiness of life may be accounted a
Saint: but, Whatsoever you shall do to the least of these my brethren, you have
done it to me. Let no man's simple estate hinder thy liberality; Luke 16.20.
be he as poor and vile in open show as Lazarus was; Mark 16.14.
be he as weak in faith as his Apostles were before his ascension: yet I say
to thee, says Jesus Christ (who cannot lie, 1. Pet. 2.22.
and in whose mouth is no deceit) Whatsoever thou shall do to the least of
these, I will account it even done to my self. Surely we believe not this: if
we believed it, we would do any thing for the poor; we would not be so hard
hearted to them, as we are: Who would not do any thing that possibly he
could for Jesus Christ, if he were here now present amongst us? Well, he tries
us by the poor; least we should hereafter say: Lord, if it had been in our
powers, if we had ever seen thee, we would have showed our love and kindness
toward thee. These are but flattering speeches. He shall say, I have been
amongst you, and you have daily seen me in my poor, and yet you have showed
no kindness to me: And therefore as unkind to so merciful and loving a
Savior, as I have been unto you; you shall justly be condemned.

Ser. de Eleemosyn.
Cyprian makes a challenge and comparison between the devil and his servants,
and Christ and his, on this manner: Let every one (says he) imagine that he
saw the devil with his servants, that is, with the people of perdition and
destruction, as it were to step forth into the middle, and to make a challenge
to all Christ's people, when as he shall sit in judgment, saying on this manner:
I for these (whom thou see with me) was neither buffetted, nor whipped, not
crucified, nor shed my blood; neither did I redeem this my family by the
ransom of my passion on the cross; neither do I promise them the kingdom of
heaven; neither having restored to them again immortality, do I call them
hence again to paradise: and yet what great and precious presents (long sought
for, and most stately prepared) do they offer me? laying their goods to gage,
or selling them for the preparing of this my present. And if it do not answer
their expectation many times, they are reviled and scoffed at, and through the
rage of the people stoned to death. Show me O Christ of thine, such
present-bringers to thee, even of those thy rich men, The worldlings and
servants of the devil spend al their riches in vain shows to see, and to be
seen. And surely they are like mad me^, that thus spend their riches. And the
people erred greatly, that commended this their vanity.
those that abound in wealth: Thou thy self ruling and beholding all things in
thy Church, do these offer thee such a present, gaging and selling their
goods? yea (or changing the properties of them) translating them into heavenly
treasures? In these earthly and vain gifts of men (which they bestow on me) no
man is fed, no man is clothed, no man is sustained with their relief of bread
or drink: all things are consumed and wasted with a vain pleasure and
delight, between the madness of the shewer, and the error of the beholder.

But there (says he) in thy church, in thy poor, thou art clothed, thou art
fed, and thou promisest eternal life to them that do these things: and yet for
all this, thine are scant to be compared to mine that perish: which are
honored of thee with heavenly wages and celestial rewards. What answer shall
we make for these things, my brethren (says Cyprian) or how shall we defend
the souls of these rich men, which are overwhelmed as it were with a
sacrilegious barrenness, and with a night of darkness? What excuse shall we
make for them, who are inferior to the servants of the devil; which will not
requite Christ the price of his blood and passion with our excesses, and those
things which we may well enough spare? which will not give Christ for his
passion so much as the parings of our nails, as we say? Thus far Cyprian.
And if these things will not move Christians to despise the world, and to be
liberal to the poor, I think nothing will move them.

It is wonderful to consider, how liberal the heathen have been for vain
glory; and how pinching and sparing for Christ's sake Christians are in zeal
and charity one to another. When Lucullus had entertained certain Grecians
many days very stately; in so much that they said, Plutarch in Romans Apoph.
that they marvelled that he would bestow so much cost of them: He answered: O
my guests, I have bestowed something for your sakes: but the greatest part for
Lucullus his sake. And shall not Christians bestow much more liberally upon
Christians by Jesus Christ's sake, that he may be glorified for their works?
Ma. ser. 8.
Demosthenes being asked what thing men had like to God? he answered, to show
liberality and courtesy. Would thou be like to God, then show liberality:
Demosthenes a pagan could teach thee this lesson. The Turks have ever in their
mouths (for our good morrow) feed the hungry, Johan. Anton. Menauinus.
and clothe the naked. And thus they are wont every one to salute another in
the morning, when they first meet. I would to God this were our good morrow
also, and not that only, but also our morning works.

And here concerning the relief of the poor, how bountiful it should be; let
us mark concerning this matter what the Gospel teaches. Is not this a plain
commandment of our Savior in the Gospel? When thou make a dinner, or a
supper, Luke 14.12.
call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich
neighbors: least they bid thee again, and recompense be made thee. But when
thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind: and
thou shall be blessed, because they cannot recompense thee. For thou shall be
recompensed in the resurrection of the just. Who regardes this commandment?
Who is it now that in the great expenses, that in our age are bestowed upon
feasts, makes a feast to the poor? Who will feast the maimed, the blind, or
the lame? nay who almost will come near them? So little are the commandments
of Christ regarded amongst us: we make our selves better then our master: we
think we may do his commandments at our pleasures. But all Gods
commandments must be done upon necessity: Whether he command to sacrifice
or to murder; Genesis 22.2. 1. Sam. 15.3. 1. King. 13.9.
or to abstain from meat, or to feast: As the example of Abraham and king
Saul, and of that man of God which came to Bethel, and preached against
Ieroboams idolatrous altars, plainly prove.

And here that saying of Plato is verified, that a man's table is the mother of
friendship. Sphinx Philosophica de conuiuiis cap. 21.
And Athenaeus says very excellently; that wine has force to draw men to
frie^dship. Let all Christians then join these two commandments of our
Savior together; that is, first make the poor their friends, that when they
depart hence, and shall fail in their accounts, they may receive them into
everlasting tabernacles: And this also, let them feast them, and let them
drink of their wine also: that so they may purchase their friendship, as
Plato and Athenaeus teaches them.

And here to stir us up to this liberality in relieuing the poor
sufficiently and bountifully: let us but a little consider the sins of
Sodom, for which the was condemned: the Prophet Ezechiel thus reckons them up
unto Jerusalem. Behold, Ezech. 16.49.
this was the sin of thy sister Sodom: Pride, fullness of bread, abundance
of idleness was in her, and in her daughters. She also relieved her poor;
they died not for hunger; she kept life and soul together, as we say: but
she strengthened not their hands, says the Prophet; she relieved them not
sufficiently: She did not to them (according to that rule in the Gospel) as
she would have wished to have been done to her self. Matthew. 7.12.
And this her pinching the poor condemned her. And do not we in many places
even now relieve our poor so? We pinch them, Let us have special care that
the poor may be sufficiently relieved,
we pine them, we do not strengthen their hands: we are so far from feasting
them, which our Savior here commands. This pinching the poor was one of the
causes that condemned Sodom: Let us beware therefore of it, least it likewise
condemn us.

The Prophet Esaias thus writes of Tyrus, that after her covetousness and
fornication and other sins, when she shall repent, Esaias 23.18.
that then her merchandising and her gain shall be even holiness it self
unto the Lord. Neither shall it be laid up as treasure, nor hoorded up in
store: but her merchandising shall be to them now that dwell before the Lord,
that they may eat sufficiently and have durable clothing. Here is Christian
Tyrus described unto us, and under her Christ's Church. She shall not hoord up
in treasure, that which she gains by her merchandising: but it shall be
distributed among the Saints of God, as every man stands in need, that every
one in Gods Church especallie his Ministers and poor Saints, Mal. 3.10. Gal.
6.6 1. Cor. 16.1.
now may have meat sufficient, and sufficient apparel And the first
Christians in the Acts of the Apostles followed this her example: They which
had lands sold them, and laid the price of them at the Apostles feet, and
distribution was made according to every man's necessity, and there was none
that stood in need amongst them, Act. 2.45.
neither of meat, nor of apparel. Such relieuers of their poor were the
merchants of Tyrus, and the first Christians: and such relieuers should we be
now also. The poor are sent home to be relieved in the places where they were
borne: Let all Christians remember these examples, and this counmandeme^t of
our Saviors. Let the^ relieve them so, that they may eat sufficiently; that
they may have durable clothing. The Merchants of Tyrus did this of their
gain, gotten with peril of their lives: and shall not we do the like with
our riches, which come more easily to us? Let there be none amongst us that
want any thing. This care and provision the first Christians had in the time
of persecution for their poor: and shall we not have the like now in our
peace, plenty and abundance? So the Macedonians in their extreme poverty were
abundantly rich in liberality to the poor, even willing above their powers,
as S. Paul witnesses: 2. Cor. 8, 1
and shall not we in our great wealth be liberal to them? Let us not be like
the men of Sodom: let us strengthen their hands: nay let us be good scholars
of our heavenly master and Savior. Let us even feast them; and our expenses
(cost our dinner or supper we shall make them, never so much) they shall not be
lost; we shall receive a reward at the resurrection of the just. Luke 14.14.
O happy feast-maker, that then shall be recompensed! At that day, to have
only the loving countenance of that great and mighty king, what a joy or
comfort shall it be? but to receive a recompense at his hands, the joy thereof
shall be to our poor hearts then, no doubt, unspeakable. O let us not despise
it: Let us believe this promise of our Savior. Let us make some such feasts,
that at that day (when all such as feast themselves with Dives shall quake) we
may then rejoice.

Eccles. 11.1.
This is that which Solomon also teaches us: Cast thy bread upon the face of
the waters, and after many days thou shall find it. As though he should say,
that which our Savior here says; Cast thy bread away, bestow it on them, who
are never likely to make she any recompense. Throw it not on ye earth where
some may find it, and it may perchance do them some good; and they may
thank thee for it: but throw it on the waters, that it may seem to be quite
lost and cast away; and yet after many days, Luke 10.38.
that is, at the resurrection of the just, thou shall find it. So that here we
may see this doctrine of our Savior is no strange or new doctrine, even
Solomon as it were in a shadow, Genesis 18.1.
and obscurely taught the same. So Abraham sat at his tent door (as I have
noted before) to wait for strangers, that he might feast them. So Martha
entertained and feasted Jesus Christ. Luke 22.11.
So that citizen of Jerusalem (whatsoever he was) entertained Jesus Christ,
when as he should eat his passover: He not only lent him his house, and the
best room in it, but also gave him a lamb, and wine and bread, and al things
that belonged thereunto: condemning all those that will not suffer Christ to
come within their houses. The poor must lie at their gates, Luke 16.^0.
as Lazarus did at the gates of Dives: but they may not put foot over the
threshold, either to entertain them or relieve them. It were more
Christianlike, that they were even admitted within their houses, and even
feasted, as Christ commands; and these good Christians practiced. This our
liberality would cause the poor to speak well of us. Pet. Gregor. de repub.
lib. 22. cap. 13.
When as one Smicythus told king Philip of Macedonia that Nicanor continually
spoke evil of him: Well says Philip, Nicanor is not the worst subject I have,
and it may be the fault is in me. And when as he understood that he was a very
poor man, and that he never did give him any thing; he commanded that
something should be given him: which when it was done, then Smicythus told the
king that Nicanor commended him highly to all men. Thou may see, says
Philip, that it is in our power either to be well or evil reported of. This
liberality should make the poor not only to praise, but to pray for the rich:
which is the greatest and best thing in the world. God hears the prayers of
the poor. And one says very excellently, that a Christians weapons, are
tears and prayers; Exodus 5.22.23.
and that therefore if the poor do cry out against any man, they fight and
prevail more against him, with their prayers, then if an host of armed men
besieged him.

Christians should not only be thus liberal in giving and relieuing the
poor, but also in lending: Psalm. 112.5.
A good man (says David) is merciful and lends, and will guide his words
with discretion. And again, I have been young, and now am old, yet saw I
never the righteous forsaken, Psalm. 37.25.
nor his seed begging their bread. But he is ever merciful and lends, and
his seed enjoys the blessing. Here are notable descriptions of good men: And
in them both this is a principal part, that they are merciful to the poor;
which is the thing that I have touched before; and are merciful to their
brethren, and will lend: which is the thing I do now mean to handle by Gods
grace. And here first is a great blessing promised to all lenders: Their seed
shall never beg their bread: their seed shall never be forsaken. Who would not
purchase such a benefit for his children, though he gave for it all the goods
he had? Surely for the lack of this lending and charity to their poor
brethren, no doubt, the heirs of many great purchasers do go a begging, and
after their fathers deaths come to great penury. The just man's seed is never
forsaken; never goes a begging: but his father is ever merciful and lends.
Would thou not have thine heirs come to beggerie then? nor be forsaken of
God? Be thou never so rich, it is not thy great purchasing of lands, or heaping
up treasures together for them, that shall bring this to pass: But rather be
merciful and lend to thy needy neighbor, and no doubt (as God has spoken it
by the mouth of king David) thy children shall never be forsaken, nor beg their
bread. Some will put an hundredth pound in some men's hands, for a yearly
annutie to be paid thereof to their children: but that is but a kind of cloked
usury, and it is as much as to make their children drone Bees, and not to
labor in any vocation. But let it be lent to their brethren rather, and here
is promised a certain and everlasting annuitie for them.

And the manner how every Christian ought to lend, our Savior also teaches;
If you lend, of whom you hope to receive again, Luke 6.34.
what thanks have you? for sinners lend to sinners; that they may receive the
like again. But love your enemies, and do good, and lend, looking for nothing
again: and your reward shall be great, and you shall be the sons of the
highest, for he is kind both to the unthankful and wicked. Our Savior no
doubt, here commands all Christians to excel the wicked infidels. But they
lend to their friends only, and of whom they look for like courtesy again:
But (says he) Lend you even to your enemies, M.D. Fulke in his notes upon the
Rem. testam. expounds this place thus.
looking for nothing again. That is, if thy brother be not able to pay thee;
being thus resolved in thy mind, when thou lendest him, that thou art content
to lose the principal for Gods cause, for whose sake thou lendest. But if any
will say, that this is a hard doctrine: let such but mark that the words
import it. The wicked when they lend, look for like courtesy again: but thou,
look for nothing again: says our Savior. And again, God may command this,
who lends thee freely all that thou have. And wilt not thou be content at his
request, 1. Cor. 4.7.
to lend that which thou may well spare? So that the commandment is but
even in man's reason just and good: nay if the commandment were hard and
against reason, yet ye reward which is annexed to this kind of free lending,
should even force us to it: And your reward shall be great in heaven (says our
Savior) and you shall be the sons of the most Highest. He does not say only
we shall be rewarded in heaven; but that our reward shall be great in heaven.
What wise man will not prefer a reward in heaven, before all the usury and
gain in the world? much more a great reward. They which are not thus minded,
in truth are plain infidels, and do not know what heaven means, whatsoever
they say with their mouths. Naie, who would not be Gods son? Surely they
which lend so shall be Gods sons, as the Son of God himself here tells
them: and do we not respect this great dignity? Surely they which will not
lend without great usury, and respect not this great promise (no doubt) say
in their hearts, Psalm. 14.1.
as that foolish man does, whereof David speaks: The foolish body has said
in his heart that there is no God. What greater rewards could have been
promised then these? To have a great reward in heaven, and to be the sons of
the most Highest? And shall not these make us lend freely? And here let no
man's unthankfulness, or wickedness hinder any man from this charitable act: God
himself (says our Savior) is kind both to the unthankful and wicked: And
shall not we follow his steps?

And here our Savior seems to have relation to that shadow of the law: The
sun comfort, but the shadow no less delights: Matt. 5.20,
The charity and righteousness of Christians toward their brethren, should
exceed the charity of the Jews toward their brethren: they were but as
children under a school master; we are perfect men, as S. Paul teaches. Gal.
4.1.
It is a shame for a man not to know so much, nor to go so far forward in
the way of godliness, as a child does. Deuteronomy. 15.1.
At the end of seven years thou shall make a remission or forgiveness, faith
God: and this is the word of forgiveness, that every Lord or owner shall
forgive that his hand or ability has lent. He that has lent to his neighbor,
shall not ask it of his companion, and of his brother, when as that year is
called, The forgiveness of the Lord. Of a stranger thou may require it; but
that which shall be between thy brother and thee, thy hand shall forgive.
Luke 4.21. Col. 2.17. Phil. 3.1.
What can be plainer then this? The Jews every seventh year, were commanded
to forgive their brethren their debtes: And now to us Christians every year
is a Sabbath, and a year of Iubilee, and every man is our brother: Therefore
if our brethren were not able to pay us, we should every year forgive them.
And so lend as that we looked for nothing again; as our Savior here teaches.
And then it follows: The Lord shall bless thee in the land, which the Lord
thy God gives thee for an inheritance to possess it. So that thou hearken
unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and do all these commandments,
which I command thee this day. We must not do Gods commandments at our
pleasures (as many think that they may do) and specially this commandment
of lending: but we must do all Gods commandments; and then God shall bless
us in our land, and in all our businesses and affairs. A Prophet (says Moses)
shall God raise up unto you like to me, him ye shall hear (not in some
principal matters of faith, Deuteronomy. 18.15. and 7.37. Act. 3.22.
as the most men do) but in all things, in matters of manners also. And every
soul that will not hear that Prophet, his soul shall be rooted out from
among his people. This Prophecy is first delivered by Moses, and after
repeated by Saint Peter: and shall we not believe it? It is terrible, let us
mark it well. The soul that fulfils not all things that that Prophet shall
speak, shall be rooted out from amongst his people: And dare usurers then
take usury against the express commandment of their Savior? Do they not
hear the danger of their souls? To be rooted out from among Gods people.
What will all their vsuries profit them? Luke 9.25.
Nay, if they should gain all the whole world, if so be that they should lose
their souls.

But here I know some will say: If the case stand so, they will not lend at
all, unless they might gain something by this their lending. But to such I
answer: Let them take heed, how they hide their talents, though it be never so
cuningly and finely, and lap it up in a napkin. The owner thereof will not like
well of that at their hands. Gods will is, that all his talents should be
employed. Matt. 25.28.30
Take (says he) his talent from him, and cast therefore that unprofitable
servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. O
terrible sentence! And here let every one mark that he says not, Cast that
wicked, but that unprofitable servant into utter darkness. God will have all
his servants painful and profitable servants: They must not only eschew
evil, but they must also do good. Psalm. 34.14.
The fig tree which brought forth no fruit, but troubled the ground, was
therefore threatened to be taken away. The rich man must lend, if he be able: he
must not by any excuse whatsoever, hide his talent. God is the searcher of
hearts; much more of chests. Act. 1.24. and 15.8.
He knows what is in thy chest; whether thou be able to lend or no. If thou
shall pretend inabilitie to thy brother, when as thou art able; he that sees
and knows what is in thy chest, be thou sure he will punish thee for it.
Beware thou be not an unprofitable servant. Mark well the punishment, Cast him
into utter darkness, says our Savior, there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth. O use thy talents, whosoever thou art! beware of this terrible
sentence.

The Fathers to exhort men to this liberal kind of lending, are very
plentiful: August. in Psalm. 36.
If (says Augustine) thou had given one a little money to lone, and he to
whom thou had given this money, for thy little money, should give thee a
farm, which were far better then it: how would thou thank him? how glad
would thou be? But see what an excellent possession, he will give thee to
whom thou have lent: Come ye blessed of my father, receive ye: What? that
which you have given? God forbid: you have given earthly things, which if you
had not given would have putrified in the earth: For what would thou have
done with it, if thou had not given it? that which would have perished in the
earth, is preserved in heaven. Therefore that which is preserved we shall
receive. Thy desert is preserved: thy merit is become a treasure. For mark
what thou shall receive: Receive ye the kingdom, that was prepared for you from
the beginning of the world. On the contrary, they, that would not lend, what
shall they hear? Go ye into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
devil and his Angels. Thus far Augustine. Where he plainly sets down the
great blessing that the merifull lender shall obtain at Gods hands; and the
terrible punishment, which not the usurer only; but he that will not lend,
shall be sure to have.

I would to God all Christians would but mark what censures the very Heathens
have given concerning usury. When as one asked Cato Censorius, Cic. lib. 2.
Off.
what were the chief points of good husbandry? He answered, To feed well, to
cloth well, and to till well. And to him that asked, What is it to commit
usury? Is not that also a point of good husbandry? Cato answered, What is it,
to kill a man? He thought that an usurer sinned as greatly as a murderer. Did
Cato judge thus of usury by the light of nature, and shall Christians profess
it; or think better of it in the light of the Gospel? Panor. lib. 4.
Alphonsus king of Aragon compared usurers to greedy birds, which snatched and
catched all things. And surely no doubt, very justly. For usurers are the
cruellest Kites and vultures in the world. They consume men's patrimonies, they
often kill their bodies, and undo their heirs. And this they do to their
brethren, to whom they were bound to open, even their very hearts and bowels
to do them good, 1. Ioh. 3.17.
as Saint John teaches. And will not then, these cruel hearted men open to
them their coffers or purses? Another compares Usurers to the devil: for what
else (says he) do Usurers, but that which the devil persuaded Christ to have
done? (when as he would have had him to have made stones bread) for by their
lending, Pet. Greg. de Rep. lib. 2. cap. 20.
they gain of stones and mettalles that which nature cannot bring forth. For
naturally a piece of gold, or any other money, engenders not money. O wicked
age that we live in! now usury amongst some is accounted the gainfullest, and
surest trade of living. And whereas lending was commanded of God to profit our
brethren, now the usurer thereby (perverting this order of God) profits
himself.

To conclude, that interpretation (of the two edged sword in the Revelation) of
Victorinus an ancient Bishop, Victor. in Apocal.
is worth the marking, By the two-edged sword glistering out of his mouth, is
meant, that it is he, that now showed to the world the glad tidings of the
Gospel: and by Moses the knowledge of the law. But because, by the same word
he shall judge hereafter all mankind, that were both under the law, and under
the Gospel: therefore it is said to be a two edged sword. A sword arms a
soldier, kills a man's enemy, and punishes a reuolter or a turnecoate. And
that he might show his Apostles that he preached judgment, he says, I came
not to send peace into the world, but a sword. And after that, he had ended his
parables, he says unto them: Have you understood all these things? And they
said, yea. Therefore every Scribe learned in the kingdom of God, is like to a
householder bringing out of his treasure new and old things: that is, the new
words of the Gospel, and the old of the law and Prophets. And that these come
out of his mouth: He said to Peter, Go to the sea, and cast in an angle, and
the fish that thou shall first take, opening his mouth, thou shall find a
stavre (that is two pence) give it for me and thee. And David also by the holy
Ghost says: God has spoken once: I have heard these two things: That God has
once determined, that in the beginning, that shall continue to the end. To
conclude, when as he is appointed of his Father to be Judge, he minding to show
that through the word, which is preached to them, men should be judged, he
says, Do you think that I will judge you in the last day? But the word which
I have spoken unto you, that shall judge you in the last day. And Paul against
Antichrist says to the Thessalonians: 2. These. 2.8.
Whom the Lord shall kill with the spirit of his mouth. This is therefore that
two-edged sword proceeding out of his mouth, etc. I would to God all men would
mark this exposition: By Gods word all men at the last day shall be judged,
whether they have directed their lives according to that which they have heard
with their ears, or no? And therefore our Savior says so often: Matt. 11.15.
and 13.9.43. Mark. 4.24.
He that has ears to hear, let him hear. And again, Take heed what you
hear: As though he should say; one day ye shall give an account of it. And
here that is verified, that our Savior says, You are clean, for the word
that dwells in you. Ioh. 15.3.
Gods word makes our faith and religion pure and clean, and also our lives
clean. But we must not be like those that can say, Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.22.
and have done wickedlie; which have professed Christ with their mouths, and
have denied him with their works. We must not only embrace the promises of
salvation, which the Gospel teaches us, but also the precepts of life. We
must eat the whole Paschal L^mbe, or else it will do us no good: Exodus 12.9.
As well the feet as the head and purtnance. Many at this day, eat greedily
the head and purtnance of Christ, that is, his divine promises, and his
heavenly miracles; they are very desirous to eat these: but few eat the
feet, that is, his precepts and commandments. Matt. 24.14.
To such the Gospel shall be preached as a testimony of their condemnation,
at that day of judgment, and not of their salvation. Let us beware that we be
not hearers, but doers; Iam. 1.22.
and not only desirous to eat the head and purtnance, but also the feet of
Christ; and let us as willingly learn his precepts and commandments and do
them, as we are content to believe his promises, and remain in them.

These are the ways which Gods word teaches all Christians to walk in. These
are plain ways, here are no tropes or figures; and yet many which will seem
to profess Gods word, make no account of these: let such take heed, at ye day
of judgment they stand not among those to whom God shall say, Why did thou
preach my laws, Psalm 50.16
or take my covenant in thy mouth? Why did thou profess my word, and would
not be reformed by it? All such hypocrites shall then be condemned.

The manners and conversation of the ancient Christians, drawn out of the
Fathers.
IVstine the Martyr thus describes the ancient Christians. Christians differ
not from other men, neither in country nor speech, Just. epist. ad Diog.
nor in civil government. They dwell in no cities by themselves; neither use
they any language, that differs from the common speech of other men; neither
have they a kind of life which is famous for any singular or odd thing in it;
neither do they go about to learn any thing devised of curious heads; neither
are they patrons of any man's opinion, as many are: but inhabiting partly in the
cities of the Grecians, and partly of the Barbarians, as every man's lot has
befallen him, following the manners of the people with whom they dwell, in their
apparel, and living, and other things, which concerning this present life,
they set before our eyes a wonderful state of their common wealth. They dwell
in their own countries, but as it were strangers. They have all things common
with other men as citizens; and they distribute all things away, as it were
some traveling into another country. Every strange region is their country:
And all their countries are to them, as strange regions and dominions. They
marie wives as other men do, and beget children; but they make not their
children away, as the heathen do. They have a common table, but not polluted
with excess. They are in the flesh; and yet they live not according to the
flesh. They live here upon earth, but they have their conversation in heaven.
They obey laws which are made; nay in their manner of living, they far
exceed and go beyond the laws. They love all men, and all men persecute them.
They are not known what they are, and yet they are condemned to death. They
are murdered, and yet they are multiplied. They are poor, and yet they make
many rich. They want al things, and yet they abound in all things. They are
dishonored, and in their ignominy their glory shines. They are slandered,
and yet all men bear record of their innocence. They are reviled, and they
give good speeches again. They are injured, and they honor their persecutors.
And when as they live like good men, they are punished as though they were
wicked. And when as they are punished, they rejoice; as though then they were
revived. The Jews make war against them, as against strangers: and the
Grecians persecute them: and they which hate them cannot tell wherefore they
hate them. And that I may in one word say all: That which the soul is in the
body; that are Christians in the world. The soul dwells in the body; but
it is not of the body: So Christians dwell in the world, but they are none of
the world. The invisible soul is placed in the visible body, as in a
garrison: so Christians are known while they live in the world; but their
divine worship of God is invisible. The flesh hates the soul, and makes war
against it; because it cannot enjoy her pleasures: And the world also hates
Christians; they resist their pleasures. The soul loves the flesh, which hates
her, and loves her members: So also Christians love them, which hate them. The
soul is enclosed within the body, but it preserves the body: so also
Christians are kept in the world, as in a prison; but they preserve the world.
The immortal soul dwells in a mortal tabernacle: and Christians inhabit
amongst those things which are corruptible, as strangers looking for the
immortality of heaven. The soul the worse it is fed, is the better: so
Christians whiles they are daily punished, are increased. etc. By this it
appears how zealous in the service of God, how homely and simple in their
apparel, what contemners of the world Christians were in the beginning. Who
condemn by their examples the Atheists and lukewarm Christians in religion,
the curious and covetous worldlings of our age: who are as it were wedded to
this world, and take their delights and pleasures therein, who will have all
things (as they say) in print, both their houses and apparel, and whatsoever
they have else. Surely this is not to contemn the world, as they did. These
former used the world only for the present necessity, they took no pleasure
therein, as many do, and with great costs labor to obtain at this day.

Athenagoras also a very ancient Christian, in his Apology for the
Christians, Athenagor. Apol. pro Christianis.
speaks thus to the Emperors: When as all men through your great clemency
and benignity have their right, and cities according to their dignities, enjoy
their freedoms; nay the whole world by the means of your providence and
wisdom, enioyes most firm and sure peace; only of us who are called
Christians, you have no care. For you suffer us, who have committed no evil;
yea, who above other (as it shall be declared in the progress of this
Defense) have behaved ourselves most religiously and obediently, both toward
God and your Empire; to be vexed, spoiled, banished; many bringing false
accusations against our very names. Wherefore we were bold at this time
manifestly to declare our cause unto you. And you shall perceive by this our
discourse, that against all right and reason we are thus punished. Wherefore we
beseech you, that you will have also some care of us, that we now at the last
may cease to be murdered of those our accusers. We pass not for the loss of
goods, nor for the glory and credit of our good names; or for any such like
or greater things, wherein men may hurt or injury us. For although these
things be made great account of amongst the common people, we are wont to
despise them. For we have learned, that if we be stricken or beaten, to
abstain from striking again; or if any invade or take violently away our
goods, not to go to law with them: but also to those that have given us one
blow, to turn the other cheek; and to them that will take away our coat, to
offer our cloak also. And seeing we make thus small account of our lives and
bodies, they seek for our riches: and they babble out huge heaps of crimes
against us; which never once so much as came into our minds to think: but
which might rather be laid to their charge, and to such like as they are. But
if any shall be able to convict us, not only of any great, but of any small
offense; we do not only desire that punishment may be remitted us, but we
are ready to endure what punishment soever. But if so be, that we be accused
only for our name because we are called Christians (for even unto this day all
those uncertain rumors and reports, which are spread abroad on us are lies;
neither is any Christian convicted of any heinous offense) it is your parts, O
most wise and courteous Princes, by your laws to deliver us from this injury,
that as in all the world both every private man, and all men in every town,
by your bountifulness do enjoy common peace and quietness: so we may have
cause also to thank you, that we as it were triumphing, may rejoice that we
also are delivered from these slanderous accusations. Here also we may see
the same Christians most lively painted out, which before we saw in Iustine;
holy in life and conversation. Despisers of this world, not given to
quarrelling, or going to law, they had learned another lesson, says
Athenagoras in those days: which condemns the quarrelling and contentious
Christians of our age, who sue at law now for every light trifle their
brethren: When as I have heard that even in the memory of some yet living, to
have a suit in law in a whole town, or to have one go to London, was counted
a great strange matter; even as now it is counted to travel to Rome, or to
Constantinople. So peaceably they lived in those days. A man in all his life
never saw London: that was a rare thing. But now our suits are so common,
that they make the way thither beaten. The former Christians were not so
contentious, as we may learn here by Athenagoras.

Eusebius also very excellently describes thus unto us the manners and
conversation of Christians in his time: De demonst. Euang. lib. 3. cap. 8.
If it be now a thing most certain, that the Disciples of our Savior were
such like, why was not then their master also such a one long before? And if
you will learn of the Disciples, what a kind of master they had, you have at
this day innumerable scholars of the words of Jesus, of whom there are many
great assemblies of men; who both as it were, in battle array, stand and fight
against the natural pleasures of the body, and also who keep their minds safe,
and stand without any wound from all unlawful affections, or lusts of the
flesh: who when as they have spent their whole life, eue^ to their old age,
most temperately; may yield unto us most evident proofs of the information of
his doctrine; and what his doctrine teaches. Neither men only under this
Schoolmaster do teach us this philosophy; but so many thousands of women
through the whole world, which are so many as their number cannot be told: who
as it were certain priests, worshipping the God of the whole world, and having
embraced that heavenly philosophy, and for the love of this heavenly wisdom,
make no account of offspring and children (as of things which pertain to the
body) but with all their studies and diligence, having a care of their souls,
have dedicated themselves wholly both in body and soul to the king of all
things, and to the God of all the whole world, that so they might practice
perfect and perpetual chastity and virginity. Behold here another notable
description of Christians. They despised not only the world, but also the
pleasures of the flesh. They embraced virginity, and they did dedicate
themselves as spouses and wives only, and wholly to the king of all kings, as
Saint Paul teaches. 1. Cor. 7.34.
They seek to please the Lord only, they are holy in body and spirit. So are
not they, who are married. And in those days of this sort were thousands; so
many as their numbers could not be told. How are now Christians degenerated
from this? Surely now we may say, They marie, and are married, as our Savior
prophecieth in the Gospel: Mat. 24.38. Luke 17.27.
so few at this time embrace virginity in comparison of the thousands in
those days.

Apolog. ca. 34
Tertullian also a very ancient Father, describes the conversation of
Christians in his days thus: Now I will declare the works of the sect of the
Christians: that seeing I have repeated the evils wherewith they are charged, I
may also declare the good things wherein they are occupied. We are all one
body bound together with one manner of religion, with one truth of discipline,
and with one league of hope, we meet altogether in our assemblies, that
praying with our prayers, we may as it were even with an army of soldiers
take God. And this force is pleasant to God. We pray also for the Emperors,
and for their officers, and for all those that be in authority: for the whole
world, for peace, and for the stay of the end of the world. We meet altogether
also, to have the holy Scriptures read, as the present state of the time
forces us, either to forewarne any thing to come, or to consider any thing
that is past. We feed as it were our faith, with that most holy word; we
strengthen our hope therewith, as with an anchor we make sure our confidence.
And we also print deeply into our minds the doctrine of those holy precepts,
by often beating upon them. There also are exhortations, corrections, and even
as it were Gods judgment seat. For we pronounce sentence there against sinners
most severely, that to others in the sight of God, this may seem to be but a
preamble of Gods judgment to come. If any offend so, that he be accounted
worthy to be excommunicated from the communion of prayer, and of the assembly,
and of other holy exercises; certain chosen Elders set in authority, who have
obtained that honor, not with any money, but for their good report, (for none
of Gods things with us are bought and sold,) and they do excommunicate all
such. Of every artificer also we gather somewhat for the poor, but not any
grievous sum of money, as though he should pay for his religion. Every one
brings his little alms every month, or when he will, and puts it according to
his ability in the poor men's box. For with us, no man is compelled to do
this, but every one contributes willingly. And this same work of cha^itie, is
a cause why we are evil spoken of some. See, say they, how they love one
another, (when as they hate one another) and how they are ready even to die one
for another, when as they themselves are more ready to kill one another. But I
suppose they are grieved at no one thing more, then that we call one another
brethren, when as amongst them all names of kindred (through pride and ambition)
are but counterfeit. We are your brethren by the law of nature, as it were of
one mother: although you in this point do a little degenerate from the nature
of men, because that you are evil brethren among your selves. But how much
more rightly are they called and accounted brethren, which acknowledge one God
for their father, which have drunk one spirit of justification, which as it
were from one womb of ignorance have aspired to the same light of truth. But
perchance therefore we are accounted less brethren, because no tragedy
exclaimes of our brotherhood; or else because we are as brethen in the
communicating of our temporal goods, which amongst you most commonly breaks
this brotherhood. We which are joined together in soul and heart; make no
account to communicate our riches one to another; there is no difference of
any things amongst us, but of our wives, etc. Such unity as members of one
body; such common prayers with faith and knowledge; such hearing of the
Scriptures, with punishments of the disobedient; such voluntary contributions
to the poor; such Christian charity; such a community of the use of all
things were in those former good Christians. But with us almost all these are
quite contrary: so far we have degenerated.

And in their prayers they used great reverence, in those days they kneeled.
For thus I read in a sermon of Beatus Caesarius, Bishop of Orleance: For when
as very often (as it becomes me) I mark diligently when as the Deacon
cries: Biblioth. Pat. Tom. 7. ser. 30.
Let us kneel down; I see the greatest part of the people to stand upright
like pillars; which is neither lawful nor seemly, nor expedient for
Christians to do in the Church in the time of prayers, etc. It should seem
that the Deacon in time of prayer cried. Let us kneel; as we in our prayers
now say, Let us pray; to stir up the peoples minds to prayer. And that the
Bishop had a care to mark whether the people in time of prayers kneeled or no.
I would all Pastors of Churches would do the like now, and mark who kneeles
not, and exhort them to kneel. But now no man regards this.

And in another place of the discipline of Christians, the same Tertullian
writes thus: Love your enemies, and bless them which curse you; Tert. lib. de
Pat.
and pray for them which persecute you, that you may be the children of your
heavenly Father. In this chief commandment all the doctrine of patience is
briefly comprehended, when as we may not hurt any (though we have a just
cause.) Now if we shall run over all the other causes which may drive us into
impatiencie; the other commandments will likewise fall out justly in their
places. If thy mind be moved to impatiencie by the loss of thy goods, it is
admonished almost in every place of the Scriptures, that it ought to despise
the world. Neither can there be any greater exhortation to despise money, then
that the Lord himself had no riches: And, he ever iustifies the poor, and
condemns the rich. The former Christians (as appears by this) did not so
greedily seek for money and riches, as we do at this day. They despised
riches: they passed not for money.

Cyprian also condemns this covetousness in Christians. C^^ Lib 2. ^pi^t. 2.
But those whom thou supposest to be rich men, joining field to field, and
excluding the poor of their quarters, have their pastures and fields without
bounds: which have great store of gold and silver, and huge masses of money, or
reekes it as were of silver hid in the ground: these being afraid amongst the
midst of all their riches, the doubtfulnesse of their estates often troubles
them, least the thief should rob them, least the murderer should catch
them, least the malice and envy of any wealthier then themselves, should vex
them with trouble some suits. He sighs even in the middle of his banquet,
though he drink in pearl: and when as the down and soft featherbed has
embraced his pined body, for all his good cheer over the ears, as it were,
in her bosom; yet he cannot take any rest for all these feathers. Neither does
this miserable wretch understand, that his riches are no other thing to him
then brave torments, and that he is bound with his gold, as thieves are with
gyues and fetters. And that he is rather possessed of his riches, then that he
should possess them. And O abominable blindness of the mind of man, and deep
darkness of raging covetousness! when as he might disburden himself, and
also ease himself of so great a weight, he goes on still forward to set all
his mind upon these same riches, that thus vex him; he goes on still to
cleave fast to these pinching burdens. There is no bestowing of them upon his
poor retainers; no distribution to them that stand in need. And they call that
their money, which they keep very carefully locked up in their houses, as if
it were another man's: whereof they will bestow none upon their friends, no nor
to their children, no nor to themselves. They possess these riches only to
this end, that another should not have them. And what a misnaming of things is
this? They call them goods, whereof they have no use, but to those things which
are naught. Or do you think that they are also safe, whom amidst the robes of
their honors and great riches; whom flourishing with the glory of kings
courts a great company of armed men continually waits upon and guards? They
are more afraid themselves, then others are of them: he is as glad to fear
himself, as he is feared of others. Dignity, and honor or auth^rity seems
to take punishment even of the mighty man himself etc. Their au^h^^it^^ first
makes themselves afraid, which make them so terrible to others. This account
the former Christians made of riches, as of fetters; and of honors, as of
burdens.

But to come nearer us, and to condemn our covetousness, Chrysostom tells a
strange history of two Christians: I will show you (says he) a thing that was
done amongst our forefathers, Ho. 30. ad Pop. Ant.
not concerning anger, but concerning money. There was a certain place that
had treasure hidden in it: And when as the Lord thereof knew not so much, he
sold the place. He which bought it, when as he dug it up, that he might
plant his field, and dress it; he found that treasure that was hidden in it:
And when as he came to him that sold him the field, he would have compelled
him to have received the treasure. For he said, that he bought the place, and
not the treasure. But he on the contrary, refused that which he would have
given him, saying: I have sold the place, neither have I now any right in it.
They fell at strife, the one would have given it the other; and the other
striving that he would not receive it. And going to a certain man, they
reasoned the matter before him: and after they asked his sentence, to whom the
treasure was due? He would give no sentence on neither side. But says he, I
will end your controversy; let me have it, and possess it for you both. The
which when they had both yielded to; he that was so greedy to receive the
treasure, sustained afterward a thousand evils. And learned by experience, that
they justly, and not without good cause, had departed from it. Such contempt of
riches was in those days; and such a conscience amongst Christians: The
Fathers here agree with the scriptures alleged before concerning the contempt
of the word.
The like should be amongst us, if we were not grown out of kind. Such like
contemners of the world were Augustine, Ambrose, Cyptian, Ierom, and all the
Fathers, as by reading their lives appears. We have now few such Augustines,
Ambroses, and Ieromes. We allege their sayings commonly, but never follow
their steps of life: nay, it is likely we never read their lives; which are well
worth the reading, but much more the following, seeing we swerve so farfro^ them

Fulgo. lib. 6.
Nay, not only Christians, but even the very Pagans teach us this contempt of
riches. I read of Themistocles, that when as he had gone to the sea shore to
see a great overthrow and slaughter of the Persians; after he had seen the
chains and bracelets of them that were slain, scattered here and there,
turning himself to his friend that came with him: You, says he, that are not
Themistocles, gather up these things. He accounted it a disgrace to
Themistocles to stoop down to them: and shall not Christians account it a
much more disgrace unto them; whose father is God, whose kingdom is heaven;
whither no such earthly or transitory things shall have any access? They
which do in this life apply their whole studies and cares to the heaping up of
these earthly riches, do like as if a king should go and heap up pibble
stones in his treasury; what folly were this in a king; seeing he should have
no use of these in his kingdom? Such foolish kings are these worldly minded
Christians. And less use shall they have of these earthly riches in their
kingdom.

Hercules also that most famous Grecian, Plutarch. ex Aeschilo hunc verse.
recitat.
is thus in two words very excellently pictured out unto us: (...): he was
outwardly a homely and rude man, but in all great exploits excellent. I would
to God all Christians would imitate him, that their excellency would appear
in their excellent works, which they should do, and in the virtues of their
minds; and not in outward and external pomp and vanity. That they would be
(...), rude and homely outwardly, Psalm. 4^.13.
as he was; but inwardly all glorious, as all Christ's Church is.

The Romans also were such despisers of the world, and of the vain pomp
thereof, as Cicero does teach us: Cic. Parad. 1.
We abound (says he) with domestical examples (and having re ^oned up a great
number of ancient and famous Romans) ^oe we think (says he) that all these
did make account of any ^^g all their whole lives, save of that, which of it
self was praise worthy and commendable? Let them come forth now, who ^augh at
this my speech, and are of a contrary judgment: and let them give sentence
even their own selves, whether they had rather be like some of these, which
abound in their marble houses, glittering with Iuorie and gold, and have great
store of signs and pictures, yea engraven of silver, and gold, and of the
curious works that come from Corinth: or else like Caius Fabricius, which had
none of all these, nor would have none of them. And after. Parad. 5.
What think you if Lucius Mummius should see any of these, that make now so
great account of a pispot, that comes from Corinth; when as he himself
despised all Corinth it self? Whether do you think, that he would esteem him
as a notable citize^, or rather as some diligent porter and good doore-keeper?
O that Marcus Curious, or some of them now were alive again! in whose farm
places and houses there was nothing glistering, nothing brave or excellent,
besides themselves. Thus Cicero declares to us the manners of the ancient
Romans, ever how they despised the state and pomp of the world: And shall not
we Christians? But especially Seneca in this point is excellent, he describes
thus Scipio unto his friend Lucilius.

Seneca ad Lucil. ep. 87.
I lying in Scipio his farm place where he dwelt (says he) write these things
unto you, reuerencing the very spirit, and soul, and altar (which I suppose to
be the gra^e) of so famous a man: I persuade my self, that his soul is
returned to heaven from whence it came; not because he was a Captain of great
and mighty armies (for so was also furious Cambyses, yea and also for all his
fury had good luck withal) but for his great moderation and piety. Yea, and
for that which was more wonderful in him, when as he forsook his country,
even then, when as he had defended it, either Scipio must want Rome; or else
Rome must want her liberty: I will derogate nothing (says he) from the laws,
nothing from the ancient customs: let all the citizens have their lawful
right. O my country, use my benefit without me; I have been a cause to thee
of thy liberty, I will also be an augmenter of it: I will depart, if so be
that thou think that I have increased more then I ought. Why should I not
wonder at this valiant mind? He went voluntarily into banishment, and
disburdened the City. The matter was come to that pass, that either the
liberty of the common wealth must do some injury to Scipio, or else that he
must do some injury to the liberty of the common wealth. Neither was lawful:
he gave place to the laws, attributing his banishment no more to the common
wealth, then if it had been Hannibal, or some open enemy that had banished
him. I see the farm where he dwelt, builded of four square stones, having a
wood compassing it about in steed of a wall, and two towers built aloft on both
sides of it to defend it: having a great pond beneath the buildings and the
pastures, which had water enough in it to water an whole army; and a narrow
bathing place and obscure, after the old fashion. Our ancestors thought nothing
warm unless it were dark and obscure. I took great delight to compare Scipio
his manners, and ours together. In this corner, that terror of Carthage, whom
Rome may thank that she was but once taken, washed his body, being now weary
with going to plow. For he was not idle, and as the custom was, he went to
plow himself: he remained under such a rude roof, and such a base floor bare
him. But who is there now that can abide to be washed so? every man accounts
himself now a poor man, and one of no account, unless his walls shine with
great and precious spheres, unless his marble of Alexandria be drawn with
plaster that comes from Numidia; and unless it be pargetted over curiously,
and after the manner of pictures; unless his chamber, for the hugeness of the
windows, do seem to be built with glass: unless his fish pools be
compassed about with that stone that is called Thasius, which in times past was
a rare thing to be seen in a Church, into which we throw in our empty body,
wasted with immoderate sweat; and unless silver ewers power water on his
hands etc.

Such a pitiful man to his country, and plain man in his dealings was
Scipio, as here Seneca avouches unto us. He had rather be banished then do his
country any harm: he past not for curious buildings, costly furniture, or
the pomp of this world, which some afterward then (as in our days now)
greedily sought for: so far off was he to hurt or oppress any man to
obtain or maintain this. These Pagans condemn the curiosity and pomp of
the world, which now reigns amongst us: They shall condemn us, unless we
repent, at the day of judgment. It is a shame for Christians, that Pagans
should go beyond the^ in any virtue. We have had Christians that have excelled
them even of late. Panorm. lib. 4. de reb. gestis Alphons.
I read of Alphonsus king of Aragon, when as one brought him ten thousand
French crowns: And one that stood by perchance said, O that I had so much
gold! it would make me rich and happy. Go thy way (says the king) and take
it, how much soever it is, and be happy. Surely this Christian king, and that
not long since, He lived in the reign of Henry the 6.
exceeded all these Pagans: And shall he have no scholars? All Christians
should herein be his scholars, should learn by his example to despise the
world, to despise money and gold. It is a Christian and kingly lesson. But
this Christian philosophy is now quite banished, and that (...) and (...), 2.
Tim. 3.2.
that love of our selves, and love of money, whereof Saint Paul prophesies are
now in their kingdom, and reign amongst men. We will not now give thousands
of Crowns, no nor of pence or shillings, no not to our brethren. We love our
selves and money, and gold so well, that no man almost loves his brother. The
first Christians had learned this lesson, and therefore they laid not the
rents, Act. 4.35.
but even the prices of their lands at the Apostles feet: They gave it not
them in their hands; to declare no doubt, this contempt of the world, and their
love to the Apostles. The like love had the Galathians to Saint Paul: I bear
you record (says he) that if it had been possible, Gal. 4.15.
you would have pulled out your very eyes, and have given them to me. Phile.
verse. 19.
And he writes to Philemon, that he owes him his own self. This condemns
those, that love the world so well, that now they are so farce from giving any
thing to the Church, that they rather study and devise how they may take that
away, that has been well given of others, which come not to the Church now
ad offerendum, sed ad auferendum, not to offer, but to take away. The like
contempt of ye world had those Jews, which when as Christ rode to Jerusalem,
Matthew. 21.8.
spread their garments in the way. And no doubt they were a figure of us:
rather then Christ should go barefoote, we should cast even our very garments
in the way. But now to maintain their suits of apparel, and their brave
garments, many make Christ in his members to go barefoot, and ill clothed, and
with many a hungry meal: And do these spread their garments in the way?
Nay, Amos. 2.6.
these sell the poor even for a pair of shoes, as ye Prophet speaks. They
make no account of the poor members of Jesus Christ. They despise not the
world.

Neither have the Heathen only taught us this contempt, but even nature her
self. Oil if it be put in water, will not be mingled with it; but will swim
above. Such excellent oil should Christians be, whereof they take their names:
They should swim above all the waters (that is, of riches, pleasures, and
delights) of this world whatsoever. All which may be fitly compared to water
for their uncertainty: they flow like water: they are not stable and
permanent: and for their dangers, they do drown men, if they take not great
heed of them. Cast a tree into the water, and it will not sink at the first,
but it will swim aloft. Such trees should all the Lords trees be: though they
be here placed in this world, and as it were cast into the water; yet they
should swim aloft always: they should not sink down therein. But now all
men almost sink down into these waters; they are over the ears in them: they
swim not aloft; they despise them not. Where the body is, Luke. 17.37
there will the Eagles be, says our Savior: comparing all his to Eagles. Now
the Eagle does mount on high: and he compares himself to a body; because he
was slain for our sakes. And therefore with him in heaven should the hearts,
the desires, the loves, the studies of all his Eagles be, and not here on
earth, Col. 3.1.
and on these earthly things. Christians cannot serve God and Mammon together.
Matthew. 6.24. Esa 28.20.
The bed of love is too straight ( as Esaias says) it cannot hold two, and the
cloak or garment is too short, it cannot cover two. Christ only must be in
our bed, and in our bosom.

This contempt of the world and devotion of obeying the commandment of God,
Amb. lib. 1. de Abrah. cap. 1.
was the first thing yt Abraham pleased God in, as Ambrose notes. Abraham was
surely, says Ambrose, a great and mighty man, famous in the highest degree for
his many virtues, whom all the Philosophers could not wish a man that might
match him. And to conclude, it was far less that they imagined or fained in
all their excellent men, then that he did indeed. And the plain faith of the
truth was greater, then the stately lie of eloquence. Therefore let us first
consider what kind of devotion was in him; for this virtue is the first in
order, and the foundation of the rest. And by good right God requires this of
him, saying: Go out of thy country, and of thy kindred, and of thy fathers
house. It had been enough to have said, Go ou^ of thy country. For that had
been, to have gone out of his kindred, and out of his fathers fathers house.
But therefore he added every one of these, that he might prove his love, least
peradventure he should have seemed to have taken a matter in hand unadvisedly;
or else should fraudulently have fulfilled the commandments of God. But as the
precepts were to be heaped one of another, least he should be ignorant of
any thing: so also rewards were set before him; least he should despair. He
is tried as a valiant soldier. He is pricked forward as a faithful servant. He
is challenged unto the combat as a just man, and he went out. Here in him is
that, which among those seven wise men of Greece was so highly commended, for a
wise saying, (...), Follow God: Abraham indeed prevented that saying of the
wise men, and followed God before they were borne. Let us now also consider by
his example, what we ought to follow, least perduenture that it be also said to
us; Go out of your country, that is, go out of this dwelling we have in this
body; out of which Saint Paul went also, who said; Our conversation is in
heaven: and out of the entisements and pleasures of the body, which he called
as the kindred of our soul: which she must endure as long as she is coupled in
league and fellowship with the body. Therefore we must go out of this earthly
conversation by the acts and manners of that heavenly life, in so much that we
must not change our places (as Abraham did) but even our souls. If we desire
to cleave to Christ, let us forsake all corruptible things, etc. Thus by
Ambrose judgment every Christian is herein to follow Abraham's steps; and the
same commandment which was then given to Abraham, remains even to every one
of us as yet still. Depart out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from
thy fathers house: that is, forsake this world, renounce the pleasures of the
flesh; and delight in heavenly works and pleasures.

And this is also that lesson that David gives to the whole Church of Christ:
Psalm. 45.10.
Forsake thine own people and thy Fathers house: so shall the king have
pleasure in thy beauty. Forsake this earth, the house of thy father Adam: And
the pleasant apples that thy mother Eve so greatly longed after; Genesis 3.6.
that is, all the pleasures and delights thereof. And then shall the king have
pleasure in thy beauty. Iam. 5.4.
They which love the world and the pleasures thereof, are adulterers, and do
not love their husband Jesus Christ, as he commands: and therefore he has no
pleasure in their beauty. And also in that general muster of all Gods
soldiers, Psalm. 108.7.
Manasses, that is, forgetfulness, is one of them. God has spoken in his
holiness: I will rejoice therefore ( says David) I will take to my lot
Shechem, that is, them that shall serve me early, as Abraham did, when as he
rose up early, and went to offer his son Isaac. Genesis 22.3.
And I will measure out the vallie of Succoth; that is, humble and merciful
men, which give harbor to poor travelers, as Lot did: who sat at the gate of
Sodom in the evening to intertaine strangers, Genesis 19.1.
who seeing two men come toward him, rose vpto meet them, etc. Gilead is
mine: that is, he yt keeps my testimonies in his heart, as Marie did: Luke
2.19*
But Marie kept all these sayings and pondered them in her heart. And Manasses
is mine, that is, oblivion or forgetfulness, that is, he that forgets his
fathers house, and his kindred, and goes out of his country, as Abraham did.
Ephraim is the strength of my head, that is, he that is fruitful in all good
works, as was Cornelius, a devout man, Act. 10.2.
and one that feared God with all his household, which gave much alms to the
people, and prayed God continually. Judah, that is, he that confesses me, and
praises me with works and words, as king David did, shall be my lawgiuer,
shall be a Prince with me. Here is the Catalogue as it were, of all Gods
soldiers. Let all Christians live so, and deal so, and fight so, that they
may be accepted amongst the number of them.

Granatensis by certain excellent similitudes describes unto us the
contrariety betwixt the love of God, Granat. de perf. amoris dei lib. 1. ca.
and the love of the world: If a table (says he) have any image graven in it,
how can it receive another, unless the former be blotted out? How can the land
which ye husbandman has sown with barley bring forth wheat? So how can the
soul, which is in love with ye world, contain in it also the love of God,
which is quite contrary to it? Wherefore it is excellently said of Seneca: He
that loves indeed, can love but one thing. And again, Ibid.
Imagine (my brother) love to be as it were a hand, which if it hold any thing,
cannot receive another thing: And that it may receive any other thing, it is
necessary that it first let that go which it held first: So he that loves the
world, cannot love God; for the hand of his soul is full now already with that
love. Ibid.
These two loves therefore are like a pair of balance: whereof if the one
skale do descend, the other must needs ascend; if the one be lifted up, it
cannot choose but the other must descend down: Even so how much the more the
love of our selves increases, so much the more the love of God decreaseth in
us: And how much more the love of God increases in us, so much more the love
of our selves is diminished, etc. And after. Even as a wax candle being put
into water, Cap. 7.
is taken out from thence as dry as it was before: so the heart of the servant
of God, although he live in the midst of the world; yet he tastes no more of
worldly things then fishes do of the sea.

And after, Plotinus a Platonist makes three, as it were, Cap. 10.
steps or degrees to climb up to God by: first to abstain from evil; then to
abstain from all earthly and vile things: and lastly not to meddle with many
matters, etc. This meddling with mani^ matters hinders us so, that we can have
no time to serve God. And surely this is a great policy that Satan uses;
^^^^with he entangleth the men of our age: they must have many things in their
hands; and then when they have them, they flatter themselves with this conceit,
that they must needs look unto them: And so they have almost no time to spend
in the service of God. O that the covetous Christians of our age would but
mark this, which will not be content with sufficient livings, as their
forefathers were! Ecclesiasticus teaches them a good lesson: Eccle. 11.10.
O my son (says he) meddle not with many matters. Plato his scholar had
this opinion of the things of the world: And shall Christ's scholars thus busy
themselves with them? And after Granatensis writes, that in the Scriptures the
just men are called heaven; Lib. de perfect. amoris Dei. cap. 12.
because they are freed from the imperfections and passions of this life. And
again. For the same cause it is said in the Psalm, that God makes his
ministers and servants a flaming fire. For even as the flame ever burns
upward: so the just men ever pant or breath, and are carried also as a burning
flame, to those good things of that heavenly rest.

cap. 14.
And in another place, he says: Let the servant of God persuade himself, that
he is (as he is indeed) the lively temple of God; and as that place is kept
shut from all buying and selling, and profane businesses and affairs, because
it is consecrated to God alone: so let him also think of his heart. And after.
The children of Israel had not Manna given them from heaven, cap. 20.
till all their meal and flower that they brought out of Egypt, were consumed.
Neither shall any man have the sweetness of Gods love, but he that has first
renounced quite the delights of the love of this world. And the Prophet meant
both these, when as he said: Shake off this dust, arise, and sit now, O
Jerusalem. By which words, the Prophet means, that first she must shake off
the dust of all earthly things; and that all the snares of worldly affections
must be taken from her neck: the which things being done; then we may without
any let arise to the contemplation of heavenly things, and sit down in the
rest and comfort of them. Saint Paul prophesies of some, 1. Tim. 3.5.
that in the latter times shall have a show of godliness, but have denied the
power thereof. Which prophecy I fear me touches many at this time, who make
a show of Christian religion in words, but have denied ye power thereof; which
is, as members to join us to Christ our head in heaven (what member would not
long to be with the head?) and to have us united as spouses to Jesus Christ
our heavenly husband (what wife would not long to be with her husband?) and to
draw men from the love of this world, to account this world but as an Inn in a
man's journey, and to account heaven their country. Our excessive purchasing of
land, our covetousness about this vile earth, our great cost spent thereon,
argues plainly, that we are not so affected toward it. Would a man bestow so
much cost, or be so busy in his Inn, where he was to lodge but a night, as
men do now on the earth? Our Savior has said, It is as hard for a rich man to
go to heaven, Matt. 19.24.
as for a camel to go thorough a needles eye. But now all men study to be
rich, and many times they pass not how: As though he had said; It is as easy
for a rich man to go to heaven, as for a twine thread to go through a needles
eye. But let all such worldly minded rich men take heed, they shall one day
find his saying true; what excuses and pretense soever they make now. And
Saint Paul also says: They that will be rich, 1. Tim. 6.^.
shall fall into temptations and snares of the devil. He does not say, they
that deal hardly with their brethren to become rich; And how will hard dealing
landlords here creep out? Who would fall into the hands but even of a mortal
Prince? but to fall into the snares of the devil, what a madness is it? Surely
we believe not Saint Paul's words; for if we did, we would not do as we do.

And again, the same Granatensis writes thus: Although the affairs of this
world (says he) do sometimes draw thy mind down to these earthly things: cap.
11.
yet by and by the spirit which is in it rebounds back again, and is again
lift up to heaven: no otherwise then wood that is violently kept under the
water; yet by and by according to the natural lightness that is in it, it
will appear and swim aloft again. That which nature does here, good
conditions and the grace of God should work there, which are of fair greater
power then nature.

And here is a doubt resolved, which perchance in reading the Scriptures may
trouble some. Sphinx Philosophica cap. 39.
Often times you will think that in the Scriptures the answers which are
there made, do not concern the matter proposed, or do not fully answer the
question, and are nothing to the purpose; because indeed they answer not to
those things which we enquire for, but to those things that we ought to have
enquired for. Christ being asked of the restoring again of the kingdom of
Israel, Act. 1.7.
answered of the heavenly kingdom. We are troubled about the cares of this
life: but we are instructed of the life to come. If at any time the Prophets
do make mention of the calling of the people back again from Babylon, of
restoring the kingdom of Israel, or of the repairing of the Temple; by and by
as it were forgetting themselves, they are rapt to speak of the spiritual
deliverance from the yoke of Satan, of the kingdom of Christ, and of the
description of the true Temple, that is, of the Church. Hereby signifying unto
us, that we must not cleave to, and rest in these momentarie and transitory
things, which are nothing else, but a shadow; and that we should not have our
kingdom here in this world: but that Christ should reign in us, by the
scepter of his word, and power of his spirit. This lesson these impertinent
answers in the Scriptures do teach us.

Orat. adhort. ad gentes.
Clemens Alexandrinus thus also describes a Christians conversation: Come to me
all ye that be weary and laden, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon
you, and learn of me: for I am meek and humble in heart, and ye shall find
rest for your souls: for my yoke is pleasant, and my burden is light. Let us
that are religious, and like to the word of God, make haste and run. O men! O
his images! let us make haste, let us run. Let us take his yoke upon us; let
us take upon us incorruption. Let us love Christ that most excellent carter and
driuer (as it were) of men: he yoked the foale and the old Ass under one yoke
together; and likewise he made two yokes of men, and he drives his chariote to
immortality, making haste to God; that he might now evidently fulfill that,
that mystically before he signified in Jerusalem; doing now the same in heaven.
The eternal Son being a Conqueror, is the brauest show that can be to God
the Father. Therefore let us with great study and zeal be carried to those
things which are virtuous; and let us become holy and religious men; and then
we shall obtain the chiefest of all those things which are free from all
affections and perturbations; that is God, and immortal life. The Word is our
helper; and therefore let us be of good comfort, and let us put all our
confidence in him. Let never the desire of silver and gold so possess us, as
of the word of truth. For we greatly displease God if so be we make no account
of those things which are precious; and if we shall highly esteem follies,
ignorances, idleness, pleasures, idolatry, manifest shame and reproof and
extreme wickedness: The very Philosophers very justly say, whatsoever
fools do think, that they do wickedly, and judge them wicked for their
labors. And also defining ignorance to be a kind of madness, what do they
else, but teach that many are mad? Therefore the word will say (there is no
doubt) whether of these be better, to be wise and sober, or to be mad?
Therefore we must, cleaving to the truth, valiantly follow God with all our
strength, behauing our selves soberly, and to account all his things such, as
they are indeed. And further, when as we shall know that it is the greatest and
gloriousest thing in the world to possess God: let us commit our selves unto
God, loving the Lord God, and accounting this to be our duty all our whole
life. And if amongst friends all things be common; and by the means of the
word, the godly man is now become Gods friend; now all things are man's, because
all things are Gods; and all things are now common also to these two friends
God and man. Thus Clemens described a Christians life, to love God all his
life, and to become as it were a friend with God, and so to have all things
common with God, and to despise these worldly things. Zuinger. in theatro. vol.
13. pa. 2822.


There is extant an epistle of Pliny the younger (who was Governor of Asia)
to Traian, wherein he asks his advise, what he thought best to be done to
the Christians, in whom he perceived no such fault, as to be worthy of so
extreme punishments. They confess (says he) that this is the sum of their
fault, or of their error, that they were wont at one appointed day, to meet
together before the Sun arise, and to sing all together a Psalm unto Christ,
as unto God. And to bind themselves all together with a solemn oath, not to
any heinous act, but that they should not commit theft, robberies, or
adulteries; that they should not beguile any man; that they should not withhold
any man's pledge, when as it was demanded of them. The which things being done,
their manner was to depart asunder again: and after to meet again to eat
their meat in common, earned or obtained without any man's harm. The which
thing they surceased to do after my proclamation: wherein according to your
commandments, I forbad such fellowships or meetings. This testimony Pliny
gives of Christians being a Pagan. And these were then their manners, even with
a solemn oath to bind themselves from hurting or defrauding any. It were to
be wished that amongst the oaths of Christians (now so common amongst many)
these kinds of oaths were used also. Such then were the oaths of Christians,
to swear against sin.

Tatian a very ancient writer, thus also describes the manners of Christians.
Orat. contra Graecos.
First teaching the obedience that they yield to Princes and civil
Magistrates, he writes thus of himself. And why, if I will not give my consent
to your laws, am I as a most heinous offender, hated of all men? But if the
king command me to serve and wait, I acknowledge my service due unto him,
because man is to be reverenced after the manner of men. But God is only to be
feared, who is not seen with any man's eyes, nor contained or comprehended by
any art. If any man shall command me to deny him alone, I will not obey him:
but I will die rather, least that I should be found a liar, and unthankful.
He acknowledges service and obedience due to Princes. And that no image can be
made of God. He seems to condemn Images in the worship of God. whom (he
says) no art or cunning of the workman can express. And that he was ready
to do any thing (saving to deny his God) that the Prince commanded. And
after. I will not be a king, I pass not for riches; I despise the favor and
courtesy of the Emperor, I hate fornication; I will not sail on the seas
through covetousness; I long not for the crown of your masteries or games; I
am free from mad ambition; I despise death; I am a conqueror of all kinds of
sicknesses; sorrow never grieves my mind. If I be in bondage, I endure my
servitude patiently; if I be a free man, I brag not of my gentilitie or
freedom. I see that there is one Sun that shines to all men; and that there is
also one death common to all, which comes as well in abundance and excess of
all things, as in poverty. The rich sow their land; and so do the poor also.
The richest of all die: and beggars also have the same end of their lives. The
rich men stand in greater need, and because many attend upon them, therefore
they become glorious; but the poor and mean man desiring only those things
which concern his estate and degree, more easily obtains them Why do
thou besides thy lot and destiny assigned thee of God, watch through
covetousness? who whilst thou desire many things besides thy lot; in the
mean time thou die. O rather die unto the world, quite rejecting from thee
the madness thereof, and live to God by knowing thy self, forsaking thy old kind
of life etc.

Here Tatian in his own person, describes plainly the affections of all
Christians in his days: they despised the world; they passed not for riches,
nor for honors, no nor for death. And surely if we would follow their steps,
and despise these earthly riches, and these vain honors, it would make us
despise death also. But now while me^ are (as it were) wedded to this world so
much, it makes them loath to go out of it. Eccl. 41.1
They have some parts of their hearts fixed here. And even as a brier though it
hold but one part of a man's garment; yet it will stay the whole man (you must
not let the brier touch you at all, if you mean to go quietly away by it:) so
the world it is a brier, if you will depart hence quietly, you must let no part
of this brier touch you; if it do never so little, it will stay the whole man.
Naie this love makes God not to love us; and so he withdrawing his grace from
us, we die sorrowfully: the world, wherein we ioyed, at that day cannot help
us.

And after he writes thus: With us vain glory is not sought for, neither have
we many and diverse opinions amongst us, but being separated from these earthly
things, which the world so highly esteems: and giving our selves wholly to the
commandments of God, and following the law of immortality, which our father
has given us: Whatsoever belongs to the glory of this world, we loath and
detest. Not only rich men with us, do play the Christian Philosophers; but the
poor also are instructed freely. For the doctrine of God is more exellent,
then that it can be requited with any gifts of man, for the teaching of it:
And therefore we admit all that are desirous to learn, both old and young. To
conclude, every age is dutifully honored of us; and wantonness is quite
banished. And in our speech also we use not to lie, etc. Here again are the
manners of true Christians set down, contempt of the glory of this world,
knowledge of the law of God in general of all men; and truth (lying being
detested) in all their speeches and dealings.

Anastasius Episc. Nicen. quaest. 1
Another writes thus: What is the sign of a true Christian? A right faith and
good works: for a Christian is the true house of Christ, consisting of good
works and of holy opinions. A true faith therefore is proved by works, because
faith without works is dead; as also works without faith. Wherefore we must with all our strength firmly and constantly keep our selves from filthy works,
least that be said unto us: They confess that they know God, but they deny
him with their deeds. And our Savior says: If any man love me, he will keep
my word, and my Father will love him: and we will come to him, and we will dwell
with him.

Of the excellency of fasting.
And here to say some thing in the comme^dation of that notable Christian work
of fasting, Be not like the Pharisees (says our Savior to all Christians)
when you fast. But thou when thou fastest anoint thy head, and wash thy face,
that thou seem not to men to fast; but unto thy Father which is in secret: and
thy Father which sees in secret will reward thee openly. Matthew. 6.17.
If an earthly Prince should promise a reward for any notable exploit to be
done, how many, and how earnestly would they strive to obtain it? And here in
this most certain, and unspeakable reward of God, promised to this excellent
virtue, how slow and slack are all men?

Cyril. lib. 10. in Leu.
The Primitive Church (as appears by Cyrill) diligently observed this
commandment, and the great reward of God. They fast (says he) that have lost
the Bridgroome. But we which have the Bridegroom with us, cannot fast. Neither
(says he) do I speak this, that I may loose the reins of Christian
abstinence: for we have the days of Lent consecrated to fasting: we have the
fourth and sixth days of the week (that is our wednesday and friday) wherein
we fast solemnly. It is free for a Christian to fast at all times, not for
any superstition of the observation: but for the virtue of chastity. For else
how could chastity be kept amongst them uncorrupted? unless it were
underpropped with the pinching posts and props of continency. How could they
study the Scriptures? how could they apply themselves to the knowledge of
wisdom, but by the pinching of their belly and gluttony? How can one geld
himself for the kingdom of heaven? unless he cut quite away this abundance
of meat, and use abstinence, as his waiting servant, etc. This is the reason
why Christians fast: I would to God at this day that all Christians would not
slackely, or at their own pleasures, but even willingly and solemnly every
week fast Wednesdaie and Fridaie, as those former good Christians did: No
doubt God, who saw them in secret, would then reward them openly. This fasting
would be a means to maintain chastity amongst us, to increase knowledge and
learning. How can they study the Scriptures and increase in knowledge (says
Cyrill) that fast not? The zealous and learned books of many that profess
the Popes religion, relish of this virtue of fasting: it is to be feared that
ours want it. And yet here Cyrill condemns superstition in fasting, as though
we were so bound unto it, that upon pain or peril of death, upon no occasion,
we might not break these days: but only the bond thereof is chastity. In
consideration whereof, a man is bound weekly to observe them, or else he shall
very hardly entertain that Lady and princely virtue. Let all Christians
therefore learn of Cyrill the order, which the Primitive Church observed in
their fasting: and as we follow it in other things; so let us follow it in this
also. Let us observe the fast of Lent, and of wednesdaies and Frydayes. We
shall find even the best of us all, how ye our rebellious flesh stands in
need of these bridles, even weekly. The etymology of the Greek word (...),
which signifies clean or chaste, may teach us thus much; it is derived of
(...), which signifies to dry, so that if we would be (...), if we would be
chaste, we must by fasting dry our bodies.

Ambrose also a Father of the Latin Church, agrees with Cyrill a Patriarch of
the Greek Church, concerning the fast of Lent. And also he shows us the
reason of it, and manner of fasting which was then used in the Church, and the
virtue also thereof. So that then Lent was observed, thorough the whole Church.
He writes thus: Christ wrought not our salvation by riote, but by fasting; and*
he fasted not, to deserve grace to himself, but for our instruction. Neither
was he overcome through the infirmity of his body, that he should be
hungry; but by being hungry, he proved the truth of his body: that he might
teach, that he took upon him not only our body, but also the infirmities of our
body, etc. And in another place. And because these say, that we must not fast;
To. 3. lib. epist. 10. epist. 82.
let them show why Christ fasted, but that his fasting should be an example
unto us. So that by Ambrose opinion most manifestly, the fast of Lent was
grounded upon Christ's fast. And this was the reason why the first Christians
used it: They would follow Christ as near as they could. And therefore in
another place he writes thus: My brethren, it is no small offense, to break
Lent, appointed of the Lord; and through the greediness of the belly, to
dissolve the consecrated fastes. He that says that he abides in Christ, Tom.
3. ser. 25. de quadrages.
ought to walk as he has walked. Therefore if thou will be a Christian, thou
ought to do as Christ did. He which had no sin fasted Lent; and wilt not
thou which art a sinner, fast Lent? He I say had no sin; but fasted for our
sins: what kind of Christian art thou in thine own conscience, that when as
Christ fasted for thee, thou will dine? that whereas Christ fasted for thee,
thou will have thy meals? Therefore I say, it is no small offense to break
that fast which is enjoined us.

Here we may learn two things. First that the Fathers grounded their fast of
Lent, upon the example of our Savior Christ: Let them show any other reason
which refuse to fast ( says Ambrose) why Christ fasted forty days, but for
our learning, and to give us an example? Again, it seemed to them a very
absurd thing, that Christ should fast forty days for us: and that we (as
near as we could) should not follow him, and fast forty days for our selves.
Secondly, that when they fasted, they dined not, but deferred their dinners
till night: and that which should have been for their dinners, they used to
give to the poor: As appears by another place, where he speaks at large of
the manner of their fasting.

We must know (my brethren) that this fast is acceptable to God, not only that
we should tame our bodies through abstinence, Tom. 3. ser. 33.
but also that we should put humility upon our souls. Let us be gentle to our
servants, courteous to strangers, merciful to the poor. Rising very early,
let us make haste to go to the Church: let us give God thanks: let us ask
pardon for our sins, craving mercy for those which are past, and
watchfulness and carfulness, and a taking heed for our sins to come. Let us
spend all the day either in prayer, or reading: he that cannot read, let him
seek out some holy man, by whose talk he may be edified. Let no worldly works
hinder the works of God. Let not playing at tables withdraw thy mind, nor the
pleasure of thy dogs abstract thy senses, nor the greedines of the gain of
any matter pervert thy soul. For whatsoever thou shall do beside the
commandment of God, although thou abstain, thou fastest not. For this is a
wholesome fast, that as thy body abstaines from delights, so also that thy soul
be brideled from vices. This also (my brethren) which is required to the
perfection of fasting, is not to be passed over in silence, that we which
abstain, and do not dine at this time, should bestow our dinners upon the
poor: for this is true righteousness, that when as thou art hungry, another
be refreshed with thy meat: and when as thou prayest God with thy foresaid
fastings, he being filled, obtaines thy suits for thee: Both these profiting
thee, both thine own hunger, and the beggars belly being well filled. But he
that fasts so that he imparts nothing to the poor of his good cheer, seems to
have made a gain of his fasting, and a good market (as we say) by his sparing:
for to that end he abstained, not that he might please God, but that he should
not spend over much, etc. This place teaches us how we ought to spend our
fasting days, in studying the scriptures, and in prayer: and that when we
fast, we should not dine, but bestow our dinners upon ye poor. For he that
breaks his fast in the morning with bread and drink, and after at noone
dines, and at night has his belly full of bread and drink again (as the
most use to do when they fast) does this man fast? No verily. But he fasts that
eats nothing till night, if he be not hindered, through infirmity of body, or
sickness. So Cornelius fasted till the ninth hour of the day, Act. 10.30.
that was till three a clock, and then the Angel appeared unto him: No doubt
he continued his fast after, even till night.

And in another place he describes to us ye force of fasting thus: Our fastings
are our tents which do defend us from the assaults of the devil. They are also
called standings, or aboades, because that standing and continuing in them, we
overcome our enemies assaulting us. He compares our fasting in the le^t to the
^o mansions of the children of Israel.
Without all doubt, fastings are the tents of all Christians, out of which if
any wander or stray, he is either invaded of that spiritual Pharaoh, or else he
is devoured of the wilderness of his sins. He must needs have even a wilderness
of sins, that forsakes the society of the Saints (and will not fast with them)
Fasting therefore is a wall unto a Christian, which the devil can never
assault, nor the enemy ever climb over. For what Christian ever fasted and
was taken? who ever remained sober and was overcome? The devil assaults the
drunkard, and the enemy lays siege to the riotous person: but when as he sees
one fasting, he flies away; he fears, he is afraid, he is terrified with his
pale countenance, his hunger weakens him, and his weakness quite overthrows
him. He is overthrown, I say, by his weakness, because Christian weakness is
fortitude. Wherefore the Apostle says, When I am weak, 2. Cor. 12.
then I am strong. But some will demand, how can infirmity be strong? Then is
infirmity strong, when as the flesh is lean with fasting; but the soul is fat
with purity. For as much as you take from that the juice of meats, so much the
virtue of righteousness is increased in this. Then a man is weak to worldly
works, but strong to the works of God: then he more seriously thinks of God,
then he fears his judgment, the^ he ouercomes his enemy. Matt. 17.
Our Savior says of the devil: This kind is not cast out but by fasting and
prayers. He says verily that he which is possessed of the devil, cannot be
purged, but by fastings. Mark well therefore what great force is in fasting,
and what great grace she affords to the man himself whom she dwells in,
which yields such a forcible medicine to another man: how she sanctifies her
own man, which does thus purify another man. It is a strange thing, one man
fasts, and another reaps the commodity of his fasting: Therefore (my brethren)
let us not lay aside the weapons of our abstinence, and let us have a care to
keep the fastings of our 40. days, without any intermission: for this is a
perfect number to ouercom withal. For the Lord overcame the devil, after that
he had fasted 40. days; not but that he could have overcome him also before
his fasting, but that he might show us, that then we are able to be conquerors
of the devil, when as we have been conquerors of our carnal lusts by fasting
40. days, and that he that has violated this holy number, through the excess
of gluttony, as a weakling and a wretch he may be easily overcome of the
enemy: for how can he overcome the malice of the devil in another, which has
not overcome the unruliness of gluttony in himself? Therefore (O man) be first
a conqueror of thy self, that thou may be a conqueror of another. For thou
have thy proper enemies within thee, which daily do assault thee. Behold
covetousness with the ambition of riches undermines thee: Riot with her
pleasant banquets takes thee prisoner; and heresy with her froward knowledge
overthrows thee. Overcome therefore these thy proper enemies, that you may be
able to overcome other men's, etc. Here we may learn the necessity of
fastings: by Ambrose judgment, they are the only tents of Christian
soldiers; he yt abides not in them, shall be soon snatched up of the enemy.
And their force is such, that they prevail even against the devil himself. I
have been more large in handling this point, because of a slander that the
enemies of the Gospel lay to our charge. One of them writes thus of us:

Michael. ab Isselt. epist. dedicat. ducis Priet. Granat.
If there be any among them which teach any thing of the new obedience (as they
term it) and with strange and flaunting words do commend newness of life;
they do that very coldly: and when as they show the way of virtue, they lend
not me^ their hands, nor they prescribe not the means whereby they may attain
unto it. Such like teachers Plutarch compares to the^ which light a candle or a
lamp, and pour in no oil, etc. And after. Which of the^ ever has written
any book of the contempt of the world, of the narrow and straight way of
salvation, of perpetual chastity, of the poverty of the Gospel, of true
obedience, of loving our enemies: who of humility, and poorness of spirit?
And what marvel is it? when as they themselves being altogether drowned in this
world, are carried very earnestly by the broad way, to the pleasures of ye
flesh, and riches of this world, being accustomed to obey no body, being
desirous of revenge, ambitious, etc.

These stumbling blocks, as much as in him lies, every good Christian must
endeavor to take out of ye way. We must not only commend and praise virtue
with our mouths, but also embrace the means by the which we may attain ye
same; which are, contempt of the world, hearty and earnest prayer, fasting,
and such like. That holiness of life, which flourished amongst all sorts of
men in the Primitive Church appears not in our days, because we use not those
means of fasting and prayer which they used. If we would use the like tillage
to the grounds of our hearts, which they then used; without all doubt we should
have ye same fruits of righteousness. Can even the best land bring forth good
corn without tillage? Sow to your selves in righteousness (says the Prophet)
and reap after the measure of mercy: Break up your fallow ground. Hos. 10.12.
Fasting no doubt is this spiritual ploughing and braking up of our fallow
ground, and mercy is that spiritual sowing which the Prophet here speaks of.
They which will have the land of their hearts bear good corn plentifully,
and be fruitful in all good works let them use these means: let them use
this husbandry. Many amongst us at this day, are like the Jews, which rely
only on the word of God, and search out therein many high points, Romans 2.17.
those things which differ, and are most excellent: but those works of charity
to their neighbors, of contempt of the world, of mercy to ye poor, of
watching in prayer, of fasting, which so manifestly almost every where it
commends to us and commands; they practice not. And is this to profess Gods
word? This is plainly to do as the Jews did: to brag of it, and not to
follow it. The which if we do, Romans 2.23.
it shall no more profit us, then it did the^. For they were (as S. Paul there
says) catechized and instructed in the law, even as well as we are, and knew
the will of God.

And here I would to God all Christians would mark what Basil writes
concerning another Christian exercise; which is watching in prayer (which point
also I have handled before out of the Scriptures) But as concerning that matter
that we are accused of, Basil. epist. 63.
that is, for the singing of Psalms; by which thing they chiefly terrify the
simpler sort, which slander us: yet this I have to answer, that the customs
which now are used, are correspondent, and agreeable to all the Churches of
God. The people rising in the night, go to the house of prayer, and making a
confession to God, in labors and vexation of mind and continual tears; at
length rising from prayer, they are appointed to sing Psalms, and being
divided into two parts, they sing, one part answering another; and after that,
they strengthen themselves with exercising and meditation of the word of God,
and they prepare to their hearts thereby attention, and (having rejected all
vain cares) soundnes and constantnesse. Then one of them has this office
committed to him, to begin the Psalm, and all the rest sing after him; and so
they pass over the night with variety of singing of Psalms, prayers being
entermingled: at the break of the day they altogether, as being one man, with
one mouth, and with one heart, offer to God a psalm of confession; and they
profess repentance every man with his own words. If you fly from us for
these things, you must also fly from Egypt, you must also fly from both Libyas,
from the Thebans, Palestines, Arabians, Phoenicians, Syrians, and they that
dwell by Euphrates; and that I may say all in one word, all those with who^
watchings, and prayers, and common singing of Psalms are of great account.

Here is plainly set down the form of common prayers, used in the Primitive
Church. They rose to prayer before day, they made a general confession, as we
do, all together of their sins; but with tears, which we leave out. They
read the Scriptures, and with them strengthened their faith. They sang Psalms
all together sometimes, and other sometimes prayed. Thus they spent their
nights: and this was the common practice of all the Churches in those days:
but now we cannot abide either to weep, or to watch in prayer. Let us follow
their holy footsteps, which agree with the Scriptures, as before has been
declared.

They which bear ye names of Christians, and are not true Christians indeed,
are like to counterfeit coin, which although it have as it were ye Princes
image and stamp upon it, yet is none of his, but is forged of some rebel or
enemy: so these although they have ye outward stamp of ye sacraments, are not
pure gold within, but dross: They are not gold, but copper. Gold is a soft
thing, and pliable, and comfortable, and restoratiue, as Physicians say: but
copper is stiff, hard, and hurtful to man. These lack the true gold of
faith: Their faith works not by charity: they are not merciful, Gal. 5.6.
2. Tim. 3.3.
they are not comfortable to their brethren. Their belief is a counterfeit
belief; it is of copper: they are not loving and kind: they deal hardly with
their brethren: They speak Gnathok (as it is in the Hebrew, Psalm. 93 4
which signifies any thing that is old; and old things are commonly stiff and
stubborn) that is, stubbornly and roughly to their brethren: Luke 16.24.
they comfort them not: they kill their hearts. And though such Hypocrites, can
say to Abraham with that same rich man, father Abraham, and to our Savior
Christ with many Christians at ye day of judgment. Lord, Lord, open unto us; we
have eaten at thy table, Luke 13.26.
we have received thy Sacraments, and we have heard thee preach, not seldom
but often, even every Sabbath plentifully, even in our streets. Yet the Lord
at his coming (for all these external religious works, of invocation of his
name alone, and receiving his sacraments, and of hearing him preach) shall
(...), shall punish to the example of all others such counterfeit Christians,
which have wrought iniquity, and he shall (...), Matt. 25.32. Luke 12.46.
cut them in the middle, because they have but half served him, and their part
shall be with hypocrites. For that servant which knew his masters will, and
prepared not himself, not did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes. But he that knew it not, and yet did commit things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes: For unto whomsoever much is given, of him
shall be much required: and to whom men much commit, the more of him will they
ask. O terrible sentence! The hypocritical Christian is in worse case then
the infidel and Pagan. For he not knowing Gods will, and yet sinning, shall be
punished but with a few stripes: but the other which knew his masters will, and
yet offended, shall be punished with many stripes. And woe be to him that shall
be punished with many stripes at Gods hand, who is not able (...) ^ndure one!

There is a parable in the ^^spel of a father and two sons, and he came and
said to the elder Son, go and work to day in my vineyard. And he answered and
said, I will not: Matt. 21.28
yet afterward he repented himself and went. Then came he to the second, and
said likewise. And he answered and said: I will Sir (or as it is in the Greek)
I, Lord, (I will work in thy vineyard.) He made a great show of willingness,
but he went not. What think ye, says our Savior? Even in man's reason, the
former is preferred, and this younger with his great shows is condemned. This
parable was the^ verified among the Jews, of the bragging and learned
Pharisees, and repenting and ignorant sinners: and I pray God it be not
verified likewise in our days of some vain protestants puffed up with
knowledge, and of some ignorant and repenting Papists.

That same parable also of the virgins was never more truly verified then now:
Matt. 25.11.
it is to be feared, many that be virgins, and hate the spiritual fornication
of the whore of Babylon, and have lamps of faith: Revel. 17.5.
yet for want of the oil of mercy, and light of good works shall be excluded,
though they knock and pray, saying, Matt. 5.16.
Lord, Lord, open unto us. Let your light so shine before men (says our
Savior) that men may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven. This lesson is general to all Christ's disciples: Our works should be
seen. Many Christians worldly and stately works at this day are seen, but
their good works are not seen. Revel. 14.13.
Blessed are they that die in the Lord (says the Spirit) they rest from their
labors, and their works follow the^. Many do such works now as cannot follow
them, but remain behind them: But such works shall not profit them. Phil.
2.15.
That ye ( says Saint Paul to the Philippians) may be blameless and pure,
and the sons of God, without rebuke in the midst of a naughty and crooked
generation, amongst who^ ye shine as lights in the world. Such should all
Christians be: They should be blameless. But now one shall hardly hear any
one spoken of, but that he shall be blamed for some thing. They should be
lights giving good examples in the midst of a crooked generation: but now
almost all men give evil example to their brethren.

Ephesians. 4. Luke 15.8. Exodus 19.5 Romans 4, 11, 24 Matthew. 25.1 Phil. 2.15. Luke
12.37. 2. Tim. 1.17.
The Lord Jesus give all Christians grace to walk worthy of their callings,
and of that most honorable name wherewith they are called, that they may be
the Lords tr^ ^ne and his jewels, that they may be Abraham's sons, and wise
^ins, that they may be blameless, and as shining torches in the ^dst of this
wicked world, and froward generation: That Jesus Christ at his coming may
acknowledge them for his obedient and watchful servants, for his glorious
names sake: to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, one God immortal,
invisible, and only wise, be al praise, honor and glory, power, and salvation,
both now and for ever Amen.

FINIS.

