A brief Treatise Of the virtue of the Cross: And the true manner how to
honor it. Translated out of French into English.

1. Cor. 1. ver. 23. We preach Christ crucified. St. Chrysostom. The Cross
of Christ is to us the Sun of Justice, that being lightened by the mercy
thereof, we may glorific the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. AT
LONDON, Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at the little North
door of S. Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gun* 1599.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr, STEPHEN SOAME, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London: And to the virtuous Lady his wife, all happiness and hearts content
unfeignedly wished.
MY good Lord, in respect of some favors from you received, as also in regard
of the dutious affection I bear you, I am bold to present you and your Lady
with this little remembrance, though simple and small in show, yet of
inestimable value in substance. Ingratitude is the most abject sin in the
world, and caniustly challenge no excuse for it self, be it in how great or
mean persons soever: And therefore least my self should therewith be
tainted, having found such extraordinary gentleness both in you and my good
Lady your wife, I have made a learned and divine French man my intercessour,
to tell you in rude English, that I forget not such favors.

And the rather made I choice of his furtherance heerin, because on good Friday
last, your Honor with the rest of your Brethren, heard at Paul's Cross, a
very learned Sermon tending to this purpose, I mean the cross, death, and
passion of Christ Jesus, which iumping so near with this Argument, and well
worthy to be continued in remembrance: I could find no fitter means for the
same, then this most excellent and learned French Treatise, which handles both
the sacred virtue of the cross, and also what worship ought to be given
thereto.

I beseech you my good Lord and Lady, when leisure from weighty occasions
will so permit it, that you would but vouchsafe this Treatise the reading:
happily you shall find somewhat therein well worthy noting, and I hope
vvithall, the true sincerity of my affection toward you, which being but so
found, and by you as kindly accepted, I shall remain alvvaies yours for any
further imployement, be it even to the uttermost of all my endeavors.

Since in this world nothing can perfect be, Pardon I pray, if you these
faults do see.
B. page 1. lin 13. for have plunged, read, having plunged. Page, 7. lin 21.
for, 1. Cor 1 verse. 23, read, 1. Cor. 2. verse 2. Page 9 lin. 20 for* ones
aith* read* one says Page 13. lin. 5. for, Colosl. 5. verse 15. read, Phil. 3.
verse 3.

C. Page 14. lin: 1* for, so phistically, read, sophistically. and lin. 26,
for, Chirst. read Christ.

D. Page 2. lin 24. for, Apostasta, read, Apostata. Page 3, lin. 15, for,
begit, read beg it. Page 4. lin. 21. for, 2. Cor. 7. read 1. Cor 7. Page 7. lin.
20* and 21. for, was in honor, etc. read, is in honor and at his end* at his
end in respect of punishment: but remains in glory.

E. Page 13. lin 24. for, others believe it should: read, but that other
crosses should.

F. Page 9. lin 27. for, Constiantne, read Constantine.

A brief Treatise of the virtue of the Cross, and the manner how to worship
it.
WHen I consider the differences, which at this day are in the Christian
church, the conference which our Savior Jesus Christ had with the woman
Samaritaine, in the 4. of S. John. ver. 22. may very well be called to
remembrance. You (said he to the Samaritaine) worship ye know not what: we
Jews worship that which we know. So that seeing on the one side, the justice
of God discouers it self in such as love shadows better then truth, have
plunged themselves of long time, and yet wade further more and more in
ignorance: and on the contrary part, his mercy shines on such, whose eyes it
pleases him to unseal, that they may behold the strength of truth made
manifest, we may be good reason rejoice in our selves, and say, that being of
this latter number, we worship what we know, because God himself speaking to
us in his word, makes us thereby to have knowledge of him.

Now on the contrary side, whereas they of the Romish Church erroniously led,
or perhaps by simplicity, confirmed therein through ignorance, and carried
only with self-wild obstinacy, worship that whereof they but presume, and
have (indeed) no knowledge of at all. For seeing that in the most part of their
service, there is nothing else contained but human traditions, it is most
evident, that there can likewise be nothing beside but opinion: that is to
say, wavering and doubtful thoughts, tending either to good or evil, and
vnconsonant or disagreeable to God. And since it is so, that where there is no
faith, there can be no certainetie: it must needs follow, that in whatsoever
they introduce, there can be no assurance, considering therein is no faith
contained. But let us go a little further, those things which have nether faith
nor certainty, must needs be matters much displeasing to God, because what
soever is done without faith, is sin. Yet notwithstanding seeing it has
pleased God to give us such grace, as to hold his word in price and
estymation, addicting our selves wholly to the service thereof, as neither
speaking or thinking any thing, but what is therein uttered and prescribed to
us, that we might embrace the very least particle therein contained, we may
say and speak it by good right, that we know, namely by a knoweledge more
firm, then are all the sciences and demonstrations induced by human sense or
discourse. For our says being grounded on the word of God, holds more
strictly the^ all else in the world beside can do: it is firm and stable,
subject to no kind of alteration whatsoever. Following then the contents of
this word, we believe in our hearts, and confesle with our mouths, that God
only is to be served and honored, and that the service due to his Majesty,
ought to be given according to his good pleasure and ordenance.

Now the manifest will of God concerning this point, is, that we should
worship and serve him in spirit and truth, according to S. John the 4. ver.
24. and therefore not only ought we to reject the ancient judicial
ceremonies, but all other beside, that offer themselves over and above the
word of God in the Christian Church, for it were no point of reason, to
forsake those ceremonies instituted by God: nevertheless, in regard they were
to endure but for a certain time only, and then afterward grew fastened to
the manners of men, and were accepted or neglected after their opinions. Such
(for the most part are those, which the Roman Church practices in
invocation on deceased Saints, the Images of God and of those Saints, the
adoration of the Cross, and such like: which have no other foundation, but
only men's vanity and no verity, Now we intend not at this present to speak
of other points, for they are appointed and shall be (God willing) handled else
where in ample manner: but this instant occasion imposes a needful task, to
speak of insupportable abuse committed by them, concerning the Cross, to the
end all men may learn how to furnishe them selves against the poison of
idolatric, which the devil comes to vomit forth again in this time of near
neighborhood, furthering his purpose with the iuglings of diverse his
instruments, who by words and writing, labor to rebuilde up idolatry again,
as the walls of Jericho, which notwithstanding, by the sound of Gods trumpets
are fallen, and that by good numbers in these quarters.

We consider, that they who brought hither and diuulged those two writings,
which they send flying abroad in form of Placards, doubted not to grieve and
make many good Christians among us shed tears: for whatis he, who beholding
the follies, absurdities and idolatries in them contained, that can refrain
from lamenting, seeing the son of God dishonored, a number of souls
withdrawn from true christianity, and an infinite multitude to fortify
themselves in ignorance and falsehood? Yet this lamentation marches not alone,
for we accompany it with our daily sighs and prayers, drawn from the entire
depth and bottom of our hearts, to the only true God, by the intercession of
him that was crucified, dyed for our sins, and rose again for our
justification: that he will confirm in his truth, such as it pleased him
already to call thereto, and withdraw from error, those whom the false
preachers of idolatry labor to blind therewith.

First then it is to be noted, that the word Cross signifies sometime a kind
of libbit, which in elder times they used for the greatest and most infamous
malefactors. Sometime it signifies the punishment, which those offenders
were to endure. In the history of our redemption, these two significations are
oftentimes found. For, when it is said, that Christ carried the cross, and was
fastened thereon: it is easy to be gathered, that it was the Cross of wood he
bare, and that thereto he was nailed and fastened. In like manner, when it is
said* Colos. 1. ver. 20. That by the blood of the Cross of Christ, our peace
is made: it cannot be doubted, but that these words have reference to those
sufferings, which it pleased the son of God to endure for us. This
distinction being well observed, we shall the more easily and Christianlie
determine, the matter handled in those placards. For if by the word Cross, the
death and passion of Christ is understood: it will follow by the confession of
all true Christians, that the virtue of that Cross is such, as is no way to
be comprehended by the understanding of men nor Angels. For it is the Cross
and death of Christ Jesus, that witnesses the love which God bears to his
elect, which Love passes all understanding, says Saint Paul, Philipi. 4.
ver. 7. In this Cross is our life, light, health, defense, strength* joy,
perfection, and our all whatsoever: for there is no good or hope for us
elsewhere, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Hereof may we say
with S. Paul, Galat, 6. ver. 14. God forbid we should glory in any thing,
but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified to
us, and we to the world, whereupon, the same S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 1. ver.
25. That he desired to know nothing but Christ Jesus, and him crucified.

But if by the word Cross, we understand the wood or libbit, whereon the
son of God was hanged for the sins of the elect, we may boldly say, that
we find no testimony in the word of God, written by the Prophets and
Apostles, nor any examples or practice of theirs, that either may or ought
induce us, to attribute any virtue to the wood it self. For albeit we doubt
not of Gods omnipotency, to whom nothing is impossible: yet ought we to
conceive of this almightinesse, by that which appears to us of his own will,
according to that in the 115. Psalm. God has done all whatsoever him pleased.
Then safely may we conclude, that God had no will such virtue should be
adherent to the wood or cross of h^s son: for then he would doubtless
have witnessed the same by his word. Among true Christians, whatsoever is not
written in the word of God, is held as a matter of no estate or being, as
we may gather from the 7. to the Hebrews, verse 3. where it is said, That
Melchisedech was without father, without mother, etc. for this only reason,
because the scripture no where at all speaks of his father or mother:
although it be most certain, that he had a father and mother like to other
men. Of the Cross we read, that Jesus Christ carried it, so likewise did Simon
the father of Rufus bear it: that Jesus went out ofthe cittle of Jerusalem
bearing it, that it was brought to the mount of Caluarie, where it was
prepared, Jesus nayledthereon, and likewise the inscription, Jesus of Nazareth
king of the Jews, that thereon Jesus had his side pierced, rendered up his
spirit thereon, and when night came, that the body of Jesus was taken down
from the cross: over and beside these points, we read nothing whereby
appears, that God was willing to forestall idolatry, which nevertheless
Satan would needs bring into the world. For as he had no will, that the
Sepulcher of Moses, should be known: so is there not any witness recorded,
that God was willing his sons cross should have any notice among men, for to
say that it was kept, or enterred in the place where it had been erected,
which was, as ones aith, the place where Adam was buried, this has no
semblance of any certainty, for if we shall believe our elders, Adam was
buried in Hebron, and not near Jerusalem. Likewise, seeing the Disciples and
Apostles of Jesus Christ, were scattered at his death, and that after his
ascension they were prohibited to speak of or name Jesus Christ, that they
were made prisoners and scourged: that Saint Stephen was stoned: that great
persecution was in the church of Jerusalem: and soon after that, Jerusalem was
brought to total extremity and ruin; what appearance can there be, that this
cross was hidden and honored by them that followed Christ Jesus* In like
manner, we read not any where that the Disciples and Apostles of Jesus, did
ever recommend this cross: and yet they said in the 13. of the Hebrews, verse
13. Let us go forth after Jesus out of the camp, bearing his reproach. And
Christ himself said: That whosoever would be his Disciple, must take up his
cross and follow him. Math. 16. verse 24. And as for that where he says, the
enemies of Christ have gone about to abolish his cross, and yet they could not
do it, such would lighte^ darkness by darkness. For where one reports, that
they endeavored to burn the cross, it is altogether uncertain: Another
maintains, they threw it into the sea, how can that hold, who^ Jerusalem was
not a seabordering city? Perhaps then (says he) they took pains to bring
it to the port of Japhet, which is distant from the said City about two
days journey: but herein it is to be doubted likewise.

And concerning what others have said, that the self same enemies of Christ,
after al these other trials to destroy the cross, did lastly (yet cunningly)
bury it very deep in the earth, and with it, the images of Venus and Adonis*
who would not utterly reject this fable, ifhe but consider* what hatred the
Jews bare to al kind of Images? Can it any way seem likely, that they which
resisted the Roman Governors, yea the Emperor of Rome himself, not
permitting the Eagle* which was the Romans Ensign, should be received into
the city of Jerusalem, offering themselves to all dangers whatsoever,
ratherthen to suffer such a banner be displaide among them: that they of so
stearne nature, would make or search for the images of Venus and Adems, to make
in serve them for such a purpose* Such reckonings do indeed seem no otherwise,
but only to annihilate the virtue of the cross of Christ.

The holy History enstructs us in far better manner, what was to be understood
by the enemies to the cross of Christ, as their rejecting the preaching of the
Gospel, and persecuting the^ that said they were Christ's Disciples, not
suffering him to be named among them, Acts. 4. and 5. And as for us, we say,
that the passion and virtue of Jesus Christ, ought to be sought for in
himself, and not in a tree of wood. If ye object the linen clothes and
handkercheifes of Saint Paul, Acts. 19. verse 12. the answer is easy: that
god was willing by those miracles to honor the Apostleship of Saint Paul, to
the end that such as never saw his face, might yet be persuaded of him, and
that God had authorized such miracles by him, as being the true servant of
Jesus Christ. But here is the point whereon we stand, to wit, that those
miracles are testified by the word of God: which cannot so be said of the wood
of the cross of Christ, the scripture not making any mention thereof. For it
is most certain, that if God had pleased to work by such an instrument or
means, the spirit of God would not have been silent therein: the rather making
mention of things concerning the servant, doubtless he would never have
forgotten the master.

It seems most evident, if it were for no other reason, but that God would not
limit men to such earthly things, as likewise S. Paul has taught us by his
example, 2. Cor. 5. verse 16. That we ought not to know Christ Jesus after the
flesh. And to the Colossians 5. verse 15. We serve God in spirit, glorifying us
in Christ Jesus, not believing at all in the flesh. Now before we pass any
further, it is necessary to declare in this place, what is to be understood by
the sign of the cross. If by the word cross, we understand the sufferings
which the son of God endured, both in soul and body, as Esaye 55. verse 3.
Being filled with sorrows, and full of heaviness in soul, even to the death,
as having drunk the cup of Gods anger, whereon he cried, My God, my god, why
have thou forsaken me? it is most certain, that such sufferings exceed
representation* For our sense cannot comprehend the^: but by faith we
understand, that they were infinite and unspeakable. Therefore we say in our
Creed, that we believe Christ Jesus did suffer, that he was crucified, dead,
and buired, that he descended into hell: all these then being unspeakable,
must needs be likewise irrepresentable.

But if by the word Cross, we understand the wood, whereon the son of God
oftered himself a sacrifice to his Father, for the propitiation of our sins:
it is casie then to be painted or figured, yet such a figure can be but the
portraite of those instruments, wherewith the hangmen were furnished to torment
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: if then those instruments can have no virtue
in them, that which is but the image thereof must needs have much less. Now
it is most apparent, that the wood had no virtue in it, but what was natural,
neither could the Jews give it any, for themselves had none, but a readiness to
cuill doing: why then it remains, that if it can have any at all, it must be
by touching the body of our Lord Jesus Christ. But how such touching could
confer any grace to the wood* we are not able to say, because (as has been
declared) it is not expressed in the word of God: why then we may likewise
affirm, that those lips of Judas which kissed Jesus, the hands of them that
laid hold on him, led, buffeted, nailed and crucified him, received likewise
some virtue from him. Which being most absurd, much more is it then to say:
that wood having no life, by a mere touch only, should be susceptible of
holiness and virtue: for if such virtue had been given to the Cross of wood,
because Christ suffered thereon, like virtue would have been bestowed on them,
by whom he suffered. For they were those, which should perform what the
defined Counsel of God had before determined. Acts 4. ver. 28. Nor are such
allegations worthy receiving, in nothing some difference in dissemblable
instruments, to wit: that Judas and the Jews could be bad, and yet the Cross
not. For evermore this is to be granted, that if the touching drew virtue and
sanctity to it, cheefely because it was as the Alter for sacrifising the
Savior of the world: it stands not with reason, that the Cross being a
life-lesse thing, could be endued with virtue and sanctity, sooner then men
living and moving. Hence then easily may be derived, that if the Cross of
wood could not receive any virtue or holiness: the sign or Image thereof
(doubtless) was far less capable of such grace. And this is the reason, why
Saint Paul attributed all the power of the Cross, to the word, and not unto
the sign thereof, when he said, 1. Corinthians. 1. ver 18. The preaching of the
Cross, is the power of God, to us which are saved. For God enstructed his
Church by his word, and the signs and Sacraments instituted by him, which
Sacraments could not be Sacraments, except the word of God were united with
them: according as S. Augustine says, The word is conjoined to the Element,
and then it is made a Sacrament.

Seeing then the sign of the Cross, never was ordained by God, and that
neither the word of God, nor the history of the Passion and Cross of Christ,
have made any mention of such virtue in the sign: we ought not stretch our
wit beyond the wisdom of God: for to outstep the limittes prescribed by God,
is to eat the fruit forbidden by God, and to tempt God by bold presumption.

Likewise it is infallible, that God never works by sole figures or
carracters* for in things natural, the virtue proceeds from the essence and
quality of themselves: in things supernatural, God helps himself by
miraculous virtue, not fastened to the sign or figure* Nor do we read, that
when Jesus Christ wrought his miracles, he did them by Carracters, but that he
spoke, and imposed his hands thereon, and his Apostles did the same. When our
Savior raised Lazarus: he cried with a loud voice. Come forth Lazarus* John
11. ver. 45. When S. Peter healed the lame Cripple, he said. In the name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk. Acts 3. ver. 6. When he raised
Tabitha, he said: Daughter, I say to thee arise* but we read not that he used
any sign of carracter. We are not ignorant, that diverse of old have spoken of
the sign of the Cross, and of the virtue thereof: but it was not with any
such intention, or to the end which at this day is pretended* for they used it
as a public profession, and confession of their Christianity, whether it
were in private or public. For because the persecutions were great and
grievous, the Christians would not discover themselves but to their Christian
brethren: and so they knew each other by that sign, and would to one another
make the cross, which declared them to be of one and the same religion in
Christianity.

On the other side, although the Pagans made a mock of the cross of Christ,
saying, it was foolishness to believe and hope in one who was crucified and
dead: yet notwithstanding, the Christians (knowing that all our glory
consists but in the Cross of Jesus Christ, wherein is the great power and
wisdom of God, with assurance of health to all believers) would show that
they were not ashamed thereof, but made openly the sign, to witness, that
they were the crossed Knights, that is to say, the disciples and followers of
Jesus Christ. Heereto may be attributed that which Saint Chrysostom spoke, in
his second Homily on the Epistle to the Romans. If thou hear any one say:
Woorshippest thou one crucified? never be ashamed there of, nor east down thy
looks to the ground: but glory and rejoice in thy self, anouching confession
thereof, with free looks and bold countenance.

Saint Augustine in his eight Sermon on the Apostles words, Chap. 3. The wise
of this world, says he, assail us concerning the cross of Christ, and say:
what understanding have you, to worship a crucified God? we will thus answer
them. We have no part of your understanding, we are not ashamed of Christ
Jesus nor his Cross: we fix it on our foreheads, which is the seat of
shamfastnesse, where do we place it, even there, to give instance, that in the
place where shame appears, it being there fixed, we shall never thereof be
ashamed.

But the same Saint Augustine handles another cause, in the book he made as
a Catechism for the unlearned, Chap. 20. namely, that the Christians desired
in so doing, to imitate the action of the Israelites, before their departure
out of Aegipt: for as they signed their door posts with the blood of the
Paschall Lamb, even so the Christians would be signed on their foreheads; the
words of Saint Augustine are these. The passion of Christ was most plainly
sigured by this people, when they were commanded to kill a sheep, and ^^ eat
it, and to mark with the blood thereof the doors of their habitations. Now
the Prophet manifestlye speaks of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, that he was ladde
as a Sheep to the slaughter* and thou ought at this day to be signed in the
forehead, as the door of thy hearts most noted dwelling, with the sign of his
cross and passion. Which is confirmed by the saying of Lactantius, in his 4.
book of true wisdom, at the end of the 26. chap. The forehead (says he) is
the door of a man's understanding, and the overthwart arising there of the
blood, has some signification of the Cross. How ever it be, this was a matter
brought in by imitation and example of the Jews, and not by commandment:
never then should any foundation be made on men's examples, but on general
rules drawn from the commandment of God. The Jsraelites had commandment
from God, to do what they did upon their dwellings: but the Christians were
never commanded to sign themselves on the forehead. In like manner, it has
proceeded from a most pernicious error, first borne by simplicity, increased
afterward by ignorance, and at this present debated by selfe-wilde obftinacie:
to attribute to the Cross of wood, what only is proper to him crucified
thereon. In brief, seeing God only is the author of all goodness, to him
only ought be ascribed all the good and welfare that can be recoiued: for
albeic he conferreth his gifts and graces in this manner, and by such
instruments as are best liking to him* yet is it but our duty, to seek after
his will in his institution, and not else where: otherwise, it is a fordging of
a God and a religion to our selves, and that by very bold presumption.

Now it cannot be denied, but many marvelous things have been done under
the name and sign of the Cross: although it be likewise as certain, that the
greater part of them left to be read, has been licentiously maintained and
invented. For who will not count this as a fable, when he reads, that a
Maiden eating a Lettice, and not making the sign of the Cross thereon,
swallowed down a devil? That a converted brother, drinking a Cup of Wine, and
not using the said sign of the Cross, was likewise possessed with a Devil?
With infinite other such reports.

Saint Paul tells us* That meats are sanctified to us by the word of God
and prayer. 1. Tim* 4. ver. 5. That is to say, we may use them with a good
conscience, when we receive them with prayer and thanks giving, not speaking
of the sign of the cresse, or any else beside; but howsoever it be, we must
still come to this point, if that which is done, has approbation and warrant
from God or no. For God has permitted diverse times, himself to be feigned in
things, which yet he gave no warrant to: as infinite effects long since
happened by the Oracles, which are so aunciently recorded of. But when such
things happen, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 13. ver. 3. (speaking of the prodigious
effects of the false Prophets) the Lord your God proves you, to know whether
ye love the Lord your God, with all your heart, and with all your soul. For
it suffiseth not to say, such things shall happen: but it must be known,
whether God be the Author of them, and whether they tend to the salvation of
men, and glory of God or no. For if it be any thing, how little soever,
directly or indirectlie, abating the glory due only to God: the rule is
given us, that we must fly all things which have appearaunce of evil. We
must likewise beware of Satan's sleights, who does like to them (as one says)
which teach the way onward, by going backward. For he durst never be so
bold, to thrust himself into the Christian Church, by the knowledge of Jesus
Christ crucified only: but publishing the praises of the Cross, he has made
wood, stones, and paintings companions with Christ Jesus, defacing quite the
spiritual service of God, introducing carnal fashions, sauouring rather of
Paganism then Christianity. Seeing therefore all power, virtue and dominion,
appertains only to him that sits upon the throne, we ought to see him not
injuried in the least part of his right: but likewise, if it may be, to engraue
in men's hearts, a more deep consideration of the death and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

At the beginning of the Gospels preaching, GOD sometimes would have it known
by extraordinary means: wherefore, if then it pleased him to express his
goodness in such sort to his chosen, it ought to be acknowledged, and his
gracious support to be thankefully remembered.

But if it has pleased him, that such as yet see slenderly, shall become more
blind, or indeed altogether stark blind: it ought to be reckoned as his
judgment, and so to be observed for a truth, for truth is not truth,
except it be so quite throughout. And to speak with Nazianzen. If a precious
stone loose his value, by reason of some crack or vnsightlie flawe: it is not
to be doubted, but that the purity of Christian doctrine, will be much
impaired by the mingling or leaven of erroneous teaching, attributing to the
sign or figure, the virtue of him, who would have his Cross fixed in our
bearts, and not tied to our habits, or planted either in fields or Cities.

These matters first here noted, have urged us to resolve such allegations, as
are contained in the first placard, the Title whereof is: Of the virtue of the
Cross. The intent whereof is* to show that the material sign of the Cross,
has many great and goodly virtues: where contrariwise, all true Christians do
maintain, that all virtue and power ought to be attributed to him crucified
thereon* This proposition is underpropped with a place out of Ezechsel the 9.
v. 4. and by some other ancient passages: but when the weakness of such a
building shall be discovered, it will presently appear how easy it is to
overthrow what soever is founded thereon.

Now, to judge rightly on this place, we cannot do beter then to set down
the very words of the Prophet, to the end we may thereby be led to the true
sense. In our language we deliver it thus, word for word with the Hebrew text.
Go through the midst of the City, even through the midst of Jerusalem,
and set a mark upon the foreheads of them that mourn and sigh, for all the
abominations that be done in the midst thereof.

In this sense, and in the self same words, has the Greek translation
yielded them: as likewise S. Hierome notes, that the seventy Enterpreters,
and Aquila, and Symmachus have done the self same. For as Thau in Hebrewe
signifies a mark or sign, and is taken from the word Thauah, that is to say,
to signify or design: so true it is, that Theodotion and the vulgar
enterpretation, have held the word Thau, taking it materially, as it is spoken
in the Schools; yet hereon many have played at their pleasure. For as the same
Saint Hierome writes: Some have said, that by the letter Thau, which is the
last of the Hebrew Alphabet, is signified such as have perfect knowledge.
Others say, that by the same letter, the law is understood, which in Hebrew is
called Thorah, of which word the first letter is Thau, And finally, the same
Saint Hiereme, leaving the Carracter used by the Propher, searched the
Samaritaine Carracters, and says, that Thau among the Samaritaines, has the
resemblance of a cross, but yet he sets not down at all the figure of this
Thau of the Samaritaines. Wherefore, he perceiving that this saying of his would
be further serched into, adds imediately aftewards an other exposition to wit:
As the letter Thau is the last in the Alphabet, suen so sherby is represented
those good people, being the remnant of the multitude of the euilliuers. But
admit the letter Thau* to be figured after the Hebrew Carracter, or the
Samaritaine Carracter by one only figure: yet is it easy to be seen, that it
has a very slender resemblance to an entire cross.

For the Hebrew Carracter is made thus, (...) and the Samaritaine after this
manner, (...) which is not the true figure of a cross, for it wantes that part
above, where the writing was fastened, or title of the cross, as Lypsius has
well noted, in the tenth Chapter of his first book of the cross.

That if the word Thau had been written with his Consonantes and one vowell,
as at this day it is read in the Hebre we text, in this manner, (...) then it
would have much less resemblance. But after the word, let us now come to the
sense.

First of all, it appears by that which is recited in the eight and ninth
chapters of Ezechiell, that all there spoken of, was represented in a mental
vision, so that the things were not really done indeed, In the second place, it
is a matter most evident, that this Prophet was properly and particularly
prepared or furnished, against the City of Jerusalem, and the execution
thereof to be discerned, when the Babylonians had taken and rased the City of
Jerusalem, leading some remainder of the people into captivity.

It is then beyond reason, that this which was spoken for a certain time and
place, and for certain persons: should be turned and assigned else where,
which never was the intention of the spirit of God, that then spoke by the
mouth of Ezechiell. Moreover it is no where to be found, that ever the Jews
were marked with any mark in the forehead whatsouer, and much less by the
cross, which was a thing odious and ignominious then among all nations of the
world: that death being cursed amongst the Jews, following what is written in
Deuter. 21. verse 23. That he was accursed, who should be hanged on a treee,

Now then, the true sense of this passage in Ezechiell, is, that God declared,
how when this great judgment should be exercised on the city of Jerusalem,
they only were to be exempted, who should be marked by the spirit of God.
After this manner is understood what is read in the 12. of Exodus, where the
destroying Angel passed through the midst of Egypt, and slew all the first
borne of the Egyptians: but he commanded the Israelites to put the blood of
the unblemished Lamb for the Passover, on the posts of their habitations, to
the end when the Angel should pass by, he might see the mark of the blood,
and so pass on without offending the Israelites. Likewise in the 7. of the
Apocalips, is mention made of those that were marked, who elsewhere are called
the elect of God, or those whom the Lord knows and graunts to be his, because
he has signed them with his seal, and, as the scripture says, Written their
names in the book of life. For as says S, Paul, 2. Cor. 1. verse 21. 22* It
is he that has anointed us, sealed us, and has given the earnest of his
holyspirit in our hearts.

God then declared to Ezechiell, that Jerusalem should be destroyed by the
Babylonians: but yet notwithstanding, that he would spare some small number of
them which feared him, and mourned for the iniquities of their fellow
Citizens. In contrary sense is that spoken in the Apocalips, 16. verse 2. The
Angel powered forth his vyall, and there f^liagreeuous and noisome soar upon
the mer, which had the mark of the beast, as much to say, as the servants of
Antechriste. Such in the lively sense of this place, as it is most manifest to
them who read it with judgment, and without partiality: yet is it badly
wrested, and so phistically applied by these fellows, who would hereon build
the sign of the cross, whereof the Prophet never thought in all the passage.

The second foundation is a gathering of places from some of old times,
confusedly recited, and (for the most part) changed and altered, as it may
appear by that allcaged of Saint Athanasius, for Saint Athanasius magnifying
the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ, said. It appeared heerem, That although
the Pagans mocked at his death and passion: yet the sign of the cross; and
invocation on the name of Christ, should chase away devils, and make their
diuinations to cease. But that which the placarde avouches, never was spoken
by Saint Athanasus, to wit, that God made great account of this Sign, and he
caused it to be forctold by the Prophet Ezechiell. Notwithstanding we deny
not, that to authorize the preaching of the Gospel, rejected as then by the
Pagans, who stretched then almost through the world: that God did many miracles
by the name of Chirst Jesus crucified. And that is it which the same Athanasius
declares in the beginning of his book against Idols. After the coming of the
Cross, all adoration to Images was to be taken away, and by that mark, all
deuillish deceites should be shased away, and the only Christ worshipped and
his Father knowns, and those which blasphemed him, daily eonfounded. By which
words is witnessed the virtue of Christ, acknowledged in his cross, and not
any naked sign: it is then Sophistry to take seperately, that which was
spoken ioyntlytogither. The second testimony is of Epipbanius, who speaking of
one Joseph of Tiberias, says, he was made a Christian in the time of
Constantine, vncharmed from the furnace and chopping of chalk, to build a
Christian temple in the City of Tiberias. Now we must not so slightly part
from this testimony, because the placarde intends to prove hereby, and in this
example of Joseph: that the Christians enemies have themselves submitted to the
sign of the cross. As for this Joseph of whom he speaks, he was not an
enemy to the christians, because he was a Christian, and builded a temple unto
Christ: now then it is very likely, that whatsoever was done here in* must
needs be for the reason before named, to wit, if the charm were discharged by
the power of Christ Jesus, it was then through invocation upon his mighty
name, and not by any silly naked sign* If it happened by bad means, one
charm to be expelled by a counter charm, as one venom or poison is expulsed
by another, then God gave efficacy to error, to the end such as would be
deceived so, might be, through their own wilfulness.

The third is of Saint Gregory, in the third book of his Dialogues, and
seventh Chapter, concerning a Jew, who being one night in the temple of
Apollo (where faith he, many devils held their counsel) he made but the
sign of the cross, and so was warranted from any harm. He that in one word
would unwind himself out of this place, will say that such Dialogues are but
filled with very frivolous toys. But we e must bring in a more sound answer,
which is, as has been lately said, that God did give the strength of error to
Satan, whereby to deceive men, and Satan seeing himself driven from his
Forte by Jesus Christ: erected another Forte against the same Jesus Christ,
employing to such purpose the simplicity of Christians in those times, whose
eyes he began in such sort to hood-winke, that they might no more clearly see
into the pure service of God.

Then afterward, when Pagan-idolatrie began to decline day by day, by the
bright splendoure of true christian doctrine, then the devil steps in with
idolatry, as great or more dangerous in the midst of Christianity: so that
the ancient Idols names were changed, but the things themselves still
continued, and in flying before from the cross, he has done like them that
draw back, to get more ground. For if ever he invented a strange kind of
idolatry, it was this which he brought in about the cross. Satan finding an
instrument in Christ's own house, wherewith to chase the same Christ out of it,
if it were possible for him.

The fourth is of Nazeanzen, who recites that Julian the Aposta^a figured
himself with the cross, when he saw himself lost in an obscure place by
evil spirits, whereto one might answer as before: but I hear one tell me,
that the example of such a miserable wretch, ought not be alleged for
establishing any doctrine in the church, for this were, as if one would prove
Christ to be the son of the living God, and allege the words spoken by the
devil, saying, Thou art Christ the son of the living God, Math. 8. verse 29.
Mark. 5. verse 7* To who^ our Lord imposed silence, not willing to have him a
Preacher of truth, who was the very father of lies. In like manner, they who by
this deed of Julian the Apostata, would authorize the sign of the cross,
mistak themselves too much, and ought to know, that such an example is no way
allowable. As likewise is not their imitatio^, who not believing in God, nor in
the blessed Trinity, place before these names of God and the trinity, the
Angels and Prophets: the beginning of the gospel according to S. John, and make
mighty signs of the cross, for furthering their enchantme^ts. Herehence it
appears, seeing such wicked enchanters and charms, serve their own turn with
evil means, which simply are things no ways receiueable: hereby we may well set
down this conclusion. Since Julian the Apostasta and such like, made the sigue
of the cross, and thereby was succored, as is said: it is apparent, that this
proceeded not of god, but only came from Satan, who would more and more fold
him into such deceits, as eue^ so appointed by the just judgment of god. For
this case happening extraordinarily, served so much the more for confou^ding the
abominable wretch, as well in his conscience, as before me^, and god himself.

The fifth is of S. Augustine, in his book of 85* questions, question 79. But
this testimony is falsely alleged, for it is not so read there, as the placard
sets it down: but rather in confirmation of that we have delivered in the two
last witnesses, yea, and that expressly: the words are these. Jf he wicked at
any time obtain somewhat, by innocation on the highest God, they begit for
their bad desires: and so this is not grace to them, but the vengeance of God,
for the Apostle said not in vain, That God had given over such people to their
own hearts desires. For that which our Lord said, Satan cannot cast out
Satan, is not to be esteemed false, when any one has cast out Satan, in
using the names of some inferior powers: but it should be understood, that
this was said to this end, albeit Satan spare the body or the
corporallsence, he spares them but with intent to rule over the will, and with
greater glory to triumph! by the error of impiety.

These are the words of Saint Augustine, which properly appertain to the
prodigious effects, many times happening about the cross* For Satan slies
from the body, to the end he may get entrance into the soul, and cares not
for troubling the corporal sense, because he would reign altogether in the
will, or rather in the desire, as faith the same S. Angustine. The sixth is out
of the first book of S. Augustines confessions, Chap. 11. yet impertmently
alleged. For there S. Augustine declares nothing else, but that being as yet
in his mothers womb, he was marked with the mark of the cross of Christ
Jesus, and seasoned with his salt. That is to say, that being the son of a
good christian woman, he was designed to be a Christian, and to receive the
outward sign thereof: agreeing with Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 7, verse 14. That the
children of the faithful are sanctified, and the alliance with God is made to
them and their posterity after them.

The seventh is out of the book called The visitation of the sick: whereto
one answers, that that book is falsely attributed to S. Augustine, as it has
very well been noted of long time by the learned Divines, and not long
since by the doctors of Louaine in the impression of S. Augustines works,
printed by Plantin at Antwerp, the year 1576. with privilege from the Emperor,
the kings of France and Spain.

The eight is out of 130. Sermon de tempore. But that Sermon is likewise none
of Saint Augustines: but forged by some modern writer, as the same Doctors of
Louaine have also well noted in the self-same impression. Yet notwithstanding,
in that sermon is no speech used of the sign of the cross: but there is said,
that the cross shows the combat of Christ and the resurectio^ declares the
triumph of him which we in like manner avouch and maintain.

The ninth is out of the 12. book against Faustus the Manichean, Chap. 30*
which place serves to confirm what we have alleged, in exposition of the
words in Ezechiels 9. chapter. For Saint Augustine makes an Antithesis of what
was done under the law, and what has happened under the Gospel, speaking
thus. As the doors and ports of the Israclites dwellings, were marked with the
blood of the Paschal-Lambe, to the end their perdition might be avoided: so
the people since are marked in the forehead with the sign of Christ's passion,
to the same intent: Which may as well be understood of the bloodshed, and all
the sufferings endured by our Lord Jesus: yea, better and much rather, then of
the bare sign of the cross.

The tenth is out of the book entitled, the difference between the Church
and the Sinagogue, which alleges the same place of Ezechiels 9. chapter
before spoken of. That book is none of Saint Augustines, neither carries
testimony of any good author, but rather it seems the compiler thereof, was
some Courtier or Ciuillian, so say the doctors of Louaine in the same
impression.

The eleventh is drawn from the nineteenth Sermon of the Saints: but that
Sermon is not (as likewise these others) Saint Augustines, as appears by the
same Louaine Doctors, the 9. Tom, page 700* 2. C. The twelfth is out of the 22.
of the city of God, chap. 8. where it is said. A certain Lady of Carthage,
was healed of a cankre in her breast, having bin warned before in her sleep, to
be marked with the sign of the cross, by the first baptisd woman which should
come before her* But in the same place it is likewise said: that she before
prepared her self for god only, in devout prayer to him: to whom she
attributed her healing, and not unto the sign the woman had made. For it
appears by the demand made, how she was cured, and the answer is returned
by the heathen Physician in these terms. What a great matter has Christ
done, in healing a cankre, when he could raise up Lazarus, who had lien dead
four days before? It is then to God only, and not to the sign of the
cross, that this healing is to be reputed.

The thirteenth is out of the exposition of 36. Psalm, in these words. In old
time offenders were crucified, now no more is crucified: the cross was in
honor, and to his end, it was at his end, inrespect of his punishment, but
now it remains with him in glory. The answer is, that he speaks not of
the sign of the cross, but shows how Princes and Monarchs, having embraced
Christ crucified, did him honor, in submitting to him their seepters and
crowns, which they had especially prepared, in honor of his cross and
passion, whereof hereafter more shall be spoken.

The foureteenth is taken from the third treatise on S. John, in these words.
If we be Christians, we will have some feeling of Jesus Christ. We will bear
in our foreheads the mark of him, whereof we will not blush a jot, if we
bear it likewise in our hearts: the mark of him is the humility of him. With
this testimony we will join, because of the brevity, all the other following,
which are about ten in number, and because they very necrely iumpe all with
this here spoken, that christians signed themselves on the forcheads, we will
then acknowledge, that in times past, this custom of signeing on the forchead
has bin brought in. By whom, or how, it matters not, for in things doubtful,
as this is, it is best to follow the rule of Saint Athanasius. If we be
resolved (says he) let us make our recourse to the Saints, that is, to the
Apostles writings, who had more exact knowledge of Evangelical matters, then
we can have. Beside, it is certain, that neither Jesus Christ, nor his
Apostles, have made any mention at al thereof: if it had been a thing, either
necessary or expedient, there is no doubt but they would have done it.
Wherefore we will say with S. Hierome: That it is nothing else but prating,
when the word of God marches not before us. Nor need we demand, who has
done or said this, here or there: but what has Christ Jesus instituted, what
has his Apostles said and done? nor ought we so much seek what is done, as
what is to be done. Again, it is to be noted, that our elders speaking of the
death and passion of our redeemer, have most spoken of his Cross, and of the
sign thereof together, never meaning what at this day is understood by the
word sign: but they likewise called it the Standard or Ensign of the great
King and Captain, who overcame the devil and hell, in bringing thence the
spoils, drinking of the torrent by the way, and lifting up his head, as is
said in the 110. Psalm. So did Fortunatus take it in his Himne beginning thus.

Pange lingua gloriosi
Praelium certaminis,
Et super Crucis trophaeum,
Dic triumphum nobilem.
That is to say.
Tongue declare the combat of a glorious fight,
And tell the noble tryumphes on the Cross.
And Theodulphus:
Vexilla Regis prodeunt,
Fulget Crucis misterium.
That is.
The Standards of the King march forth,
Shining with the mysteries of the Cross.
So that the Cross then used, was made in form of a Standard or Banner. By
the sign then, those reverend predecessors of ours, understood the Cross and
passion it self: but since, ignorance has devised, that that should be
separate, which ought to be conjoined, setting the passion of Christ apart,
and the sign of the Cross apart, making small account of the one, speaking
the little of the passion, but enough of the sign: witness the passion, death
and wounds of Christ, which are daily and hourly in the mouths of
blasphemers, who think nevertheless to be warranted from all evil, when they
do but make the sign of the Cross.

Thus has bin declared, what our elders understood by the sign of the Cross,
to wit: the exterior testimony of the christian faith: which evidently
appeared in them, who were converted from dumb Idols, to true service of the
living God. This may be discerned more clearly, by the saiing of S. Cirill,
answerering the objections of the Emperor Julian, surnamed the Apostata, in
his sixth book. For Julian magnifying the antiquity of the Pagane religion,
said, that the Oracles were given by Jupiter, as the escutchions or bucklers
fell from heaven, and Jupiters saddle, which was given or sent to Numa: and
made this comparison, that the Pagans kept the Armor which great Jupiter the
Father of Mars had given them as a warranted gaege, that he would always have
a care of the City of Room. All this notwithstanding the Christians desisted
from honoring and worshipping these things: whereupon Julian said, that they
honored the wood of the Cross, and painted the Cross on their foreheades,
and before their houses. Whereto Cirill answered thus.

Albeit the Lord and Savior of all, was not in show, yet equal in all with
his father, and seated on the throne of his divinity: nevertheless he was
abased, and took on himself the shape of a servant, and despising allignomie,
bare the cross, to abolish the power of corruption, and one only dyed for
all, to the end, that being raised again from the dead, he might deliver all
mankind from the snares of death, destroy the tyranny of sin ruling in us,
appease the law, which exercised his tyranny in our members, making us
spiritual woorshippers, killing in us the feelings of the flesh: that they
might be made the sons of God, which believed in him, and were sanctified by
his spirit, so to despoile Satan of his tyranny, the author of evils, the
mort all beast, and those wicked powers, which our calumniator called the
Prince of nations and Gods defenders. The wholesome wood made us remember all
these things, and advised us to think, that as S. Paul says: Even as one is
dead for all, so ought they to know, that the living could live no more by
them selves, but by him who dyed and rose again. Which answer shows, that the
Christians painted the cross, not as attributing any virtue to the visible
sign: but to let the Pagans see, how they (having forsaken their Idolatries,
wherewith they hadbin before enchaunted) embraced Jesus Christ, of whom, the
cross which they placed before their houses, was the true mark and public
ensign.

And the same Cyrill expounds himself, in his third book of adoration made
in spirit and truth, manifesting the vnbelecuers by this mark, that they
would never receive the cross, that is to say, acknowledge Jesus Christ. They
(says he) that have no will to receive the Cross, are vanquished and overcome
by the devil, and they are such as Christ spoke to saying: Verily, verily J
say unto you, if you will not believe that I am he, you shall dye in your
sins. So that to receive the Cross, is nothing else, but to believe in Jesus
Christ. For so likewise Saint Cyril, speaking of the coming of Christ, shows
it by these words, the coming of the Cross: understanding by the word
Cross, all that which the son of God did and suffered in the world for our
salvation.

These things thus breefely touched, may suffice to answer the allegations
contained in the first placard. Come we now to the second, which is entitled:
How the Cross ought to be honored: which likewise at this present we must
consider on.

How the Cross ought to be honored.
FIrst of al, it is a matter most manifest, that the punishment of the Cross,
was not only one of the cruellest: but likewise the most ignominious of all
them which was practiced by any nation. For it was called a death most infamous
and accursed, and for this reason, our Lord Jesus Christ was put to the Cross,
that he being made accursed, we might be delivered from the curse of the law.
Yet for all this, it was not without great reason, that himself, speaking of
this kind of death, calls it his exaltation. John 8. verse 28. and 12. ver.
32. for his Cross is the great victory, the trophee and glory which he
obtained against Satan, and against death.

See now, why we can never sufficiently honor the cross, death and passion of
our Lord Jesus Christ. For it is the means, whereby the Son of God draws
all men to him, as himself says in Saint John 12. verse 32. But the manner
how to honor it, ought likewise to be learned from our Lord and master himself.

He plainly expressed it, when he taught us, that whosoever would be his
disciple, ought to take up his cross and follow him: for by this means being
conformed to his sufferings, we shall likewise be semblable to his glory. When
he instituted his holy Supper, saying: Do these things in remembrance of me,
how often so ever you do them, you shall show the death of the Lord, even
until his coming. This S. Paul saw, when he writ to Timothe, his 2.
Epistle. Chapter 2. ver. 8. 12. Remember that Jesus Christ was raised from the
dead: And that if we dye with him, we shall live with him, if we suffer with
him, we shall reign with him. So that the Son of God is highly honored, when
he is acknowledged to be the sole Savior and redeemer of men lost in Adam, and
who being sinners, and destitute of the glory of God, are reconciled in him,
and reestablished in far greater glory, then ever they had or could have
before. But on the contrary part, the great glory of Gods elect shines, in
this, that as S. John says, 3. ver. 16. So God loved us, that he gave his
only Son for us, to the end, that whosoever believed in him* should not
perish, but have everlasting life. And the same S. John says, in his first
Epistle 3. ver. 1. Behold this love has the Father bestowed on us, that we
are called the Sons of God.

So that each of us may say this of himself, the life which I have at this
present, is by the faith I have in the Son of God, that he has loved me, and
gave himself for me: adding withal, that by the sufferings which my Lord
Jesus Christ has endured, all misery and afflictions which can happen to me,
are sanctified. For whereas in their own nature, they were punishments: by the
death of Jesus Christ, they are become visitations and testimonies of Gods
favor, that he looueth and enstructeth such as he corrects. We likewise
honor the Cross in this, that we are crucified to the world, and the world to
us, so that dying with Christ Jesus, we are raised up again with him, says S.
Paul, Romans 6. ver. 8. For he has given us an example to follow his steps,
that being dead to sin* we might live again to righteousness, being healed by
his wounds, says S. Peter, 1. Pet. 2. v. 21 and 24. And again. The grace of
God, that brings salvation unto all men has appeared. And teaches us, that
we should deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts: and that we should live
soberly and righteously, and Godly in this present world. Looking for the
blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior
Jesus Christ* Titus 2. ver. 11. 12. 13.

Behold here the true manner, how to honor the cross and death of Jesus
Christ, as the Apostles S. Peter, S. John, and S. Paul has raught us in their
writings, and which themselves practiced, when they were in this world, and
such has bin the reverence, which the Primative Church made to the cross. For
those signs which were made at the beginning, were nothing but with the moving
of the hand, applied to the forehead, or cast up into the air, having no
subsistence in bodily matter of wood, stone* silver, gold or other such like.

The first that made any of some matter* was Constantine, who having obtained a
notable victory against Maxentius, made his Ensign in form of the cross*
enriched with gold and precious stones. Yet was it not after the fashion of
the Cross observed now-adaies, for the Historians have thus described it.



At the end of a high staff, the Greek letter P, was represented* and under
it the letter X, which are the two first letters of christ's name in Greek.
Soon after, a sail was hanged ouerth wart this staff, without any figure in
the sail, and was in all respects as is here set down.

And because he was newely exalted to the imperial dignity, by the consent
of his warriors, who preferred him after the declining of Dioclesian his
predecessor: he considered, that the means to maintain him in this
dignity, against all competitours and contenders, was to make himself a
friend: with those Christians which Dioclesian had persecuted even to his
uttermost.

And for this cause he made the cross to be erected, before himself became a
Christian: for he was not Baptized, till the seventh year of his Empire, and
the victory before named, happened in the first year. Now because the Christian
historians speak of an apparition of the Cross in the air, with these words.
Thou shall over come by this: it is so, that Zosimus a Pagane historian, who
lived at that time there, and was a most exact searcher after the deeds of
Constantine, has made no mention at all thereof. Also it appears, that the
Ecclesiastical histories speak diversely thereof. For Eusebius says, that this
vision chanced at noone time of the day: and Sozomenus writes, that it appeared
in the night to Constantine sleeping. Nevertheless, God might permit this
miracle, as a help to the conversion of this Prince, beings as then a Pagane,
and that it might serve afterward for the further auauncement of Christ's
glory, whatsoever affection himself should bear thereto: for some Authors have
noted great defectes and faults in him. He then made the ensigns and Arms of
his soldiers to be marked with the Cross, he caused it to be set up in
public places: as is to be read, that he made to be erected his own statue
in brass at Room, holding a Cross of the same metal in his hand.
Notwithstanding, he never appointed it in any Temple, but in a public place,
for then the Roman Temples had as yet the Paganes Idols in them.

But afterward, when it was said, that the true Cross indeed was found by
Helena, mother to Constantine: then a great number of Crosses were erected* Nor
shall we need in this search to enter so far, whether this were a contrived
invention, or a truth, albeit Volaterranus, and Friar O^uphrius Panuinus of the
Augustines order, in his notes upon Platina, in the life of Pope Eusebius, 32.
gives sufficiently to understand, that this was an uncertain matter,
considering the diversity found in Authors, as touching the time of this
invention.

For if we shall credit some historians, Helena was yet at that time an
Infidel, and Constantine himself not become a firm Christian, not having
then done any thing in Siria. And some say, that it was not found in the time
of great Constantine, but in his Son Constantines time: heereto may we add
Eusebius, who writ the life of Constantine, and speaks of all which Helena did
in Jerusalem: yet speaks not one word of this invention of the Cross. Neither
does Saint Ambrose agree herein with other writers, for he faith, this Cross
was known by the title thereon: and others say, that it was by miraculous
healing of a woman, which the very touching of this Cross brought to perfect
health again. But howsoever it was* there is no man (I think) but will hold
for fabulous, when he reads, that Adam being sick, sent his Son Seth to
the gate of Paradise, to have some of the oil of mercy, wherewith he might be
anointed and healed: and how the Angel gave him a bough of the tree, whereof
Adam had before eaten the fruit, and so transgressed Gods commandment. But
being returned, he found his Father dead, and therefore planted this bough on
Adams grave, which afterward grew to a goodly tree* so that when Solomon caused
the temple to be built, he made the tree to be cut down, but it could never be
made to serve to any use, wherefore it was rejected, and made a Bridge of, over
a certain Lake. When the Queen of Saba came to see Solomon: she would not
go over the Bridge, became she had been before advertised in a vision, that
on that wood should one be hanged, who should destroy the Kingdom of the
Jews.

Which when Solomon heard of, he caused it to be buried very deep in the
earth, in the place where a Poole was afterward made, which Poole had the
virtue of healing sickness, by reason of the wood, for it came forth of the
earth, and floated above upon the water, at the hour when Jesus Christ, was to
be crucified, and therefore the Jews made the cross thereof.

Behold what has been invented and preached to poor people: only to make
the cross be honored* as it is to be read in the 21. Sermon, of the book
called, The Sermons of the Disciple.

But let such consider, that the ancient Christians using of the cross, in
whatsoever matters by them managed: was but the simple practice of Saint
Paul's meaning, when he said: J am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. For
because every one, as well Jews as Paganes, mocked at Christ, and his Cross
was become a scandal to some, and folly to others: the more they strove to
defame it, the more the christians endeavored to adorn it. Heereup on, they
opposed the Cross to all things, and in all places, as a most honorable
mark whereby they sufficiently declared, that they would have part of Christ's
opprobry, to the end he might impart to them some of his glory. And therefore
said Chrysostom. That Ensign should be more honored, then all the Crowns
and Diademes could be. For this cause, the Emperors and Kings made applycation
thereof to their Crowns and Scepters, so much the more to shame and confound
the Jews and Pagans, whom S. Ambrose brings in, thus speaking. Wehaue
crucified Jesus, to the end the Christians may rise after death, and that the
dead may reign: We have crucified him whom Kings shall honor: Whence
happened, that the Princes which persecuted Christ, became Preachers, and their
Vestiments served to repair the cross, that faith might shine forth the more
gloriously. Upon the same occasion it is said, that the cross should be a tree
fair and splendant, adorned with the purple of kings, and more brightsome then
the stars. And Theodoret in the third book of his history, chap. 27.
writes, That by all, the cross should be borne, to testify the triumph of
Christ.

But all this while, they attributed nothing to the cross only, or the bare
figure thereof: for Constantine gave acknowledgement, that the victoric which
happened to him, was through Christ, and not the cross, and so he caused to be
written on the crosses by him erected, these three words: Jesus Christ
overcame, and (after that manner) made his prayers of the cross* Helena
likewise worshipped the king, and not the cross: For else it had bin a Pagan
error, and vilde vanity, faith Saint Ambrose.

In this forte may christians honor the cross: for who makes any question*
but in our wars against the Jews or Mahumetists, we may bear our Ensigns
orarmes crossed, for public testifying to the Infidels, that we are
Christians, and our adversaries are miscreants andvoyd of faith. So may the
cross be engraue^ on money to show, that it is the coin or stamp of a
christian Prince. So may the cross be placed on the gates of Cities, Castles,
or houses, to deliver apparently, that the Inhabitants in such places, do make
profession of christianity. So was it long since ordained, that the
instruments of contractes or bargaining, made by public notaries, should be
sealed and signed with the cross, as it is read in lib. de Cod.

And in such like polliticke considerations, we reject not the use of the
material cross. As Constantine in the very same respect, forbad to punish
malefactors any more with the death of the cross: To the end (says Saint
Augustine in his 36. Treatise on Saint John) They should not be honored by
such a punishment. For the same reason, was it forbidden by the Emperor
Theodosuts, to engraue the cross in earth: and a pain decreed, against all
such as despised or cast the cross at their heels.

Now withal is to be remembered, that then the cross was but two pieces of
wood thwarte one another, having no shape of a crucifixe, much less of the
blessed virgin Marie, as since then, in diverse crosses the image of the
crucifixe is on one side, and that of the mother on the other, as if she had
borne company with our Savior in his sufferings, and she in some sort had
wrought the redemption of mankind.

Then they had not read the goodly disputation, between the Cordeliers and the
Jacobines, in the time of Pope John the 22. of that name: the Cordeliers
maintaining, that the crucifixe ought to be naked, only with a crown of
thorns: the Jacobines justified, that he was to wear a crown on his head,
and a royal robe with all. As for the honor done by some in this case, they
of old crowned him simplye with flowers, but it was for special instruction
to the beholders; for thus they intended, that whosoever would have the crown,
and partake in the reward: he must first of all bear his cross, for so has
the Poet Prudentius written. To bear the cross must be thy pain,
If thou desire the crown to gain.


But in the end, these matters grew so forward, that the cross was brought into
the temples, and saluted in these words, O Crux, aue, Al hail, O cross,
which are but fond speeches. Then invocation was made to it, saying. Auge pits
iustitiam, reisque dona veniam.
Increase the justice of the good, and pardon the offenders.
Likewise, Crucem tuam adoramus Domine:
Lord, we adore and worship thy cross.
Which are indeed blasphemous speeches.

For to Jesus Christ only should such a prayer be made, It is Jesus Christ who
is the son, he ought to be kissed, and not the cross of wood. So that* albeit
we may honor one another ciuilly, following no more then is commanded, the
inferior to honor their superiors: yet when question is made, of religious or
devout honor, they are matters not according, to give all honor to one only
God and his son, and yet to divide a portion thereof to any man, or a
material cross, or any creature whateuer* Yet are not these questionaries
them selves fully agreed hereabout: for one has demanded, with what kind of
honor it is to be worshipped.

Some say, that the very cross, which touched the body of Jesus Christ, oght
to be honored with Latria, service: or by the means of Hyperdulia, humble
duty* but others believe, that it should be serucd with the honor of Dulia,
bond-seruice: as much to say, that the true cross ought to be reverenced with
the honor due to Christ: and other Crosses should be reverenced with such
honor, as servants owe unto their masters. And this is the resolution of the
second placarde, which like wise it becomes us to consider of, and briefly
search into the bottom of it.

There are diverse places of our elders alleged, but without sense, and quite
from the Authors meaning that writ them. For when they of old time speak of
the cross, they did not understand thereby two pecces of wood th wart one
another: but the mystery of our redemption: the true summarie and
accomplishment whereof, was by the cross, death and passion of Jesus Christ.
And this equivocal or double signification of the cross, being not perceived
by these Sophisters* makes the^ to err, and they cause other to do the like.
Heerevpon it was that Chrysostom said* The cross is the cause of al our
blessedness, it is the christians hope, resurection of the dead, and a guide to
the blind, etc. And as for the material cross, behold what one has written
thereof: We honor not, neither desire to have such a cross, as the express
words are to be read in the 8* book of Arnobius, answering to the Pagans
objections, which blamed the christians, as if they had honored the cross of
wood. For the same reason, Athanasius says in his 16. question, those which he
writ unto Antiochus. That the Christians declared, how they honored not the
cross, when they laid together two pieces in such sort: they acknowledged it
to be no more then wood, and would not prostrate themselves before it, as now
they do, setting up crosses only to be honored. And heerevppon says
Epiphanius, that passing by a village named Anablaiha, and entering into a
Temple, where hung a painted cloth, having an image thereon of Jesus Christ,
or some other Saint* he rent the cloth in pieces, because they kept it there
contrary to the Scripture* this is at large to be read, in his Epistle
translated by Saint Hierome. Whereupon the same Saint Hierome says* that no
other image of God is to be honored, but that which is God, and with God; as
much to say, as the son of GOD, Which is the engraven form of the essence of
God, Hebr. 1. verse 3. and in this sense we hold with the testimonies alleged
in the placard.

But because the Church of Rome contains not it self within these limits, but
aymeth at a material cross: it is apparent, that it maintains insufferable
idolatry. And to the end it may appear, that we wrong them not in saying so:
mark here the very words they use, when they hallow the wood of the cross.

Digneris Domine, benedicere hoc lignum crucis, vt sit remedium salutare generi
humano, sit soliditas fidei, bonorumque operum profectus, and redemptio
animarum, tutela contra sae^a iacula inimicorum: which is thus interpreted.
Lord, that it might please thee to sanctify this wood of the cross, to the
end it may be a healthful remedy to mankind, assurance of faith, advancement
of good works, redemption of souls, and a defense against the cruel darts
of the enemies.

Again. Crucem tuam adoramus Domine.
O Lord we adore and worship thy Cross*


Again. O crux adoranda, o crux speciosa, hominibus amabilis, sanctior
vniuersis, quae sola digna fuisti, portare talentum mundi.
Dulce lignum, dulces clanos, dulcia ferens pondera.
Serua presentem cateruam, in tuis hodis laudibus congregaram.
O cross, which ought to be honored, O cross, which ought to be
regarded,
Amiable to men, more holy then all, Which only wast worthy to bear the
worlds talent.
Sweet wood, which bear sweet nails, and a sweet burden:
Save this present Congregation assembled in thy praises.


Again, Crux fidelis, inter omnes arbor vna nobilis: Nulla sylua talem
profert, fronde, flore, germine.
Dulce lignum, dulces clauos, dulce pondus sustinet.
Faithful cross, the only noble tree among all other:
No forest ever bare the like, for boughs, flowers and branches.
This sweet wood bare sweet nails, and a sweet burden.


Wherein is to be noted, that this Himne says, it is a tree, albeit others,
and namely the Canonists say, that it was made of four woods, to wit, of
Palm, of Cedar, of Cipres, and of Oliue-tree.

Of like stuff is the French prayer, which is usually read at all hours, and
is in the book called Hours, that which Michaell Joue imprinted at Lions
1568* according to the usage at Rome, and is in this manner.

Saint vraye croix adoree,
Qui du corpse Dieu fut adornee.
Et de sa grand' sueur arrosee,
Et de son sang enluminee.
Par ta virtue, par ta puissance,
Guard mon corpse de mal meschance,
Et m'ottroye par ton plaisir,
Que vray confez puisse mourir.
In English thus. Holy cross, truly to be worshipped,
Which with Gods body was adorned,
And with his great sweat sprinkled,
And with his blood illumined.
By thy virtue, by thy puissance,
Keep my body from all mischance,
And grant if so thy pleasure be*
Truly confessed, that J may die.


Nor is it only called the adorned cross, but likewise the adored cross: as
on the holy Friday it is termed worshipped, in regard of the adoration of the
cross as that day there. So that if the time when the cross is honored, is
called holy: the place likewise where the cross is to be erected, is also
hallowed, and the hands and fingers of them that erected it. For there must
be some reason allowed to the circumstances and instruments, as well in one as
the rest, or, to speak as we ought, he must needs be his crafts-maister, that
will not let the stench of such impiety be descerned or felt, by them whose
breath idolatry has before poisoned.

Like follies and blasphemies commit they about the lance or spear, wherewith
the side of our Savior was pierced* First, that it was sent by the great Turk
Baiazeth, to Pope Jnnocent the eight of that name, in the year 1490. if the
account lie not* of which holy spear, the feast is celebrated on the Friday
after the Octaues of Easter, and thereto is appointed this prayer following.

Aue ferrum triumphale,
Jntrans pectus tu vitale,
Caeli pandis ostia,
Foelix basta, nos amore,
Per te fixi saucia.
Thus Englished. Triumphant Jron, be thou blessed,
Which entering in the vital breast.
Heaven gates did open spread:
Holy spear do us wound,
With the love of him profound,
Which by thee was pierced dead.


So that whosoever will believe these people, must likewise worship S.
Lantern, Saint Sponge, Saint Ladder, Saint Cord, Saint Whippe, and other
instruments wherewith the hang-men tormented Jesus Christ.

Let then these Sophisters bite their nails as long as they please, to
overthrow this shameful taxation: yet shall they never make of wood, more
then wood. And because they bless themselves with this wood, bowing down
their heads before it, and calling it the health and remedy for mankind: we
say, that they are more blockish then wood, if they will not acknowledge the
great fault they commit, in honoring the wood, in stead of applying such duty
to him, who bare our sins in his body on the cross of wood.

We are not likewise ignorant of their goodly verses, Effigiem Christ: etc.*
but we say, it is also a drugge answerable to that which we call to bring one a
sleep. For certainly, this is to make the ignorant sleepie: whereas such as
receive instruction out of Gods school, do hold, that seeing god in no case
will be honored by images, it is a matter altogether intolerable, that me^
should have any images to worship. For Idolatry is committed when we honor
Idols, or honor God otherwise then he would be honored: as appears by the
Prophets speeches of them that worshipped in high places. They are reproved
not for that they worshipped God: but because they worshipped him otherwise
the^ he had allowed in his ordenance. For he would have but one place only,
to wit, the temple of Jerusalem, where he would be served, and they honored
him in woods and on mountains. This is the reason why the Samaritaines, who
called themselves the children of Jacob, were reproved, because they
worshipped in the mount Gartzin, albeit they yet prepared themselves to God.

For this reason, in the Elibertine Council, held in the time of the first
Council of Nice, the 36. Canon, were set down these words.

It is ordained, that in the Church shall be no kind of paintings, to the
end, that that which is honored and worshipped, should not be figured in any
resemblance. Their answer hereto is frivolous, for they say. They worship them
not* because they put no trust in them. To worship, is to incline ones self
thereto, to make signs of humiliation, and bowing the knees: as may be seen
by the scriptures manner of speaking, which by bowing of the knee, notes
idolatry, as appears by the answer made to Elias, 1. Reg. 19. verse 18.
Where the true servants of God opposed to idolatours, are marked out by this:
That have not bowed their knees before Baal, nor kissed him with their mouths.
These kind of words uses the scripture, for describing of idolatours: that
they bend themselves, burn incense and kiss the hand or the lips, all which
the church of Rome does to images, relics, and crosses: the conclusion then
is manifest, they are idolatours, because they do the deeds of idolatours.

But that which is alleged out of the 21. of Numbers, may not be let pass
lightly: for if there be an example, which formally and firmly plucketh down
the abuse committed about the cross, it is that of the brazen Serpent. That
was made by Gods commandment, therefore it was no Jdol.

Now, albeit that by the law generally, God forbad to make the image of any
thing in heaven, the earth, or waters under the earth: so it is, that not being
bound to his law (because he is above it) it pleased him to dispense therewith,
even as himself dispensed with the law, and gave commandment to make this
serpent, the figure of the exaltation of Jesus Christ, lifted upon the cross,
as himself witnesses in the third of John, verse 14. Not that it was elevated
on wood made crosse-wise, as they use commonly to picture it, (for it was
lifted up on a standard or post, as the text says) but because it was to be
lifted up, and they which by Gods commandment looked thereon, should be
healed: Now let us see what ensues heereon. From that instant, till the time of
the good king Ezechias, about the space of seven hundredth thirty and five
years, there was no speech at all of this brazen Serpent. It happening then,
the people making obeisance thereto, worshipping it, because it had been made by
Moses, and was so kept for the space of 735. years; Ezechias brake it, and
caused it to be burned. From hence we gather, if images in general, and
especially that of the cross, were never made by the commandment of God, but
by the diffidence and presumption of men (who thought God did neither see nor
hear them, except they had such images before their eyes) especially such as
have been brought in we know not since when: how far off ought they to
be from us? When it shall come to this point, that they were not begun to any
such purpose: it is then evident, that they ought to be taken away, as Ezechias
did the Serpent, because at first it was not framed to be worshipped.

And because of the abuse which has risen heereabout, it were very necessary
to be generally abandoned. For Idolatry is no part of those things, whereof one
will say: Correct the abuse, yet hold the use: because in whatsoever sort the
I doll is taken, yet it is as nothing.

And when question is made, for reformation of such disorders, we should
follow the saying of Jesus Christ, in Math. 19 verse* 8. It was not so from the
beginning. If then at the beginning, when the Apostolic Church was pure, and
truth sincere, the sign or form of the Cross was not made, it was no where
appointed, saluted nor worshipped: it was very ill done, to bring in this
corruption, (which can no way well be called a custom,) and much worsse is it
to retain it still.

There remains one testimony, out of the first book of Sozomenus, Chap. 4.
where it is said: That the soldiers of Constiantne, did highly honor his
Standard, made in form of the Cross, and that many miracles were done among
them: which being consessed, concludes not, that therefore we ought to honor
the material Cross. For say that they did honor it, or did such things as
ought not to be done: it is resoluedly to be held, that in such actions they
are not to be imitated. Considering the conclusion serves to the contrary, to
wit: if the Cross ought to be honored, because it did a miracle: It follows
then, that the Cross which never did miracle, ought not to be honored. Now it
is most certain, that of an hundred thousand crosses, 3. cannot be found that
did any miracle: no though we should allege their own accounts, and the
effects showed by them, with the histories which these exorcistes do
confirm. Witness the example, of that so holy and renowned doctor Picard, and
other Sorbonists, who in the year 1552. could not by their exorcismes, Cross
and holy water, chase a spirit out of a maidens body in Paris. No more could
the Munke of St. Benet, brought to Room by the Cardinal Gondy, in the year
1554. drive forth the cuill spirits cut of the bodies of 82. maidens,
notwithstanding all his coniurations, for the space of six months together,
as Bodinus says in in the 3. book, Chap. 6, of his Demonomanie, So then* all
those Crosses of Room (which surpass other in holiness and miraculous
virtue, by reason of the sanctity which is there obtained) having no more power
then those of the Munkes: have little duty to be honored, for the cause being
taken away, there remains no more of the effect.

Last of all, because it seems, that we would have no Images of the
crucifixe, nor the Cross: we declare, that we desire all our days, Jesus
Christ should be painted before oureyes, in the same manner as S. Paul, Gal.
3. ver. 1. painted Jesus Christ before their eyes: for the pensill wherewith God
ought to be pai^red, is his word, which himself calls the word of truth,
where contrariwise, all the doctrine of Images, is but the doctrine of lying
and vanity. So then, the Cross of Jesus Christ is as the chair, wherout we
purpose to preach on the one side, the multitude and ennormity of our sins,
on the other, the severity of Gods justice and depth of his mercy. The
greatness of our sins is shown us, in that they could not be borne nor
abolished by any other, then he who was very God and very man. His justice, in
that God, who hates iniquity, did punish it with all extremity. His mercy, in
that himself gave us the price to acquit us withal, even us that were his
utter enemies: for this is to us a most certain gaege, of the merciful
affection of our God, discerned through the wounds of his only Son. And the
lively contemplating of those wounds, is the balm to heal the hurts of our
souls. His feet and hands were pierced, his side opened, and thence issued
the price of our redemption, as also the washing away of our filthynesse: blood
(I say) and water always streaming, to deface our sins past, present, and to
come, to the end, that having our hearts washed from an evil conscience, we
should go by the fresh and living paths, towardesour God with certainty of
faith, and keep ing the confession of our hope. Heb. 10. ver. 22. 23. that is
to say, in following after Jesus Christ. Which is nothing else, says S.
Carill, but renouncing the world for the love of Christ, and preferring the
goods which we hope for by faith, before all other in this bodily life. In
like manner, says S. Bernard. The joyful hope and assurance, is that which
is affirmed by application to the death and passion of Christ. For since the
Father has given us his Son: how shall he not with him give us all things
also? Romans 8. ver. 32. And be is giu en us of the Father, to be our justice,
wisdom, redemption and sanctification. 1* Cor. 1. v. 30. It is Jesus that
iustifies the faulty, it is Jesus that paies for the indepted, that strengthens
the weak, illuminates the blind, binds up the hurtes of the wounded,
recalles home by-wanderers, gives life to the dead: and in a word, it is Jesus
that destroies the works of the devil, and beats down Satan under our
feet.

Such is the memory which we continually observe, of the perfect obedience,
which the Son of GOD delivered upon the Cross, to God his Father for us
poor miserable wretches: and not the ridiculous and I dolatrous devotion,
which the ignorant so gladly would make us believe, that they honor the death
and passion of Jesus Christ, in saying, during their great weeks space, before
the cross, and beholding the face of the Crucifixe, with hands elevated, and
knees bended, to wit.

On Palm Sunday, thirty three Paters and Aues* the Monday, the beads of our
Lady: the Tewsday, forty Peter's and Aues: the Wednesday, thirty Paters and
Aues: the Thursday, twelve Paters and Aues: the Friday, sixty Paters and Aues:
the Satturday forty Paters and Aues: on Easterday, twelve Paters and Aues.
Likewise, during their twelve white Fridayes: the first, three Paters and Aues:
the second, seven Paters and Aues: the third, sixty times Paters and Aues, in
honor of the sixty thorns in the crown: the fourth, forty Paters and Aues:
the fifth, forty Paters and Aues: the sixth, twelve Paters and Aues: the
seventh, thirty Paters and Aues, in honor of Judas his thirty pence: the
eight, thirty Paters and Aues: the ninth, five Paters and Aues: the tenth,
three Paters and Aues, in honor of the three nails: the eleventh, five Paters
and Aues: the twelft, fifteen Paters Aues, in honor of the fifteen horrible
signs, which shall come before the day of judgment. Such is the summary of
the style observed, in the book by them called Hours. But true worshippers
indeed, entreat of God, that it may please him, to make them feel the
efficacy of the death and passion of Jesus Christ, and desire to bear the
Image of him: to the end, that as we have borne the Image of the earthly
Adam, so we may carry the Image of the celestial Adam in our hearts, that the
holy Ghost would be the Temple thereof, and so by this means, we shall be
known by the same Jesus Christ, at his great and last coming. Truly, it is
thou Lord Jesus* whom we honor, whom we bless and thank: because thou
dying on thy Cross, have thereby given us assurance of life. To thee be all
honor and glory, with the Father and the holy spirit. Amen.

It is sweet to bear the Cross with Christ, and for Christ.
FINIS.
A Sonnet annexed to the former Treatise in French.
WE are undone, Satan has us destroyde,
Sin, death and hell is our due portion.
Ah wretch, recant, for Christ his passion,
Sin, death and hell has utterly made void.
Thereby, our first rights are to us regainde,
Thereby, health, victory, and life we hold:
Thereby, we see the light so manifold,
Thereby; heavens highest secrets are attainde,
It is the death of death, the hell of hell,
The steel that has rebated Satan's steel,
Opening the gate where blessedness does dwell*
Happy is he, this death by faith does fellc.
But he that worships wood or stone, procures
Those pains on him, which ever more endures.
There is no de^eipt nor subtilty, which Satan has not ad^^sedly studied,
thereby to make men commit Idolatry: whereby his power is no way ruynated, but
established.


