An Apology, or Defense of our days, against the vain murmurings and
complaints of many: Wherein is plainly proved, that our days are more happy
and blessed than the days of our forefathers.

In the latter days, I will power out my spirit on all flesh. Joel. 2.

In the Evening, it shall be light. Zachar. 14.7.8.9.

The Gospel shall be preached through all the world, for a witness unto all
Nations: and then shall the end come. Math. 24.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1589.

To the right worshipful, Sir Anthony Thorrold Knight, and to the virtuous
Lady Anne Thorrold his wife: Francis Trigge wishes this year with many
others, prosperous and joyful in this world, and in the world to come, life
everlasting.
Being provoked (right worshipful) by your manifold courtesies at all times
showed to my mother and me. Lest I should seem ungrateful (which of all
sins, both toward God and amongst men, I account the greatest) I was even
enforced to show my self thankful unto your worships. And whereas at this
time, every one, do not only in words but also in deeds, with their
presents and gifts, show some sign and token of this their thankefulnes: Even
so I also, out of my simple garden, have chosen a handful of Flowers, as it
were a Nosegay (the best present I could get) to offer unto you: In the which,
although some of the flowers perchance shall seem rough, and to have some
pricks, yet I trust (as the Gilliflower and the Rose) they smell sweet, that
is, taste of truth: being grounded on the undoubted truth of Gods word.

The which I have entitled, A defense of our days, against the murmurings and
complaints of many: Then the which murmuring and complaining, we have no one
sin amongst us more common: nor any one more odious to the Majesty of God,
which stoppes his blessings from us, and yearly, in my judgment pulles his
heavy wrath and plagues upon us: For amongst the old Israelites, after their
departure out of Egypt, Exodus 16.
this sin was almost continual, and daily among them: they were never
content: they still found fault with something. They either lacked water, or
victuals, or Quails: or their enemies were too mighty for them, or Moses and
Aaron took too much upon them. And by this means, those 40 years they angered
the Lord, and provoked the holy one of Israel (as says the Psalmist.) And S.
Paul by their examples gives us a lesson: 1. Cor. 10.
Be not murmurers (says he) as some of them were, and were destroyed of the
destroyer. Thus to murmr or complain, we account but a small thing, and
almost no sin at all. But behold, it is a deadly sin, it brings death,
unnatural and untimely even of the destroyer. And surely I fear me, this
one thing has caused the untimely deaths of many of our rich men this last
year: When as God had sent them plenty of corn, yet they were not content,
they would hurd up their old. They would say, it will be dear still: nay they
would devise how to make it dear. They would complain of much straw and
little corn, and so no doubt they angered the Lord God with these hurdings up
and murmurings: and even shortened their own days. For we are all taught this
general lesson by our doctor and master S. Paul: 1 Thessalonians. 5. Phil. 2.
In all things give thanks: And again, do al things without murmurings and
reasonings. And David shows us the talk and speeches of Gods servants: They
say always, the Lord be praised. And S. Paul himself, not only by word of
mouth, but by his own example teaches us this lesson, who going up to
Jerusalem, and as he went by the way, certain Prophets told him, that of a
truth he would be hardly welcomed thither, and that he should be bound and
imprisoned, who never grudged at such hard tidings, but joyfully answered:
The Lords will be done. Ecclesiasticus. 39. ver. 13.
I am not ready to be bound, but to die for the Lord Jesus. And Ecclesiasticus
gives us this counsel: Hearken unto me O ye holy children, and bring forth
fruit as the Rose that is planted by the brooks of the field, and give you a
sweet smell, as incense, and brings forth flowers as the Lylie, and give a
smell, and sing a song of praise Bless the Lord in all his works. This is a
sweet rose unto the Lord, even at Christyd. This is the sweet frankincense
that the Lord delights in. This is the pure white Lyllye flower. And none may
say, what is this? wherefore is that? At all times convenient, they shall al
be sought out. We shall one day perceive that all the works of God, even our
great fluddes, our ill seed forrowes, our great winds, our weete haruestes,
shall tend to the salvation of our souls, though they diminish the gain of
our purses. Therefore let us not say: Oh what a weather is this? Oh what a
harvest is this? But rather, the Lord be praised, who sends this. The book
of the wisdom of Solomon, in the first Chapter teaches us the same lesson, as
a chief and principal point of wisdom. The ear of Jealousy hears all
things, and the noise of the grudgings, shall not be hidden. Therefore beware
of murmuring which profits or avails nothing. See what great reasons
Solomon alleges, that we should beware of this murmuring. He compares God to
an earnest lover, which cannot abide his gifts, his tokens to be found fault
withal. The Lord marks our words and gestures, when he sends us rain,
winds, fair weather, how we take these his tokens. He tryes us whether we
love him or not. If we frown when we receive them, it is a sign we love him
not perfectly in deed. A true and a faithful lover will receive any thing,
and that cheerfully at his lovers hands: So ought we to do at Gods hands.
Secondly, all our murmurings and complainings avail nothing, they make the
weather never the better, therefore they are in vain. Beware therefore of
vain murmuring and complaining. The Lord, when as we our selves deserve to
be drowned with the old world, for despising not Noah the eight preacher of
righteousness, but eue^ eight score: He drownes our Hay and our pastures, when
as we our selves deserved to be destroyed with those same covetous Gergesites:
For despising his Gospel, and making light account of it. He killes and
destroys but our swine. He rottes our sheep. When as the Axe being laid long
ago to the root of the tree by many John Baptists: who preach unto us even
his very commission and preaching (Repent for the kingdom of God is at hand.)
And we waxing every year worse and worse, deserve quite to be cut down: he
does by his sharp winds, of wars and taxes, but pluck of our leaves, pinch
our purses. And shall we complain? or not rather commend, and extol this great
goodness of our God: and find fault with our selves, and say with David, in the
like case being plagued for numbering the people: Lo, it is I that have sinned,
and that have done wickedly, but those sheep, what have they done: Let thy
hand I pray thee, be against me and against my fathers house. Thus we ought in
all these external plagues and punishments of the Lord, to find fault with our
selves, and to say, that we have deserved even the same plagues, and not to
find fault with those judgments of God, which are far less then we have
deserved. And yet surely amongst us in these days, no sin more common. We
shall come in no place, we shall talk with no man, but we shall find him
complaining, or grieved with somewhat. The gentleman, he complains, all things
are dear, and money skant, and his charge great: which dearth in truth, him
self in some part, is the cause of: For if he let his pastures and fermes
dear, he must needs buy dear again. The husbandman he complains, that
corn is too cheap: he is not able to pay his rents and servants wages of his
crop. The Artificer, he says, there are so many of an occupacion, that one
cannot live by another: and that he can not get his debtes paid, whose prices,
without all conscience, the Lord sometimes plagues with evil paiments. The
servants some times lack masters, (men will do their work them selves) some
lack wages, some victuals. So that from the top to the toe, no part is free:
every one is grieved, every one complains. So that this plaster is very
necessary, the disease being so general, and dangerous. Therefore I conclude
with our last weeks lesson out of S. Paul's Epistle to the Philippians fit for
our times: Phil. 4.
The Lord being even now at hand in deed: Rejoice in the Lord alwaie, and
again I say rejoice: Let your courtesy or gentleness be known or manifest to
all men. The Lord is even at hand. Be careful for nothing, but in all things,
let your petitions be manifest unto God in prayer and supplication with giving
of thanks. Let us rejoice in the Lord, who is now our advocate, our lawyer that
pleads al our causes, shall be our Judge. Let our courtesy and mercifulnes be
known to al men, that we may find mercy and courtesy at the Lords hand at
that day: For with what measure we measure to others now, in the chafe and
pelf of this world, shall then no doubt be measured unto us again. The Lord
is even at hand: let us be careful for nothing, but in all our needs and
necessities, let us pray unto him, and we shall receive. What is more easy
then to ask and have? But above al things let us give thanks. Let us beware
of murmuring and complaining. So shall the Lord, not only this year, but every
year, power down his blessings upon us. Thus desiring your worships to accept
this my simple gift, praying the Lord to bless you both with his holy
spirit this year and many others, to his glory, and the benefit of this our
country, and in the world to come, of his great mercy, to crown you with
everlasting glory: I most humbly take my leave.

Welborne this xv. of November. 1589.
An Apologye, or defense of our days, against the vain murmurings and
complaints of many, wherein is plainly proved, that our days are more happy
and blessed, than the days of our forefathers.
WHereas there are many things in my opinion, (right worshipful) in this our
age out of counse: many things complained without a cause: many things and
that of them which would be counted wise men) very injuriously, and
unadvisedly given forth, and commonly uttered, then as me seems amongst
all the rest, that complaint is very iniust, vneqaull, and against all reason:
That these our days are worse than the former, that our times are unhappy and
miserable: and that the former days, the days of our fathers were happy and
very blessed, very calm, and prosperous. When as this opinion of the common
people too too common amongst us. Solomon the wisest that ever was,
Ecclesiastes ver. 12. c. 7.
in that one Sermon of his, of the excellency and vanity, and comparison of
things together, wherein he names himself a preacher to all ages and
countries: has with his verdit (as it were) plainly condemned. Say not says
he: what is the matter, or how chances it, that the former days are better
then these: for if thou say so, thou have not asked wisdom counsel
concerning this matter. As though he should say: Wisdom would teach thee
another lesson, that is to say: That things present seem always grievous to
men, and strange things pleasant, and that our own things, although they be
better in deed, to be of none account with us: and that other men's things do
please us most of all. Thus is the nature of man ever lothing things present,
and longing for things absent: despising her own things, and greedy of other
men's things: bragging of things past, and slack in things present: very
fruitful of unthankfulness.

And not only Solomon, but Jesus Christ, being the wisdom of God the father,
teaches us the same in his Gospel. He has said: many that are first shall
be the last, and the last shall be the first. Our heavenly father will have his
noble Kings, his Mecenasses, and gentlemen his Constantines, his Theophilus,
his doctors, his confessors, his Martyrs: not only in the infancy of his
Church, but also in her old age: not in her cradels, but in her graye hairs:
not in her time of increasing and flourishing, and shining, as at the first
sending down of the holy Spirit, but also in her groaning and decreasing, and
as it were now laboring time of travel under Antichrist.

And these are no less notable, no less famous, no less valiant, no less
inflamed with the zeal of Gods house than the former. And these at the last
day shall be without doubt in majesty, even to be reckoned up amongst those
first. Because his mercy is for ever, Joel. 2.
even the same toward his Church. And also our Prophet Joel does teach us the
same doctrine which did prophecy of our times, upon whom truly those ends of
the world have come more fully than upon those first Christians which do not
live in the last hour of the day, as they did, but truly in his last moment
and minute. I will power out, says the Lord by that Prophet, in those days,
my spirit upon all flesh, and your children and your daughters shall
prophecy, and your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see
visions. And also I will power out my spirit in those days upon your servants
and maidens. And I will show wonders in heaven above, and tokens in the earth
beneath, blood and fire, and the vapor of smoke. The Sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the Moon into blood before that great and notable day of
the Lord come. And it shall be, that who soever calls upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved. Who is he which will deny these things to concern our
days. The fulfilling of this prophecy does plainly prove the same in our
eyes: For from whence comes those great streams of knowledge, of light, of
learning, of wisdom in every art, in every science, in comparison of the
former times, but from this pouring out of the Holy Ghost. Then seeing in all
other arts, also in divinity, in the knowledge of tongues, and in expounding
of Scriptures, this wisdom, this light, this knowledge of the Scriptures,
this gift of tongues, this great blessing of expounding the Scriptures, and
prophesieng, (the which all the Church of God now enjoys) cannot be denied but
to be of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore this prophecy does stretch out it self
even unto us. This flood and pouring out of the Holy Ghost being begun in
the Apostles time, and being dried up with that fervent heat of worldly
troubles, and of wars in the Popes tyranny, now at the length in the
euentyde, in this twilight, is burst forth again, and flows to us most
plenteously, and also with great abundance. This we see, this let us confess,
this we must acknowledge.

The Holy Ghost is compared to the wind by our Savior: It loves the
coolenes of the air: It flies from the scortching heat of the Sun: Morning
and evening, the pleasant and wholesome blastes of it is felt and perceived.
And at noone time for the most part it is quiet, calm, and not discerned.
What? that same coopling together that follows, of miracles, of wonders of
the Sun, of the Earth, of the Moon, of lightning, (the which our times do
behold, do plainly testify, that the same prophecy going before, does
concern us, that that same stream of the Holy Ghost does reach unto us, that
it does water also our Church. (Hereof thanks be to God for this his
unspeakable gift) the states of our Realm, our Noble men, our Counselors,
are more wise: as David in the law of the Lord, and by his law then their
Elders, Seniors, Priests: yea, what do I say Priests or elders, then their
doctors, yea then their Bishops in time of Popish religion. Our children are
able to speak to the praise and glory of God, far beyond their old men.
And when as their Pharisees, their Scribes and doctors of the Law, are in
deed dombe, our infants and sucklings in age, in comparison of them cry
Osanna: And that in Greek, Hebrewe, and all kind of tongues: When as in that
blind and dark kingdom, this proverb no less old then true was commonly
used: It is Greek, it cannot be read. Timothy the young man, Apollo the Jew,
Aquila the artificer, even now in the Church of God, are more mighty in the
Scripture, can expound the word of God more perfectly: can reprehend sin
more boldly: can comfort the afflicted soul more forceablye, then those whom
they called Clergy men, as though they alone had been the Lords: then the
Schoolmen, whom they so termed, much like the Scribes amongst the Jews:
then those greye hairs, and reverend fathers, of their Hermits, Abbots,
Monks, in all their Cloisters. Such Timothies have we had very many. Some
such Jews: Tremelius.
Some such artificers in the beginning of the Gospel. Although they do deprave
and maliciously scoff at, such young men, and such workmen. But in the end
such which are young in years, and have been trained up in some occupacion in
the beginning of their life, (that with S. Paul counsels Timothy to do)
shall show them selves workmen without reproof, rightly dividing the word
of truth, against that great day of the harvest, to the shame and confusion
of their so many Priests, Elders and fathers.

Of whom, if I held my peace, their works and monuments in the Church of God
would testify the same. Wherefore this prophecy does belong unto us: those
holy streams flow unto us, and also they are ours. Hereof are those dreams,
meditations, and revelations by night of the law of the Lord to his faithful
servants, to them which love it, to them which chewe, and as it were eat it,
to them that muse in it day and night. Therefore this is an unjust complaint.
That self same thing and these our days, nature her self also has as it
were shadowed unto us, and lively expressed in the Sun. What? do we not see
in our Sun before his rising a certain brightness to go before by certain
degrees through our whole Hemispherie: An Hemispherie is the compass of the
heavens as far as we can see.
and the beams of his light, as it were sent before, before the appearing and
seeing of the body of the Sun it self: So truly, before the rising and
returning again of Jesus Christ, of that true Sun, before his most glorious
appearing in the Hemispherie, or compass of his Church, we see it come to
pass, and do now plainly feel. We see the beams of his brightness sent
before, through the whole world, through all things, through all Arts,
through all countries: this light, this brightness increases every year more
and more, we our selves do plainly perceive this.

When Wyckliffe and Hus preached, this light began, in the midst of most
thick Popish darkness. When Erasmus and Luther preached, this light was
increased, as in the dawning, or in the day break. When Calvin, Bucer, and
Bullinger preached, it was spread far and wide. But now truly, all darkness
being dispersed, it has filled all the world, it has entered into every
think, it has lightened all the air. And it increases every day, and is
more brighter and clearer. This is a most certain sign, (as also in that
material Sun) even now of Christ's drawing near, of appearing in his
majesty, and standing as it were in the last degree. And as S. James says,
standing at the door: yea, now at the very thresholde. And is not this the
very true Image of our time?

O how happy were were we, if we knew our own good things, but we are
like Israel, plainly under the government of Moses, both for Gods blessings,
and for our own blindness, unthankfulness, and murmurings. Pharaoes Egypt,
was not better than the Wilderness: his meats not better than Manna: His Leekes
not better than the Law of the Lord: The waters of Nilu^, then that, which
flowed out of the Rock: the harbors of their houses, than the ouershadowing
of the dark cloud: the Torches and lights of the Egyptians, than the Pillar
of fire which could not be put out. But yet, the blind, unthankful and
wicked Israelites, do not account these things so? How often would they
have gone back to Egypt again. How often did they wish for it again? How
often in their mouths did they highly commend it. We plainlye are in the
same case? What good things they had in the shadow, we have them in the
truth: What things they had painted unto them, as it were, we have the
things them selves, lively given unto us: What things they had in their
bodies, we have them in our souls. And yet we complain, we murmr: we are
not thankful: we wish for the former Egypt again: We commend thick
darkness: We would have four and twenty Eggs for a pennye: We have that
true Mannah, the bread which came down from Heaven, the Gospel of Jesus
Christ: But we had rather have the flesh pottes of Egypt, their Eggs, and
Onyons: Oh it was a good world then we say.

We have the armourie of Gods worde^, the whole armor of God, but we would
rather have Python, and Raamses, of Egypt Pharaoes armories. We have the Lord
our tower, our Castle, our defense: but we would rather have the tower of
Babell, and the strong castles of Babylon. These are now overthrown amongste
us, and we live without wall, without Bulwark: and yet (the Lord be thanked)
peace is established amongst us: the enemy is vanquished: Mars is vanished.
The Lord him self (as he did the Arc of Noah) has made fast the bars of
our gates. Noah may build the Arc, he may enter into the Arc, but the Lord
alone must shut it up, must make fast the door thereof. We have Christian
sufficiency, as much as we stand in need of, of all things, of Corn, of
Wine, and Oil: although not that great superfluity, and great plenty of
Egypt, or of Sodom.

But to let this plenty pass, they had task Masters, overseers, Bishops,
which compelled them to make Brick, which laid great burdens upon them: We
have sheepeheardes, which do not compel us, but exhort us, not to make Tyles,
to build and maintain the Popes Babylon: but Pearls of the Gospel, to buyld
the Church of Christ, which do not burden our consciences as they did, but
unburden them and settle them in most sure peace of salvation, of health.
Without all doubt, all the works they did in Popery, they were but brick, so
painful, so hard, so costly, fit for the fire: not for the praise of God,
because they were not commanded of him. Who will praise that work of his
servants which he commaundes not: and so although they labored and swet much
in those days, they did but make brick and wash brick (as it is in the
proverb) that is, they lost their labor: I fear they lost their reward. We
have not Pharaoes, Princes, maiestrates, which do burden their subjects above
their power, not only with rents, but with labors and toylings with their
bodies: but Moses, gentle Magistrates and courteous, which like sheep by the
hand lead the people of God, and for the need of the common wealth, lay
tributes and taxes upon them, as they are able to bear. Which do not lay that
tribute upon our husbandmen, as I have heard by custom the kings of the
Scotts do, that are bound to bear armor with the King a certain number of
days in the wars, of their own proper costs and charges at his pleasure:
which do not lay that tribute of victuals of the French men upon their
subjects, which without a pension or payment cannot eat the fatlings which
they have fedd: Which do not enjoy that Turkish slavery, where none, no not
their Noble men can give their lands to their children without their Princes
pleasure: and that under charge of Soldiers, ever ready to serve in the
wars at an hours warning. What should I reckon up here the tributes and
taxes of the Romans. Octauianus took the eighth part of al free men, of al
their goods. When Caesar was slain, every one of the Senators were commanded
to pay for every tyle of their house, six farthings: and every one of the
citizens, the four and twentieth part of all their goods. Our subsidies and
taxes are light and easy, and to be borne withal in comparison of these
ancient payments and other later exactions in other countries. We have not now
Toll gatherers which sit at the receipt of custom, who as in times past,
amongst the Jews, so amongst our ancestors gathered and scraped together
our silver, our gold, their Peter pence, as they called them, the first fruits
of our Bishops, that they might carry them out of the Realm: But which do
long before give warning of our paiments, and gather them by small portions,
nor do not transport them any where else, but lay them up in the Princes
treasury.

I would to God we did not complain without cause. These be our good things
and we see them not, and yet men do complain and find fault, and are not
content. The greatest part of men were never so rich, never so gentlemanlike
prepared and furnished with all things, both within and without. I would to God
we did not impouerish our selves by unlawful buying and wearing of silks and
veluets, against all reason and laws, only to satisfy our own fond
pleasures: and of very many persons, for no other cause but to follow the
vain fashion of the world. They must do as other do, and they must be in the
fashion, although they be beggars for their labors, and greatly offend the
majesty of God, who commands us most straitely obedience to our Princes, and
wills us not to be careful for our apparel, and to be content with couerings,
or happings, as we call them, to cover our nakedness, and not so earnestly to
seek after every vain fashion of apparel that shall be devised. This makes us
poor: 1. Tim. 6. v. 8.
this transporteth our treasure out of the Realm, although some there be,
which are pinched of cruel landlords. And yet all men do complain of great
penury, of great poverty, of want of all things. But this want, and this
complaint amongst very many in my opinion, is covetousness, which will never
have enough, which florisheth amongst all men, and not truth, to whom that
wants as well that which he has, as that which he has not, as the Philosopher
said truly.

But many do lament the pulling down of Abbayes, they say it was never merry
world since: They highly commend their liberality to the poor: their courtesy
to their tenants, their commodity to the common wealth: their planting of
woods, their setting of trees. I do not here excuse our cruel landlordes,
our oppressors of their tenaunts, our pullers down of towns, of whom as
every age has had some, so our age has too many: and from which faults the
Abbayes themselves are not free, as I suppose, as their granges do testify. I
do believe we have more strangers now in England then heretofore some of our
shires have had people.
But I speak generally of the state and condition of our days. In such great
scarsitie of all things, in such a great multitude of people, in such a great
price of all things: they are not able to show I believe in our age, so great
liberality toward so many, as we have tried these many years next going
before, and especially this dear year last past here in England. The which
dear year truly, I think the Lord sent to this our England, one amongst
so many, to the trial of our rich men, and to the glory of his name. And
here in deed, was proof and trial made of all men. The Lord be praised for
that his excellent gift, which so well disposed the hearts of a great many)
our country, towns, and villages, sent their contributions and collections to
our Cities. Our gentlemen, some of them sent waynes laden with corn of their
own to the markets to be sold only to the poor: and that by a smaller price
than the common rate was. Others which had not so good store of their own,
bought corn in the market, that they might help to supplye the wantes of
their poor neighbors at home which stood in need, and that also by an
indifferent price.

Such buyers and sellers, our Lincoln shire, and other shires adjoining,
famous gentlemen, worthy of eternal memory, had in that hard time. Then it
was worth God have mercy, to help the poor. Then it was acceptable to the
Lord: Then it was thank worthy, when all things were dear, scarce and
hard to be gotten. Here was trial of mercy: here was commendation of
liberality. Here the poor widows myte in the Gospel: and the little
barrel of Oil and flower of the widdowe of Sarepta shined and came again
into the world. These men gave more in this penury, and even of their own
scarcity and want, than all these Monks of their abundance and great
superfluity: neither of that year only, but of every year, the same now
may truly be pronounced.

The earth now waxes old and barren: it does not give his increase, as
under that black horse in the sixth Chapter of the Revelation of Saint John,
When all things were plentiful: Apoc. 6.
when it was in his flourishing youth: his virtue, his strength, his force,
now decays. And as the decaying, vading, and death of old men is sudden:
even so is it of the world it self, of the earth, and of the Heavens: now
they all wax old as does a garment, and are changed suddenly from their
old glory, fruitfulness and fertility. Wherefore these years next going
before, our husbandmen have not reaped so great plenty of corn as they were
wont to do. And yet we all must needs confess the number of poor to
increase. Wherefore our liberality is of a morsel with Job, not of a Barn
stuffed full for many years: Job. 31, 17.
of the Widows myte, not of thousand thousands of Munkish revenues: of the
little Oil of the Widow of Sareptha, not of the superfluity of the
Pharistes. And in this great scarcity and dearth of all things, in the frosen
charity of a great many, no man perished for hunger. No man dyed for want, as
we have read in their Histories, many have done, in that bountiful and
liberal kingdom, which they commend so highly.

In England, here in the days of king Henry the sixth, there was such a
dearth, that some were compelled to make bread of Beans, and bracking or
Fearne roots, which cast many their lives. In the latter end of Queen Marie
her reign, in that great dearth which was then, as I have heard, many of the
poor had perished for hunger, if the funeralles of the rich had not relieved
them better than their alms or gifts. And as I have heard, the Acornes that
they did eat then, killed many for all that. But amongst us, this I can
truly report, that I heard say, very many were not ashamed to confess, that
they could get more by begging from door to door weekly, than they could
yearne by working for wages continually. The Lord does so open the hearts of
his secret ones, that his poor should be relieved, that his Gospel should
be fruitful, even now also, as in the days of the Apostles. And that his
name should be glorified. But in the former cheapenesse of all things, in
their great plenty, and in not so great number of poverty: What was it to
give their bread and cheese, (for they seldom gave money) and such like. And
such were those days, they themselves being witnesses.

But to return to our Monasteries again. It is pity says one that the
houses were pulled down, the houses might have stand, the abuses might have
been taken away. But whosoever speaks thus, they speak unadvisedly: for
they open their mouth against the Lord. The pulling down: the defacing: the
sacking of these houses was the Lords doing. It was not the power of any
Prince, of any mortal man. These men were famous sinners against the Lord (as
were the men of Sodomah) and their sins, as it were heaped one upon another,
reached even up to Heaven: although they were perchance to them selves and
their neighbors bountiful and beneficial. The sins of Sodomah reigned
amongst them: Such sins Ezechiell describes unto us, (that is to say)
Pride, Idleness, Ezech. 16.
fullness of bread, and unmercifulness. In so much that the fatness and
haughtiness, and idleness of Monks, came into a Proverb amongst all men:
In so much, that idle persons were called Abbey lubbers: fatt men were said to
have Abbots faces.

But there was greater sins than these amongst them: Idolatry the first
sin in the tenth commandment: Blasphemy of the name of God, the next sin
also, by their vain and rash oaths, by things of no value, as by the Mouse
foot, and such like (which they counted no sin:) yea, and the third sin
also was amongst them, the breaking and profaning of the Lords Sabbath: whose
observation and keeping, is chiefly in preaching and hearing the word of God.
As our Lord Jesus himself, being here on earth taught us to keep it. He
preached every Sabbath day, Luke 4. Luke 4. v. 16.
For so he spent his Sabaothes: In doing good to our neighbors, not in
idleness of the body, as the Pharisees taught? not in singing Odes, and
Himnes, without understanding, as they were wont. What shall we reckon up here
their other sins beside these. There was one amongst them, notable, and
deadly sin, as they term it, and chief of all other, both against God, and
against man, which truly they shall never wash away with any sacrifice. And
that is this: that under show of holiness, and for covetousness of gain, they
seduced the people, and teaching a false way of salvation, they threw headlong
(as much as in them lay) into hell, even thousands of souls, without the great
mercy of God. Through covetousness, making merchandise of men, as S. Peter
says, 2. Pet. 7.
and selling souls, as says S. John. This selling of salvation, of Masses, of
pardons, shall condemn the covetous deceivers, before the Lord. If they had
given these freely, perchance their simplicity might have made a place of
pardon for them, but now their covetousness, must needs be condemned.

Should God have let these remain? Nay, should he suffer their houses to
stand? Their cry now, even as of Sodom was great and had ascended into the
ears of the Lord of hosts. They were sinners against him, though they seemed
simple, and beneficial to others. Although, what liberality I pray you call
you this? To fill the belly and to kill the soul. Such surely was their
hospitality, even as Satan's Apple: all their courtesies, as Judas kiss, an
unhappy present to mankind: a cruel courtesy, and a pestilent liberality.

But yet for all this, says one: some of the houses might have stand, it
pittieth many to see their ruins: he might say the same of Sodom. Sodom was
a pleasant place profitable to men, as it were a Paradise of God. But the Lord
for their sins, did overthrow this pleasant Sodom, and their possessors for
ever. And the same has the Lord pronounced by his Prophet Jeremy in his 50
Chapter, of our Babylon, and spiritual Sodom, which is also called by the
same name by S. John in his Revelation. As the Lord has destroyed Sodom and
her Cities adjoining, so shall he surely destroy our Rome and spiritual Sodom.
Now the destruction of Sodom was terrible, wonderful and sudden: In the
compass of viii. miles to this day, as witnesses Strabo: Strabo.
The earth yields nothing where it stood but fiery smoakes of brimstone and
such like. And even so suddeinly and forcibly shall Rome one day be destroyed.
The Lord has begun her destruction already, by pulling down these her high
walls: Apoc. 18. ver. 21.
Her plagues shall come in one hour as S. John says, and she shall be as a
Millstone cast into hell, never to rise up again. Therefore cease to marvel
at her desolation, or to lament her fall, but with speed rather fly out of
her every one, lest you be partakers of her plagues.

But the Abbeys were good to their tenants, they were good land lords. Well,
suppose they were so: It is no courtesy which is by compulsion. It is no
benevolence, which is violent, when one can neither will nor choose. They were
in these days compelled almost to this courtesy: for by continual wars,
which these Popes many times raised, and by grievous plagues which the Lord
laid upon them for the contempt of his word, men were so consumed, and so few
left alive, so few honest substanciall men, and good husbands remaining, which
would pay their rentes, and till their grounds, that many houses stood
without a tenant: many fermes without husbandmen: yea many lordships without
any to dwell in them. The landlords in those days were glad to seek their
tenants: yea, as I have heard to hyre them that should till their grounds and
be their tenants. A good tenant was then hard to be found. Every man then kept
that his father occupied, and desired no more. Then there was such plenty of
all things, and so few men, that they were scant able to pay very easy
rents of very good fermes. This we have heard of our ancestors, in so much
that for this cause many Fermes have line untilled.

And I pray you then, what courtesy was this. They sold then as dear as they
could all things, they would loose nothing of their price. They sold all
things cheap in deed, but there was good cause why: because they could get no
more for it. They let their lands for easy rents: but such, as often times
they were glad to put the keye under the door and depart, not being able to
pay them. And who would not then let a Ferme for a coople of Capons, rather
then have it stand without a tenant. Who would not sell 24 Eggs a penny, then
keep them till they be rotten. Surely such was the benevolence of those days:
rather of the time it self, than of the men: of necessity, then of free will,
among the best sort: Although I do not deny in that blind age, there were some
which with the Pagans and heathen Philosophers, in those moral virtues of
liberality and charity, were famous. But because they did that without faith,
without the light of Gods word in the darkness, they did not please God no
more then did those Heathens. But what do they commend their liberality to
their tenant. Pharaoh the Egyptian, their pattern and patron in this point
far excelled them: who coming by his lands, not by free gift, as they did
commonly, but buying them with his corn, let them it again for the fifth
part a great deal easier then they did. Surely a good bountiful landlords.
For so Joseph his steward declared his pleasure unto the people. Genesis 47. ver.
23.24.
Then Joseph said to the people: Behold I have bought you this day, and your
land for Pharaoh. Lo here is seed for you: sow therefore the ground: and of
the increase ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts
shall be yours for the seed of the field and for your meat, and for them of
your household, and for your children to eat. Behold the goodness of this
Pharaoh to his tenants, he was content that they should occupy his land, and he
would find them seed, and they should pay but the fifth part of their
profits and no more to him whether it were great or small for his rent. He had
care of their families and children, which a great sort of our landlords in
letting of their lands at this day have not. The four parts says he, shall be
for your wives and children. We now a days will scantly let our land to
half part, with many reseruations and bonds. Joseph did not decree this
without Pharaohs mind, else he had been an unfaithful Steward. But this
Pharaoh so good to his subjects, which did not change the rentes of his
ancestors, only he changed his mind toward the people of God, which put
from him Moses and Aaron the Lords ministers, which neglected and set lightly
by the Lords law and his commandments, is afflicted with many plagues, is
counted the Lords open enemy, and at length is drowned in the red Sea, Our
Bishops and Abbots were not so courteous as this Pharaoh was to their tenants:
neither were they good to so many as he was: he was good to all his whole
realm. But to hear the word of God, to receive courteously his Ambassadors,
to obey only his commandments, is the only work and chief work of all
other. And this is a work of the ears to hear, not of the earerings to make
an Image: of Gods word, not of our will. And without the work of hearing and
obeying Gods word: Pharaoes goodness to his tenants: Saules sacrifices to God
himself: David's ready and willing mind to buyld Gods house: the strait laws
and ceremonies of fasting and living of the Pharisees, received by tradition
from their fathers, are vain worshippings, are as the sin of witchcraft, are
abominations unto the Lord. And because they lacked this work, so were all
their works, so were all their goodness to their tenaunts, so were al their
strait rules of fasting, and of their rough apparel, and scourging of
themselves.

What shall I repeat or rippe up here, the cutting down of woods, the spoiling
of vestments and coapes, the breaking of Images, the expulsion of Monks and
Nuns, the ransaking of those rich goodly houses, which things many complain
of, grieve very many to remember at the hearts. We shall find in the books of
the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel far greater spoils and expulsions, and
breakings and hewing down, and ransacking of those good kings Ezechiah and
Josiah then these were. Wherefore these things now should not seem strange or
wonderful unto us. And these Kings of Ecclesiasticus, in the greater number of
other Kings which builded those high places, which planted those groves, which
ordained these Priests: these Kings I say, which pulled down their buildings,
and cut down their plantings, and expelled their Priests, are counted only
famous not infamous, only religions not impious, not spoylers but reformers of
Gods house. Eccl. 49. ver. 4.
These be his word: All kings, except David, Ezechias, and Josias, have done
wickedly. For the kings of Judah forsaking the law of the Lord, have forsaken
God himself. These three kings did lay wast groves, aulters, high places, but
they forsook not the law of the Lord: and therefore their horn is exalted
with glory: and their remembrances is for ever. So truly with the Lord and
with all godly and faithful men, which dare ground their faith on Gods word. Our
kings which have pulled down the Abbeyes, and expelled their Munkes, are also
famous and in great estimation. We may say: O thrice happy and fair
Sunneshine days of ours, the which all the clouds of ignorance being
dispersed, all the vailes of superstition being rent in pieces, all the
monumentes, and pillars of Idolatry being pulled down, have Jesus Christ the
true Son of righteousness, of salvation and truth, most clearly shining,
and with his beams most plainly glistering in them.

Neither do I here justify or allow the wickedness of the world, which daily
increases: the charity of many, which is waxed cold, nay plainly frosen.
Neither do I commend all the ground which we the Lords husbandmen do till, but
the fourth part only which receives the seed and keeps it. We must needs
confess we have much thornie ground, much stony ground, many high ways,
wherein we are some time compelled to throw the Lords seed. Therefore I do
not allow here or commend that old beaten way of Papistrie, which many do
follow when they come to the Church to hear the word of God thinking thus
with themselves: what seed soever shall be sown in their hearts, they will not
receive it. They will believe as they have believed. Neither the stony ground
of time seruers, which ground their religion upon the Prince and not upon God:
and will turn which way the Prince turns. Neither the thornie ground of
covetous men, which in the Church receive the word of God gladly: but when
they come home, or into the field, their chestes and their hedges choke it.
All these grounds I allow not. And these are too too common in every field,
in every town. That same beaten way, most old men follow: that same stony
way, hypocrites tread: that same thornie way, covetous misers trace. And
these being put altogether, they will make a great show. But there shall be
such always. Our Savior has told us before. Therefore the faithful marueil
not, when they meet withal, and see many such. But yet for all this, their
barrainnesse and unfruitfulness cannot, nor ought not to defraud or deprive the
fourth ground, the good ground, the Lords field, of his just praise and
commendation, which of one seed yeeldes unto the Lord, some thirty, some
sixty, some an hundred fold of fruit. This land is worthy of praise, and
such land, the Lord be thanked, we have amongst us. I may justly pronounce
our days happy, and our selves unhappy, of whom now very many of us
stumble at noone day, and slide in the light, and run headlong into the
pittes of sin in the Sunneshine, who would not praise the clearenes of our
time, our Sunneshine, our great light and knowledge. And again, who would not
wonder at the foolishnes and sottishnes of many men: the blindness of their
eyes, the stumbling of their feet, their falling down (even groueling) for
all this light. Who would believe that charity should wax cold in such daily
kindling of the Lords fire amongst us: that covetousness should once appear
amongst us, being so daily and diligently wed out and plucked up by the
roots: that usury durst once show her face, being arraigned and condemned so
often in all courts, by all laws, in all languages both in Lattine and
English. That oppression of any landlordes to their tenants should be once
named, thought on, or felt amongst us, in such great knowledge of brotherly
love. These are the blockishnes of men. These are the blindness of their eyes,
whose minds (as the Apostle says) the Prince of this world has blinded, lest
the glorious light of the Gospel should shine unto them. This is no just
complaint, or condemnation of the days, then the which days the Lord gave to
the world never any more clear, more blessed, more laden with all blessings,
the lantern of his word, the sun of his Gospel, so many clear and
innumerable stars of his ministers, shining, glistering and flourishing
amongst us.

They therefore that stumble in such great light, may condeme themselves, not
the times: the men, not the days: their wilful negligence, not our wonderful
Sunshine.

But the greatest and most grievous and dangerous complaint (of all) follows.
Many urge the discentions of our time, and the sects, that like Tares are
sprung up with the Gospel, and the bitter speeches and sharp contentions of
the professors of the Gospel amongst themselves. They remember not, that
amongst the Parables of his kingdom, our Savior also intermingled this, of
the Tares, sown by the envious man, even in the midst of his wheat: and to
have stopped the mouths of his disciples, which marvelled at this, and were
greatly troubled at this matter, by his commandment and authority: And also
in his doctrine to have many times taught this principal point to strengthen
their faith, and to avoid the offenses of the wicked chief of all other.

Do ye think that I am come to set peace upon the earth? No, but rather
division: and this division is the overthrow of Satan: the breach of his
peace, the overthrow of his kingdom: For Satan the devil himself has a
peace in his kingdom: as in another place our Savior does teach us, or else
his kingdom could not stand: and the world loves her own. This peace, the
doctrine of our Savior Jesus Christ breaks, and quite takes away. The bounds
of Laws shall be broken for my name, says our Savior, nay the bonds of Nature,
and that into two parts, nay into twenty parts: from henceforth, there shall
be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three. A small
number was wont to be the mother of love, and a great many the mother of
sedition and quarrels: but here, neither frwnes of number, nor nighnes of kindred
shall make peace: for the father shall be at variance against the son, and the
son against his father. And the mother against her daughter, and the daughter
against her mother: the daughter in law against her mother in law, and the
mother in law against her daughter in law. And even now the world marueiles,
slanders, and complayneth at these discentions of sons and fathers against
the Gospel and name of Jesus. This thing in my opinion that Satan goes
about, is that he might quite abolish and take away credit from the Gospel.
Our Savior Jesus has foretold us the same thing so often that we should not
be offended thereat. The Lord by this means tries some, whether they will
rather stick to their old father Zebebe mending his nets, or with James and
John, forsake al and following Jesus Christ calling them. Whether at the Lords
commandment they would forsake Sodom with Lot and his daughters, or for
their own pleasure with his wife, they would look back, and be turned into a
pillar of salt. Other some, by this means, the Lord quite refuses and
casts of, who being well brought up of their parents, and in true religion,
yet they had rather quite cast off the fear of God and obedience to their
parents, and to shake hands with the Prince of darkness, Gods utter enemy,
then to tread the trace of Gods holy commandments, and of their fathers
wholesome instructions. And are not such children, both of God their father and
of man their father, justly to be forsaken. Neither the agreement and concord
of al men in the darkness and ignorance of the Popes religion, whereof they
brag so greatly does avail any thing to the confirmation and truth of
that blind and superstitious religion. For in the night season, if we mark
well as things are quiet and peaceable. Nay, the quietness and peace of the
night is far greater then the quietness of the day: But who would then
therefore commend the night before the day. Such was their blind and dark
peace, concord, and agreement which they had.

Again, Satan himself has a certain kind of unity in his kingdom, as
our Savior witnesses in the Gospel. If Satan should rise against Satan,
and be divided, says he, he could not continue but should have an end. Satan
therefore in his kingdom has a peace, and surely to our outward senses a
far greater peace then the Church of God has, which outwardly in this world
like a ship is tossed hither and thither, and is never at rest. But he
lacks that inward peace, that peace of conscience which the Church and
household of God only enjoys. Though Satan and his members do make a fair
show of peace and quietness outwardly: yet they are tormented and vexed
inwardly. So that outward peace, is no argument of truth, but rather that
other inward peace. For that crafty serpent creeps softly, and goes stilye,
and brings in under hand like a crafty iuggler without any noise, without
any words, all his trishe trashe: But this peace overthrows the works of
God, denounces war to his word: this creeping steals the word of God
from the hearts, nay from the ears, from the eyes, and knowledge of all
Christians. Hitherto tends all his stealing steps to this end, his quiet
times. Such was the unity, or security, or drowsines, rather of the former
times.

And here by the way, because they find fault with our agreement, I pray you
note the consent and agreement of the devil and of the Pope together, most
manifest, that no man of indifferent judgment can deny. The devil (says
our Savior) When the word is sown in the heart of man, he comes privily and
steals it away lest it should take root there.

The Pope, he steals and plainly conueyeth the word out of the Church, so
that it shall neither come into the ears, nor into the heart. And is not this
manifest? Does not the Pope forbid the word of God to be read in the Church,
but in Latin, in a tongue unknown to the hearers. So that it were as good not
read to them at all: they are never a whit the better for the reading of it.
And shall we not say then? that the Pope and devil in stealing Gods word
from our hearts do agree. Is not this too too manifest? Such is their peace
and agreement they have, quite contrary to Jesus Christ. But the house of
Jesus Christ is buylt upon an hill, it has many cold blastes, and sharp
storms. His ship sailing in the Sea of this world, has many storms,
quick sands and rocks.

That same Whirlewinde whereof Saint Mark speaks in his fourth Chapter,
which from out of the earth is suddenly carried upward to Heaven, would as it
were, blow the ship out of the world. All Gods children, all his servants
are of the day, and of the light, they sustain troubles, cares, they are
vexed they are pinched. They carry their cross with their Master Jesus
Christ. They are never as long as they continue in this wilderness, free from
the pinchings of hunger, thirst, and scarsitie: from the perils of enemies,
both at home, as of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: and abroad, as Amalech, Balacke
and such like. They are still in the field, their life is a warfare, and this is
their trial, this is their crown, this is their victory. This is the wisdom
of the serpent, which the Gospel commands, who stop their ears to all the
voices of the charmers, charm they never so wisely, that they may hear their
Jesus alone, which believe not the doctrines of these false Prophets, for all
their miracles, which will not depart from the word of the Lord: Deuteronomy. 13.
For the Lord suffers some time false Prophets to do miracles, as Moses does
teach us, to try us whether we will stick to his word alone or no.

Hereby their Egles eyes are tried whether they can behold Jesus Christ the
true Sun without twinkling of their eyes or no? Only the Eagles can do so:
The eyes of other birds cannot endure it: these turn their eyes aside to
flies and mottes in the Sun, to fat prays, which the tempter castes in their
way. The Christian Eagles respect only the glory of Jesus Christ. Therefore
David prayed: O Lord, turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity, and
quicken me in thy way. These vanities, these flies, these motes in the Sun
are left in the air, to try the zeal of true Christians. Deuteronomy. 33.
The which Moses taught before his death, all the Levites of Israel, and our
Savior Jesus, all his disciples, which say to their father and mother, we
know you not: aus to their brethren, we care not for you, no not for their
own children: But they keep the word of the Lord, and his covenant. These
faithful Levites prefer Jesus Christ and his Gospel to all Counsails,
Fathers, yea, to their own natural fathers, to their beloved wives, to their
dear children: yea, to their own soul and life. This great courage of theirs
could not so clearly appear without some light skirmishing at home amongst
their brethren. And without open war abroad against Heretics, from whence
that trial of spirits which Saint John commands to all his children is
had. From hence that spirice of discretion and judgment, 1. Cor. 3.
whereof all the servant of God in some measure are partakers appears. He
that is spiritual, says the Apostle, judges all things, and now all
Christians are spiritual. For they which have not the spirit of Christ, are
none of his. And all the sons of God, are led with the spirit of God. And
they all by this holy bond, are knitte to their head Jesus Christ. And
therefore the holy Ghost is called the bond of peace. They all can discern
light from darkness, Christ from Belyall: They are not without sense, without
spirit, fleshly, not having the spirit as are those false Prophets, whereof S.
Jude prophesies, as are those Idolaters, of whom David says, Their Idols and
graven Images are without sense and understanding, and so are they that made
them, and so are all they that put their trust in them. And surely such was the
insensiblenesse of many Idolaters in times past, they were as void of true
sense of God, even as the Image which they worshipped. But the true Christians
all have hereof a feeling and understanding: and they must use their senses,
they must try their feeling, they must use their discretion. The Lord has
not given them these his graces in vain.

What? this variety of judgments and opinions does only beautify the Church
of God. Hereof was the great glory and beauty of Moses Tabernacle, of the
diversity of oblations, of the variety which every one offered. If they had all
brought things of one kind, it had not been so glorious and pleasant to the
eyes. Hereof when as they all agreed in the manner of their offering, in this
one thing, that they offered willingly, and freely, as for the matter, not
only gold and silver, but also brass, not only blew and purple, but also
scarlet, not only linen and fine silk, but also Goats hair, were accepted
and received. All these being aptly joined together, according to that form
which Moises saw in the Mount, did give great glory and beauty to this
Tabernacle. Salomons temple also contained in it diverse furnitures of nature,
diverse functions, and helps of art. And hereof was the glory of it
contained, Ephesians. 4.
what also means that meeting of all men in unity of faith, in the Church of
Christ, but the diverse ways, and diverse judgments of many. What means
this prophesyings of two or three in the Church, and congregation, and the
judgment of the rest, but diverse senses, and sentences of holy Scripture,
what means that prophesying or interpretation of scripture, according to the
Analogy of faith which Saint Paul makes mention of 12. Romans But that there
is a certain compass of discenting and varying in the Church of God, so that
it be within the bounds. What means that marriage garments of the Church her
self. 45. Psalm, which Salomons wife no doubt did shadow out unto us. The
Queen stood on the right hand in a vesture of gold wrought about with
diverse colors: and what means that needle work that follows, all the
glory of the kings daughter is within: In a vesture of gold wrought with
needle work, shall she be brought unto the king. What I say, mean all these
varieties, all these diversities, all these needle works, but wholely a
diversity of judgments, and as it were the soft stinginges of Bees one
toward an other, which make the Lords honny.

And yet all this without death, without destruction, without damnation.

Therefore in vain cry our adversaries, and urge this as Hercules dart.
Luther and Calvin, do dissent concerning the Lords Supper. Therefore if
Luther be saved, Calvin is damned. Therefore in vain do many whisper this
into the ears of the simple people, they strive amongst them selves and that
very bitterly, of certain rites and ceremonies of the Church, of abuses of
Ecclesiastical matters, of the garment of this Queen. Therefore their
religion is naught, and no credit is to be given to their Sermons, therefore
there is no truth amongst them. For say they, there is but one truth, and
that simple and peaceable. In deed to confess the truth, they strive of the
vesture of the Queen, (that is to say) of Sacrifices and Ceremonies, but not
of the life of faith, they quarrel amongst them selves in deed, of the
building upon of gold and silver and precious stones, but not of the
foundation of Jesus Christ. For truly besides faith in Jesus Christ all the
other points of our religion are but the garments, ornaments, exercises,
iewelles, badges, fruits, companions, waiting maids of this our mother of
true religion. Not her substance, not her life, not her salvation. And
therefore first of all as concerning faith, only says our Prophet Habakuck.
The just shall live by faith, and the same saying the Apostle Saint Paul
repeateth often after him. The first to the Romans the seventeenth verse: and
the third Chapter to the Galathians, and the tenth to the Hebrews: as an
undoubted truth without any addition of works, or any thing else. And our
Savior Christ him self teaches us the same thing. He that believes in me,
though he were dead shall live. And he that believes not shall be damned.
And also the Apostle Saint John. He that has the son has life. But as
concerning Sacraments, the Apostle Paul to the Galathians says: as many as
are Baptized have put on Jesus Christ. And of good works the same Apostle
says to the Collossians, Put upon you as the elect of GOD, bowelles of
mercy, etc. And to the Hebrews of the same he says: But we hope better of
you, and things accompanying salvation. Therefore works accompany salvation,
they are not salvation it self. And godliness he calls the best exercise:
and circumcision, a seal of righteousness: These names do declare the nature
of all these.

Then truth in deed is but one, but as long as she is here on earth, she is
not without a veale, without a mufler. If truth were so easy to be met
withal, then all labor of seeking, of searching, of studying, was but in
vain. If either the Church it self, at any time could embrace truth in her
perfect age, absolute in all respects, then there should be no increase of
knowledge, as long as we live here in this world. The which growing in
knowledge, that it should be in us all, the Apostles Peter and Paul, do very
earnestly exhort and command. If the millitant Church here on earth could
clyme up to the highest degree of knowledge, then in vain were that perfection
in knowledge, and not proper to the triumphant Church in heaven. But as yet the
Scriptures are to be searched of us day and night, besides the light which the
fathers have left us, They are written for our further learning and
instruction. As the Church of the Israelites had many mansions, and going
forwards, even till it came to the bounds of the land of Canaan to that
land of the Lords rest, so no doubt the Church of God shall have as long as
it is in this wilderness, until it come to the very limitres of that
spiritual land of promise: I mean the kingdom of heaven, in this
wilderness though it have some abode, some stoppes, some stays, as yet no
continual rest, no continual stop prefixed, no not of knowledge: In this
veil of darkness we have only shadows, Images, dark speeches, parables,
degrees, gresings, as it were of knowledge of things. But on the top of a
hill, whether we shall ascend there is a perfection of all things, the
absolute knowledge of the things them selves, the very naked face of truth,
the highest degree, the very crown of understanding and knowlenge her self.
Why therefore do we marvel here, the diverse searchings of men after the
diverse degrees of knowledge and understanding, the diverse leuelinges and
roauings of many, although at the mark, ye sometimes beside the mark. But as
long as they shoot at one mark, that is to say Jesus Christ, as long as they
tread his way of truth, as long as they seek for Jesus Christ, and preach him,
as long as they bear no weapons against him, and the salvation which he
purchased with his own blood, they are to be borne withal, they are not to be
condemned, they are not to be forbidden, they are to be admitted as soldiers
into his camp: but besides all these things how unequally they weigh all
things here, and how smally do they consider in all arts the Lords diverse
ways and judgments: Of Physicians, in diseases of the body diverse medicines
are prescribed in one disease. Shall we therefore condemn Physic. Also of
lawyers in the self same cause there are diverse allegations, diverse
proceedinges, sometimes diverse sentences: shall we therefore abrogate laws,
shall we not use the helps and counsels of both these in our necessities and
causes. This variety is man's frailty: from whence comes that old Proverb.
As many heads, as many devises: as many men, so many minds. Nay in my opinion
this variety is a certain print or footesteppe of the Image of God left, and
is yet remaining in the mind of man. That of the same matter, of the same
cause, of the same theme, two excellent wise and well learned men shall never
write think or speak the same things. But diverse, and yet truth: sondrie,
and yet excellent: Of such sentences in the same causes, of such diverse
handling of the same matter, very excellently of diverse men, we have many
examples. But to let this pass in this thing me thinks the great wisdom of
our heavenly Father most clearly appears, who as in the faces of so many
men, being such a small part, in so many countries, thorough so many ages, has
put a beautiful kind of difference, so that of countriemen, of kinsmen, of
twins: there is no two, one like another in every respect. And yet all their
countenances very comely and beautiful: even so likewise in the mind of man,
he has put a certain comely and divine difference that they shall think and
speak and devise diuersely, and yet all to the purpose, and yet cunningly, and
yet wisely. Neither this thing only clearly appears in all arts, and in
the workemanshippe of God the Father: but also in the divine inspiration, and
wonderful framing of the holy scriptures, by the holy spirit. As in the
writings of the Prophets and Evangelists, there is a most beautiful
harmony: So there is also a pleasant variety, and a wise diversity
intermingled. The fathers also had among themselves this variety of opinions
and diverse interpretations of places of scripture, as we may see in their
works: yet for all this those fathers which were at discention amongst
themselves were not by and by Heretics and damned and judged to hell fire.

Our Savior Jesus Christ called himself a vine, and all his branches. And the
Apostle S. Paul calls him an Olife, and us all wild Olifes, which should be
grafted in him. Now we see in the vine, and in the Olife, that all branches do
not grow out straight, nor of one side, nor are all of like height: but some
are crooked, some are straight, some are heigh, some are low, some are
stretched forth, some are bowed in: yet all are fast in the root, all are
fixed in the body, all are partakers of the sap, and this diversity of the
bowghes, is the beauty of the tree. So truly in the vine Jesus Christ, in the
true Olife, although all his branches be not plain, although all his bows be
not straight, although all his grafts be not low: yet as long as they remain
in the vine, as long as they are partakers of that sap, which comes from
the root, and as long as the words of Jesus remain in them, and by faith
they are grafted in him: yet they live all, both crooked and straight, both
stretched out, and drawn in, both high and low, and they flourish without
doubt, neither do they wither, neither as they which hate the Gospel would
gladly have them, are they cast out into the fire. This crookedness of the
boughs, as it is manifest in every man's eyes and apparent, so they are not
ashamed to confess it with their own mouths, but the root is as certain,
and the grafting in as sure, and the unity or joining with the stock no less
manifest. The faith of the Gospel is that thing by the which alone we are
grafted into the truth. As the Apostle teaches us plainly in the 10. of the
Romans. An incredulity or unbelief is that thing, by the which the Jews
although they were old men and fathers, and kin to Christ Jesus according to
the flesh were broken off. Hereof then is the life of the bowghes, wherefore
although some of them be so far stretched out a sunder, that they cannot be
brought together, although other some do grow a loft, and will bow to none,
being wise in their own eyes, although other some be crooked, being made
crooked of the crafty serpent, and being turned out of the straight way, of
the law of the Lord: yet as long as they have this grafting in of faith, as
long as they draw that lively sap from the root, as long as the words of
Jesus remain in them, as long as they believe them, love them, read them,
muse on them day and night, so long they are branches, so long the children of
Abraham, so long boughs of the true Olife. Let our adversaries take heed here
which do offend at the very knotte of the grafting, which divide and part in
sunder their faith, which do not suck only the sap of Jesus Christ, that
is, his words, as necessary to their salvation: but also the Popes cold water,
and the vain doctrines of men, and the uncertain traditions of their fathers.
Let them take heed I say least they wax rotten, least the bark of the stock
do not cover them, least they be not safe and sound: and so as rotten and
corrupt branches be hewne off and quite thrown away, of the heavenly
husbandman God the Father himself: for not to believe the gospel is a mark
of the reprobate, a badge of those that shall be damned, a certain sign of the
bowghes broken off. As both the Apostles Peter and Paul, may teach us. If
judgment begin of the house of God says S. Peter, Pet. 1. Epist. 4. cap. v.
17. 2. Ep. These. 1. cap. verse. 8.9.
what shall be the end of those which will not believe the Gospel of God. And
S. Paul says, the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with the Angels of
his power in a flame of fire, giving vengance to those which know not God, and
which do not harken to, and obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. All such
are not of the Lords family, all such are withered boughs, thrown forth to
everlasting fire. And here let our recusants take heed they be not such.

Now follows the common complaint, but not so bitter as the former, nor so
properly a complaint, as of weeping and bewailing of the simple sort, and
especially of women. Who going into the Churches, and seeing the bare walls,
and lacking their golden Images, their costly coapes, their pleasant Orgaines,
their sweet frankincense, their gilded chalices, their goodly streamers, they
lament in themselves, and fetch many deep sighs, and bewail this spoiling
and laying waste of the Church as they think. The like bewayling of the people
of the Jews, and of those old men which now returning from Babylon, had seen
the glory of the first temple with their eyes is repeated unto us, in the 2.
chap. of the Prophet Aggey. They missed Salomons gold, his marble, his Cedars
his c^ruings, they accounted ye house which Zorobabel builded as nothing to it.
But what did the Lord teach them by the Prophet, what glory did he promise to
the second building, what kind of ornaments did he prepare for it. It
follows in the Prophet.

The same word which I couenanted with your fathers, when I brought them out of
the land of Egypt, and my spirit shall stand in the midst of you, fear you
not now says the Lord of hoasts. Yet once again (seems it but a small thing
unto you? Agge. 2. ver. 5.6.7
) And I will move the heavens with the power of my holy spirit, and with the
preaching of my word, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land. And I will
move and make quake for fear all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall
come, and he shall fill this house with glory says the Lord of hosts. What
do ye wish for gold? Golds and silver are mine says the Lord of hoostes. If it
please me I could employ these to beautify this house, but I will give it
greater glory. The glory of this latter house having nothing but bare walls,
is greater then of the former, so gylted, so carved, says the Lord of hoosts:
and in this place I will give peace says the Lord of hoosts. This is the
glory of the second temple, this is the glory of our Churches, although the
walls be not painted, although their vestures be not silk, although their
roode lofts be broken down, although they want their frankincense and
Orgaines, yet the word of the Lord and his spirit shall stand steadfastly in
the midst of them. The Gospel of Jesus Christ ringeth in the^, although
their Orgaines cease, that sweet savor of life to life is felt, although that
earthly frankincense be put out, that pearl of the Gospel, which our Savior
counsailleth all wise marchantes to buy, though they sold all that they had,
is present, is set forth to, and offered to all men freely. Although the
pearls of this world, and jewels, which are but clay and mire are absent,
these things alone deck and adorn our Churches, delight the souls of the
faithful, above all harmony and music in the world: please the ears better
then all Orgaines, are sweeter in their noses, than all frankincense, and do
refresh all their senses with a heavenly kind of chearefulnes and liuelines.
Their Images do not so lively picture out Jesus Christ unto us as his Gospel
does. Their Images were all false, their roodes were lies, their pictures
painted out a false Christ unto us: for they painted him like a goodly young
man, comely, beautiful and well favored in all respects, as fine as the
Painter, or caruer could devise: but ye Prophet Esaias, who indeed painteth out
Christ unto us truly, and his true countenance and shape of body, describes
him far otherwise, as we may read in his 53. chap. For he did grow before the
Lord like as a branch, and as a root in a dry ground, he has neither
beauty, nor favor when we look upon him, there shall be no fairness, we
shall have no lust unto him. He is despised and abhorred of men, he is such a
man as has good experience of sorrows and infirmities. We have reckoned him
so vile, that we hidd our faces from him, such a one in deed was Jesus
Christ: this was his true picture, and what beauty can there be of a tree that
grows in a dry ground, what comeliness in a monster of men and the outcast
of the people. For so David also calls him in the Psalms. Psalm. 22. verse. 6.
Esaias. 40.
Their Orgaines of brass do not so much delight the ears, as the trumpets of
his preachers does. Their golden coapes as they termed them, put upon their
Priests backs did not so much adorn the Church, as the book of Gods word in
their hands. We bring forth this pearl of the Gospel more precious then all
their Vestmentes, Chalices, Censours, Images, broken, rent, sold (the losses
whereof they do complain) and we put it against all their complaints. And
they which are wise will cease to complain or murmr any more, and will say
we have made a happy exchange. What shall I reckon up here the moving of all
Nations, the desire of all Nations, Jesus Christ the peace of conscience, the
fullness of heavenly glory, which all that word of the Lord and his spirit
as in time past to the Jews temple, even so now have brought unto us. This
word has rowsed up the Nations which before was a sleep, this voice of the
Lord has called them up even from the dead sleep of blindness and bondage.
Now that which David said of Israel coming out of Egypt, the same may we say
of the people of Christ, coming out of the spiritual Egypt. When Israel came
out of Egypt and the house of Jacob from amongst the strange people: Judah was
his sanctuary and Israel his Dominion: the sea saw that and fled, Iordaine
was driven back. The mountains skipped like Rams, and the little hills
like young sheep. So truly even now in our days the Lord being present in
Judah his Sanctuary, which confesses his name alone: and in Israel his
dominion, which wrastleth with prayers and supplications, and not with his own
strength, and merits. The sea of all people and Nations almost have fled
back from our Pharao, the Pope: and Iordaine that most commodious river of
sailing to Rome for pardons, and dispensations, is driven back. And these same
great mountains of kings and noble men, have skipped like Rams, and
revolted from him At the presence of the Lord and his holy spirit, which is in
the midst of our churches: and the little hills of the people like young
sheep. This desire of all nations Jesus Christ has so inflamed the hearts of
all men, has so set them on fire, and kindle in them an unspeakable zeal. For
what other cause can be given of the sudden forsaking of the Popes yoke and
obedience, almost now of the best in every country in his so great power and
cruelty: in theirs so great perils and dangers, which do forsake him that
they should hazard and venture, not only their goods and possessions, but also
their own lives. Surely it must needs be some great matter that should thus
move themselves to venture their lives to this extremity, and that voluntarily
and not by compulsion. Besides this moving of all Nations, the word of God
has given to all men peace of conscience, which believe it and receive it.
That now they fear not to dye merrily and joyfully without any (...) or
pardons, or Diriges, to be song yearly for them after their death. That now
with their captain Jesus Christ they dare boldly commit their souls into the
hands of God their father, without any singing or ringing, or massing of Popish
Freers. This is the peace of the gospel: this is the peace in death: this of
all other peace is the greatest.

And are not our churches adorned and decked? are not they very glorious: are
not they very famous. Are not these strange things and wonderful, which in our
church the Lord works? Do we account this moving of all Nations, this
knowledge of Jesus Christ: this presence of his holy spirit: this preaching
of his word: this greatest peace of all other: peace of conscience to be
matters of nothing, to be matters of no weight?

Many there be that make many other complaints, but these are the most
grievous and most common. Some do find fault at our evil lives. They do not
follow say they the word of God which they profess, and they commend to the
skies the holiness and good works of our forefathers. Some other do accuse
the baseness of our birthes, the obscurity of our stock. They are vpstartes,
strangers, of base parentage, youths not of the ancient Nobility. Some other
do fear and blase abroad the sturres and storms of our times, the invasions
of our enemies. See, say they (...) what dangers they have brought us in: how
many and how mighty enemies they have plucked on our backs. Some mislike with
our often marriages, and that makes so many beggets, say they: Some other do
condemn especially the marriages of Ministers, and they cannot abide that they
should purchase any land for their children. Others which would seem more
devout stand only on this point. They condemn all our forefathers, say
they, and therefore they will never be on our opinion. So that there is almost
no man but he has something to complain of, some thing grieueth him. To which
all, he that would fully satisfy, should never make an end. Yet, lost by our
scilence they should seem to have gotten the victory. I will say some thing
to every one of these. And first of all, these which talk so much of their
forefathers, do little consider with David the days of their forefathers in
deed. Psalm. 75. ver. 3.
These did not go into the Tabernacle of God: they do not receive the
congregation with David: for then they would judge rightly: they pronounce
like blind men of colors without light of virtue.

But that I may answer briefelye to this great Chaos, and heap of quarrels,
this is my opinion. First, concerning our lives, that they so greatly find
fault withal, and our works. We have one work almost daily amongst us in
many places, which does surmount and surpass all their works of the whole
year, nay of their whole lives. The which only work God the Father
commands from heaven (that is to say) the hearing of the word of Jesus
Christ. Mat. 17. ver. 5.
This is my beloved son (says God the Father) hear him.

God the Father was never heard to speak to any man before in this world, so
properly in his own person: as in Matthew 3.17. and in the 17. Chapter, and
fifth verse, teaching this doctrine. Therefore his voice is worthy to be
marked diligently. And he commands nothing but this: Hear him. And our
Savior Christ has pronounced of his ministers to the end of the world: lest
our Recusants should say, they refuse not to hear Jesus Christ:) He that
hears you, hears me: He that hears me, hears him that sent me. And
I am with you to the end of the world. This work we have: This only we
do: This is our glory.

But they had one sin in those days, which surpesseth all the sins of the
whole world, which like that leven of the Pharisees, corrupted all their
works, so many in number, so costly, so stricte, and so severe: and that was,
Incredulity. They believed not the Gospel of Jesus Christ. They durst not
ground their faith, and venture their lives upon it.

The Holy Ghost, when he shall come into the world, (says (...) Savior
Christ) shall rebuke the world of sin. John. 16. ver. 9.
But of what sin? of that great sin of all other because they believed not
in me (says our Savior.) Because they have not believed in the only
begotten son of God.

Because they have not believed his Gospel, his joyful tidings of salvation.
This sin was common to them, with the Pharisees: and therefore all their
works were unsavory. Nay, they were sins before the Lord: For without
faith, it is impossible to please God. And what so ever is not of faith is
sin.

And as conseruing the small fruit of hearing the word of God, which they
find fault withal, because it is not fruitful in all, or in the most
part. Let them remember, our Savior Christ himself has told them: that
not all his seed but the fourth part only, should bring forth good fruit.

Let them remember, the Apostle Saint Paul, rebuking them which so curiousely
prye into other men's lives, and for the most part neglect their own. Romans
14. ver. ^. 1. Cor. 4. ver. 3.
Who art thou that do judge another man's servants? Every man stands or
falls to his master. The praises or disprayses of men, he himself nothing
regardes. He runs his race by good reports, and evil reports, as he
teaches the Corinthians. And so surely, must all his companions, and fellow
servants. That servant is happy whom the master commends.

Satan is ready to pinche the heel of the woman's seed, of the servant of
God; as of (...) Job. The sins of all the other Idolatrers in that country,
he not so much as touched them: he hid them, he covered them: he accused
the elect of God. His own children he rocks in the cradell of security. It
is to be feared, lest be so concealed heretofore their works of darkness.
And they which now find fault at strawes, and m^ates, in our eyes, at that
great day of account, let them take heed, lest there be great Beams found
in their own eyes, and in those, whom they so highly commend.

Then besides this, almost all their works which they so greatly brag of,
and commend to the ignorant: they were of the will of man, not of the Law of
God: They were devised of them selves, not commanded of their master.

They were voluntarily done, not enjoined them in Gods word, they were supplies
of Christ's ^^rites, as though he had not paid our ransom sufficiently:) Not
testimonies of his grace, signs of our duty, and arguments of our
thankefulnes. And what worshipping of God is this I pray you? what obedience
of his servants? what reward of his grace and mercy can be looked for at his
hands, for such works? All their works were done for the salvation of their
souls. This they have put down in their Authentical instruments, and
writings, to all posterities: not for the love of Jesus, which mark he set
down to us for all our works. If any love me, says he (his perfect Savior
and redeemer) let him keep my commandments. He does not say: if any one will
be saved, let him keep my commandments. Besides this, their works were not
done for the glory of God, the which he makes the chief and of them all: as
in the seventh of Matthew: Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.

These two ends we find principally set down in the Gospel to all our works,
and none other, not for the salvation of our souls. Wherefore, Cha^o^.
when as in the Hebrew tongue, to sin, is nothing else but to miss the
mark. Surely, all their works, though they were very glorious and costly,
and praise worthy in the eyes of man, Marks.
yet indeed, they were but sins, because they missed these two marks:
because they were not done to the glory of God, and for the love of Jesus
Christ. Our Savior in the Gospel says: He that hears my words and does
them, is like unto a wise man that buylt his house upon a Rock, and the (...)
r^se, and the winds blewe, and they could not move it, because it was builded
upon a Rock. Surely, they builded all their works, all their Nonries, all
their Abbeyes like foolish men, upon the sands of the Sea, according to the
doctrine and devices of men: not upon the Rock of Jesus Christ, and upon his
word. Therefore they could not stand for ever, nor endure the forces and
storms of winds and floodes. The Abbeyes had no commandment in the Gospel:
no plat form among the Saints of God. Moses never saw them in the Mount.
They were the buildings of man's brain. They were man's devises. Wherefore
they were not founded upon that sure foundation Jesus Christ.

As conserning the baseness of our Parentages, and newness of our Nobility,
which they object: this has been an ancient complaint of wicked and
desperate men, against the elect servants of God and followers of virtue,
always both in the church and in the common wealth. So Catiline amongst the
Romans bragged that he and his adherents were Senators and ancient Citizens,
but Cicers was an vpstart gentleman: one that come but yesterdaye: a new
found Citizen. So the Sodomites taunted Lot drawing them to virtue: Will this
stranger be a Judge amongst us? So Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, the eldest
sons of Ruben and Levy, the chief of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
company, rose up against Aaron and Moses. These men in birth in deed, were
the chief amongst all the Israelites. So Ismaell mocked Isaac, and Caine the
elder brother, disdained Abell and slew him. So the Athenians said to Saint
Paul, when he preached Jesus Christ. What new doctrine is this? To morrow
we will hear thee again of this matter. But worship, honor, authority,
nobility, as David tells us, comes neither from the East, nor from the
West, nor yet from the South. (Neither the Northern men, nor Southern men,
can make a king, though they be stout, valiant and expert Soldiers) But
from the Lord. And he is tied to no man's kindred, to no man's stock. He
exalts and brings down whom please him, and whenever it shall please
him.

The hundred and thirteenth Psalm, does give unto us two notable arguments
and causes to praise the Lord, in all lands, from the Sun rising till the
Sun setting. Praise the Lord ye servant: O praise the name of the Lord.
Blessed he the name of the Lord from this time forth for evermore. And that
not only amongst us: but the Lords name is praised from the rising up of the
Sun, unto the going down of the same.

And what is the cause of this so great and universal and everlasting praise?
because the Lord humbles himself, to behold the things that are in heaven
and in earth. He takes the simple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out
of the mire. That he may set him with the Princes, even with the Princes of the
people. He makes the barren woman to keep house and to be a joyful mother of
children.

These two things are as it were spurs, and prouokements, to prick men
forward to praise the Lord in all ages, amongst all Nations. Here is the well
head of true Nobility, even the Lord God himself.

Even those same ancient noble men, which brag so much of the antiquity of
their Petigrees, they were once in the dust, and perchance in the mire. Let
them remember their first estate, and from whence they came. Let them
acknowledge their creator and lifter up, and not despise others, their equals,
whom the same God has exalted also. For there is no power, no worship, nor
Nobility but of the Lord. And they which do resist these powers, resist the
ordinance of God. And they which rail upon, and blaspheme, and scoff at
those which be in authority, are Heretics, are children of Satan, as Saint
Jude does tell us.

The Lord God of Hoastes, and King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, has ever
dealt thus from the beginning. He has ever exalted from most base and simple
estate. Cirus.
He exalted Syrus the great Monarche of the Persians, from a sheepeheardes
cottage. And Romulus the first founder of Rome, was glad to have a Woolfe (or
woman strumpet) as some think, for his Nursse. He drews Moses the great
Captain of the Israelites out of the Water. He chose Saul the first King of
the Israelites, a Beniamite, and one of the least Trybes, from seeking his
fathers Asses. He made Alexander the great, being the son of King Phillip,
who was but the third son of Amyntas, and a pledge amongst the Thebanes: of
a very boy, almost in twelve years space, the swiftest, and most famous
conqueror that ever was in the world. Even so also be exalted that wicked
Mahomet, the Popes king fellow (as I may term him:) For their kingdoms
begun both in one year, of a Merchauntes factoure, to be a great and
mighty Emperor.

The Sophye also of the Persians, had for his Father, a learned man, not a
Noble man, as his name also does signify.

And all these, amongst all Nations, in all ages, til our times; have been
the greatest Princes and famous Monarchs that ever were in the world.
Wherefore, whosoever does carye at, or find fault withal the base parentage
of any, that be in authority: they do plainly mislike, accuse and condemn,
the very hand of God himself. For it is not our Kings, but that King of
Kings, which makes Noble man, Judges and Potentates: though some time the
Lord use these as his instruments in (...) them.

But they object the storms and sturres of our days: the rage of the
Anabaptists: the discention in France, the wars in Flaunders, our
invasions, prepared, concluded, and vowed, and this last year attempted. They
dare be bold to say, that all these plagues were laid upon us, for the
reformation of Religion. But here also (which is the chiefest point of
Wisdom, they neither look behind them, they are carried like brute beasts
headlong, to that which is before their feet. They do not weye the old ways
of the Lord, which ground much of antiquity: Measuring their antiquity, not
of the written truth of God, but of the vain tryalles and reports of men.
But such antiquity is counterfeit, is deceiuable, is like to that of the men
of Gibea: Not true, sincere, and Christian.

They do not remember Moses, that delivered the people out of the hands of
Pharaoh, but not without great perils and dangers: Pharaoh at his very
heels, pursuing him with a great army: The red Sea before his eyes, almost
no way, left of deliverance, of escaping: and yet he the Lords servant.
This true liberty, his cause good. They do not remember, Ezechias purging the
Temple: refourming Religion: vanishing superstition: yet for all this, invaded
of Senacherib: His Cities many of them sacked: Jerusalem besieged: yet
Ezechias a good King: his reformation just: his religion pure, and undefiled
before God.

They do not remember Iehosaphat, which sent his Princes with the Priests,
having the book of the Law of God with them, through all his Cities, to
teach and instruct them. (A notable part of a King, 2. Chro. 20.
thus to countenance the Preachers of the word of God:) and yet afterward,
besieged, and in great peril of the Amonytes, and Moabytes, and many other,
which were confederates against him.

Neither did all these invade his kingdom only, but they got his Haven
towns, and got his land, and pitched their camps at Engaddi, a City on the
Sea coasts, before his knowledge: And yet Iosophat was a good King: a godly
King, and one that feared God.

What shall I here remember Josias, who had the same desire and earnest
endeavor of banishing idolatry, or reforming religion, and of setting forth
of the lawd of God. Who was also in the same case, in the same peril of war:
Nay who lost his life in the war: and yet all these Kings were most famous
amongst the kings of Israel: most religious, best liked of of God himself.
And yet they all tasted these tumults, these storms, these strange chances
and events in their adyes. Shall we therefore say their religion was naught:
their reformation against the law of God, (God forbid:) nay these tumults and
troubles, and hard happes (as they term them) are the continual companions of
true religion, and of true reformation. And as we have borne the burden of
these storms: so we have tasted the pleasant cup of salvation and deliverance:
A cup of salvation and deliverance I say, has our most gracious God both more
full and more easy, and more pleasant offered unto us then unto them. That he
might no doubt, stir up our thankfulness, and kindle our obedience toward
him: For, who is there I pray you in all the world, that will not be bound
with benefits and moved with good turns, and even as it were chayned with
courtesies? Surely he is savage and fearce, and even flintie hearted whom these
will not move. The Lord did not suffer the enemies to come into our havens,
but being now in great possibility to have taken them, he describe them. He
suffered them not to pursue us at the very heels, as he did his own
Israelites, but not so much as to come into our fight, not to besige us, as he
did good Ezechias? but he pinched them in their own ships, with cold,
famine, lack of water, even as though they them selves had been besieged.
This was the great goodness of God to us ward. This was our deliverance, more
merciful, more myraculous, then was that of Ezechias: then was that of Moses:
then was that of Iehosaphat. And that which was of all other most wonderful,
without the loss and destruction almost of any of our men: And not without
the loss and captivity of many: yea, almost of the best of our enemies. So
the Lord has made wonderful his goodness toward us, above the ancient days
of those holy Saints and servant of God. And yet many here will not
acknowledge the Lords power, that the Lord fights for us: that the Lord
has put to fight these our enemies. And although perchance with their mouths
they do confess it: yet with Pharaoh, they will not leave off from their set
purpose, of persecuting the people of God, and of pursuing, with all their
maine and might, the true Israel. So great is the hardness, blindness, and
obstinacy of their hearts.

But to let these old examples pass, they which complain at the strange
raines, great floods and wonderful ouerflowings of waters and drownings of
their pastures, of this last year. They do not remember the ship of Christ,
wherein he himself was, how it was tossed in the seas, how it was beaten with
waves, how it was hoised with ye whirlewinde, and almost drowned. Insomuch that
the Apostles cried out, Oh master do thou not care for us, we perish. And
yet in the midst of all these storms, this was the ship of Christ, this was
his Church, here was he himself and his beloved, here his Apostles and
Disciples were present: Therefore let not us now in the Church of Christ, in
his ship, where he is present only by his grace, and not in person, as he was
there. Marvel at the like floods, the like storms, the like tempests, the
like drownings, not of our grounds, but even of our selves. But rather with
these storms let us be stirred up, with his Apostles to call upon him. These
waves try our faith. Let us not distrust as they did, and think that the Lord
does not care for us, that he does not regard us, that he does not know our
needs, yea our very s^ed furrows, and our haruests: yea truly, the Lord
cares for us, and does know that these things are necessary for us, and at
his good pleasure will give them us. But he sends these strange and stormy and
unseasonable times amongst us, to shake off our drowsines, and our sleepiness.

They which will not be awaked with calling and with words, we are wont to
raise up with pinchings: with prickings, and with blows. So the Lord deals
with us. We which are deaf at the preaching of his word, we which regard not
that, we which will not be awaked from the slumber of our sins, by the voice of
his preachers, he beats us with these his sharp whips of war and plague: he
pincheth us with hunger and famine: he even thundreth from heaven unto us, with
these strange tempests and weather, that we should awake, that we should fly
unto him by prayer, that we should turn unto him by repentance, that we should
learn to trust in him in all our perils. This is the end, this is the mark,
this is the good we shall learn by all these storms, as truly as we feel
them, so I would to God we would rise speedely from our former security and
sluggishnesse, to prayers, repentance, and trust in him. Then as in times past,
even so now also: the Lord Jesus will command these winds and tempests, that
they should be still, and they would forthwith obey his word, and we should
have a great calm, and his Church should enjoy the blessing of peace.

As concerning marriage which many complain is too common in these days, we
lay of no man necessarily the law, or rather the share of virginity, or the
yoke of marriage: they which cannot live chaste may marry: be they rich, be they
poor, be they old, be they young, be they servants, be they masters, it is
better to marry in this world, then to burn in hell fire for ever. The Lord
has ordained marriage a remedy for all men, which can not live chaste, as
well to servants as masters, to poor as rich. But the enemies of the Gospel,
the Papists, have ordained the stews as a remedy for poor men, for servants.
They may not marry, for fear of filling the world full of beggars and
ouercharging them selves in relieuing of them. And so while they respect their
own gain, and this worldly reason, they send them headlong to the devil. For
the harlots house is the gate of hell, as Solomon says, and the stews are the
devils schoolehouse: it is better with Tobias being married to lead a poor
life in this world, then with Holofernes having his Concubines to ruffle and
flow here in all kind of pleasures and superfluities, and after to live in
hell for ever. And even as unjustly they do condemn and complain of the
marriage of ministers, when as the Apostle has plainly pronounced, marriage
is honorable amongst all men, and the bed undefiled. He that names all,
excepts none, he that says it is honorable, says it is not damnable,
filthy, detestable, as they are not afraid to avouch. And as in the law, it
was lawful for all to marry, even for priests, even so no doubt, in the
Gospel, this word all, comprehendes them now also, there is no restraint
limited to them. he that can comprehend it, let him comprehend it, says our
Savior Christ in the Gospel to his Apostles, he does not say, my will is that
you should vow it. The Gospel does bar no man from that sweet comfort and
necessary help of marriage no more then the law. Let every man have his wife,
says the Apostle, for the avoiding of fornication, even to those ministers of
the Church of Corinth, which wrote to him of the same matter, he does not
exclude those which moved this question unto him, he praising virginity dare
not lay the same as a snare of any, by commanding it, but by commending it as a
principal virtue he persuades it to all men. And is not there vow a plain
snare? into the which a man may willingly go in, but he can not willingly get
out again. Therefore the Apostle wishes all men to be like unto him self,
that is unmarried, but he commands it to no man, not to ministers and pastors
of the Church. And if this be true which the Apostle says, those whom God has
coupled together, who dare separate a sunder. Then this is as true, that which
God has permitted and made free to all men, who dare restrain or forbid. The
Apostle Paul durst not do it: and do we think the Bishop of Rome may do
it? no truly. They which think he may do it, see how greatly they are
deceived. And with this restrainte of vowing, see into what a horrible pit of
sin and wickedness he has cast headlong all his Clergy. Erasmus
reports, who was a great traveler, that there was one Bishop in Germany,
that found in his visitation, Erasmus in responsione ad Natalem ^edam.
that there was eleven thousand priests that kept whores and Concubines. This
Erasmus avouches for a truth. So that wicked Son of perdition the Pope, by
these his hard laws, against the law of God, does establish the kingdom of
Satan, and does draw men unto perdition. Was it not better to marry? was not a
wife more holy then a woman? as they term her: is not Gods liberty better
then the Popes vow? Besides all this, the priests and ministers of the Greek
Church, ever have had wives. And Saint Ierom reports, that the priests in
France had wives in his days. Therefore this popish vow and interdiction of
marriage was never universally received.

As concerning the purchasing and buying of lands of ministers for their
children, what an unnatural and an unreasonable complaint is this? 1. Tim. 6.
ver. 8.
who will forbid a father to provide for his wife and children. He that will
not do this, is worse then an infidel, as the Apostle says. And here I do
not allow, the nice bringing up of many ministers children, who would have all
their children gentlemen, nor their immoderate purchasinges, but Christian
provision: Such as is sufficient for every man's vocation and calling, that they
may have whereof to live honestly and christianly after the departure of their
fathers. Should not they which profess religion practice themselves in this
chief point of religion? He that can not govern his household, nor care for
his family, how would he govern or care for the Church of God. Especially
this provision is necessarily, in this wicked and hard world, where the
charity of many is waxed cold. And that prophecy of our Savior is plainly
fulfilled, you shall be hated of all men for my names sake: now the ministers
of the Gospel are hated of all men: and shall they not provide for their
children? I am ashamed (says Saint Ierom) that the Idolatrous priests, that
strumpets and harlots, should succeed in the inheritance of their fathers. But
to only Priests and Clerks, this is not lawful. And that amongst Christian
Emperors. Why is not that lawful to us, which is lawful to all men, yea to the
very meanest sort of men. If all other men may purchase land, why may not
Ministers purchase. In deed amongst the Jews, this purchasing for Priests
was not lawful, because their children succeeded their fathers in the
Priesthood: but now that succession is taken away. The Levites children were
sure of living, were they learned, were they unlearned, were they unlearned,
when their Fathers were dead: but so are not our Ministers children. God has
dealt better with us, then with the Jews, we are not tied to any one man's
succession or stock, for our priests and Ministers, as the Jews were. We may
choose the best and learned where soever we find them, whose sons soever
they be. And shall our ministers children be worse provided for, then were the
children of those Jewish priests? Seeing then their succession is taken away,
which was a sure stay of living for them, I do not see but that our purchases
are lawful. God gave every one a lot in that land of Chanaan, and I do not
see, why our ministers children should be without their lot also in our Chanaan.

But they say we condemn our forefathers, if our religion be true, then all
our fathers be damned say they. No, we condemn not our fathers, but we
condemn all unbelievers, which now will not believe the word of God. Our
forefathers, if they lived now in this great light, they would surely have
condemned the great blindness of many of their children, they would have
condemned their obstinacies, in the refusing this great goodness of the Lord
so mercifully offered them, they would have condemned the hardness of their
hearts, in not being moved to turn to the Lord from their former superstition
and ignorance, in such great knowledge, in such great light, in so many of the
Lords wonders showed amongst us. As our Savior Christ taught the Jews, they
should have had no sin, if he had not spoken unto them: so we teach of our
forefathers, that their sins was not so grievous, because they hard not the
word of the Lord. But now our sin is in the highest degree of comparison, if
we obey it not being so plainly taught us, 1. Tim. 1. cap. ver. 13.
that which S. Paul confesses of himself. I being a persecutor, a blasphemer
of the name of Jesus, yea the chief of all sinners, yet have obtained mercy,
because I did it ignorantly: so we judge of our forefathers, that without all
doubt they have obtained mercy. And that which Azaria the Lords Prophet, 2.
Chron. cap. 15. v 34 Mark. 12. ver. 19.20.
being sent to Aza, taught him and all Israel, in the like case of their
forefathers departed. This same we do teach and affirm of our forefathers.
Israel has been a great while (says he) without the true God, without any
priest preaching unto him, without the law: Surely in the like case was our
forefathers, in the same state was the Church of God in those days: they knew
not God, there was no priest to preach unto them the word of God. But what
then? were they all damned that dyed in those days? no, God forbid (says the
Prophet:) but whosoever in their affliction turned unto the Lord God, and
sought him, was found of him: so truly our forefathers, although in their life
they trusted in their works, and called upon Saints, yet when they came to
dye once they forgot all these, and were wont to call upon the Lord, and to
seek after him alone, and to have him in their mouths. And we do not doubt
(but according to his promise) they found him: but we judge, and plainly
affirm, the case and cause of those blind guides, of those covetous priests
which sold their merits, and their masses to be far harder in the day of
judgment. And that they for their wilful blindness and great covetousness
shall hardly find mercy.

No in truth, if they mark well they shall find that our religion, does not
condemn our forefathers, but that if ever any of them were saved, we show how
they were saved, Mar. 12. ver. 19.20.
for we preach Jesus Christ such a one as he is in deed, a most merciful
Savior, who will not quench smoking flax, nor break a bruised reed, have
he faith as a grain of mustard seed, have he a sparkle of Gods holy spirit,
though he be not a stone with Peter, but a reed with Thomas, though he be not
all a fire with Paul, but even smoking with Nicodemus. Our Jesus will not
refuse him, he will not put him away, he will not break him: she which touches
the hem of his garment was healed. This is the salvation of our fathers, thus
they were saved, this we believe, this we teach, this is the Gospel, this is
the glad tidings of our salvation. But the Popes confessors, bringing in again
the law of Moses, as in their Jewish robes of Myters and Copes, and Tunicles:
so also in their doctrine have taught another lesson. Do this, and thou shall
live say they, give thy lands to a chauntrie priest, to a morrow mass, build a
Chapel, and so forth. Overthrowing the word of faith altogether, which the
Apostles preached. And that continual practice of our Savior, to all that
ever he cured or saved: who said not at any time, do this and thou shall be
saved, but thy faith has made thee whole, very like that same naughty
servant in the Gospel, who having but one talent, hid the same: even so did
they that same small knowledge they had of Jesus Christ. Yea, more then this,
belying him, saying he was a hard man, a cruel requirer, and exacter of his
debts, even to the uttermost farthing, either in hell, or in their purgatory:
that he was a severe, not a merciful Savior, that he was not affable or easy
to be spoken to: that he had his Porters, his intercessors or mediators unto
him: so that poor sinners could have no access unto him: such a Christ, such
a Savior they made of our Savior Jesus, when as the Gospel plainly teaches ye
king of Sion our Messiah to be most gentle, most meek, most merciful, most
affable, most courteous, most lowly: which will not strive with sinners, which
will not enter into judgment with them, which will put none from him: yea which
with his own mouth calls them which are slow and heavy laden unto him. Who
is so far off, that he will not hear our prayers, that to this end and
purpose, he is said to have ascended into heaven, and there even now to stand
ready to receive all that shall be offered unto him, and putting unto them
that sweet incense of his death and passion to present them unto his father.
Such a one is our king, such a one is our Savior, such a one is our Mediator:
but they have lyingly and falsely taught him unto the people, they have limited
and set bounds to his infinite mercy, that they might sell their masses, their
pardons, and their relics dearer: that men might trust in them, that they
might get and provide them.

But mark I beseech you, how greatly the world was blinded. The good works of
others which was commanded of God in his law, can profit none but them selves.
And do we think that their works then, which were not commanded of God for
the most part, can profit any? When as the Apostle Paul says plainly, we
must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ: 2. Cor. 5. ver. 10.
and every one, whether he be monk or mass Priest, or Pope himself, or
people, shall receive according to those things which he has done in his own
body, and not according to those things which other has done for him, or
according to those things which he has left by his will to be done for him
after his death. While life remains according to our Saviors doctrine, there
is a day allotted to every man, in the which he may labor, in the which he may
work, and bring forth the signs of faith, merits of mercy, and fruits
pleasant to the Lord. But when death comes, then it is night, in the which
no man can work any more. Wherefore all their works done after death, done
for them, bought so dearly, provided for so carefully, done so devoutly, in
truth were nothing worth, were unprofitable unto them, did them no good, and
were of no force with the Lord. What profits any man that is dead without
faith, without repentance, now being in torments, masses, himnes, songs, meat
to be divided yearly in remembrance of him, or some daily for his sake. After
death there is no place of prayers, no place of repentance, no place of
translation or alteration, no place of tears and good works to any man, as
the Story of the rich glutton and Lazarus, does plainly teach us: wherefore we
must work our selves, in our own bodies, the works that must do us good at
the day of judgment. When the tree is once hewed down, where it falls, there
it lies, whether it be toward the North, or toward the South, that is,
whether it be in the pleasures of heaven, or in the cold storms of hell,
Eccle. 11. ver. 3.
as the wise man teaches us. After it be cut down, it can flourish no more,
neither can it bear fruit any more. No more, no doubt can we: this tree is a
parable of us. Then besides this, these Huxters, these selles of merits and
works, and Masses, they do not only beguile others, but they beguile
themselves. For though perchance you will say they are Virgins, and live
straightly, and punish themselves more then other men do. Math. 25.
Yet they are but foolish Virgins as the Gospel does plainly teach us. The
wise Virgins durst not deminish or lend any of the oil, of their good works,
no not one drop. And what fools are these then, that dare be so bold to
do it? They durst not give any of their oil, which was a work of mercy,
commended and commanded of God him self in his law. And these dare sell
theirs. They feared least they should want themselves, but these think that
they have overplus, and to spare for others, and do make the dearest and
gainefull occupation of selling their works. No occupation ever got or
purchased so much land as they did, by this their trade of selling their
Masses and merits. All the Saints of God cry and sigh with David, even from
their hearts. Enter not into judgment with thy servants O Lord, for in thy
sight shall no man living be justified. And in another place, If thou Lord
wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide it. And
with Job we are not able to answer one for a thousand. And having learned
that good lesson of their master Jesus Christ, in the Gospel, all his
servants whether they be Virgins or married folks, or Martyrs, say, when
they have done all what they can, we are unprofitable servants, we have done
but our duties. Wherefore this hope, in trusting to other men's works is
death: this staff of leaning to other men's merits, is the staff of Egypt, it
wounds his hand that trusts unto it. The other staff of Jacob, with the
which alone he passed over that Iordaine of this life, that is Jesus Christ,
and to trust to his merits, to his works, to his death and passion is a sure
staff, Psalm. 3.5. Psalm. 3.8. ver. 15. Psalm. 3.9. ver. 8. Psalm. 18. ver. 29.
is the staff of all the Saints of God. With this staff David leaped over
the wall. Plead thou my cause O Lord, says he, with them that fight against
me, and thou shall answer for me, O Lord my God. And in another Psalm, And
now truly, what is my hope, truly my hope is even in thee, and with the help
of the Lord my GOD, I shall leap over the wall.

This staff our Fathers catching even at the pit brinke of death. We do
not doubt but they were saved: by this they went over Iordaine with Jacob
safely, by this they leaped over the wall of their sins, and former
superstition (which did separate them from God) with David, by this with the
thief of the cross, they passed from death to life. All their former sins
were covered, and they were even that day with Jesus Christ in Paradise. Thus
we hope of our Fathers, and this was their salvation. Wherefore let us embrace
the Gospel, and be thankful to God for the same. Our Fathers, nay many Kings
and Princes, nay the ancient Fathers have not seen the things that we have
seen, this great light shined not in their days. Let us express in our lives
and conuersations. Let us do all the things it commands. In times past how
many things would they observe for men's pleasures, now let us be obedient
for the Lords sake. Let us forsake that Romish Babylon, with her Antichrist,
and all his trumperie. They have not one title, nor jot for testimony of thy
truth, in the word of God. But as you see, all their doctrine is flatly
condemned in the same. Let us venture our lives for Jesus Christ and his
Gospel, not for the pope and his Church, as his Jesuits do. We have no such
commandment in the word of God. Let not the wickedness of the world, or of
some carnal gospellers, which say, and do not, any whit dismaie us, or make us
stumble. There has been such and shall be such always. The seed is good, but
the ground is naught. Let us be of the small flock of Jesus Christ, which
hear his word and keep it. Let us in all things which chance unto us,
either in the weather, or in our wealth and goods, or in our bodies, bless and
praise the Lord with blessed Job. Let us possess our souls with patience. Let
us arm our souls to temptation, for the Lord will try all that be his. Will thou be a Paul, thou shall have an Angel of Satan to buffet thee. Will thou
be a David, thou shall have Saul to persecute thee. Will thou be Peter, thou
shall have Satan to sift thee.

And to be short, as many as will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution. Let us now wait for the coming of the bridegroom. The Cocks
have crown a great while, the day dawneth, great knowledge and light is in the
world: surely the Sun is not far off, I mean Jesus Christ, Luke. 12. ver.
35.
he is even now in a rising. Let our loins be girded up, not flaunting with
our vain garments, and our torches of faith and good works in our hands: and
let us be as servants every day and hour, waiting when our master will come
from the marriage: who has promised he will come quickly. And surely he will
keep his promise. And the spirit, Apoc. 22. ver. 17.
and the Bride said: Come Lord Jesus. And let him that hears say Come, and
let him that is a thirst come. And let whosoever will, take of the water of
life freely: Even so come Lord Jesus as thou have promised, and make us all
ready against thy coming, and make us thirst, and long for the water of life,
which is thy holy word, that we be not fruitless and dead at thy coming. To
thee, the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all praise, power, and salvation, for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

