THE HISTORY OF IVSTINE. Containing a Narration of Kingdoms, from the
beginning of the Assyrian Monarchy, unto the reign of the Emperor AUGUSTUS.
Whereunto is newly added a brief collection of the lives and manners of all
the Emperors succeeding, unto the Emp. Rodulphus now reigning.

First Written in Latin by that famous Historiographer IVSTINE, and now again
newly translated into English, By G. W.

LONDON, Printed by William Iaggard, dwelling in Barbican, 1606.

To the Right Worthy, and most accomplished gent. Sir James Haies Knight,
endowed with that Honorable quantity of virtue, and true love to Learning,
wherewith every Noble spirit should study to be enriched, G. W. wishes the
felicity of his content.
RIght worthy Sir, Artaxerxes sir-named Longhand, the fifth king of Persia,
used to have the Chronicles both of his predecessors, as also the affairs of
his own time, read before him every night ere he setlod his eyes to any
contented rest; as well to have knowledge of the dignity of his Ancestors, as
to remember in his reign how he bestowed himself. And Alexander the great,
had that noble writer of the famous battle of Troy in such prizelesse
estimation, that about what affairs soever he inclined his actions, he had his
works about him, nor ever slept but they rested under his pillow. Moreover,
coming into a School, and not finthe the labors of Homer there, he struck the
master with his fiste, meaning thereby, that the knowledge of Histories, was a
recreation fitting all estates and degrees, and that it was a great and
capital offense to be without them. For like as in Music, many discord
notes and many tunes make one consent, and one delightful harmony, so in a
history, the variety and multitude of examples tend all to one end; that is,
the advancement of virtue, and overthrow of vice: offering themselves as a most
perfect mirror for man to behold, not the outward portraiture and shape of his
body, but the lively image and express figure of his inward mind,
instructing him how to apparel himself in decent ornaments, and to discard
from him his wild infirmities.

For what can enforce more to Cheualrie, then not barely to hear of, but as it
were presently to behold, the sage and grave consultations of expert Captains,
the speedy and provident putting in practice of devised stratagems, the
policies and sleights in their present execution, the favorable assistance
and success of the same, with the fame and renown, that continues (longer
then rich Monuments) of valiant enterprises? Or what can be a more readi^
encouragement to virtue (which is the soul and light of a good life) then to
behold men (who not so much as thought of before) by their proper desert to
raise their name vnto^ high estate and Honnour, to give themselves cause with
Cicero to speak of themselus, Egomeis maioribus virtute pr^luxi:

Or what may give a greater object to loath vice, then to see others whose
Nobility was given them as an inheritance, whereby perpetually to follow and
maintain the steps of their ancestors, by their unnoble disposition, to root
out the renown that was raised to them by their parents: For better is it to
be Thersites, who was a man of obscure calling, with condition to be Achillis,
then to be hauiored like Thersites and Achilles our Father, for virtue is the
true Nobility: withal, to s^e realms flourish, commonwealths prosper, the
laborer beloved, the drone loa^hed; to see the good Citizens advanced, (for
every man should be a citizen to his own Country) and the bad dissranchised of
any worthy societic; to see peace and tranquillity observed, Nations
willingly to offer their obedience; to see long continuance in felicity, and
every man so desirous to live, that he may have an honorable report after
death; Or what a more forceable dehortation from vice, then to have plainly
pictured and set forth, not only the heinousnes and enormities, that is heir
to every several offense, but also the miseries, calamities, punishments, and
shames worthily ensuing, as a portion given to them in life, with endless
reproach and infamy after death, and so consequently, What can be more
comodious then a History?

Moreover, what can be more pleasant to divide the time, or satisfy us in the
hours wherein we would be delighted, then to sit quietly and receive tidinges
of things concluded through the whole World: to behold the places, the persons,
the times, the affairs, with the order and circumstances in determining the
same, to see so many running streams, so many high and stately mountains, so
many raging and turbulent seas, so many forests and uninhabitable deserts, so
many kinds of strange Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Serpents, Herbs, Trees: so
dissipate and large Countries, so rich and populous Cities, so well gouernd
Commonwealths, so good Laws and Customs, so sundry sorts of people,
together with their natures, dispositions, effects, descriptions, scituations,
commodities, pleasures and displeasures, foundations, continuances and decaies,
beginnings, proceedings, and endings of the same: and in such an ample Globe,
that they shall not seem to be reported, but instantly presented.

Right worthy Sir, I having at this time brought to an end the Translation of
these Histories of Justine, with the Emperors lives (who in so small room, and
in so few words comprehended, so much with as many and so notable examples,
that it isto be doubted, whether it be more brief of sentence, or plentiful
of Subject, (J staid with my self) as if it were to take breath at the end of
so labored a journey, devising to whom J might specially dedicate the same as
an eue^lasting monument crected to his name, and he thereby a worthy
countenance to my endeavors, the remembrance of your name, did the first present
it self unto me, as a fit foster father to a Child of such merit, when
presently my devotion accounted the many J might make choice of, as short of
your perfections, as a body dyeng, is of a life flourishing, and believing that
no disdainefull scorn could grow in so noble a breast, J submitted me to your
censure, persuading my self, that this Justine being accepted by Anthony the
Emperor in Latin, it could not but be acceptable to you in English, thus
wishing that Fortune might have eyes, if but to cherish you and those you love,
what is mine, even to my soul is yours.

Yours worships in all serviceable duties, G. W.

SIMON GRYNAEVS


Te qui cunque, Simon Grinaee, aspexit, amauit:
Splenduit in vului gratia tanta tuo
Te quicunque, Simon Grinaee, audiuit, amauit:
Facundo fluxit tantus ab orc lepos
Cum priuil.

A Preface of Simon Grineus to the Reader, concerning the Profit of reading
Histories.
WHo is so simple in experience, or so lean in understanding, that knows not
by reading Histories, and treading the plentiful and fruitful fields of
them, he does therewith make the examples and instructions left in them to grow
up in himself, to his abundant profit. For what can be thought more pleasant
or more desired, then sitting as it it were in the Theater and stage of man's
life, (the which a History has most exquisitely furnished in all points) to be
made capable of the perils that other men have sustained, without further
danger to himself: to take examples of alsorts, either medicynable for his
ownesecure estate, or beneficial to others: to be so ably furnished for the
presence of great men, when with grauest advice they debate of the most
weyghtiest affairs, to discuss the end and sequel of their desires, by
example, or answer them by argument. The company of which worthiness, to the
worthiest is welcome, and the cogitations of the Noblest thoughts do covet.

Which profit, without History (considering the shortness of man's life) cannot
be attaind: Who can compass in memory the times of many hundred years past,
behold the beginings, proceedings, and subuersions of great Empires, to witness
the evils they endured, either private or publik, and manifestly to discern
the ground and occasion of them. In every difficult and dangerous matter, to
have one try the perils, and as it were tread the ice before them, never to be
destitute of tried experience, and by times past which properly and peculiarly
appertains to the duty of a wise man, politickly to foresee what may succeed
in all estates, and to judge of them as if they were present.

Sincc then the ground of such works are large and spacious to walk and
recreat our studies in, it is requisite we prepare our thoughts to the reading
of Histories, having first a taste of civil policy in our selves, which so
must govern our affections to judge discreetly of all actions, either
pleasinge or displeasing to us, to be as sufficiently contented with whatsoere
we read, and does resist our inclination, as delighted with that motion keeps
fellowship with our nature, and not by the sway of passion be miserably led,
only with vain imaginations, and so toss from one place to another, to read
as birds skip from bow to bough, more to prime their bills, then benefit their
bodies: but like good Surgions, who search al sores thoroughly to the bottom,
ere they lay Cataplasme on any, and in so viewing over Histories, thou shall
either by contemplating on the virtue of good men, learn to aspire thy self,
or by reading the infermities of the bad, blush at the remembrance of thine
own, and be taught to reform thy condition.

But it happens as at a royal and sumptuous feast, furnished with all sorts of
delicate viands, one thing is placed before one man, some set before another,
few satisfy themselves of one restoratiue, but every man of that helyketh
best: and although there is but some one kind of measure which nature has
appointed, and one kind of meat simple and in any wise uncorrupted, that is
most for the health and the nourishment of the body, from the bounds of which
whosoever exceeds, and follows his own appetite, beyond either measure or
the ordinance of nature, he may receive hurt by that was ordained for his
necessary good: even so in that great variety of Histories, wherein there is set
down a thousand counsels, directed to a thousand purposes, and after what
sort socuer the reader be led by fancy or stayed by judgment, so does he
censure or apply them. Whereby oftentimes that which is ordained for meat,
couerts to surfeit, and salutaria pharmica, the wholesome medicines prepared for
the recreation, infectes the mind, by which abuse it follows not, a decree be
made all food to be distasted, nor any benifit despised, since there is for all
men leauied a pathway to virtue, in which who so walks advisedly, is
praise-woorthy, and who transgresses ofselfeopinion is to be condemned for his
error.

Some reading Histories deceive themselves, imagining the bare style of the
history, is of authority enough in it self to instruct the reader, whereas
indeed it does no more but minister matter to learn upon, offering it self
to all uses, according as the person is affectioned, in like case as does the
feast, for as he that draws an arrow in a bow, may draw it home or short, as
his strength finds good for him, and as he (...): (...), so in the use of
Histories, the practice is made not according to the use of the words, but the
inclination of the will. Some read Histories for no other delight but only in
the reading, who seeking no more but a present delectation, do loose the
benefit of the pleasant fruits, such men gain no more by turning over the
leaves of a history, then they that play upon an instrument, taking no further
delight therein, then to pass away the tediousness of the time present, and
shottly after enter into a more tedious conflict with themselves: for it is no
pleasure that has not respect unto virtue. Others there are whom the
glittering gloss of glory pricketh so forward, and to such a mishape
transformeth them, that they think no adventure to great for them, nor no
prehemmence above them, being of no ability, for the performance of the one,
nor of desert to at taine to the other; utterly forgetting, that those glorious
examples which they read, are not set forth by writers for any other intent,
then that such as ensuing virtue, may thereby learn to contemn glory being
above their reach, or if it accompany them, not to be proud and arrogant of it.

And although that none but Fools will enterprise to aspire to the like glory,
without the like virtue, yet notwithstanding it is manifest that some finding
no other merit in themselves, but that they have read the Noble acts of
others, do think their desert of highest worth, notsparing of themselves to
speak, Why should not I be either a Scipio or Caesar, like unto players of
Tragedies, who when they have put off the apparel, wherein they have played
the part of most Noble personages, do continue to counterset them in
countenance and behavior.

There are also men of rude and vulgar understanding who destract from al
record, which is not either news or wonders, like Idiots that give more to a
man's gay and superfluous cote, then unto the person or his virtuous parts; that
extend large offices to the outward show, if it be gaudy, and neglect the
labored instruction within, be the work never so worthy.

But whereas, it is the principal commendation, apertaineth to a history, to
stir up the mind of man from sloth fullness, and to fence it from all
dangers by the strength of examples, (then the which there is nothing of
greater power either to persuade or diswade) and that the ancient reserving of
them tends to that end and purpose, yet it comes to pass through the
sloathful security of men, and the neglect of their good, being so carefully
reserved and offered them, by persuading themselves, that other men's perils
help nothing to their safty, that such acts as are most worthy of remembrance
are either ungratefully rebuked, or else heard with deaf and unsettled ears.
Finally their be, that out of an obstinat presumption, transgress even against
that same part contains the most grave and carnest matters, as though
histories should be written, not as they were done indeed, but as they ought to
be done, with ^iled phrase and fresh invention, of set purpose only to' please
them. So that partly by means of that careless security, and partly by the
surfeit of rash and unadvised reading, it comes to pass that (even as it were
of corrupt humors) a certain corruptnesse of Judgment and perverse opinion is
bred.

There is also another of no less force then these a forsaid, and that is in
the writer of histories, who following as it were the taste of their own Palats,
as though they were forgers of their work themselves, fashion their labor
rather to entice the reader to spread their commendation, then to let their hand
and pen consent to the truth: wherein they do like Cooks, who oftentimes in
seasoning their masters meat rather please their own ^ellish then their
May, by which, two several Judgments are misled, the one by rash censure,
the other not recording plainly and sincerly.

For a Historigrapher, is no other but a reporter of things done, (with whose
judgment if there be any fault) it stands with him as with a tun of Wine,
which (of it self being pleasant and beautiful) does either take an evil
talent of the Caske, or else is made vnrellishable by being mingled with some
other compound, which is either a shameful and intolerable deceit, or a point
of extreme folly and ignorance.

To those then that ingrosse Histories I perscribe this rule, that they write
to record, not to flatter. Of those that read them (since I am of firm opinion
such authors are profitable to be read) though for no other but for the great
abundance of examples that they entreat off, I request that they
circumspectly and carefully ouerlooke them, considering how great fruits or
discommodities are in them propounded: otherwise it happens unto them that
imagine a work may be read over lightly, as with those that hold a h^e may be
passed over unadvisedly, without the exact observing and executing of a man's
duty, or as it does to Soldiers who in the sacking of a City come to the
risling of some pothycaries shop, plentiously furnished withal store belonging
to their art, and being allured with the sweetness of the confections, and
spices which they chance first to lay their hands on, thinking the remain to
be of the same, do eat and deuorue all that they light on, in such sort that
some fall sick, some run mad, some dye presently, and he scapes best, is
maruailously distemepred, so that for their greediness their ^llowes laugh
them to scorn. For even as man's life is full of commodities and discommodities,
so is a history, which is the true image and representation of the life, and as
the wisdom of the life consists only in the fair carriage and good
behavior of the life, so the profit of reading is in the applycation thereof.
F^rwell, and enjoy these things to thy most furtherance and commodity.

The Preface of the most famous Historiographer Justine, upon the Histories of
Trogus Pompeius, dedicated unto Anthony the Emperor.
WHereas many of the Romans, even such as had attained to the state of
consuls, had put the acts of the Romans in writing, first in Greek, and after
into other foreign languages: Trogus Pompeyus, (a man of ancient eloquence)
whether it were for the desire of the like renown and glory, or for the
pleasure that he had in the variety and strangeness of the work, compyled as
well the Histories of the Greeks, as the Histories also of the whole world
besides, in the Latin tongue; to the intent that as our Chronicles are read
in Greek, the Chronicles of the Greeks might be published in our own tongue:
Wherein he enterprised a painful labor both of body and mind.

For first seeing many authors have taken upon them to set down the reign of
some one King, or the actions of some one peculiar kind of people, and thought
themselves to have undertaken a weighty business; we may well think Pompeyus
to have bin as bold as Hercules, that durst adventure upon the whole world. In
whose books are contained the government of all ages, of all Kings, of all
Nations and countries: And those things, that the Greek Chroniclers have
disorderly set down, as every man thought most convenient to please himself,
the same has Pompeyus compiled into one maine history, omitting nothing, save
only those things altogether unprofitable to be spoken of. Therefore of these
xliiii. volumes (for so many did Pompey set forth) by leisure, during this
time of my residence in the City, I drew out all such principles as I thought
worthy to be remembered, only leaving out such notes, the knowledge whereof,
could not either be delightful, nor yet necessary for example. I have
therefore gathered, as it were a bundle of Flowers, to the intent that all such
as have knowledge in the Greek, might fully be satisfied, and as for them
which are therein unskillful, matter of instruction.

All which I have dedicated to your Majesty, not so much to read, and peruse,
as to correct, and also to give an account of my time, whereof Cato wills a
due account should be rendered. It suffices me at this present, if your
highness do allow my labors; trusting hereafter, that when the brunt of
slanderous envy is ouerpaste, they that come after, shall bear witness of my
travel and pains taking.

Farewell.
The translator to THE READER.
READ, benefit, but detract not,
Vrit enim fulgore suo qui pragrauat Arts
Infrasepositus, extinctus amabitur idem.
Who being made Arts Judge, does Art deprave;
His name shall be forgotten, at his Grave.
G. W.

THE Succession of the Kings of the three Monarchies mentioned in this Book,
collected out of Eusebius, Berosus, and Megasthenes.
The first Monarchy of the Assyrians.
NInus the son of Jupiter. Belus was the first Emperor of Assyria, and
reigned 52. years. Semiramis the wife of Nynus raignd forty two years. Zanes
Nineas, otherwise called Ninus, and son of the forefaid Ninus and Semiramis,
38. years. Arius. 30. years. Aralius. 40. years. Baleus Zerxes. 30. years.
Amatrites. 38. years. Belochus the priest of Baall. 35. years. Baleus. fifty
2. yea. Altadas. thirty 2. Mamytus. thirty. Mancaleus. 30. years. Sterus or
Spherus. 20. Mamelus. thirty. Sparetus. 40 Ascatades. 40 Amynthas. 45. yea.
Belothus. 25. years Bellopares. 30. Lamprides. 32. Sosares. 20 Lampares.
thirty. Panias. 45. years. Sosarmus. 19. Mytreus. 27. Tautanes. 32. Tauteus.
40. Tineus. 30. years Dercillus 40. Eupalus 38 Laosthenes 45 Pyriciades thirty
year. Orphrateus 20. years Ophratanes. L years. Ocrasapes. 42. years. ^onos
Concoleros. al. sardonopallus. 20 yea.
This Empire continued 1236. years.

The second Monarchy of the Medians and Persians.
The Medes.
Arbaces. xxviii. years. Mandanes. I., years. Sosarmon 30. years.
Articarmines L. years. Arbianes xxii. years Areeus 40. years. Artiues. xxii.
years. Astibares 20. years Astyages 30. years
The kings of Media held the Empi. CClxxxxii. years.

The Persians.
Cyrus 30. years Cambises vii. years v. mo. Podizites and Oropastes usurpers
vii. months. Darius 36. years Xerxes. 20. years Artabanus usurper that slew
Xe^xes. 7. months Artaxerxes longhand. 40 years Xerxes 2. months Sogdianus 8.
months Da^ius the bastard. 19 years. Artaxerxes the mindful, 40. yea.
Artaxerxes Ochus, 26. years. Arses 4 years Darius the son of Arsamus, whom
Iustine calls Cadoma^. 6 yea.
The kings of Persia ^e^de the Empire. CC, 30. years and five months.

The second Monarchy of the Medes and Persians endured 522. years, 5. months.

The third Monarchy, of the Macedons.
Alexander the great, after whose death his kingdom was divided among his
Noblemen 12. years. Arideus 7. years Cass^nder 18. years An^ipater and
Alexander. 4. years Demetrius 6. years. Pirrhus 6. mon. Lysimachus 5. years
Ptolomeus Ceranicus 1. year. Mele^ger 2. mon. An^pater 1. year Sosthenes 2.
years. Antigonus Gonatas. 36 years Demetrius 10. years Antigonus 15. years
Phillip 42. years. Perses the last king 10. years.
The empire of Macedon lasted with Alexander Clxix. years. and 8. months.

The kings of Asia.
Antigonus 18. years. Demetrius Pollorcetes 7. years
The kings of Siria.
Scleuchus Nicanor. 32. years
The kings of Syria and Asia.
Antiochus Soter 43. years. Antiochus Thcos 15. years Scleuchus Callinicus 20.
years. Scleuchus Ceranus. 3. yea. Antiochus the great 36. yea. Scleuchus
Philopater 12. years Antiochus Epiphanes 11, years Antiochus Eupa^er 2. years
Demetrius Soter 22. years Alexander 10. years Demetrius 3. years Antiochus
Sedetes 9. years Demetrius again 4. years Antiochus Gripho 12. years
Antiochus Cyriccnus 18. years Phillip 2. years
The kingdom of Siria endured CClxxxxix. years.

The kings of Egypt.
Ptolomeus (...) son of Lagus. 40. ye, Ptolo, Philadelphus lv^^^. years.
Ptolo. Eu^rgetes 36. years. Ptolo. Philopater. 17. years Ptolo. Ephiphanes 24.
years Ptolo. Euergetes 20. yea. Ptolo. Phiscon al. soter 22. year Ptolo.
Alexander 10. years Ptolo. Lathyrus viii. years Ptolo. Dyon^sius 30. years
Cleopatia 22. year
The Empire of Egypt stood after Alexander CC. lxxxviii years.

The Monarchy of Alexander continued in altogether CCC, years.

FINIS
THE FIRST BOOK OF that famous Historiographer JVSTINE.
THE ARGUMENT.
Nr NVS, was the first founder of the Monarchy of Ass^ria. The wise of
Semyramis, attireth her self in man's apparel: she builded Babylon, conquereth

ITis generally held from all beginnings, that the government of Countries and
Nations, has always Kings ought to be cho^en only for ^ertue.
rested in the hands of Kings: who were chosen

NInus king of the Assyrians, was the first that changed this old law of
Nations, and thirsting after Sovereignty, made war upon his neighbor Nations,
who being ignorant what way to make resistance, he easily overcame, conquering
all as he went a long, even to the borders of Affricke.

I read that before his time two Kings, Vexores king of Egypt, and Tanays king
of Scythia, the one of which made a voyage to Pontus, the other to Egypt, but
that was far off, not at home: neither was it to thirst after Souerainty or
government, Desire of honor first cause of ^^rre.
but to win honor to their Subjects, and only contented themselves with
victory. But Ninus enlarged the Empire by continual seizing into his hands
all such Countries as he overcame: by reason of which conquests over the
neighboring countries, he so increased in power and grew so strong, that at
Zoroastres king of the Bactrians, which King is reported to be the first
inuentour of Magycke, and made great search to find out the beginning of the
world, and the moving of the Stars. This Zoroastres being The first invention
of Magyck and Astronomy.
slain, Ninus himself dyed also, leaving behind a Son (being under age
called Nynus) by his wife Semiramis.

She durst not commit the government to the child, nor her self take it upon
her openly, considring that so many and mighty Nations (which scarcely would
obey a man, would much less submit themselves unto a Woman) resolved thus:
that whereas before she was Nynus wife and a woman, she counterfaited A Woman's
policy.
Tyara) and Semyramls wears mas apparel.
because people should not mystrust any thing by her newfound attire, she
commanded them to apparel themselves in the same manner: which kind of attire
the Assyrians did ever after use, even to this day: and in this disguise she
was never taken for any other but her Son.

In the time of this disguise she attained many worthy enterprises, by which
greatness, when she thought she had out-worne E^uy, snee reueyled her self.
Babylon, and enclosed it with a wall of Brycke inlayed with Bytumen, a kind of
mortar much used in those Countries. Many worthy enterprises did this Queen
atchiue: for not being content to maintain the estate of the Empire (as her
husband left it) she subdued Ethyope, and made war upon India, wherinto no
man had ever entered, but only the and Alexander the great. At the last
vnnaturaly desiring to company with her own Son, she was by him slain,
Semyramis slain by her own son.
when she had reigned forty two years, after the death of her husband Nynus.

Nynus her Son, contented himself with what his parents had gotten,
Assyrians (which afterward were called Syrians) held the Sovereignty 1300.
years. The last king that reigned was Sardanapalus (a man more nice then any
woman) into whose presence Arbactus (whom he made Lieutenant general over the
Medes) could not be admitted: but by long suit he was at last suffered to have
entrance to his presence (which before was never granted unto any man.) When
Arbactus came in, he found him spinning of purple upon a distaffe in women's
attire in the middle of his Concubines, and he far surpassed all the women
there present, both in softnes of body, and purity of Vicious wantonness the
bane of kingdoms.
countenance, and thus sat he weighing out to every one their task: At which
sight Arbactus being abashed, grew into high disdain, that so many worthy men
should be subject to such a womanishe disposition, departed, and presently
Sardanapalus destroys him^el^e
made, cast himself and all his riches thereinto, herin only playing the man.

After Arbactus the worker of his confusion, was made king, and removed
Assyrians, to the Medes. Long time after (many kings coming between) by
dissent the kingdom came to Astyages. This man having no Issue, save one only
daughter, dreamt that he saw springing out of her bellye, a vine, whose
branches should ouer-shaddow all Asia: Astyages his Dream*
whereupon calling before him all his Soothsayers and Interpreters of dreams,
demanded the meaning of this vision: who answered, that his daughter should
bring forth a nephew, whose greatness was disclosed by this vine, and that by
him he should be deposed from his regal dignity.

The King being hereby stricken into a marvelous fear, thinking to prevent
fate, married away his daughter carelessly: not Nobly at home, to any Her name
was Madane
them accounted the vildest people living: and yet not herewith satisfied, sent
for his Daughter (being great with child) that so soon as she was delivered,
he might see the babe destroyed. So soon as the child was borne, it was given
to Harpagus a chief man of the Kings Council, to be slain. Harpagus Astyages
causes his Nephew to be slain.
wisely casting the inconvenience that might redound hereby upon himself, after
the kings decease (because he had no issue male to succeed) if the king dome
should light upon the daughter, how egerly she would prosecute revenge upon
him being a Subject, which she could not upon her father being king: Al which
considered, he delivered the child to the kings Heardsman, the more moved at
the sight hereof, took up the child and brought it to his cottage, the Bitch
following egerly all the way. As Soon as the woman had the babe in her arms,
he smiled and played with her and there appeared such cheerfulness in him,
that she desired her husband rather to cast away his own child, and she would
bring up that in stead thereof. And thus ^^rodo^us ^^po^^^th the Shephea^ds
^hild was still borne.
the destiny of the two children being changed, the kings nephew was brought up
in the place of the Shepherds son, and the Shepherds cast away for the
kings nephew. The nurses name was after called Sp^^con (for so the Persians
call a Bitch in their language)

The child being brought up among the Shepherds, was named Cyrus: The courag^
o^s stomach (...) Cyr^s.
kings bondmen. The king sending for the child demanded why he did so: who
answered (without changing countenance) that he had done as becam a king. The
king wondering at his audacity, called to remembrance his dream and the
interpretation, and when he had well uiewed the countenance of the child, the
time of his casting away, the Shepherds examination, and all to iumpe
together, he openly acknowledged him to be his Nephew.

Now As^yages became altogether forgetful of his dream, thinking it was Cyrus
had playde the King among little Children, whilst he was abiding with the
Shepherd, therefore he put away all displeasure, and wholly bent his furious
revenge against Harpagus (his chief and only Councellor of state) unto whom he
proved so great an enemy (for Harpagus sonn^ is (...) and g^uen to his father
to ^eed on.
that he spared the life of his nephew) that nothing might satisfy, but that
his son should be butcherly killed, and set before his father, as me^t to
feed upon. This tyrannous proceeding, mustred up a thousand discon^entes in
the thoughts of Harpagus, which on the sudden he could not frame and fit for
revenge, but in wise discretion dissembled grief, til opportunity had shaken
hands with just occasion. In mean space, Revenge slept, Cyrus grew Harpagus
bare the heavy burden of his sons mu^der: even so long, that being overwhelmed
as it were, he sat him down and wrote unto Cyrus a very moving Epistle, showing
the whole proccedinges of his H^rp^^^^ (...) a l^^ (...) to Cyrus being in
P^rly^.
most cruel Granfather. First, the base manage of his daughter into Persya,
then the charge imposed upon me, to see you made away, and how by me you were
preserved, the kings hatred toward me, and that which even woun death my very
soul, the loss of my dear son, more deerer unto me then life: All which
considered, he encouraged him to raise an Army, and with all have to enter the
kingdom, promising, that he for his part would so alter Medes should revolt.

This letter thus made ready, could not safely be conveyed to the hands of
Cyrus openly, for sear of the Kings Officers which kept strait watch in all
the passages: at last, beating his wit for policy in so secret a stratagem,
he thus resolved: A Hare was brought before him ready bowelled, and in the A
letter sent in a (...) belly.
belly thereof puts the letter, and caling a trusty seruent, deliuerd the Hare
willing him to carry it to Cyrus being in Persya, and the more to remove away
al suspicion, he caused him to carry nets along therewith, under color of
hunting, and such like pastimes.

Cyrus, although he had taken a through view of the letter, was not fully
satisfied, till in a dream he was commanded to receive it as a truth, and in
every thing to take those courses that was therein delivered: In which dream
also, he was advised, that whosoever met him first the next morning, he should
Cyrus makes him his c^^m panion that he first meets.
join him as Companion of al his Fortunes. Hereupon, early in the mo^n he
took a journey out, and on the way there met him a servant (called Sybaris)
lately escaped forth of prison from a man of Media. Of him he required Persyan
borne, he commanded his ^etters to be loosed, and received him joyfully,
taking him as companion of his chances, and so returned back again to the
City Persepolis.

Being come into the City, he gathered together a^ the Inhabitants thereof,
commanding every man to provide an Axe, to cut down all the wood that grew by
the highway side, which they did courageously. The next day, he made a great
feast unto them: in the midst whereof, when he saw they grew to be merry and
pleasant, he puts forth this question; That (if they were put to their
choice) whether they would live in labor and toil as they Cyrus makes the
Inhabitants a great feast.
did yesterday, or in mirth and feasting, as at this present. The people took
Cyrus) so long as ye are in subjection to the Medes you must endure labor and
toil, as yesterday: but if you will follow me, ye shall liueing eat iollity, as
on this day: So with a genetal resolution, he raised a power, and made war
upon the whole Nation of the Medes.

Astages for getting the wrong done to Harpagus, made him Lieutenant general,
who so soon as he had received the charge of so huge an Atmye, presently
remembered his promise made to Cyrus, and accordingly yielded Hatpagus reuolteth.
up al his Forces: herein requiting the kings cruelty for his son, with
disloyalty, to the utter overthrow both of his state and kingdom. When tidings
Astiages, he with all speed raised another mighty power, and went in person
toward Persia, where he fiercely renewed the battle, and The valiant ^outage
of Astyages.
as his soldiers were in fight, he still placed fresh companies at their backs,
charging to beat them forward perforce that were before upon the enemy, and
the rather to keep them to the fight, told them they were cuery way so begirt
with enemies that they could no way escape by cowardly slight, and therefore
withed them ma^fvlly to bear themselves.

Al which when the Soldiers had welconsidered, and noting the policy of the
king, they resolved to bide the brunt, rather then the rebuke of cowards, and
thereupon gave so fierce an assault, that they made the Persian host to
Persians being ouercharged, and perceiving that they still gathered ground
upon them, gave back: but their Wives and mothers ran hastily among them,
desiring them not to be discouraged, but The ^ourage of the Persian women.
return again into the battle: but when the women perceived that they made
small have, they all at one instant lifted up their clothes, and showing their
pri^y parts, asked if they would run again into their mothers wombes for
succor and defense.

The Persians being in this reproachful manner touched with their women's The
courage of the Per^ur.
words and actions, in a revenging anger reunited all their forces, and
returned back again into the Battle, and charged upon the enemy in such
courageous manner, that they compelled them to fly, from whom but even now
they themselves did run away. In this battle Cyrus overcame his graundfather
Aslyages, and took him prisoner, taking nothing away from him, save the
kingdom only; rather choosing still to be accounted as his Nephewe, then
Tyrant-like to insult upon him as a Conqueror: moreover, because all his
dignities should not forsake him at one instant, he m^de him Ruler over the
Hyrca^ians, which were a mighty Nation: And thus came the Empire Medes to an
end, which before had continued 350. years.

Cyrus, in the beginning of his reign, made Sybaris (whom according to his
vision he had before delivered out of prison, and taken to him as Companion
(...) Vision.
of all his fortunes) Lyeutenant general over the Persyans, and to his more
content, gave his own sister to him in marriage. But as for all such Cities
as before were tributary to the Medes, (for so much as the Empire was changed,
they supposed their estate to be also changed) felaway from Cyrus, which was
the occasion of much war, and many bloody battles: yet at last many of
those he forced back again to their former obedience, and in thend made war
upon the Babylonians. Croesus king of Lydia (whose wealth has Babylonians,
where being overcome, and growing into consideration of the end, closely
retired home again to his own Country. Cyrus having here attained victory,
could not so content himself, but hasting to ^ettle Babylon at quiet, takes
his course from thence with all his warlike companies to Lydia, where in very
short time he overcame all the powers of Croesus with no great toil or labor
(by reason they had so lately returned from Babylon) Croesus himself being
taken prisoner in the field: and according to the ^ase he had in their
Cr^^sus take prisoner
vanquishment, he used the same proportion toward them again. For first, to
Croesus he granted life, and with his life, the greatest part of all his
inheritance, Barce; in the which although he lived not asking, yet he had the
state of a King, and all the royalties thereunto belonging, the title of king,
only excepted.

These deeds of mercy mightily redoubled upon the Conqueror, and with small
damage to the conquered. For the rumor here of being sp^ead abroad, that war
was made against Croesus, presently all Greece was up in Arms and came to
aid him (even with as much speed, as it bin to quench some outrageous fire.)
Such was their love to Croesus, even in general, that if Cyrus had offered him
cruelty in Conquest, it had kindled a most sharp war upon the head of Cyrus.

After in course of time, Cyrus being employed in foreign wars, tidinges came
that the Lydians were up in Arms, whereupon he speedily returned, and with
small force brought an end of that revolt: and to prevent all future The
Lydians revolt.
chance, he took from them al defense of war; as Horses, Armor, and other
weapons, giving straight commandment that they should use nothing but practices
of pleasure and delight: as drinking, music, gaming, and all delights of
effeminate wantonness. Hereby it came to pass, that this people Reward of
Rebellion.
(being ever accounted strong, warlike, and of proud stomach) becam idle,
drousie, drunken, and unapt for any exercise; not of Arms, but even weak and
feeble in strength of body, and so spent all their after days in riot.

There were amongst the Lydyans many worthy kings, before the days of Croesus,
whose acts were worthy after-memorie: but among many, none ever out-stript the
Fortunes of Candaules, who having a wife (which for perfection of beauty far
surmounted the women of those times) could not contain himself within the
limits of his own secret pleasures, but made his own tongue to blazon out to
every ear, that which in silence might have lien buried in Gyges) whom he made
an ey-witnes of what his tongue had uttered. This vna^uised demeanor of
Candaules wrought such an alteration in his friend, that he instantly becam his
enemy, and shortly after he slew Candaules, and married his wife, who
willingly yielded her self and kingdom into the hands of this adulterat
murderer.

Cyrus, who all this time was busied in Asia, in the end became sole conqueror
of the East: but not therewith content, began wars against the Scythians.
Thomaris a Warlike woman.
In the time of which attempt, there reigned over that Nation a Queen (called
Thomaris) who (not like a woman) received the enemy courageously, and with
manly resolution gave him leave to pass the River Araxes, (although she might
have stopped all the passages) and gathered all advantages of strength for the
defense ofher own Country: so that if the enemy received the worst, they
should very hardly escape back again, because they could not suddenly
recover the R^uer, neither keep any order in their retire.

Cyrus being as polliticke, passed the River, marching with his Army up into
the Country, a days ioutney and more, and then pitched his Camp. The next
day, as if he were afraid he retired, forsaking his camp, which he left very
richly furnished, fit for to welcome any kingly gueste. The Queen hearing
hereof, gathered up the third part ofher Army, giving the conduct thereof unto
Spargapyses) who followed the enemy very eagerly. At last, coming to the Camp
of cyrus, (the young Prince being too raw in Ignorant lea ders dangerous in
warr^
wa^l^ke stratagems) forgot the bettaile, and fell to the banquet: suffering his
followers (being not used to such dellicate viands) so to ouercharge themselves
with Wine, that there was little use of weapons. So soon as cyrus heard
hereof, he returned secretly in the night, and falling upon them unawares, put
them al to the sword, and amongst the rest, the Queens son escaped not, but
was there slain.

Thomaris having lost so great an army, and what was worse her only son,
cyrus and his policy with the like: for seeming to be fearful of her former
loss, she still drew back more and more, till she had brought cyrus to a
mighty strait, and leeing a fit place, begirt him round with aband of men
which lay in ambush, and slew two hund. thousand Persians, wherein Cyrus
amongst the rest received a very dangerous and mortal wound The death of Cyrus.
whereof shortly after he died. In this conflict, which is worthy note, there
was not a man left alive, to carrye home tidings of this deadlye fight. The
Queen could not yet rest satisfied, although she had the life of her enemy,
but commanded his head should be smitten off, and thrown into a great bole of
man's blood, making known his cruelty more apparently, by these words which
she then uttered: Go, now and glut thy selse with the blood of Men, which in
thy lise would never be satisfied. This Cyrus reigned thirty years, being a
(...).
very valiant and worty Prince, not only in the beginning of his reign, but
through out the whole course of his life.

Cambyses his son succceded in the Kingdom, who by conquestioyned Cambyses
(...).
the Empire of Egypt thereunto, making one Sovereignty over both. He was
mightily offended with the Egyptians for their superstition, and commanded the
Temple of Apis and other gods to be beaten down, and laid level with the
ground; and withal sent a migthy Army to destroy the Temple of Amon, (which
temple was held in so great estimation amongst them,) which Army being over
whelmed with vyolent tempests, and huge heaps of sand, was utterly destroyed
Afterward he had a dream wherein he conceited that his brother Smerdes
should wear the Diadem after him, the which stroke such a terror to his heart,
that he was never satisfied, till he had wrought his death: for it was not to
be thought that he would spare his brothers life, when he offered Comays (a
very especial friend of his, being one of the samily called Magyes,) a
bloody tyrant fit for his purpose, but he was prevented. T^ranny rewarded.
At last himself by his own sword, by chance falling out of the scabberde,
received a grieuons wound in the thigh, where of he shortly after died, taking
the true reward of a Homycide.

This thus coming to pass, wor^ ^ereof came unto the cares of the Wiseman,
who very cunningly kept close the death of the King, and the rather, for that
he would fully effect what he had undertaken: and to the intent he might
remove away Smerdes (who was right heir unto the Crown) he caused him
Oropastes) to the throne of Majesty (for both in making and favor, he very
much resembled the King.) This cunning plot of Comays, lay yet still
undiscovered, and vnmistrusted, and the mista^e betwixt Smerdes and Oropastes,
passed for current amongst all men; and the rather might this be brought about,
for that among the Persians (for the greater reverence and high regard that is
given to the person of the King) he never she weth himself unto the people
open faced. Then the Wiseman thinking to gain the m^re favor of the Commons,
Oropastes is made king by treachery.
eased them of all manner trybute and allegience, during the term of 3.
years, as also from all pressing of Soldiers, and services in war, during
all the said

These things being thus carried, then began suspicion to spring up amongst the
Nobles, but especially (one above the rest, called Orthones) a man of worthy
resolution, and pollitick in all the affairs of the commonweal: This An
excelent plot to find out the treason of Comar^s.
man therefore, casting about by all means to sound out the depth of this their
misdoubting, sent to his daughter (being one of the kings Concubines) to learn
of her whether he that was king was the true son of Cyrus or no: who sent
answer to her father, that of her self she cannot resolve him, neither any of
her fellows, although they were so near the king, because they came in place
not together at any time, but only by one and one: This answer being received
from his daughter, he rested not here with content, but sent back word, that
she should do after this manner; when he was fast asleep, to feel about his
head, whether he had ears or no ears, for that Cambyses in his time had caused
both the ears of the wise man to be cut off. She according to the Treason
discovers ^t self.
to him, but by him to the rest of the Nobles of the Realm, and by way of
compulsion, bound every man to other by oath, that they should resist and
gather all the strength they could, whereby in all speedy manner they might
remove and utterly overthrow the Usurper.

There was chief in this resolution but only Seven, who leaving all
detraction, Seven principal plotters in the action.
(for fear least if the multitude who was to aid them might have much
breathing time, the whole confederacy might happily be bewrayed) therefore
every man preparing with his weapons ready under his gown, strait Gobryas
catching at one of the wise men held him fast in his arms, and when he
perceived that his copartners staid their hands, (fearing least they should by
mistake kill the one instead of the other, for this action fell out in the
dark night,) bad them The truth of Gobrias toward his Country.
life of Gobryas: but the event fell out better then the resolution, for it so
chanced that they killed the Usurper, and Gobryas was saved harmless.

This coming so well about, these Noblemen wan unto themselves great fame, in
that they had by such valor regained again the kingdom, which was by so
polliticke a course long time ruinated: as also their renown was the more
famous, in that when they were in controversy about the kingdom, they did so
well accord together amongst themselves; For they were al men of high spirit,
great warriors, and every man within himself of great estate, that it grew a
hard matter in question amongst the people, who was worthiest,

This union by consent thus ended, they appointed next, that at a certain time
each man upon his courser should present himself before the palace, in the
morning by break of day: and then he whose horse first neighed before the
sun rising, that man should without any contradiction be their king and sole
monarch (for the Persians hold this for immovable, that there is no other God
save the sun only) and that a horse is held the only joy of the same God,
and there unto him are hallowed.

There was amongst the conspitators, one Darius, the son of Hystaspis who
being greatly perplexed in thought, how he might by some cunninge slight,
gain the kingdom to himself, bestowed much beating and labor in his
troubled pate, till at last his horse-keeper perceiving the whole matter said:
If my Lord there be no other thing to cross your desire, take courage, and let
no thought further trouble you, for assuredly the day shall light on your
side. Hereupon, the evening before the day appointed, he brought his The
policy of a horskeeper.
thing would so come to pass, as his Lord and master had desired, and
afterward sorted to their desired wish.

The morning being approached (every man kept the due hour appointed) Darius
horse knowing the place, by reason of the courage had to the Mare, forthwith
neighed alowde, and first of all the company gave him a token of his
long-thirsted for authority. The residue of the Lords, calling to remembrance
their forepassed decree, so soon as they heard the neighing of the horse,
dismounted Darius by the name of king, and all the people following their
example, and allowing the judgments of their peers and petty Princes, took
him from thenceforth for their lawefull and just king. Thus was the kingdom
brought back again out of the hands of usurpers by the exceeding resolution
and valor of seven of the greatest Nobles in all the kingdom into the hands
of one man to be governed. It is almost not to be credited in course of humain
reason, that so many famous, worthy and great personages (notwithstanding that
they hazzarded their lives) to regain the kingdom out of the hands of the wise
men, and in so great content to let it rest only on the fortunes of Darius, but
that they well remembered their faiths was before obliged, and what was more,
knew that Darius was very Persia. Again to give further satisfaction and
content to the state of his whole Land; in the beginning of his reign (to the
intent he might the better establish his kingdom, he joined Darius takes to
wife the daughter of Cyrus.
himself into the blood royal) taking in marriage the only daughter of
Cyrus, whereby it appeared, with more plainnes to every understanding, that the
kingdom was not so much in the government of a stranger, as that it was more
fully reduced into the family and stock of king Cyrus.

Not long after the Asstrians fell into rebellion, taking the city of Babylon
by force. The king having word hereof, grew into an exceeding great rage
Zopyrus, (one of the seven which subdued and overcame the wisemen) who withdrew
himself home to his own house, and calling about him such seruitors as he then
had, caused them first to strip him out of his cloths, and then with certain
whips in most lamentable manner to ouerunne all his body, and to cut off his
nose, lips, and ears, In this vile and ghastly shape, Zopyrus comes very
hastily into into the presence of the king, who was so amazed hereat, that he
stood confounded, and could not tell what might be immagined at this so woeful
spectacle. At last, gathering up himself, out of this mazed motives, demanded
who had so shamefully mangled and martyred his body, and upon what occasion:
Zopyrus, stepped forth more nearer unto the person of the king, and in The love
of Zopirus to the King and Country.
secret discoursed his whole intent, and to what end this disguised body of his
was thus strangely dismembered, and withal told the king his whole drifte and
purpose herein.

Thus taking his leave, he went his way like a wandering Vagarant toward
Babylon, wherein grievous manner before all the Inhabitants, he shows this
his mangled body, withal falling into most bitter exclamations against king
Darius, rehearsing in what cruelty he had proceeded against him, and that he
had received such indignity from him, that he had even bereft him of a part in
the kingdom, not by prowess or manhood, but only by a hard measure of
fortune: neither was it by the applause or election of men, but an exceeding
cunning slight, namely the neighing of a horse. Hereupon he councelled them,
to take warning by this his misery, how they gave credit to such a dangerous
foe. Further he advertised them, not to rely upon the weakness of their walls,
but betake them to their weapons: and if they stood so affected, as to make
choice of him to take their part in these actions of war, because of the
Zopirus treachery toward the Babylonians.
Babilonians having thoroughly considered, and giving credit to the personage
and Nobility of the man, as also for that he was a worthy warryour, and that
his wrongs were as a sufficient warrant to credit him, they made him general
over all their services, and he to smother and disguise his plot the more,
with a small company twice or thrice, set upon the Persians, and still
prevailed, especially for that they gave way to his purpose for the nonce. At
last, seeing him fortunate in all his attempts, they put the whole Army over to
Zopirus delivers Babylon to Darius
his trust, who having what he came for, delivered them up by treason to the
king his master, and by this experienced plot, brought the City again
Scythians, whereof more shall be set down in the next book following.

The end of the First Book.
The second Book
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Scythyans and Egyptians contend for the antiquity of their Countries.
Scythia is described, with the Manners and customs of the people: their
fortunate enterprises, and what Empyres were by them first set up. Plynos and
Scolopythus two Gallants of the bloud-royall banished. They take unto them a
great

IN reporting the actions of the Scithians, which were no Persians and
Bactrians, so the other errected the souerainty of the Amazons: yea Contention
between the Scythians and Egyptians for antiquity.
the exploits of the one sex so equalized the fortunes of the other, that
hard it were to censure, to whether party to give the garland by way of
comparison

These Nations were ever accounted most ancient, yet concerning their
antiquity many disputations were moved between them and the Egiptians: the
Egiptians aledging, that in the beginning when some countries were scorched
with immoderate heat, and others as bitterly vexed with such insufferable cold,
that it not only hindered natural procreation, but (that worse is (...)
security of life or health to arriving strangers, before the use of (...) (...)
found out against weathers injury, and the temperature of Clim^^ (...) by art
and industry: whereas Egypt was situated under so moderate a ^^^^ellation, that
neither the cold of winter, not the heat of summer was any way offensive to the
natural inhabitatnts. Also the grounds was so fruitful, that there is no
land under the Sun, that brings forth more abundance for the use of man:
from hence therefore it may be very well concluded, that of right men ought to
be borne and brought up, where the soil of the Country is most pleasant to
their constitution.

To cross this their affirmation, the Scithians denied, that the temperatenes
of the air, made any thing for proof of antiquity: insomuch that nature it
Scithia, then in Egypt, so much the more harder and stouter were the Scithians,
rather then the Egiptians. But if the world being now divided into parts, were
once in one lump: then whether water in the beginning were Lord of the earth,
or fire had got the vper-hande Scithians in both of these must of necessity
prove the auncienter. For if you will say fire had the first possession of all,
that might by little and little be quenched, and so give place to the earth,
from which, no part could be sooner separated from the fire, by the extreme
nipping of the winter season, then the North: which even to this day is by
experience known unto all people and Nations, that for extremity of cold the
North claims the pre-eminence: whereas Egypt, and so likewise all the East
parts were a long season in finding forth that temperatenes, wherein they
could be satisfied, as for better

But if all the world were once drowned, then it will soon appear that the
higher the place is, the sooner it is discovered: by this reason, that the
waters withdraw themselves into the lower grounds, and there abide some course
of time before they can be dried up, and the sooner it is consumed, then the
sooner is it made a place for the breeding of living creatures. Now it is well
known that Scythia is so much higher then other Countries and Dominions, that
all the Rivers thereof, take their courses downward, and in their fall meet
with Meotis, and so altogether run from thence into the sea of Pontus, and
lastly into the Egiptian Sea.

But as for Egypt in it self: being by care and great cost of many kings for
many hundred years, maintained with huge dams and mighty banks, there cast up
to resist the rage and violence of the waters, as also strengthened, fortifyed
and cut out into ditches and trenches, to the intent that the Waters being
received into the one, might be kept by the other from any furthe^^ing, and
therefore could not be peopled, except the River Nylus were ^^ut up, cannot
seem to be accounted auncienter then other, but rather (by reason of the great
cost in the land that many Princes have bestowed, as also the abundance of mud
that the River of Nylus leaves behind) may rather seem to be last inhabited
amongst all other kingdoms and Countries. So in conclusion of this long
controversy betwixt these two famous Nations, the Egiptians received the foil
by argument, and the Scythians were ever accounted most ancient, and therefore
most Honorable.

Scythis stretches his bonds into the East, and is enclosed, on the one side
The Situation of Scythia.
with Pontus, on the other with the Mountains called Rhiphaes, upon the back
has Asys, and the River of Tanais: It is of a great length, and also exceeding
wide. The inhabitants make no bonds between man and man. They have no use of
Tyllage, nor any certain places of abode, or houses.

As they feed and graze their Cattle, wandering from place to place, thorough
deserts and wild places, they take with them their wives and Children, which
they carry along in certain wagons and Chariots, all covered with raw Hides,
to resist the violence of the air, the which they use instead of dwelling
Their manner of habitan^.
houses.

They have the use of Justice, even of a very natural inclination, and not
Justice.
houses, nor any place wherein to make themselves safe, and again that all
their riches consists of Cattle, what could they account to be in safety, if
they should give way to theft: and as for Gold and Silver, they do as much
despise it, as other Nations desires and covet it.

Their principal food is milk and Honny, they have no use of woole, nor know
how to make garments thereof: and though they be continually vexed with cold,
yet they use no other clothing, then the skins of wild beasts, and Their food.
a certain vermin called Myce. This is one chief ground of their vprightnes
Clothing.
it is every where to be found, that where abundance of wealth is, there
covetousness reigns as a great commander, and in the end bursteth forth
into such greediness, that it is never satisfied but with blood, or bloody
actions: as murder, war, and all other calamities of woeful destiny: Again,
it is note worthy, that they should have that by nature, which the Greeks by
instruction of all their wisest men, and precepts of all the Philosophers, so
long time continued, could never attain: as also that the exquisit and civil
manners of the Grecians, should be so far surmounted, in comparison of the
rude and Scythians, because they made more use and profit of their time in the
nursery of ignorance and vice, than the other did in the studies and knowledge
of virtue.

Three several times they won the Empire of Asia, themselves still remaining
unconquered by any enemy, or power offorraine Nation: First against Darius king
of Persia, giving him a great overthrow, and after put him to a most shameful
flight, and at last forced him clean out from all their territories. Then at
another battle against Cyrus, whom they overcame and slew with the greatest
part of al his armies. Again in the same manner proceeded they against
Zopyron, (a great and principal commander to great Alexander) Their many
victories.
and all his host they utterly ouerthrewe. Many times rhey were hardely
threatened by the Romans, but they contented themselves, with the only braues
of that Nation, but for their strokes they felt them not.

Within some certain times after, they founded the Empires of the Parthtans
The Scithians strong and stout men.
and Bactrians. These were a people of an excellent tough temperature given to
endure any labor, stout men of war, and as for strength of body fasurpassed
other Nations, having minds answerable to their strength of body, naughty

The first that offered to make war upon the Scythians, was Vexoris king of
Egypt, who sent his Ambassadors long before, to agree upon certain articles
Vexoris makes the first wars upon the Scithians
of obedience. The Scithians having received advertisement of the kings coming
against them, made slight account thereof, and gave answer to the Ambassadors
after this manner: We cannot but marvel that the King and ruler of so mighty
and rich a people, will so unadvisedly move war against us Beggars, Scithians
will not abide his coming to us, but withal speed make toward him to meet him
on the way, or rather into his own land, for that we know there is treasure
of infinite value, worthy the labor we shall undertake: And accordingly they
made good by action, what they promised by word. The king understanding that
they remained resolute, and that they made upon him in such speedy manner,
sledde for fear, leaving behind his whole army, with all their furniture of
war, and secretly recovered himself into his own kingdom: But the
Scithians could Egypt, by reason of the fenny contrys, wherewith The Scithians
conquer Asia.
they were altogether unacquainted. As they made their return homewards, they
took all Asia in their way, which with some small labor they conquered, and
made them tributary, rather to show forth their conquestes, then any boaste
they took in their victory: Also they were constrained to make their resiance
in those Confines, the space of fifteen years, before they could further make
any settled state of government in those Nations. At last they were called home,
at the great and importunate requests of their women, from whom they had
received a message by the whole consent of the women, that if after so long
absence, they did not speedily return, they would The message of the Scithian
wom^.
Scithians, to decay.

Thus became Asia tributary to the Scithians for the space of 1500. years: and
Nynus king of the Assirians, was the last that yielded this tribute money unto
them.

About this time there were among the Scythians, two young Gallants of the
blood royal, named Plinos and Scolopythus, these two being at great variance
Plinus and Scolopithus banished.
with the Nobles, was by a general consent banished: who when they saw the
hard measure that was laid upon them, drew into their faction, a great number
of the younger sort of the Gentlemen of the Country and others, and ranging
abroad for a place of abode, at last settled themselves upon the bounds of
Cappadocia, about the River of Thermodoon, taking possession of all the fields
and lands about the City called Themyscira: many years lived they there upon
the spoil of such inhabitants as were thereabouts: whereupon the people being
wearied of these Out-lawes, privily at unawares gathered themselves together,
and giving the assault upon them on the sudden, put The first original of
the Amazons.
by this sudden action also become widows, betook themselves to arms, and
stood upon the defense of these borders as their own, and after by making war
upon their neighbors (the rather because they had a full resolution not to
marry again, especially with their neighbors) saying it was rather a bondage
then otherwise to be accounted. After, they both increased and governed their
Commonwealth without men, and also defended themselves against all the forces
of men: and fearing that they which had husbands least should be accounted in
better state then the rest, they very bloudily murdered those men they had
amongst them: and in revenge of the deaths of their husbands

Thus having by war purchased peace, they sent for men and accompanied with
them: and when any child was borne, if it were a male, it was presently
killed, if a female it was preserved and brought up: but how, not in idleness,
neither to learn to spin and card, but valiantly in feats of arms, as
ridinge The training up of the Amazonians
great horse, hunting, hauking, and all the exercises that belongs to men: and
that they should not have any hinderance of martial exercises, as shooting, or
throwing of darts, their right paps was seared off with hot Irons when they
Amazons.

They had amongst them two Queens, Marthesia and Lampedo, who always divided
their Armies into two parts, and when they were grown mighty in wealth, they
took it by turns, one to govern at home, and the other to govern and lead
to the wars upon other Nations abroad: And that they Two queens over the
Amazons.
might be accounted the more renowned in all their exploits and enterprises,
they made it known by proclamation, that they themselves were the only and
immediate daughters of Mars. They conquered the greatest part of al Europe, and
subdued also many Cities in Asia, where they builded the famous City of
Ephesus, and many other Cities besides. They discharged a great The building
of Ephesus.
part of their Armies, and sent them home with abundanne of rich spoils. The
other part which remained still behind to defend the worthy and mighty Empire
of Asia, were suddenly assaulted by the Barbarians, and put to the sword,
amongst whom was their Queen Marthesia shamefully murdered.

After her death the Empire came by succession, vno a daughter of hers (called
Orithia: who was very active in all millitary discipline, and was accounted a
mirror amongst women, in that she lived and died, in the royaltic Orithia lived
and died a Virgin.
of a maid: In her days, she so highly advanced the honor and high renown of
the Amazons, that the king for whose pleasure Hercules attempted twelve such
dangerous labors and adventures. (being thought impossible for him to
perform,) this king also commanded that he should fetch him the Armor of the
Amazonian Queen. Hercules made great preparation to the voyage, Hercules is
sent to fetch the Amazonian Queens Armout.
and chose for his companions, many of the young and towardly Lords, and Nobles
of Greece, and within short time arrived with 9. Galleys on the Amazonian
Shores, and suddenly assaulted them at unawares. At his coming thither the
Queendome was governed by two of the four Sisters (called Antiope and Orithia)
Orithia was abroad in foreign parts upon occasion of wars, by reason Antiope,
neither was there any mistrust of any enemies approach, whereby they accounted
themselves to have less need of such companies, as in former times they were
forced to entertain. Upon which sudden charge given, they sounded as sudden
an alarm, whereby those small companies which they had, ran presently to their
arms, and in the end gave the enemy a very easy victory: for many were
slain, and many taken prisoners, among whom were the two Sisters of Antiopes:
Menalippe taken by Hercules, and Hippolite, by Theseus. Afterward Theseus made
his prisoner, his wife, upon whom he begot Hippolitus: Hercules after victory,
restored Menalippe back again to her sister, and only took for her ransom
the Queens armor, and having accomplished Hercules gives Menalippe his
prisoner for the quee. armor.
all his affairs given him in charge, returned back again to the King.

Orithia having knowledge of all that had happened, and that the Prince of Athens
had carried one of them away by strong hand and violence, rouzed up her
Countrymen to revenge: giving them in flat terms, that all their conquests,
both in Asia and Pontus was but vain, if they should put up such a foil at
the hands of the Greeks: not so much in regard of the wrong received by war,
as the foul rauishments they had offered them by the Athenians.

Hereupon she sends forth an Ambassador to Sagillus King of Scithia, Orithia
ctaueth aid si^^ the Scythian king.
of Scythia, as also of the slaughter made upon their husbands: their want of
armor, and the cause why these wars were undertaken. And the rather to incite
him up unto their aid, showed the exceeding valor of their women, and what
warlike enterprises they had attempted in glory of the Scythians. In which they
accounted that Nation more honorable, for that the Women (in martial
discipline) were nothing inferior to the men. The king duly considring the
circumstances, and for that he stood upon the honor of his house, quickly gave
consent to aid them in their distresses, and to that purpose appointed his
only son Penaxagoras, accompanied with many gallants and Dissension the
^^nker of an Army.
a sudden discention fell amongst them, whereby they that before came to
their aid and succor fell away from them, and so left them to themselves, and
in the end the Athenians put them to the worst: but though the Scithivus had
forsaken them in their most need, yet with their whole camp they so asisted
them afterward, that they were by them defended and guarded home into their own
country without any violence offered of other Nations.

After the death of Orithia, Penthesilia obtained the diadem, who left behind
her a famous remembrance of her worthy acts in that great and mighty assembly
of valiant men, and warlike Soldiers the Greeks and Troyans, in the long wars
that happened betwixt these two mighty Nations. At last Penthesilia Penthesilea
slain.
being slain, and the greatest part of her Army wasted, those few that
remained alive, (with much ado) defended themselves against their enemies, even
unto the days of Alexander the great: at which time there reigned as Queen
over them Minothea, (otherwise called Thalestris) who much desired the
Alexander, which at last she obtained for the space of fourteen days, to the
intent to have issue by him, and having herein satisfied her lust, returned
home into her own land, and shortly after deceased, with whom the name of the
Amazons utterly decayed, and in her ended. The last end of the Amazonian race.


Here we return again to the Hystories of the Scythians.

THe Scythians had now made their third voyage into Asia, where they remained
the space of seven years, seperating themselves by this long stay out of the
company and remembrance of their wives and children: For their wives being a
long time wearied by their absence, supposed that the The bondmen of the
Scithians made war upon their Masters.
together in most rebellious manner, and at their aproch bad them a most sharp
and dangerous fight, with full intent to give them not the reward of Masters,
but accounting them as their enemies and strangers.

The Scythians wisely considring, that by continuing wars against them they
should now loose what before they had won, advised themselves to another What
weapont the Scithians brought against their bond-slaues.
him in place of a sword, a complete furniture of rods and smarting whips,
(whereof it is general for bondslaues to stand in fear:) This counsel was
generally applauded, and every man prepared himself with his furniture of
whips to the fyeld, and when they were within sight of the enemy, upon a sudden
every man drew forth his whip, and began to yerke the same coragiously: most
desperately made hauock among themselves, some by weapons, and some by most
inhumane violence hanged themselves.

After this the Scithians lived in peace until the days of Lan-thine their
king, upon whom Darius king of Persia made war (as is before mentioned) because
he would not give consent to have his daughter in marriage) and with seven
hundred thousand men in arms, he entered into Scytbia^ at last having spent
sometime in great disdain, to give countenance to these his excursions,
insomuch as they never made any show of giving battle to them, he fearing
that if the bridge over the river of Danow should chance to be broke, he might
Darius enters into Sci thia with a great Army.
thereby be prevented and also enclosed, so that he could not return home
again, retired back again over the water, in great fear, with the loss of
fourscore Darius conquers Asia the less,
Asia, and Macedony, and the Ionians, at Sea, and brought them also under his
subjection: and having certain intelligence that the Athenians had aided the
Ionians against him, he fully bent all his power upon that Nation.

And for so much as we are come to the wars and victories of the Athenians, which
they compassed beyond all man's expectation, as also beyond all credit A
digression to the acts of the Athenians.
they achieved: and for so much as the acts and deeds of the Athenians, were
greater in effect, then in hope could any way be wished: therefore their
original is to be set down in few words, because their increase came not

They boast highly as well of their first original, as also their great
increase among themselves: for it was not by strangers, nor a multitude of
raskals gathered from all parts of the world, that first founded that Cttiy:
but they were bred and brought up, in that same soil and continent, whereas
they still inhabited: and that the place of their dwelling, was also the place
of their original beginning.

They are held also for to be the first that had the use of weauing and making
What thigns the athenians first muented
only upon Acornes, they by painful industry found out the use of the
plough, and so in short time had corn in great abundance. And without doubt,
all order of civil government, learning and clloquence, may well yield the
Garland to this Nation of the Athenians.

Before the days of Deucalion, they had a king was called Cecrops, (who if you
will give any credit to the report of ancient fables) had two faces, and
Deucalion said to have two faces.
therefore is said to be the first among the Heathen that joined men and women
together, as it were a resemblance of marriage.

After him succeeded Crandus, who had a daughter named Atthis, and she it was
that gave name unto the Country. Next follovved Amphitrion, and he Minerua,
and so it came to be called Athens. In these days there came upon the land so
great a slood, that the greater part of Greece was overflowed thereby, which
made so great havoc of the inhabitants that there was none escaped, save
only such as could recover to the tops of mountains, or get into vessels or
ships, and so sailed to Deucalion king of Thessaly, for which succor that this
Nation found at his hand, they ever after reported him to be the only
preserver and repairer of mankind. Then by order of succession, the kingdom
descended to Erictheus, in whose time the sowing of corn was found out at
Eleusis, by one Sir-named Triptolemus: Sowing of Corn first found out.
In liew of which benifite received, the night sacrifices were after instituted
in the honor of Ceres.

Aegeus also the father of Theseus reigned as sole Sovereign in Athens, Aegeus.
from whom Medea being deuorsed (by reason her son in-law Theseus was grown
up to man's estate) took her journey to Colchos with her own son Medus, whom
she bare by Aegeus. Then fell the kingdom upon Theseus, and after him to his
son Demophoon, who bent all his powers in aid of the Greeks against the
Troyans. There were many quarrels between the Athenians and the Doriens upon
ancient and deadlye grudginges, which the Doriens kept still in mind,
intending a time of shape revenge upon them, but as yet found no fit
opportunity to put in execution their long retained malice. In the end
concluded that they would send to the Oracle to ask counsel what might be done
herein. They received this answer that they should get the better of their
enemies, always provided that they laid no violent hand upon the king of
Athens. Herevppon when they came into the field, a general charge was Codrus
the king of Athens, who had understanding both of the answer of Apollo, as
also of the charge given through the camp of his enemies, Codrus
wherefore he stripped himself our of his princely robes, and so putting
himself into a suit of rags, with a bundle of vine shreds on his neck, in
which disguise, he attempted into the compe of his enemies, and being now
amongst them there flocked a great throng of soldiers about him, wondering at
this so misshapen an Anticke, where he was slain by a common soldier, whom he
had most grievously wounded with a hook of set purpose. The Doriens having
understanding that he that was slain amongst them was Codrus the King,
Athenians (by theresolution of their king and captain, who rather chose to put
himself into the hands of death, rather then to make shipwreck of the safety
of his Country) were prevented and delivered from this grievous war. With his
death ended the Codrus the last King of Athens.
government, for after him was there never any more kings in Athens.

Then became the government of the commonwelth into the hands of magistrates,
who were yearly chosen and appointed thereunto. But the Cittye Athens governed
by ^^^^ly Magistrates.
was at that time unfurnished of any laws, by reason that the kings word or
will was accounted ever for law amongst them: Then was there chosen to execute
Solon, a man of marvelous vprightnes, who took upon him to make laws, and so
to make the City as it were a new City, by his Solon.
new laws. This man so bare himself between the people and the Senate, that
although it were hard for one man to take such a course whereby both parties
might rest contented, yet he so cunningly and so gravely behaved him self,
that he at once gained equal goodvvill from both.



Amongst many worthy acts of this man, this one is to be recorded in
everlasting memory: When the Athenians and the Megarenses had long fought, and
endured many battles and much bloodshed, about the winning and keeping the
Isles of Salamine, unto Athenians made it high Treason to any, that thereafter
should make claim to any of those Solon noting the strict edict that The wise
policy of Solon
went out, grew exceeding sorrowful, least by holding his speech, he should
neglect the duty he ought unto the Common weal: again if he spoke, he brought
himself within danger of the Law. To prevent both Solon fained madness.
not only say, but do things forbidden: To this purpose, he put himself into
a Fools coat, and so runs out amongst a multitude of people, and being in
the middle of the rowt (and the rather to further his intended purpose) in
certain broken Rymes and Meeters, of all other to him most unacquainted, he
began to incite and stir up the people to that thing which was most
unlawful, wherein (although he were thus disguised) his words so wrought in
the ears and judgments of the people, that suddenly they proclaimed open
Wars against the Megarenses: In which attempt they overcame their Enemies,

The Megarenses being thns politikelie prevented, shut not up their malice but
practiced some other way to revenge themselves upon the Athenians: The
Megarenses seek revenge among the Noble-women.
whereupon they suddenly embarked themselves, upon set purpose to come and
surprise all the Noble-women and Matrones of Athens, as they were at the
celebration of their night Sacrifyces unto the honor of Ceres, in the temple
at Eleusis: Of this had knowledge one Pisistratus (a worthy Captain amongst the
Athenians) who gave commandment the women should celebrate these ceremonies,
in all points as they had done before, with iollitye and much rejoicing,
whereby there should grow no suspicion, that they had heard any thing of their
enemies intent and purpose, and so laying certain bands of Soldiers in ambush
abroad in diverse places was ready at all assayes to receive the enemy: At last
the Megarenses had recovered the coast whereunto they sailed, landed their men,
and began to rank them up in battle arraye, when upon the sudden Pisistratus
brake upon them, and violently overcame them, and put them al to the sword, and
forthwith entered into their Ships, (in which he put a great number of the
women, thinking thereby to deceive and Aegera.

The townsmen of Megera looking abroad, discovered their own Navy of ships
to be floting upon the waters, and in those ships they might perceive The
towns men of Megera mistake
a multitude of women to be there amongst (all which they vainly supposed to
be the booty they had so long sought after) they went forth to meet them, all
which when Pisistratus perceived, he instantly raised a power of men and came
against them, making much havoc and slaughter upon them, Megarenses, turned
to the triumph and victory of the courageous Athenians.

Pisistratus after all his great victories gotten, turned them unto his own
private commodity, and not to the general good of the whole Nation, and
Pisistratus by policy usurps
at last by usurpation and treason wound himself into the sole government and
kingdom. To this end, by subtlety and set purpose, he suffied his body to be
rent and mangled with whips and scourges at his own house, and in this
lamentable manner, he comes forth among the people, and when they were
gathered together in a route, showed his wounds, making most bitter
exclamations The multitude believe his hypocrisye.
the Nobles) he set the giddy-headed multitude on fire, making them believe
that for the love he bare unto their common good, he was thus punished and
hated of the whole Senate. When he had ended all his hypocritical Oration,
they presently consented together to aid him with a very strong guard of men,
which continually attended on his person: which having gotten, he not only
employed as his guarde to keep his person, but with that

Pisistratus being dead left behind him two sons, the one called Diocles, who
ravished a maiden, and was slain by the brother of the same Maid: the other
called Hyppias succeeded in the kingdom, when he was seated he gave straight
command to apprehend the body of him that sluc his brother Dyocles, who being
brought before him, he delivered over to be tormented in the cruellest manner
could be inflicted, only to get from him the knowledge of all those who were any
way consenting to the murder. This prisoner being resolute, nothing feared the
stroke of death, but in the very extremity of this A notable strong resolution.
extorted misery, spoke of diverse men who were the greatest and dearest
familiar friends that were about this Tyrant, who laying hold upon his
accusation, condemned them every man to present execution. His friends thus
being dispatched, he said: Are there yet any more that are confederated in the
blood of my brother. No more (quoth he) alive, whom I would see dead, save thy
self only: By which it evidently appeared, that he not only satisfied his

The Citizens also began to think upon the ancient liberties that they had
possessed, and seeing that terror and tyranny gouernd all his actions, they
gathered them together against him, and shortly after deposed him, and after
that banished him for ever out of the Country. When he was thus dealt against,
he took his course to Persya, and there made tender of his service unto
Darius, who was ever a mortal enemy to the Athenians, and maintaind continual
hostility against them (as has heretofore more at large been showed) and with
him he served as a Commander, even in all their excurtions against

The Athenians hearing of the approach of Darius, sent forth Ambassadors We come
again to the history of Darius.
to the Lacedaemonians to crave aid against their enemies (who at that instant
were also in league with the Persyans.) But when they perceived no quick
return, considering their have and much affairs in present hand (about
religion) which held the space of four days, they resolved with themselves
not to make any longer stay for their supply, but with their own forces, which
was not above ten thousand ^^ong, (but well appointed, being all chosen men of
their Cittyes) and one thousand Plateans who also aided them, they ventured
forth to battle, against six hundred thousand of their Enemies, on the plains
of Marathon.

The chief Commander and captain of these forces, was committed unto
Milciades, whose only council was, that rather then they should stay for The
Noble courage of Milciades.
aid from any other Nation, they would courageously adventure, and with more
advantage recover by speedy forwardness; then sustain loss by their sluggish
lingering. Whereupon they ran, as it were with great cheerefulnes to the
battle, and with resolute manliness so behaved themselves, that when as yet
both the Armies were a mile asunder, they ran forward in such earnest manner,
thinking to join with the enemy, before their enemies could make ready to
discharge their multitude of Arrows upon them, that they suddenly The valor
of the Athenians, and cowardice of the Persians.
would have confessed, that on the one side they were courageous men, and on
the other side, a multitude of most faint-hearted and fearful Beasts. Thus
the Persyans being overcome sled unto their ships, whereof many were sunk and
many taken.

In this battle every man bestowed his best endeavors, and their manhood
exceeded high, and worthy everlasting renown. Amongst all others, the glory
of one young man called Themystoeles, showed it self in great admyration, in
whom there appeared such resolute perfourmance, that it was every way likely,
that for his valor he was the next to be elected and chosen chief Captain
amongst them.

Also there was one other (called Cynegarus) who was in account no better than
a common soldier of Athens, whose praise is highly to be remembered amongst
al Writers. This man, after innumerable slaughters received in the Battle, as
also having pursued the Enemy in flight even to their ships, (...)
caught hold of a ship being fully laded, with his right hand, and therewith
held her so fast she could not stir, til at last they chopped off his hand.
His right hand being gone in this manner, he laid hold upon her as before with
his left hand, the which he also lost as he had his right: Then seeing both his
hands smitten off, he caught hold of the ship with his teeth in such eager
manner, that being neither discouraged by the great and heavy slaughter and
effusion of blood, nor yet dismayed with the loss of both his hands, yet like
a savage and wild beast he sought reuengmenr even with his teeth. The Persians
lost in this battle two hundred thousand men, besides their ships. Hypias also
the Tyrant of Athens, who only was the author of all these broils, was

Darius also who in the mean time sought how to renew the war, dyed before
he could accomplish the end of his purpose: who left behind him many sons, of
which some were begotten before he was king, and other some in the time of his
reign. Amongst the rest the eldest called Artobazanes made Artobazanes (...)
Xerxes both lay (...) the kingdom.
claim unto the Crown, by prerogative of his age, alleging that by order of
Law, by order of birth, by instinct of nature, and by custom of all Countries,
only he it was that ought of right to be sacred in the place of his Father.
Xerxes replied and said, that their controversy was not in regard of the
Artobazanes, was the first borne of Darius, but at that time Darius was but as
any other man (a private person) but I my self was the first borne to Darius as
he was a king: Wherefore he further alleged, that those Brothers that were
borne during that time their father was a subject, might very lawfully claim
all such private inheritance as Darius then had, but in no case could lay any
claim to the kingdom, which properly appertained to him, as the first
begotten of his father, being seated and fully inthronized in the kingdom.

Again, he farther urged, that Artobazanes was borne no better than a pri^ate
Xerxes born of Roya^l blood.
for his father, he never knew him other then a king, and more his grandfather
by the mother was also a king (namely Cyrus) who came not to the kingdom by
order of succession, but was the maine pillar and first founder of that famous
and great Empire. And therefore, although their father had left them both equal
right unto the Crown, yet in regard of his mother as also his graundfather, he
ought rather to have the pre-eminence and preferment to the regal throne.

This controversy being long debated betwixt them, was at last by free The
controversy betwixt Xerxes and his brother for the kingdom.
consent of both parties, quietly and lovingly put unto the judgment and
discretion of their uncle Artaphernes, as to an indifferent judge between
them, who having long and deliberately advised of all the circumstances
heereunto belonging, at last preferred Xerxes to the kingdom. This contention
between these two was so mildly carried, that neither he had the kingdom
boasted, nor he that held the worser part sorrowed for his loss: but in the
greatest current of all their contention, saluted each other with many rich
presents, Brothers amity.


Xerxes being thus mutually seated in the kingdom for the space of five
years, gave all his whole employment and study, to set forward and continue
Xerxes continues his fathers wars.
the Wars which his father had begun against the Greeks: Which when Demeratus
Lacedaemonians (who at that time was a banished man, and l^ued in king Xerxes
Court) understood, being more friend to his Country then to the king
(notwithstanding all the kind intertaine he had received) and yet further, to
the intent they should not be oppressed nor surprised with sudden War, got
to be brought him certain Tables of wood, in which Tables he wrote unto the
Magistrates and governors of Sparta, all the whole proceedings against them:
Having thus done, he covered all that he had written in the Tables over with
wax, least if the writting were bare and uncovered it might bewray it self,
or the new wax should make known or disclose his devise.

This being done he called unto him one of his trusty Servants, to whom he
delivered them, giving him in straight charge to take his direct way unto A
cunning policy of Demetratus.
Sparta, and deliver those Tables to their chiefest magestrates: This messenger
did all as his master gave him in charge, but when he had delivered the tables
to the hands of the Lacedaemonians, they marueiled much what might be the
meaning hereof: and the more for that they could not discern any writing
thereon, and yet they knew well enough that they were not sent in vain, and
the more obscure it seemed to the eye, of the greater import was the business
therein contained: whiles the men and magistrates were thus drowned in several
opinions, and the effect of the matter no whit opened, the Leonides found out
the meaning of the writer, and fo causing the wax to be scraped away by little
and little, at last it evidently began to show out and fully appeared
underneath, their whole proceedings, and what course was intended against them.

By this time had Xerxes ready in the fyelde about seven thousand of his own
kingdom and people, and three hundred thousand of all other nations: The
mighty host of (...)
Insomuch as it has not (and that for good cause) been reported, that his Army
was of such multitudes, that as they traveled they drank all the Rivers dry,
and further that the whole country of Greece, was searse able to receive his
host: It is also reported that he had a Navy of ten hundred thousand ships.
This mighty host being thus gathered together, wanted nothing so much as a
courageous and excellent chiestaine to be their guard: For if ye respect the
king, he had a great deal more wealth then valor: for his realm Xerxes more
welthy then courageous.
was of that inestimable treasure, that though all the Rivers could not find
them water to quench their thirst, yet had he more coin then could in any
short time be spent And it is thus reported of him, that he was the last in
Greece, as it was terrible, so his departure was as shameful and
dishonorable: for when Leonides king of Spartans, with four thousand men had
gotten the streights of Thermopyle, Xerxes in disdain of his small number,
commanded that not a man more should give the assault upon them, save only
those, whose kindred Marathon: who to revenge the deaths of their kindred, was
the first that were brought to the Jaws of death, and began the slaughter: and
still as they were slain, new men came up in their rooms, till the slaughter
was mightily increased: Three days lasted this dangerous battles, and the
Persians maintained the fight to their great loss: The fourth day, word was
brought to Leonides, that twenty thousand of his enemies had taken the top of
the hill, whereupon he began to exhort his partakers that they would depart for
that time, and rather to reserve their aid till further opportunitye might
give occasion for the further defense of their Country: As for himself and
his companies of Spartanes, they would hazard the frown The love of Leonides
to his country.
life, as he did the general good of his Country, as also that there ought a
remainder to be kept for the defense of Greece. When thus the pleasure of the
king was published and fully made known, they all departed, saving the
Lacedaemonians, and they would by no means leave him, but remained still with
the King.

In the beginning of this war, counsel was asked of Apollo at Delphos, where
answer was returned, that either the king of the Spartans must die the death,
or the City be utterly destroyed. And therefore when Leonides should go onward
The answer from the Oracle.
to these wars, he gave such worthy encouragement to his Soldiers Spartanes,
he began to call upon them that they should not forget themselves, that
howsoever they fought, yet the end was, that they must be slain, and therefore
councelled them to give no cause for after times to report, that their hearts
served them better to abide the fight, then fight with courage, urging still
upon them that they must be very watchful and careful in all their affairs,
and not stand still and so give way to Idleness, and so the enemy getting
advantage compass them about to their utter ruin: but ^rather labor by the
contrary, to prevent their enemies by all advantages. As Soon as night
approached, and opportunity offered, they set upon the enemy while they in
careless manner were frolic in their Tents (for Conquerors cannot die more
honorably, then in the Camp of their Enemies.) Upon these his words unto
them, they put themselves in Arms, and being but six hundred strong, brake
violently The valor of Leonides and the Spartans.
Lacedaemonians, seeing the king not to be found, ranged still throughout the
camp as Conquerors, ripping up with their swords, and spoiling all that came
in their way, as men that came not in hope of victory, but only to revenge
their own deaths.

This battle continued in this furious manner, from the closing up of the
Sun, all that night, and most part of the next day, yet was neither party
utterly

Xerxes had now received a second loss in battle upon the Land, wherefore he
intended to leave the land-fortune, and venture next at Sea. But Themystocles (a
great captain among the Athenians) hearing that the Ionians (in whose quarrel
the king of Persya made all this war) were come up to the aid of the
Persians with a great Navy of ships, began to beat out what they intended, to
see if it were possible by any means to draw away and allure them to take his
part: and in that he could not well compass a personal presence with them, he
commanded these words following to be engraven upon certain stones, A notable
policy of Themistocles.


What mad men are ye (O ye Ionians?) or what mischief do you intend? purpose
ye to raise war upon those who were your first and original founders, and now
of late your new reuengers? have we builded and reedified your walls, His
Oration.
to the intent you should take upon you to destroy ours? what if we had not
these occasions of war: First with Darius, and now with Xerxes? seeing we
forsook ye not, when he rebelled against us, why do ye not forsake that siege,
and fly unto us, and partake of our companies? If you persuade your selves, you
cannot do this without great danger, yet at least when the battles shall be
joined, you may easily slip aside, and then by withdrawing your ships, quite

Before this encounter, Xerxes sent forth four thousand men to Delphos,
Xerxes overthrows the Temple of Apollo.
thinking to make havoc of the Temple of Apollo, accounting it not a
suffycient revenge upon the men, but warred also even with the Gods, but the
their reward was, that they were destroyed by Thunder and lightning, letting
them understand, that the more the Gods are angered with men, the less power
has man against God. Afterward, he set fire on the Cities of Thespy, Plate
and Athens: but the people were sled before forth of those Cities, and seeing
he could not destroy the people by the sword, he revenged himself upon their
houses by fire.

The Athenians after the battle at Marathon (by the counsel of Themistocles,
who told them that the victory which they had gotten over the Persyans, was but
the beginning of a far greater war) made a fleet of Ships of two hundred
sail: So that when Xerxes made out toward them, they sent to ask counsel of
the Oracle at Delphos, what was to be done, which gave unto them this answer,
that they must provide and make up wooden walls, for their The council of the
oracle.
more sure defense and safeguard: Themistocles thinking it was meant of Ships,
persuaded the people, that the Country signityed not the walls but the men:
neither that a City was not so called of the houses, but of the Citizens and
inhabitants: and therefore it was more safety to betake themselves to their
themystocles vn^oldeth the Oracle.
ships, rather then to put too much confidence to their walled towns: This
counsel of his was generally applauded, whereupon leaving their Cities they
conveyed their wives and children, with all their rich Ornaments and Jewels,
into unknown Islands, and there caused them to make their safest abode: all
which when they had put end unto, they put themselves in arms, and presently
took shipping, after whose example, other Cities did in like manner.

Therefore all the whole flect of their partners and partakers being thus
assembled together in the compass of the narow Seas, which adioyneth to the I Will
of Saltmine, thereby in time to prevent a further mischief, least they should
be enclosed by the great and puissant power of Xerxes, even then (I say) when
they were in the depth of consultation, how this fight at sea might be best
maintained, there arose among them a sudden and unlooked for disturbance A
mutiny amongst the Princes.
and variance, amongst the Princes of the Cities: every one bethinking how he
might priu^ly break up, and steal home to resist the Enemy, and defend his
own.

Upon this breach of their own peace amongst themselves, Themistocles was
stricken into a thousand fears (least by the departure of his friends and
Themystocles keeps al his forces.
companions, his strength should be hereby brought to extreme weakness) sent a
lusty servant unto Xerxes, that if ever, now was the fyttest time, and with
greatest ease, and small loss, to take all Greece together at one instant, and
in one place: whereas otherwise if every man were suffered to depart his own
way, and also to his own City (as they had amongst them determined to do) it
would ask great travail and troble, to make pursote after so great a
multitude, being departed one after another,

By this policy, the king gave a sudden signal to the battle, and the Greeks
perceiving that they were prevented, by this so sudden approaching of their
Xerxes stood aloof, as he had bin a looker on, and (being guarded with a good
number of sufficient Ships, well The val^^nt resolution of Queen Artemisia.
mand for the fight) lay still within the rode, without striking any stroke:
But Artemysia the Queen of Halicarnassus, (who of purpose came to the aid of
Xerxes) fought furiously amongst the thickest, and ever cast her self amongst
the foremost Captains in this battle: So that Xerxes showed in himself an
effeminate fearfulness, and in this Queen appeared a resolute and manly
courage.

In the heat of this Battle, the Ionians, according as Themystocles had given
in charge, began by little and little, to withdraw themselves out of the
prease, which raised a great discouragement to the whole Army: Insomuch as the
Persyans began to look out which way was best for them, to retire themselves,
The Persians discomsited by Sea.
and so if it were possible to make a sudden escape, wherein they threw
themselves into so confussed a disorder, that they drew upon themselves an
utter overthrow, and finally were put to a most shameful flight: In which
discomfiture many ships were taken, and many sunk, but many there were among

This slaughter and havoc made in the Army, stroke Xerxes into a wonderful
fear, so that he stood as one amazed and knew not what to determine: The
counsel of Mardonius.
till at the last there came unto him one Mardonius, and counseled him to
depart home into his kingdom, with all the have he could, for fear the rumor
of an overthrow (which commonly adds to things that which they are not)
mightraise an insurrection amongst his subjects, before he could recover
himself to be amongst them, and that he should leave with him three hundred
thousand of the tallest and most sufficientest picked Soldiers of the army,
Greece, or (if it otherwise fell out) without dishonor to his Majesty, give
place to his Enemies.

This counsel of Mardonius, was generally well allowed of, whereupon the
fore-remembred number of men were given unto him in charge, and the king with
the remainder of his host, and all the have they possible could, made return
home into his own land.

The Greeks having knowledge of the kings flight, presently drew to counsel,
how it might suddenly be brought to pass, that the bridge which he (as Abydus,
might be rased down and broken, to the intent that thereby his passage might
be hindered and clean cut off, or else he with his whole army might be utterly
destroyed and brought to such an exigent, as if not clearly overcome, he might
be compelled at the least to desire peace at their hands.

Themystocles fearing least if his enemies should be stopped of their passages,
that it might thereby increase their courage, and so turn their despair into
hardiness, insomuch as they saw no way but death on every side, and so make
way by fury of their swords, told them that there were already too many enemies
Themistocles sends his servant a second time to Xerxes.
in Greece, and therefore his judgment no way allowed, that they Xerxes,
acquainting him with all their whole intent, and therefore wished him to make
all the speed he could possible, if he meant to escape their furious malice
bent against him.

The king at this sudden news, was now again stricken into an exceeding
fear, wherefore he delivered over all his huge Army, unto several captains,
Xerxes slieth for fear.
to be by them delivered home, whilst he himself with those few straglers that
were left, made toward Ahydos: where finding the bridge broken with the fury
and tempests of the Winter, he ferried over very fearfully in a Fishers boat.

This was a thing worthy note: to behold as in a glass the frailty of this
worlds honor: how that he was now glad to be harbored up in a little boat,
which but A worthy note of man's frailty.
even a little before, all the Sea could scarce be able to receive, and also to
see so great a king clean bereft of all attendance, and service, whose armies
(by reason of their huge multitudes) was even a burden to the earth: neither
had those Armies that he had assigned over to several Captains, any better
success Pesilence andfamine a one time in the Persian hoa^.
ways were covered with the dead carcasses: so that the beasts and fowls
being drawn into these places by desire of pray; were the continual
companions that followed the host.

In this mean time Mardonius took the City of Olynthus in Greece, by
assault: also he entreated with the Athenians about a peace to be concluded
between them and the king, promising that he would make good all their Cities
Mardonius wins Olynthus.
Beotya, whether followed him also all the host of the Greeks (which was an
hundred thousand men) and there they fought a mighty battle: But the changing
of the Captain changed not the kings fortune: For Mardonius being overcome,
escaped with a few Soldiers (even as one delivered from a churlish shipwreck)
his tents, wherein was all manner of treasure, after Mardonius (...) overcome.
a most princely triumph were taken and rifled: where upon the Greeks
Persians amongst them) grew into so great disorder and riot, that it was a
hard matter for their Governors and leaders to pacify their outrageous
tumults: Also the same day that Mardonius Mutiny amongst the Soldiors for the
Persians gold.
host was overthrown, there was another sierce and great battle fought upon
the Sea against the Persians, in Asia, not far from the mountain sur-named
Mycale: where some small time before the encounter, as both the fleetes were in
a readiness prepared to the battle, on the sudden news ran clean thorough
both the Armies, that the Greeks were the men on whom Fortune had bestowed the
better of the day, and that the whole host of Mardonius and his followers were
utterly discomfited and overthrown: so swift was Fames Beotya, but in the
beginning of the morning, yet before the noontyde of the Suns progress, the
rumor of either the loss or victory, was spread so far in so short a moment
of time.

When these wars were come to end, and that by long consultation, it was
determined how every City should be rewarded, by a general voice, the
Athenians were judged to have borne themselves herein most valiantly: The
m^stocles highly advanced fox his valor.
Again discending amongst every private Captain, the whole verdict ran upon
Themystocles, as chief and principal, which added unto him an exceeding
credit and renown of all the chief inhabitants of the whole country. Thus
grew the Athenians into high esteem, and were so worthily increased both in
riches and honor, that they began to build their City new out of the ground:
These tidings came to the ears of the Lacedaemonians, how that the Athenians
had enchroched and taken in more ground then in former times, and so far
enlarged the walls of their City, that they had them in great lclousie, and
wisely bethought themselves what might be the end hereof, and what strength
they might grow unto by peace, seeing they had so well prosyted

Themystocles perceiving that they began to repine at the raising up of their
City, and considering that it stood him upon to take in hand nothing
unadvisedly: The wise d^mean^r o^ The ^^^^d^s.
gave answer to the Ambassadors in this manner: that certain of the grauest of
their commonwealth should go back with them to Lacedemon, to confer at full
with them concerning this matter. Thus having dispatched Sparta: he wished the
Citizens to make all have they could in their work, and shortly after
himself took the Embassage in hand: In which journey, what with sometime
faining himself sick, and what by putting fault in the slackenes of such as
were joined with him in commission (without whom he could not determine any
thing) that he at last delayed the time so long, that in the mean space they
had fully put an end, to their long and tedious works: Tidings was brought to
Lacedemon, that notwithstanding all offers that was made, the building of the
City went on a pace at Athens: whereupon they appointed new Ambassadors
again, to take the journey and return certain word, whether it was true had

When Themystocles saw how things were carried, and that their iclousie more
and more increased, he sent a certain servant of his own with letters to all
the chief magistrates of Athens, containing thus in effect: that they
Themystocles sends letters to the whole Magistracy.
should make stay of the Spartan Ambassadors, least that they should offer him
any violence, till they heard further from him being at Lacedemon: having this
done, he went boldly before the whole Senate or counsel of the Lacedaemonians,
certifying for truth that Athens was now thoroughly fortifyed, and more then
that, it was able to withstand the force of any enemy, not only by sword, but
by the strength of their walls also: and therefore if they Athens, vvithall,
he grevv upon them in such high terms, and foul rebukes, for that they coueted
to have the soueraignity over them, which they could not maintain by their
own powers, but must crave help, from other nations of whom when they stood
in most need, could render them but very weak helps: having thus demeand
himself, in such triumphant manner over the Lacedaemonians, he was suffered to
depart, and was joyfully received at home amongst his own Citizens.

After this the Spartans (fearing least their forces should be weakened by a
The spartans make war upon the Persians.
slavish Idleness, as also having kept themselves for revenge upon the
Persians, which twice before had made inrodes upon the Greeks) out of their
own voluntary, invaded the borders of their Empire: They chose for Captain and
principal over them, both of their own Armies, as also of the armies of their
Compettitors and adherents, one called Pausanias: this fellow, being thus
chosen amongst them could not content himself with being their Captain
Pausanias works treason.
or general, but in the end, (urged by ambition) coueted the regaltye and
kingdom of Greece: to this end he conspired with Xerxes, upon this condition,
that he might receive the Kings daughter in marriage: and for that the King
should gather no mistrust, he voluntarily sent home all the prisoners, which
before he had taken freely without ransom. Moreover, he wrote unto Xerxes, on
this manner, that whatsoever messenger he sent unto him, he should put him to
present execution, for fear that by some whisperinges all their plots might be
destroyed: But Aristides the chief Captain of the Athenians (being chosen
also his equal and fellow Governor in all these Aristides preuenteth the
Treason
wars) in that he opposed himself against all his enterprises, and that he
Pausanias being arraigned, convicted, and found guilty, was accordingly with
all have they could executed. But as for Xerxes, when he perceived that all
their Pausanias condemned.
plottes and conspiracies were disclosed, determined once more to proclaim open
wars against the Grecians.

The Grecians preparing themselves in readiness to receive the foe, appointed
for their Captain, one Cymo of Athens, the son of one Milciades, who Cymo
made great captain
was their Graund Captain at the battle of Marathon, a very Noble young
Gentleman, whose virtuous and forward disposition, declared before hand, His
natural love to his father.
And on the other side their trust in him was not deceived, in that they called
him to so great a place: for he was a man of such courageous spirit (as also
his father before him) that he vanquished and clean overcame Xerxes both by
Land and Sea, forcing him fearfully to retire home into his

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK of Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
XErxes and his sons are slain, by the treason of Ar^abanus. Artaxerxes
reuengeth the death of his father. The Lacedaemonians and the Athenians fall at
variance: Lycurgus makes laws and willingly banisheth himself. The
Lacedaemonians make war upon the Messenians. The Partheniens place them

THis Xerxes great king of Persia (to whom was added this name; The terror of
all other Nations) when he had sped so unfortunately in his wars in Greece,
was held in a general contempt amongst al his subjects: whereupon Xerxes
slain by treason.
Artabanus (a principal Lieutenant of his kingdom) perceived the glory and
estate of the king daily to decay, and foolishly soothing up his own conceits,
that he might very easily enjoy the kingdom, notwithstanding his seven
sons, (who were all very tall and strong men) upon an evening entered the
kings palace, (for the king reposed such considence in him, that it was
lawful for him, to come and go whenever he pleased) and seizing upon the
person of the king, shamefully murdered him.

Having thus slain the king, he sought also how by some quaint slight or The
treason of Artabazanus.
policy he might destroy his children, of whom he stood in doubt, that they
Artaxerxes which was a very child, he thought he might abuse him as he listed;
and to the intent he might the sooner compass the kingdom, he bare him in
hand that the king was murdered by Darius, who was grown up to ma^s estate: by
which devise he compelled Artaxerxes to revenge the murder of the king with
murder of his brother. When they came to the lodging of Darius, they found
him, as if he had been asleep, and presently drawing forth their Weapons they
fell upon him and murdered him.

After Artabanus, perceiving that yet for all this mischief, there remained
one of the kings sons alive, and fearing that the peers of the Realm, would
stand to him to place him in the kingdom: made one Baccabassus of his
counsel, this man contenting himself with his present estate, vtteily
disallowed those his treasons, and thereupon went and bewraied the whole plot
The ^^^son (...).
to Artaxerxes, first how his father was shamefully murdered, next, that his
brother upon false intelligence was put to the sword, and lastly, that there
was violent treasons in hand against his own person: when Artaxerxes heard
Artabanus, for that he had so many (...).
sons) commanded all his Armies to be mustred up the next day in Armor, for
he in person, would both take a special view of their number, as also cucry
man's acctiuitic in handling his weapons.

Amongst the rest Artabanus also stood out in complete Armor, who when the
king cspied, he feigned that his Curat was too short for him, and therefore
commanded Artabanus to change curats: Artabanus nothing mistrusting, did as he
was commanded, and as he was putting it off, he King taking him upon
advantage, suddenly thrust him thorough with his svvord, and vvithall
presently commanded that all his sons should be apprehended, and kept in
Artabanus.

While these broiles happened amongst the Persians, in the mean time all Greece
fell into civil dissension, dividing it self the one part against the other A
civil dissension among the Greeks.
(whereof one part followed the Lacedaemonians, and the other part followed the
Athenians, turning the point of their weapons into their own bowels. On the
one side the Lacedaemonians drevv unto their part, all such forces as were
before vvaged at the common charge of every Cyttie, for the defense of the
whole country: while the Athenians upon the other Greece, both of them also
equal in the execution of the statutes of Solon, and the laws of Lycurgus,
through mere envy at the good and flourishing estate one of the other, were
swallowed up through civil dissension.

As for Lycurgus he succeeded his brother Polibita in the kingdom of Sparta,
Iastice to be preserred before a crown.
and although he might very lawfully have challenged the kingdom as his own
right, yet willingly he made surrender thereof, and with so great faithfulness
Charilaus, (who was borne after the death of his father) as soon as cuer he
grew up unto man's estate: to the intent that all men might see and understand,
how much more good men do esteem of their faithful dealing, then all the
riches of the world beside: Also in the nonage of the child (of whom as
protector he had the government) he devised Laws and Statures to be put in
due execution amongst the Spartans (who till this time were altogether
destitute) in which labor of his, he deserved everlasting renown, not only
in that he provided such laws, as for the good example that he gave for the
preserving and keeping of them: These were his laws in effect.

First, he taught the people how to tender their due obedience toward the
Prince, and the Prince how to carry himself to the administration of instice
^ycurgus and (...) L^^es.
among the people. He persuaded all estates and degrees to beware of gluttony,
and to be sparing in their diet, for in his judgment he thought that war
would be the better maintained, where the goods that they got by moderation,
was also thriftily preserved and kept: he also ordaind that their might

The use of Gold and Silver (as the only occasion of much mischief) he
utterly took away from amongst them. The government of the commonweal, he
distributed into certain estates and degrees of men: He allowed unto the king
absolute power and authority in all matters concerning the wars: unto the
Magistrates, he allowed authority in Judgments, and other courses in law.
Amongst whom he ordained, that they should hold their places, but the term of
one year at the most. Unto the Senators and Sages amongst the people it fell
out to see these laws put in execution, to the commons he gave

He ordained that they should all eat and drink openly, to the intent no man
should in secret use any manner of excess or superfluity: He permitted the
younger sort of men to wear but one garment in the year, neither one man to
exceed another in apparel, nor one fare better then another, least by the
evil example of one, it should entice and draw on others to the like riot: Any
child The bringing up of children
whatsoever, being under the age of fifteen years, was not suffered to come
into

He also made a law that maidens should be married without any dowry, and in
that law ordained that men in choosing wives, should profess love only,
Marriage of maidens
and not to marry as in these times for the love only of money, he thinking by
this law to have the bonds of Matrimony more firmly kept and observed:
Reverence to the aged.
for their many years: And to give them their due, there is no one place in
the world, where age is more honored, then amongst the Spartans.

These laws and precepts at the first seemed hard, heavy, and tedious,
especially to such as in all their times before, were wont to line at liberty,
therefore (...) the worst in three several battles, brought the Lacedaemonians
to such a strait, that to supply their Armies, they were feign to make all
their bondmen free, as also to make faithful promises to them, that it should
be lawful for them to take the wives of such as were slain, not only to
supply their places to make up the number, but to possess all their estates
and worships whatsoever.

The kings of the Lacedaemonians feared belike that in striving against Fortune,
they might still come by the worst, and so endanger their Country and people
the more, determined to have conveyed home again all their host of men, if
Tyrteus had not at that instant come amongst them: who summoning all his Armies
together, rehearsed before them certain verses, that he

When the kings had taken knowledge of this their resolution, they caused The
courage of the Messenians.
their forwardnes to be sounded forth into the ears of their enemies: which
nothing astonished the Messenians, but rather increased their fury more
violently: In which encounter they behaved themselves so courageously on both
parts, that it grew to be the bloudiest day that had been heard of in many ages
long before: yet as the longest Summers day has his end, so had the fury of
these violent broiles, and the Lacedaemonians remained Conquerors.

At another time, (some respite of years coming betwixt) the Messenians now
made a third insurrection and rebellion: At which time amongst other, The
Messenians the third ^^me (...).
the Lacedaemonians craved the aid of the Athenians, as before times they were

The Athenians judged hereof as a froward and churlish disgrace, and in the
heat of their displeasure, fetched away all the chiefest treasure and money that
was laid up and stored at Delos, by the whole power of Greece, for the
maintenance of their wars against the Persyans, and brought it to Athens:
fearing, Lacedaemonians should be the first that violated the league, they
might have seized thereupon, and made purchase and spoil thereof. This drove
the Lacedaemonians more and more out of quiet, for in that they were entangled
in wars, against the Messenians, they waged the Penoponnesians to Eney ne^^r
satisfied.
make war against the Athenians: who were very weak and of small power to
resist, by reason chiefly that they had at that instant sent a great Nany of
Ships iuto Egypt, and therefore being set upon at sea, were soon discomfited
and overcome.

Within a while after their fleet arrived safe at home, being increased both in
number of ships, and strength of men, whereupon having hearts burning with
revenge, they reunited again the wars, and made head upon the enemy:
whereupon the Lacedaemonians left the Messenians, and turned all their forces
upon the Athenians. Long held the heat of the battle, doubtful to whether
part the day would be assigned, and so indeed it fell forth, for after many
slaughters, gaping wounds, and maimed soldiers on both sides, they both
remained equal victors of the day. Hereupon the Lacedaemonians were still bound
to maintain the wars with the Messenians (and yet were loathe Athenians
should be idle all the while) couenanted with the Thebans, to restore them
back, the kingdom of Beotia, (which before time were taken from them in the
time of the Persian wars) upon condition that they should continue war with
the Athenians: so mad and enraged were the Lacedaemonians, that although they
were now already engaged into two several wars, against two several
Nations, yet they sti^ked not to undertake a third, only to give scope to
their reuengefull hate against the common adversary.

Whereupon the Athenians, to pteuent mischances, and to withstand these
boisterous tempests of war, chose from among them two Captains and Pericles
a worthy man of war.
Pericles, (a man of tried virtue and experience) and Sophocles, who was only
a writer of tragedies: These two valiant commanders, had the charge of two
Armies, who wasted the territores of the Spartanes exceedingly, and as they
went along subdued many cities of Achaia to the Empire of Athens. Thus was the
pride of the Lacedaemonians cast down, by these misfortunes, and in the end
were forced to make a peace for thirty years: which notwithstanding, they
still retained a private grudge against the Athenians, in so much that they
made shipwreck of their league, before The Lacedaemonians make a pease and
break it
the term of fifteen years were fully acomplished, and in dispite both of gods
and men, invaded the borders and territories of Athens: wherein, that they
Athenians (by the counsel of their Captain Pericles) delaied the revenge for
wasting of their Country until fitter opportunity The discreet policy of
Pericles.
might give advantage to pay them home for their truce-breaking and accounted
it but mere folly to trouble themselves any further at that time, considering
that ere many days were past, they might revenge all their wrongs, with more
profyt and advantage, and less danger of loss unto themselves.

Whereupon a little after they made a great preparation of men, money, and
munition, and suddenly imbarking their forces, put forth to sea, or ever the
Lacedaemonians got knowledge of them, and suddenly arriving upon the borders
Sparta, wasted all the Country before them, and carried away with them far
more spoil, than made good four fold the loss that they had before received
of the enemy: Honorable was this voyage of Pericles, but a greater honor was
it accounted for him, in that he not only undertook this dangerous service,
but that he forsook even all the earthly possessions that he had about him
only to attempt revenge for his Countrymen the Athenians: although the
Spartans before time had spoiled all other men's lands and livings, yet they
departed, not daring to touch one jot of that was called his, hoping thereby,
either to bring slander and envy upon him amongst his Countrymen: or if the
worst fell out (which they rather coueted) he might have been reputed amongst
them as a Traitor: This did Pericles gather an insight into, and therefore made
known unto the inhabitants what would come to pass, and in the end to free
himself out of al suspicion, he royally gave al those lands and livings to the
good of the whole commonwealth, whereby the evil fortunes that they sought to
throw upon him to his high disgrace, by his provident care and wise demeanor,
became his everlasting fame and renown.

After this, there was another very fyerce fight upon the Sea, in which the
Lacedaemonians, were put to the worst, and betook themselves to flight: and
(...).
from that time forward they ceased not to slay and kill one another, either by
sea or land, as fortune favored either parties. Finally being ouertoyled and
wearied out with so many mischiefs, following one in the neck of another,
they again desired that they might have a peace concluded for fyfty years,
which was accordingly agreed upon, but long this lasted not; for before six
years were fully ended, they again revolted: for the truce which they had
taken in their own names, they thought they might lawfully break in regard
Truce broken again by the Lacedaemonians.
of their neighbors: as though the perjury committed on the behalf of their
accomplices, might more lawfully be maintained, in their quarrels, then if
themselves had offered violence by open war. After these broiles, the wars
were removed into Sycill: which as yet I mean not to handle, but proceed to
entreat and set down somewhat of the situation of that Isle.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK
THE ARGUMENT.
THe description of Sycill, with the strange wonders thereof. Eolus takes upon
him the Crown and government of the same. After his decease, every City was
governed by his Tyrant, amongst whom Anaxilaus governs one City. He
contendeth much against the cruelty of the other Tyrants. He stri^eth

COncerning Sicilly, some Ancients hold that it was near The description of
Sicily
Italy, and that as a member of the body it was (as it were) rent and torn
asunder by violence and rage of the upper Sea, which in full course, has the
fury of her waves continually beating thereupon. The earth of these parts is
wondrous brittle, The nature of the Soil.
and full ofholes and pipes in the ground, by reason whereof it lies open to
every blast of wind: Besides, the nature of this soil is such, that of it
self it ingendreth, and nourishes fire: for the substance of the molde
within, is much after the nature of Brimstone and Rosen, so that by means
hereof it comes to pass, that the wind having such violence and beating upon
the fire, that lies hidden in the innermost Many Tales conceited of Aetna.
some other times again, continual duskish and smolthering smokes. Upon these
flashes of fire, that are there so often and continually seen, grows that
fire that is fained to be continualy burning out of the mountain called Aetna,
which has continued many thousand years: and when there chances any
extraordinary wind in these foresaid holes, great heaps of sand are at that
instant found to be purged and cast out of them.

The next Contry that fronteth Italy is Rhegium: so called of the Greeks, and
in their language so term things that are broken off one from another. It is
not greatly to be inaruailed at, that in former times, there went many fables
of this place, into which there is conveyed so many strange things to be seen.
The rage of their narrow Seas.
First, there is not any narrow sea in all the world so outrageous as in this
place, not so much for the violence and swift passage of the waves, as also the
extreme meeting of the tides: so that it is not so terrible only to those
that try Aetna and the Isles of Aeolus, it may seem that these fires are
nourished by the water: for otherwise it is not possible that so huge a fire
should otherwise continue for so long a season, in so small a room.

Upon this was founded the tales of Scylla and Charibdis, which made men
believe in sailing thereby that they heard the continual barking of dogs, and
beheld fearful monsters, to appear unto them, which indeed was nothing else,
The fables of Scill^ and Caribdis
but the violent waves falling down into the Gulf, and in the fall beating
and working one against another: The like to this may be accounted of the
continual si^c burning in the mountain of Aetna, for the meetings of the
waters, draws the wind with such rage into the bowels of the earth, and
there holds it pent up so long, till being spread into the forenamed holes of
the earth, it sets the Sulphur matter into a burning flame.

Italy and Sicilie are so nearly united together, and the head-lo^ds of both
Italy and (...) nearly knit together.
now wonder at the same, even so much men in former ages were afraid there of,
verily persuading themselves that the hills had met together, and upon some
displeasure taken were parted one from another again and that betvveen these
two hills, whole nauies of shipping had been swallovved up and never after to
be seen again: neither was these things devised in old times for any
pleasantnes that they found in the report thereof, but only thorough fear and
astonishment of such passengers as had taken their courses that way. For such
is the nature of that place, that whosoever beholds it a far off

Sycill was first called by the name of Trynacria, and afterward, it was called
The seuer^^l (...) of (...).
Sycama. This Island from the beginning was accounted the chief habitation of
the Giants, which had but one eye, and that stood only in the foreheade Giants
called S^^lops.
(called Cyclopes) which being rooted out, Aeolus took upon him the rule of
this Island: after whose decease, every Cirty had a Tyrant by themselves, and
there was never Country better stored of them then this Country of Sicilly.
Amongst the rest of these Tyrants, there was one whose name was Anaxilaus, one
that striued against the cruelty of all the rest in the execution of Justice,
whose wise and discreet government wan unto him great reputation: Insomuch
that after his decease, leaving his children very young under the An example of
upright l^^^^.
tuition and government of a very trusty servant of his (called Micithus) he
was so exceedingly beloved of all his subjects, that they rather chose to be
obedient to this his servant, rather than they would any way forsake his
children,

The Carthagenians made many assayes to conquer the whole Empire of Sicilly,
and maintained wars along time with the kings thereof: and yet they could
not accomplish their desires upon them, but at one time they gathered ground
upon them, and at another lost all that before they had made boot of. At last
having lost their graund Captain and leader Hamilear and al his host, their
hearts were stricken into a great dampe, and were so discouraged, that Of
Hami^^at lee more in the 18, 19, 20, and 22 booke^.
of Rhegium fell at variance amongst themselves, so that the City was divided
into two parts: the one part whereof, mistrusting their side to be weak, sent
for the old Soldiers, that had bin employed at the City of Imera, to aid and
succor them, by which means they beat their adversaries clean forth the town,
put them every man unto the sword, and took their city, with their wives,
children, and all the substance that they could lay hold upon, and made havoc
thereof: which deed of theirs was accounted so cruel and tyrannous, that the
fiercest tyrant that ever raignd, could not have attempted a more violent act.
Insomuch that it had been a far more easier yoke for the inhabitants of
Rhegium, to have been vanquished and overthrown, rather then to have

Also the Catanenses, being ouerpressed by the Syracusans, and altogether
growing distrustful of their own strength, were very desirous of some small
Civil wars in Ci^^ll, between the Catan^nses and the Siracusa^^.
succors from the Athenians; who (whither it were for a desire that they had to
enlarge their own Empire, or that they had already gained the conquest of al
Greece and Asia, or whether they feared the great Navy of ships which the
Syracusans had lately builded, should be to the aid and further strength of
the Lacedaemonians) sent them a gallant captain, named Lamponius, with a great
Navy of ships into Sicilly, that under color of aiding the Cathanenses, they
might put in practice the conquest of the whole Realm.

Now having had good success in the beginning in all their affairs, as also a
great and mighty slaughter upon their enemies, they were now a second time
encouraged against Sycilly, with a more puissant strength both of men and Ships
then before they had made out against them, appointing forth two warlike
Captains to take charge of these their forces, the one was called Lachetes,
and the other Chariades. But it followed, that the Cathenenses, (whether for
fear of the Athenians, or rather being weary with those wars) concluded a
peace with the Syracusans, sending back again all those Athenians Two worthy
Captains Lachetes and Cha^ades.
which before were come unto them for their aid.

A while after this, when the Syracusans, had made a breach of the late
concluded peace, they suddenly sent forth fresh Ambassadors to Athens, who
Athenians; in this pitiful manner came they before the people: and in making
report unto them, wept very bitterly: insomuch as the inhabitants took so
much pity upon them, that they wholly condemned those Captains, that were
employed for their succors, in that they withdrew away their forces from them:
whereupon with all convenient speed, a fresh Navy of ships was prepared and put
in readiness, whose Captains and chief leaders were Nicias, Alcyhyades, and
Lamachus, who entered into Scycilly with such a power of men, that even they who
before craved their aid, and to whose succor they came, were even amazed and
afraid Alcyhyades was commanded home, to answer to certain enditements that
were laid against him: in which time Alc^hiades sent forout of S^^illy, to
answer certain accusations.
of his absence, Nycya^ and Lamachus had two prosperous battles upon the
land, and at another time so suddenly begirte their enemies round on every
side, that they neither could have victuals come unto them by Sea, nor any new
supplies of Soldiers to come to them by land.

The Syracusanes seeing themselves thus distressed, desired aid from the
Lacedaemonians: who sent unto them no aid at all save only Gylippus, who The
same of Gylippus.
was of himself of more strength and policy then half the forces that they
had beside: For he having heard the manner of the war, and perceiving all
his accomplices to be at a uery low ebb, raised a great power, consisting,
partly Greece, and partly in Sicilly, and then he chose him forth such a plot
of ground as he thought to be most convenient for two hoastes of men to
encounter on: where he was twice put unto the worse, but at the third
encounter, he slew Lamachus, put all his enemies to shameful flight, and in
the end raised the si^dge: But perceiving that the Athenians vvoulde forsake
the land, and bid him battle upon the Sea, he was forced to send for the Navy
of the Lacedaemonians to aid him. This being made known to the Athenians (they
to supply the place of the Captain that before was slain) sent demosthenes
and En^^me^^^.
Demosthenes, and Enrymedon, with another fresh supply of men.

Also the Peloponesyans by general consent of all their Cities, sent a new
supply of Soldiers to the aid of the Syracusans, so that both parties having
furnished themselves with fresh supplies, there powers grew to be so great,
that it was to be doubted least the wars had been removed out of Greece in
to Sicilly: wherefore upon their first encounter upon the Sea, the Athenians
The Athenian^^ anqui^^^d.
were put unto the worst, their tents and treasure were all seized by the enemy
and being overcome upon the land also, then Demosthenes began to counsel them
to leave Sicilly betimes, and not longer to hazard themselves and all their
fortunes in so desperate a service as this had fallen out on their parts, but
rather to withdraw themselves home into their own country, and in what
they could preserve all such furniture of war as was yet remaining amongst
them to defend themselves when they were at home amongst their own
friends and acquaintaince: Whereupon Nieias, whether it were for shame of his
ill succes, or for fear of his own citizens, being disappointed of their
hopes, or whether it was for that his destenie compelled him thereunto,
vvoalde by no means be persuaded, to go

Hereupon, the vvarres by Sea was again renewed (and all the cloudie storms
of their former ill fortunes being dispersed and blovvne over) gathering Their
fourt^ overthrow.
a fresh resolution for a nevve encounter: But yet at last thorough their
unskillful leaders (who set upon the Syracusans as they kept themselves within
their streightes) they were with small labor brought to yield: and their
courageous captain Enrimedon, casting himself valiantly into the fore-vvard,
was the first man that tasted of death: and the thirty snippes which were
appointed to his charge, were all set on fire: As for Demosthenes Nicias,
seeing themselves to be ouercom, as fast as could possible be, they landed
their men, and thereby sought which way was best safety for them to make an
escape from the angry face of their enemy: notvvithstanding all which, there
was yet left behind, an hundred and thirty sail of ships, which that
worthy Captain Gillippus lighting upon, pursued Gylyppus pursues the Enemy.
them continually as they would have fled away from him, whereof some he
slew by the svvord, and the residue remained with them as prisoners.

As for Demosthenes, when he savv what had fallen out, how that he was
dispoiled of all his powers, to the intent to quite rid himself out of
thraldom, he vvilfully ran upon his own svvorde and there ended his
Demosthenes bec^mm^th his ovv^ Butcher.
Nicias framing himself unto another temper, (could not yield in heart to take
away his own life by violence as Demosthenes had done,) but rather yielded
himself into captivity, whereby he greatly increased the slaughter of his
men, and mightily increased his own disquiet and peace.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK
THE ARGUMENT.
ALcibiades willingly commits himself to banishment. He compels the King
of Lacedemon to make war upon the Athenians, by the aid and succor of
Darius King of Persia. He causes the Cities of Asia to revolt from the
Athenians. The Lacedaemonians lay wait to kill him. He escapes that danger

WHilst yet the Athenians' made wars in Sicilly for the space of two years,
(with more desire of greediness Alcihiades, (who was the chief causer hereof)
in the time of his absence, was accused at Athens to have set forth the
mistcries of Ceres, and the sacrifices that was done unto the honor of her, as
a public spectacle, which can no way be so highly solemnized as by silence.
When thus Alcybyades was commanded home, to make answer to all such
complaints as were ptefetred against The Articles whereupon Alcibiades stood
indighted.
him, whether it were that his conscience accused him as guilty, or that he
could not endure such dishonor and reproach to his person: he secretly and
suddenly without any words made, cast forth himself as a banished man, and
altogether kept the remnant of his days at an unfrequented place (surnamed
Elis.) Afterward, being in this voluntary exile, it came to his knowledge, that
he stood not only as a condemned man, but also was accursed by all the
priests which belonged to those ordinances of religion: he therefore secretly
took Alcibiades takes part against his Country.
his way to Lacedemon, and by great persuasions moved the king thereof to make
vvarres upon the Athenians, especially at that present, whilst they were now so
sore vexed and disquieted with their ill success they had received in Sicilly.

Hereupon, all the kingdoms of Greece gathered themselves together (in as
great have and multitudes as if it had been to quench some outrageous fire) for
they bare the Athenians a secret and malicious hate, by reason of their
innumerable greedines, ambition, soueraigntye, and government, that they
Darius so nof Artaxerxes the 8. king of Persia.
would have over them: Also Darius king of the Per^yans, calling to remembrance
the former hate that his father and graundfather bare unto this City; entered a
league with the Lacedaemonians by meanns of Tyssaphernes, who was Lieutenant of
Lydia, and promised to bear out the whole charge of those

This was the whole course and pr^tence of the entrance into league with the
Greeks, but in very deed he mistrusted, least when the Lacedaemonians had
overcome the Athenians, they would also set upon him: and therefore it is no
way to be wondered at, though the estate of Athens were accounted so
flourishing, The courage of the athenians.
since to oppress that one City, all the whole power of the East parts
banded themselves together against it: and yet they could not be accounted to
yield as Cowards and run-awaies, but with manly courage, and with much
slaughter, they stood out in fight to the very utmost man; somevvhiles
putting their enemies to the vvorst, and suddenly again on the

In the beginning of these Wars, even those aides and asistances which they
ought to have received from their own fellows and associates, and in which
they for the most part trusted and relied, gave them the slip, and in the time
of most need, vt^erly forsook them (as by many examples is most evidently to
be perceived, that where Fortune bends the brow, or hides her favor, there
the strength and trust of men, does withdraw and quite forsake

Thus Alcybiades set on fire all these Wars, that were with such violence
prosecuted against his own Country, adding thereunto all such strength as in
his power was possible to be gathered, which was not to be accounted unto him
as the aid of a common mercinary Souldier^ but as a great Chiefetaine, and as
a most puissante commander: For first, he took along with him ten sail of
ships, and sailed into Asia; and being there safly arrived, by the authority
both of his place and name, he compelled all such Cities as were at that time
tributary unto the Athenians, to turn all their succor and strength unto the
aid and furtherance of the Lacedaemonians: for being well assured that he was a
man of great power and command at home in his own country, they therefore
resolved that he could still be nothing less, although he remained as a
banished person: Also they thought not so basely of him, being thrown out from
amongst the Athenians, as they esteemed and accounted him being received as a
Captain amongst the Lacedaemonians: and in fine, they esteemed better of him in
his new received Lacedaemonians, then of his abject forsaking amongst the
Athenians.

Thus when Alcibiades had fastened himself amongst the Lacedaemonians, by reason
of his forwardnes and stout valor, he raised up unto himself more envy and
hartburning on the one party, then praise and thanks on the other: whereupon
the Princes by a general consent, laid all the wait they could possible, how
they might take away his life: either by treason to be falsified against him,
or by any other extraordinare plot, to bring him to his end. This muttring and
devising amongst the princes came unto the ear of Alcibiades (only by the
wife ol king Agis, with whom he had committed adultry) Tissaphernes, King
Darius his lieutenaunt, with whom by his courteous and lowly behavior he
in-linked himself in such great friendship (for he was now in the pride of
his years, and for beauty, personage, and eloquence, among all the Athenians
was not one to be found, that might justly be accounted his equal) he The
description of alcibiades.
was more ready to win friendship, then having vvoon it, to keep and
preserve the same: because all his evil, was still masked under a fair,
smooth, and deceitful tongue, and shadowed and set out by the gift of
excellent eloquence: he therefore so subtily and politickely wrought with
Tyssaphernes, that he wished and advised by this his dissembling counsel,
that Tissaphernes His subtle council to Tyslashernes to win credit
Lacedaemonians, and also that the Ionians should be called upon, and forced to
bear a part of that great charge that had been disburssed, and for whose
liberty (when they paid tribute unto the Athenians) these vvarres were first
undertaken.

Moreover that the Lacedaemonians ought not to receive so much help as they had,
considering that he prepared for another man's victory and not his own,
therefore ought in right to be maintained in such sort, that they might not
break off for want of things necessary: for as long as the Greeks were at His
reasons used to persuade Tyssaphernes.
debate amongst themselves, the king of Persia had the law in his own hands,
with the Conqueror: and therefore was Greece fusfred to consume it self at
home in Civil wars, that all opportunity and leisure might be taken away
from them, that they should not look out abroad for the invasion of foreign
Dominions. For the better performance whereof, each party was to be maintained
in equal strength to match the adversary: and the weaker was still to be
strengthened with fresh supplies, and new succors; for it could no way be
thought that the Lacedaemonians could long continue in rest, if once they got
the upper hand, considering that they had now already made open proclamation,
that they only were the sole defenders of the safety and liberties of Greece.

This Oration of his pleased Tyssaphernes wondrous well, and presently began
T^ssaphernes cun^ingly d^ceiued by Alcibiad^s.
first began to cut short all their wonted liberal allowances; next he
with-helde some part of the kings fleet, fearing least he should either give
unto them a very speedy victory, or else constrain them too suddenly to
break up and give an end unto these long continued wars.

These things coming thus to pass by the craft and subtlety of Alcibiades, he
then began to work a new plot for the good of his own Countrymen the
Athenians Whereupon shortly after was sent unto him certain Ambassadors from
Athens, unto whom he made this promise, to regaine unto them the favor and
good liking of the king, if so be that the whole government Athenians,
especially seeing the danger of war that they were wrapped into, and
therefore took more respect to their safety, then care of their honor, and
with general applause and good will of the people, the government of the
commonwealth was wholly committed into the hands of the Senators: when they had
gotten all into their own direction, (through a Alcibiades c^lled home, and
made Lieutenant generalm the wara^s.
their aid the long banished Alcybyades, who being come amongst them, they
made Admyrall of the Sea: upon which he immediately sent word unto Athens, that
he would presently come thither with all his host, and take the government out
of the four hundred Senators hands (even by violence) unless they would
willingly make surrender thereof unto him of their own acord.

This his message troubled all the chief and great men of the City
exceedingly, Lacedaemonians, but perceiving that they could not bring their
purposes to pass, they voluntarily and willingly forsook their Country, and
were content to be accounted as banished persons. Thus when Alcybiades had
freed his country from homebred iarres, he furnished a fresh Navy of ships,
with all the have he could possible, and directed all his forces against the
Lacedemoni^ns. There was already in prepared readiness to wait his coming,
two worthy Captains of the Lacedaemonians, (the name of one was Myndarus, the
other Pharnabazus,) whereupon these two great Armies joined battle, in most
fierce and eager fight, but in conclusion the victory fell upon the Athenians.
Albiciades ouercometh the Atheniins.
In which conflict, the greater part of the army (especially of their chosen
men and Captains) were put to the sword, and fourscore sail of the enemies
ships were also taken. After within a few days, the Lacedaemonians, removed
from the Sea to land, where they received a far more greater spoil then ever
before: through which discomfiture, they were greatly perplexed, and in time
were forced to make a long and ^edious suit that a peace might be concluded
Carthagynenses made wars in Sycylly, whereby the Syracusanes were forced to
call home all their forces that were abroad to defend their own territories;
so that the Lacedaemonians being utterly bereft of al their aides and succors,
Aleybiades with his victorious navy, wasting and forraging all the coasts of
Asya, was bid batel in many places where he came, yet every where he got the
victory, and recovered back again all those Cities which before had
revolted; adding unto his conquests some new places, which before time they
never Albiciade; triumphantly received home.
were possessed of; recovered all the ancient demaines of the Athenians,
increased his renown, both by Sea and land, and lastly returned home to Athens

Amongst all these battles and bickerings were taken and put to flight of the
enemy, two hundred sail of ships, besides a mighty great spoil: At the
return home of this triumphant Conqueror, all the people of the City came out
by heaps, rendering abundant of praises even unto every common soldier: but
upon Alcibiades they threw down a wonderment of welcoms, insomuch they were
never satisfied enough with the sight of his person, but even if it were
possible ^dored him as he had been a God amongst them, or as if he had been
victory it self: Upon this, they highly extolled and praised him, for the
memorable and famous acts that he had done for the principal good

It is a wonder to behold, that in one man should appear so many tokens of
valor, as first to be the overthrow of so mighty a kingdom: next of the
setting Albiciades se^^eth up and pulls dovvnc.
up and reuniting again of the same: Again, that whersoeuer he took part,
victory was evermore attendant upon his actions; which was the only cause
they honored him above men, and little less than a God, they were driven into
rewards, and his cursings with blessings.

Now was no more whisperings amongst them of the battles, that he lost at
Sicilly, but all places were filled with his victories gotten in Greece: there
was no speeches what ships he had lost, but every one could tell what ships he
had taken from the enemies: now were the Syracusans clean forgotten and cast
out of memory, and no other triumphs but of his conquests, throughout all
Ionia and Hellespont. And thus in these extremes passed he his whole course of
life amongst his Countrymen, either meanly and basely abiccted and thrown
down; hated, or else highly honored; admired, and in manner worshipped as a
God amongst them.

During the time these triumphs had their courses, there was one Lysander made
Captain general amongst the Lacedaemonians, both at Land and Lylandet made
captain ge^eral
Tessaphernes, Darius the king of the Persyans, made one of his sons called
Cyrus Lieutenant general of Ionia and Lydia, who gave unto the Lacedaemonians
such plenty of aid, both by men and money, that he put them thereby in good
hope, that they should yet once again recover their former estate: wherefore
being thus increased in strength, and hearing, that Alcibiades was gone into
Asya with a great Navy of above one hundred sail of ships, they made have and
followed after him, and whilst he was in forraging and spoil of the Country,
(which was grown exceeding rich by reason of their long continued peace)
taking little or no regard to his soldiers, but for a little couetise,
suffered them to scatter and disperse themselves Oversight in Comanders dangerous
so scattered and disioynd) that the Athenians received more loss in this one
so sudden action, then they had won from their enemies in all the battles
before: whereby they were brought into so great desperation, that forthwith,
without any stay they turned away Alcibiades, and chose one Conon in his place
to be their Captain and commander: falsely immagining that they received not
this ill success, by fortune or the chance of war, but through the former
treason of their Captain, newly reviving their old displeasures against
Alcibiades was of so subtle and politic a reach, and was withal so far
engaged with a loose and vicious life, that it was very suspicious that he had
such or the like intent as they surmised against him, wherefore fearing the
rage and displeasure of the people, out of his own voluntary disposition,
^ommitted himself the second time again to banishment,

He being thus shut forth from amongst them, ^onon was next to follow in
Alcibiades the second time banished.
their stoutest and strongest men were lost in the forraging of Asya: at last
what with old men, on the one side, and beardles boys on the other, they
silled up again the number of Soldiers, though it were a very little strength
unto the host, neither feared they to encounter with their enemies, although
like weak and unskillful soldiers, they were every where beaten down, or
else forced to betake themselves unto their heels: Amongst whom there befell
so great a desolation (what of them that were slain, and them that were Great
slaughter amongst the Athenia^s
taken) that not only the Empire, but even the very name of the Athenians,
seemed in a manner to be extinct and clean worn out of memory.

By this overthrow, they were brought unto so low an estate, and were so
Greece) were now scarcely able to uphold and maintain their own liberties.

All this not withstanding, they still retained proud hearts within them, and as
it were scorned the utmost frown of fortune: in so much that they resolved
once more to venture all at one chance, and set all their fortunes upon one
hazard by Sea: and where as but even a little before, they were in utter
despair The Atheniaus resolute.
of keeping their own in safety, they now plunged themselves into a vain hope
that they should get the victory: But it lay not in the power of soldiers to
uphold the honor of Athens, neither was it that power vvherevvith they were
vvontto give the overthrow unto their enemies (and as for their late company
of rascality who never spent their time in practice of military discipline,
but waste most part of their daics in prison and not in the camp,)
wherefore what through their pride on the one side, and their want of men of
courage and tried experience on the other side, they were all either slain, by
the svvord, or taken prisoners: As for Conon their Captain, he all alone made
a fearful slight out of the battle, and fearing the cruelty of his own
Conon slyeth, with certain ships in to Cyprus.
to Euagor as the king of Cyprus.

Thus the Captain of the Lacedaemonians having gotten a prosperous victory,
proudly insulted over the great adversity that his enemies were fallen into:
and in great pomp and triumphs sent al such shipping and other spoils as he
had gotten home to Lacedemon, and made a composition upon certain Articles,
with all those Cities that were tributary unto the Athenians, and as yet
continued their obedience, because they were not fully resolved to what issue
the wars would come leaving not any thing under the possession of the
Athenians, save only their bare city.

When these ill tidings began to be spread at Athens, all the inhabitants, as
people amazed forsook their houses, running up and down the city, demanding
of one another what news abroad, diligently making search for him that
brought the first report hereof: I say none (from the infant to the old man)
had the power to keep within their own houses, the very extremity of
grief, did so oppress and trouble them: but neither children, who want
discretion, nor old men, who want strength, nor the women, who are weak by
nature, but they altogether partake in this their sad and hopeless
desolation.

Moreover they made many meetings in the common market places, and there would
spend whole nights in reviving their common misfortunes with woeful mourninges.
Some bewailed the loss of brethren, some the want of The horror of desolation
sons, some the lack offathers, some the misfortune of kindred, other some
for those that were nearest unto them, and generally all bewailed their common
misfortunes: now was nothing to be expected but shipwreck both of themselves
and Country, accounting those that were alive in far worse Persians an
happy chance unto them, in comparison of this, in the which they had their
wives, children, parents, and kinsfolks remaining still in safety, neither
lost they any thing save only their houses: but now on

Whilst they were thus in the midst of their mournings and Lamentes, Athens
again besieged
their enemies came upon them, and so sharply begirte them on every side by
besiedging them, that they constrained them to abide much hunger, for want of
victuals: for they knew well enough that there was no great number of soldiers
left alive within the town, and without they so beleagred and stopped
Athenians were brought into so great extreamitie, partly by famine, and partly
by the pestilence, that they desired peace.

Hereupon grew a long debating between the Lacedaemonians, and other their
adherents, whether it were necessary to be granted or no: At last they came
unto diverse censures upon the matter; where some were of opinion, and
thereunto advised that the name of the Athenians should be utterly rooted out,
and burn the City down to the ground: but hereunto the Spartans would in no
wise condescend and agree, seeing that the Greeks having but only Peace granted
the Athe nians upon condition.
Arms of those wales, that stretched themselves toward the haven of
Pireum. Secondly, that they should deliver up al their ships and shipping that
they had yet left. Thirdly, that they should receive from them xxx. Rulers to
govern and guide their commonwealth.

Upon these Articles the City was yielded up unto the Lacedaemonians, who
committed the whole course and managing thereof unto the discretion of
Lysander. In this year fell out many things that are worthy to be committed to
lasting memory: as first the utter subversion of Athens, next the death of I^
was 400. v^^r^s before Christ, as (...) affirm^th.
Darius great king of Persia, as also the banishment of The younger Dyonise, of
whom see more in the 21. Brook.
Dionisius the extreme Tirant of Sicilly.

Thus when the estate of Athens was thus mangled and altered, the people were
altered also with the state: for those thirty Rulers that were appointed over
the Commonwealth, fell into extreme tyrrany, for at their first entrance,
they chose unto them for their guard the number of three

Having thus strengthened themselves, they began to make slaughter upon the
Citizens of Athens, beginning first of all with Alcibiades, putting him first
to death, least under pretense of restoring them again toliberty, he might
invade the commonwealth: For it was secretly come unto Artaxerxes, King of,
Persia, (wherefore they sent out certain poastes after him, to cut him off in
the midst of his journey, if any way could be found: at last it was their
hap to overtake him, but seeing they could not easily put him openly to
death, they set fire on the chamber wherein he lay, and so in the dead of his
sleep burnt him quick. Alcibiades burnt in his bed.


Thus was the Tyrants delivered from the fear they stood in of this
courageous revenger, and now they thought themselves free to work any
violence upon the rest of those vveake inhabitants, as slaughter, extortion,
rauishments, or whatsoever spoil they could inflict upon those miserable,

But when they perceived that their cruelty was repined at amongst The
cruelty of these Tyrants.
them, (especially by one whose name was Theramenes,) they to the greater
terror of all the rest, put him to a most vile and slavish death, so that happy
was he that could first rid himself out of the city: insomuch that all
Greece was full of the banished Athenians, and yet long endured not this
poor refuge for these poor vvretches: For the Laeedemonians the more to
increase their misery, gave out a straight edict and proclamation Athenians.

At last they vvithdrevve themselves unto a place called Argus and The^es,
where they lived in great danger during all the time of their exile, but yet
they had this comfort, that they should yet once again recover their country.
And to strengthen these their vveake hopes there was amongst these banished
men, one Thrasibulus, a very goodly man, stoutand The exceeding love of
Thrasibulus to his Country.
coragious (and what was more, one who came of a noble stock and kindred) this
man thinking himself bound unto the good of his country, although it were with
the hazard of his life, adventured and assembled together all these his
b^ni^hed countrymen, and took the Castle of Phyle, within the territories of
Athens: for they had much furtherance of other Cities, that pitied their
miserable and wretched estate: Amongst the rest Ismenias prince of the
Thebanes, though he durst not make open show of any succor or aid toward
them by the power of his Country, yet he spated neither Gold nor treasure,
such as he had under his own possession: Also one Lysias an O^ator, of
Siracusa, The kindness of Libas.
soldiers well appointed at his own change, to the further aid of these his
sad and heavy Countrymen

These forces being all combined together, recomforted their hearts exceedingly,
and herupon began a very fierce encounter on both sides (inasmuch as the one
part foug^t in earnest, for the recovery of their Couhtrey, and the other part
as carelessly for the maintenance of further Tyranny) the Tyrants were put unto
the worst, and making their retire into the City, which they had already in
manner wasted with slaughter and spoils, they began to hold all the Athenians
in Jealousy of treason, wherefore they put them all out of the city, and
Faithfulness no way to be corrupted.
foreign soldiers into their service, thinking hereby to maintain and uphold
their former superiority over them. After, they went about to try if they could
any way corrupt Thrasibulus, promising to make him a fellow equal with them in
their Empire; all which could not work their policies to effect; which they
perceiving, sent for aid unto the Lacedaemonians, the which they suddenly
attained, and then made a new encounter upon their enemies: In which Critios,
and Hyppom^chus, two of the greatest Tyrants amongst them al, were slain, the
residue being vanquished and overcome betook themselves to fl ghr. Thrasibulus
Oration t^ the disti^ssed Athenians.


When thus their Army (whereof the most part were Athenians,) were making
Thrasibulus, cried unto them with a loud voice, saying: Why do you fly away
from me (o ye Athenians) seeing I have ob^ained the victory, and not rather
stand unto me and help me as one who seek the defense of you all: vvherevvith
he bad them also call unto their remembrance, that all those soldiers which
were under his conduct, were of their own Citizens, and not enemies: as
also that he had not taken weapons in hand, to the intent any way to vvrong
them, or to take any thing from them, but only to restore unto them all
such things as had by violence been pulled from them by others; assuring them
upon his honor, that the

Again, I entreat you to call to your remembrances the kindreds, the laws,
the rights and ceremonies, that had been in common amongst them. as also the
true fellowship that had been among them, in so many battles in times past,
all which things being well considered of you, I pray and humbly beseech you to
have pity upon your poor banished Countrymen: and if you your selves can be
so hardy and resolute to bear this insufferable yoke of bondage with patience,
I beseech you to restore unto us yet our country, and I will be the means to
set you all at free liberty again.

By this his long and perswasiue Oratory unto them, he so wrought with them,
that when they had gotten all their whole power into the city, they compelled
the thirty Tyrants out to Eleusis, and in their places they elected The Tyrants
banished out of Athens.
only ten out of their own choice, who should govern and rule the whole
Commonwealth: these being thus seated in the authority of their predecessors,
fell into the same cruelty that the former had put in practice.

These things being this come about, tidings was brought to Lacedemon that the
Athenians were very sharp set upon wars: which to the intent they might
repress and keep under, they sent unto their king (named Pausanias) who taking
great compassion of the banished people, restored all these poor decayed
Citizens home unto their own Country again, violently throwing out those
other last ten Tyrants out of their Cittye: forcing them to the former place
called Eleusis, amongst the rest of their assocyats.

By these means they began in some good measure to settle themselves in peace,
but yet within some short time after, these Tyrants (disdaining the restitution
of the banished Citizens, as they repind at their own downfall, even as though
other men's liberty had been their bondage) made wars upon the Athenians: But
when they came forth to parley, demanding their former rule and sovereignty
again, they were by policy suddenly taken, and slain as a sacrifice of peace:
then were the people, which they had expelled out of the City, Tyrany justly
punished.
called in again, and the citizens which by this means were distracted
diversely, was now at length brought into one body again. And to the intent no
dissension might grow about things past, they took every man his corporal
oath, to bury under foot whatsoever grudgings had risen up amongst them. The
athenians again restored.


Presently after, the Thebanes and Corinthians sent Ambassadors unto the
Lacedaemonians, making demand of their shares of all such spoils and preies,
Lacedaemonians returned back unto them a flat denial of these their demands,
whereupon they presently proclaimed open wars against them: but they did not
presently prosecute the same war, but only bare unto them a spightfull
grudge in their hearts, and would burst forth into action at some other time,
when least they were suspected.

Much about this time, Darius king of Persia dyed, leaving behind him two
sons Artaxerxes and Cyrus. By his last will and testament, bequeathed unto
The death of Darius the Bast^rd, with his last Will.
Artaxerxes the kingdom and unto Cyrus he bequeathed al such cities whereof
Cyrus thought his father wronged him exceedingly in his bequest, wherefore he
very privily prepared and made war against his brother. Artaxerxes having
knowledge hereof, sent for him, and not regarding his counterfaite pretense of
innocence, as that he purposed no such matter against him, bound him in fetters
of gold, and was also fully determined to have put him to death, had not his
mother hindered him. Cyrus therefore being thus set at liberty, did not as
before make war in secrecye but openly, not now by dissembled shows, but
open defiance; so that he gathered unto him much aid and assistance. Amongst
the rest the Lacedaemonians calling to remembrance, that by his means they were
greatly strengthened in their wars against the Athenians, (like ignorant men,
not knowing against whom this war was intended) determined to send all the
aid they could make unto Cyrus upon any small warning given, seeking both for
thanks at the hands of Cyrus, and pardon from Artaxerxes, if his should chance
to be the victory: pleading for their better excuse, that what they had
attempted was not meant against him openly. But being in battle, Artaxerxes
was wounded very sore by the hands of Cyrus, but by the swiftness of his horse
he was delivered from death, but his brother Cyrus was Wars betwixt Cyrus and
Artaxerxes.
overcome by the kings guard, and presently put to death: So that Artaxerxes
got the victory and spoil over his brothers war, and his army also. In this
battle were ten thousand Greeks that came to the aid of Cyrus, who in that
wing where they were placed got the upper hand, and after the death of Cyrus
could neither be overcome by so great an host of men, nor yet be intrapped by
policy: But in their return homward, they defended themselves Cyrus slain.
manfully, (though they passed by many nations, and also had

The end of the fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK of Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe L^^e lemonians thirst after the whole Empire of Asia. Tissaphernes put by
the office of Lieutenant general. Conon of Athens made Admiral of the Persian
sleet. The L^cedemonians send to thEgyptians for aid. Agesi^^^s is ^mployed
against Conon. Conon ouercomm^th Lysander upon the Sea. Athe^^ (...) liberty
again. Epaminondas overcomes the Lacedaemonians,

WHen the Lacedaemonians had conquered the Athenians, they could not yet rest
contented, although they were grown to great power and strength by this their
fortunate (...).
succes: but now they began to cast about h^^^ they might attain unto the
whole Empire of Asia (the greater part whereof was in the go^ernement of the
Persians.) There was appointed as Lie^tenant general of these vvarres one
Dercillides: who ^he^ savv, that he m^st o^pose himself against two other
worthy Pharna^^zus, and Tissap^ernes, which (...) (...) unto Artaxerxes, and
e^ermore had in a read^nes, the (...) (...) of the greatest Nations under ^he
sun, at their f^ll com^^^^ (...) (...) himself how he might work it
about, to make the (...) (...) (...) comma^^ders, his friend and whether of
their friends^ip (...) most available for his intended purposes: vvhereupon he
concluded within himself that Tissaphernes was the fittest and worthiest
person to make peace unto, being a man both of greater experience, and far
more courageous and active in military discipline then the other, as also that
he was better furnished with companies of soldiers, for he had all those
forces which sometime belonged to King Cyprus.

Some short time after upon occasions they met together, where after much
communication had betvveen them, it was agreed upon certain conditions, that
Tissaphernes should not meddle nor be seen to advise any thing at that time in
these vvarres. Whereupon Pharnabazus being soon displeased hereat, made a uery
grievous complaint unto the King their lord and Master, declaring all the
manner of his slacknesse against the Lacedaemonians Asia, nourishing them there
at the Kings charge, and further that he had agreede with them to delay the
Wars, Tyssaphe^nes accused to the ^ing.
which they had in hand, seeing the damage would redound upon the whole
Empire. Also he urged further, that it was an evil president, that the vaarre
should hang, and not go thorough, but lingered still along, as if the enemy
were well bribed with money, when as indeed it were meet, to make them fly
by force of Arms.

When he had done this complaint and brought Tissaphernes into high displeasure
with the King, he gave him counsel to remove him from being high Admiral of
the seas, and in his place to call home Conon of Athens, (who Athenians were
berest of power and riches, yet their experience in Navigations, remained
within them uncontrolled: Moreover if a man should search never so secretly
amongst them al, there was none to be found, for that place, more fit then
Conon.

Hereupon Pharnabazus has delivered unto him five hundred talentes of silver,
with full commission to make Conon high admiral of the Kings fleet. But
when the Lacedaemonians had gotten intelligence hereof, they sent Conon made
Admiral of the Persyan Fleet.
presently Ambassadors unto the King of Egypt, desiring him to send
Hercimonius, Lacedaemonians; requested that they might obtain as their general
Agesilaus (and at that time king of the Lacedaemonians.) Heere-about the
Lacedaemonians, demurred upon the matter a long space, whether they might make
him general or not, by reason of the Oracle at Delphos, which was, that that
Empire should suddenly end, when it was seen, that the Agesilaus was lame
in one of his feet.) At length they resolved, it were better their King to halt
in his going, them the kingdom halt for want of a sufficient Governor.

Hereupon was Agesilaus sent into Asia, with a mighty host, there was never The
worthy praises of Conon and Ages^aus.
two such worthy captains better fitted together then these two: for they both
were of equal years; alike valiant, wise, honorable, and pol^ticke, and their
whole government, iumped in all things alike: Now although fortune had made
them so like the one the other in all things, yet she still so preserved them
in all their enterprises, as that they never had conquest the one over the
other: They both were great commanders in the wars, and both of equal
spirits in all attempts: But as for Conon, his soldiers mutanized much against
him, for that the kings Lieutenantes in former times, were accustomed to deal
very wrongfully with their soldiers about their wages, abridging and cutting
short much of that allowance which The soldi^rs mut^^^ye against Cono^.
was appointed for them, and therefore became much more the earnester with
him, and so much the rather in that they took upon them, such a piece of
desperate service in so great a war, under so Noblea commander.

Now had Conon been a long suter unto the king by his Letters, but could
never receive satisfaction for his long labors, vvheruppon bethinking with
himself how to make short, his vvearisome travails, at last in resolved
manner, went unto the king in person: when he was come into the kings Court,
he might not be admitted neither to the presence, nor speech of the King, (the
reason was) because he would not worship him after the manner of the
Per^yans: Nevertheless, he was limited to entreat with the King by certain
Messengers, wherein he much lamented that the vvarres of so mighty and rich a
Prince, should be hindered and slacked, only for want of money, whereas the
enemy, whose army could no way exceed theirs, had money in great abundance,
and yet your Majesty Conons violence upon ^ern^ce.
waste much of the enemies land, vvoon many of their Cities, and even as if
it had been a violent tempest, bore down whatsoever stood in his way.
These his boisterous proceedinges, brought the Lacedaemonians into great fear,
vvhereupon they determined to call home again Agesilaus out of Asia, to look
unto the defense of his own country.

In the mean time (fearing the vvorst) Lysander whom Agesilaus appointed his
Vize-gerent the time of his absence, assembled a great Navy of ships, and
furnished them with all the power they were able to make, purposing if
occasion offered it self to try their fortunes by dint of svvord, rather then
to yield to the proudest enemy under the Sun.

Conon all this while was making all things in readiness to wage battle
with his enemy (but for so much as this was the first time that ever he
encountered Conon^ forwardness to the fight.
with so great a power) it stood him much upon to be very careful and
circumspect in the ordering and appointing out of his men, for there was not
only a controversy amongst the Captains, but also betvveen the common
soldiers, and Conon being chosen captain over all, was as careful for the
Persyans, as for his own Country. For like as it fared with the Athenians,
when thy were utterly discomfited, he was one of the only men that sought the
overthrow of their Dominion: so on the contrary, it was his whole desire, to
recover it again, and now at last to set up again his country by the victory
which he before had lost being overcome: the which thing being brought about,
would redound much more to his honor, for that he had not now under his command
the Athenians his own Countrymen, but the whole power and strength of a foreign
Prince, so that by this means all the peril, danger, and loss, should be
the Kings, and the gain of victory should be only for the good of his country:
and the honor which would light upon him, would be in far greater measure
then many other valiant Captains Persians, he should set her up in her former
estate, by making the Persians conquerors.

On the other side Lysander, in that he was of near kin to Agesilaus, was also
an earnest immitater of his virtues, framing himself by all means possible,
The worthy praise of Lysander.
not any way to swerve from his Noble and worthy examples, nor from his
shining renown and glory that the world did cast upon him: but that he would
have so watchful an eye over his proceedings, that the Empire which was so
long a getting, in so many battles, might not come to wrack, thorogh his
Athenians should recover again the sovereignty: But the fiercer the battle
grew, the more glorious appeared the victory on Conons part. For the
Lacedaemonians were put unto the vvorst, and fled, and many of their garrisons
were led away to Athens. Thus were the people once again restored to their
former estate, and many of their cities also were recovered back again unto
their Empire. This was a full victory unto the Athenians, and to the
Lacedaemonians an end of the freedom that they had long retained: and now
seeing that with their kingdom they had lost the greatest part of their valor
also, their neigbors on every side, held them base, and provoked them Thebanes,
(with the help of the Athenians) raised Wars upon them: the which city
being mightily increased Disdam, hand ^^^yd to ^ll Fortune.
through the valiant acts of their Duke, (who was called Epaminondas) began to
aspire at the whole Empire of Greece. Whereupon there happened between them, a
great battle, wherein the Lacedaemonians had as ill success by land, as by
sea, against that worthy leader Conon. In which conflict. Lysander, a chief
captain of the Lacedaemonians over came the Athenians, and was slain.
Pausanias, being attached for treason, fled. Lysander sl^^^.


Thus the Thebans having gotten the upper hand, made their whole power
Lacedemon, persuading themselves to make an easy conquest, their reason was,
in that they were destitute of aid to make resistance. This their intent gave
matter of great mistrust unto the Lacedaemonians, causing them to speed home
Agesilaus from his Persyan victories, to defend his own kingdom from
violence; for Lysander being dead, no fit Captain could be found, on
whose trust and valor they durst repose. Nevertheless, seeing it would
belong cre Ag^silaus could come, they raised up their powers, preparing to
meet the enemy: But neither their courage, nor yet their strength was able to
withstand the enemy, (of whom but even lately they had received a foil)
therefore at the very first joining of their battles, they were forced to
betake themselves to slight.

As thus the host of the Athenians were in the depth of their discomfiture,
Ag^silaus the king come into the field, and what with his resolute courage,
and a band of fresh and justy old Soldiers, such as had been nursed up in
many bloody bankets, with little or no labor at all, snatched the victory out
of the enemies hands: But himself received in this conflict a very dangerous
wound: At last tidings here of came unto Athens, wherefore the Athenians
Lacedaemonians would get the upper hand, again, and then they were sure to fall
into their old estate of bondage) raised a power of men, and sent them to the
aid of the Beotians by a young Gentleman (named sphic^^^^s) not above the age
of one and twenty years, but yet of a most towardly and courageous spirit. The
valor of this young man, excelled and far surpassed The (...) (...) of (...).
his years, for amongst all the noble and valiant Dukes and Captains that the
Athenians had had before, there was none of gr^ater likelihood, or more ^ype
ca^iage then he: also he had planted in him, not only all the points of an
excellent Captain, but for an exquisit Orator deserved worthy commendation.

Conon hearing of the return of Ag^silaus, returned also out of Asia, meaning
to wast and spoil the country of Lacedemon in most sharp revenge: In somu^h as
the Spartanes being enclosed in on every side, (and being sore afraid Conon
returns to Athens.
of war, which continually r^ng in their ears) were mightily out of heart,
and almost come into a desperate state: But notwithstanding Conon spared them
not at all, for when he had by voilent spoils forraged the fields and houses
of his enem^es, he took his journey toward Athens: where (albeit his welcome
was with great joy unto his countrymen) yet notwithstanding, his sorrow f^^re
exceeded their joy; to behold, how his country had been vyolated, burned, and
defaced by the Lacedaemonians: wherefore such places as were laid L^ce^e^onians,
and at the charges of the Persian Army. Such was the bad fortune of Athens,
that being once before burned by the Persyan, it was now repaired and made good
again, with such spoils as had been gotten from the Persyans: and at this
time being defaced by the victories that they got (...) the Lace lemonians,
came all about by clean contraries, for they that (...) but even now their
fellows and friends, became their enimes: and tho^^ that were al^aies enimes,
became their friends.

Wh^^^ these things sell out amongst them, Artaxerxes king of Persia, sent
Greece, commanding that every part should cease from ar^^^s, and whatsoever
they were that withstood the contrary, should be reputed and taken as an enemy:
further he restored unto every city their ancyent liberties, and every man to
take new possession of his own: which d^ed of his, was not so much in
regard that they might have respite from hostility and civil Wa^res amongst
themselves, neither was it to ease and draw away (if it were possible) the
hatred that they nourished amongst them one A vniuet sall peace by ^opulsion
thoroughout all Greece.
toward another: as it was for fear whilst he was employed about his own
Wars in Egypt, (the which he had drawn upon himself in that he aided the
Lacedaemonians against the Egiptian Lieutenants,) his host of men should be
detained and withheld in Greece. Wherefore the Greeks being even wearied and
ouertoyled with Wartes, easily consented to obey willingly, what they were
commanded.

This year was accounted vvorthily of, not only because of their sudden
peace throughout all Greece, but also because the same year, the the city of
Rome, was taken by the Frenchmen: Now the Lacedaemonians had too long rest,
and idleness began to set new fire amongst them, wherefore It was before the
birth of Christ 389. (...).
they laid in vvait for any the least ad^antage that might be given. At last
they espieng th Arcadians were gone from home, they surprised one of their
Castles, turning out their men, and planted in their places a garrison of their
own. Here began again fresh broiles: for the Arcadians, having the aid of
the Thebanes challenged their losses again by the svvord: In this conflict
Archiadanus captain of the Lacedaemonians was sore vvounded who perceiving that
his men were ouerpressed and beaten down, as being overcome, sent unto the
enemy an Herald, demanding the dead bodies of all his men that were slain,
and that he might by order and law of

For amongst the Greeks, it is an undoubted token of victory in yielding
themselves, wherewith the Thebanes sounded a retreat, and left following any
further in the pursuit of them. Afterward within some small time, when every
man seemed to rest so well satisfied even as if a truce had been taken
between them: and all displeasure quietly put up in silence without any
further mistrust on either part: the Lacedaemonians being employed on other
scruices abroad amongst the Nations, the Thebanes contrary to all expectation,
under the leading of a valiant captain (called Epaminondas,) began a new plot
of cunning, purposing to win away their city, and to set upon them at unawares.
Lacedemon, as closely and as secretlye as could any way be devised: but they
received as foul a repulse, as their intention was treacherous. For the old
men of the city, and other impotent people (as were most unable,) having true
intelligence of the approache of the enemy, put themselves in arms, met them
at the entrance of the Gates, and although their number was exceeding small (not
much above one hundred, old, lame, and forevvorne men) put themselves upon the
encounter, against fifteen thousand Soldiers: So undaunted was their courage,
and strength, that rather The couragi ou^ stomach of a (...) ag^d p^^^^ns.
they did choose to put their lives to hazard of fight, rather then to sit

In this battle there were two of the most valiantest of their Captains
slain with the sword: mean space word was brought that Agesilaus was very
near at hand, which stroke such a dampe amongst the Thebanes, that they
suddenly retired, and made away as fast as they were able: but yet it ended not
in this manner, but within a little space after, there was a new encounter
again. For the younger sort of men amongst the Lacedaemonians, being informed
of the valarous courage and demeanor of the old men, their rage could no way be
restrained, but they would have a new trial made in open field, although they
were already fully persuaded that the victory would fall upon the heads of the
Thebanes.

In this conflict Epaminondas, (who bare himself valiantly, not only as he
Epaminondas daungerously wounded.
was Captain, but both captain and soldier) received his deaths wound: At
the report whereof the one part was so surprysed with fear, and the other part
so amazed in joy, as both of them (as they had been new combyned friends)
departed the fields, without any further strokes. Some few days after
Epaminondas departed, and with his death began the whole wrack of the
commonwealth: for even as it fares with one, who having a weapon bateth and
takes away the edge thereof, whereby that is left is able to do little harm:
even so fares it with this commonwealth, who having lost so good a Duke, who
was the very edge of the commonwealth of Thebes, the force of which The (...)
of Epammo^das.
edge was eu^n so much abated, and weakened, that they seemed not so much

All which afterward was made evident to every eye, that the glory and
renown of the whole Country began with him, and at his end dyed also with
him. Also he bare himself every way so worthy a statesman, that it was hard
for a man to judge whether he deserved more praise for valor, or exact

In learning, he far surpassed many, who thought themselves his superior, and
therein was so studious, that he was able to give instruction, in the knowledge
of Philosophy, and which was more to be admired in him, that a man so borne
and bred up altogether in Schools, should yet in the end prove so excellent a
warrior. neither did his death disagree with the former course of his life:
for being by a violent blow, stricken to the ground, he was taken up and
brought into his Tent, (being half dead) anon when he was again something
revived, and withal recovered his speech, he looked round about upon all his
attendants, and seeing them al there, the first question that he demanded was,
whether his enemies had taken and seized upon his shield when they felled him.
They who were nearest unto his person, answered him no, his shield was safe.
Then The words of Epamino^das a little be fore his death
he commanded it to be brought unto him, that as a principal companion with
him in all his travails and glorious victories, he might kiss it. Then he
demanded further, whether part had gotten the glory of the field: so Thebanes
remained conquerors: then (said he) al is well: So ast were in rejoicing manner
for the safety of his country, he laid him down again, and so departed. His
death.


This man thus removed by death, here also ended the prowess and valor of the
Athenians: for after that time, he being gone, whose footesteps and dyrections
they ever followed, they gave themselves over to slothful Idleness, spent and
consumed all their revenues vainly, (not upon ships, and men of war, as
informer times) but in feastings, in Hollidayes, in making preparation for
Pageants, plays, and other idle pastimes; assembling themselves in great
multitudes in Theaters, to behold their famous stage plays and Poets; Greeks
gave over themselves to all sensuallitye, the name of the Macedones, which ever
before was held most vile and contemptible sprung up, and grew to honor amongst
them: and that Phillip, (who had been three years in hostage in the City of
Thebes) being grown up to great knowledge in millitary Epaminondas and the
Pelopidanes) laid the kingdom of Macedonie like a heavy yoke of bondage upon
the necks, both of Greece and Asya, bringing them and their posterity into an
everlasting subversion.

The end of the sixth Book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK
THE ARGUMENT.
MAcedon described with the kings thereof. Caranus following a heard of
Goats wins the city Edissa. He alters the name thereof, making it the
chiese city of Macedon. He subdueth diverse kings. Perdicas reigns after him
and prophesies of his posterity. Argeus takes his place, and leaves

COncerning Macedon, in ancient times it was called Aemathya, after the name
of Aemathion, sometime king Pelagians, and the Country it self B^tia: but
afterward, through the worthy actions of their kings, and manly resolution of
the people: first in that they subdued and brought under those that inhabited
round about them, and shortly after, other nations, and people dwelling further
off, whereby the Empire became mightily enlarged,

In the region of Peony (which is now accounted a parcel of Macedon) there
sometime raigined, (if report may carry any credit) one Telagonus, the father
of Astriopeus, whose name a man may hear so often repeated in the battles of
Troy, amongst those noble warriors which stood only upon the defense of that
City. Again, in that part, Europe, reigned a king, called by the name of
Europe.

Then sprang up among them one Caranus, (who with a great multitude of The
f^^st (...) of M^^edon.
^reekes) having received a charge from the Oracle, that he should seek an
habitation in Macedony; wherefore following the commandment he had received,
at last he came into Aemathia (following an heard of Goats that fled from a
great shoure of rain) and entered and wan the City of Edissa, before the men
of the town were warned of his approach, chiefly by reason that the storm
was very great: then did he call to mind what was delivered by the former
Oracle, that he should seek out a kingdom, whereunto the Goats should be his
guide, wherefore he appointed this the chief seat of his kingdom. Also ever
after it was his observation, that whenever and whethersoeuer he conducted
any host of men he would ever have the same Goats set before his Goats
appointed by the Oracle to direct to a ^ing dome.
Edyssa, and called it Aegaea, and the people thereof Aegaeades. Afterward,
when he had quite expelled and shut out Mydas (for he also held a part of
Macedon) and diverse other petty kingdoms, he brought it all into one sole
government, and uniting together diverse sorts of people, made but one entire
body of all Macedony, whereby he laid a very strong and sure foundation for his
succession to build upon.

After him succeeded Perdicas, whose life was notable, and the speeches that
P^^dicas and his prophe^y.
worthy of everlasting memory: For being very aged, and even ready to shake
hands with death, he called before him a son of his called Argeus, and showed
unto him the place whereas his body should be buried, and not his body only,
but even the bodies of all them that should succeed him in the kingdom, to be
interred in the same place: prophesieng before, that so long as the bones of
his posteriry were buried there, so long the kingdom should remain in his
house and family, Whereupon grew up a superstitious beleese among them; all
which failed in Alexander the great, because he was the man that altered and
changed this place of burial.

Thus Argeus having governed this kingdom, with upright Judgment, and much
love of the people, left this world: after whose death, his son Phillip
swaied the Crown and Septer by lawful succession; but Phillip also had not
long supplied the state and dignity of a king, but sudden death surprised him,
whereby the Crown descended upon his heir, (named Europe) being then a very
babe.

In these days, there was continual hostility between the Macedones, and the
T^r^cians and Illyrians, by continuance whereof, they became so hardened, that
they grew tobe accounted famous in marcyall discipline, and also became a fear
and terror unto all their neighboring nations. Wherefore the Illyrians holding
the Infancy of the young king in great contempt, they bid battle unto the
Macedones, in which conflict having received a very shameful repulse, from the
hands of their enemies, they brought forth their king as he lay in his Cradle,
and placed him in the midst amongst them in the field, and Europe king of
Macedon brought in a (...) (...) the (...).
having so done, they gave a fresh assault upon the enemy (vainly imagining,
that the only cause of their former overthrow was, the want of the kings
presence in the battle) and that now they doubted not to gain the vper-hand,
although it were no way likely, but even to satisfy their superstitious
blindness, and fed themselves with mere imaginations.

Atlast (calling themselves to remembrance) they bestowed some part of their
pity upon the infant King, of whom it was none other to be looked The infant
King (...).
for, but to make him of a King, to become a captive, if they chanced to lose
the day, and fall into the hands of their enemies. Wherefore the encounter
being siercely maintained on both parts, atlast the Illirians received the
soil, with much slaughter, (as if the Macedons in all their former battles
wanted neither manhood, nor courage, but a king only.) After Europe, Aminthas
was next in succession, he was a right renowned Prince, both for the prowess
and manly resolution of him himself as also the singular forwardness of his
son Alexander, whom nature had sorichly bedect in full perfection of all
virtuous Ornaments, that even in all the games and pastimes of Olimpas, he bare
away the prize, from all that opposed themselves against him.

About this time, Darius King of Persia (who was put to flight and banisned out
of Scithia) scorning to be dishonord in every place he came, by reason of his
many ill fortunes in the wars, sent forth Megabyzus, with a great part of his
army to subdue all Thr^ce, and other kingdoms situate about those coasts,
amongst which (for the slender regard and estimate thereof Macedon for one:) he
making as short work as he could, put in execution what his Master had
commanded, dispatched Ambassadors to Amyntas King of Macedon, demanding
hostages of peace for that that should be concluded and fully ratified between
both parts. These Ambassadors were very royally entertained and feasted by
Amyntas: At the last being fully gorged with full carouses, their only suit
and request was, that inasmuch as he had made them so sumptuoas a feast, and
snewed unto them such store of royal entertainment, so he would also grant
unto them likewise the rights that justly follow and belong to that kindness
they had Persians, as a sure token and pledge of hospitality,) which being
granted, they entered the place, at whose approach, the Persians began to fall
to wanton dalliance, in greater measure then was to be endured. Whereupon
Alexander the son of Aminthas, desired his father in respect of his age and
gravity) to withdraw himself from the banquet, promising that he would
quickly assuage this uncivil carriage of his guests wantonness.

When Amyntas was departed, according as he had requested, Alexander called
forth the women one after another, making show as if he would The (...) of
wanton Ambassadors
as many lusly men, young and venturous, and these richly attired in Ladies
weeds, with every man his weapon, under their rich attire, charged them, to
queach the wantonness, of these dotards with the points of their weapons: and
so were all the Ambassadors put unto the sword, even in the ^^igth of their
iolli^^.

When Megabyzus had received true intelligence of what was happened (being wrapped
into a world of admiration, in that they made so long tariance, and returned
not) he himself disdaining to take in hand the voyage fearing it might greatly
disparadge his honor, ifhe should offer battle to so base and abject a
Nation: appointed forth one of his princely leaders called Bubares, to whom he
gave in charge but only the smallest part of his Armies, acounting it as
sufficient for so mean and easy a piece of serui^^^ in which action Bubares,
became of a valiant Soldier, an amorous loue^^ for whereas his only coming
was to bid them battle, he was on the sudden so entangled in the love of the
daughter of Amyntas, that he banished far from him all former Marriage
between the Persyans and Macedons.


Shortly after the departure of Bubares from Macedon, Amyntas deceased, who
left behind him Alexander as his son and lawful successor. Moreover the
marriage and affinity of Bubares into the Persian race, brought therewith such
abundance of peace, that throughout all the days of Darius it had full scope
and passage, without any manner interruption: and after him it also purchased
the general favor and good liking of Xerxes, who was after lawfully seated in
that kingdom: Insomuch as when he made an invasion into Greece (being mightily
incensed and intaged against the same) he gave unto him all the royalty of the
whole Countries, that lay open toward the mountains of Olympus and Hemus:
notwithstanding all which gifts and graces, he enlarged his kingdom more and
more by his own fortunes, as well as by the liberal hand of the Persians.

Afterward, by order of succession, the kingdom of Macedon descended to
Amyntas, who was son unto his brother Menelaus. This man was held in high
regard, for his manly prowess, and all the exercises of military dissipline.
Amyntas the second
He took to wife Eurydice, on whose body he begat three worthy Sons, the
first Alexander, the second Perdycas, the third and last was Phillip (the
father of Alexander the great) and one only daughter (named Euryone.) Cygea,
of whose body he also had issue Archelaus, Arydens and Menalius: This king was
much encombred by maintaning wars every way: first with the Illyrians, and
after with the Olinthyans.

Also he was often in danger of his life, by the plots and treasons of his wife
Eurydice (who practicing and attempting all the ways she could to enjoy her
wanton desires with her Son in law, left no way unattempted to shorten The
treason of Eur^dice toward the Kings person
and dispatch her husband, thereby to establish the kingdom to her lawless
Paramour: the which practices ofhers had wel-nigh taken effect, had not her

The old man, being thus preserved and delivered from all the practices of
treason, died in peace, leaving the kingdom to his eldest begotten Son
Alexander. This Alexander at the vere entrance to his crown concluded a peace
with the Illyryans, for agreat sum of money to be paid unto him, and for

(...) THE EIGHTH BOOK
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Lacedaemonians and Phocenses condemned in a great sum of money. The
Phocenses rob the Temple at Delphos. Phillip is chosen captain general against
these Church-robbers and subdueth them. Afterward he sets upon the
The^anes and spoiled them for whose defense he pretended all his labors.

WHile the provinces, and Cities of Greece, were in their pride and flourishing
estate; while concord and love Greece a garden from whence all The ci^^l dis
sention among the cities of Greec
nations gathered flowers to delight in, and generally a people unvanquishable.
But when an emulating desire to bear rule and bring each other in subjection,
like sparkels hid in the ashes, did glow in their bosoms, which after aspired
to higher flames, they were themselves the subuerters of the^r goodly
buildings, slately monuments, the greedy famine that devoured their plenty, and
their own hands their own destruction: for Ppillip king of Macedon seeing
this

The original causes of these great mischiefs were the Thebanes, who having
The Theba^s lose their sovereignty.
sovereignty, and wanting discretion to use it, arrogantly accused at the
common counsel of Greece the Lacedaemonians, and the Phocenses, whom they had
vanquished in the battle, not contenting themselves with the slaughters,
rauishmentes, spoils, and Trirannies which they had inflicted upon them, but
pursued the advantage they had got with cruelty, and accounted the extremest
punishments to merciful for them: It was laid to the Lacedemons, that they
had taken the tower of Thebes in the time of truce: to the Phocenses, that they
had wasted the country of Boetia: So that after they had made spoil of them by
war, they would also extort from them what

The Phocenses therefore, seeing cruelty chaste them as fierce as lightning, and
knowing they should be bereft of their Lands, Wives, and Children, and
compelled to slavery, if their imposition were unsatisfied, chose rather a
present death, then a perpetual mischief: and forthwith elected for their
Captain one Philomelus, under whose conducte, they offered their lives by
speedy war, to free their bodies from this The Phocen ces rob the Temple of
Apollo.
with the Gods themselves, gathered their faction to a head, and ransackt the
temple of Apollo at Delphos.

From thence enriched with that treasure they could make, they strengthened
their army with straunger-souldiers, and with such forces they made War upon
the Thebanes. This deed of the Phocenses, although all men abhorred, being so
foul a fact as Sacrilege, yet in reguarde they were driven to it by
extremity, it engendered a more deadely hate in the hearts of the neighbor
provinces, toward the Thebanes then to them. The Athenians therefore with the
Lacedaemonians took politic

Both Armies being met, and arraide for Battle, at the first encounter
Philomelu^ forced the Thebanes to retreat, and pursued them so far, that he
subdued their tents, and was conqueror of all the ground whereon they were
encamped. The besotted Athenians beaten with their own solly.
But while he was more forward in this chase, then wise; more rash, then
valiant, and more certain of victory then behooved, he was run so far into
the Thebanes danger, that no relief had power to succor him, and by those
enemies whom his rash conceit held conquered he was slain, and his life made

In his place Ornomarchus was selected Captain, against whom the Thebanes and
men of Thessaly, chose for their general, not an experienced souldior of their
own Nation, doubting least if he should be victor, he would bear himself
too Lordly over them; but unto Phillip King of Macedon they would willingly
submit not only themselves and forces, to become subjects and governed by a
forrener, which was the thing they pretended to fear in one of themselves.
Phillip being thus possessed of their power, and fully informed of the original
cause of this war, took upon himself the title of The revenger of
Sacrilege, and not of the defender of the Thebanes: and presently gave
command that al his Soldiers should put garlands of Laurel on their heads,
and in this manner as having the gods chief Captain of his enterprise, he
marched into the field.

The Phosenses at the sight of which, being held the cognizance of the gods
(for to Appollo is the Laurel dedicate) were struk with an inward remorse of
conscience, as remembering the offense they had committed, and presently The
(...) (...) to the Gods.
without further resistance, cast down their weapons, took them to ^light,
willingly offered their lives to the slaughter of the enemies, receiving
^eserned punishment for violating the sacred law of their religion, and
defiling the temple. The renown of Phillip by this was spread through al
nations, who dignified him with the titles of the punisher of S^criledge; the
Revenger of religion: he only worthy to comp^ll offenders to make
satisfaction, and honored him next unto the Godds, by whom the majesty of the
Gods was maintained.

The Athenians hearing of this success of Philip, with intent to stay his
passing into Gr^^^^, took the straightes of Thermop^le; in like manner as they
had Philip (...) of (...) (...) (...).
don before against the coming of the Persyans: but neither with like courage
no^ for like quarrel. At first it was for the liberty of Gre^^e, but now for
manifest Sacrilege: then in the honor of their temples against the inv^sions
of an enemy, now i^ the fortisieng of the Church-robbers against lawful
reuengers, making themselves pertakers and defenders of ^o ^ainous an offense,
whereof themselves chiefelye ought to have bin punishers; not remembering even
in their most adversity, they had used that God as their chief counselor, and
by his instrvctions finished so many battles with Conquest, built so many
Citti^s with fortunate success, attained so great an Empire both by sea and
land; and finally achieved nothing either in private or public affairs,

This people of excellent understanding, exquisitly furnished with learning and
Judgment, traded in pollitick laws and institutions, were now like Battes, who
have ci^s to see the sun, yet shun the sun: And made themselves agents in such
crueltyes, whereof they could not after justly blame the most ba^barous nation,
if they executed upon them the like reward. Phillip having thus like the fox,
got in his head, would make hard shift to draw all his body after: grew Philip^
(...) dealing
persidioas in his promises past, and those Cities which but lately he was
Captain of, which had fought under his standard, which had rei^iced in him,
which had bin as hands to h^n in his victories, like an utter enemy he invaded
Sacrilege as to pro^ure free liberty in person to perpe^rate the same.

From thence as having accomplished all things to his desire, he passed into
Cappadocia, where he began war with like treachery: and having by policy and
several stratigems, either taken or slain the kings that were Borderers, he
settled the whole province under the Empire of Macedon. Then to abolish the
shameful reports that were spread of his tirranies, he sent unto the kingdoms
and wealthy Cities, certain people to raise a tumor, and busy the heads of
the multitude, that he would royally extend a mass of treasure to the
building of the walls about their Cities, to the reedifying of churches, and
honoring their Temples: For which (as if he would be expeditious in this good)
the M^isters of such works were straight procured by proclamation, who
presently upon the rumor coming to Macedon, waited attendance, and were put
off^o long with delays, that they were feign to depart without any

After this he raised war against the Olinthians, who knowing Phillip had
most unjustly put one of his Brothers to death, in pity took his two other
brothers, borne of his stepmother to safeguard, for Phillip brooking no
corriuallship, Philip makes wa^^e upon the Olinthians.
in Rule, sought also by all politic means to dispatch them to their graves.
In this war, and for this occasion, he sent and subverted this ancient and
noble city, executed his brothers, according as in the counsel of his heart,
his thoughts had decreed, inioying thereby a great prey of treasure, and
Thessaly, and on the silver mines in Thrace. And that neither law nor right
should be by him vnviolate, he furnished himself to be a rover on the sea.

While these things were ordered by Phillip, there were two brothers, (both
kings of Thrace) at civil variance between themselves; in which continuance
Two brothers str^pt out of ^^^ir Kingdoms.
of their strife, being uncertain how to descide it, they agreed to choose
Phillip to be judge, and arbitrate their difference: not in regard of his
indifferency, Justice, and vprightnes, in such controversies, but doubting
least he should Phillip being solicited in this business, and having granted
his consent, according to his accustomed nature, proceeded to judgment, as if
he had marched to battle, and assailing the brothers before they dreamt of a
danger, not l^ke an upright judge, but an unsatisfied tirant, ravished them both
of their kingdoms.

Upon this the Athenians sent Ambassadors to him to entreat a peace, whom he
honorably heard, and their conditions of league being liked by him, he also
sent his Ambassadors to Athens; with Articles to the same purpose: so to Peace
concluded with th Athenians.
the content and commodity of both, a peace was concluded. Out of these Greece,
came also several Ambassadors, not so much for desire of his friendship, as for
fear of his name. But the Thebanes and Beotians having their inueterate rancor
and malice vnpurdge out of their bosoms, were continual advocates both to
Phillip himself, and to his counsel, to stir him up to approve himself a
Captain of Greece, as he had undertook and professed himself to be. The
Phocenses enforcing themselus to forget all slaughters which their own families
had by him endured, and contenting themselves, and their posterity to undergo
what slavish subversion soever, then that people whom they professed themselves
to be at such deadly hare withal, should live to understand what a calamiti^
and miserable sight The misera^^^ (...) of Gree^^.
this was, to behold Greece which but late, both in strength and dignity was
reputed Princess of the whole world, always a conquer^sse of kings and
kingdoms, lady of many populous and goodly Cities, dancing attendance in
sorraigne Territories, either entreating peace, or fearing war; that such a
Nation should be enforced as it were, to put her head vnde^another man's girdle;
that they the only worthyes of that time, should b^ brought to expres^e
Thebanes and Lacedemons, by whole domesticke I^rres, Greece from a slouri^hing
Commonwealth, of which themselves were the Pri^^es and bare sovereignty, was
now subjected to a distresfull estate not able to resist adversity.

Phillip in this season for the advancement of his own glory, debated
concerning Philip hea^^th both the (...) and (...) them both.
parties, and to both given a Princely and favorable countenance, to one he
promised to discharge them of the wars and danger they consisted in, and
took an oarh of them, not to discover their treaty and his promise, to any
living creature.

^o the contrary he offered himself, to come personally with his power, in
their help and asistance against their enemies: but to both gave especial

While both Cities were satissied ^ith this variable answer, and both lived
peaceably and without distrust, he took the straights of Thermopile, to
which the Phocenses were near neighbors: which people perceiving them
selu^s entrapped by the policy of Phillip, fearfully took them to their
weapons, but having not time to furnishe their own battles, or stay for
succor from their bordering friends, and Phillip threatening he would destroy
them vnless^ they yielded incontinent; overcome with necessity, they submitted
(...) (...) alon advantage.
themselves to his mercy, their lives only saved: but even of as much validity

The children were not left to their parents, nor the wives to their husbands,
nor the images of the Gods in the Temples. Phillip thus a Conqueror, like as
Grasiers shift their cattle, sometime into one pasture, sometime into one
another, as the season of the year inforcoth; even so removed he at his
pleasure whole countries and cities, as he thought for his advantage, the
situation fitter to be replenished or forsaken: nor was the desolation of
these cities, or the terror of this people like an invincible army of enemies
The mis^tie of de^olation
approach, or when men of war run massacaring up and down in every corner of
a city: or when two hoasts encounter violently in the field; or when the
goods which a peaceable life has gathered together, are taken away

Thus the affairs of Macedon being at a stay, continuing his former practice
and policy, he took the chief coasts of the Dardamans, forraged their
borders, and subdued their countries, not being merciful to his own kindred:
for in this havoc he determined to put Arimba king of Epirus, and Olimpias
from his royalty, and thereupon sent for Alexander brother to Olimpias his
wife, a youth of excellent beauty, in his sisters Phillip abuses his wiu^s
brother.
name, to come to him to Macedon, upon whose arriual, by persuasion, partly
with the hope of the kingdom of Epire, he won to consent to him in abominable
Sodomy, and so satisfied his inhuman disposition of him, til he came to the age
of twenty years, when according to his promise, he deposed Arimba from his
kingly seat; and possessed Alexander therein. Thus dealt he not like a kinsman
with neither: the one he removed contrary to conscience, the other he made a
Harlot, before he made him King.

The end of the eigth Book.
THE NINTH BOOK
THE ARGUMENT.
PHillip besieges Constantinople, and in that time wins many Cities of
Chersonesus. He bickereth with the Triballes, but returns unfortunately. He
makes wars upon the Athenians. He gets the whole Soueraigntye

PHillip having with fortunate success led his forces thus far into Greece,
debated with himself though not before he pretended, yet before he
undertook any further enterprise, whether the riches and spoil of those
Greece, according to his determination, as he had already done of part: for the
furtherance of this counsel, he thought it would be a profitable advantage
Philip besieges Constantinople.
for him, if he could subdue and make Byzantium, as a Port-refuge for his fleet
by sea, and a billeting place, or safe garrison, for his men by land: near
which Cittye having drawn his forces, he summoned them concerning this his
principallity and their subjection; but they bold of spirit and cofident in
their own strength, made slight of his defiance and hostile forces, shutting
their

This City was first built by Pausanias king of Sparta, and by him possessed
the continuance of seven years. Afterward the Lacedaemonians and Athenians
surfeiting with their own prosperity, grew into private faction, from thence
to public and domesticke war: so that as victory inclined itself to either
part, sometime it belonged to the one, and sometime to the other, which
uncertain possession, having too often fed on the miseries which by such
mutations cities endure, made it now stand stiffly in the defense of her own
liberty, and the rather, for that during this siedge wherewith Phillip had
begirte them, neither the Lacedaemonians, or Athenians, rescued it as their own.

Phillip having here spent the most of his treasure, in the hope he had to
make this city his dignity, and finding by the delay of this war, the
citizens grew rather hardy then deliberate, purposed by roauing on the sea,
to enforce treasure, wherewith to keep his siedge settled, without which his
Chersonesus. At this time he sent for his son Alexander, of the age of
eighteen years, to the intent he might see him traded in the discipline of
war under him, holding it a Maxim, that

He made an inrode also into Scithia, to fetch booty and spoil from thence,
entending after the custom of Merchants, to bear out the charge of one Phillp
invadeth the Tar tarians.
war with the gain of another. At the same instant, was Matthey King of the
Scithians, who being ouercharged with the wars of the Istrians, sent the
Apollonians in his behalf, to solicit the aid of Phillip, promisinge for
such succor and assistance, to adopt him king of Scithia.

Phillip ambitious after rule, took little advice of this request, but
presently according to the contents of this treaty, leauied his forces as he
Matthey. But the K. of the Istrianes deceasing, while these affairs were in
furtherance, his death delivered the Scithians, both from occasion ofbattel,
and from cause of help. Matthey being now like fowls, that fear the snares
no longer then they are fettered, upon the arrival of the Macedons,
reguardlesse of Phillips favor, commanded them home again, willing them to
deliver this message to their master; that he neither requested him for
succor, nor yet gave the Apollonians in commission to adopt him: That the
Scithians had no need of rescue from the Macedones, and pronounced themselves
better men then The ingratitude of the Scythian K
the Macedones: and for himself to desire a foreign help to succeed him, it

This message thus delivered to Phillip, he forthwith sent Ambassadors to king
Matthey, requiring him ofhis help toward the charge ofhis siedge, least he
should be constrained by poverty to break up his camp: to which request
Phillip urged he should of reason so much the vnwillinger condescend, in that
he did not allow the so^ldiors he sent in his aid, so much as Conduct money to
supply their necessities by the way, nor gratified them wi^h any reward for
their labors. M^tthey excusing himself by the excessive cold and barrenness
of his Country, which was searseable to yield the Scithians The ingrati^^de of
the ^^^thian K.
food, much less to enrich them with possessions. Again, he protested he had
not riches wherewithal to satisfy ^o great a King, and therefore thought it a
greater dishonor to reward him with too little, then to recompense him with
nothing: for my people (quoth Matthey) are esteemed for their coa^^age of mind,
and hardiness of body, and not for their treasure or substance.

Phillip perceiving himself thus scornd, dislodged his siedge from before
Bizantium immediately, and bent his whole power against the Scythians. All this
his pretense might not be discovered unto them, but keept them careless (^ay
even suspectlesse) of his intent, he sent Amb^ssadors beforehand, to declare
unto King Matthey, that while he basied himself at the siedge of Bizantium, he
^owed to consecrate an Image unto H^^cules, the which he was coming to effect
in the river of D^nubia, desiring to have peaceable passage and f^rtherance in
this his sacred and religions Vow made to that God: protesting, he came not
otherwise then as a royal friend, both unto their King, and the Scythians his
Subjects. But M^tthey sore warned by all his former Inconstancies toward
others, and do^bting indeed as much as Phillip, that if he stood so much upon
the performance of his Vow to erect an Image, it should not be by him nor any
of his Subjects res^^ted, always pro^yded he would send the same, promising
also it should not only be set up, but should always so remain and continue:
but to su^^er any Army to come within his borders, or martch through his
country, he utterly denied urging farther, that if Phillip (notwithstanding
this contradict should offer to place this Image, himself would see it
defaced, and the brass thereof converted into Spear and Arrow-heads.

The m^nds of both these Kings being by this occasion encouraged, they
Scythians were of far greater number than the M^cedons, yet by the policy and
experience of philip to order such warlike actions, they were o^ercome: twenty
thousand women and children were taken prisoners, also a great booty of
cartell, but as for gold and sil^er none; in which plainly appeared the
Scythians pouertye. Twenty thousand large Mares were brought home to M^^^don,
and only kept for breed. But as Philip with all his pillage was returning,
the Tr^^^lles having gathered a head met him, and denied him pass^ge through
their country, The T^^bals (...) on (...) (...) ca^^e home.
except they might have part with him in those his spoils.

Thi^ parl^ contin^ed not long in words, but they fell to blowcs; in which
Philip was sore wounded in the thigh, his ho^sse slain under him, and he
himself les^ for dead: so the M^^^dons being discomsited, the s^oyle which
they had but la^ely ra^isht from the Sc^thians, was now a relief to the
^ri^als. At length Phillip being recovered of his wound, made war upon the
At^^^ians, with whom so long time till then, he held a dissembled friendship.
The Thebanes mistrusting if the Athenians were overcome, the brunt of the war
(like as when ones neighbors house is on fire) fell upon them, took part with
the Athenians, so that by these means there was a legue contracted between
these two Cities, which before were at so merciless a contention.

This conjunction knit between them, they sent ambassadors to all the provinces
of Greece, importuning their speedy asistance; inferring, so common an enemy as
Phillip ought to be removed by the general forces of all the Country, and
withal, making it perspicuous by demonstration, that if he had fortunat issue
in this, his conclusion would be the utter subversion of al Greece. Some moved
with these reasons, joined themselves to the Athenians, Phillip. The day came
wherein these two Armies assailed each other, though the multitude of the
Athenians exceeded the Macedons, yet sell it out to them as The Athenians
vanquished.
before to the Scithians, and Philip having this days honor, finished it with
the slaughter of them all; yet died they not unmindful of their ancient
glory: for look in what place every man had charge under his captain to be
kept, that place he as worthily made good again, that when thorough the
danger of his wounds he was forced to yield, he covered that place he had
in charge with his liuelesse carcass being dead. With this day ended the
renown of the Empire, and the ancient liberties of Greece.

The joy of this victory was by Phillip politickly dissembled: This day he made
no sacrifice as he was accustomed, he was not pleasant in company, he had no
enterludes at his feasts, ware no Crown, nor anointed himself with sweet
ointments: but so much as lay in men to council, he so ordered The notable
hypocrisy of Philip.
this victory, that no judgment could discern by his outward appearance he
rejoiced to be a conqueror. Moreover he would not suffer himself to be called
the king, but the captain of Greece, finally he bare so even a hand between
his own private gladness and the public sorrow of his enemies, that neither
could his own friends report he rejoiced, nor his enemies conjecture he was
proud of their overthrow.

For as touching the Athenians, who by testimony he had tried to be the most
dangerous of his enemies, the prisoners of them he discharged without ransom,
and delivered the bodies of them that were slain to be buried: Philips
mildness toward th Athenians.
and of his own disposition, publicly exhorted them, to convey home their
bones, and bestow them in the sepulchers of their ancestors. Besides, he sent
his son Alexander, with his friend Antipater, to conclude a final peace and
perpetual friendship between them. But concerning the Thebanes, he did not
only put their prisoners to ransom, but made them pay tribute for the
interring of their dead. The Princes of their city, some he beheaded, others
banished, and all their goods were surprised.

Such as had been councellers and were exiled out of their native country,
their banishment he repealed, and made of them three hundred Judges and rulers
of the Commonweal, giving unto them full commission to call before them, all
the guilty procurers of their wrongful banishment, and proceed His rigor to
the Thebans
against them. By this Decree, those that were lately great, were now araignd
of this trespass against public government, who constantly replied and all
confessed themselves to be authors thereof: affirming, it was more prosperous
with the Commonwealth, when that their Judges were condemned, then when they
were restored: it was out of doubt a marvelous courage, for prisoners to give
sentence on them whom they knew sat to decide betwixt their life and death: as
who would say, they disdained to be acquit at their enemies hands: and for as
much as they could not revenge themselves in work, they would use their liberty
in words.

Phillip having settled the estate of Greece in an indifferent stay, summoned a
Parliament at Corinth, for reformation of such politic businesses as were yet
vnestablished, where he enacted a Statute of peace for all Greece, according
Philip summon^th a par lyament.
as he had experience of the deseruings of every City, electing out of them
all, one Counsel, and (as it were) one Senate. The Lacedaemonians only
contemned both the king and his law, accounting that peace a bondage, which
was not agreeable to the Cities themselves, and their ancient liberties, but
were granted at the pleasure of a conqueror.

At this counsel, was appointed unto every City, what soldiers they should
always (as command was ministered) furnish for his wars, either to assist
him being invaded by foreign power, or to protect him in what war soever he
pretended against other. Upon this, great preparation was made from all parts,
for Phillip had made it apparent to this counsel, that so soon Persia; The
sum of al his succors mustred together, were two hundred thousand footmen,
and fifteen hundred horsemen, besides which number, was also his host of
Macedons, and other barbarous Nations bordering thereabouts whom he had subdued.

In the beginning of the spring, he sent over before into Asia, (which then
belonged to the Persians) three of his Captains Permenio, Amyntas, and Attalus
(whose sister he had lately taken in marriage) for he had now divorced
himself from Olimpias, the mother of Alexander, upon suspicion of adultery,
which was raised against her. In this season that his army was assembling
Philip diuorceth himself from Olympias.
out of Greece, he solemnized a marriage, between his daughter Cleopatra, and
Alexander whom he had made king of Epyre: which day was honored with the
greatest royalty of triumphs and feasting, according to the estate of two so
great Kings: there wanted neither music to entice the ear, nor diversity He
marries his daughter to the king of Epyte.
of shows, to satisfy the eye, that Art could devise to hear and see: all
which as Phillip was going forth without his Guarde, only between the two
Alexanders, his son, and son in law, and himself in the midst, a young
Gentleman of Noble descent in Macedon, stepped to him in a straight place which
he intended to pass, and slew him, turning that day into present He is slain.
heaviness, which was consecrated and only appointed to mirth and pleasure.

This Pansanias in the prime and delight of his youth, was enforced to com mit
detestable incest, by the vyolence of Attulus, who unsatisfied with that
inhumanity his shameless disposition executed upon him, himself brought him
unto a banquet, where making him drunk, compelled him like a strumpet to
sustain the beastliness not only of his own desire, but of all the other
guests present: so that he was not only a iesting-stocke unto al his
companions, but also a prostrate Calamite even to his inferiors. I he
Gentleman no way digesting this reproach, but rather ingendring and nourishing
revenge in his secret thoughts, casting cuery way to effect some action fitting
so foul disgrace, he oftentimes made complaint of his wrong, and became an
earnest suter to the King for Justice; at whose hand he was either put off with
delays, or was answered with a wanton scoff in stead of help The cause of
Phillips death.
and redress: thus finding his injury no way to be satisfied, and knowing his
adversary (in stead of receiving punishment from the king for his offense) to
be advanced to a captainship, he grew resolute to turn his wrath upon Phillip
himself, accounting it happiness, since he could not be revenged upon so
monstrous an enemy, to revenge himself upon a wrongful judge. It was thought
that this Pansanias was encouraged to this deed by Olympias the mother of
alexander, and that Alexander himself was alsopriuy to his fathers murder,
nor is it unlike that Olympias took her diuorcement and the the preferment of
Cleopatra, as grievous as Pansanias did the abuse of attulus; and that
Alexander feared his brother begoten on his stepmother, as an enemy to his
succession after his father, for that his father had refused the the love of
Olimpias, for the unjust daliance of another: for Alexander before this time,
some such like arguments as these being in question at table, Occasions of
great ^^^lea^ure between Philllp and his son Alexander.
first fell in deffiance with Attalus, whom he perceived his father to defend,
he then spared not to be as liberal in speech to him, insomu^h that his father
rose, and with his sword drawn pursued him so violently, that such as were
present, (being friends to both could hardly temper to a more cooler judgment,
then rasnnesse of his will from killing him.

Upon which occasion Alexander with his Mother, sled unto his Vnckell King
Epire, and from thence to the King of the Illirians, in which, though several
times persuaded, he would hardly be reconcild to his father, no: tho he was
sent for, he would scarce embrace any counsel of his friends, that tended to
advise him to return, Olimpias at this time was also exasperating her Epire, to
raise war against Phillip, which suit, no question she had effected, had not
Phillip prevented it with the marriage of his daughter; and making him his
son in law these occurrentes therefore are thought to have annimated
Pansanias forward to this execution, who both hated attalus for his immodest
fact, and the king for neglecting his complaint without redress: this is
certain, Olimpias had made posthorsses ready to convey him thence, after he
had effected his pretense, yet she her self when she heard certainly that the
king was murdered, came to his funeral rites the same night, under a great
pretense of duty, and there set a Crown of gold upon Pansanias, as he was
hanging upon the gallows, The behavior o^ O^^^pias at the death of king
Phillip.


Shortly after this, she took down the body of Pansanias, burnt it upon her
husbands a^hes, built him a monument for everlasting memory, in the same
place, and possessed such a superstitious toy in the heads of the people, that
she made them yearly sanctify a day and keep it holy in remembrance of him
This done, killing Cleopatras daughter even in the arms of her mother, for
whose sake Phillip had deuorced himself from her, she compelled her even in
her sight to hang her self, and in beholding her while she was strangled
enjoyed the reuengement, to which she made haste by the murder of her husband.
The cruelty of a Woman.


Lastly, she consecrated the sword, wherewith the king her husband was slain,
unto Apollo by the name of Mytralis, for that was Olimpias name, during the
consistance of her infancy, all which she perpetrated so openly as who should
say, we fear not least that which we do should be allowed.

Phillip deceased being of the age of seven and forty years, when he had
Larissa a dancing damsel, and a son named Artdeos who reigned after Alexander,
he had many other sons propagated from several women; of whom, some died of
their natural death, some of the sword: he was a king, more desirous of battle
then of banqueting, whose The description of king Philip.
riches chiefly consisted in furniture for war: he was more cunning in
getting riches; then in keeping them: and for all his tyranies, policies,
conquests, taxations, and the enforced treasure which he daily had, yet was he
always needy. Mercy and falsshod he loved alike, he thought it no shame to
purchase his desire by what means soever he was possessed of it, where he
favored he would make as though he were displeased. Subtle and captious was he
to talk unto, promising more then he would p^rforme. In devising serious
matters,

After him succeeded Alexander, thriuing beyond his father, both in virtues and
in vices. First, for the manner of their conquests, it had no affinitye, for
Alexander atchiued his battles by force, Phillip by policy; he reioysed A
comparion between Philip and Alexander.
to beguile his enemies, this king to vanquish them in open field; the other
was more prudent in counsel, but this was of a more Princely and invincible
stomach. The father would oftentimes dissemble his anger, and overcome it, but
this once enraged, there was nothing but revenge in his thoughts, and never
alaied without action; which pursued either without mercy or Justice. But both
of them were by disposition, inclind to imoderat and excess drinking of wine,
but in their drunkenness their purposes had several effects, by their several
disposition. The father, would ordinarily rise from his meat, and encounter
his enemy even to handy blows, and unadvisedly cast himself into Alexander,
outraged not against his enemies, but his especial friends: So that where
Phillip came oftentimes from battle wounded, by his delperate hardiness, he
rose from the table, a murderer of his Captains. The father loved to have his
friends reign and be near him, the son to be a tyrant, even unto his own.
The f^ther desired to be beloved, the son to be feared; for learning, it was
alike to both of them. The father a man better tutred in the principles of
policy, the son, best to be trusted. Phillip more modest in his conference, but
Alexander in his actions. The son of a more honorable nature, ready to show
mercy to them he overcame, but the fathers cruelty was not laid open to his
own confederates. The father was given to thriuing the son to riot. By which
means, the father to his glory, laid the foundation of the Monarky of the
whole world, and the son to his higher renown finished the whole work.

THE TENTH BOOK
THE ARGUMENT.
THe natural affection of Artaxerxes Mnemon toward his son Darius. His
treason against his father. The punishment of Darius and his fifty brothers.
The cruelty of Occhus. The prowess of Codoman, for the which he is created

ARtaxerxes King of Persia had a hundred and fifteen sons by his wives and
concubines, where of three only This same is he that is mentioned before in the
five and six book^s.
were begotten in lawful wedloc^e, Darius, Artarates and Occhus. Of these 3.
contrary to the Persians use, which are not accustomed to make chaung of their
K. unless he decease, the father drawn by entire love to his son, so
persuaded with the counsel and commons, Darius in his seat and dignity,
accounting it honor to himself, that he saw possessed in his son: making the
remembrance of being a father to him, his only felicity, and in his life time
he beheld the lively representation of his own royal estate presented in his
issue: no sooner had this Artaxerxes expressed this loving affection, and
fatherly example toward his only son, But Darius forgetting the name of a
father, the duty of a son, all the laws of nature, whereby men are coniunct
in obedience to their parents being part of themselves, as a chain
vnd^ssoluble, began to practice the death of him whom he ought most (as being
the monument whereby he might remember himself) to have studied to preserve
alive.

Wretched and detestable had this treason been, had it been contrived alone,
but more abhorred was it, in that he drew fifty of his brothers to consent
(...).
with him in the acts: and it is monst^ous to remember so heinous a mu^ther, so
Paricidiall, should not only be consented unto, but concealed in such a
multitude of posterity. That of fifty sons, not one should have that remorce

The cause of this pretended murder, was now more wicked then the murder it
self, for after Cyrus was slain in that war he ad^^nst against his brother,
Darius seeks to (...) (...) fath^^ (...).
(as is before mentioned,) king Artaxerxes took his concubi^e Aspasia, Darius
now being pleased with the kingdom his father resignd to him, was also pleased
with his fathers wife, and required him to part with her to him, as he already
had dispossessed him of his Empire. The father so entangled with the love he bare
to him, at first granted him his consent, but after stri^ken with remembrance
how vild that request was in a son to ask, and in a father to grant; he was
moved to repentance, yet that he might modestly deny the thing he had rashly
promised, he made her chief priest to his son, whereby she was bound by the
religious law of their Nation, to save her self chaste from all men during her
life. Darius being with this just deceit of his provoked to anger, unsatisfied
with the uncivil reproof he gave him, immediately Artaxerxes conceiving an
inward grief at this untimely fall of his generation, in that sorrow of his,
fell sick and died, a far^e happier king, then a father.

The inheritance of this kingdom was then delivered over to Ochus, who The
king^^me (...) to (...).
nor sex whatsoever, nor pitiful neither to age, nor youth.

Thus having cleansed this Jealousy from his kingdom, he made war upon the
Armenians, in which one Codoman having the favor and affection of his
Country, undertook the combat against one of Ochus Captains, who had grant
of Ochus to challenge any of the Armenians in s^^gle A Combat.
fight, and thereby to determine the defference twixt the Armenians and him.
This Codoman, in this noble enterprise slew his enemy, whereby he both won the
victory, and rescued the honor of his Country, which lay in hazard to be
lost: for which atchieument, Codoman was made lieutnant over th Armenians, and
in short time the life of Ochus expiring, in remembrance of his pro^^ss^, the
people created him their King. And to the intent that nothing should be wanting
in him, that appertained to the seat of so great a Monarch, they called Codomon
made King.
him by the name of Darius; who afterward, with great industry and Nobleness
of spirit, held long war against great Alexander, sometime honor inclining to
the one, and sometime to the other. At last, being vanquished by Alexander, and
slain by his own kinsman, he ended his life, together with the Empire of
Persia.

The end of the tenth Book.
The Eleventh book of Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
MAcedon in an uproar after the death of Phillip, all which Alexander brings
into a settled quietness. Alexander puts many of his kinsfolks to death. He
suppresseth many rebellions. He goes on in the Wars that his father set on
foot against the Persians. He pardons the rebellion of the Athenians, razeth
Thehes to the ground, enters Asia, overcomes Darius, and over throws many
of his Lieutenants. He takes his journey to the City of Gordis, and there he
vntieth the knot of the waine. A History by way of digression to the affairs
of

IN the Army of Phillip, as there were men of diverse qualities and conditions,
So after the time that their King had received his deaths-wound, The estate of
Macedon after the death of K. Phillip.
the minds of the Macedonians were diversely moved, and distracted. For some
that were enthralled, and restrained of their liberties, were revived with the
comfortable hope of their accustomed freedom. Others there were even ouertoyled
with the troublesome weariness and woes of warrefare and far from their
native Country, rejoice to think that those affairs should be dissolved, and
they dismissed. Many sorry to behold the Tapers that were lighted at the
daughters marriage, to stand upon the hearse of the deceased father. His
friends also were not a little amazed, to seethe sudden change and alteration
of things, considering how Asia was but lately challenged, Europe scarcely yet
conquered, and that the Illyrians, Thracians, Dardanians, and other barbarous
Nations, were as unconstant of mind, as unfaithful of promise. All which
people (if at one time they should rebel) it were not possible any way to
repel their commotions. But unto these mischieses the coming of Alexander was
a present remedy. For in an Oration The wise behamour of Alexander.
delivered unto the people, he did not only free their hearts from fear, but
confirmed in their hopes, a conceit of all happy success. He was then twenty
years old, in which age, his modesty was such, as that it promised much more
then was expected.

He gave the Macedons a clear discharge of all things, save only of the
Wars, by which he purchased to himself so much favor, and ingraffed so good
liking in all men's opinions, that they said, They had changed the body of the
King, but not his virtues. His first and chiefest reguard was, to perform the
funeral rightes of his father, with such solemnity as became the greatness of
his estate. In the obsequies whereof (before all other things) The murder^^s of
King Phillip punished.
accessory to his death. Only he pardoned Alexander of Lincest his brother, for
that he was the first that saluted him by the name of King. But he caused his
half brother Daranus to be putto death as an underminer of his estate.

In the beginning of his reign, he subdued many Countries that rebelled, and
suppressed diverse insurrections, even in their beginning. By which being
greatly encouraged, he travailed into Greece, where after the example of his
father, he summoned the cities to appear before him at Corinth, and was
substituted Captain general of the forces, and thereupon he immediately
prosecuted the wars against the Persyans, which were begun by his Alexander
prosecuteth the wars of his father.
Athenians, Lacedaemonians and Thebans, were revolted from him to the Persyans,
and that Demosthenes the Orator, (whom they had corrupted with gold) was
author of that revolt: and avouched before the people, that the King of Macedon
with all his host were slain by the Triballes, bringing his tales-man in open
audience, who (to make the matter good) affirmed that he himself was wounded
with the King in the same battle. Upon which report, the minds almost of all
the Cities were changed and the garrisons of the Macedones besieged: to
prevent which motions, Alexander entered He overcomes the commotions in Greece.
into Greece, with his army so well appointed, and in such good order of
battle, that they scarce believed their own eyes, when they saw him, because
they had not heard, or received former notice of his coming. In his way
thither, h^ exhorted the Thessalians to keep their aleagiance, urging still the
benefits that his father had extended toward them, and putting them in mind
of the kindered and alliance that was betwixt him and them, by his mothers
side, which came of the stock of Aeacus. The Thessalians entertained those
speeches with much joy and admiration, and established him in the place that his
father formerly possessed, which was chief Duke of their Country, yielding
him all the tributes, and revenues, thereunto due, and accustomed. But the
Athenians as they were the first that revolted, so were the first that
repented: wondering at the disdain of their enemy and extolling the childhood
of Alexander (whom before they held in scorn) above the prowess of their
aucient captain. Therefore they dispatched Aambassadors with entreaty of peace,
and pardon: Whom Alexander hearing, (after many rebukes given them for their
insolency) made joyful in the fruition of their request.

From thence he turned his power toward Thebes intending to have showed the
like mercy to them, if he had found the like repentance in them. But the
Thebanes in stead of submission and entreaty went to it with force of arms. So
soon therefore as they were vanquished they suffered the grievous punishment
of miserable thrauldome and captivity.

When the matter came to be debated in counsel as concerning the destruction
of the City, the Phocenses, Platecenses, Thespians and Orchomenians,
(Alexanders confederats and pertakers at his victory) found fault with the The
h^tred that fell between the Thebans and Gree^an^.
cruelty of the Thebanes in destroying their Cities, and with the good will
Persians, not at that time only, but of old to the open prejudice of the
Grecyan liberty. That their dealings had purchased a general hatred of the
people, this might be an evident proof that they had all bound themselves with
an oath to raze Thebes, as soon as they had overcome the Persians. And that
they might be the more hated, not only for their present disloialty, but for
their former impudency, they pronounced that they had cloied all stages with
plays made of their wicked and detested proceedings.

Then Cleadas one of the prisoners having free liberty of speech, affirmed The
conncel of Eleadastor to save the City.
that the Thebanes had revolted from the Kings heirs, and not from the king

For a pryuate superstitious instance to entreat the king withal, he alleged
that Hercules (from whom the house of the Acacydes do fetch their petigree) was
borne among them, and that his father Phillip had passed his childhood at
Thebes: beseeching him to spare that city, which honored some of his
ancestors that were borne their as Gods and had seen other of them that were
there brought up raised to the possession of royal and kingly Diadems. But
wrath prevailed before entreaty. The city therefore was razed, the Lands
divided amongst the Conquerors, and the prisoners saved under a Garland, the
price whereof was set, not to the advantage of the buyers, but according to the
malice of the enemies.

The Athenians thought it a miserable sight, and therefore opened their Gates
for the refuge of such as had escaped by slight, contrary to the Kings
commandment. At which deed Alexander took such displeasure, that when their
Ambassadors came again to sue for peace, he remitted their offense, upon
condition that they should yield into his hands their Captains Alexander
d^maunde^^, the first beg^^^er of these br^^les.
and Orators, upon whose trust they did so often fall into rebellion. The
Athenians Darius, did not a little increafe the strength of the Persians.

At his setting forth to the wars in Persia, he put to death al his mother in
laws kinsmen, whom Phillip had raised to high promotions: and made rulers of
countries, neither spared he such of his own kindred, as seemd meet His
mother in laws (...) put to death.
to undertake rule or government, least (while he was making war a far off)
occasion of rebellion should remain in Macedon. Such kings also (of any Asia,
in is courage he grew wonderfully inflamed, and made twelve altars to the gods,
as a vow for prosperous success in his wars.

The inheritance he had in Macedon, and Europe, he divided among his friends,
saying that Asia was enough for himself. Before any sail departed Alexander
deuideth his inheritance in Macedon among his friends
from the shore, he slew sacrifices, making his prayer for victory by battle,
as by which he was best to be the revenger of Greece, that so often times
before had been assailed of the Persians, whose Monarchy had continued long
Persians, and the riches of the whole East, as if it had been their own
already, nothing dreading the dangers of the War, but doubting their
courages, by an undoubted expectation of purchase, and victory. As Soon as they
were come to land, Alexander first of all threw a dart, as it were in the face
of his enemies, and in his armor lept out of his ship, and so killed his
sacrifices, Troy.

Then sought he for his enemy, straightly charging his soldiers to make no
wast in the country of Asia, saying it was but reason, to spare that, which
they intended should be their own, and to make no havoc of those things,
which they purposely came to possess. In his Army were thirty two thousand
footmen, four thousand and five hundred horsemen, and one hundredth,
fourscore, and two ships. And it is to be doubted, whether it might be The
number of Ale^and. b^^st.
more wondered, that with a handful of men he conquered the whole world, or that
he durst give the enterprise to attempt it: Considering that to so dangerous a
warfarre he made not choice of lusty young men, and such as were in the prime
of youth, but old worn Soldiers, and such, whereof many by reason of their
years, were exempted from the wars, who had served under his father, and his
uncles; So that it might well have been thought, that he Daryus king of Persya
trusting in his own strength, refused to do any thing by policy, assirming
that it stood not with his honor to steal the conquest, or The (...) of
Darius.
to keep his enemy from the borders of his Kingdom, but rather to receive him
into the bowls of his realm: and that it should add more honor to his name
to expel him by force, then not to permit his entrance. The first encounter
Adrast. In the host of the Persians were sieve hundred thousand fighting men,
whereof many being slaughtered The number of the Persyans.
the suruiuing residue turned their backs and fled, being vanquished as much
by the policy of Alexander, as by the puissaunce of the Macedons. Of
Alexanders host, were slain nine footmen, and an hundredth and twenty
horsemen, Whom the king (the more to encourage the remainer of his soldiers)
caused to be sumptuously buried and their Images to be set on their Toombes,
and gave great privileges to their kinsfolk.

In this victory the greater part of Asia fell unto him. He fought many battles
Darius, whom he (not so much by force by the terror of his name) did afterward
vanquish, and subdue. In the mean time Alexander (by the confession of a
prisoner) received information that Alexander of Lincest, the son of
antipater, whom he had left his vicegerent in Macedon, went about to work
treason against him. Yet distrusting that if he should put him to death, there
would rise some commotion in Macedon, he committed him to safekeeping. This
done, he marched toward the city of Gordis, the which is situate between the
greater and the lesser Phrigia. The desire that Alexander had to get this city
in his possession, was not so much for the riches, Of the City of Gordis and
Gordi^^ Waine.
or the worth of it, as because he heard say, that in that city in the temple
of Jupiter, was the yoke of Gordius waine, the knot whereof whosoever could
undo, the ancient Oracles had prophesied, should be king of all Asia. The
occasion, and original hereof was this. As one Gordias was going to plough in
the country, with oxen that he had hired, birds of all sorts began to fly
about him. And as he went to ask counsel of the Southsaiers of the city, by
the way he met with a maid of excellent beauty, and craving her advice to
what Southsayer he were best to go, she answered (after the relation of the
matter) that by the insight she had her self into the same science, by the
instruction of her father and mother, it signified he should be a king, and
thereupon offered her self to be his partaker both of wedlock, and of the
kingdom A maid shev^eth Go^dias the meaning of the Bi^des
predestinate unto him.

He thought himself happy to have such afaire offer at the first entry of his
kingdom. After the marriage solemnized, the Phrygyans amongst themselves fell
at discord and discention. And when they asked counsel of the Oracle how the
same might be appeased, answer was made that it could not be ended without the
help of a king. Demanding again, of the person of Jupiter, and take him for
their king. The first man they met, was this Gordias, whom they presently
saluted by the name of King. The chariot wherein he rode, when the kingdom was
imposed upon him, he placed in the Temple of Jupiter, and consecrated it for an
offering, as a thing accustomed for Kings to do at their Coronation.

After the reign of Gordias, his son Mydas, (who was trained up by Orpheus
in many superstitious Ceremonies) filled all the realm with sects of Midas
traind up under Orpheus.
religion; by which, more then by his cheualry his life was safe and secure
from

Alexander having taken the town, and coming into the Temple of Jupiter,
immediately inquired for the yoke of the waine: the which being brought before
him, and he (upon sight thereof) finding himself unable to come by the ends of
the thonges that were hidden with the wreathes, wrested the Oracle to the
uttermost, and cut them asunder with his sword, and so the wreathes being
losed, he found the ends of the knots within the braides.

As this was doing, tydinges were brought him, that Darius approached with an
huge army of Men, upon which fearing to be encompassed within the straights, he
made all possible speed to pass the mountain Taurus, in which have he ran
five hundredth furlonges.

When he came to Tarsus, he was much delighted with the pleasantness of the
river Cidnus, which runs through the midst of the City, and as he
Alexander in great danger by a surfeit.
was full of dust and sweat, he threw himself naked into the cold water, which
forthwith begat such a stiffness through al his sinews, that he lost his
speech, and was in such danger of death, that he seemed past hope of recovery.
Only there was one of his Physicians, named Phillip, which warranted him his
life. And yet the same Physician was had in mistrust, by reason of the letters
sent the day before out of Cappadocia from Permenio. Who knowing nothing of
Alexanders mischance, wrote unto him to take heed of Phillip his Physician,
Darius for a great sum of money. Yet Alexander thought it his better safety
to commit himself into the hands of the physician, then to abide the danger of
his disease, whereof there was little hope but death. Therefore he took the
drink that the Physician had made him, and delivered him the letter: And as he
was drinking, he steadfastly beheld his face, to observe and mark what
countenance he would carry at the reading thereof.

But he was nothing abashed thereat, which Alexander was very glad of, and the
fourth day after recovered his health. Darius therefore with three hundred
thousand footmen, and an hundredth thousand horsemen proceeded unto battle.
Which huge multitude of enemies when Alexander beheld, he was much The second
encounter of alexander and Darius
moved, in respect of the small number of his men; yet when he called again to
mind what great enterprises he had achieved, and how mighty Countries he had
conquered with that small quantity, he van quished all fear with hope (the
minds best comforter) and thought it dangerous to delay the battle, least
his men should be discouraged. Therefore he rode about his Army, and with
sundry orations did anymate the hearts of his company.

The Illirians and Thracians he encouraged with promise of great riches, and
substance. The Greeks he set on fire with remembrance of their former wars,
and their continual hatred against the Persians. The Macedons he put in mind
of Europe already conquered, and of Asia now conquered: persuading them that in
the world there were not men like them for strength and mag naminitye, and that
this battle would make an end of their troubles, and immortally eternize their
glory. In speaking these words, he commanded his batels to stand still
again, that by pausing, they might acquaint their eyes with the huge number of
their enemies.

Darius also was not remiss in ordering of his battles, for whereas it
belonged Persians, and of the perpetual possession of the Empire given them by
the the Gods.

This done, with great courage both the armies buckled together. And in that
battle both kings were wounded, and the victory hung in doubtful suspense,
till Darius, forsook the field. Then followed the slaughter of the Persians, of
whom were slain threescore thousand footmen, ten thousand horsemen, The
slaughter of the per syans.
and forty thousand were taken prisoners. Of the Macedons, were put to sword,
an hundredth and thirty footmen, and an hundredth and fifty horsemen. Persians
was found much gold and other riches. Amongst others, were taken prisoners
Darius Mother, his wife, and two of his daughters. Whom when Alexander came to
visit and comfort, they made a great skreeking, upon sight of the harnisht
men, and embraced one another, as if there had been no other way with them,
but present death. They fell prostrate at Alexanders seete, not entreating
pardon for their lives, but beseeching respit for a time to celebrate the
funerals of Darius.

Alexander seeing the tender affection of the women was moved with pity, and
told them that Darius was yet living, wishing them to be of good cheer The
^lemen^y of alexander
for no violence should be don; but esteemed as queens, and well entreated. He
Daryus should trust in him for their aduaunsment in marriage, both for their
fathers honor and reputation. After this, he beheld the riches, Jewels, and
apparel of Darius, which when he saw, he was struck with admiration and
wonder. Then began he to make riotous banquets, sumtuous feasts, and to fall in
love with Barsiue (for her beauty and favor) who was one of prisoners, and of
whom afterward he begat a Son, and named him Hercules; nevertheless
remembering that Darius was yet alive, he sent Parmenio to invade the Persian
^leete, and appointed other of his friends to receive the Cities of Asia.
Which immediately upon the report of Alexanders victory yielded to the
conqueror, so did the Lieuetenants also that Darius had placed over them,
bringing with them a great masle of money and treasure. Then set he forwards
into Siria, where many Kings met him with their crowns on their heads to do
him royal entertain. Of whom (according to the measure of their merit) some
he had received into favor, some again he deposed and substituted others to
reign in their steades. Amongst all other Abdolminus (whom Alexander made king
of Sydon is worthy A (...) made (...) of Sydon.
to be remembered. For of a me^cinary poor Gardener, that before lead his life
miserablye, and was went for wages to cast pondes, and watercourses, Alexander
made him a king, setting aside the respect of the Nobility, least they for
their birth, and lynage might have seemed to challenge it of duty, and not to
accept it, as a free guist.

The Citizens of Tire sent their Amb^ssadors to Alexander with a weighty
Crown of massy gold, for joy of his good success: who thankfully accepting
their present, replied that his intent was, ^re long to visit Tire, and to
perform Alexander (...) (...)
his vows to Hercules. But when the Ambassadors understood his purpose, they
replied again that he might do that better in old Tire, and in the old
Tyrians, full of courage and resolution, trusting also to the people of
Ca^thage, for welcome entertained him with wars. For they were not a little
encouraged by the example of Dido who builded Carthage, and conquered the third
part of the world, thinking it no small disgrace to them, if their women
should be more commended for their magnaminity in conquering: then they had in
defending their liberty. Wherefore they sent all such to Carthage as were
thought unmeet for the wars, and brought other supply in their

And Alexander received the Rhodes, Egypt, and Cilicia, without resistance, or
stroke of war. Then took he his journey to Jupiter Hammon, to inquire
alexander go ^th to Hammo (...) Egypt.
of the chances of future accidents, and to be resolved of the condition and
quality of his own birth. For his mother Olympias had secretly delivered to
Phillip her husband that she conceived not Alexander by him but by a Serpent of
admirable bigness. And Phillip himself but a little before his death, had
openly reported that he was not his Son: whereupon (as though she had played
false with him) he put away Olimpias. Alexander therefore being desirous

As soon as he entered into the Temple, the Prelates saluted him by the name of
the son of Hammon. And he rejoicing at this adoption of the gods gave
commandment that al men in general should take him for his father. Then he
demanded whether they had inslicted punishment on such as were guilty of the
murder of his father. They made answer that his father could neither dye, nor
be killed, but as for the death of king Phillip, the dooers there of had
received sufficient and condign punishment. To his third demand they
answered, that he should tryumpth in victory, and be conqueror in all battel^:
and should be entitled the owner of the universal world, and the riches
thereof. ^o such also as attended upon him, especial charge was given to
honor Alexander as a god, and not a king. Which made him grow to such exceeding
haughtiness, and pride, that the gentleness which he had learned by the
li^terature of the Greeks, and the instructions of the Macedones, was quite

As he returned from Hammon, he caused Alexandria to be builded, and peopled it
with Macedones, ordaining it to be the head City of Egypt. Darius (...)
being escaped to Babylon dispatched his letters to Alexander, entreating that
the women (taken prisoners by him) might be ransomed and set at liberty, and to
that end he prosfered a great Sum of money. But Alexander returned answer,
that they were not to be ransomed for money, nor under the value of his whole
kingdoms possession.

Not long after came another letter from Darius to Alexander wherein he made
tender of one of his daughters in marriage, and a portion of his kingdom with
her. But Alexander sent him word again, that the things he proffered Darius
addressed himself again to the wars, and with four thousand footmen, and
ten thousand horsemen marched toward Alexander.

In his journey news was brought him of his wives decease in deliverance of a
child before her time, and that Alexander shed tears for her death, and
accompanied her co^ple to the bur^all, not for any lasciuions love but of his
(...)
own me^r c^^^^^sie, and true honorable disposition, for he never saw her but
once in all l^f^. Darius then thinking himself wholly vanquished, and (...)
(...).
him the greater part of his kingdom, even the river Euphrates, with another
of his daughters to wise: and for the rest of his prisoners thirty thousand
talents. Hereunto Alexander made answer that he expected not thanks at his
enemie^hands, for what he had done was not to slatter him withal, or to seek
Darius request, if he would acknowledge himself as next unto him, and not as
his e(...) for as the world could not be ruled if there were two suns, so could
it not be by two Sovereign kings.

Therefore advised him either to submit himself the same day, or else to
prepare himself to battle the next day, and not to beguile his hopes with the
expectation of any other victory, then what he had tried already. The next day
they brought their men into the field. But suddenly before the battle
Alexander fell a sleep, being very heavy, and surprised with the multitude of
cares, and discontentments. And when all his men were in readiness to give the
charge upon their enemies, the king only was missing. Who afterward being
very hardly awaked by Parmenio, and of all his men demanded the cause of his
so sound sleeping in a time so dangerous, seeing he was formerly accustomed
to content himself with very little sleep even when the quietness of his
affairs gave occasion of all leisure, and liberty: he made answer Darius,
which he was afraid should have been prolonged if the Persians had divided
their Army.

Before the battle each army stood in the sight of other. The Macedones
wondering at the number of their Enimyes, their goodlye personages, and their
costly armor: the Persians on the other side, amazing that so few should
overcome so many thousands as they had. The Captains bestirring themselves in
looking to their several charges. Darius encouraged his soldiers Alexander
willed the Macedones not to be abashed at the multitude of the contrary party,
at the hugeness of their bodies, nor the strangeness of their color. But to
remember that this was the third time of their fight, and that they should not
think their enemies were become better men by their often running away,
especially since they brought with them into the field so sorrowful a
remembrance of their own discomfitures, as of so much bloodshed as they went
away with, in the two former battles. And as Darius exceeded him in number of
Men, so did he surpass Darius in the greatness of strength. Therefore
exhorted his men to despise that

After this, the onset was given. The Macedones laid about them fiercely with
their weapons, as disdainning their enemy whom before they had so often
vanquished. The Persians on the contrary side had rather dye, then be
vanquished, which caused so much effusion of blood, as had not at any time been
seen in any batteel. Parius when he perceived his men put to the worse, Darius
is put to slight. The care of Darius for the safeg^^d of his soldiers.


Afterward when some gave him counsel to break the bridge over the river
Lycus, that he might stop his Enemies from pursuit, he said that his care
should not be altogether for his own safeguard, but that he would also show
himself careful for his company, and not cast so many of them into their
enemies hands: Therefore appointed, it should be a way for others to escape, as
well as it had been for himself. Alexander, he undertook still, and
enterprised such things as were most full of danger, and where he saw his
enemies thickest, and the sight sharpest, thither did his resolution carry him,
and there would he thrust himself into the greatest perils, and not leave them
to the hurt, and hazard of his Soldiers. By this battle he took away the
Empire of all Asia, the first year after he began to reign. Whose felicity
The beginning of the Empire of Macedon.
was so great that no man durst rebel against him, and the Persians themselves
after so many years continuance of their monarchy, patiently endured the yoke
of bondage.

When he had rewarded, and refreshed his soldiers, he did nothing for forty
days after, but take view of the spoil of his enemy and found locked up in
the City forty thousand talents. He also won Percipolis, the head City of
the kingdom of Persia, the which had continued famous many years together,
and stuffed with the spoils of the whole world. While these things were doing,
there came unto Alexander about eight hundredth Greeks, who besides their
punishment of captivity, were deprived of some of their limbs, and requested
him that as he had revenged Greece, so he would also revenge the cruelty of
their enemies. When he had put it to their choice either to stay there, or
return into their countries, they rather chose to take certain lands,

In the mean season to win the favor of the conqueror, Darius his own
kinsmen, in a village of the Parthians called Taken, bound him in setters, and
chains of gold: which was thought the very ordinance and disposition of the
Darius wounded to death by his own kinsmen.
Gods, that the monarchy of the Persians should take end in the land of them
that should succeed in the Empire.

Alexander also the next morrow, following upon spur, had intelligence that
Darius was conucied out by night in an horse-litter. And there upon commanded
his host to follow the chase with seven thousand of his horsemen. Darius, as
his horses were a baiting, one of his soldiers, going down to a watering
place nere adjoining, found Darius sore wounded in a Litter, but as yet alive.
Who calling the same soldier unto him, and perceiving by his speech that he
was one of his own Countrymen, he told him, that being in the case he was, it
was no small comfort unto him, that he should not utter his last words in
vain, but speak to a man that could well understand him.

He bad him then bear word unto Alexander, that he died a great debtor of his
without any desert of his own part, for he was better entreated of him, The
words o^ (...). (...) ^is death.
then of his own kindred, and alliance, and he had found him not like an
enemy, but a royal friend in his kingly courtesy toward his wife and
children. For whereas his enemy had given his wife, and children life, his own
kinssolke, upon whom he had both bestowed life and kingdoms, had now given
him the fatal stroke of death: for which he rendered such thanks unto himas it
might please the Conqueror to accept at the hands of the conquered. Only one
thing now at the point of death lay in his power to do for Alexander, in
requital and full recompense of all his good turns, which was, that he would
pray to the celestial, and infernal powers, and the Gods of Kings, to give
him the victory, and Dominion of the whole world. For his own part he desired
nothing, but that without grudging he would grant his rightes of burial
for to be solemnly celebrated.

Touching the revenge of his death, it was now no part of his care, but (for
example sake) it concerned the common case of Kings, which to neglect, as it
should be dishonorable, so it might turn to his own utter peril. Form the one
part it was a case that craved justice, on the other it touched his Alexander.
These words being vttred, he stretched forth himself, and immediately yielded
up the Ghost. Which when Alexander heard of, he came to see his body, as he
lay dead, and wept over it, to behold so worthy an estate come to so unworthy
a death. Whetfore he caused his body to be buried in that royal manner, as
became the estate, and condtion of a K. and the same to be bestowed in the
famous Toombes of

The end of the eleventh Book.
THE TWELFE BOOK
THE ARGUMENT.
ALexander burieth his soldiers sumptuously. Agis king of Lacedemon makes a
great insurrection in Greece, and is slain. Alexander king of Epire makes
Wars in Italy, and is dangerously wounded, whereof he dies. Zopyron

ALexander bestowed great cost in burying his soldiers that were slain in the
pursuit of Darius, and to the residue of his company that suruiued, he
imparted fifteen thousand tallents. The greater part of his horses were
foundred with heat, and such as remained were able to do no service. The whole
sum of the money gotten by this late victory, was one hundredth and three and
fifty thousand talents, where of Parmenio was made Treasoror: while these
things were doing, letters were brought (...) cedon.
from Antiapater out of Macedon, the tenor whereof contained the wars of Ag is
King of the Spartans in Grecce; of Alexander King of Epire, in Italy; and of
his Lieutenant Sopiron in Scithia: which at first filled his thoughts full of
sundry amazements. Nevertheless when he had well digested the natures of two
Kings, that did envy the prosperity of his fortunes, he was more glad of
the loss of them, then sorry for his army, and his Captain Zopyron.

For after Alexander had taken his journey, the most part of Greece sell to
rebellion, in hope to recover their liberty, following the example of the
Lacedemontans, who forsook the peace, and despised the orders taken both by
Phillip and Alexander. Captain and ringleader of this commotion, was Agis the
Lacedemonian king. But Antipater leuyed a power and suppressed this
insurrection, at the very first beginning, notwithstanding there were on both
parts, great slaughter and much effusion of blood. King Agis, when he saw his
men put to flight (albeit his fortunes were not so good as Alexanders,) yet The
v^lour of king Agis.
that he might not seem inferior to him in courage, sent away his guard, and
himself alone made such slaughter of his enemies, that sometimes he put whole
bands of men to flight: and at last, although the multitude oppressed him, yet he
won the glory from them all.

Moreover, Alexander king of Epyre, being sent into Italy to aid the
Tarentines against the Brutians, took that voyage upon him with as great
desire, as Alexander, the son of his sister Olympias should have had the
East, and he himself the West, intending to have no less command in Italy,
Affrike, and Sicill, then the other should have to do in Asia, and among the
Persians. Besides this, as the Oracle at Delphos had prophesied unto Alexander
the great, that his destruction should be wrought in Macedon, so the Oracle of
Jupiter of Dodones, had told this Alexander, that the city of Pandose, and the
river of Acheruse should be his fatal end.

Now as both of them were in Epyre, (not knowing they were also in Italy)
Italy, was with the Appuleyans, (...)
but when he understood the destinies of their cities, he concluded peace and
friendship with their king. For at that time the chief city of Appuleia, was
Br^nduse, which was founded by the Actolians, under the conduct of that famous
captain Diomedes, so much renowned for his valor at the battle of Troy. But
being expulsed by the Appuleyans, they asked counsel of the Oracles, who
answered, that they should for ever possess the place that they required.
Hereupon they dispatched Ambassadors to the Appuleyans, and willed them either
to surrender their City again, or to expect sudden, and sharp Wars upon
them. The Appuleyans having knowledge of the answer of the Oracle, put the
Ambassadoures to death, and buried them in the City, there to remain for ever.

So having dispatched the meaning of the Oracle, they enjoyed the city a long
time after. Which when Alexander of Epire understood of, he forbear to trouble
th Appuleyans reuerencing the destinies oflong coutinuance.

Then made he war with the Brutians, and Lucanes, and won many cities
Alexander of (...) wounded to death.
from them. He concluded a peace and league with the Metapontines, Ruti^ians,
and Romans. But the Brutians, and Lucanes having obtained help and aid of
their neighbors, siercely renewed the wars: where the king (nere unto the
city Pandose and the river Acheruse) was wounded to death, not knowing the
name of his fatal place, before he was slain. And when he snoulde die, he
perceived the danger of death lay not in his own Country, albeit for that
cause he forsook the same. The Tyrians ransomed his body at the charges of
their City, giving it honoarable burial.

While these things were doing in Italy, Lopyron also, whom Alexander the
great had leftpresident of Pontus, thinking it a point of cowardice to lie The
death of ^^^^ron ^^^^ent of Pon tus.
still, and do nothing, raised an army of thirty thousand soldiers, and made
war upon the Seythians, where being slain with all his host, he suffered due
punishment for making so rash and unjust war against a people so innocent,
and harmless. When news of these accidents were brought into Parth^^ to
Alexander, he seemed very sorry for the death of Alexander his kinsman, and
commanded that all his host should mourn for him, by the space of three days
following. After this, when all men looked to return into their countries, as
though the war had ended in the death of Darius, and all (after a sort) were
ready in their hearts to embrace their Wives, and Children: Alexander, summoned
his soldiers together, persuading them Darius death but his diadem, and all
such ought to be pursued with violence, as sorsook their due odience to the
kingdom. When he had by this oration sharpened the resolution of his Soldiers,
and quickened their minds afresh, he subdued Hyr^^^^, and the Mardes.

In the same Country Thalestris met him, otherwise named Mynothaea Queen of
the Amazones, with three hundredth thousand women, who came sinc and twenty
days journey, through the savage countries, and the midst (...)
Alexander. The sight and coming of whom, was much wondered at, both for
strangeness of their apparel, vn^^ccustomed to be worn by women, and also
for their desire to company wi^h Alexander and his followers: upon this
occasion were thirty days spent, and when she thought her selse with child she
departed.

After this Alexan. (as though he had made himself subject to their laws and
customs, whom he had vanquished) took upon him the apparel, and alexander
im bra^eth the manners and appar^^ of the Persians.
Diadem of the Kings of Persia, a thing altogether unwonted before that time
of the Kings of Macedon. And that he might counterfeit the Persians as well in
excess of apparel, as of Fare, and that it might not seem more heinous in
himself; he commanded his friends to were long robes of cloth of gold, and
purple. Moreover he spent the nights by turns amongst the kings Concubines,
which were women both of excellent birth and beauty. And least his lustful
likinges might seem to abate, or decay, he surthered them with all sorts of
great fare, and set out his feasts with all princely pastimes, and shows,
forgetting quite by such means riches are wont to be consumed, and not
obtained.

This caused much murmur to arise through all his camp, that he should so
degenerate from Phillip his father, as to disdain the name of his own
Country, and to take upon him the manners of the Persians, whom for the
vileness thereof he before had suppressed, and subdued. But that it might not be
a fault to him alone, to yield to the vices of such, as he had vanquished, he
gave liberty to his Soldiers (if any of them would be delighted with the
company of their prisoners) to take them to their wives; thinking indeed they
would have less mind homewards, when even in their tents they had a Policy
(...) a cust^^^.
(as it were) a similitude of their houses, and dwelling places; and that they
would make less account of their travel in the wars, for the delight they

Besides this, he thought Macedon should not be so much spent in sending
supplies for them that were slain, if the young Impes succeeded the old
Soldiers (their fathers) and were trainde up in the same trench that they were
borne in; and that they would become the hardier, being not traind up only,
but also Nursed in the camp. Which custom afterward remained amongst the
successors of Alexander. Therefore there was a stipend appointed to maintain
and foster up the Children, and when they came to man's estate, they had
furniture, horse, and harness given them, and the fathers Epigones. When he
had conquered the Parthians, he created Andagoras, (one of the chiefest Noble
men of Persia) ruler over them, from whom afterward the Kings of Parthia
descended.

In the mean space Alexander, began to grow outrag ous with his own
followers, not like a king, but an enemy. The chiefest cause of his displeasure
alexand^^r (...) great ra^e and discontent with his Noble^.
both of Phillip (his father,) and of his own country. For which the ancient
father Parmenio, (after inquisition had) being in estate next to the king, and
his son Philotas, were both put to death. Whereupon all the camp began to be in
an uproar, grieuing at the mischaunce of the old man and his Son and not
letting sometime to say, that it was not for themselves then to expect any
better.

When these things came to the hearing of Alexander, fearing that if the
report thereof should be blown into Macedone, the glory of his victories would
be stained with the imputation of cruelty, he fained an intention to send
Alexanders fear of the people.
certain of his friends into Macedon to bear tidings of his several
conquests, and willed his Soldiers to write to their frindes, saying it would
be long ere they had the like opportunity, because he meant to make war
further of. This being done, by which he perceiving every man's opinion, put all
those into one band that had an ill conceit of him, intending either to
consume them Dracans, the Euergets, the Permenians, the Paropamys sadons,
Hisdaspians, and the other kinds of people, that inhabit the foot of the
mountain Caucasus. In the mean time Bessus was brought unto him, one of
Darius friends, who had not only betrayed the King his Master, but had also
cruelly slain him. Whom in revenge of his treachery, he delivered Bessas
delivered to be punished for tree son.
to Darius brother to punish as he thought good, and to use such Justice upon
him, that had traitorously slain his own master, as the seucrity of such a
foul sact required. Upon the river Tanais he builded a City, and named it
Alexandria, to the end, he might leave his name amongst them in those
Countries. The walls whereof, being six miles in compass, he finished Cyrus
had builded. Among the Sagdians, and Bactrians also, he builded seauenteene
Cities, placing in them all such as he knew to be seditious in his host.

These things thus effected, upon a certain day after, he caused a solemn
feast to be provided for himself, and his friends. Where after many cups M^^ke
the (...) of drun^^ ^^esse in a (...).
of wine caroused, mention being made among them of King Phillip his Acts, he
began to prefer himself before his father, and extolled the greatness of his
own deeds above the heavens. Which the greatest part of his guestes assented
to, and confirmed. When Clytus therefore one of the old Phillip, and stood in
the praise of his Noble and worthy acts, he so much provoked the displeasure
and indignation of Alexander therewith, that he snatched a weapon out of one of
his guards hand, and slew him as he sat at the table.

Then triumphing at the murder, he vpbraided him as he lay dead, with his
commending of Phillip, and with his commendation of his fathers wars. But after
his mind (satisfied with the slaughter) began to be quieted, and that advice
had entered in the place of anger: one while pondering in his Repentance, as he
was even now in Anger, in that extacie he would have died.

First he fell a weeping, and taking up the dead body in his arms, searched
Rage to l^^^ calmed with Repentance.
his wounds, and acknowledged his madness to him, as if he could have heard
him, and pulling out the weapon, set it to his own heart, and had slainc
himself, had he not been prevented by his friends, that wrested it forth of
his hands. He continued certain days after in this wilfulness to die. And
the more to increase his sorrow, there came to his mind, the remembrance of
Clyt us sister, who albeit she was notthere, yet was he ashamed in himself,
that he had so shamefully rewarded her that nursed him, as now being a man
grown, and a Conqueror, to present her with her own brothers corse in
requital of her good turns, that had borne him in her Arms all the time of
his

Moreover he bethought him, what reports and scandals he had raised of himself
in his army, and among the Nations, that he had conquered: What a fear, and
secret hatred, he had stricken into the hearts of his own friends: how bitter,
and loathsome he had made his own Table, being not so bloody, armed in the
field, as sitting naked at his meat. Then came to his remembrance Parmenio,
and Phylotas, then amint as his sisters son: then came into his mind, his
Mother in law, and her brothers that was put to death: then attalus, Eurylocus,
Pausanias, and other Noble men of Macedons, whose lives he had taken away.
Hereupon he obstinately refused his meat three days together, till
Philosopher Callysthenes, who had been his scoole fellow under aristotle, and
was then lately sent for by the King himself to put his acts in writing. When
therefore he called his courage again Calisthenes persuades much by his
cloquence.
back to the wars, he received the Chorasmians and Dracans, by composition.

Afterward that all things might seem more spightfull, he gave general
Callysthenes was one of them that stood stisliest against his purpose, which
was both the confusion of himself, and of many Noble men of Macedon. For under
the coulor oftreason, they were all put to death. Nevertheless the Macedones
still observed their custom of saluting their King, and utterly rejected the
manner of adorning. After this, he marched toward India, to bound his Empire
at the Ocean sea, and the uttermost parts of the East.

To add renown to his Name, and that the ornaments of his army might
Argyraspides. When he came to the City Nisa, the Townsmen (upon a
superstitious confidence that they had in their God Bacchus, who was founder
thereof) making no countenance of resisting, he gave forth an exceeding
straight commandment that it should be spared: rejoicing greatly, that he had
not only followed the wars, but the very footsteppes also of the gods. From
thence he led his host to see the Mount, which was naturally beset with vines,
and Iuye, in such order, as if it had been dressed with man's hand, and placed by
the cunning of workmanship: as soon The holy ^ount.
as his host came at the Mountain, being moved through a sudden instinct of
mind, to the holy howlings of the gods, they scatterd here and there (to the
great admiration of the King) without any harm taking. Whereby he might
perceive that by sparing the Townsmen, he did not so much profit them, as
pleasure his own Army.

Then took he his course to Daedalus hill, and to the kingdom of queen
Cleopis, who yiedling her self received again her kingdom, paying for
ransom De dalus hil^.
of it, only a few nights lodging with Alexander. In the daliaunce whereof, she
obtained that at his hands, which by force of arms she could never have
gotten. The Son that she conceived by him, she named Alexander, who
afterward enjoyed the Indian kingdom. The Queen for violating her Cert^in
nights lodging paid to Alexander for a Queens ran some.
chastity, was ever after called of the Indians, the kings concubine. When he
had traueled through India, he came to a marvelous rough and huge rock, into
which many people were fled, from winning whereof it was told him that Hercules
was prohibited by an carthquake. Burning therefore with desire to surmount the
doings of Hercules, he won the same rock, with much labor,

Then Porus one of the kings of India, a man of marvelous magnanimity and
strength of body, understanding the fame of Alexander, meant to encounter
Thincounter between Por ru^ and Alex ander.
with him, and prepared for the war against his coming. And when on both
sides the Army was in readiness to give onset, he willed his Men to set upon
the Macedones and to suffer him alone to combat single with their king.

Alexander made no tariance to the battle. But at the first encounter, his
horse was wounded under him, and he himself fell down headlong to the Porus
not able longer to abide the brunt of battle, by reason of his multitude of
wounds, was surprised and taken prisoner. Whereat his grief was so great, for
his being vanquished, that although he found favor at his Enemies hands, yet
would he not recciue any sustinance, nor suffur his wounds to be dressed: but
much ado there was to entreat him to live. This courage, and valor did
Alexander so highly commend in him, that in honor thereof he sent him home
again with safety into his kingdom. Then builded he two Cities, whereof the
one he called Nicea, and the other (after the name of his horse) Bucephala.

Afterward he conquered the adrastes, the Stathenes, the Passides and the
Gangarytes, and slew all their Armies. When he came to the Eufits where his
Enemies waited his coming with two hundredth thousand horsemen; His whole Army
being wearied with the number of their victories, and their continual labors,
besought him with tears that at length he would make end of his wars, and
minding his own country, have regard to the years of his soldiers, which were
scarce able to live so long, as while each man might recover his several home.
One showed his gray head, another his many wounds, another his lean Carcass,
wythered with the multitude of years, another his body full of skarres, and
maimes. Saying that they alone were the Men that had endured the continual
wars of two Kings, Phillip and Alexander. Wherefore they did beseech him (at
the least) to restore their poor carcasses to the graves of their fathers, who
now fainted, not for want of heart; or goodwill, but for want of years, to
maintain the resolute performance of their willing minds. If he would not
regard his Soldiers, yet to have respect of himself, and not to weary out his
good fortune, nor offend with presumptyon.

Being moved with these just petitions, (as it were to wind up his victories
in more honor) he caused his camp to be set out after more stately sort then
was accustomed, that the hugeness thereof might both put his enemies in fear,
and leave somewhat to sucdeeding posterity to talk of. His soldiers did never
work in all their lives, with more alacrity, or free spirits. When they had
therefore discomfited their enemies, they returned with great joy and
gladness. From thence Alexander went to the river Acesyne, and by that he
sailed to the Ocean, where he took to mercy the Gessones and Asybanes, which
were founded by Hercules.

From thence he sailed to the Ambres, and Sycambres, which met him with
Alexanders valor among thousands of enemies.
which before any of his Men he himself had scaled) he leapt into the City,
without any of his guard about him. When his enemies saw him there alone, they
ran at him on all sides with a great shoute, indeuouring if they could to
finish the wars of the whole world in one Man's death, and to be revenged upon
him for many Nations.

Alexander on the contrary part, as manfully withstoode them, and being but one
man fought against many thousands. It is almost incredible and not

But when he saw he was ouercharged, he withdrew himself to a block, that
stood by a wall, by help whereof standing in safeguard, he held them all tacke,
till his friends knowing what peril he stood in, leapt down to aid him. Of
whom many were slain, and the battle hung long in suspense, till the time
that his Army (having beaten down the walls) came in to his rescue. In that
conflict he was stricken with an arrow under the right pappe, and Alexandes
sends a great host to Babylon.
he was wounded.

The healing of the wound was far more gricuous then the wound it self.
Therefore when at length contrary to all hope, he had recovered his health and
strength, he sent Polyperchon, with his host to Babylon, and he himself with
a number of his most select and chosen Soldiers, took shipping, and scowred
the Ocean Seas, along the coast. When he came at the City of king Ambyger, the
townsmen heating he could not be overcome by sword, dipped their arrows in
poison, and so with double wound of death repelled the Enemy Alexander re
pelled with venomed Da^^^.
from their walls, and slew many of them. And when amongst many others Ptolomy
was deadly wounded and very unlike to escape the danger of death, an herb was
showed the King in his sleep, that should remedy the poison.

The which being given him in drink, he was forthwith delivered from
theymminent danger, and the most part of the Army was by that means preserved.
After when he had won the town by force, he returned into his Neptune, the
Sea-god, with prayers, and petition for safe return into his Country. Then he
established the bounds of his Empire as far as there was any land habitable,
or as far as the sea was able to be sailed, and with prosperous wind entered
into the mouth of the River Indus. There (as a monument of his conquests) he
builded the Barce, and set up Altars, leaving one of his friends Lieuetenant
of the Indians, that inhabit the Sea coast.

From thence intending to take his journey by land, as he heard there was
scarcity of water by the way, he commanded pittes to be made in places
convenient Alexanders return again to Babylon
Babylon. There many of the Nations that he had subdued, accused their rulers,
whom Alexander without respect either of friendship, or favor, caused to be
put to death in the presence of the Ambassad. After this, he took to wife
Satir, the daughter of king Darius. He also chose out of the Noblest, and most
beautiful Ladies and Gentlewomen of all Nations, and gave them to his Noblemen
in marriage: which he did to the intent that the custom and community of the
fact, his own offense might seem the lighter.

Then summond he his Army before him, and enquiring of their debts, he promised
to set them free, and pay what they owed out of his own purse, Alexander, both
for the greatness of the sum, and in regard of the cheerful and free gift
thereof. And it was as thankfully received of the creditors as of the debtors,
being not easy for the one to recover His bounty to his Soulo^s.
it, and very hard for the other to have paid it. In those occasions, three
and twenty thousand talents were disbursed.

He also cashierd the old Soldiers, and supplied their rooms with younger,
such as were still retained grudging that the old soldiers were dissmissed
required also to be cashiered: bidding him pay them their wages, and not tell
them of their years, for seeing they were chosen into warfarre together, they
Hammon, and then go set light by his Soldiers. He on the contrary side sometime
rebuked them, sometime admonisht them, persuading with gentle speeches, that
they should not darken their famous conquests with rebellion.

At last when he saw his words were not available, he rose out of his chair
13. of thebeginners ofthe tumult put to death.
unarmed, and stepped amongst the thickest of them, being all armed, to fetch out
the Authors of that rebellious contumacy: and without contradiction or
resistance brought forth thirteen and lead them to execution with his own
hands. So great a patience in suffering death did the fear of a king cast
upon them, or the customable envring to the discipline of war give him
bouldnes to put them to death. Then did he call the Persians a part, and
speaking to them praised their continual faithfulness both to himself, and
to their kings in times past, and rehearsed his benefits toward them: how
he never esteemd them as vanquished, but as partakers of his victory, and (to
be short) how he Macedones only, but to the safety also of the Persians.

Thereupon he chose a thousand of their young men into his guard, and to
another sort of them he gave armor, and weapons, and dispearst them into his
own hoaste, that they should learn the orders of the Macedonian wars. This
the Macedones took very grievously, lamenting much that the King should take
his enemies to serve in their rooms. And so with tears, Alexander, requiring
him to be more satisfied with punishing them, then with putting them to shame.
By which submission they obtained, that Eleauen thousand of the old Soldiers
were discharged. And of his friends there were dismissed, Polyperchon, Clytus,
Gorgias, Polidamas, and Antigonus: because they were old Men and by reason
thereof not able any longer to endure the travels of warfarre. Craterus had the
charge of such as were sent away, with commffion to take upon him Antipater
displaced
the regynent of Macedon, in the place and stead of Antipater.

Antipater in like manner was commanded to come with a number of young
Soldiers to supply the Room of Craterus. They that returned home Ephestion
(one The death of Ephestian, and the great mag nificence of his Toombe.
of Alexanders friends) deseased, whom he loved most entirely, both for his
excelient beauty, when he was borne, and for his humble obedience in his Man's
estate. For him Alexander mourned a long time, and that in more extremity, then
well became the condition of a king to do: bestovving twelve thousand
talents upon a Tomb for him: and giving commandment to honor him as a God.
In his way as he was returning toward Babylon, from the furthest lands,
that bordered upon the Ocean, tidings were brought him, that the Ambassadors
of Carthage, and other Cities of Affrik, Spain, Sicill, France, Sardinia, and
many other places of Italy, did vvait for his coming to Babylon. So great a
terror had the fame of his name stricken into the hearts of all the world, that
all Nations, as if they had determined to acknowledge him for their Sovereign
Lord, were glad to fawn on him.

For this cause, as he was making speed to Babylon, (to hold a parliament of
the whole world) one of the wise men gave him advice to refrain his com ming
there, for it was the fatal place of his death. Upon this he left Babylon and
went to the City Byarse, beyond Euphrates, which but of late lay desolate.
There Anaxarchus the Philosopher, persuaded him to despise the sayings of the
wisemen as false and uncertain. For, look what was determined by destiny, Men
could no way be priny unto: if once ordained by the law of Nature, it was not
possible for man to avoid them.

Returning therefore to Babylon, when many days had been ydely consumed, he
began anew his feastings and riot, which of some long time he had refrayned:
and giving himself wholly thereunto, he spent his time day Thessalus made a
reare-supper, and invited the king and al his Lords thereunto, where Alexander
taking a cup in his hand, as he was in Alexander is poisoned.
the midst of his draught, he suddenly gave a great sighe, as though he had
been pearsed at the heart with the point of a dagger and being carried from the
banquet half dead, was soterribly tormented with intolerable pain, that he
desired a sword to take away his life, and when he was touched by any man, it
was so grievous to him as if they had wounded him. His friends caused it to be
blown abroad, that his excessive drinking was the cause of

The author of this treason was Antipater, who seeing his most dear friends
murdered, his son in law Alexander of Lyncest, put to death, and himself The
pr^^ur^rs of his death.
(after his many Nobles enterprises achieved in Greece) reaped rather disdain
then respect, for all his labor; and drawn likewise thereunto by diverse
complaints made unto him by Olympias Alexanders mother: considering further,
what extremity and cruel execution, was but even a little before done upon the
Licutenants of sundry countries, he could not but gather by the premises,
that he himself also was not sent for out of Macedon,

To prevent therefore the kings purpose, he sent his son Cassander privily
with poison: the which Cassander, with Phillip and John his brothers, were wont
to serve the king at his table. The force of the poison was such, The poison
not to be carried but in the hoose of a Horse.
that neither brass, iron, nor earthen vessel was able to hold it, nor could
it be carried otherwise then in the hoose of an horse, giving especial charge
unto his son, that he should put trust in no man, save Thessalus and his
brothers. For this cause was the banquet prepared in the house of Thessalus,
Philip and John, which were wont to be the kings Tasters and cup-bearers,
Alexanders drink: the fourth day after, Alexander perceiving there was no way
with him but death, acknowledged the destiny of the house of his Ancestors,
for the Aecides died ere they attained the age of thirty years.

Then he appeased his Soldiers, which began to grow mutinous, and to make an
uproar, in mistrusting that the king was killed by treason, and being carried
up into the highest, and openest place of the City, and laid forth there upon
a couch, he admitted them all to his presence, putting forth his hand to them
to kiss, as they stood weeping, and lamenting about him. When all the company
wept to behold him in that case, he not only shed forth never a The
ambassadors of Assri^ke.
tear, but was without sign or token of pensiuenes, Insomuch as he gave great
comfort unto his followers that sorrowed for him.

To many of them he gave directions to recommend him to their friends, and to
do errands to them for him. Thus as his heart was invincible toward his
Enemy, so was it not to be daunted with the danger of death. When he had
dismissed his Soldiers, he demanded of his friends standing about him, if
they thought ever to have the like king again: whereat every man holding his
Macedon in that quarrel, and with how great slaughter it should keep his
funerals after his departure.

At the last he willed his body to be buried in the Temple of Hammon. And when
his friends perceived him to draw on, and even at point to give up the ghost,
they asked who should be heir of his Empire, he answered, The worthiest. So
great was his magnanimity, and courage of heart, that whereas he left behind
him his son Hercules, his brother Arideus, and his wife Roxanes

The sixth day when his speech was gone, he took the ring from his finger, and
delivered it to Perdicas, the which appeased the dissension of his friends,
Alexander deseased at the age of three and thirty years, and one month: a man
endued with stoutnesse of courage, and beyond the condition of Man's frail
nature. The same night that his mother Olimpias conceived him, she dreamed she
had to do with a great Dragon, neither was she deceived of the gods in her
dream, for out of all doubt she bare in her womb, a work of nature exceeding
far the conceit of human power or capacity. Tokens that appeared at the
death of Alexander.
And albeit she was much renowned both for the house of Aeacus, from whence by
ancient descent of so many hundredth years, she was lineally conveyed:

Many wonderful fortokens of his greatness apeared at the time of his birth.
For the same day that he was borne, two Eagles stood all day on the top of his
fathers house, representing a sign of his double Empire of Europe, and Asia.
The very same day also his father received tidings of two victories. The one of
a battle against the Illirians, the other of the gaming at the mountain
Olimpus, unto which he had sent his chariots. Which things were tokens that the
child should be Conqueror of all countries. During his childhood, he was
brought up and kept to his learning very straightly. When he came to man's
estate, he profited much in knowledge for sieve years space under Aristotle, the
most famous Philosopher. Afterward when he had taken the kingdom upon him, he
proclaimed himself king of all lands, and of the whole world. And he so
behaved himself among his Soldiers, that

The end of the twelfth Book.
THE XIII. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe mother of Darius dies for sorrow. Aridens is made King. The Empire is
divided among the Noblemen of Alexander. The Athenians and Aetolyans drive
Antipater out of Greece. Perdicas makes war against Ariarathes King of
Cappadocia. The Noblemen of Macedon fall at variance among themselves. The
foundation of the City Cyricene in Aphricke. Perdicas is hated for his

WHen Alexander had thus left the World in the flower of his age, and the glory
of his conquests: all men were stricken into heaviness and admiration,
especially the City of Babylon: But the Nations whom he had brought to his
subjection, could not give credit to the report, because as they believed him
to be invincible, so likewise they thought him to be immortal; Darius, hearing
of Alexanders death, was not more tormented with The heaviness of Enemies, and
reioicing of the Macedons for the death of Alexander.
grief for the loss of her son, or her own downfall from so high estate,
as she sorrowed to see that day: Not that she set more by her enemy, then by
her son, but because his clemency and favor was so great being a conqueror,
and she had found the natural love of a son in him, when she feared

The Macedons contrariwise mourned not for him, as for their countreyman, or
for their king of such high and great Majesty, but rejoice as if they had lost
an enemy, his severity was such, and the continual ieopardies that he put them
to by the wars. The Princes also gaped on every side, for the division of his
kingdoms and provinces: the soldiers for a great mass of money and gold, as
a booty falling into their mouths unexpected. The one making account to
succeed him in his Empire, the other to possess his great riches and
treasure. There were found in his treasury, one hundredth The great riches
that was found after the death of Alexander.
thousand talents, besides the yearelye custom and tribute, which amounted to
three hundred thousand more. But it was not for nothing that the Noblemen of
Alexander did so look for the kingdom. For they were all of that prowess and
magnanimity, that every one in his carriage represented the majesty and
condition of a king.

They were all of such excellent beauty, and favor, of so tall, and goodly
personages, of so great strength, and wisdom, that he to whom they had The
choicest men of the kingdom.
did Macedon nor any country before that time, ever flourish with such a
number of Noblemen, as first Phillip, and then Alexander with good aduisement,
had picked and chosen forth; not somuche to serve the wars, as to succeed in
the kingdom. Who can then marvel that the world was subdued by such men of
service? seeing the Army of Macedon was guided by so many, not captains, but
kings: who could never have bin matched by others, had they not fallen at
contention between themselves. For if that envy and emulation of their own
puissance, had not stirred them up to selfe-destruction, they should have had
many Alexanders for the loss of one. But after Alexanders death; they
assembled themselves together, not any one fearing the other, or mistrusting
the men of war, whose liberty was now more large, and favor uncertain.

Among themselves the equality increased the discord, no one man so far
exceeding the rest, that any would subscribe to submission. They assembled
therefore all in armor in the palace, to set matters in order for the Great
emula tion amongst the Nobility and Wa^riors
time. Perdicas thought it good to abide the deliverance of Roxanes, who had
now gone eight months with child by Alexander, and would be ready to lie down
shortly. If she brought forth a son, to substitute him in his fathers
Meleager replying thereunto, said it was not meet to delay their determination,
upon her doubtful deliverance, nor to tarry for a King that was unborn, Since
they might take such as were borne already.

For if they desired to have a child to their King, there was at Pergamus,
alexanders son, called Hercules, whom he had by Arsine. If they had rather
have a young man, there was in the camp aridens, the Brother and companion of
Alexander, one that was beloved of all men, not for his own sake only, but for
King Phillips sake, his father. As for Roxanes for that she was a Persian, it
was not lawful for the Macedones to take Kings unto them of their blood, whose
Empire they had subverted, since it was no part of Alexanders Controu^^se
maintained about the next h^^^e to the C^owne.
meaning, neither did he make mention there of at his death. Ptolomy, refused
to have Aridens made King, not only for his Mothers baseness, for he was
begotten of a Concubine of Larissa, but for his continual sickness, which was so
great, that it was like to dishable the government, and sway of so high a
place. Therefore he thought it better for them, to make choice of some of
those, which for their prowess had been nearest about the King, that they
might rule the provinces, and take charge of the wars, rather then under the
color of a King, to be at the commandment of unworthy persons. At length by
the consent of them all, the sentence and opinion of Perdicas took place, and
so it was esteemed fit to tarry the deliverance of Roxanes: and if Perdica^,
his advice followed.
she had a manchild, it was determined, that Leonatus, Perdicas, Craterus, and
Antipater, should be protectors, and the rest took their oath to be obedient to
them. When the horsemen had done the like, the footmen disdaining that they
were made privy to no part of their doings, proclaimed Aridens alexanders
brother to be their King: and chose him a Guard of his own kindred, giving him
the name of his father King Phillip. When tidings hereof attalus, and Meleager
Ambassadors, being two of the Noblemen, to appease their wrath; Who seeing
pre-eminence by pleasing the multitude, relinquisht their message, and
condiscended to the Soldiers. Forthwith the tumult increased, as soon as
council had gotten head, and directions.

Then prepared for the purpose, they violently rushed into the place, with
intent to destroy the men of arms, who understanding what peril they stood
Common between the hor^^^^ and soo^^^^.
in, fearefullie conveyed themselves out of the City, and picht their campo
in the fields, at which the footmen also began to be afraid. Neither did the
hatred of the Noble men cease, for attalus was sent to kill Perdicas of the
contrary Persians, but the Macedons; not against their enemies, but their own
countrymen: many of them their kinsmen, and most of them, their companions in
arms and partakers of their perils. Wherefore they ought rather to make a good
show to thetr enemies, that they may Perdicas his Oration to them that came to
^^^^der him.


When Perdicas had with his singular eloquence fully debated these matters, he
so moved the footmen thereby, that by common consent he was chosen their
Captain general. The horsemen also being brought to atonement, consented to
take aridens for K. reserving a part of the kingdom for the son of
Alexander, if any should be borne. This did they, laying the body of
alexander, amongst them, that he might be a witness of their decrees. These
things thus set at a stay, Antipater was made regent of Macedon, Greece.
Craterus appointed to be high Treasorour. The charge of the camp, the host,
and matters of warfarre committed to Meleager, and Perdicas. Aridens himself
being assigned to convey the corse of Alexander to the temple of Hammon. Then
Perdicas sore displeased with the authors of the sedition, without knowledge of
Meleager, the next day commanded a sudden search to be made in the camp for
the death of the King.

(...) After there arose war betwixt Antigonus and Perdicas. Antigonus was
aided Great w^rs amon^st the (...) of Alexander.
by Craterus, and Antipater. Who taking truce with the Athenians, made
Polyperchon Regent of Macedon and Greece. Perdycas perceauing that the world
went not on his side, sent for arydius, and great Alexanders son (of whom the
charge was committed unto him) to have them come out of Cappadocia, and give
their advice as concerning the order of the wars. Some were of opinion to
remove the war into Macedon, to the very welspring and head of the kingdom,
because Olimpias was there, who being Alexanders mother would be no small stay
on their side, for the favor of cominalty in the remembrance of Phillip and
Alexander.

But it was thought most for the common profit to begin at Egypt, least when
they were gone into Macedon Ptolomy might invade Asia. Eumenes besides the
provinces he had before, had delivered unto him paphlagonia, Caria, L^cia, and
Phrygia, and there he was commanded to abide the coming of Craterus and
Antipater. To assist him, were appointed Alcetas the brother of Perdicas and
Neoptolemus, with their Armies. Clytus was made chief admiral of the sleete.
Cilicia was taken from Philotas, and given to Phyloxenus, and Perdicas himself
with a great army went toward Egypt. So Macedon, through the discord of the
Captains, dividing themselves into two parts, set her weapons against her own
bowels, turning the furnitur of war that was appointed

But Ptolomy by his industry got great riches in Egypt, for by his modesty he
both won the hearts of the Egyptians, and by his friendly and gentle
behavior, The great commendation of P^^lomy K. of ^gypt.
he purchased the goodwilles of such kings, and as were his neighbors.
Further, he so enlarged his kingdom by conquering the city Cyrene, that by
means thereof he was now become a Prince of such power, that there was not such
cause for him to fear his enemies, as his Enemies to be afraid of him. This
city Cyrene was builded by. Aristeus, who because he was tonguetyed, was named
Battus. This Man's father called cyrenus King of the ^lande Delphos to make
intercession to the gods for him, received answer, by which his son Battus was
commanded to go into Affricke, and build the city cyrene and that there he
should receive the use of his tongue: but because the answer seemed like a
mockery, the matter was left of, by the likelynesse of the Isle Theramene, out
of which inhabyters were commanded to repair into Affricke, there to build a
city in a country so far of. Afterward in process of time, there fell such a
pestilence among them for their stubbornness, that they were compeld to obey
the commandment of the god, being so small a number of them, that they were
scarce able to furnish one ship.

When they came into Afric, both for the pleasantness of the place, and the
abundance of water springes, they expelled the inhabiters of the mountain
Cyra, and planted themselves in the same place. There their Captain Battus had
his tongue stringes loosed and began to speak. This encouraged their hearts to
build up the rest of the city, for that the gods, had already performed part
of his promises. Their tents therefore being pitched, they heard a report of an
old tale. Namely that Cyrene, a maid of excellent beauty was ravished by
Apollo in the mountain Peluis in Thessaly, and carried from thence to the top
of this mountain, where the gods begat her with child: and when she had gone
her time, was delivered of four Sons, Nomius, Aristeus, Eutecus, and Ageus.
And that her father Hypseus king of Thessaly, sent out men to seek her, who
enticed with the pleasantness of the place, abode still with the maid in that
country. Of which children when they came to estate, three returned into
Thessaly, and possessed their grandfathers kingdom: but Aristeus had a large
dominion in arcady, and first taught the use of bees, and Honey, of Milk, and
cream, and first found out the times of the year, Battus learning the name
of the maiden by the oracles, builded the City Cyrene. Ptolomy therefore
increased in strength by the power of this city, prepared for the war
against Perdicas coming.

But the hatred that Perdycas had gotten thorough his passing pride, did him
more harm then the power of his Enemies. For his own companions hating P^^de
in p^^a c^s they (...) (...)
him, fled by heaps unto antipater. Neoptolemus also being left to assist
Eumenes, purposed not only to turn unto the contrary part, but also to be
tray the whole host of his adherents. Which pretense when Eumenes, had
Neoptolemus being vanquished fled to antipater, and Polyperchon persuading them
that if they would keep on their journey without staying, they might fall
unawares upon Eumenes, who now ioying sor his late victory, was secure and
without care, in that he had put him to slight.

But his purpose was not unknown to Eumenes, therefore the treason turned upon
the traitors heads. For they which thought to have surpryzed him ere he was
aware, were met withal themselves, when they least looked for it, having
watched all the night, and wearied with travel. In that encounter Polyperchon
had his deaths-wounde, and escaped not. Neoptolemus also fighting Polyperchon
and Neoptolemus slain.
hand to hand with Eumenes a great while together, after many hurts given, and
Eumenes therefore getting the upper hand in two pitched fields together, up
held his side for a time, which was not a little impaired by the reuolting of
his adherents. Nevertheless at the last when Perdicas was slain, both he, and
Phyton, Illirius, and alcetas the brother of Perdicas, were proclaimed Traitors
by the host of their enemies, and antigonus was appointed to make war
against them.

The end of the thirteen Book
THE xiiij. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
EVmenes preuenteth the policies of his enemies. He is besieged by antigonus.
He is rescued by antipater. He craves aid from the argiraspides. He is over
come by antigonus, and is betrayed by his own soldiers. cassander is made
Regent of Greece. The Lacedaemonians enclose their city with a wall. Euridice
and arideus are slain at the commandment of Olimpias. Cassander likewise
puts Olimptas to death, and imprisoneth the son of alexander.

WHen Eumenes understood that Perdicas was slain, himself Macedon, and that
Antigonus was appointed to make war against him, he declared matter of his
own accord to his Soldiers, least the sudden ^umenc^ preuenteth his enemies.
news thereof might cause them to esteem the matter worse, then it was
indeed, or the strangeness of it discourage their hearts. And to the end he
might try whether their minds were any way bent against him, or no: and
intending to proceed according as he saw them inclined, he boldly protested
amongst them, that if any man's heart failed him, he should have liberty and
license to depart. the which speech so persuaded them all to favor Alexander
by the sword.

Then did he remove with his host into Aetalia, where he raised a tax of the
cittyes, and such as refused to bestow it upon him, he sacked them like an
enemy. From thence he went to Sardus, unto cleopatra the sister of great
Alexander that by her words, the captains and chief officers might be the
more strengthened to stand in his quarrel. For he was of opinion that the
majesty of the kingdom was on that side, which the Sister of Alexander held
with. So much reverence was attributed to the greatness of Alexander, that men
sought the sauou^ of his sacred name, even by the footsteppes of women. Eumenes
head unto Antigonus. Eumenes having knowledge hereof, summoned his soldiers
before him, and first gave them thanks, that none of them would be sound to
preser the hope of a bloody reward before his faithful oath.

Then he polly tikly knit up the matter, saying that those letters were devised
by himself to try the minds of his soldiers, and that it lay in all their
hands to save him, or cast him away, excusing antigonus, or any other of the
Captains, that in such manner they couetted to get the upper hand, or to give
any such wicked example to others to do the like by him. By this he both stayed
Fumenes (...) to flight by Anti^onus
the wavering minds of his Soldiers for the time prsent, and provided before
hand, that if the like chance snould happen hereafter, his soldiers should not
think themselves corrupted by their enemy, but rather tried only by their
captain. Every Man therefore strove who might be most for the safeguard of
Eumenes. In the mean season came Antygonus against them with his host, and
resting himself in his camp for that night, brought forth his men in battle
ray the next morning: neither did Eumenes detract the encounter, antipater, who
was able to match antigonus. Antygonus hearing that antipater had sent to
rescue Eumenes, brake up his siege and went his way.

Thus was Eumenes delivered from fear of death, but he could not long continue
in safety, seeing he had sent away his men of war. Therefore when he
Argyraspides that Fumene^ g^t t^th the ^auor of the Ar gira^pides.
invincible host. But the argiraspides, after alexander was gone, disdained al
captains, thinking themselves dishonored to serve under any other,
considering what a Prince they had fo lately served.

Eumenes entreated and spoke gently to every of them, calling them sometimes his
sellowes and companyons in arms, sometimes his patrones and defendours, other
whiles his partakers of all dangerous attemptes and enterprises in the East:
boasting that they only were the men by whose puissaunce the East was subdued,
which had surmounted the monuments of Hercules: that by them alexander was made
great: by them he obtained to honor and immortal antigonus came against him
with an army, he compelled them to put themselves in order of battle so that
whiles they disdained to be ruled by their captain, by force of their enemies
(...) (...) another overthrow.
they were overcome. In that battle they lost not only al their glory and

Eumenes the author of this their loss and discomfiture, having none other
comfort or refuge to fly unto, began to harten and encourage them when they
were vanquished and overcome: affirming that they were surperior as touching
their prowess and puissance: For they had slain ^^ue thousand of their
enemies, and if they were minded to stick to it to the uttermost, they should
see their enemies feign to sue to them for peace. As for the losses and damage
whereby they thought themselves so much hindered, it was but only two thousand
women, and a few children and bondmen, the which they might better recover by
getting the victory, then by forsaking the victory for want of courage.

The Argyraspides made answer, they would neither attempt to run away with the
loss of their wives and bedfellowes, nor yet make war against their own
children; where with they began extremely to revile him, in that after so
many years, when they were returned home with their wages which they had well
and dearly earned, and with the rewards of so many battles,

Hereupon without knowledge of their captains, they sent messengers to
antigonus, whereupon he desiring restitution of their goods sent them word
Conspiracy against Eumenes
again, he would restore every whit, so that they would yield Eumenes into his
Eumenes hearing of this practice, attempted with a few scattering soldiers to
escape by flight: but being sent back again, seeing no hope of recovery, as
the multitude slocked about him, he made request that he might yet once before
he dyed, speak unto his army.

They willed him to say his mind. Silence being made, and his bands losed, he
stretched forth his hands fettered as they were, and showed them, saying.
Behold my Soldiers the apparel and ornaments of your Captain, Fumenes his
O^ation to his soldiers.
which none of his enemies has put upon him, for that were a comfort to him,
but even you your selves, have made me of a conqueror a vanquished person, you
have made me of a Captain, a Captive.

Four times within this twelve month, you have sworn to be true to me, but I
will let that pass. For it is not meet for men in adversity, to vpbraide
others. This only one thing I require at your hands, that if Antigonus be so
fully bent to take my head from me, as in whose death all his affairs and
purposes should be finished, you will let me die among you. For I am sure he
cares not after what sort, or where I die, so I be dead, neither do I pass
greatly for my life, so I might be delivered from this slanderous death. If
you will grant me this request, I discharge you of your oath, whereby you have
bound your selves so often unto me. Or if ye be ashamed to slay me your
selves, then reach me a weapon, and give me leave to do that thing for

When he saw he could not obtain his request, he left intreatance and fell to
anger. Now the Gods said he, the just revenger of perjury, look upon you,
you false forsworn kaitiues, and give such ends unto you, as you have given
unto your Captains. For it is not long ago, since you polluted your selves
with the blood of Perdicas, practicing to have done the like with Antipater,
yea and that is worst of all, you oftentimes troubled even Alexander himself
with your seditions and mutinies; doing your best to have slain him, if it had
been possible for him to have died of man's hand. And last of all you seek my
blood, which shall be offered as a sacrifice by you false forsworn wretches,
wherefore I pray the Gods, that these curses may light upon you, that being
beggars and Outlawes, you may spend all your life in this warfare, like
banished people, never to return to your country again, and your own weapons
devour you, with the which you have consumed mo captains of your own, then of
your enemies.

This spoken, in a great rage and anger he commanded his kepers to go
Antigonus camp. The army followed after to betray their own captain, and he
being prisoner, led as it were a tryumphe of himself They (...) (...) (...)
and Capta^n unto (...).
unto the camp of his conqueror, delivering up into the conquerours hands,
both themselves, and all the ensigns of king Alexander, together with the
honor and renown of so many conquests. And because they should want no pomp,
the Elephants also, and all the powers of the East followed after. So much more
glorious were these things to Antigonus, then unto Alexander all the Conquests
he atchiued. In that whereas Alexander conquered the East, Antigonus overcame
them by whom the East was conquered.

Antigonus therefore dispersed those Conquerors of the world into his host,
making restitution unto them of such things as he had taken from them at the
time of this onerthrowe. And because he had in times past familiar acquaintance
and friendship with Eumenes he would not for shame suffer him to come in his
sight, but assigned him two keepers. In the mean Euridice abu seth the auto
^^t^e of her husband Ari d^us the K.
season, Euridice the wife of King arideus understanding that Poliperchon was
returning out of Greece, into Macedon, and had sent for Olimpias, being
thereupon stricken with womanly malice, and a busing tho weakness of her
husband, whose Office and authority she took upon her, wrote to Polyperchon in
the Kings name, that he should deliver up the host to Cassander, as into
antigonus in Asia. By which benefit Cassander being bound unto her, did every
thing after her rash and unadvised commandment.

Then went he into Greece, and made War against many Cities, at the
destruction of which as of a fire near at hand, the Spartanes being afraid,
both contrary to the answers of the Oracles, and contrary to the ancient
renown of their ancestors, distrusting their own valor, enclosed their city
with a strong wall, the which ever before that time, they had bin wont to
defend by force of arms, and not by strength of walls. So much were they

While these things were doing, the estate of Macedon was so troubl^d, that
Cassander was feign to return thither out of Greece, for when Ol^^^ias, the
mother of Alexander the great, came out of Epire into Macedon, accompanied with
acacida king of the Molosses, and that Euridice and aridens the king went about
to prohibit her from entering into the Realm, the Macedons, whether it were for
remembrance of her husband King Phillip, or in respect of the greatness of
her son Alexander, or that they were moved at that unworthy demeanor,
gathered themselves unto Olimpias; at whose commandment Euridi^^ and the King
were both slain, when he had reigned six years (...)
after Alexander. But Olimpias her selse reigned not long, for when she made
slaughter of her Noblemen and peers, more like a Tyrant then a Queen, she
turned her favor into hatred. Therefore when she heard of cassanders Macedons,
with Roxane her daughter in law and Hercules her Nephew, she conveyed her self
into the City Pictua. She had in her train D^idama the daughter of King
acacida, and her daughter in law Thessalonice, a Lady much set by for her
father Phillips sake, with many other Noblemens wives. When these things were
reported to cassander, immediately he came in all have to Pictua, and environed
the town with a strong siege. Olympias being constrained with sword and
^amine, and weary of the long continuance of the siege, yielded her self,
their lives only saved. (...).
But cassander assembling the people together, asked their advice what they
would have done with Olimpias, and suborned the parents of such as she had
Macedones were so incensed, that without respect of her former estate, they
gave sentence she should be put to death: quite forgetting that under her
son and husband, they had gotten great riches, and the Dominion of the whole
world. But Olimpias when she saw the armed men coming toward her to kill her,
ofher own accord apparrelled like a Queen, and leaning upon two ofher
Gentlewomen, she went to meet them. At the which sight they that should have
killed her being astonished, for the Mai^sty which she before time had
represented and remembering so many of their Kings, who even after a sort apeard
in her person, pau cassander sent others to thrust her thorough. Who never fled
back when she saw the sword, nor yet s^riked out An example of wonderful
courage in a Woman.
like a woman, but after the manner of the most valiant men, advanced her
forward to the death for the glory of her ancient stock and progeny: so that a
man might have beheld even Alexander himself in his Mothers dying.
Futhermore, when she was even giving up the Ghost, it is reported that she
covered her seet with her Garments, and with the hair of her head, least
they that stood about her might have seen any uncomely sight in her body.
After this, cassander took to wife Thessalonice the daughter of King arideus,
and put Alexanders son amphipoles.

The end of the fourteen Book
The XV. book of Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe conquerors fall at variance about parting the spoil. The abderites are
driven out of their country with Frogs and Mice. Cassander putt^th the sons
of Alexander to death. Ptolomy is vanquished on the Sea by Demetrius.
Alexanders Lieutenants proclaim themselves Kings. Lysim^chus takes part with
cassander against antigonus: The valor and life of Lysimachus described. The
wonderful begetting of Seleucus, with his partaking against antigonus, His
conquests in the East. Sandrocorte delivers the Indians from the subjection

COnsidering Perdicas and his brother Alecta, with Polyperchon and the residue
of the adverse part was slain, it was thought, that the contention among the
successors of great Alexander, had now been utterly extingquished; when
contrary to opinion the conquerors sudenly fell at difference betwixt
themselves: for Ptolomy, Cassander, and Lysimachus, requiring to have the booty
antigonus denied to admit them any partnership in the profit of that War,
whereof he himself had abiden the brunt and hazard: and to the intent he might
satisfy the multitude, he had both a fufficient and honest quarrel, to make
war upon those which lately had bin their confederates; he caused a rumor to
be spread, that he would (as in Justice it was requisite) revenge the death of
Olimpias, whom Cassander treacherously had slain, and deliver the royal
issue, the son of his master king Alexander and his mother out of
Amphypolis, whereas they were detained as prisoners. This his purpose being
signified to Ptolomy and Cassander, they presently en Lysimachus and Seleucus,
furnishing themselves with all manner defense whatsoever might withstand this
warlike preparation of Antigonus, both by land and sea. Ptolomy held Egypt,
with the greater part of Afric, cypres and Phenicia: C^ss^n^er ruled
Macedon, and Antigonus go^erned Asia, with part of the East, whose son
Demetrius was clean vanquished by Ptolomy at Calama. In which battle, the
renown of Ptolomyes modesty exceeded his victory: for he both dischargd the
friends of Demetrius, being his prisoners, not only with their own private
substance, but also honorably rewarded them. Moreover all the private
possessions of Demetrius, which he had ransackt out of his tents, he restored,
sending him word, that he made war not for gain, but for honor; not for
treasure, whose glory must determine, but for the dignity of virtue, whose
Trophes are perpetual. And that it grieved him, atigonus his father having
overcome the Captains and fauoure^s of his faction, should usurp to himself,
and to his proper use, the reward of that victory, which was heretage to
others.

While these differences had their passage and event, cassander returning from
apollonia, chanced upon the abderites, who for the excessive swarms of
Frogs and Mice, ranging amongst men, inforest them to relinquish (...).
their native habitation, and inquire out for residence in some foreign country.
Cassander searing hereby, least these straglers, destitute of succor, should
invade Macedon, received them to friendship, and made such league with them,
that he assigned them lands to inhabit and settle their number, in the
uttermost borders of that kingdom.

By this, Hercules the son of Alexander having attaind to the fourteenth
year of his age, gave Cassander cause to grow suspicious, least the settled
good will which the people bare to his father (he being now come to this
Macedon, as the immediate heir to that title. To prevent which, he commanded
both him and his mother Barsiue, secretly to be executed, and their bodies to
be buried in the ground, not suffering them to have the obsequies and funeral
rites, according to the custom The (...) (...) (...) (...)
be sitting their estate; least the murder which he so privately acted, should
come to light. This cassander, not staieng his cruelty herein, accounting the
trespasses he had thus past through triuiall, forced on king Alexander
himself, on Olimpias his Mother, and Hercules his son, now persisted and
Alexanders, with his mother Roxane by like treason: holding it impossible for
his ambition, to cut a path to the peaceable sovereignty of Macedon, which his
thoughts so thirsted for, otherways then by blood.

In the mean time he was encountered again by Demetrius on the Sea: but in
this sea fight having lost his ships and received an overthrow, he retired into
Egypt. Demetrius having now occasion offered, whereby to gratify Ptolomy, and
to manifest his disposition, and being indeed provoked thereunto by the
princely example which Ptolomy had expressed to him and his, in the like
advantage; safegarded home into Egypt, Leuticke Ptolomies son, and (...) (...).
Menclaus his brother ransomelesse, with all their private goods and treasure

Atigonus heart being exaulted with pride, at the news of this victory,
proclaimed himself K. and his son Demetrius also. Ptolomy likewise, holding
scorn to be in less estimation among his subjects, then they among theirs, was
by his men of war proclaimed King. Cassander, and Lysmachus, took upon (...)
them the same title of dignity: all which abstained from usurping the honor of
this name, so long as any of the sons of their Master Alexander were yet
alive. So great did they account it modesty in themselves, albeit every one
ofthem, had severally the riches and power of a King, yet to forbear the
public rule of Kings, while Alexander had any rightful Heirs to succeed.

But now Ptolomy, Cassander, and the Captains of their port, perceiaing
Antigonus licked them up by turns: they therefore sent letters of persuasion
and encouragment, apointing a place of meeting, where they so agreed, that they
laid their powers together for one War: and where they were before like sand,
subject to dissipation, by the violence of every wind, this temper had made
them sollude, and sit for any foundation. At this meeting, for as much as
Cassander could not be then present in person, compeld by the Wars which he
was then excercised in against the borderors, Lysimachus with a selected and
choice host, to the aid of this coaiunction.

This Lysimachus was born of a Noble house in Macedon, but his prowess,
Knigthood, and experience in Martial direction surpassed, and made him The
by^th o^ Lysimachus.
more worthy to be remembered then the dignity of his birthe. Virtue and her
branches were so planted in his body, and mind, that in haughtines of courage,
knowledge of Philosophy, strength and abilitiy of body, he far excelled all
the Governors by whom the East was Conquered. For Alexander the great, being
stird to indignation and highly displeased with Calisthenes Persians, and had
accused the said Calisthenes of treason, and by force thereof, adjudged him to
be cruelly mangled, by cutting off his ears, his nose, and his lips: that
being made so loathed a creature to behold, he was by all men lamented, as too
miserable a spectacle: yet Alexander not contented with this revenge, caused
him to be carried in what progress he went along with him, shut up with a Dog
in a cage, to the terrible ensample of other.

This Lysmachus, who before in the better fortunes of Callysthenes, had bin
excercised to receive instructions of virtue at his hand, moved now with
Alexander displeased, commanded he should be cast Lysander (...) (...).
into a Lions den, by tha^ fierce beast to be destroyed, as a just judgment
for his attempt. But when the Lion at first sight, with open month came running
to prey upon him, Lysimachus winding his arm in a towell, thrust

(...) THE XVI. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe cruel murder of Antipater the son of Cassander, for the which his
brother Alexander proclaims war against him. Demetrius slays Alexander,
and usurps his part of Macedon. Lysimachus yields unto him that right which
belonged to Antipater. Ptolomy, Lysimachus, Seleucus and Pyrrhus, join
themselves in league against Demetrius. Pyrrhus drives Demetrius

AFter the death of Cassander and his son Phillip, one immediately ensuing the
other, the life of Thessalonyce Cassander was pursued by her son Antipater,
and though she complaind for pity to him with bended knees, and laying open to
him her breasts, from whence he had his unhappy nutryment, she was by his own
hands most cruelly slain. The cause from whence he grounded this murder was
this; After the death of her husband, when the kingdom should have been
divided between the two brothers, she seemed to be more favorable to
Alexander, then to him. Alexander moved by this so slight occasion, prepared
for reuengfull war against his brother, for his mothers death, and for
expedition thereof Demetryus, whom he found easily entreated to that purpose:
though indeed not so much for his assistance, as hope he had thereby to
leauell out sit opportunity himself to invade the kingdom. Of the coming of
Strife between Cassanders child^^n.
this army Lysimachus being afraid, persuaded with his son in law Antipater,
that it was rather convenient, and indeed more policy, for the securety of
his estate, to make an agreement, (though with loss) with his brother, then to
suffer his fathers enemy to have footing in Macedon.

Demetrius having notice a reconcilement was entreated of between the two
brethren, and without his advice not only plotted but treacherously
accomplished the death of Alexander, and so his forces being in present
readiness he pursued his purpose and invaded it. But a general murmur
touching The sonn^ punis^^^ (...): the (...) (...).
Alexanders death being in his army, he sought with himself how he might best
excuse this murder to his men of war, least their present murmur should
change to mutiny. So having called them together, he aledged, that Alexander
had by several plottes, and at several times, land weight to entrap his
life. Before that, he had not committed a murder, but only prevented Treasons
against himself, urging their own Judgments for witness, that Alexander,
both for the advantage of years, by which he was able with deeper and grauer
experience, as also endued with fortitude, both of body and mind, the fruit
of which, reapt but with due consideration, would well satisfy them that they
are the very collums and cement that vpholds a commonwealth.

Besides, he urged his father had accompanied the father and the son Phillip
and great Alexander, in all their wars, and after had done seuice for
Alexanders children, bin their Captain or rather general, in pursuing the
Rebels, whereas on the contrary part, Antipater the grandfather of the young
men, was always a more rough governor of the kingdom, then the Kings
themselves, Cassander their father the very rooter up of the Kings house, and
extirper of Alexanders royal famely. That he spared neither women nor
children, never satisfied, till he had destroyed all his offspring, and left
namelesse his posteryty. The revenge of which mischief, though his will had
not power to execute one Cassander himself, it is now but justly transfered
unto his children, whereof both Phillip and Alexander, if the dead had any
perseverance, would speak in approbation of the vengance, and aver that it is
their will, no branches descended from such infected roots, no issue from
their seditious loins, but rather the loppers off of such unprofitable stumps,
and punishers of such intestine traitors, should establish the kingdom of
Macedon. Dem^trius pro^laimed king of Madon.


The multitude thus pacified, they presently proclaimed him king. Lysimachus
Dromychet king of Thr^ce, to the intent he would not be constrained the
selfsame time to hold battle with Demetryus, yielded to him that part of
Macedon, belonging to his son in law Antipater: by which surrender, he made
peace with him. This Demetrius furnished with all the power of Macedon,
purposed to try his fortunes in Asya. When Ptolomy, Seleuchus, and Lysimachus,
having proof by the former conflict, what advantage was gained by concord, they
entered league, and joined their whole power making have into Europe against
Demetrius. This was he that made w^^ upon the Romans


Pyrrhus king of Epire, persuading himself that Demetrius might as easily
Macedon, as he had before gotten it, joined with them in this war, neither
was he deceived, for having means to corrupt tharmy of Demetrius with great
rewards: upon which encounter, his followers sled, and Pyrrhus seized upon the
kingdom of Macedon into his own hand. Now Antipater, son in law unto
Lysimachus, grudging and complaining that he was deprived of the kingdom of
Macedon which was only his right^^^ inheritance by the falsehood of his father
in law, Lysimachus took occasion thereat and put him to death. And because
Euridice his daughter took her husbands part in making like exclamation, her he
imprisoned; so all the house and family of Cassander, partly by murder, the
rest by execution, suffered due punis^ment in revenge of the wrong done to
great Alexander and his posterity. Demetrius now having the overthrow in this
battle, being ouercharged with so. any hoasts whereby he might have made the
period of his days Demetrius yeeld^th
honorable, chose rather to yield himself to Seleuchus shamefully.

These Wars thus ended, Ptolomy having deserved great renown for the
Noblenes of his acts died peacefully, who contrary to the common law The father
(...) son.
executed the office of his Guard and served the King in seruill Offices, as
another private person: and being demanded how from the chair of command he
could be pleased with this subjection would reply, It is more honorable for a
man to be a father to a king, then to be a king himself. But discord Lysimachus
and Pirrus. Both but lately one in the overthrow and ruin of Demetrius, are
now two for the confusion of themselves: but Lysimachus having the better of
Pirrhus, he inforst him to leave Macedon, which as we say he was scarce warm
in, and by his repulce brought it under his own command: After this he made a
very great War against Thrace, then against the City Hiraclia, the original
and end of which City are in both wonderful, for it happening that the Boetians
afflicted with a grievous plague ranging among them, they agreed to seek
redress Delphos, where answer was given them by the Priest, that to purchase
their relief, they should build a city in the country of Pontus The ^uilding o^
H^r^^lya.
and dedicate it unto Hercules.

But they fearing the long and perilous voyage they were inioynd to undertake,
desired death in their own native soil, rather then to enterprise so tedious
and uncertain a iourny. This in^unction of the oracle omitted the Phocenses
made sierce war against them, by whom being diverse times put to the worst,
they sled again to the Oracle, soliciting his counsel: from whom answer was
made, that the same instruction they had given them for remedy of the
pestilence, should if they would yet perform it remove the war. Metapont,
and according to the decree built the City Hiraclia, where in short time by
obeying this ordinance, they were multiplied and grew very wealthy.

This City withstood the assaults and battles of their neigbors, and was quiet
through civil dissension of mischief with themselves: among many their
honorable actions, this one thing especial, is worthy to be recorded. A^ such
time as the Athenians bare the Sovereignty, and had vanquished the Persians,
they raised a tax to be leauied in Greece, and Asia, both for the maintenance
A tax levied for the mam tenance of tiapping.
of their fleet, and provision thereof: and whereas all other Cittyes and
provinces under their subjection, fearing a further opression were willingly
tributaries, even to what they asked, only the Heraclyens for the amity they
held, and favor they received from the kings of Persia, refused to contrybute
any thing. Machaeus therefore was sent with a power from Athens, to constrain
them deliver that by force, they so obstinatly had denied. But while he
forraged about to wast their fields, and make pillage of what he could, his
fleet that he left in the Rhode was sunk, and the greater part of his army by
the force and extreme violence of a sudden tempest, were all put to wrack.
Therefore not being able to return by Sea, his shippyng being lost, nor durst
Heraclyens reputing it more honor to use this occasion, in showing to those
their distressed enemies bountiful curtisie, then bloodye reuengement, both
furnished them with victuals, and safely conducted them home; accounting the
wasting of their contry and danger they had sustained by them satisfied to the
full, if they might hereby win their enemies to be their friends.

Among many evils this city endured, they sufferd tyrany even amongst
themselves: for the rich, surfeiting in pleasure, scornefully neglected the The
miserable estate of ^^Heracleas.
a continual plenty and a prosperous peace, were greedy of innovation:
whereupon the common sort gathering together, importunately exacted to have al
debts clearly released, and the possessions of the rich either equally divided
amongst them, or else all to be in common. This request of theirs being rebuked
of some, was favored of many, and some of the greatest magistrates of command in
the city, such whom either with a smothered hypocritical emulation, repined
at their equals happiness, or else feathered with the wings of emulation, by
the overthrow of others to aspire to higher rule. This business Tymotheus Duke
of Athens, and after of Epaminondas Duke of Thebes; but neither favoring the
cause, their answer was an absolute denial from both. The matter thus far a
foot, that danger was feared on the one part, and threatened on the other,
they determined to fly for refuge to clearche who was lately banished his
country, and were constrained to repeal in defense of the same. Thus adverse
fares it oftentimes even in the most flourishing kingdoms.

But Clearche more ^^pened in the subtle and close conueying his treasons,
Clearche a v^^y cunning politician.
purposed, he saw occasion offered and a path directed to make himself a K. for
which advancement, he took counsel privately with Mythridates, the chief and
professed enemy to these Citizens, who being made fast the one to the other,
and the conditions agreed upon, compounded that at his Clearche a (...): and
dangerous (...)
repeal and calling home into his Country, which he shortly expected, that
City and the prosperity thereof, should be at his reuersion, only he for
such industry in his behalf, should be Sovereign, and possess the eminent
authority, with all things faithfully promised him. This treason thus intended
against his Country, he made use upon Mithridates himself: for being redressed
out of exile, and instituted as an indifferent judge for the determination of
civil controversies, at the same time, that he by promise had Mithridates, to
deliver over the town unto him, he relying on his trust, was in hope to have
taken the town, his friends, and himself prisoner, and not without a great
ransom which he was feign to provide and pay to this treacherous surprizer, were
any of them releast, and as thus Clearch dealt with Mithridates, making a
perfect friend, a sudden enemy: even so of a defender of the estate which he
undertook, he presently became a protector of the commons, even against the
chief procurers of his preferment, by whom he had been enlarged, to the
liberty of his Country, to those who had placed and advanced him to this tower
of his royalty, he not only incensed

For having summoned the people together, he insinuated and told them, that he
would now no longer be grievous unto them, by being an Agent, Clearche
insinuates and plos^th with the people.
or rather a subuerter of such a Senate, whom now himself had testemony of, was
to burden some and rigorous in their authority: but would rather give the help
of his blood, to suppress their pride, if they continue in their accustomed
tyranny: wherefore if they thought their strength of themselves sufficient, to
repress their oppression, he would withdraw with his men of War, and not
engage himself, in their civil discords; but if they distrusted N^wter in
their cause, or stay with his power as a partaker in their quarrel, but they
taking little advice, other then building upon his constancy and clemency,
presently called him Sovereign: so while they sought for redress, they found
only grief, but in their harebraind opinion, they subjected their selves,
with their Wives and children, in bondage to a Lordly tyrant.

Clearch at this first step to his advancement, apprehended threescore of the
Senators, (the rest being sled) and imprisoned them, where the multitude
Clearch as covetous as ambitious, knowing His cru^lty.
by the ancient peace and prosperity they sustaind, these senators
(wheresoever bestowed) had great treasure, bargaind with them that for a sum
of money which they agreed upon, he could now deliver them from the peoples
displeasure, and re-establish them in their former peace, and seat of
Magistracy: knowing that whatsoever he commanded he had power to effect,
condisended to his composition and made their tender of his demand: but being
by this treachery, possessed of all their goods, withhelde not his cruelty, but
bereft them of their lives: after this, understanding that those which before
were fled, had by their provoked complaints moved the neighbor cittyes to
pity, promising them help: and in that promise, new prepared war against
him: he held it policy to set all their bondmen at liberty, and that all
misery might be pointed to prick the hearts of these honorable houses, and
the f^mer to unite the faithfulness of these slaves to himself and his
disseignes, and to encourage them more against their masters, he made
proclamation, that the wives and daughters of those noble men, should join
themselves in marriage Death to (...) preferred be fore dishonesty.
rauishments, were more grievous to the honorable Ladies, and the modest
condition of their thoughts, then death it self: so that before the ceremony
of these sorrowful weddings, and some at the very instant of their nuptial,
killing first their new husbands, then themselves, delivered their chastety by
this natutall virtue, from so barberous a dishonor. The (...) (...).


After this, their was a field fought between the fugetiue senators and
himself: in which, the Tyrant having the upper hand, he drew so many of them
as he had taken prisoners, in triumph through the face of the city: which

With this success of his outragiousnesse he became proud, and no resistance
undertaken against his will he grew arrogant: So that having continual
prosperity, in what barberysme soever he undertook, he held it a deprauation
of his dignity, to be called a man, and therefore entitled himself, The Son
of Jupiter; When he rode abroad, he caused always to be borne before him, an
Eagle of gold as a token of his begetting. He used to wear Robes of Ceraunos,
signefieing Thunder.

Two noble gentlemen called Chion and Leonides, disdaining his miserable The
valor of Chion and Leonides.
and wretched ambition, conspired with themselves to kill him, intending by his
tragedy to set their country at lyberty, or failing in their purpose were
resolved they could not end their lives better then in so honorable and
merytorious an action. These sometime were scholars to the Philosopher Plato,
who desiring to bestow upon their birth place, the virtue to which they were
furthered season their ambush was not ready enough in coming to their rescue,
the Guard pressing in, to apprehend them, they were slain. By force whereof,
it succeeded that though they prevailed in their stratigem, yet they died and
their Country not delivered, for Satire the brother of Clearch following the
principal steps of his brother, aspired to the like tyranny, so that the
Hiraclians many years after by degree of descent, were under the subversion of
Tyrants.

THE
THE ARGUMENT.
THe horrible Earthquakes in Hellespont and Chersonesus, the cruelty of
Lysimachus to his own children by the instigation of their stepmother
Arsirice. The last war between the successors of Alexander. Wherein
Lysimachus is slain by Seleuchus. He also within a while after is slain by
Ptolomy the Kings brother of Egypt. Pirrhus aydeth the Tarentines against the
Romans. A discourse of the Realine of Epyre, with a declaration of the acts
of the Kings thereof.

IN these days their happened a marvelous and terrible Hellespont and
Chersonesus, so that the city Lysimachia, being built by Lysimachus, about
two and twenty years A wonderful (...).
past was subverted; the which wonder betokened some fatal misfortune, to
ensue upon Lysimachus and his offspring: nay should stretch so far, even to
the overthrow and decay of his kingdom, and the destruction of their countries
that were peopled by him: Even so it came to pass: for shortly after,
Lisimachus Agathocles, whom he had caused to be proclaimed heir apparent of
his kingdom, and by whom he had atchiued many famons battles prosperously:
him he now poisoned by the instigation and working of his cruel stepmother
Arsirice: This was the first sore broke out to give warning of the mischief
that was toward him. this was the beginning of the ruin hung over his head,
and a glass wherein was evident his emmenent misery, for having thus murdered
his son, he persisted in the slaughter of his Nobility, having no other
ground for his abortiue actions but that they did consecrate the too sudden
fall of so noble a Prince, and bewail his death: by means whereof, such as
were chief officers in his camp, revolted by troops unto Seleuchus, who
being of himself desierous of such alteration, thorough the envy he had to the
glory of Lysimacus, made their acceptance the more willing: to whom they being
honorably received, and entertainment of command given them every one
according to his degree, they moved and prevailed with Seleuchus, to make war
against Lisimachus. The last co^ tention between Alex anders successors
This was the last contention between them that had served Alexander in his
wars, and as it were a dissension reserved by the godds to be a perpetual
example.

Lysimachus was at this controversy threescore and foureteen years of age,
and Seleuchus threescore and xvii. but time had given them the number of so
many years, yet had they the ambytion that is norisht in young men's hearts,
and an insatiable desire of dominion: for whereas these two alone, now held and
commanded the whole world between them, yet ambition having no confine, they
thought themselves as it were enclosed in a straight, measuring the term of
their lives, not by the length of their years, but by the bounds

In a battle before, and by other chances, Lysimachus lost fifteen of his
children; and now in this dying manfully, he lastly himself made the full
decay of his own house. Seleuchus reioycsing in this so great a victory, (for
he accounted it a greater dignity then the present honor) that he only of
alexanders The death of Lysimachus.
retinew, remained and became a conqueror of conquerors.

While Seleuchus was thus boasting of this his glory, forgetting that either by
the course of nature, or the contrarious accedent, he ere long himself should
become an example of frailty; about seven months after, by the policy of
Ptolomy, who had taken the sister of Lysimachus in marriage, he was surprised
and slain: and with his life made resignement of the kingdom of Macedon,
Lysimachus. Ptolomy respective to conserne that Of this read more in the 24.
Book.
which by this stratagem he had purchased, was diligent to insinuate into the
hearts and favor of the comminalty, hoping to effect so much either for the
respect they had bore to his father Ptolomy the great, or for revenging the
death of Lysimachus; but finding little hope in them as yet, whereon to build
his confidence, he determined to win the sons of Lysimachus to him; and to
that purpose, was a suter to their mother Arsiue, to have her to wife,
promising to adopt the children after him: so that himself succeeding in his
room, he was assured that either for reverence to their mother, or for the
name of a father,

He also earnestly sued by his letters, to be possessed in the ancient amity of
his brother king of egypt, protesting that al inueterate malice and
displeasure, which he had against him, for usurping his fathers kingdom from
him, was now dissoluted: and that he would not thence, endeavor to wrest from
his brother, the sway of Emperor, since he had now with more honor, and more
ease, purchased sufficient from the hand of his fathers enemy. Futhermore, he
sought by all pollices, to make league and be at friendship with Eumenes, and
Antigonus, the sons of Demetrius: and with Antiochus the son of Seleuchus,
with whom he feared to have perpetual and dangerous war. And knowing that
three such enemies inuading him at once, would prove to powerful for his weak
resistance, he ommitted not a confirmation of the like contract with Pirrhus
King of Epire, as one whom he foreknew would be an able furtherance to what
part soever he inclined himself: but Pirrhus as subtle as the deepest,
waighting but advantage (how to cast these, though they had their footing in the
stirrup clean out of the saddle) bore himself Tarentines in their troubles
against the Romans, he desired of Antigonus to furnish (...)
him with ships, for safe convey of his army over: of Antiochus whose Cossers
were better paued with treasure, then his camp strengthened with men of
War, of him he requested to borrowe: of Ptolomy he demanded to send to
his aid a part of the soldiers of Macedon.

But Ptolomy best knowing his weakness not to be able to have any of his
powers gleand from him, if any of the other should break out which he Pirrhus
in consideration of this love, took the daughter of Ptolomy in marriage, and
in his journey, left Ptolomy protector of his kingdom. Forasmuch, now as we
are fallen in remembrance of Epire, it shall be profitable a while, to entreat
of the original of the same kingdom. Molosses was the first King reigned (...)
in that region. Afterward, Pirrhus the son of Achillis, being deprived of
the succession of his fathers sovereignty, by being absent at the battle of
Troy, continued in the same Country, which after his name was first Pirrhus,
and then Epirotes.

This Pirrhus coming into the Temple of Jupiter, to ask counsel of Do^one,
ravished there Anasa, the Niece of Hercules, of whom (afterward taking her to
wife) he begat eight children, of which most of them growing to be beautiful
young Ladies (at their entire request) he married to the kings that were his
neighbors: by means of which alyance, he strengthened himself both with royal
friends, and purchased to his treasure insinite riches: And so leaving the
kingdom of the Chaonians, with Andromache the Wife (...)
of Hector, (who in the division of the booty at the sack of Troy, fell by lot
to be his wife) and unto Helenus the son of king Priamus, a Prince endued

Not long after, by the treason of Oresles, the son of Ag^memnon, he was
slain at Delphos, before the Alter of the Gods. After him succeeded his
son Pylad^s, from him by order of delineation and righfull succession, the
kingdom descended to Arim^a, over whom, because he was fatherless and in his
^onage, and that their were no more alive to insist and record that Noble race
from forgetfulness, but he of earnest desire that the whole Realm had, to
p^eserue him and bring him up, there were certain protectors appointed, by the
general consent of the state, to have the oversight, care and government of
him, there were also Philosophers from al parts, sent as it were by Doctrine and
instructions to manure and fill his body and mind with virtue and manners; so
that by how much his education made him in learning excel his ancestors, by
so much was he better beloved, had the heart and reverence of his subjects. For
he was the first that made laws, ordained a counsel, appointed yearly
officers, and established the estate of the commonweal.

And like as Pirrhus first gave the people their dwelling, so Arimba brought
them first to the trade of civil ordinance, and living. This man's Son was
Neoptolemus, who begat Olimpias the mother of great Alexander, and Alexander
who after his desease, enjoyed the kingdom of Epire, and died in the An
example of a learned Prince.
wars of Italy among the Brutians.

After his disease, his brother Accides succeeded in the kingdom, who by
ouercharging his subjects with the continnall and adverse war, he had
against the Macedons, raised so strong a commotion among them, that they
banished him the realm, leaving behind him a child of his, then but two years
old, called Pirrhus, who was also diligently sought by the people to be Illiria
and delivered unto Berooe, the wife of King Glaucia, to be fostred and
preserved. The which Beroe was also extract of the house of Eacus. This Glaucia
the King, whether it were for pity of his misfortunes, or allured with his
childish and delightful flatterings, defended him long against the spite of
Cassander King of Macedon, who oftentimes demanded with forcible threatenings,
that he would conduct sharp wars on him and his people, unless he delivered
him: but Glaucia regarded not his threats, besides his careful protection of
him, adopted him his lawful son, with which love of Glaucia, the Epyrotes
being moved, converted their Tarentines, against the invincible Romans.

The end of the xvij. Book

THE XVIII. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
PYrrhus overcomes the Romans. Mago Duke of Carthage brings them aid, and
is sent home again. The Romans seek truce with Pyrrhus, the which suit is
crossed by Appius Claudius. Pyrrhus takes upon him the kingdom of Sicill. The
foundation of Tire and Sydon, with a rehear sal of their Histories.

AT this time that Pirrhus was king of Epyre, the Tarentines, Samuits, and
Lucanes, were grievously vexed with The wars of Pyrrhus in Italy.
the war of the Romans; in which necessety of theirs, they sent their
several ambassadors, to entreat his aid; who not so much moved by the
importunity of these suitors, Italy, under his own dominion promised them
succor, and to come presently with an army to remove that affliction incident
unto them: unto which affairs after his mind had thus inclinde, following the
examples of his ancestors, and to demonstrat to the world he had an honorable
qualltiy of his parents, he drove himself desperately forward into all
hazzards, disdaining to be accounted inferior to his uncle Alexander, who had
defended the Tartarians against the Brucians: or oflesse courage then great
Alexander, who had made wars far distant from his own Country, and
subdued the East. Whereupon leaving his son Ptolomy, of the age of fifteen
years as Regent over his kingdom, he landed his Army in the haven of Tarent,
leading along with him his two younger sons, Hellen and Alexander to bear
him company, and be a comfort to him in this voyage, so far remote from his
Country.

Of whose a^riuall, the Roman Consul Valertus Leunius hearing, he was
expeditious to encounter with him, before the aides of his confederates were
assembled: so brought his men into the field even to the enterview, where
Pirrhus was incampt; who on the contrary, held it cowardice to eschew the
battle offered, though the number of the enemies force, far surmounted his.
Both armies being arraid, and the assault begun, the Romans at the first
forced them to retrait, and chasing that advantage they were Masters of, were
even at the point to have put him and his whole power, either to slaughter or
flight: But Pirrhus retiring no further then the back of his Elephantes
Pyrrhus over comes the Romans.
constraind the Romans at the sight of those beasts of Macedon, to which till
then they were never inurd, first to stand as amazed, and by and by to forsake
the field; so from a conquest, which but even now was judged certain by
Pirrhus obtained not this honor without much bloodshed, for he himself was
dangerously wounded, and a great part of his soldiors slain, so that he gained
by this victory more renown then cause to rejoice. Many cities following the
fortune of this battle, yielded themselves to Pirrhus, among which, the
Locrins betraying the Roman Garrison, revolted to him, of which prey Pirrhus
sent home two hundred Roman soldiers ransomelesse to Rome, to the intent that
as the Romans had trusted the carriage and puissance of his body, they should
as well see he had the like liberallity and magnanimousnesse of mind. Shortly
after, the host of the Tarentines and the others congregated Romans likewise
relieved their dispersed Tyrians with sit The magnificence of Pyrrhus.
supply, there was another encounter undertaken between them, wherein his
fortune was like unto the former, and his worthiness appeared no less. The
Carthagentans hearing of this prosperity of Pirrhus, sent Mago one of their
Captains with a hundred and twenty ships, in the aid of the Romans, who
coming before the Senate, told them, it greatly grieved the Carthagenians his
countrymen, and their neighbors and friends, that a foreign K. should be so
powerful to make War in Italy, for which he was sent to offer them that
ready aid, knowing no reason but they being assailed by a foreign enemy might
justly be rescued by foreign sucor: the Senate gave him in the right of the
Carthagenians thanks, but dismissed him and their succors Mago subtle,
according to the nature and inclination of the men of Africa, as though his
affairs tended to proclaim peace, went secretly to Pirrhus, entending to sift
his determination, and to learn what he purposed as concerning Sicill, whether
it was reported Pirrhus was sent for: for howsoever it was otherways
pretended, the Carthagenians sent aid to the Romans for no other end, but
that since Pirrhus was arrived, he might be so occupied with the Romans in
Italy, he should find no leisure to pass on to Sicill. Pirrhus having
prosperity thus far as it were intaild to him; Fabritius Lucinus was sent
Ambassador from the Senate of Rome, to conclude a peace wtih him. The articles
agreed upon, for confirmation thereof, cineas was dismissed from Pirrhus, with
gifts and honorable presents to the Romans, but such was the continency of
them, that he returned without finding any man whose hands were open to
receive his Masters rewards. Another example to equallize this staidness of
the Romans, happened in the same time much about this, for the senate sending
Ambassadors to Ptolomy, into Egypt: the King accustomed to gratify such
Messengers with royal benefits, presented them with the like, the which they
modestly deemed, yet before their departure being solemnly invited to feast
with the King, there were commended unto them several crowns of gold, which
for that time for the honor of Ptolomy, though they refused no^ but received,
the next day after they discharged themselves of them, least they should be
tainted with suspicion of any corruption, and placst them upon the Kings Images.

But while Syneas was arbitrating these affairs betwixt Pirrhus and the
Romans, and a peace concluded, the disse^gnes were ordered in his Ambassie
Pyrhus made king of Sycil. read more in the 23. Book.
Appius Claudius. At his return Pirrhus demanded of him, what manner of thing
Rome was, who instructed thereunto by the magnificency of his entertainment, the
grauety, wisdom, and Nobleness of the people, answered that it seemed to him
to be a City al of kings. By this the Amabassadors sent from the Sicilians
were to have a hearing of Pirrhus, who admitted before him, rendered into his
hands, the righ^ and title of their whole Island, desiring him of his princely
grace to take them into his protection, whose labors were fruitless by the
continual wars which the Carthageniens A digression to the acts of the
Tyrians.
infor^st upon them: which Pirrhus accepting, le^^ing his Son Alexander at
Locus, and having strengthened the other Cities with sufficient Sicill. Being
now come to entreat of the Carthageniens, It shall not be amiss for the
amplifieing of our History, to digress from the present subject, and speak
somewhat of their Original, as also to repeat the deeds of the Tyrians, whose
miseries were no less to be lamented.

This Nation of the Tyrians had their first foundation by the Phenecians, who
before being troubled with an Earthquake, forsook their Native soil, and
inhabited first by the lake of Assiria, and from thence remoouing themselves
nearer to the Sea coast, they builded a City, which of the abundance of Fish
that had breeding there, they named it Sidon. In this continent they
Ascalonites, they took shipping, and arrived in the same ground whereon they
builded Tire: which City, was finished the year before the destruction of
Troy. In this neither remaind they in peace, but were often affailed by the
Wars of the Persians.

But their power much wasted by this war, and the multitude of the bondmen
exceeding their Masters; they pretended to exemplify their savage nature upon
them, whom they were bound to obey: which conspiracy, by the Bondmen (...) in
cruelty.
concealment thereof, first taking life, grew after to such issue, that they
butchered their Masters, and all the freeborn posterity: and having the
pity, and preserved their lives, every day bringing them food. The other
bondmen ignorant that any Masters or freeborn generation were alive, began to
consult of the estate of government; and agreed that it was requisite for the
security of them all, to incorporat the City to themselves and create aching,
and him especially (as a man most acceptable to the Gods,) that first should
see the next morrow. This honest slave declared this secretly to his Master
Strato (for so was the old man named) craving therein the furtherance of his
advise: so being by him sufficiently instructed what to do, while all the rest
stood staring into the East, he only advisedly looked into the West. At the
first, all the residue of his fellows, thought it madness in him to gape for
the Sun rising in the West. But as soon as the day began to The (...) between
honesty and villamy.
Strato could not but be preserved by the Divine providence of the Gods, for
some future good, they agreed and created their King. After whose decease, the
kingdom descended to his son, and so colatterally, forth to his posterity.
Which act of these slaves, though it were notable and a necessary example to
succeeding ages, yet Alexander the great, having continued long war in the
countries of the East as a revenger, raisd war upon them, who had bin enemies
to a common tranquillity, besieged and sacked the city, commanding all those to
be hung up, that remained alive after the battle: executing justice on the
posterity Strato preserved, and restored the kingdom to his offspring,
peopling it with freeborn families, to the intent that the slavish seed being
rooted out, the offspring of those might live to report they were planted by
him. These Tyrians being thus by Alexander a Nation new founded through
travel, and sparing in spending, grew as strong again in short time as before
the slaughter of their Masters: so that thus again replenished, they sent a
company of youth into Afric, and built up Vtica. About The building of Vtica.
which time thek. of Tire deceased, ordaining for his heirs his son Pigmalion,
and his daughter Elissa, a princess of excellent beauty. The kingdom went
Pigmalion, being a child, and Elissa was married to her Uncle Sicheus the
Priest of Hercules, being in greatest authority next the king. This Sicheus was
reputed to be possessed of so much riches, that he buried it in the ground. The
brute of which, though not certain to any, was so commonly reported of al, that
it attaind to Pigmalion, who incensed with a covetous desire (forgetting all
natural affinity, sought to stop such thoughts, or ever they apprehend the
fullness of action or without respect of religion, the remembrance of which,
would have so beat on the anuill of his conscience, til it had wrought him to a
better form then the evil he intended: to compass this wealth, which was
only to be had by rumor, he slaughtered his Noble Uncle Sycheus being also his
brother in law. Elissa detesting this wicked an abominable act of her
Brothers, lamenting the unhappy ^ragedy of her so loving a husband, and
doubting as great mischief pretended against her person, dissembled so
far, as sorrow and hope of revenge would give her leave: the labors of her
mind bearing in all things a fair and favorable countenance toward her
brother, as if she had slightly forgot so great a trespass Pigmalion, and
addressing her speech to him, entreated she might remove her own dwelling,
and come to so^ourne with him, to this intent the brute and remembrance of her
husband, should not any longer march as a shaddowe before her eyes, nor the
sight of his house, continually renew the sorrow which she coueted to forget.
The wicked ne^^^ of Pygmialion.


Pigmalion, well satisfied with this suit of his sisters, hoping with the
remove of her self to his country, she would also remove her husbands
treasure, for the which he had murdered him: gave her a liberal and frank
consent to inioie his country and that wherein might content her, Little
doubting the escape which Elissa by this policy pretended

But she being a ship board, and under sail, both with her own friends and
such of the Kings servants, who were lent in her help for her guard, in
shutting of the evening, being out of the ken of her Country, called those who
Pigmalion and compeld the^ to throw ouerbord a many of bags and Coffers full of
sand, persuading them it was treasure: when she her self with trickling
tears, and woeful Lamentation, shrieking out the The pollicye of (...) to
e^^ape her brother.
name of Sicheus in distracted sillables, beseeched him by the Love he bore
her, being her husband, to accept that his riches, as an oblation which had
been the cause of his death. This done, she turned her self to the Kings
servants, and told them, that riches which she had enforcst them to enrich the
sea withal, should be a means to hasten on her death, which she so often had
heartily desired: and that they themselves should suffer the bitterest torments,
tirrannie could invent: for being obedient to her will. For that Sicheus, for
that treasure the covetousness of my Kingly, yet vnkinglie brother, murdered
him: for that treasure my brother and your sovereign lent me your aid, and
permitted me to come and have a habitation in his kingdom: of which treasure,
when he shall find his thirsty appetite vnslackt, he will be as pitiless to me
his sister, as he was to Sicheus my husband and his. Uncle, and as merciless
to you his subjects, both we shall well escape, if you will lay your lives upon
my fortunes, go willingly with me, not to my unkind brother, but undertake a
pilgrimage out of this dangerous kingdom, whether the gods, the winds, and
this sea shall conduct us: and wheresoever we arrive, I as your Queeene, and
you as my people, will buy a plot of ground, whereon to build us a peaceful
habitation. These men, being hallowed with her words, assured of the Tirrany
of their master, with some fear and no less love, they offered themselves
unto her, desiring the gods of a prosperous voyage.

Thus a great number of the nobility, were in readiness to set forth with her,
and having made sacrifice to Hercules, they forsook their country to seek a
new dwelling place. The first land that they arrived at, was the Isle of
Syprus, Iupyter offered himself to Elysa, as a partaker of her fortune, upon
condition that his posterity should for ever enjoy the honor of the priest
hood. The custom of the Ciprians was to send their maids before they were
married to the sea side, there, with the abuse of their bodies, made offeringes
to Venus for the preservation of their chastity al their lives after. Of these
women, The wicked custom of the Cyprians.
Elisa commanded her men to take up 80. and ship them, that her young men
might have wives, and the city increase in issue. These things thus done
Pygmalion knowing of the flight of his sister, purposed to pursue her, but was
warned by prophecy, that he should not escape unpunished, if he hindered the
advancement Elissa safely arrived on the coasts of Afric, won the hearts
of all the inhabitants. After, having gotten a piece of ground, even as much as
might be compassed with an Ox hyde, and therein she refreshed her whole
company, then caused she the hide to be cut into thongs, and by this policy
got a very large plot, whereupon that place was called Birsa. After, many of the
inhabitants brought unto them many things to sell, and built them houses, so in
time it became a famous city. The ambassadors of Vtica brought them rich
presents: also the Affricans were very desirous of their company, so that by
the help of al parties Carthage was builded, paying only a yearly rent for
the The building of Carthage.
ground. In their digging they found an Ox head, betokening a fruitful land,
Carthage flourished, Hiarbas king of Mauritania calling ten Princes of the
Africks, sent for Elissa to be his wife, and if she denied he threatened war.
Which message they fearing to deliver, wrought by craft, saying their king
Hiarbas requires Dido in marriage.
requested a person to instruct his nations in civil life. They being rebuked of
the Queen, they uttered the kings command, that she must be conformable, to
his request, or look for further danger. Being thus deceived she called often
Sycheus, yet at last answered she would go whither her destiny directed. Upon
this she caused a fire to be made in the furthest parts of the city, where
after some sacrifices done, she took a sword standing on the top of the fire,
laying according to the kings command she would go to her husband, thrusting
her body through with the sword. In carthage she was worshipped Dido kills her
self.
ever after as a Goddess. This cittye was builded 72 years before Rome.

Furthermore among other mischiefs, they were sor^ vexed with the plague, for
remedy whereof, they used a bloody kind of Religion and abominable
wickedness. For they offered men up in sacrifice, and killed innocent
younglings upon the altars, the (which age is wont to provoke even the enemy
to pity) seeking to pacify the Gods with the blood of them, for whose life
the Gods are wont most of all other to be prayed unto. Therefore the Gods
being worthily angry, turned from them for so great a wickedness, although
they had war along time in Sicill to their utter destruction: and removed the
war into Sardima, having lost the greater part of their host, they were
vanquished in a sore and deadly battle. For which Machaeus, under whose guide
they had Conquered that part of Sicill, and atchiued many great adventures
against the Affricans. Which thing Machaeus ba nis^ed.
the men of war taking in great displeasure, sent Ambassadors to Carthage,
entreating that they might return into their Country, as also for pardon of
their unfortunate war, withal telling them, that if they might not obtain
their request by entreatance, they would win it by the sword. When the
Ambassadors could get nothing, neither by fair means nor by foul, within a
few days after, they took shipping, and came to the City all in arms.

Being come they protested before Gods and men, that their coming was not to
offer any violence to their country, but only to recover it, and that they
would show their Countrymen that they wanted not courage in Carthage is
besieged by her own Citizens.
the former Wars, but good fortune. Hereupon they kept the City from all
manner of victuals, and besieged it so narrowly, that they brovghte the
Carthagenians to utter despair. In the mean time Cartalo, (the son of the
banished Captain Macheus,) as he passed by his fathers camp from Tire,
(whither he had been sent by the Cartbagenians, to carry unto Hercules the
tenths of the booty that his father had taken in Sicill) being sent for by his
father, answered he would first accomplish his duty in the public religion,
(...).
Gold, to come into the open face of so many of thy wretched Citizens; and
enter into this sorrowful and mourning camp, swimming in these tokens of
royalty and prosperity, like as if thou should triumph over us? Could robe
and these crowns of gold, but the titles of my victories? For as much therefore
as thou acknowledgest thy father for no better then a banished man, I will also
show my self rather a severe captain, then a father toward thee, and I will
make thee an example to all men hereafter, not to be so bold as to laugh and
scorn at the unfortunate miseries of their fathers.

Immediately hereupon, he caused him to be nailed to a very high cross in sight
of all the city, in his gorgious apparel. Within a few days after he took
Carthage, and summoning the people before him, complained of his wrongful
banyishment, excusing the war which he was compelled to take in hand, full
sore against his will, by reason his conquests were despised. Wherefore
Carthage is taken.
Mago, by whose knighthood both the richesse, the bounds of the Empire, and the
renown of Carthage was greatly increased, and augmented.

The end of the xviij. Book.
THE XIX. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
MAgo Duke of Carthage dies. His sons Hasdruball and Hamilcar succeed. The
Carthageniens are overcome by the Affrickes, and pay the rent for their city.
They make war in Sardinia and Sycill. The message of the Ambassadors of
Darius to the Carthageniens. The Affricans are compelled to release the rent.
The army of Hamilco perishetb by the pestilent influence of the stars. The

IN these days Mago was chief Captain of Carthage, who had by his diligence
in ordering the laws of Arms, founded the Empire of Africa, and established
the fortification of Carthage, no A continu^^e of the history of Carthage.
less by his policy in war, then by his puissance, he deceased, leaving
behind him two sons, Hasdruball and Hamilcar, who following in the footesteppes
of their fathers virtue, as they succeeded him in Lynage, so they equald him in
worthiness. Sardinia, and a field fought against the Affricans, to withstand
the arrearages they demanded as rent for the soil whereon the City
stands, but as the Aphricks had the iuster quarrel, so had they the better
fortune; by means whereof this war concluded between them, by payment of
money, and not by dint of sword. In Sardinia, Hasdruball being mortally
wounded, surrendered the government to his brother Hamilear and died: whose
death was made honorable by the mourning of the whole City for him, and whose
life was no less, for he had bin eleven times Dictator, and had had triumphs.

At the news of his death, the enemy began to take courage, as though with
their Captain the strength of the city had also decaid, for the Sicilians
being oppressed by the Carthagenians daily injuries, revolted to Leomeda the
brother of the King of Lacedemon, whereupon was continued a long and cruel
war between them, the advantage sometime inclining to the one part, sometime
to the other.

Now Daryus king of Persia, entending to make war against the Greeyans, sent
his Ambassadors to Carthage, requesting their aid in the furtherance of his
purpose, with commandment also, they should leave offering of men in
sacrifices and eating of dogs flesh, prescribed to them according to the
manner of the Persians, rather to burn their dead bodies, then to bury them in
the ground. But the Carthageniens denying him aid, by reason of the
troublesome wars they had with their borderers, to the intent they would not
seem disobedient in all things, willingly obayed him in the rest. In the mean
season Hamilcar was slain in the wars in Sycill, leaving behind him three
sons, Amilco, Hanno, and Gisgo: Hasdruball had also alike number of sons,
Hamil^ar ^lame in the wa^^es.
Hanyball, Hasdruball, and Sapphe.

By these Captains were the affairs of Carthage ordered, and the city
defended, war was made against the Moors, fields fought with the Numidians,
and the Affricks compelled to release the Carthageniens for ever, of the rent
they were wont to pay for the soil of the city. After this so great a number
of Graund Captains being held burthenson to the city, which before time had
bin free, in that they built or perverted all affairs even to their own
opinion, that they acquit or condemned, whom or what they lift themselves:
there were a hundred Senators chosen to be Judges, which when any of these
Captains were returned from their wars, should take an upright account of

For directing the war in Sicil, in the stead of Hamilcar, Hamilco was made
graund captain: who having prosperous success in all battles, both by sea and
land, suddenly by the influence of a pestilent planet, lost all his men of
Hamilco made grand-Captaine.
war: whereof when tidings came to carthage, the hearts of all the city was
cast into mourning, and there eyes saw no other comfort but tears: the
lamentation was as Hideous, as though the city had bin sacked by their enemies,
and their grief so genearal, that they releiued one another sorrow, not
suffering

Mothers wept for their children, fathers for their sons, brothers for their
brothers, and one generation for another: so the shreeking and howling one made
unto another, appeared rather to be the violence of whirlewindes, or an
outtragious tempest, then the perplexities of reasonable creatures. After this
comes out of his ship, (the poor but honorable captain Hamilco) in a filthy
and beggarly torn cloak, girt about him: at the sight of whom the mourners as
they stood in rancks clustred to come near him, where they discerned by his
misery being so great, how much greater was distress to the rest. While he
himself houlding up his hands to heaven, bewailed his own misfortune joined
to the calamity of his Country, and there withal cried out upon the gods,
who had taken from him so great honor of chiualrye, and so great ornaments of
victories, which they themselves had given and made him master of: who after
the winning of so many Cities, the vanquishing of so fierce enemies, both by
sea and land, had destroyed that victorious army not by battle

But to this comfort, this honorable Captain had one grief, his repute
exceeded all limit, which was, that his own fate and the character of his
miserable days, had not period with his followers. That he was not so
fortunat, to dye and surfeit in mishap, among these most valiant men; but be
reserved out of one mischief to fall into another: from the fury of the
pestilence, not to live pleasantly, but to be a pointing stock for the
multitude, and a remembrancer of calamities

Wherefore so soon as he had conveyed home the remnant of his wretched host
into Carthage, he vowed he would follow them as their fellow; and though the
pestilence shund him, he would chase death till he had overtaken him: Hamileo
kills hunselfe.
barring the doors fast, suffering none to come whereby to intercept him, not
so much as his sons to take their leaves of him, he killed himself.

The end of the xix. Book.
THE XX. BOOK OF
THE ARGUMENT.
THe elder Dennis drives the Carthagenians out of Cicill, and maintains
wars in Italy. A declaration of the first original of many cities in Italy.
Wars between the Crotonians and the Locrenses. The life, doctrine and

DEnnis having repulsed the Carthageniens out of Sicill, and taken the
government of all the whole Island into his own hand, thinking it both a burden
to the realm, to keep so great a power as he then consisted of, without
employment, as also a matter dangerous, to suffer so noble an army to ly still
slouthfully, and without exercise, Italy: partly of purpose, to quicken the
strength of his Soldiers, by continual labor, and also to enlarge the
bounds of his Empire. the first war that he had after his aryuall, was
against the Greeks that inhabited the nearest to the Sea The wars of D^^^^s
in Italy.
coast, when he first landed, the which being subdued, he assailed the next
unto them, and in the end proclaimed war against all that bare the name of
Greeks in Italy, intending to root out all the inhabytants, and make a
hopeless posterity of them: which sort of people, so far remote from their
oryginall, were so increased, that they held not a part, but almost all Italy.
At this time, although they be many cities which after so long continuance, do
yet at this day uphold and show manifest tokens of the Greekish custom. For
the people of Thusc^ne, Venetians who ever since are inhabiters of the upper
sea, came under Antenor from Troy, after the taking and utter destruction
thereos. Adrya which is adjoining to the Illirvan sea, and gave the name first
to the Adriaticke sea, is also a Greek city. L^kewise Apros which Dyomedes
builded after the overthrow of Troy, being cast up in the same place by
shipwreck. Moreover Pise in Lumbardy had Greeks to their founders, and among
the Thuscanes, the Tarquines drew their beginning from the Thessalians, and
Spinambres, and the Perusines from the Acheans: here might be much declared of
the City cere, as also of the latin people, who A digression to the
foundation of the ^^^y^s of Italy.
say themselves to be desended from Eneas, the Falisbes, the Iapygians, the
Nolanes, the Abelanes, were of oldeenhabiters in Chalcis. What is the coast of
campanya? What are the Brutians and Sabines? What are the Samnits? But
extracted from Grecia? What are the Tarentines, who appear to this day upon
record, came from Lacedemon, and were first called bastards. It is said further,
that Philoctetes built the city Thurines, whose toombe stands yet to be
seen vnruinde, Hercules, in the Temple of Apollo, which had the name of the
destiny of Troy. The Metapontines also, reserved for a memory to this day, to
show in the Temple of Mynerua, the iron tools of Epeus, their first founder,
wherewith he made the horse Agent in the destruction of stately Illyrium. And
for this cause, that they endeavor by these ancient remembrances, to uphold
their desent all that part of Italy (sur-named the greater Greece.) But in the
beginning of their foundations, the Metapontines assisted in confedracy with
the Sybarites and Crotoniens, after determination had, endeavored to expel all the other Grecians out of Italy: and as soon as to that purpose, they had taken
the city Siris, in the conquest thereof they killed before the sacred altar
consecrate to Minerua, fifty youngmen, embracing her Image; neither
Crotonienses went first to entreat relief from the Oracle at Delphos, where
answer was made them, that in vain was all resistance, for the mischief so
evident among them might not cease, till they had appeased wrathful Mynerua;
for trespassing so heynously against the deuinity due to her Godhed: as also
the Ghostes of them in her Temple they had so cruelly slain. Civil wars in
Italy


Hereupon, they began to carue images, of the same bigness that the men
Minerua, but the Metapontines knowing also the Oracle of the Gods, thought it
good to work more speedily in a buysinesse of this necessety; so they engraued
as a recompense to the youngmens ghosts, little images, and appeased the Gods
indignation with bread sacrifices. So that the one part striued in
costlienesse, the other part endeavored in swiftness, the pestilence was
ceased to both of them. The Crotoniens having recovered health, desiered
quietness long after, for remembrance that in the siege of Syris, the Locrines
whom they distrusted not, came as their enemies to fight against them: they
take so great displeasure thereat, that in this anger they made war upon
them. The Locrines, being Spartanes, beseeching them humbly of succor. But the
Spartanes loath to busy themseleus in a war so far remote from them,
advised to ask help of Castor and Pollux: neither did the Ambassadors despise
their counsel, but departing to the next Temple, there offered sacrifice, and
inuoked the Gods of their help: so having obtained the success they came
for, (as they thought) they departed, being as iocond as if they had carried
the Gods themselves to further their prosperity.

They also made them shrines in their ships, and assuring themselves of an
auspicious journey, in stead of succor they brought home comfort. This known
to the Crotoniens, they also sent their Ambassadors to the Oracle at Delphos,
praiing for victory and prosperous end of their undertaken war: where it was
answered, they must overcome by viewing, ere they should vanquish them by
battle. Whereupon, (so desirous they were of this honor) they vowed unto
Apollo, the tenth of the profit should be taken. The Locrines on the contrary,
having good intelligence, both of the vow of their enemies, and the answer
Crotonenses a hundred and twenty thousand fighting men, armed ready for the
encounter, and knew their own power too slen^er to resist the furious shock of
such a conflict, being but fifteen thousand Soldiers at the most, they threw
away all hope of victory, cast away all fear, enemy to resolution, accounting
themselves impossible to be rescued, prepared their Men in desp^^re get the
victory.
lives confidently to dye yet honorably in that field: So in this desp^ration,
every man took such a hearty courage to himself, that they held it victory
enough for them, if before they died, they might revenge their deaths on
Locrines were in the teror of this battle, an Eagle was seen never to depart
from thence, but still kept a houering and soring bout them, till they had the
upper hand. Moreover two youngmen in strange armor, unlike the one to the
other, of excellent personage, mounted upon two white horses, and in scarlet
clokes, were seen fighting in the wings of the battle: who as soon as the
difference was ended, vanquished out of sight. The incredible swiftnes of fame
increased the wonder of this accident, Italy, the victory was reported at
Corinth, Athens, and Lacedemon. After this inauspicious sucesse, the
Crotonenses grew carlesse to exercise themselves in chiualry and feats of
arms, and as it were in the whole disposition of nature altered, by the fatal
event of that war, which they so unluckily attempted, changed their life into
riot and idleness; in which spoil they had persisted, had not the Philosopher
Pythagor as, staid them from this giddines, and molded them a new with his
instruction. This Pythagor as, being the son of a rich Merchant of Samos,
called Demaratus, was brought up in the education of learning, and studies of
wisdom, in which precepts he so worthily increased, that he took his journey
first into Egypt, after to Babylon, to learn perfectly the causes whereby the
planets so orderly moved, and to search out the beginning of the world. During
his exercise in this place, he attained to singular knowledge, and at his
return, went Of Pythag^ras and his doctrine.
to Lacedemon to study the laws of Minos and Lycurgus. In all which he being
perfectly instructed, he came to Croton, where by his authority, he brought the
people to human society and thriftinesse in life, being but even latly before
fallen into excess riot, his daiely lectures were to commed virtue and make
hateful vice, reciting the miserable chances of cities which had decayed
through that plague, whereby he so strired the multitude to the endeavor of
labor, that some over whelmed before in the pleasure of riot, whereby him
contrary to expectation (since that which is engraven in the mind, is hardly to
be raced out but by death) brought again to loathe that which but lately they
loved.

Moreover he gave the wives instructions, privately from their husbands, and the
children a part from their parents: he taught the women shamfastnesse
obedience, and womanhood to their husbands; the men children modesty,
soberness, good nurture and learning. And among these things, he enterlaced
Pythagoras o^ (...) (...).
thriftinesse the mother of virtues. Finally he did so much with his continual
Iunoes Temple, where they consecrated them to the Gods; so that what with his
boldly reproving vice and mildly encouraging them to virtue, the men held him
not worthy to eat, whose thoughts were rather given to idelnesse then
industry, and the wives persuaded themselves that the beautifieng, and those
things praise worthy in Ladies and gentlewomen, is chastity, not attire. How
much his doctrine had power and ability to sway, with the baser multitude, and
for b^^l^ing

But in this city as in all cities and kingdoms else, how careful and
provident soever be the public government of the estate: how secure and
upright, their statutes and ordinances, how diligent the ministering of
religion, let Justice carry his balance never so even, the government shall be
despised, the laws scandalized, religion disdained, authority slandered, and
when this moster, people, can no way find starting holes to save themselves,
they violently break out. So in this Croton, three hundred factious youngmen,
contemning these precepts of Pythagoras, given them as wholesome medicines to
preserve them in a publik^ good, holding in stead of law their will lawless,
Pythagorus principles, learned to distinguish good from evil, mustred them
selves, and the better persuaded people against them, where they were compact
in a house together, and at the first intended to set on fire, but they issuing
out in resistance, threescore of them were slain, and the rest apprehended,
were after by due sentence banished.

When Pythagoras, had inhabited full twenty years at Croton, he removed to
Metapont, and there deceased: whom that city also had in such estimation, that
of his house they made a temple, and honored him for a God: therefore, after
that Dennis the Tyrant (whom is declared to have passed his army out of
^^^^^g^ras dy^th.
sicill into Italy, and to have provoked war against the Greeks) had won
Locres by siedge he assailed the Crotoniens, who had scarcely though in so long
respit, recovered their strength decayed by the slaughter at the aforesaid
battle, and yet they now being thus inforst, with their few more valiantly
resisted his so Populous an army, then they could with so many thousands, make
defense against the small number of the Locrines. So great force has poverty
to prevail against riches, and so much more certain sometimes proves a
victory unhoped for, where justice and discresion guides, then conquest
accounted of before by the trust of the multitude.

While Dennis was in readiness with this war, there arrived in his army
Ambassadors from the frenchmen, who a few months before had burned Rome,
desiering him to enter into league with them, and take them to his Dennis
makes league with those Frenchmen that burned Rome.
friendship; aledging these reasons to move thereunto, that their country
Dennis taking the treaty of this Embassage to be profitable for his disseignes
in hand, took them to the league with him, and being increased in power by
their aid began as it were fresh war again in croton. The reason that
moved these Frenchmen to travel into Italy, and to seek them out a strange
habitation, was the ciuyll discord and continual debate had among themselves,
ouerwearied wherewith, arriving in Italy they expelled the Thuscanes out of
their Scttuation, Cities builded in Italy by the french
and builded for them and their posteriy, the cities of Millain, Come, Brixia,
Verona, Bergome, Trydent, and Vincent. The Thuscanes also with their captain
Rehtus, having lost their own country, took the Alps, and after the name of
their captain founded the nation of the Rhetians.

But Dennis by the coming of the carthageniens into Sicill was compelled to
return home. For they had prepared their army and with a greater power removed
that wars which they had broken up by the constraint of the pestilence. The
captain of this war was Hanno of carthage, whose enemy Sumator, a man at that
time of the greatest power and most command among the Affrickes, prouokt by an
inueterat malice he bore to Hanno, wrote familiarly in Greek to Dennis,
aduertising him of this army, the whole plot intended, and of the cowardice of
the captain. But his letters being intercepted by the way, he was apprehended,
arraigned, and convict of treason, and presently an act by Parliament was
confirmed, that no subject of carthage, should from thence learn Greek
letters, or study the Greek tongue: none should have conference with the enemy
without an interpretor, nor discover any business of state by writing. But
this Dennis whose pride and ambitious desire neither Sicill nor Italy were able
to contain, being overcome in all the adventures and battles he attempted, at
last his army dishartened by his ominous directions, practiced his destruction,
and in the end The end of Dennis.


The end of the xx. Book.
THE XXI. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe younger Dennis purposes all kind of Tyrany. He is expulsed the Realm. He
uses most unspeakable Tyranny at Locres in Italy. He is drinen from thence
and takes Syracuse. Hanno goes about to oppress the commonweal of Carthage.
His treasons twice betrayed, and he executed for the same. Dennis deposes
himself and flies to Corinth, where he lives a loath some life. Hamilear

COncerning this Tyrant Dennis thus slain in Sicill, his men of war placed
to succeed in the sovereignty Dennis his eldest son; the rather for that he
was grown to man's estate, as also hoping by the inauguratio^ of him, the
kingdom appertaining to the dignity of one would be of more validity, then if
it should be divided in many Dennis the younger
Dennis sons, this Dennis in the beginning of his reign, exasperated much, to
have put to death his brothers Uncles, only for the Jealousy he had, that he
held them to be enuiers of his greatness, and prouokers of the children to
demand, or indeed compel a distribution or partition of the kingdom:
whereupon he dissembled his desire a while, and endeavored by his actions to
procure the future favor of his commons ere he would undertake so dangerous
attempt, holding it a principle for him to be governed by, that where opinion
is once confirmed in the breasts of the multitude, of the integretie of a
Prince, be he never so distant from vprightnes, their tongues applaud of
prison, released the people three years subsidye, was liber all of any favors,
bountiful of his courtesy, alluring their minds to him by all counterfeit
gentleness, dissimulation was able to devise, but having dealt with them as
Fishers do by their nets, who draw them by little and little, till they attain
to the end they look for, he presently set forward the mischief he so long
had purposed, he slew not only his own, and his brothers kindred, but his
brothers themselves. Insomuch that those whom he ought of right, to have The
cru^lty of Demus.
made partners with him in his kingdom, he permitted, not to be partakers of
life and breath, beginning to execute his Tirany upon the blood of himself ere
he proceeded to be violent against strangers.

When he had thus dispatched his brothers, of whom more then of foreign
enemies he stood in fear, thinking himself now secure, he fell to slothfulnes,
and neglecting his wars to immoderat excess and banqueting, where by he
became corpulent and vnweeldy, and had such a disease inflamed into his eyes,
that he was not able to endure the Sun, the least dust, nor the glimmering of
any light. Finding this encumbrance, both in his body and sight, he believed
himself to be had in disdain of all men, upon whom he began to execute
extreme cruelties, not stuffing the ^ayles with prisoners as his fathers did,
but replenishing the City (which had long time been empty) with new
slaughters, so that he became not so much disdained for Syracusans were
prepared in readiness to bid him battle, he was long in counsel with his
Knights, whether it were more available for him to depose himself from rule,
or for the preservation of his dignity to withstand them by force. But his men
of war, in hope to have the spoil of so wealthy a City, made him try the
hazard of battle.

Where being vanquished, he attempted fortune the second time with success,
then sent Ambassadors to the Syracusans, promising them to depose himself from
his Tyrany, if they would send commissioners unto him, to The tteache ^y of
Dennis
conclude of an agreement betweenethem, who sent the chief men of their City
for the same purpose, who he presently imprisoned, and while the Siracusans
Dennis sheth into Italy.
retired, secretly conuaid himself into Italy, with all his Princely
apparel, treasure and household stuff, in which banishment of his he was
received by his confederates the Locrins, who had not long time received him to
succor, but one them also exerciced his violent cruelties. He enforced the
Noblemens

At such time as the Locrins were oppressed with the wars of Leophon K. of
Rhegium, they made a vow, that if they had the upper hand and overthrow of
their enemies, they would upon the next feastiuall day of Venus, set their
virgins in the general stews for all men to abuse: which vow being left
unperformed, by having unfortunate wars with the Lucanes, Dennis called the
citizens to gether before him, and exhorted them to send their wives and
daughters, as sumptuously apparrailed as might be, to the Temple of Venus, and
out of them their should be a hundred drawn by lot, to perform the common
ceremony which wives and daughters for religions sake, should contiune in the
Brothel-house for the space of one month, all their husbands being before
sworn not for that time to have any right of them: and to the intent the
maidens,

This counsel was well allowed, as in the which, provision seemed to be made a
means both for the performance of their superstitious vow, and also for the
preservation of the chastity of their virgins, whereupon all the women
assembled into the temple of Venus, so gorgiously and costly atyrued, as every
one, had despite against the other who might best exceed. Among whom, Dennis
sent his men of war, and stripped them of their ornaments, converting them to
his own gain and profit. Some of their husbands, whom he knew to be Locrines
cloid with his oppression, took heart and conspired against him, and Dennis is
expulsed.
so prevailed that they expelled him out of the city, from whence he returned
into Sicell, where likewise by treason, no man mistrusting an alteration, after
so long continuance of peace, he recovered the city Syracuse. But while he was
busied in these affairs in Sycill: in Affricke Hanno Prince of Carthage, began
to employ his riches (by which he surmounted the power of the commonwealth)
Hannos conspiraci^^ against Carthage.
about the compassing of the whole sovereignty, entending to

And therefore he prepared a feast for the people in the open porches and
galleries of the City; But for the senate in a private and particular place in
his own house, making this an assurance in himself, that if at that feast he
could poison and dispatch the senators to their graves, he might without
resistance him of his purpose, they made a decree, wherein was limited what
cost should be bestowed upon marriages, straightly charging and commanding the
sam to be observed, not of any one man in especial, but of al in general; to
the intent the person should not seem to be noted but the vices rebuked. Hanno
being by this device prevented, stirred the bondmen to rebelion, and having
determined a day again for the slaughter of the senate, finding him and his
purposes the second time circumuented and betra^d, fearing also to be
apprehended and arraigned of treason, he fortified himself with twenty
thousand bondmen well armed in a strong Castle, where while he solicited the
Affricks and the King of Mauritane for supply, being lingered off with delays,
and the senate now pursuing revenge for so heinous conspiracies, as Hanno is
taken and punished.


In the mean time Dennis after his return and possession in the seat of
Syracusa, persisted and studied how to make, his cruelties, tiranies, and
oppressions more sharp and pointed, against the Citizens, so that they again
Dennis depo^^th himself
were enforced to besiege him, which so forcibly they perceuerd in against him,
that he seeing no means, nor hope of rescue, deposed himself, and yielded to
the Syracusans both his hold and his host, and receiving no more but his own
private household stuff he was dismissed from thence, and as a banished man
betook himself to Corinth, where thinking now in this deiection the basest
estate to be the surest, forgeting the dignity of a K. and fruit of The vile
and loathsome life of Dennis.
and a companion for the most reprobates, unless he were bibing in every
tippling house with them: not to be seen in Tauernes, and Ale-hoases, but to
frequent and sit still therein, from morning till noone, from noone till
night: he held it no contumely to brabble with every rascal, with the rabble of
people, as we use to say for moone-shine in the Water. He was a companion for
the ragged, and esteemed the most slouenliest, provoking men to laughter, rather
then laugh himself: he would use to stand gaping and gazing in the Market
shambles, devouring with his eyes the things he could

For albeit his former and whole course of life always abounded in tyranous
vices, yet this was but a formal counterfetting of former qualities and no
natural disposition, he studied these things, rather of policy, then that he
had forgotten his royal and princely behavior, for that he knew by proof,
how hateful the name of a Tyrant was, though they had relinguished their
power, and distributed their riches: and therefore he labored to take away the
envy of things past, by bringing himfelfe in a contempt for his present
demeanor, having not so much reguard, to that was for his honor as what was for
the preseu^tion and saueguard of his life: yet notwithstanding among all these
counterf^t dissimulations, and policies, he was thrice accused to have
endeavored

In the time that this course of Dennis had such success, the Carthageniens
heartily troubled, with the prosperous euentes, great Alexander had in all the
warlike affairs he undertook, and doubting least where he had conquered the
kingdom of Persia, he would also adioyne Affricke thereunto, they sent
Hamilcar sur-named Rhodanus, a man far passing all the judgments of his time
in wit and eloquence, to sifte and gather intelligence what he intended
therein, for it greatly increased their fear, and gave them manifest cause to
doubt, since they themselves were witnesses, that their mother City Tyrus
chief author of their beginning to be taken, and the city Alexandria an
enemy Carthage, built in the bounds of Affricke and Egypt; withal, the
fortunat felicity of the King himself, whose covetousness, and prosperity
they supposed would never be at end. Hamilear laboring to come to personal
speech with Alexander, attained it by the help of Parmenio, to whom, he faining
himself to be exciled his country, he was fled to so great and gracious a
Monarch for succor, offering his service as a private soldier in his wars, by
which policy having from time to time perfect instructions, of the kings
proceedings and purposes, he advertised his countrymen thereof in tables of
wood co^ered over with plain wax: notwithstanding which service, carthage,
after the death of Alexander when he returned home, the Senate not only suffered
him to escape unrewarded, but most cruelly put him to death, suggesting he
went about to chaleng as his due to be king of the City.

The end of the xxi. Book.
The xxij book of Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
AGathocles rises from a very base degree as it were by steps, to the kingdom
of Sycill. He urges violent cruelty upon the confederates of the
Carthagenians, by the permission of Hamilcar, by whose death the secret
judgment, intended against the Carthagenians is prevented. Agathocles is
besieged by Hamilcar the son of Gysgo. He remoueth the war into Affricke,
overcomes the Carthagine, which causes them to revolt to his side. He
kills the king of Cyren, overcomes the Carthageneans again. He raises the
siege before syracusa, he is

AGathocles the Tyrant succeeded Dennis in the kingdom of Sycill, who ascended
to the majesty of that seat, not by degree and dignity of desent, neither
worthily by desert: for he was by birth a potters son in Sycill, and one who
The abhom^ nable life of Agathocles
imbrast no more honesty in his child-hod, then there was honor in the stock of
his ancestors. For being of favor and personage exceeding beautiful, he
suffered the Siracuse, into which City he was entertained as amongst other
inhabyters, where though he lived, yet lived he either without credit or
estimation, and was accounted of as one whose desperate stay without himself,
had nothing to loose, nor virtue in himself worthy to be loved.

At length he obtained the room of a mercenary soldier, and look how
dishonest he was in his life before, even as seditious was he in his actions
then, so forward to further mutines, that he was held a president for others to
practtise mischief by: that which was held praise worthy in him, he was of
body strong, and of speech eloquent, so that endeavoring from one preferment to
another, he was at last made Captain of a hundred men, wherein he so disged
his command, that he was immediately after made Marshall of the host. In the
first battle which he waged against the Actneans, he so behaved himself, that
he gave the Siracusans great proof to cherish in their thoughts, a hopeful
expectation of his future towardnes. In the next occasion ministered him,
against the Campaignes, he so perseuerd in his Noble disposition, and proved
so fortunate in his Martial Discipline, that from a present opinion was
conceined of him through the whole army, he was by a general voice substituted
in the Office of the grand Captain of Damasco deceased, with whose wife he had
committed adultry, and after married.

But being not contented from so base birth to have so sudden greatness,
from so little riches to attain so much and thirsty after more, he execercised
Syracusa, and twice was banished and dismissed Aga^hocles be (...) Sy racusa.
of his ambitious purpose. The Murgantines, among whom he was entertained and
lived in the time of his exise, created him first their Praetor, and afterward
their Captain, and in the first War he undertook for them, he fact the
city of the Leontines, and besieged the City Siracusa: to the rescue and
relief whereof, Hamilcar captain of the carthagenians being requested to
come, he forgot all former enmity and inueterat hatred against them, and
Syracusa was defended friendly by an enemy, and siercely assaulted by their
own citizens. But Agathocles having made trial that the town was more manfully
made good then assaulted, directed a Pursiuant to Hamilcar, requiring him in
this behalf, to arbitrate the difference, so long continued between him and
the Syracusans, and for the determination of a peace between them: promising
him, if ever occasion should afford it self for him to do the like, he would
not be slack to recompense his labors, and gratify his kindness. Whereupon
Hamilcar being filled with hope, entered into league Agathocles in strength
against the Syracusans, so much should Agathocles satisfy him withal, to the
expedition of his advancement, at home in own Country: by means of
Composition between Ha milear and Agathocles.
this composition, Agathocles was not only reconciled to the Syracusans, but
also was made Praetor of the city; at the confirming of this league betwixt
Agathocles, and Hamilcar, the holy fires and the tapers were brought forth,
whereupon Agathocles laying his hand, swear before Hamilcar to become his loyal
friend, and true subject to the Carthagenians. Upon this coniuction re ceiuing
of Hamilcar 5. M. Affriks, he put to death all the Nobility, such who His
cru^ltye against the Syracusans
either before had bin his opposits and withstood his proceedings, or were in
Senators, which massacre being finished, he spared not the lives also of such
of the commons as were the wealthiest and forwardest persons, but having
compassed what cruelty soever he thought tended to his advantage, or might
make his estate secure, he mustred soldiers and raised an Army, with which
being strengthened, he suddenly invaded the neighbor Cities, knowinge their
Hostill preparations not able to in damage him; so that by the furtherance and
permission of Hamilcar, without resistance he brought evident misery to the
nearest borderers and greatest friends of the Carthagenians.

For redress of which, they made complaint to the Senate of Carth^ge, not so
much of Agathocles as Hamilcar; accusing the one but as a Lordly ^yrant, The
com^^^^^^ of the (...).
for confirmation of the said composition, there was delivered up Sir^cusa, a
City and people that had remained ancient enemies to the Affricks, and enuiers
of the weal and prosperity of the Carthagenians, always contending with them
for the Empire of Sicill, and now under a colorable or rather counterfeit
pretense of peace, which Hamilcar had taken with them, they might see by the
example of them their friends and neighbors, and by their calamity existent,
themselves should be betrayed into the like bondage, if not prouidently and
discreetly prevented: wherefore like friends they gave them Affricke, since it
is too plain to them, what happened to the poor Island of Sicill.

By means of these complaints, the Senate was highly moved to displesure
against Hamilcar: but forasmuch as he was in Office of so great command,
they gave their judgment upon him privately, commaundinge their verdits
before they should be read to his correction, to be cast in a pot Hamylcar the
son of Gisgo, were returned out of Sicill. But Hamilcar dying, prevented the
issue of their subtle devices and unknown Hamilcar is condemned of treason.
verdits of the Carthagenians, and so he was delivered from the violence of one
death by the benefit of another: whom his own Countrymen had wrongfully
condemned upon a bare suggestion, without hearing of his answer. At which
unadvisedness of theirs, Agathocles took occasion to make war upon the
Carthagenians, and at the first encounter that he had, was against He dies.
Hamilcar the son of Gisgo, of whom being vanquished, he returned to
Siracusa, to raise a greater power, and so renew the battle: But in the
Carthagenians having thus far the vpper-hand, besieged Syracusa: When
Agathocles perceiving he was now so sore weakened by this late success,
neither of power to remove them, nor any way sufficiently furnished to linger
or endure out the siege: and that moreover his own confederates murmuring at
his former cruelties, daily forsook him; he determined to remove his wars
into Affricke: wherein his audacity was wonderful that he should enterprise
to make foreign Wars against the City of them, whom he was not able to
resist and incumber at home, and that being not able to defend his own, he
would give the onset to indamage others.

But that being vanquished he might proudely vaunt, thus much he had done to
the displeasure of his Conquerors, or else raise one siege by the setting of
another. The concealing of this purpose, was as wonderful as the device
thereof, for neither his commanders, nor other could learn or be instructed
otherways from him, but that he had invented a stratigem, ascertaind him of
the victory, encouraging them to rouse up one another hearts as he endeavored to
quicken them all, for the siedge should not belong; or Archagathus and
Heraclida, he directed his course into Affricke, and when all his men supposed,
he intended they should have gone forraging and seeking pray either into Italy,
or in the I Will of Sardinia, (...).
Afric: where then he began demonstratiuely to tell them in what danger
Syracusa stood, and particularly to explain the griefs that were falling on
that City, and the heads of his people: for the help whereof, there remained
none other means, but to endeavor the same affliction to the enemy that he had
done unto them, for wars abroad were otherways to be handled, and
oftentimes prove more available then defense at home, since the hope to get,
stirs up the soul of courage more then care to keep, and the assiedgers
come with an imboldned hope, when the besiedged are either distracted with a
sudden amazement, or terri^ied the disperatnesse of whose estates, makes them
abuse the order of government, and rail at time, being apt to entertain news
of any uproar or mischief, as hunger makes them dcsirous to cate, that honors
not discontented nobles, such whom either ambition in themselves, or envy of
others greatness, or in alleagiance to the state, (like reeds shaken with
occasion given by every wind) and are as greedy of innovation, as their
ambition makes them covetous of greatness. To such as these will our arrival
give sire unto, who though in peace they have bin reigned in with the bridle of
law, (wearied with along continned Empire they will now take hands and partake
our quarrel, though furthered with no other hope thereunto, but that they
shall be worthily aduansed by foreign Princes, then their desert gave them
occasion to rise by Affricke, are not environed with walls, nor situate in
Mountains, but raised upon plain ground, in open and champion fields, without
any munitio^ or defense. All which for fear of being destroyed, or to take
part with those of their country, (ofall forts come into us) will easily be
entreated, or if not, enforced to be our refuge in this war; with all the
envy that their bordering neighbors bear unto them, knowing them now greater
in name then in power, will assemble to us from all parts in their ruin. So
shall we finding greater strength here then we had power to bring with us, be
able to give the Carthagenians hotter wars in Affricke at their own doors,
then in Sicill when they invaded us.

Moreover, their sudden fear will be no small furtherance of victory, when
they shall consider our wonderful boldness, in coming thus to besiedge them
being besiedged our selves; and also for the increase of the same, shall
tremblingly behold, the burning of their villages, the beating down of their
Castles and holds, the sacking of their fortisied cities, and finally the
besiedging of Carthage it self. Where on the contrary, if we had stayed in
siracusa we had remained in danger ofthose enemies, whom now we shall compel
to feel, lie themselves as open to the waires of other men, as other men lie
open to them; and either by this means be vanquishers of Carthage, or at least
set Sicill at siracusa, when they shall hear that their own city is so
endangered by us, or if they should, here is war more easy, and here will
our prey be more plentiful.

Suppose in this our absence they should conquer our siracusa; in that they
gain but siracusa, when if we in their neglect by honor of their Carthage,
gain for that labor and by that victory to be governors of Carthage,
Affricke, and sicill, and the glory of our renown and out honorable waifare be
so great, that oblivion shall not raze it out, nor the worthy memory thereof,
while the world has being be forgotten. Where reproof and dishonor will

With these and such like inforciue arguments, the hearts of his soldiers were
greatly encouraged, yet the sight of a wonder that hapened, troubled their
minds, for as they sailed forward in this expedition, the Sun was suddenly
ecclipsed, of which accident the King was as careful to give them A^^^^^pse o^
the S^^n^ (...) the ^nter ^^^^non ^^^^^of.
satissieng reasons, as perswasiue motives to the war; affirming, that if it
had happened before their setting forth, it might have bin coniectured the
wonder had menaced them and their proceedings, but now forasmuch as it ensued
after their purpose undertaken, it threatened them against whom they went.
Furthermore, the Ecclipsing of the natural Plannets, foretell the alteration
of present estates, or of dangerous events. Wherefore of this Ecclips Cart^age
flourishing in wealth and riches, and his and their estates oppressed with
adversity, ^^ey must together suffer a natural Exchange. When he had thus
comforted his soldiers, by the consent ofhis Army, he set all his snips on
fire, Aga^hocl^s ^^er^th his s^^p^.
to the intent, that with his, every resolution might know, there was no
comfort after to be expected by slying, but by sight, so either honorablye to
line Conquerors, or honorably to die Conquered; so presently they fell to
prevail in that ruin they came for, bearing down and making spoil of all
which way soever they past, setting towns and Castles afire, till Hanno
captain of Carthage met them with thirty thousand Affricks. In which encounter
was slain of the Sicillians two thousand, and of the Carthagenians three,
Hanno Captain of Carthage himself. Through this victory the courage of the
Sicillians was strengthened, and the hearts of the Carthagenians discouraged;
so that Agathocles having vanquished many ofhis enemies, subdued Cities, taken
holds, surprised booties, and slain thousands, he pitched his camp about v.
miles from Carthage, to the intent they might behold from the very walls of the
City, the misery of their friends, the loss of their dearest and most
esteemed pleasures, with the wasting of their fields, and burning of their
Villages.

This overthrow and slaughter of the Carthagenian Army, the subduing of
Affricke, whereat every man was amazed, and wondered so great an Empire, so
secure in themselves, and in their own strength so confident, should have so
sudden an overthrow, and especially by an enemy, supposed and rumored among
them not long since, to be already vanquished. The wonder continued not long
ere it turned to fear, from fear, by little and little it fell into disdain
of the Carthagenians, so that these, which but lately commended their
governments, admired their posterity, judged now this their misery, a due
measure fallen upon them; and what before was so highly extold in their praise,
they had now a construction for to wrest and expound to a Affricke, but also
the chiefe^t Cities therabouts, following this strange alteration revolted to
(...)
Agath^^les, and aided him both with victual and money.

Besides these adversities ofthe Carthagenians, to the increase of their
miserable calamities, it happened their Captain, with allhis army was utterly
destroyed in Sycill. For after the departure of Agathocles, the Carthageniens
became more slothful and negligent in their siedg at Syracuse then before,
which neglect, Antander the brother of Agathocles taking note of, he issued out
upon them, and being surprised in their slacknesse, he put them all to the
sword. So that the carthageniens, receiving like misfortunes abroad as at home,
and the tributary cities having intelligence thereof, not only they but also
the kings that were in league and amety with them, waying friendship by
fortune, The king of Cy^en (...) to Agathocles.
and not by faithfulness, revolted from them. Among this number there was one
Ophellas King of cyrene, who upon an ambitious desire to enjoy the dominion of
all Affricke, entered into league with Agathocles by his Ambassadors,
carthageniens were overcome, Agathocles should take to his sway the Empire of
Sycill, and delegat to him the Empire of Affricke. To the furtherance of which
covenant, Ophellas came with a great host to aid him in these wars, whom
Agathocles entertained with fair words and fained courtesy, very lowly and
humbly (for Ophellas also had adopted him his son) where after they had many
times feasted and banqueted together, Agathocles unawares slew him, then
seizing on his army, he summoned the carthageniens to battle: so both coming
into the field, with all the power and furniture they were able to make, the
carthagenians were vanquished, but not without great slaughter and bloodshed
drawn from both parts. carthagenians many of them fell in to distrust of
themselves, so that had there not arose a mutinye in Agathocles camp, Bomilcar
the captain of the carthageniens had with his army revolted unto him: for
which offense the carthageniens nailed him upon a cross in the midest of the
market place, to the intent that the same ground might be The punishment of
Bomilcar
a witness of his punishment, which before time had been an advancement of
his honor. But Bomilcar was no whit daunted nor dismayed, but took stoutly the
cruelty of his country, in so much that from the top of the cross, as it had
been from a judgment seat, he proclaimed and pleaded like an advocate
against the wickedness of his citizens; obiecting unto them sometime their
unrightful entrapping of Hanno, upon false suspicion subborned, that he went
Gisgo, when themselves could scarce tell the cause why: sometime their secret
verdits against his uncle Hamilcar, because he sought to make Agathocles their
friend rather then maintain him to be their enemy. Which words when he had
vtred with a loud voice and great vehemence in the audience of a multitude, he
gave up his life. By this Agathocles having sundry times put his enemies to the
worse in Affricke, he delivered the charge of his host to his son
Archagathus, and returned himself with speed into Sycill, accounting all that
till then he had perpetrated in Affricke subject to imperious vicissitude, and
indeed don to no Agathocles again returns to Sycil
siracuse were still besiedged. For after that Hamilcar the son of Gisgo was
slain, the Carthageniens sent thither a new host of men to continue their
siedge and relieve them. Therefore as soon as Agathocles was come into Sicil,
all the cities having known before of his fortunate proceedings in Affricke,
yielded themselves to him; by means whereof, Having driven the Carthageniens
out of Sicill he took upon him the kingdom of the whole Island.

When he came back into Affricke again, his soldiers instead of other
gladness welcomed him with a mutiny, for his son Archagathus whom he left
for government of them, had delaide the payment of their lendinges until the
return of his father: wherefore he called them before him, and entreated them
with gentle words, saying it was not so requisite for them to demand wages at
his hands, as to seek from their enemies: for as the victory which they hoped
for, was to be deserved of al, so the profit there of should be common and
extended to all in general, desiring them to be as they had been, painful
and industrous soldiers awhile, until the remain of their wars were
dispatched, considering they knew certainly that Carthage once

Having thus appeased the uproar and exclamations of his soldiers, which he
indged to grow as much by idleness and slack employment in his absence, as
for want of means. within few days he removed his camp^nearer, where his
enemies were lodged, so rashly encountering them without A^^tho^l^s by (...) ^he
(...) an (...).
forsight what might prevail to his vantage, or disadvantage, lost the greater
part of his Army: then being forced to retire unto his tents, he perceived by
this overthrow, how his soldiers grudged at him, for aduenturing so
unadvisedly: fearing morouer the renewing of old displeasure for non-pa^ment He
(...) from among his soldiers
no other guide nor conduct with him, but his son Archagathus. Which escape
of his when his soldiers understood, their hearts were struck with an
invincible fear, as if they had bin taken prisoners by their enemies,
exclaiming against their King, that had now twice forsaken them in the midst
of their enemies, and left their lives in such danger, whom he ought not to
have left discarded. As they set forward in pursuit of him, they were stopped
by the Numidians, and so returned into their camp, having taken Archagathus,
who had lost his father by reason of the darkness of the night; while Agathocles
in the same ships that he had waftage over out of Sicil, was transported
Syracuse. Wherein is expressed a singuiar example of wickedness, a King to be
forsaken of his own Army, and a father to be betrayed of his own children.

After the flying away of the King, his soldiers falling to composition with
the Affricans their enemies, they slew Agathocles sons, and yielded themselus
to the Carthagenians. When Archagathus was to suffer death by the hands of
Archesilaus one that before time had bin a friend to his father, he asked him
what Agathocles would do to his children, by whom he was made childles. The
sons of Agathocles put to death.
Who answered him, that it was enough for him that he knew they were alive after
the children of Agathocles. After this the Carthagenians sent Captains Sicill
to pursue further War, with whom Agathocles made peace upon indifferent
Articles.

The end of the xxij. Book.
THE XXIII. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
AGathocles raises wars in Italy. The customs of the Lucanes. The original
of the Brutians. The miserable end of Agathocles. Lhe carthagenians invade
Sicill. Pyrrhus drives them out, and returns into Italy, whereupon Sycill
reuolteth. He is discomfited by the Romans, retireth with great loss

AGathocles King of Sycill having made peace with the Carthageniens, subdued
certain which upon trust they conceived of their own strength rebelled
against him, hereupon his ambitious thoughts ^egan to sprout, and he
Agathocles makes war in Italy.
thought himself to be enclosed in a straight having no larger dominion then
that Island, (of the Empire whereof Sicill following the example of Dennis, who
before him had subdued many Cities of Italy. The first people and province he
proclaimed his enemies were the Brutians, who were then esteemed to be of most
puissance and most wealth, and also most readiest to enforce wrong or offer
their neighbors oppression.

For they had expulst out of many cities the people of the Greeks descent, and
rast forth the record of their habitation in Italy: they had also vanquished
even their own first founders. The Lucanes vpheld a custom, to enstruct and
bring up their children, after the same ancient manner the Lacedomonians were
wont to do, for from the time they begun to increase past the groath of
children, Grasiers and shephards, without attendance or service, and without
garments to put on their backs or beds to lie upon, to the intent that from
their tender years, they might enure themselves without help of the city, to
away with hardness and sparing. Their meat was such as they could get by
hunting, and their drink was either meth or milk, or else fair water of the
spring, and in such sort were they hardened to sustain the labors of warfarre.

Of this sort of people, fifty at the first employed themselves to steal
cattle out of their neighbors ground, so that like drones living by stealing
from the labor pur^hased by the labourors hyers, they afterward growing to so
great a numbr, by the report of such as were allured to live after the condition
of spoil they made, the country became so dangerous, that no man durst hardly
stir abroad, and he the which was Lord of infinite riches to day, was scarce
master of any tomorrow.

Dennis therefore King of Sicill, being in a manner wearied with the continual
complaints made by his subjects, which had been plagued by them, at last sent
over six hundred of his Affricks to suppress them, whose Castle, The first
o^iginal o^ the Brutians
wherein these Outlawes were fortified they won, by the subtle treason of a
woman called Brutia, and after builded a City which was soon peopled by the
confluence of Shepherds resorting thither, upon hope they had of the fertile
Situation, and then called themselves Brutians after the name of the woman.

The first war that they had was with the Lucanes their own founders, with
which victory being encouraged, having concluded an indifferent peace with
them, they invaded other of their neighbors, and conquered The wars of the
Brutians.
them by the sword; so that they got so great purchase by this pilfring war,
and so increast in their number, that they were powerful enough to offer
displeasure even unto Kings. Whereby Alexander King of Epire, arriving in
Italy, with a great host to the aid of the Greek Cities in distress, there
with his whole army was by them vterly destroyed, with which continual suc
c^sse and prosperity, their cruelty being more inflamed, they became terrible
and dangerous to their neighbors long after.

At the last Agathocles being solicited in their help, with the hope he had
thereby to enlarge his kingdom, he transported his succors out of Sicill into
Italy; and as he was coming toward them, the rumor that was then fresh of his
puissance and magnanimity, begat a stronger fear in them, then was cause given
by his present power, so that they sent their Ambassadors to him, requesting
him of peace and friendship; whom Agathocles receiving, kindly entertained
them also to supper with him, (wherein, the closeness of his intent was, that
they should not see the shipping of his Army) and appointed them to have
hearing and conference with them the Morrow after: but in the mean season and
in the noone of night, he took shipping privily and wa^ted over to them,
hoping to surprise them so unsuspected, they should not have power to prevent
his will, nor disadvantage him any way; but the success of his fraud, proved
not to be rejoiced at by him, Sicill, by the force of a disease, wherewith, he
was taken over all his body, the pestilent humor spreading it self through
every sinew and joint, showing that as he was with Agathocles (...) (...)
strangers, so every member of his, had been at War one against another. Of
which when no recovery nor cure appeared, thee arose a contention between his
son and his nephew, each of them challenging the dignity of the kingdom to
himself, as if the father and kinsman had been dead already, in which his
son was slain. Agathocles therefore seeing this change on one part, and
feeling the grief of his disease so violent on the other, and between both
the agitation of his thoughts and mind still grieuouser, each increasing by
the furtherance of the other, being vterly in despair, he caused his wife
Theogen to take his two little sons, which he had begotten of her, withal his
treasure, household stuff, and princely furniture appertaining unto him (as
which no king in his days was reputed better stored) and sail into Egypt from
whence he took her to his wife; suspecting least his nephew who had robbed him
of

Howbeit his wife entreated him earnestly and with loving persuasions, that she
might not be drawn from him in this necessity of his sickness, least some The
duty of a loving wi^e
imputation might be raised against her love, obedience and loialty, and her
departure in so needeful a time, might deserve rebuke, and be worthily likened
to the murder done by his nephew: and also, the people might take occasion
thereby justly to report, that she had as cruelly abandoned her husband, as he
had supplanted his Grandfathe^: urging further, that when she was married unto
him, he took her not to be his companion and partaker of prosperity only, but
also in aduersitye; and to go as it were hand in hand with him, to have

Which grace though the Godds had not agreed to be due unto her, yet she A
description of lamentation.
was bound both by love and womanhood to stay with him to the last gasp, and
though not to die with him, yet he being dead, to see him honorably buried. Of
whose princely body in her absence, she was doubtful who would have care, or
would see it bestowed according to the worthiness it deserved having The death
of Agathocles.
their forced separation, was an end of the traffic that their sorrow had
together, though not an end of their tears; and the death of the king ensued
immediately upon the leave taken between him, his wife, and his children.

The Carthagenians now having true intelligence how the world went in Sicill,
thought it a good occasion to be given them of recovering the whole Island, and
thereupon sailed thither with a great power, and subdued many Citiies. At this
time Pirrhus made war against the Romans, who (as is before declared) being
desired to come to the aid of the Sicillians, having subdued many Cities,
arrived at Syracusa, where he was proclaimed King of Sicill, like as before he
was of Epire. In the prosperous success of which actions greatly rejoicing, he
instituted that his son Heleu should be king of Sicill, as in the right of
his grandfather, (for he was begotten of K. Agathocles Alexander should be King
of Italy.

Which will of his, confirmed by general consent, he fought many prosperous
battles with the Carthagenians: in which war being busied, there He returns
to the actions of Pyrrhus before spoke of in the 16 Book
came Ambassadors from his confederates in Italy, delivering to him, that by
his absence they were so weakened, it was impossible for them to make resistance
any longer against the Romans, but that he must needs yield unless he
rescued them. whereupon being troubled with so doubtful a danger, and not
knowing which way to turn himself, or which of them he might rescue first, he
took speedy advice concerning both, for on the one side the carthagenians
assailed him, and on the other side the Romans, so that it seemed a Italy,
and yet more dangerous to lead his host out of Sicill, least the one should
be lost for want of succor, or the other perish by withdrawing his help from
them. Tossed thus in this raging sea of dangers, the surest haven of all other
counsels to harbor in seemed to be, first withal his power to try the matter
now on foot in Sicill, and then having vanquished the carthagenians, to
transport Py^rhus los^th the king do^ of Sycil.
his victorious army into Italy, wherein though he in that battle prevailed,
yet notwithstanding he was no sooner with his power departed out of Sicill to
the furtherance of his former purpose against the Romans, but the Sicillians,
with his alyes and competitors remaining behind, revolted from him, Italy, then
he had in Sycill, he retired into Epire, the wonderful chance of both may
rightly be recorded for an example. For even as before through prosperous
fortune al his endeavors flowed profitably to him, beyond his desire and
expectation, and that he had obtained the Empire of Italy, the kingdom of
Sicill, with so many victories against the Romans, so now when fortune had
changed her copy, and as it were to pattern and manifestly show in him, the
frailties that man's life is subject unto, throwing down the things that she
her Trophes she had raised, besides the loss of Sycill, she paid him home with
shipwreck on the sea, with a shameful overthrow against the Romans, and
with a dishonorable departure out of Italy.

Pirrhus thus disposest of the kingdom of sicill, Hiero was created their
chiefest Officer, who was a man of such modesty, that by favorable consent of
all the cities, he was first captain against the Carthagenians; afterward King
Of this his royal estate to come, his norishing and bringing up when he was
The education o^ H^^^o.
in years and discretion a babe, was as it were a fore-messenger; for he was
descended of a noble man called Hieroclitus, whose petigree was fetched from
Gelus an ancient king of Sicill. But by his motherside he was borne of a base
and very dishonorable stock, for he was begotten of a bondwoman, and therefore
rejected and cast away by his father, as a dishonor and reproach to his house.
But the thrifty Bees, finding him a little babe, without help of nurse, or any
other comfort, wrought their combs about him, and cherished and preserved him
with life, many days together. Upon which miraculous preservation, his father
besides being forwarned by the Southsaiers, who told him the child should live
and be a king, took his infant home to him, and brought Pyrrhus rewarded him
with many rewards for his chiualry. He was of personage exceeding beautiful,
of strength so wonderful, as might be comprehended in a

The end of the xxiij. Book.
The xxiiij book of Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Lacedenionians stir up the Greeks to rebellion, and are overcome by the
Etolian Shepherds. The wicked and abominable dealing of Ptolomy toward his
sister and her children. Rome is sacked by the Frenchmen, whereof some place
themselves in Italy, and some in Pannony: they of Pannony raise a power,
dividing themselves in two hoasts, of which the one kills Ptolomy King of
Macedon,

IN these days, while the public wars and domesticke vprores, were thus at
length dispersed and made quiet in Sicill, new mischieues arose Here we left in
the 16 book.
thoroughe the dissension and wars of Ptolomeus, Ceraunicus, Antiochus, and
Antigonus among Greece (at the instigation of the Spartans, as if occasion
had been given, to pull and dissolve their necks out of the Antigonus the
son of Seleuchus.
yoke of bondage,) sent Ambassadors one to another, and knitting themselves
together in alyance, fell to rebellion. And least they might seem to have
taken weapon in hand against Antigonus, under whose governance they were, they
assailed first the Aetolians his confederats, pretending the cause of their
wars with them to be, for that the said Aetolians, had entered upon and
possessed themselves by force of the field Cyreus, which by the general consent
of al Greece, was consecrated to Apollo. As captain Aran, who assembling his
whole power together; he spoiled the towns, and forraged over the corn that
was growing in the afornamed fields, and such as they could not have carriage
sor along, he caused to be set on fire, which the shepheardes of the Etolians,
beholding out of the Mountains, gathred themselves the number of 5, C. and fell
upon their enemies as they were scattered, who knowing not that they were so
few of them, by reason of the sudden fear, together with the smoke of the
fires, they in this skirmish slew nine thousand, and compelled the residue of
the forragers to flight.

Afterward, when the Lacedaemonians renewed their forsaken war, many cities
who had been friend to them before, now denied them their aid, suspecting
their sovereignty, and not the liberty of Greece. In the mean season, the He
putsueth the former treachery and d^^e^pt o^ Ptolomy mentioned betor in the 16.
boo.
war was sinisned, and the controversy arbitrated, between the kings: for
Ptolomy having expulsed Antigonus, seized the kingdom of Macedon into his
hand, took truce with Antiochus, and also joined aliance with Pyrrhus, by
Arsinoe, to the intent to deprive her children of their lives, and her of the
possession of the famous City Cassandria. To effect which purpose, the first
point of his subtilty was, under the pretense of counterfeit love, to desire his
sister in marriage.

For otherwise then under color of concord, he could not compass her
children, whose kingdom he had wrongfully usurped from them: but his sister
suspecting the treachery of his heart, gave no credit to the testimony of

Arsinoe resting between hope and fear what in this she should do, doubting
if the sent, she should be deceived by perjury; and fearing if she sent not,
Dyon to him, whom Ptolomy brought into the most holy Temple of Jupiter, the
anuent place of religion, and of greatest reverence in all Macedon; Where
laying his hands upon the aulters, and touching the Images of the Gods as
they stood in their ^hrines, he swear before him, with oaths, and extreme
curses, calling the Gods, heaven and earth, to witness, that he desired to
consumat this marriage with his sister, without any fraud, craft, or
dissimulation; or with other purpose then religious: that he would immediately
proclaim her his

Arsinoe, after this importance expressed unto her, filled sull with hope, and
delivered from fear, came and communed with her brother her self: whose
smiling looks, and slattering countenance, pretending as much good faith as he
had promised by oath, brought her into such a Woman's Parradice, that she
consented to marry with her brother, contrary to the mind of her son
Ptolomy, who persuaded her to desist from the match, with many examples P^^lomy
ma^^th his own (...).
of his Uncles former subtilties, and treacheries; and doubting there was no
less in this: notwithstanding which persuasion she perseuerd, and the marriage
was with great sumptuousnes and joy solemnized. Phyllip presently summoning all
his host before him, there in the open view of them, himself set the Crown
upon his sisters head, and proclaimed her Queen. Whereupon Arsinoe being
joyful for the recovering of that glory which she had lost by the death of her
first husband Lisimachus, of her own accord Phillip into her City Cassandria,
through the ambitious desire of which city, all this treason was wrought. Then
having leave, she went thither before him, and proclaimed that the day of his
coming should be kept feastiuall through all the City, giving commandment,
that the houses, The natural aff^^t^on of a mother.
the temples, and all other places should be adorned and beautified, and that
the Alters and sacrifices should be set forth orderly and in readiness.
Morcouer she caused her two sons, Lysimachus of one and twenty years, and
Phillip three years younger then he (both children of excellent beauty) to
meet him with crowns on their heads, whom Ptolomy to cloak his deceit

The mother shriecking out to see this unnatural treason, demanded of him,
wherein she had trespassed against him, either in her marriage or other duty,
that she and hers should be so cruelly dea^t withal: and to express hit
motherly affection to them, she put her self oftentimes between the sword and
the danger offered her children, and at several times covering their bodies The
cru^ltye of Ptolomy tow^^d his (...).
two servants, her hair disheueled about, and from this sudden alteration of
greatness, to this so extreme misery, she trauaild to Samothorac^, accounting
her self so much the more miserable, that she might not have her desire to
perish with her children.

But Ptolomy escaped not with this wickedness unpunished, for within

For the Frenchmen abounded in multitude so great, that the Country wherein
they were bred was not able to sustain and give them maintenance. It was
thought fit among them that three hundred thousand men should be sent out, as
(it were on pilgrimage) to seek and conquer to themselves a more apt
habitation. Of whom one part rested themselves in Italy, which also took Rome
and burnt it, others of them following the flight of birds (for the Frenchmen
of all other nations are the most cunning in fowling) and with much slaughter
of the barberous Nations, perced into the coasts of Slauonta, The foolish
(...) of P^olomy.
and seated themselves in Pannonia, a kind of people fierce, hardy, and
warlike, who were the first after Hercules, (that compassing the same adventure
before purchased himself an immortal fame of his prowess) that marched over
the high tops and unmerciful cold Mountains of the Alps.

Where having subdued the Pannonians, they made war with their neighbors
many years together, sometime their fortune (like an houre-glas^^ in use)
turned one way, then another. Afterward being provoked by their fortunate
sucesse, they raised two armies, whereof the one went toward Greece, and the
other toward Macedon: in which forage of theirs, they put al to the sword that
happened in their danger. By means whereof the name and power of the Frenchmen
became so terrible, that even Kings before they were assailed, were glad to
hier them with great sums of money to procure their amity, and that they might
live in peace by them. Only Ptolomy King of Macedon made light of their
fortunes, and when he heard they were coming to comence Dardanie, who
proffered to send him twenty thousand well armed to supply and help him in this
his invasion; withal returned them with taunts and scoffs for their extended
kindness: saying, the good days of Macedon were far spent, if after they had by
their own puissance alone, conquered all the Dardanians to defend their own
country; and gave them to know that he had in his host, the sons of them
that served under great Alexander, and had subdued the whole world. So that
going forth against so infinite an enemy with so weak a power, and that so out
of order, the king of Dardanie hearing thereof did Justly report, that the
famous Empire of Macedon would shortly decay, through the rashness of an
unadvised sovereign. The Frenchmen therefore by the advice of their captain
Belgius, to the intent to try how the Macedons were addicted, sent ambassadors
to Ptolomy, offering him peace if he would buy it, as he had president thereunto
from other princes his neighbors. But Ptolomy bosted among his men of war,
that weapons, for since they had so far proceeded in open Hostility the one
against the other, he would not now trust them unless they were disarmed. When
the Ambassadors had reported this answer, the Frenchmen laughed at his
arrogance, crying out, that he and his should shortly feel whither they ofsred
peace to his behoof or theirs.

While this answer of Phillip beat on the slint of the Frenchmens spleens, the
tinder os their indignation took such sorcible fire, that they immediately
arraid themselves in readiness, and fell Pel-mell to handiblowes, where the
Macedons being vanquished, the glory of their renown began to set, for Ptolomy
being sore wounded in diverse places, was taken prisoner and his head stric The
punishment of Ptol^^y.
ken off, which being put upon a spears point, was carried up and down
through all the host, to the terror of their enemies, a few of the Macedones
escaped by slight, the rest were either slain or taken prisoners.

When news hereof was spread in Macedon, they betook themselves to sacrifice,
sorrow and mourning, one while the parents bewailed the loss The wo^ul est^te
of Macedon.
of their sons, another while they feared the besieging of their city; al
called upon the names of Phillip and Alexander, sometime their Kings, for help,
as if they had bin Gods, remembering in their minds, how under them, they had
not only lived in sasety, but bin Conquerors of the whole world. Beseeching
them to defend their country, which through the renown of their chiualry had
bin advanced to the sky, and to help them now in their Ptolomy their King,
had even brought to destruction.

While the hearts of all men were struck thus into despair, not knowing which
way to relieve themselves, Sosthenes one of the Princes of Macedon, perceiving
in adversity that to trust unto prayer only, it a^ailed not, and knowing that
in like misery, (weeping fittes fools, but practice helps the wise,) he
presently raised a number of the lustiest youngmen, and went forth against the
enemy: among whom, he so behaved himself both in (...)
worthiness of name on the one part, and encouraging his soldiers on Macedon
srom so fearful desolatio^.

In recompense of which his valiant deed, whereas many Noblemen sued to have
the kingdom of Macedon, he being not Noble by descent, was for his meritorious
service preferred before them all. And at such time as his men of war would
have proclaimed him K. he compelled them by entreaty to His m^desty.
swear to him, not by the name of K. but by the title of Captain.

In the mean season, Brennis Captain of that portion of the Frenchmen that had
bent themselves into Geeece, hearing of the victory of his countrymen which had
vanquished the Macedons, under the conduct of Belgius, and fretting for anger,
that so rich a booty, and so Laden with the spoils of the Macedon. Sosthenes
knowing how unfit it was to give them so much breathing and hope of themselves,
since as they past, they wasted the country, and burnt his villages; met them
with the host of M^^^^ons, well appointed and in good order of battle. But by
reason they were few in number and their enemies many, they half dishartned,
the adverse strong and lusty, they were soon put to the worse. Wherefore while
the Macedons were thus beaten, and retired to safeguard themselves within the
walls of their city, Brennus like a conqueror, against whom no man durst show
his head to make resistance, he wasted all the country of Macedon. From whence
as though those booties seemed too base and simple in his eye, much less to
satisfy the greediness of his expectation, he turned his mind to the Temple
of the Gods immortal, maliparrly scoffing that the Gods were rich and ought to
depart liberally to men. Thereupon he took his journey toward Delphos, setting
more by the gain of The sco^^s o^ Brennus.
Apollo at Delphos, is scituat upon the Mount Parnassus, on the top of The
(...) on of the tem ple of Delph^s.
a cliffe from every side and procliue steep down. Where the concourse of folk
(which upon trust of the majesty of that God, resorting thither from diverse
places, builded them houses in that rock) has made a populous city. Moreover
both the temple and town are enclosed and munified, not with walls, but with
the Perpendicularnes and quarry of the rock: neither are they defended with
fortifications made by man's hand, but with necessary resistance and succor The
place of the Oracles described.
causes the simple and ignorant people, to be in much fear and reverence
thereof, thinking it to be the presence of the Godhead, and oftentimes makes
them to stand so wondering at it, as if they were distracted. In this winding
of the rock, almost midway to the top of the hill there is a little plain,
and in the Brennus came within view of the temple, he began to advise with
himself whether it were more requisite to Euridianus and Thessalonus, who for
covetousness of prey had joined themselves with him in this action, advised
him to cut off al delay, and undertake the business they came for while their
enemies were unprovided, for that their sudden approach, no doubt would prove
agreat terror unto them; where on the contrary, by giving them that nights
r^spite, their enemies should hapyly get both courage and succor, and the
ways that now lay open for their passage, might be stopped to their
hinderance. While these things were in question among the captains of this so
huge an army, the common and mercinary soldiers of the Frenchmen, who after
long penury, found a country so replenished with wine, and store of all other
kind of viands, being as glad and joyful of the abundance to satisfy their
present necessity, as of victory to enrich their hopes, dispersed themselves
into the fields, and leaving their standerds, ran abroad making spoil of al
things like conquerors. By which means the Delphians had respit to prouid and
strengthen themselves. For at such time as it was first reported to them that
the Frenchmen (as The Oracle against the (...).
succeeded) were coming against them, they were prohibited by the Greek
Oracles, to convey their corn and wine out of the villages. The wholesome and
profitable meaning of which commandment, was not first understood, which
after happened, that by reason of the abundance of wine, and other victuals,
which were left as a stop in the Frenchmens way, the succors of their
neighbors had leisure to resort thither.

The Delphians having thus strengthened their town, (by the help of friendly
borderers against foreign besiebgers) thought yet their number nothing equal
according to indifferent Judgment, to make good a resistance against so
infinite an Army: for Brennis had in his host threescore and five thousand
Delphians and their accomplices were in number The French ass^ult the ^^ty of
Delph^.
but four thousand fighting men.

In disdain of which small handful to his so infinite a power, Brennis to the
intent to sharpen the minds of his followers, and enable their resolutions,
showed them what a rich and plentiful prey they should shortly be Masters of:
that the Images with their Chariots, (whereof in view though far off they
might behold great store) were al of massy gold. Which booty so delight full to
the eye, their labors should shortly bring to be more pleasant in the hand.
The Frenchmen being by this encouragement of their captains, or rather by their
own beholding, stirred up and also inflamed with the wine they Delphians
putting more trust and hope of their deliverance in their Gods, then in they^
own strength, resisted their enemies with a bold contempt, and what with
stones and with their weapons, they threw the Frenchmen as they scaled, from
the top of the mountains.

While these two adversaries were striving one against the other, in this
skirmish, one led with the hope of victory, the other to redeem their liberty:
suddenly the Priests of all the Temples, and the Prophets themselves, with
their hair about their ears, the sacred relics in their hands, like men
distracted

Moreover while they were al making humble supplication to the Gods, for
refuge, there past by them a young man, of beauty far excelling any mortal
creature, and in his company with him two Virgins in armor, which came unto
him out of the two Temples of Diane and Minerua. Which wonder and hopeful
sight, they had not only evidently seen with their eyes, but also had
perfectly herd the clattring of their harness, and the sound of their bows,
wherefore they entirely besought them, that seeing the Gods themselves did
guard their standerd, and were soldiers in their succors, they would now be
bold in the overthrow and dispatch of their enemies, and join themselves and
their endeavors, as pertakers with the Gods in so removed a victory.

With which words as it were a fresh fire of life quickened in them, they
preassed forth who might be most foremost in the fight, and there withal as
they were foretold by the prophets, they by and by preceiued that the Gods
^^^^nus (...) (...).
Brennus being not able to abide the smart of his wounds, took a sword and
killed himself. Another of the captains perceiving, how grievously the
authors of the war had bin punished, departed in have with ten thousand of
his retinue out of Greece, they were in distrust one of another, much more was
their

Moreover continual rain, frost, snow, hunger, and weariness pursued The
French miserably destroyed out of G^^^^^
them, and thereunto continual watching more grievous then the rest, consumed
and brought to nothing the wretched remnant of this unfortunate war. The
people also and the Nations followed and made pray of them, as they scattered
abroad. Whereby it came to pass, that of so huge an army which lately before
upon trust of their own strength, did despise even the very Gods, there was
not one man left, that might say heareafter, he did but at that slaughter

The end of the xxiiij. Book.
THE XXV. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Frenchmen of Pannony raise another power, and invade Macedon. Antigonus
over comes them by policy. The aid of the Frenchmen for their worhinesse, is
required of many Kings. They lend aid unto the King of Bythinia, and part
stakes with him in his kingdom, calling themselves Frenchgreeks. Pirrhus
expels Antigonus out of Macedon. He makes war against the Lacedaemonians.
The force and Hardines of Ptolomy his son, who was slain at the winning of
Lacedemon. Pirrhus is slain at Argos. The moderation and gentleness of
Antigonus, with the commendation of Pirrhus.

PEace being established between the two Kings Antigonus and Antiochus,
Antigonus being returned into Macedon, there soddenly arose a new enemy against
him. For the Frenchmen, whom Brennus at his setting forward The continuance of
the story in the beginning of the last book
Greece, had left behind for the defense of his country, to the intent they
would not seem to sit at home like cowards when their Captain was gone forth in
quest both of riches and renown, armed fiftene thousand footmen and three
thousand horsemen, wherewith having chased the hosts of the Getes and the
Trybols, and approached near unto Macedon, they sent Ambassadors to the King,
partly to offer him peace to sale, and partly to The French make a ^^ard
i^^^^^on of Macedon.
view the order and demeanor of his camp: whom Antigonus like a royal Prince
invited the same night to a sumptuous banquet. But the Frenchmen, wondering at
the great plenty of plate both gold and silver, that was set before them, and
withal being allured to a covetous desire with the richness thereof,

Furthermore, the King to the intent thereby to dismay them, at the sight of so
ugly shapes where with these barbarous people were not yet acquainted,
commanded his men to show them his Elephants, and his ships laden with victual
and artillery, not knowing that they, whom by advancing and setting forth his
power and riches, he would have discouraged; were thereby encoraged, with hope
to be sovereign thereof. The Ambassadors therefore dispatched from the King,
and returned unto their company, declared what they had taken especial note of,
and set out al things to the uttermost of praise, expressing the Kings riches,
and his negligence; how his camp was stuffed with gold and silver, and neither
fortified with ditch nor trench, and that, even as though their richesse were a
sufficient defense for them, they kept neither watch nor any other warlike
order, as if they had no need at all of help of the sword, but fed themselves
fat, wallowing in ease, and the prosperity of riches. The report of which, was
as bellows to the hot minds of the covetous Belgius, who not long before had
slain the K. with the whole host of Macedon. Wherein all agreeing, and
ascertaininge themselves of victory, ere a general assent was given, they
ass^^led Antigonus camp in the night, who prouidently forseeing the mischief
that was (...).
like to ensue, had given command the day before, to have conveyed from his
camp all his treasure, and to hide them covertly in the wood by, gessing, that
such was the desperate hardiness of the enemy in hope of riches, that there
was no other means for them to save their camp, then by forsaking

So that when the Frenchmen found all things void and not only without
defenders but also without keepers, mistrusting they were not sled, but rather
kept and concealed themselves close for the execution of some imminent policy,
it was long erethey durst adventure the passage of those gates whereat there
was no body to withstand them: at last leaving all the fortifications undefaced
they entered the camp, rather searching then riffling. And having made pillage
of what they found on land, they turned the violence of their pretense toward
the sea side, whereas they fell rashly to the rifling of the ships: the sailors
and part of the Army, that for safeguard with their wives and children were
thither fled, suddenly fell upon them, and while their Antigonus not only peace
with those enemies, but also of the fierce and savage people that bordered on
his kingdom.

Notwithstanding these several overthrows, so populous was the French Nation,
and so multiplied in many places, the people that spread over Asia, as it had
bin a swarm of Bees. Insomuch that the Kings of the East made The great in
crease of the French, with their manly courage.
not any wars, but they hired the Frenchmen as mercinaries to serve them; and
being deprived by any sinister fortune from their kingdoms, they resorted
Swisers. In which service, such was their redoubted prowess, and in what
wars else they undertook, such was their continual success, that the Kings
of those parts, thought themselves not secure, nor their own commands of
power sufficient to maintain their estate, or regaine it being lost, without
the f^rtherance and aid of the Frenchmen. Therefore both in name and nature,
being (...)
now Noble as none in that age more, and being called to the help of the K. of
Bithinta, and having in that assistance gotten the victory, they parted his
kingdom with him, and named the Country French-greece.

These affairs thus dispatched in Asia, in the mean season Pirrhus being
vanquished in Sicill by the Carthagenians, in a bat^ell at sea, he sent his
Ambassadors to Antigonus for supply of soldiers; withal sent him word, that
if he furnished him not, he should be constrained to retire into his kingdom,
and seek the Conquest upon him, which he was about to make against the
Romans. But his Ambassadors being dismissed with this (...) were, that
Antigonus Tarent to his son H^leu, and his srend Milo, to safeg^ard, he
returned into Epyre, where mustring fresh forces, he forthwith iduaded Macedon,
whom to withstand, Antigonus met with an host of (...)
men, where both Armies encountering, Autigonus having the worst was enforced to
sly, by which Conquest all Macedon yielded to Pirrhus.

Whereupon as if he had recompensed the loss of Sicill and Italy, with the
gaining of Macedon, he directed Messengers for his son Heleu, and Mylo
Tarent; Antigonus who was sled wi^h a few of his horsemen, and with this
alteration bereft of all the Ornaments of fortune, yet desirous to hear what
would become of his kingdom, he with so much labor Antigonus (...) an overthrow.
had got, and now so suddenly lost, conuaid himself into the City
Thessalonica, that if occasion served, or any hope whereby to adventure his
re-establishment might appear, he might renew the War from thence. But in
the o^fer of this purpose, being again vanquis^ed by Ptolo^ny the son of
King, Pirrhus, and escaping with no more but seven of his retinue, without
desire to regaine his kingdom, or almost relish of ambitious thoughts, he
sought secure caves, in rough and desolate wildernesses, to be his wholesome

Pirrhus by this, being installed in so royal and great a kingdom, and not
contented to have attained unto that, he had scarce means before to wish for,
began to practice how to be sovereign of the whole Empire of Greece, (...) and
Asia, as now he had of Macedon. He was of courage so magnanimous, that none wa^
able to withstand his force whom he assailed, neither took he any more
pleasure of his Empire, then of his wars, but kept his affections even to
both, and as he had no peer in couquering of kingdoms, so did he as lightly
forgo them, when he was once possessed of them, holding it more honor to be
accounted a conquer or of many kingdoms, then a keeper of few. Chersonesus,
there received him the Ambassadors of the Athenians, the Acheans, and the
Messenians, yea and all the Grecians (for the renown of his name, and for that
they were ^^^^ed at the Nobleness of his deeds against the Romans, and
Cart^^^^ians) awaited his coming there. The first war that he had was with the
(...), where he was received with greater valiantnes of the women then of men.

There he lost his son Ptolomy and the strongest part of all his army, for
when he assaulted the town, such a sort of women came running to the defense
of the City, by whom he was not more valiantly vanquished then shamefully
driven to retire. His son Ptolomy who there was slain, is reported to have
bin so courageous and stout a man at Arms, that with threescoremen, he took by
force the City Corcyra; and also in a battle upon the sea, he lept out with
seven of his men into a Gally and won it. And last of al, in the assault of
Sparta, he brake with his horse into the midst of the city, and there
oppressed with the number of his enemies, he was slain, whose body when it was
brought to his father Pirrhus, it is reported he should say, that he was slain
somewhat later then he looked for, or than his own foolish

Pirrhus when he had received the repulse at Sparta, went to Argos. But whilst
he endeavored to compass Antigonus in his hands, whom he had besieged in the
City, as he fought most valiantly amongst the thickest, he was slain with a
stone from the wall. His head was cut off, and sent to Antigonus, who using
this victory honorably, sent home his son Heleu with his Epyrotes, which were
yielded unto him into his kingdom without ransom, and delivered him his
fathers body to convey home, and see honorably interd in his own country. It
is a constant report amongst all authors, that there Pirrhus, and that it was
a hard matter to find any, not only among kings, but also among other famous
men, either of more upright liu^^g, or approved Justice. And as for knowledge
in chiualry and feats of arms, there was so much of merit in him, that whereas
he had continual wars with Lysimachus, Demetrius, and Antigonus, Kings of so
great power and puissance, yet was never overcome by any of them, neither was
he ever by his enemies, brought to so low an ebb, but that he was able to
match and boldly encounter with the Illyrians, Sicillians, Romans, and
Carthagenians. In what conflict or adventure whasoeuer, yea and often to the
overthrow of

The end of the xxv. Book.
THE XXVI. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe extreme cruelty of Aristotimus Tyrant of Epire. The wise invention of old
Helematus in suppressing of him. The cruelnesse of the French-greekes toward
their wives and children, whom Antigonus overcomes, and utterly destroys.
Antigonus is bere^t both of his kingdom and men of War by Alexander, the
son of Pirrhus King of Epire. Demetrius the son of Antigonus not only
recouereth his fathers kingdom, but also spoyleth Alexander of his kingdom

AFter the death of Pirrhus, there arose not only great and troublesome wars
in Macedon, but also a revolution and alteration of many established affairs in
Asia and Greece: for the Pelloponesians being betrayed unto Antigonus,
according as men were either in fear or Phirrhus hand, or stood in dread of
him; even in like case, either they entered in league with Antigonus, or else
upon malice, sell together by the ears among themselves.

In the time that the provinces were in this turmoile, Aristotimus a Noble man
of the realm, subjected to his use the chief City of the Epirots, and The
(...) (...) of (...).
created himself king thereof; withal, for the safe confirming himself in
that regal seat, he put many of the chief Citizens (he was either in present
fear of, or had power in themselves to cause him to distrust them) to death.
Many of them he drove into exile. So that, when as the Etolians required of him

The wives entending to live all their lives in exile with their husbands,
took al their preciousestiewels and best ornaments they had with them; but
as soon as they were all come to the gate, of purpose to travail in one
company together, he spoiled them of their treasure, murdered their little
Children in their mothers bosoms, imprisoned the woeful mothers, and ravished
the maids.

All men being amazed at this his cruel and intestine Tirany, a noble peer
(...)
of the realm named Helemate, being an aged man and without issue, as one that
in respect of his years, and in that he was childles, was void of all sear;
called home to his house certain of his most trusty friends, and exhorted them
Aristotimus was dispatched both of life and rule, the fifth month after he had
usurped the kingdom.

In the mean season Antigonus being encomberd with many wars by diverse
enemies at once, both of King Ptolomy, and the Spartanes; besides the host The
pollicye of antigonus
of the Frenchgreekes which newly were up in arms against him, he left a few
soldiers in his camp for a show against the other two, and went himself in
person with the whole power against the Frenchmen.

The Frenchmen hearing thereof, prepared themselves in readiness for the
battle, flew sacrifice, and offered to the Gods to be propitious to them for
The (...) o^ th^^ (...) men even to their (...) and (...).


In execution whereof, so extreme disperatenesse was entered into their cruel
hearts, that they spared not the young infants whom their enemies would they had
by their unspeakable wickedness, purchased themselves both life and victory,
bloody as they were, after the fresh slaughter of their Wives and Babes, they
proceeded in battle, but with as good success as fore-token.

For as they were fighting, the remorce of their own consciences, in
remembrance of their inhuman facts (the Ghoasts of them whose lives they had
ravished from their bodies, wauing before their eyes,) were the first
discoraged A great sl^ughter upon the (...)
them ere they were oppressed by the enemy; so that the encounter begun, they
were slain every mothers son, and the massacre of them so violent, that it
should seem the Gods had conspired with men, for the Ptolomy and the
Spartans, eschuing the victorio^s army of their enemy Antigonus, retired into
places of defense, which Antigonus ascertained of, while his men were yet
fresh, courageous, and resolute for any purpose, by reason of their late
victory, he made war to the Athenians. In which disseigne while he was
occupied, Alexander King of Epir^, desirous to revenge the death of his father
King Pirrhus, invaded the borders of Macedon; against whom, when antigonus was
returned out of Greec^, all his soldiers revolted from him, by which treason
of theirs, he lost both his kingdom of Macedon, and his so powerful an army.
His son Demetrius being then both in years, and discretion but a very child,
leaving a power in the absence of his father, not only recovered Macedon, that
his father had lost, but also bereft alexander of his kingdom of Epire, so
great then was either the vnconstantnes of the soldiers, or else the
variableness of fortune, that kings by course were even now banished; and
presently restored to their kingdoms again.

Alexander therefore being fled to the Arcadians, was as well by the favor of
the Epyrotes, as by the help of his confederats restored into his kingdom
again, about the same time deceased agas, king of Cyrene, who before his Read
more hereof in the (...). Book.
last infirmity, to the intent to cease all strife with his brother Ptolomy,
betrothed Beronice to his son. But after the death of king agas, arsinoe the
mother of the maid, to the intent to break the marriage that was contract
against her will, sent for Demetrius the brother of antigonus, out of Macedon,
to take upon himself the marriage of her daughter and the government of the
kingdom of Cyrene, who also was begotten of one of Ptolomies daughters.
Demetrius had no sooner entertainted this offer, but with speed dispatching
himself, and in his journey having prosperous wind, and fair weather, he was
speedily arrived into Cyrene; where upon trust of his beauty for the delight of
which, his mother began to like too well of him, immediately after his first
coming, he bare himself very proudly in the Ptolomy, and the death of
Demetrius was conspyred, and so far contrived, that as he was in bed with his
mother in law, many of these conspirators were sent to kill him. But Arsinoe
when she heard the voice of her daughter standing at the chamber door, and
giving the executioners charge to spare her mother, as they rushed in, she
sought Adultery rewarded.
long to defend and preserve her paramor with receiving his wounds in her own
body, Nevertheless he was slain: and so Beronice, with safety of her love and
duty, did both revenge the dishonorable adultry committed with her mother, and
also followed the determination of her Father, in taking of her husband.

THE XXVII. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
SEleuchus King of Syria, puts his stepmother Beronice, and her son to
death. Ptolomy king of Egypt in revenge of her death inuadeth Syri^. Seleuchus
suffers happy shipwreck, for by means thereof, for pity and compassion,
the Cities that Ptolomy had obtained, revolted. He is overcome in battle by
Ptolomy, and desires aid of his brother Antiochus. Ptolomy makes peace with
Seleuchus. Antiochus warreth upon his brother, and overcomes him by the help
of the French-greekes, who after the battle, bent themselves against
Antiochus. He ransommeth himself from them. Eumenes king of Bithinia, sets
upon Anticchus and the Frenchmen, and takes the most part of Asia from them.
The brothers continue debate, by which they both come to a miserable end.

IN those days after the decease of Antiochus K. of Syria, his son Seleuchus
succeeded in his dignity (by the instigation of his mother Laodice, which
rather ought to have counseled and with Beronice, the sister of Ptolomy King
of Egypt, with his little brother begotten upon her; by which wickedness, he
enforced a just and infamous report upon his name, and withal entangled him
self with the wars of Ptolomy.

But before the execution hereof, when Beronice understood that men were sent to
kill her, she kept her self close in a pleasant manor of her fathers called
Daphne. And when the the Citizens of Asia heard that she and her little son
was there besieged, in remembrance of the dignity of her father, and the
Nobleness of her ancestors, and for pity to see her so unworthily
entreated, they sent aid unto her. Her brother Ptolomy also being moved to
compassionat the peril of his sister, left his own kingdom, and came in all
have to her rescue, with all the power he was able to make.

But Beronice before these rescues were able to come to releeu^ her, whereas she
could not be taken by force, was surprised by policy, and put to death: The
Cytty^^ o^ Asia (...) from Seleucl^s
as also to revenge the death of her whom they purposed to have defended,
yielded themselves unto Ptolomy, who doubtless had subdued all the kingdom of
Seleuchus, if he had not bin driven to retire home to suppress an insurrection
in Egypt. So great hatred did that abominable murdering of his mother in law,
and his brother purchase on the one party, and the unworthy death of his father
so cruely slaughtred, purchase favor to the other.

After the death of Ptolomy, Seleuchus having gathered together a great sleet
against the Cities that had lately revolted, suddenly (as it were by The
vnfortu nate (...) of Seleucus.
and his life, and a few companions that with him had escaped the tempest: so
that so strange and miserable was his case, that himself could not have wished
a chance more grievous to have happened upon his enemies for his own behoose.

But the Cities which for the former hatred they bare toward him, had
revolted unto Ptolomy, now as though they thought themselves sufficiently
Ptolomy, and their hatered from him, and submitted themselves again under his
Dominion. Whereupon rejoicing in this happy alteration, and made rich by his
losses, accounting himself now sufficiently able to match his enemy in power
and strength, he soorthwith made war against Ptolomy. But as if he had been
borne for no other purpose but for Fortune to make her laughing stock, or in
this world (...) ouer^ome by Ptolomy
her tennis Court, he had been her ball, to have tossed from one hazard into
another, as if he had recovered so great wealth of the kingdom for no other
intent Antioch.

From thence he directed his letters to his brother Antiochus, wherein he
befought him of his help, offering him in recompense for such favor, all Asia
that was within the precinct of the mountain Taurus. Antiochus being of the
age of fourteen years, but yet covetous of dominion above his years, took this
preferment least it should fall to another, but not with so friendly a heart as
it was offered, for this Prince by age but a boy (coveting like a these to
bereave his brother of the whole rule of his kingdom) was as bold in executing
his wickedness, as if he had bin a man: Whereupon he was surnamed Hierax,
because he exercised his life in taking other men's goods wrongfuly, not after
the manner of a Prince, but after the nature of a Gosse-hauke.

In the mean time Ptolomy hearing that Antiochus was prepared in rescue of
Seleuchus, to the intent he would not be enforced to defend the war of ii.
such enemies at once, took a truce with Seleuchus for x. years. But the peace A
Truce
Antiochus had the victory: wherein supposing Seleuchus had been slain, they
turned the Weapons they brought in defense of Antiochus against Antiochus
himself, hopinge thereby without fear or control, if they could but destroy
all the blood war betwixt two brothers
royal, morefreely to wast the whole Country of Asia. Which thing when
Antiochus perceived, he was enforced to ransom himself for money, as if it had
been from robbers, and compelled to enter league and be at friendship

Now Eumenes King of Bythinia, perceiving the Brothers to be consumed and
dispersed through civil discord among themselves, intended to invade the
wandering people, and take to himself the whole possession of Asia. In which
purpose assayling the Conqueror Antiochus, and his Frenchmen, whom by reason
that they were sore and weary since their late conflict, and his soldiers
strong and lusty, he easily put to the worst. For in this Age all the wars that
every several Prince raisd, tended wholly to the destruction Antiochus
vanquished by the king of Bythinia.
of Asia, and every man that could make himself strongest, seized thereupon as
his prey. The two brothers Seleuchus and Antiochus for that cause made War in
Asia. Ptolomy King of Egypt under pretense of revenging his sisters Asia: on
the one side Eumenes King of Bithinia, and on the otherside the Frenchmen, and
common hirelings wasted Asia, but among so many robbers, and so many
Ambitious Princes, not one was found once to stir his foot to defend Asia.
And albeit that Antiochus was vanquished, and that Eumenes had seized into his
hands the most part of that Empire, yet could not the Brothers agree, but
contended to renew the war to destroy one another. In which Antiochus being
again vanquished, and wearied with flying many days together, at length came
to his father in Law, Artamenes king of Cappadocia, of whom at first he was
gently and with good Ptolomy, whose says he thought to be more steadfast then
his brothers considering either what he would have done to his Brother, or what
he had deserved at his brothers hand.

But Ptolomy being not so much made his friend, as enlarged his enemy,
commanded him to be kept in straight prison, from whence also he escaped by the
help of a Harlot, whom he had familiar company withal. But being thus escaped
from his keepers, as he sled thieves met and killed him. Seleuchus near about
the same instant, having lost his kingdom, fell off of his horse, and brake
his neck. So both the brothers as it were by like misfortune, like Outlawes
after the loss of their kingdoms, suffered due punishment for their manifold
mischiues.

THE XXVIII. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
OLympias Queen of Epire, by the marriage of her daughter Pythia, sets
variance between Demetrius king of Macedon, and Antioch king of Syria. The
proud and insollent answer of the Etolians to the Ambassadors of Rome.
Olimpias dies with sorrow, for the death of her two sons. Laodamia is slain
at the Altar of Diana. Demetrius dies. Antigonus being left protector

COncerning Olympias the daughter of Pirrhus, king of the Epirots, she having
lost her husband Alexander, who Here left the ^^^^ory of (...) mentioned in the
26. Book.
was also her own brother, when she had taken upon her the bringing up of
Pirrhus and Ptolomy the sons whom he had begotten by her, and the government
of the realm; she was compeld through the injuries offered Etolians (which
went about to take from her a part of Acaruania, which she being mother and
protectresse of the children had received as a help to maintain her wars
withal) to resort for succor to Demetrius King of Macedon: unto whom, (having
a wife already, the sister of Anticchus King of Syrya) she gave her daughter
Pythia in marriage, to the intent she might get help and refuge at his
hand, by the right of affinity, which she could not otherwise procure.

The marriage thereupon was solemnized, whereby the new bride, was accepted
into great grace, and the old wife into displeasure. But the first wife, as
though she had been deuorced of her own accord, departed to her brother
Anticchus, and provoked him to war upon her husband. The Acaruanians also
distrusting the Epirots, and thereupon requiring help of the Romans,
obtained of the Senate of Room, that Ambassad were sent, to command the
Etolians to withdraw their Garrisons from the Cities of Acaruania, and to
suffer them to live out of bondage, who only in ancient time, sent no help to
the Greeks against the Troyans their first founders.

But the Etolians herd the Ambassadors of the Romans very dis^^infully,
Carthagenians, and the Frenchmen, by whom they had been so afflicted in so many
battles, and so oftentimes so great a number of them slain: saying, It was
meet for them first to open their gates against the Carthagenians, which they
had shut up for fear of the wars in Assryck, ere they took (...)
upon them to make inrode into Greece. Moreover, advised them to consider whom
they menaced, since they were not able to defend their own City against the
Frenchmen, but when it was taken, they were saine to redeem it with money, and
not to recover it by the sword. The which Nation entering into Greece with an
host thought almost invincible, they themselves

Whereas on the contrary part, Italy was well near wholly subdued by the
Frenchmen, and the Romans themselves as yet trembled for fear at the
remembrance of the so late burning of their City: wherefore it was requisite
for them to expel the Frenchmen out of their own territories, ere they
presumed to threaten the Etolyans; and first honorably to resist their own
enemies ere they undertook to defend others: urging further, what manner of
Etolians were ever the Princes of Greece, and like The (...).
as they surpassed all the other in estate and worthiness, so they exce^led them
Macedons, flourishing in the Empire of the whole world; which feared not at the
command of King Phillip, which disdained to obey the laws instituted by
Alex^nder, after he had s^bdued ^he Persians and Indians, when all other people
and Nations whatsoever, stood in dread of his name. Wherefore they willed and
counseled the Romans, to hold themselves content with their present estate
and not to provoke those weapons against their lives, through which they saw
both the in^init hoasts of the Frehchmen slain, and the Macedons in their
supremest dignity despised.

When they had in this controuling form, and as it were with this check
dismis^ the Roman Ambassadors, to the intent they would not seem to have bin
more bold and liberal in words, then in deed and performance, acording to
their former inclination, they forraged over all the borders of the kingdom of
Acaruama. By this had Olimpias as their rightful inheritance delivered up the
kingdom to her son, and instead of his brother Pirrhus deceased, The (...)
Ptolomy succeeded in the whole Empire; who marching with an host Olimpias also
in s^ort continuance, being wounded with sorrow for the death of her two sons,
scarce able to draw her painful breath, yielded to nature and died.

Then remained after her decease, no more of the blood royal, but only a
young maid called Nereis, and her sister Laodamia Nereis was married unto Gelo
son of the King of Sicill. And Laodamia flying for safeguard to the Altar of
Diana, was their slain, by the conco^rse of the rude people: which (...).
offense the Gods immortal withheld not their hands to punish, but with
continual slaughters of that Nation, and almost with the utter destruction

For first being punished with dearth and famine, and vexed with domesticke and
civil discords, last of all, the remembrance of them, was in a manner quite
consumed by the merciles wars of foreign Nations. Milo who killed Laodamia,
falling distracted in his wits, so mangled his own body, sometime with iron,
sometime with stones, and in the end, so rent and tore his own body with his
teeth, that within twelve days after, he dyed most miserably.

While these disseignes found this free current in Epyre, Demetrius died in
Macedon, leaving a little son called Phillip, to be his heir and succeed
him; Antigonus being made protector, took the childs mother to wife, and then
went about to instal himself in the kingdom. Which the Mac^^ons perceiving,
they gathered an insurrection against him, threatening to ^ill him, and having
besieged him in his palace, he came forth, without any guard, where first
humbling himself before them, he cast down among them his crown and his purple
robe of estate, desiring them to bestow those transitory Ornaments upon some
worthier person, which either knew better The (...).
how to govern them, or to whom they could submit their affections more
willingly to obey: for during the time that he had enioied the government of so
odious a kingdom, and so ungoverned a people, he had not tasted

Then he rehearsed what benefits he had done for them, how he had punished such
of his confederates as had revolted, how he had assuaged the courage of the
Dardanians, and Thessalians, triumphing at the death of Demetrius; and finaly
how he had not only maintained, but also augmented the state and Empire of
Macedon. Which merit of his if their ingratitude despised, he was content to
depose him of such a trouble as to be a sovereign, and to surrender his office
into their hands: giving them leave (with thanks one his part) to seek and
create them a king whom they might rule as they list themselves Which speech of
his with such modesty and cunning apprehension he delivered, that the people
thereby were brought to be ashamed of their enterprises, and what they came
with violent intent to abridge and disanul him of, (namely the crown) they now
were earnest suitors he would assure to himself again. Which offer of theirs he
with delays refused, and which denial of his drew their desire for his
acceptance the more, insomuch that the authors of Spartanes which province
chiefly despised the wars of Phillip and Alexander, and the Empire of
Macedon, with their knighthood so much renowned over the whole face of the
earth.

This war was prepared for withal the furniture and power that could be
(...) between the (...) and the Macedos
made one both parts, and al requisite provision had in readiness, the one
sighting to support the ancient renown of Macedon, the other not only for the
maintenance and defense of their untouched liberty never before violated, but
also to preserve and continue their common safeguard. These Lacedaemonians being
in this difference vanquished, not only the men themselves but

The fathers and mothers received into their houses all such as were hurt,
Then, courage my friends, nor any other wringing of hands seen, then in their
weapons to give blows The courage of Cl^omines a king of La^cdemora
withal: there was not any trembling for fear, nor any dismay, but with an
imboldned resolution to outface mischief, every man more bewailed the common
misfortune, then his own private ease. Withal Cleomines their king, after he
had made great slaughter of his enemies, being all one a gore blood, as well
with his own wounds as the blood of his foes, came in among them. And to
death auailed. And then with his wife and children he took his way toward
Egypt to king Ptolomy: of whom he was honorably entertained and lived a long
time in great favor and estimation there, enjoying the pleasure due unto a
King. But after the decease of Ptolomy, the kindness of the father was
neglected, and he and al his household were slain by his son. Antigonus
having made so great a slaughter of the Lacedaemonians, notwithstanding took
pity of the misfortune of so worthy a City, and in that compassion gave
command to his soldiers, they should neither sack nor deface it, withal
pardoned al them that after these misfortunes remained alive, protesting to
the^ (whereby to insinuate into their loves) that he made war against
Cleomines Lacedaemonians, whom for as much as he had discomfited and put to
slight, al his wrath toward them was at an end. So that thinking it would more
become his honor rather to save their city then to destroy it, and seeing the
remnaut were few, to whom his mercy might be manifest he thought it sit to let
it extend to the soil of the city, and upon the houses. It was not long after
but that Antigonus himself died and left his kingdom to Phillip, a child of
fourteen years of age. The son of Dem^^^^u.


The end of the xxviij. Book.
The XXix Book of Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe alteration of many famous kingdoms, by the succession of young kings.
Demetrius king of Illyria, sends to Phillip king of M^cedon for help against
the Romans. Phillip exhorts the Greek^s to concord. He pr^claimeth open
war against the Romans. The Dardanians invade M^cedon. He m^keth peace with
the Romans. Phylopemenes causes the Acheans to revolt from him.

ABout this instant season, there happned like alteration almost in all the
kingdoms in the known world. For in Macedon Phillip, after the decease of his
protector Antigonus, took the kingdom to his rule being but fourteen An
alteration of kingdoms by succession of young kings.
years of age. In Asia, after that Seluchus was slain, Atigonus as yet not
having attained to full groath and ripeness of fourteen years, was made
king. The kingdom of Capidocia was surrendered by his father, to Ariarathes a
very child. Ptolomy who for the wickedness of his offense, was Philopater)
slew his father and mother, and usurped the kingdom of Egypt. But the
Lacedaemonians in sted of Cleopater, subrogated Lycurgus: and because there
should be store of alterations in those times, Hanniball being as yet scarce
man-growne, was made Captain of Carthage: not because there was a scarcity of
men, of more years, or greater experience, but for the natural and inueterate
hatred that was known to be rooted in him against the Romans, even from his
very childhood: and as it were, borne to the utter destruction, not so much of
the Romans whom he hated, as of his own country of Affrcike whom he served.

Now albeit these children kings, had no elder and grauer persons to be their
protectors then themselves, yet was every one of them seuerallye, so Ptolomy,
as he was wicked in usurping the kingdom, so was he sloathfull and negligent
in governing the same. The Dardanians with other provinces and people, who bare
as it were an immortal and unremoved hate to the kings of Macedon, disdaining
Phillip, by reason he was so young, molested him continualle: on the contrary
part, Phillip when he had put these enemies to flight, being not contented to
have defended his own, purposed to make war against the Etolians; and as he
was devising how to enterprise so much, Demetrius king of Illiria being lately
vanquished by Paul, consul of Rome, came to him as an humble suter, making
complaint of the wrong the Romans had done him; who being not content to
contain themselves within the bounds of Italy (but of an ambitious desire
coveting the Empire of the whole world) made war with all Kings: alleging
also, that for the like covetousness of the Empire of Sicill, of Sardinia, of
Spain, and consequently of Affricke, they had entered into war with Hanniball
and the Carthgeniens, and against him commensed that war for no other
occasion, but only that he was a neighbor and near borderer upon Italy: as
though it were not lawful for any king to dwell nor have dominion near the
co^sin^s and Verge of their Empire. Wherefore it behooved him and no doubt would
be much available for him, to take an example, and by other men's harms to
beware, whose kingdom the nobler and nearer it was to the Romans, so much
would it give them cause and so much should he sinde him their fiercer enemies.
Moreover, he protested that he was well contented to surrender unto him the
right and title to the kingdom which the Romans had usurped from him, rather
then his enemies should peaceably enjoy the possession and profit thereof.

With these and such other like arguments he persuaded Phillip, to desist from
the Etolians, and to turn the brunte of the war against the Romans, and so
much the rather, because he thought he should now find them to be the less
able to resist him, for that (as the tidings thereof were to him fresh) they
had lately been vauquished by Hanniball at the lake of Thrasimenus. Therefore
because he would not be charged with many wars at once, he made peace Philip
persuades the Greeks to concord.
with the Etolians; not as they should think he did it, to the intent to make
war in an other place, but as though it had been for some great reguard that
he had of the good and quietness of all Greece, which he affirmed, was never
in the like pearill by reason of the new Empires of the Romans and
Carthageniens, Asia but only this, that they were trying by the sword which of
either of them should be principal and bear the soueraignety of both. For
which party soever gat the upper hand, would no doubt upon the victory and in
the pride thereof, pass directly into the East. So that since he saw such a
cloud of cruel and bloody war rising out of Italy, and such a roaring and
thundering coming out of the west, that into what part of the world the
victory fell the tempest thereof, would wash al things with a bloody shoure.

And although Greece had oftentimes before suffered great trouble, and many
afflictions, by the wars sometime of the Persians, sometime of the Frenchmen,
and sometime of the Macedons; yet they should find, that all that ever before
was past, and whatsoever they had endured, would be a sport to that which
should ensue, if those Armies which now were fighting in Italy, should once
spread themselves into Greece: for it was already ^uident to all Nations and not
without great fear and terror wondered at, to have news, how cruel and
bloody, and both with what puissance of hosts, policy and fortitude of
Captains, those several people made war^e one against the other. The which
rage certainly could not be ended in the only destruction of one of the
powers, without the ruin and decay of such as were their next neighbors:
wherefore Greece had more cause by far to be afraid, and by providence to
withstand cruelty, if either party were honored by the victory then Macedon; both
because Macedon is further off from their danger, and of more strength to
defend it self.

Phillip having by this persuasion, and for this pretense, dislodged his tents,
raised against the Etolians, and minding nothing but the wars of the
Carthageniens P^il^p giu^th def^an^^ to the Ro^^^^.
and Romans, he waied with himself the power and abillity of them both: and
that neither the Romans (albeit the Carthageniens and Hanniball were ready to
light on their necks) were void of fear of war out of Macedon. For howsoever
they dissembled it, they stood in fear thereof, both for the ancient prowess
and actiuety of the Macedons, the renown of the honorable, and several
conquests in the East, as also for Phyllip himself, who was enflamed with an
earnest desire to become equal to Alexander in kinghthood, dominion, and
chiualry, and whom they knew to be forward and active in feats of arms.

Phillip therefore, when he understood that the Carthageniens had vanquished
the Romans again, sent his open defiance unto them, and began to build
Italy. Furthermore, he sent Ambassador^ with letters to Hanniball, to conclude
a league, and to be at friendship with him, who being taken by the way and
brought before the Senate, was after sent away without any manner of violence
done unto him, not for any entire love or inclination of good will they bare to
the King his master, but to the intent that of a suspected friend, they would
not make him an open enemy. But afterward when it was reported to them, that
Phillip went about to transport his army into Italy, they sent the Praetor
Leuinus with an army well prepared and furnished, to stop him of his passage;
who after he was arrived in Greece, with his fair and large promises,
compelled the Etolians, to take war in hand Phillip: and on the other side,
Phillip exasperated what he could, to persuade the Etolians to ioyn war with
him against the Romans. But in the mean time, the Dardanians began to wast
the borders of Macedon, and having led away twenty thousand prisoners,
constrained Phillip to ^etire home The Darda^^ans (...) Macedon.
from inuading the Romans, to the defense of his own kingdom.

While these affairs had their performance, the Praetor Leuinus entering into a
league with king Attalus, wasted the Country of Greece, with the which loss
and destruction, the cities being amazed and stricken into fear, they sent
diverse Ambassadors to Phillip, desiring aid of him. The king of Illiria also
his Macedon, made incessant suit, that he would perform his promise. Further,
the Macedons sollicyted him instanly, to revenge the wasting of his own
country: with which so many and so weighty matters, he was so sore oppressed,
and as it were besiedged at once, that he was in a maze which of them (the
necessety being great in all) to remedy first.

Yet notwithstanding he promised to send friendly succors to every one of them
ere long, so deferring them, not because he was not able to perform as much as
he promised, but to the intent that by putting them all in comfort, he might
retain and keep them his friends still. But the first voyage he took in hand,
was against the Dardanians, who watching the time to find ^m from home,
determined to take their advantage, and to invade Macedon with a greater
puis^ance in his absence. Also he made peace with the Romans, and so being
Philip makes peace with the Romans.
contented to have delayed the Romans wars against Macedon for a time, he
laid weight to entrape Phylopemenes Duke of the Acheans, who as it was
signefied to him, stirred the Romans and the minds of his confederates
Phylopemenes having knowledge thereof, and so avoiding the danger of the same,
compelled the Acheans by his authority to rebel against him.

The XxX Book of Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe s^outhfulnesse of Ptolomy king of Egypt. Antiochus inuadeth Egypt,

DVring the continuance, that Phillip was thus earnestly occupied about great
and weighty affairs in Macedon, Ptolomy behaved himself clean contrary in
Egypt. For after he had obtained the kingdom, by playing the paracide and
murdering both his parents, and that he had moreover killed his natural
brother as though he had achieved all things as he desired prosperously, he
gave himself to riot, and in such excess that all the realm endeavored after
his steps, and as a lantern made to give light to the followers, so they
took from him. By means whereof, not only his Noble men and officers, but
also his men of war, laying aside the recreation of chiualry, and feats of
arms, fashioned themselves in sted of more worthy exercises, to sloth and
idleness.

Antiochus king of Syria, being provoked with an old grudge (which long had
lain smothered, but not forgot) between these two realms, raised
expeditiously a populous army, with which hostile forces, he conquered many
cities and also set footting into Egypt. Ptolomy trembling for fear at these
sudden and unexpected powers, and being taken unprovided, and presently to bid
him a resistance, besought Antyochus by his Ambassadors, that he would Greece,
he fought a prosperous battle, and had utterly bereft Antiochus of his
kingdom, if he had furthered his good fortune he had a foot by prowess. But
he being content with the recovery ofthe Cities he had lost, desirously
concluded a peace, and took the occasion of quietness when it was offered
him: but after this success, like a swine that returns again to his mire, or
like The (...) li^e of Ptolomy Philopater
an old sore sooner cut off then cleansed; he fell to wallowing again in his
old accustomed slothfulness; and as fire folowes smoke, so one sin traceth
another, he after flew Euridice his wife being his own sister, through the
flattering Agathoclea, with whom he was betrothed in affection. And so
forgetting quite the renown of his name, and neglecting the majesty of his
kingdom, he spent the night in incontynency, and the day in voluptuous
feasting.

Besides this the more to inflame his lecherous appetite, he had at his feasts
musical singing and dancing. Neither could this King here content himself
with the beholding of other, but also like a master of misrule or a Mercenary
fiddler, would play publikly upon Instruments himself. These were the first
plagues and privy maladies broke out to greater sores, and were afterward the
decay of his royal house: for not long after, both he and such Scholars
Agathocles, made her the more to be bold and presume upon the King, and to
bear her self the more stately and arrogant.

And to the encreasement hereof, came to the court her mother Euanthe, with
whose custom also the King taking a liking, she with her daliance so allured
his heart unto her, that of her he begot two sons. By means whereof althese,
thinking their security and foundation thereof now impossible to be Agathocles
sitting cheek by cheek with the king, in his regal throane, ruled the realm
at his own pleasure.

The women disposed Marshalships of the host, Lieutenantships of provinces,
and Captainships as it pleased them, so that ordering all things for the
public Weal, there was no man in the realm that could do less then the king
himself. At the length he died, leaving behind him a son of five The death
of Ptolomy
years old, begot of his Sister Euridice. But whilst these Harlots practiced
to have robbed and made spoil of the treasure, and compact themselves
confederates The b^ni^hment of his strumpets.
with the most dissolute persons, and desperate reprobates in the kingdom; to
the intent to deprive the right heir of his inheritance, by keeping secret the
death of Phillip long after his decease. Nevertheless his conspiracy was not
so concealed but it came to light, and for Justice, the people Agathocles and
killed him, and the Women in revenge of Euridice were hanged up upon Gibbets.

And thus the notorious infamy of the realm being purged and put away, by the
death of the king and the punishment of his strumpets, the men of Alexandria
sent Ambassadors to the Romans, desiring them to take upon them the
protection of their Orphan King, and the government of his kingdom of Egypt,
which they avouched that Phillip and Antiochus had already The Romans
protectors of Egypt.
bought and told, intending to divide and part it between them. The Romans
very glad of this Embassage, as they that sought occasion of War against
Phillip, to be reuengd of his purpose and do them displeasure, in the time of
their Wars with the Carthageniens. Besides, after they had in set
Carthagenians, and repulst Hanniball, enforcing him to slight, they feared no
man's puissance, nor the Hostility he could raise more then Phillips,
accounting with themselus, what a trouble and damage Pirrhus had put Italy
unto, as it were with so small a handful of Macedons, and how great
enterprises the same people had atchiued in the East.

Hereupon Ambassadors were sent to Antiochus and Phillip, willing them least
they infer further danger upon their own, not to molest and meddle with
the kingdom of Egypt, nor the subjects thereof. Furthermore M. Lepidus upon
the acceptance of the former treaty, was dispatched with Egypt to take upon him
the protection of the child, and the administration of the realm.

Just about the same time, the Ambassadors of Attalus king of Pergamus and the
Ambassadors of the Rhodians came to Rome, heavily to complain of insusserable
wrongs King Phillip had done unto them. In which complaint, and for redress of
which, the Senate were stirred to take Counsel and set Complaint^s against
Phi^^p b^ the Romans.
forward the Wars of Macedon forthwith. So that under pretense of ayding
their confederates, War was decreed against Phillip, and a consul was sent
with an Army into Macedon: upon whose arriual, it was not long before all
Greece upon trust of the Romans rose against Phillip, in hope to

When the Articles thereof should have been propounded by the Romans, both
Attalus, the Rhodians, the Acheans, and the Etolians, demanded restitution of
that had bin robbed from them, on the otherside, Phillip granted that he could
be content to be ruled, and have the affairs arbytrated by the Romans, but
he proposed that it was unfit the Greeks being vanquished by his predecessors
Phillip and Alexander, and subdued under the yoke of the Empire of Macedon,
should like Conquerours prescribe the Articles of peace, and not rather be
driven to a straight accounte of their disobedience, ere they presume to
challenge any liberty. Nevertheless, at length by much intreatance they
grannted him a truce for two months, that a longer peace which could not be
agreed upon in Macedon, might be requested of the Senate in Rome.

The same year between the Islandes of Theramene, and Therasia, in the midway
between the Shores, there was a great Earthquake in the sea. By means of the
which (to the great admiration of such as sailed that way) A terrible
Earthquake.
suddenly out of the deep, floted up an Islande with hot Waters; and in
Asia the very same day, another Earthquake snaked the City of rhodes, and many
other Cities, subuerting many gorgeous houses and palaces, and throwinge
down many rich and goodly buildinges, and edificies, whereof some were
swallowed up whole.

At which wonder all men were sore afraid, and the Southsayers prophesied,
that the Roman Empire then beginning to spring up, should devour the old
Empire of the Greeks and Macedons. In the mean season the peace Phillip
sollicitted the Tyrant Nabis to take his part, and join with him against the
romans: so that when he Philip maintain th the Macedons against the Romans.
had brought his host into the field, and his enemies were standing in order
of battle against him, he began to encourage his men, rehearsing how the
Macedons had conquered the Persians, the Bactrians, the Indians, and in brief
all Asia, even to the very uttermost border of the East; exhorting and aduising
them, that so much more force and courage they ought to show in this battle,
as liberty is a thing of greater price, and should rather be sought for then
Dominion.

Flamminius also the Roman Consul, hartned up and encouraged his Flaminius
in courageth the Romans.
remembrance, the famous victories they had lately atchiued and brought to
pass; showing unto them, how that on the one side, Carthage and Sicill, were
conquered, and on the otherside, Italy and Spain recovered, by the prowess
and Nobleness of the thrice-woorthy Romans. Also, that Hannibal was little or
nothing inferriour unto great Alexander; after whose expulsion out of Italy,
they had subdued a great part of Affricke, being the third part of the world.
Nor were the Macedons to be any thing the better esteemed of, by the ancient
renown of their predecessors, but according unto the power

For they should not encounter with great Alexander, whose prosperity was such
in his wars, that he was reported to be invincible, nor with his huge and
mighty army that conquered al theast, but Phillip a child which had not yet
scarce attaind to the years of discretion, and judgment, who had work enough
to defend his kingdom against his nearest neighbors, much less against them,
chosen not from the meanest of the Romans; besides they were to adventure
themselves with those Macedons, which but even the other day almost were
spoiled and led away prisoners by the Dardani^ns, and were able to report no
merit of their own, but only had to boast of the renowned acts of their
auncostors. Whereas the Romans might justly and worthily relate the deeds done
by themselves and their Soldiers. For it was no other host that subdued
Hanniball and the Carthagenians, and almost all the West, then the very same
Army whom he had there standing in battle arraye, and with whom, (would
every one but from his forwardness their general

With these encouragements the minds of both the Armies being inflamed they
ran si^rcely to the encounter, the one part glorying in the Empire of the East,
the other in as great Dominion of the West: the one bringing in to the battle
with them the ancient and foreworne renown of their predecessors, the other
the fresh, green, and flourishing Flower of their late tried knighthood and
chiualry: But the Romans had the fortune to vanquish the Macedons, and
Phillip being utterly discouraged by this overthrow, and desiring peace of the
consul Flaminius, retained still the name of a King though he was bereft of all the Cities of Greece, which were as it were the members Macedon. And yet the
Etolians being offended, that at their pleasure Macedon also was not taken from
him and given to them, as a recompense in reguard of their pains taken in the
war, sent Ambassadors to Antiochus, who by flattering him, in aduauncing his
puissance and chiualry, hoped thereby to enforce him to make war against the
Romans, and in trust that as partakers therein, al Greece would take his part,
granted

The end of the xxx. Book.
THE XXXI. BOOK OF
THE ARGUMENT.
ANtiochus inuadeth the territories of the Dominion o^ Egypt. The Romans
proclaim war against him. Nabis king of Lacedemon subdueth many cities

WHen Ptolomy-Philopater was dead, Antiochus king of Sirya disdaining his
little son being so young (who being Antiochus invadeth Egypt.
the only hope of the Ptolomies left to inherit the kingdom, was even as a
pray to his own subjects) purposed Egypt. Whereupon when he had invaded
Phenice and the other cities scituat in Syria, but under the dominion of
Egypt, the Senate of Rome sent Ambassadors to him, and by them willing him to
abstain from the Orphans kingdom, both him, and which, was by the last will
of his father sovereign thereof, left in trust with them, and committed to
their charge: who being sent away with a sleeuelesse answer, immediately after
arrived another Ambassador, who not treating with him in a mild form, like
the former, but commanded them to make restitution with full amends, of the
Cities that by the law of Arms appertained of right to the Romans.

Upon his resusall they made their defiance, the which as he lightly received,
so he as unfortunately performed. At the same time the Tyrant Nabis, subdued
many Cities in Greece. The Senate therefore least the Roma^nes should be
entangled in two Wars at one instant, wrote unto Flamminius, that like as he
had delivered Macedon from the bondage of Phillip, so if he should think it
requisite, he should relieve Greece from the subjection of Nabis. In
consideration whereof, his authority was proroged. For Hanniball made the
Wars of Antiochus terrible, whom his cnuions adversaries had accused to the
Romans of secret conspiracy with Antiochus, alleging that the ambition of
his heart, would not suffer him to be subingate and live under the correction of
a law, which was necessary in every republicke, who had been accustomed also
unto sovereignty, and to the too much licentious liberty of the camp. And the
rest which the Citizens inioyd after labor, quietness, without turmoile; peace,
and the plenty thereof; a public ^^nquility, and the prosperity thereon;
seemed so ^edious and burdensome to him to endure, whose body and faculties
had been so inured, and as it were made ordinary unto him, in the practice and

Which information of theirs, though it was given and reported against him
contrary to truth, yet notwithstanding among them that stood in dread of him,
and to prevent the danger of their fear, caught hold at the least occasion
might entrap him, they were believed, or at least held up these suggestions for
credible instances: and testimonies such, that gave manifest sign whereby to
suspect him.

Whereupon the Senate being possessed of some distrust in him, Seruilyus was sent
by them Ambassador into Affricke, to take note of the demeanor of (...)
Hanniball, of his public carriage, and to gather by intelligences (which he
might disperse in the City) what privately the multitude whispered of his
proceedings, what was the resort to him, and how and to whom he dispersed
himself abroad, withal gave him secretly in charge, that if it were possible,
he should contriue with some of his adversaries, to find means to kill him.

But this secret working of theirs, was not so closely carried, that it could
(...).
be kept from Hanniball, who being a wise and expert Captain, both in
foreseeing

T^erefore when he had presented himself all the day in the view of the Noble
men and of the Roman Ambassadors, and with looks abounding in courtesy, gave
them princely entertainment, in the close and shutting in of the two doors
betwixt day and night, he secretly took horse, and rode to a manor that he
had situate in the subburbes, and bordering near upon the Sea side, without
making any of his servants witnesses to his intent, only willing them to
weight at the gate till his return. Up to this manor came a creek of the
Sea, where he had provided ships in readiness for himself, and Mariners in
readiness for them.

Moreover he had furnished himself with a great sum of money, both to defend
him in what necessity soere chanced, and least by the want thereof, his journey
which he purposed to undertake, might there by be resisted: and thereupon
Italyan prisoners) he took shipping and directed his course to Antigonus.

The succeeding day, the City attended in the Judgment hal for the coming of
their Prince, and the same time their consul. But when they heard certainly
of his so sudden and unexpected escape, their hearts trembled for fear, as
careful Citizens do when there City is besiedged, fea^ing least it should be
sacked, all misdoubting that his departure would redound to their utter
destruction. The Roman Ambassador, as though Hannibal had even then made
war upon Italy, with quick despatch returned to Rome, delivering the
Flaminius having joined himself in confederacy with diverse Cities in Greece,
vanquished Nabis Nabis overcome.
in two several pitched fields one after another. By means whereof having
brought him to so low an ebb, that all his fortunes being desolated and as it
were melted from him, he lest him in his kingdom, as a man that had received
to himself of all his pristine dignity, nothing but the comfort of a careful
Nabis again r^neweth the War
life.

But after that this Flaminius had withdrawn his Garrifons out of the
cities, and conveyed his host back again into Italy, Nabis being entised
when so fair leisure was offered (and the rather for that he saw no man of
eminent Acheans being first dismaide, and doubting least the mischief wherewith
their neighbors had been entangled, should creep upon ^hemselues, determined
first to make war against Nabis, whom they feared if he were not withstood in
his course, would do no less upon them. Of which wars they made lieuetenant
general their Praetor Philopemenes, a man of excelent merit in himself, The
worthy praise o^ ^^^lopem^nes.
and of chief reguard among them, who behaved himself so valiantly in the
tr^st they reposed in him, both for the dignity of his own name, and the
advancement Flaminius the Grand-captaine of the Romans.

The same time, and by this, Hanniball was artiued and had joined his power
H^^^bals entertain to (...).
in the strengthening of Antiochus, and of whom for love that he conceived of
him, at his first coming, he was entertained and welcomed as a guest sent from
the Gods, and the king, in the the hope that he had of ^^m and his valor,
(...) utterly despised him. So that a counsel called, and so a question
propounded, when every man severally had given his opinion, Antiochus lastly
asked him of his adiuce.

Which charge Hanniball understanding well, replied to the King that he
perceived he was not called because his majesty thought himself to have had
need of his counsel, but only to supply and fill up the number of sentences.
Nevertheless, for the anciant hatred he had and did maintain to the Romans,
and for the good he wished, and the entire devotion he had, and was so in
Hannibal ad^^^^th to m^i ^^^^ne w^^^ wi^h the Romans.
duty bound to bear unto the King, as in whose court only he had refuge in
the time of his banishment, he would discuss what co^^se his experience Greece
should be the place wherein to make war, seeing that Italy was better for the
maintaining of the same: neither might the Romans be vanquished but by their
own weapons; nor Italy otherways subdued then by her own power. For as the
disposition and nature of those peoplewas contrary from other Nations, so that
of force the wars were to be ordered otherways, then against other enemies.
In other wars, it is fu^therance and advantage to the one part, to search for
the benifit of the place, to take occasion of the time, or to have wasted their
fields and villages: But with the Roman, Italy, it is possible to over come
them with their own weapons, their own riches, their own power, even as he
himself already had don. But if any opposite shall suffer them to enjoy Italy,
as the well spring of their strength, he shall be as far from attayning his
purpose, as a man to compel back a river against the streme, or to dry it up,
not first beginning to stop it at the head, but at such place where waters were
most deepest and most increased. This related was his opinion in himself.
Whereupon he was minded to have offered his service and advice unrequested,
romans, who out of their own country were invincible, and at home on their
own thresholds easy to be subdued. Insomuch that it was a far easier labor to
depose The N^^ure o^ ambition.
them of Rome then to set them beside their Empire, and to drive them out of
Italy, then out of their provinces. For their city had bin sacked by the
French men and they themselves almost utterly destroyed by him, and yet he
could honorably boast he was never vanquished by them before, out of their
country. But as soon as he was returned unto Carthage, immediately with the
place was also altered the fortune of the wars. The Kings counsel not
reguarding the Ant^^chus, misliked not so much the counsel, as the author
thereof, least the glory of the victory should redound to Hanniball and not to
him: thus thorough flattery and ambition, nothing was well ordered.

The king all the winter season giving himself to riot and pastime was every
day making new marriages. On the contrary part Attalus the Roman consul who
was sent to those wars (with all diligence preparing men and armor withal
other munition, artillery, and abylements for the war) strengthened the
cities that were in confederacy; allured such as were neuters, and in
conclusion according as either part laid before for their furniture, so had
they success in what they undertook. In the first encounter, when the king
saw Antiochus put to flight.
his men retire and give back, his cowardice did not relieve them with fresh
succors, but offered himself captain of such as first ran away, and left his
camp replenished with alriches to his enemy. When he had by flight escaped into
Asia, while the Romans, were occupied in gathering the spoil, he had
Hannibals counsel, and thereupon Hannibal again receiud to favor.
taking him into favor again, promised him he would order all his affairs
fully according to his discretion. In the mean season he was aduertisd Liuinus
Menenius a Roman captain, appointed admiral of the sea by the Senate, was
coming toward him with fourscore ships of war; which tidings put him in
cheerful comfort to recouere his misfortune: Therefore he determined to
encounter with him by the way, before the cities which as yet held their
aliance with him, were revolted to the Romans, hoping to abolish the dishonor
of discomfiture of Greece, by a new victory. But neither were the men of Asia
able in this conflict to match with the Romans, nor the ships of Roman
Galleys, yet not withstanding the slaughter was the less, by reason of the
policy, providence, and Hannibal be ing Admiral of the Navy is overcome.
valor of the Captain. The fame of this victory was not yet reported at Rome,
and therefore the city staid the creating of their consuls, at which
conuenticle and soleme assembly, none was thought fit nor of more sufficiency
to bemade captain, and have command against Hanniball, then the brother of
Affricanus, for that it was the peculiar work of the Scipions, to vanquish the
Carthageniens.

Lucius Scypio was created consul, and his brother Affricanus was given to him
as his lieuetenant, to the intent Antiochus should understand they had as
Scypio, as he had of his vanquished Hanniball. As the Scipions were conueying
their host into Asia, word was brought to them, that the brunt of the war in
both places was already past the worst; so that they should find Antiochus
vanquished in battle on the land, and Hanniball overcome at an honorable fight
on the sea.

At their first arrival, Antiochus sent Ambassadors unto them to entreat a
peace, sending moreover as a peculiar present unto Affricanus, his son,
Antiochus seeks peace.
whom the King had taken as he was passing over in a little bark; but
Affricanus answered, that there was great difference which ought to be
considered and humanity it was requisite, he returned the king hearty thanks, for
his honorable present, promising to reunite his bountious liberality, with some
equal good turn and answerable kindness, if at any time it should lie in his
own private power so to do. But as touching War and peace, he wished him to
expect from him no other then was lawful betwixt enemy and enemy: neither
that he would do more or less then was requisite to the behoose of his
Country. For it was ever the disposition of his thoughts, to entreat for the
ransomming of his son; nor suffered he the Senate, though persuaded thereunto
to go about it, but as appertaind to his honor, he said always he would
recover him by force of Arms, or loose him.

After this were Articles of peace propounded, the contents thereof were, that
he should depart out of Asia, suffering the Romans to enjoy it peaceably,
deliver them their prisoners and runnagates, withal their ships, and (...)
make restitution of all charges and expense, that the Romans had bin put to
in these Wars.

Antiochus having intelligence hereof, answered, he was not as yet so utterly
vanquished, that he should suffer himself to be spoiled of his kingdom,
expressing that it was the next way to provoke him to war, rather then to
allure him to peace. But while time gave these two enemies leisure, for full
preparing of both their armies, the Romans entering into Asia came to Troy, The
Romans com to Troy
between the Troyans and the Romans.

The Troyans declaring how Aeneas and the other of their Captains came from
them, and the Romans vaunted themselves to be descended of them; so that the
joy seemed as great between both parts, as at the meeting between parents and
children, when either to other of long have bin supposed lost. It did the
Troyans good, that their Lynage having conquered the West, and subdued
Affricke, did now challenge the Empire of Asia also, as their ancient
inheritance, and the rightful possession of their forefathers: saying it was
happy fortune for Troy, that it was destroyed, considering how Romans had an
immeasurable desire, to see the houses of their ancestors, the places where
their for-fathers were bred and born, with the temples and Images of their
Gods.

Now when the Romans were departed from Troy, King Eumenes met them with a
power of men in their asistance, and not long after a field was fought against
Antic^^us; in which, when a legion of the right wing of the Roman battle being
put out of artay, fled to the camp, with more shame then danger, Marchus
A^^elius Marshal of the host, being left behind for the defense of the camp,
commanded his soldiers to arm themselves (...).
they should find their own camp hotter for their entertainment, then their
enemies army could be powerful for their flight.

The legion being astonished at so great a danger, accompanied with their
fellows that stopped them of their cowardice, returned into the field where in
The courage of the Ro^^^s
seeking to recover, the reproach they so worthily had incurd upon themselves,
they made a great slaughter of their enemies, and were the first means that
begot hope of so famous a victory. There were of the enemies fifty thousand
slain, and a leaven thousand taken prisoners: yet notwithstanding when
Antiochus desired peace, nothing was added to the former articles, for
Affricanus answered, it was not the custom of the Romans to be discouraged
for loss, nor to be proud for prosperity. The cittyes they had taken they
divided among their confederats, judging it a greater reward to the Romans to
have honor, then possessions: making it probable, it was meet for a Roman to
challenge glory and fame, and to resign

The end of the xxxi. Book.
THE XXXII. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Etolians are subdued. The Messenians and Acheans strive for the souer
ainty. Phylopemenes Captain of the Acheans is taken prisoner and poisoned by
the Messeniens. The Messenians are overcome and punished for the death of
Phylopemenes. Antiochus and all his host is slain by the men of the country.
The

THe Etolians which had exasperated Anticchus to commence war against the
Romans, after the day that he was thus subdued, remained of themselves
against the Romans both unable to match them in strength, and also destitute
of any supplye from their neighbors to The ^toliars are subdued by the
Romans.
enable them. By means whereof it was not long they could hold out ere they
were vanquished, and lost their ancient liberty, which they only among so many
cities of Greece, had retained untouched and unblemished against the dominion
of the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians: which estate of bondage was much
bitterrer unto them, by how much it came later then their countrymen, and the
grief of which was the more increased by calling to mind the calamity which
in former times their countrymen endured, when they, with the only power of
their own people, had borne out the great force of the Persians, and repressed
borne out the great force of the Persians, and repressed the violence of the
Frenchmen, so terrible to Asia and Italy, in the battle at Delphos, the
glorious remembrance of which, made their misery the more burdensome, and
kindled a greater desire of liberty. But while these affairs were thus
contrived, C^^tention b^^^^n the M^^^^s and Ac^^^^
in the mean time the Messenians and the Acheans fell first to contention, and
not long after to public battle for the sovereignty. In which battle
Philopemenes the noble grand captain of the Acheans was taken prisoner, not
through his own default, because he durst not fight for saving of his life, but
as he was about to bring his men in array that were in the leaping of a ditch,
his horse overthrew him, which his enemies espying clustered about him,

And yet the Messenians when they found him ouerthrown, whither it were for
fear of his prowess, or for reverence of his estate, durst not to kill him.
But as though by surprising him they had finished all the War, they led him
about all the City in manner of a triumph, and the people ran out by heaps to
meet him, as if their own captain, and not the captain of their enemies had
bin coming. And without question the Acheans his countrymen could not have
been more desirous to have seen him a Conqueror, if he had got the upper hand,
then were the Messenians his enemies, to behold him a prisoner, for they led
him into a public Theater, to the intent that young and old, from the cratch
to the cradle, might generally behold Lycortus the The courage of Philopemenes
at his death.
Lieutenant of the Acheans (whom he knew to be a man of best knowledge in feats
of Arms next to himself) had escaped in safety or no. Of which when he was
truly resolved that he was in safety, then the world goes not altogether
against the Acheans (quoth he) and with that word he gave up the ghost.
Messenians being vanquished, suffered deserved punishment for putting
Philopomenes to death.

In the mean season Antiochus K. of Syria, being greatly over charged with the
tribute that he should pay to the Romans, and seeing himself vanquished, and so
grievously burdened, whither it were that he were compelled for want of The
death of Antigonu.
money, or that he were allurd with covetousness, because he hoped under pre tence
of necessity, which he was put unto for the payment of the tribute, he he
should be held the better excused, if he committed Sacrilege; forthwith he
assembled an army, and in the night assaulted the Temple of Jupiter,

When many Cities of Greece were come to Rome, to complain of the injuries that
Phillip had done them, there was great contention in the Senatehouse, between
Demetrius the son of Phillip, sent thither by his Father to excuse him to the
Senate, and the Ambas of the Cities: The young Prince being confounded with
exclamation, suddenly held his peace, by which his shamefastnes, the senate
being moved, gave judgment on his side.

Of this the King was advertised by the decree of the Senate, to the intent he
should understand, he was not acquitted as guiltless, but rather pardoned for
his sons sake, which though it were upright, purchased unto Demetrius not
thanks for his behavior in that Embassage, but hatred thorough the
maliciousness of backbiters. For with his brother Perses (who sought by all
means to surprise him) it procured him envy, and with his father (when he knew
occasion of his acquittal) it procured him displeasure, disdaining that the
person of his son, should be of more force with the Senate then the authority
of the father, or the estimation of his estate, being a King Perses therefore
perceiving his fathers disease, made complants daily unto him of his brother
Demetrius, Romans to be the ruin of his father.

But not contented to have proceeded thus far against his brother, he went
about to entrap him by treason, and surmised he went about to vsurp the dignity
of the kingdom: for proof whereof, he brought in record, and sobbo^^ed false
witnesses, to uphold the crime that he charged him withal. By means whereof,
he compelled the father to murder his own son, and brought all the court
into sorrow and heaviness.

After Demetrius was thus put to death, Perses (as it were the party being
dispatched Phillip being highly offended with this misdemeanor and perverse
behavior of his sons, and finding no counsel nor tender admonition of power
to reclaim him, from time to time very impatiently bewailed the death of his
son Demetrius, as a young plant that would have borne to him better fruit,
and he himself had better hope of. Whereupon mistrusting himself to be
deceived by some cautel treason he put the witnesses to torture.

Through which having boulted out their mischief, he was vexed as much Perses,
as with the undeserved death of Demetrius: and he had (as by natural office he
was bound) been revenged of the treason by punishing the offender, had not
death prevented him of his purpose; for shortly The death of Phill^^ (...) o^
(...).
after thorough great sorrow and pensiveness of heart, he fell sick and died,
leaving behind him great furniture for the wars, the which Perses afterward
made employment of. Moreover he had allured the Frenchmen called Rascians to
take his part, and was minded to have made forceable wars upon the Romans if
he had not died. (...).


For the Frenchmen, after the unfortunate battle at Delphos (in the which the
wrath of the gods, did them more displeasure then the puissance of their
enemies) Brenne, fled like outlawes, some into Asia, and some into Thrace; from
thence they retired into their native country back, the very same way they
came out. A certain of them rested at the meeting of the two Rivers Dan^y and
Say, calling themselves Rascyans. The people of Langue^^ock being returned into
their old country of Tolouse, and there stricken with a Pestilent murreine,
could not recover their health, until such time as by the admonishment of
their Southsaiers, they had thrown into the lake of Tolouse all the gold and
treasure that they had pillaged in the wars by the robbing of Temples: all
which Scypio the Roman long time after took away to the use of the Senate.
There was of gold 110. thousand weight, which sac^^^^ge wa^ afterward the
confusion of Scipio and his host. Immediatlye after followed the war of the
Scimbrians against the romans, as it were to punish their former taking a way
the church-goods. A great number of the people of I^^^^ck, being ^nticed with
the sweetenes of the prey, as men wonted to live together upon the spoil went
into Illiria, and there having spoiled the Istrians rested in Pa^^^^c. It is
reported, that the nation of the Istrians descended from the n^e^ of Colchos,
(...)
that were sent by King Aetis, to pursue the Argonantes and Jason, that led may
Pontus, into the ^^^^r of Istre, and so directly into the river Say, following
the Argonantes at the ^eard heels, carried their ships upon their shoulders
over the tops of the M^^taines, even unto the shore of the Adriatic sea,
which things they (...) that the Argonants for the length of their ships had
don before them. But when the men of Colchos could not find them, (whether it
were for fear of the king, or tediousness of the long sailing) they settled
themselves near unto the C^^e aquilia, and called themselves Istryans, after
the name of the river, ^^to which they first entered out of the Sea. The Daces
also at the issue of the Getcs, who with Olor their king being vanquished in
batel by the Bactrians, were put to this Perses therefore being crowned king in
his father Phillipes sted, stirred all these nations to take part with him
against the romans.

In the mean time there arose war between Prusias (unto whom Hannibal wars
betwixt Prus^^s and ^^^^es
was fled, after that peace was concluded between Antiochus and the romans)
and Eumenes: the which war Prusias (breaking the league upon trust that he
Hanniball) did first move. For when the romans (among other a^^^^les of
peace) put in the deliverance of Hannaball sor one; the king ga^e him friendly
notice of it, and he fled into Candy. In which I Will, when he had quietly l^^ed a
long time, and at length perceived the people began to grudge and repine
against him, for his great wealth and riches, he filled ports with lead and
set them in the temple of Diana, as a vow for the preservation of his life and
good fortune. By means whereof the city having no mistrust of his doings, in
as much as they believed they had his riches for a pledge, he went to Prusias,
carrieng all his gold with him conveyed in Images of timber, least if his
riches should happen to be espied his life might be endangered for the ber^^^^
thereof.

Afterward when Eumenes had overcome Prusias in battle upon the land ^^d The
(...)
that Prusias would try the adventure on the Sea, Hanniball by a new deui^e was
the occasion that he gat the victory: For he caused of all kind of Serpents to
be put into earthen pottes, and in the midest of the battle ^^sl them into the
enemies ships.

This policy seemed at the first to the men of Pontus to be but a mockery, to
leave weapons and sight with earthen potts. But when the serpents began to
swarm about them in the ships, they were so troubled with the doubtfulnesse of
the danger, that having both their enemies and the poison of the Serpents to
defend them from Prusias, they got the upper hand.

When tidings hereof came to Rome, the Senate sent Ambassadors to cease the
strife between both Kings, and demanded to have Hanniball yielded unto them.
But Hanniball being advertised of this condition, and fearing the event The
death of Hanniball.
against him would be granted, poisoned himself and died ere the Ambassadors
had time to ceaze on him.

This year was notable for the deaths of three of the most puissaunt
captains in all the whole world, that is of Hanniball, Philopomenes, and Scipio
Affricanus; The (...).
of which it is truly recorded that Hanniball, neither in the time that Italy
qu^ked to see him thundering like a tempest in the Roman Empire, nor when he was
returned to Carthage and held the sovereignty, did ever sit down to his meat,
or drunk above a pint and a half of Wine at a meal. And as for chastity, he
kept it so undefiled among so many prisoners that he had, that a stranger
would swear in wonder of his condition, he was not borne an Affrican. He was
also of that modesty and government that albeit he had sundry kinds of people
to rule in his host, yet his Soldiers never went about to betray him, neither
could be entrapped by

The end of the xxxij. Book.
THE XXXIII. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
PAulus Emilius encountreth with Perses. The valiant demeanor of Cato. Perses
is oue, come and taken with his sons, slying toward Samothrace, with whom
the Empire of Macedon ends. The Noblemen of Etoly, with their wives and
children are led prisoners to Rome.

THe Romans finished the Wars of Macedon, with far less trouble then they
did the wars of Carthage, but the conclusion thereof, was so much the more
honorable, Great preparation of the Romans against Philip.
by how much the Macedons excelled the Carthageniens in renown and estimation.
For they were furthered partly with the glory of the conquest of the East, and
in special with the aid and help of Kings. To this war the Romans gathered
all the power they of them selves could make, and to enlarge their host more
insinit, sent for succor Masiniss^ King of Numidia, and to all other their
confederates: Furthermore they charged Eumenes king of Bythinia to asist them
withal his power, from age, even unto youth.

Perses besides his host of Macedons (who by the opinion of all men were
accounted invincible) had in his treasury and in his storehouses provided
beforehand, wherewithal to maintain ten years wars: but this carfulness
was not his own providence and thrift, but his fathers which lest it to him.
By means whereof being puffed up with pride, forgetting the mischance his
parent had before him, grew careless of the invasion of so great and powerful
an enemy, and like worms that never dread danger Perses to his men of war
made light of the Roman army, saying it was sufficient enough for them to
resist so intruding an enemy only to consider; and when they were ordering
themselves to fight, but to remember the ancient renown of Alexander.

(...) against them by the Lacedaemonians, whose fields (for a mutual hatred
borne between those two people) the Acheans had forraged. The Senate returned an
swear to the Laccdemonians, that they would send Ambassadors into Greece, in
that behalf, and that none of their confederates or any such as desired to be
at league and friendship with them, should complain to them, of any^ wrongs
but they would both desend them, and by restitution to be made, redress them.
But the Ambassadors had secretly in charge, to endeavor as by all persuasions,
to dissolve the agreeable consent to friendly and faithful union, that these
cities of the Acheans had the one with the other, and to the intent they might
the easier be brought to subjection, to order every city to

The Ambassadors about these affairs arriving at Corinth, there summoned
before them all the Princes of these withstanding cities, recited the decree
ofthe Senate to them, and declared what they were come to counsel them unto;
namely that it was expedient for them, that every city should be governed by
their own laws, institutions, and customs, and not to be gouernd by the
providing of others. But when this embassage was notified to the multitude,
insted of accepting this aduertisment of the Romans, like mad men least there
should be any partakers ofthe sorrainers which inhabited amongst Roman Am bas
also, had not they by having private notice of them rescued themselus by slight.
But so soon as the news hereof was by the Ambas. brought to Rome, the Senate
appointed Mummius the Consul, to make war against the Acheans, without
protracting his endeavor or without delay, conveyed thither his Army, and
having stoutly provided for all necessaries in readiness, appertained to
further so great an enterprise, offered his enemies battle. While the Acheans
as though they held it a matter of no more importance to be invaded Romans,
then by some other straggling enemy, were utterly careless otherwise then of
ordinary resistance; sor minding the bootye which their enemies brought, and
not the battle, whereby they should be endangered themselves, they brought
wagons to be laded home, with the spoils of their enemies, and set their wives
and children in the mountains to behold the conslict. But the battles were no
sooner drawn to form, and the encounter begun, but their wives, children, and
friends, which they brought to be the view of the war, and to be witnesses of
their valor, were testimonies of their overthrow, they were slain every
souldior, even in their dearest friends sight, and left them noioy of them to
be comforted by, but the sorrowful remembrance of their fall, to record all
their lives after, their wives Corinth was beaten down, all the people sold by
the drum, for an example to other cities. Corinth laid wast.
After this, Antiochus K. of Syria, made war upon Ptolomy the elder, his
sisters son K. of Egypt, who was altogether given to sloth, and grown so
vnweeldy through daily riot, that he not only ommitted al things appertaining
to the estate and Office of a king, but also by means of overmuch pampering of
himself, became in a manner void of that reason which man by nature is
inclined unto. Being therefore in this war expulsed his kingdom, he fled to
Alexander, with whom he divided his kingdom, who two together so concluded,
that they sent Ambassadors jointly to the Senate of Rome, requesting their help
by virtue of the league that was confirmed and held between them.

The Senate being moved at this reasonable request of these two brethren sent
Pub. Popilius their Ambassador. Antiochus willing him to abstain from
Antiochus m^^^^th w^^ against Ptolomy.
Egypt, if he were not entered there, and retire himself and his forces from
thence, if already he with them had disturbed their peace. Which Popil. being
admitted to Antiochus in Egypt, and that the king offered to kiss him, (for at
such time as Antiochus lay in hostage at Rome, among others he had this
Popilius in great reverence. But Popilius advertised him, to let cease and
forbear all private friendship, while affairs concerning his Country were in
hand. And therewithal drawing forth the decree of the Senate, and delivering
it to him, when he saw him pause on the matter, and asking him leisure to
consult and take adusie with his friends.) Popilius with a wand that he had in
his hand, drew a wide circle about him, wiling him to call his friends to take
counsel with him there, and not to remove or set his foot out of the Romans.

This rigorousnes of Popilius and with such heat delivered, so much abated the
kings courage, that he made reply, he was sufficiently contented to be An
example of an uncorrupted mind.
ruled by the Senate. Antiochus after his return into his kingdom, leauinge
his heir a tender infant, whom the realm assignd to be under the governance of
certain protectors.

Hereupon his Uncle Demetrius who lay in hostage at Rome, hearing of the death
of his brother Antiochus went unto the Senate, and in his own behalf,
delivered that he came thither for a Hostage duringe his life, after

But when he perceived though with long labored suit, the Senate would not
license him to depart (because they were all of one opinion, that the The
death of Antiochus.
kingdom should remain in more safety, and less uproar, being in the Ostia,
and there with such of his fellows whom he thought best to trust, he privately
took shipping, and safely escaped from thence. As Soon as he was arrived in
Siria, he was received with great joy and favor of all men, and the protectors
who had taken the infant in defense, first murdered their ward, and after
seated him in the possession of the kingdom.

The same time Prusias King of Bythinia went about to kill his own son
Prusias taken in his own Share.
Nicomedes, provoked thereunto by no other cause, but thereby to advance his
younger sons that he had begotten upon his second wife, and were then
soiorners at Rome. But the unnatural plot being discovered to the young prince,
by those whom his father had made ministers for the Tragedy, they further
counseled him, that for as much as his father in his cruelty had animated them
to so inhumaine an act, he should prevent the conspiracy, and turn the
mischief upon the deuisers own head: neither found they it any difficult
matter, to persuade him; but being prompted with the desire of his own
preservation, as soon therefore as he was called home into his fathers realm,
with the intent Prusias the father and soueraign was deposed by his own son
and subjects, and being left not regarded no further then a private person, was
forsaken of his own servants, and as he lay hoping to obscure himself in an
unfrequented and desolate place, being discovered to his son, his son as
cruelly flew him as he had commanded his son to be put to death.

The end of the xxxiiij. Book.
The 35. Book of Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
Demetrius makes war against Ariarathes king of Cappidocia, supporteth his
brother Holofernes against him, whom afterward for treason prepensed he keeps
in prison. Prompalus is subborned as the son of Ant^^chus by the name of
Alexander against Demetrius, by whom Demetrius is deprived of life and
kingdom. Demetrius the son of Demetrius recouereth his fathers kingdom.

COncerning Demetrius the usurper of the kingdom of Siria, supposing it to be
dangerous to the security of his estate, and a hole for insurrection to creep
in at, if upon his new advancement he should give him to idleness, and not
express as much of his Nobleness to his subiect^ as they in making him their
King expected from him; determined to enlarge his kingdom, and to augment his
riches, by subdu^^g his neighbors. Whereupon for the displeasure he bare to
Ar^arathes King of Coppadocia for refusing his sister in marriage, he maintained
against him his brother Holofernes; who being An example of ingratitud
that he had so honest title to make war, he purposed to replant him in his
kingdom again. But Holofernes being of a cankered and cor^upt nature, made a
compact with the Antiocheans, who at that time wet his enemies and offended
with Demetrius, and practiced with them to deprive him of his kingdom, which
in this his banishment went about to restore him back into his.

Demetryus having knowledge thereof, spared his life not for any zeal he had
toward him, but because Ariarathes by his preservation should not be delivered
from fear of his brothers war; nevertheless he caused him to be apprehended
and inprisoned in the city Selucia. And the Antiochiens were not so Ptolomy
King of Fgypt, Attalus King of Asia, and Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, all
which Demetrius had by his wars sti^red against him, they subborned one
Prompalus a man of the basest condition, to challenge the kingdom by battle,
as though it had bin his by right inheri^ance.

And to the intent their should want nothing to spite Demetrius withal, they
proclaimed him by the name of Alexander, and reported him to be the son of
A^tiochus. So sore hated was Demetrius among all men, that by an universal
consent they not only gave his adversary the power of a king but also atributed
unto him nobility of lynage. Alexander now enriched by means of this
wonderful exchange, forgetting his villainy and outrage, and being accompanied
with the power almost of all the whole East, made war against Demetrius whom
he vanquished and deprived both of life and kingdom.

Howbeit Demetrius wanted no courage to withstand the brunt, for at the first
encounter he put his enemy to flight, and when the kings renewed the battle, he
The (...) (...) of Demetrius.
so valiantly answered them, that he slew many thousands of them, and yet at the
last (though of an invincible courage) he was slain fighting among the
thickest of his enemies. In the beginning of the wars, Demetryus had
committed to the charge and oversight of his host of Guidus in Licia, his two
sons with a great sum of Gold, for defraying of their expenses, to the intent
they might be both out of ieopardy, and also if need enforced, so much be
preserved to revenge their fathers death.

The elder of them named Demetrius, being past childhood, and hearing of the
^^otous demeanor of Alexander (who for the joy he had in his riches unhoped,
and in the ornaments of another man's felicity, given over to licentioulnesse,
kept himself like a cowardly carpet knight at home in his palace, among
Demetrius the you^ (...) his fathers kingdom.
Candiens, assailed him carlesse, and misdreding no hostility prepared against
him at all. Then Antiochiens also, to make amends with their new benifits for
the old displeasure done to his father, yielded themselves to him.

Moreover his fathers Soldiers being enflamed with favor toward the young
Prince, and preferring the concience of their oath made to his father, before
their latter promise given to their new proud and dishonest King, revolted
wi^hall their ensigns to Demetrius: and so Alexander being with the like rage
of fortune over thrown as he was li^ted up, was in the first battle
vanquished and slain, and so suffered due and deserved punishment Demetrius
whom he had slain, and in the right of Antiochus whose stock he had slandered.

The end of the xxxv. Book.
THE XXXVI. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
Demetrius makes war against the Parthians, and is taken prisoner. Tryso
usurped the kingdom of Siria. Antiochus the brother of Demetrius wresteth it
out of his hands, and subdueth the Jews. The oryginall of the Jews. The
commendation of Joseph. The going of the Isralites out of Egypt under Moses.
The hollowing of the saboth day. The fruitefulnesse of Jury, with the
description of the vale of Jericho, of the dead sea. Of Attalus king of
Pergamus. Of his cruelty, and madness, and how he made the people of Rome his
heir. Aristomicus the bastard

Demetrius having thus recovered his fathers kingdom, was himself also
corrupted with the prosperous success of his affairs, and not forwarnd by the
fall of him that preceeded him, through the inclination of vice, that is
commenly wont to be in the thought of youth, and the hot desire of evil, so
generally rooted in the blood, he fell to sloth and idleness and wholly
neglected the requisite ordaining of his affairs, and the honor of his
Parthyans. Whose coming the people of the East were not willing to behold,
both by reason of the cruelty of Arsaces King of Parthyans, and also because
the countries being enured with gentle entreatance of the ancient dominion of
the Macedons, Parthians. By means whereof being aided with the powers of the
Parthians, Emilians, and Bactrians; he vanquished the Perthians in many
battles. (...) (...) prisoner.


Nevertheless at last being deceived at a parley, under a counterfeit coulor of
peace to be handled, he was taken prisoner and drawn through the open face of
the Cities that had before revolted, and showed in dension to the people that
had took part with him, as who should say, they might to their terror, see
what a dejected creature he was now, whom they but lately had so highly
favored. Afterward he was sent into Hyrcania, and there courteously entertained,
according to the dignity of his former estate. In the mean time Tryfo, Tr^fo
vsurps.
who through great suit had obtained to be admitted protector over Antiochus,
son in law to Demetryus, killed the child and usurped the kingdom, which
long after as a sovereign thereof in peaceable possession he enjoyed.

But at the length, when the favor that was given to him at his first
coronation began to be worn out, Antiochus the brother of Demetrius (who all
that time was brought up in Asia) being but a very child, overcame him in
battle, Sciria was reduced back again to the posterity of Demetrius:
Antiochus therefore, remembering that both his father was hated for his pride,
and his brother despised for his slothfulness, to be sure that he would not
fall into the same vices himself, after he had taken in marriage Cleopatra his
brothers wife, he with all his deligence pursued the Cities, that had revolted
from his brother at the beginning of his reign, and having subdued them,
reformed them again to the obedience of the Empire. At this time also, he
conquered the Jews, who in the reign of his father Demetrius, having gathered
themselves into one body, had withdrawn their obedience from being subject to
the dominion of Macedon, and having set themselves at liberty, which Macedon
able to subingate their fealty by his dominion, but that in spite of them,
they created a ruler among themselves, and disturbed all Sciria with their
nations proceedings.

The original of the Jews was Damasco, which is the Noblest city of al
Sciria, The original of the Jews.
and from whence the kings of Sciria derived their pedigree, as linially
descended and propogated from Semiramis. The city had the name of a king of
theirs (called Damascus) in honor of whom, the Scirians, worshipping the
Sepulcher of his wife Aratis, for a Temple, and reverenced her with much
deuotition and superstitious Ceremonies for a Goddess. After Damasco, reigned
Abraham, Israel, and Moses, but Israel was more not^ble then his au^cestors,
by reason of the frutfull increase of his ten sons: Therefore he divided his
people into ten kingdoms, and delivered it to his sons, calling them all
Jews, after the name of Judah, who deceased immediately after the division: the
remembrance of whom, he commanded all the rest to have in reverence, (his
portion was the chief of all the others) the youngest of his brothers was
Joseph, of whose excellent wit all the elder brothers being afraid, secretly
laid for him, and having betrayed him, sold him to a Marchant-stranger, by whom
he was carried over into Egypt: where through the sharpness and pregnancy The
(...) of (...) in Egypt.
of his wit, he profited in the magical arts, that in short continuance he
proceeded many year before the Empire thereof, and without question all Egypt
had in that greedy unsatisfied time perished for hunger, if the K. advised by
his counsel, had not given straiht command, to engrosle and lay up in store,
the corn of many years before to preserve his people from the extremity
ensuing. Finally he was so well experienced, that his answers seemed not to be
given by man but by God. His son was Moises, who besides the inheritance of
his fathers knowledge was also worthily commended for his exceeding beauty and
comely personage. But the Egyptians being stricken with a great itch and leprouse
scurf over al their bodies, to the intent the contagion should infect no
further, by the warning of an Oracle, exiled him and all the infected out of
Egypt. Moises An vn^^uth
therefore being there made captain over the banished people, stole away
Egyptians, which stuff due to their devotion, they entending to recover the
same by force, were compelled by the violence of a tempest, which wether beat
them to retire home again, and Moses soon after resorting to Damasco, the
native country of his ancestors, ^ent up into the Mountain Syria, in which
(forasmuch as he first rested there, after seven The hallowing of the lab baoth
day.
days fasting and travel of himself and his people through the desetts of
Arabya) he hallowed the seventh day, and called it after the manner and custom
of the country then in use, the saboth day; commanding it to be kept fasting
day for ever after, because upon that day they made an end of their travel and
Egypt for fear of infection, least they should be hated again for the same
cause where they should inhabit: they instituted a law, never after to
communicate with strangers, which ordinance rising at first thus upon good
consideration, by little and little grew into a custom of superstition. After
Moses his brother Aruas or Aaron, was consecrated, the first priest of the
Ceremonies of Israel, and not long after King: so that it remained ever after
as a custom amongst the Jews, that they which Aaron
were their priests were also their Kings. Through which, justice joined with
religion, it is increadible how greatly they increased. The enriching of the
Jews came by the revenues of Balm, which grows in no other country but
only in theirs. For certain, there is a spacious valey enclosed round about
with continual Acres, is named Jericho, in the same valley there is a wood
worthy principal record, both for the fruitfulness The description of I^^^^o
and for the pleasantness thereof; for it is both beset within and enclosed
about, with date trees, and balm trees. The balm trees are a like in making
and grows unto pitch trees, saving that they be much lower and are dressed as
vines are: these at cetrain seasons of the year do sweat out balm, neither is
the place so much to be admired at for the fruitefulnesse, as for the
couldnesse; for whereas through all the climate of that country the sun is
exceeding hot, there is in that seat, a natural warmenes of the air, and a
continual shadow to Bytumen resists the force of them, The dead sea
wherewithal the water is made immovable, neither can it be sailed upon,
because all things wanting life, sink down to the bottom, and it will not be^re
any substance unless it be ouerlaid with Allome.

Xerxes King of Persia was the first subdued the Jews, afterward, they and the
Xerxes first subdued the Jews.
Persians also, were brought in subjection by great Alexander and continued by
many years under the government of the Empire of Macedon: lastly rebelling
against Demetrius, by seeking the friendship and aliance of the Romans (who at
that time did cut large thongs of other men's leather) they were the first of
all the Nations of the East that recovered liberty. During the same time that
there was such alteration of the kingdom of Siria, among the new Kings,
Attalus King of Asia, distained his most flourishing kingdom, which he had
received of his uncle Eumenes, with the slaughter of his friends, and the
execution of his alies, falsely surmising one while, that the old Lady his
mother, Beronice were by their sorcery and enchauntments put to death. After
the committing of this wicked and outrageous cruelty, The sorrows of Attalus.
he apparelled himself in indecent apparel, and suffered his head and beard
to grow long and forworne, like as offenders fashion themselves to do, being
once in prison, carlesse of any thing that should refresh or delight either
their bodies or minds: he took no pleasure to come abroad, it was hateful to
see or hear the people, al m^^th in his house was loathsome unto him, all
pleasures poison, and as a man distracted and ^ent from his human reason, so
contemned he al human society: so that it was thought he offered this
punishment of himsel^e, as an oblation to alay the fury of the Gods which he
had justly provoked to do justice against him, or to pacify the wondering

Furthermore he gave himself to the practice and exercise of the Smiths crast,
and to the founding of mettales, maru^lously delighting in casting of Brass.
Finally entending to make his mother a Toombe, as he was earnestly occupied
about the same, he caught a surfeit by the heat of the sun, of which Rome his
The death of Attalus.
heir.

But Aristonicus the son of Eumenes, not begotten in wedlock, but born of a
single woman of Ephesus, who after the death of Attalus, took upon him the
government of the kingdom of Asia, as it had bin successively his claim by
right of the inheritance. When he fought many prospercus battles, against such
of the cities as would not yield themselves to his aid, for fear of the
Romans, and by that success seemed now to be rightful King without
contradiction, Licinius Crassus the consul, was appointed to have the charge
and disposing of al things in Asia, who having more mind of Attalus The
reward of a (...) man.
overcome, and with the loss of his life concluded his rashness, and suffered
punishment of his covetousness. To succeed in his room was sent the consul
Perpenna, who in the first encounter vanquished Aristo^^^us, took him
prisoner, and shipped all the treasure of Attalus appertaining to the Romans by
force of Legacy, and conveyed them to Rome; the which his successor Marcus
aquilius the Consul, taking sore to heart, made all the speed he could, to take
Aristomicus into his hand, whereby he himself might rather have the honor of
the triumph for vanquishing him then Perpenna: but the death of Perpenna brake
off the strife between the two Consuls, and so Asia being made the right of
the Romans, did with her riches send all her vices unto Rome.

THE XXXVII. BOOK OF
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Massilians entreat the Romans to release their displeasure against the
Phocenses. The Romans reward the Kings that aideth them against Arystomicus.
The cruelty of Laodice toward her own children. The birth, education,

AFter that Aristomicus was taken prisoner, the Massilians, sent Ambassadors to
Rome, humblye requesting pardon for the Phocenses their first founders, upon
whose Aristonicus, and before time when they had like controversy with
Antiochus, the same city like deadlye enemies had ever furthered the war
against them, which request the Massilians with much suit obt^ined.

This done they rewarded the kings that aided them against Aristomicus. unto
Mithridates king of Pontus, they gave the lesser Syria, and unto the sons of
Ariarathes king of Cappadocia, who lost his life in the same battle, they
gave Licao^^a and Cilicia, wherein the Senate and people of Rome, dealt more
favorably with the sons of their confederates, then the mother dealte with
her own children, for by the one the child had his kingdom enlarged, by the
other he was bereft of his life. For Laodice, of six sons Ariarathes had
begotten by her (for sear least by continual succession in the government
Laodice, (whom the people The (...) (...) tuelty of a mother.
had put to death for the cruelty toward her children) inioyd the kingdom to
himself. Mithridates also being surprised by sudden death, left a son to
possess his throne of his own name, who afterward grew to such power, that he
surmounted in estate, not only the kings of his time, but also all them that
had reigned before him: he held wars with the Romans six and forty years
together, Myth^idates the great.
sometime with conquest, sometime with loss, whom the most expert captains,
Silla, and Lucullus, with diverse others: and in fine, Cneus Pompeius

The very wonders of heaven did pronosticate to what greatness he should aspire,
for both the same year he began his Empire, there appeared during the progress
of therescore and ten days, at both times such a blazing star, A Come^
occupied a quarter of the heaven, and showed so bright, that it blemished the
light of the sun, and when it rose or went down, it consumed 4. hours at
each time.

When he was a child, his own governors went about to destroy him, set ting him
upon a rough and unbroken horse, and compelling him to learn to ride, and
practice the actiuity and Noble exercise of Turney, the which attempt,
following not their minds as they hoped for, because the young prince
Mithridates managed the horse better then was hoped or expected in one of his
age, they assailed him with poison, but he casting how to escape perils

After this, fearing his enemies would compass the treason by stratigem, which
they could not by poison, he counterfetted a desire of hunting, where by the
space offoure years, he came not under any roof in the City, or cottage
in the Country, but wandered up and down in forests and woods, and rested the
night time in Mountains, sometime in one place, sometime in another, making no
place especial for his repose, nor no man that knew his particular haunt, he
enured himself either to chase or to pursue the wild beasts on foot, and with
some of them to encounter by plain force, by means whereof, he both avoided all
treason, and also hardened his body to ab^de all kind of labor and travel.

Afterward when he came to take the government of the kingdom upon him, he
immediately set his mind not so much to the governing, as to the enlarging of
the same, and in his Wars, he marvelous fortunately subdued Mit^ ^idates
(...) the (...)
the Scythians, who before that day was never conquered, who Nobly destroyed
Zopyron, the captain of great Alexander, with thirty thousand fighting men,
who had slain Cyrus K. of Persia, with two hundred thousand men of war, and
had put to flight, Phillip king of Macedon.

Being thus increased in strength, he conquered Pontus, and consequently
Cappadocia. Then with certain of his friends he went secretly disg^ised out of
his own kingdom, without knowledge to any other, then those friends associated
him, and wandered through Asia, viewing the Situation of the cities and
provinces of the same. From thence he traveled over Bithini^, and as though he
had bin already Lord of Asia, he provided himself of all things

After this travel, when all men supposed he had been dead, he returned back
into his own realm where he found a little son, whom Laodice his Sister and
wife had brought him forth in his absence. But in the midst of the joy that
was made, for his return and for the birth of the child, he was in danger to
be poisoned; for his sister Laodice, believing him to be dead, The wife of
Mithrid^tes pra^^^leth to take his li^e.
and thereupon abusing her body with his friends, (as though she might have
less ened her offense, by committing of a greater crime) prepared a cup of
poison to Welcome him home withal. Whereof Mythridates having intelligence by
a Damsel, punished the offense upon the practisers thereof.

After when Winter drew on, he spent not the time in feasting but in seats of
Arms, not in idleness but in exercise, not among carpet knights, but in
Iusting and Turnement, in running on foot, and on horseback, or else in
wrestling and trial of strength amongst his peers: he also daily enured his
men of War by daily exercise, to be enured to like labor and travel, equal
with himself. By means whereof, as by the Noblenes of his mind, and courage
of his body, he was reputed invincible himself, so his whole host trained up
under him, were held invincible also.

He first entered into leage with Nicomedes, and then invaded Paphlagonia, the
which having conquered, he divided the benefit thereof to his captains He
conqueteth Paphlagonia.
commanding them not only to desist from what they had begun, but withal
to leave it, without being any way indamaged by them in the same estate they
found it in. But Mythridates accounting himself now of power sufficient to
resist the puissance of the Romans, answered proudly, that the kingdom was
his fathers by inheritance, and that he maruailed, (knowing no reason they had
for it) they should make argument with him for his, more then they before had
done with his father: upon which answer being threatened in the behalf of the
Senate by the Ambassadors, he set so light by their menaces, that he forthwith
invaded Galicia. Nicomedies also (forasmuch as he was not able to make his
party good, in the right of his kingdom by any title) answered he would
surrender up his to the lawful King. And thereupon changing the name of his
own son, he called him Phylomenes, by the name of the Kings of Paphlagonia.
By which conueiance, under that counterfeit pretext, he still Roman
Ambassadors being thus had in derision without other answer, then being scoffed
by both, returned back to Rome.

The end of the xxxvij. Book.
The 38. Book of Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
MYthridates destroys Ariarathes king of Cappadocia, and Nicomedes inuadeth
the kingdom. Mythridates under pretense of helping his sisters son, drives
Nicomedes out of the realm, and by a cunning slight takes away the life of
his sisters son, and makes one of his own sons king. The Cappadocians rebel,
and set up Artarathes, the brother of the before slain king, whom Mythridates
overcomes, and drives him out of the realm. The said Ariarathes dies,
whereupon Nicomedes subborneth a beautiful young man, under the color of being

MYthridates now, least any stop or suspicion of his, should lie in the way to
withstand his ambitious proceedings, Laodice, whose husband Ariarathes king of
Cappadocia, he had traitrouslye slain by the furtherance of Gordius,
accounting the stratigem that concluded the Father, of little purpose, if after
him the young Princes should enjoy the inheritance of the kingdom, which heeso
much thirsted after.

But while he was busied in these politic affairs, Nicomedes king of
Bithinia, invaded Cappadocia, then detistute of a head, b^ reason of the late
death of the king: which Mithridates taking in hand to defend under a sayned
pretense of pitying his sister, he sent her succor to expuise Nic^^^^es o^t
of Cappadoc^a. But Laodice had by that time they were arrived yielded her se^f
to Nicomedes, upon condition he should take he^ to wife. Which marriage
Mythridates taking in high displeasure, he compelled the Garr^sons of
^^comedes Cappadoc^a, and restored the king^ome to his sisters sou^^, wherein
he had per^ormed a kinsman part, and therem had (...) (...) right Noble if
thereby had not followed a de^eit which he practiced in the Mithrida^es d^^^^th
Nicom^des out of C^ppadocia.
doing thereof.

For within few days after he was earnest to have Gordius restored home into
the favor of his king and (...), whose help he had ^sed in the murder of
Ariarathes, hoping that if the young king thereat wo^lde seem to make
resistance, he should the a have some q^arrel to make war upon him; or if he
were contented therewithal, that he then might dispatch the son by the same
man that he ruinated the father. Which devise when Ariarathes Mithr^^ates now
having bro^ght into the field, fo^rescore tho^sand sootmen, and ten tho^sand
horsemen, with six hundred armed Chariots, and that his adversary Artar^thes
by the help of the kings that were his neighbo^rs, and were contesserat with
him, had levied and assembled together as great a power as their enemy, which
Mythridates s^pposed them impossible to raise,

And the rupon procuring the young Prince to come to a conference with The
trech^ry of M^thridates.
him, he conveyed a dag^^^^ in the vpperstock of his hose, and when the sercher
that was sent by Ari^^^thes (as the manner ofkinges is) began to feel
carefully the nether part of his be^ly, he i^stingly bad him beware that he
sound not another weapon then he sought for^so by means of which scosse

Then both the kings being come to the place of parley, Mythridates drew
Ariarathes a good way from hi^ Friends. as it had bin to have their
communica^ion secret to themselus, where watching his aduant age in the open
view of both armies slew him, and crowned a son of his own of the age of 8.
years k. of Cappad^cia, giving him the name of Ariarathes, and assigning
Gordius to be his governor.

But the Cappadocians being vexed with the cruelty and treachery of the The
son of Myth^^dates it expulted
forenamed persons, revolted from Mithridates, and sent for the kings brother,
whose name was Ariarathes also out of Asia, where he was instructed and brought
up, against whom Mithridates renewed the wars, and having overcome him, drove
him from out of the realm of Cappadccia. Not long after, what for fear of his
kinsmans pursuit, and what by the present distress he was in, the young prince
caught a sickness and died. After his death Nicomedes fearing least Mithridates
by obtaining Cappadocia, would further invade Bithinia, as next neighbor unto
it, subborned a child of excellent beauty (as though Ariarathes had begotten 3.
sons, and not two only) to desire of the senate of Rome the kingdom of
Cappadocia, as his rightful inheritance from Laodice unto Rome, to testify
that she The impudent suit of M^th^d (...) to the S^nat.
bare three sons by Ariarathes, and that was one of them: which device, when
Mithridates heard of, he also with like modesty sent Gordius unto Rome, to
avouch before the Senate, that the child to whom he had delinered the kingdom
of cappadocia, was the son of the same Ariarathes, which in the quar rel of the
Romans, was slain in the battle of Aristomicus. But the Senate understanding
the meaning and subtle endeavor of both the kings, would not seem so unjust
and partial, to give other men's kingdoms to usurpers and vpstart heirs that
assumed forged names to themselves, but they sirste took The order t^len by
the S^nat.
cappadocia from Mithridates, and to comfort Nicomedes withal, they took
Paphlagonia from him. And to the intent it should not seem, they would bereave
kingdoms from these kings in despite of them, and presently bestow them upon
others, they having disposest them, left both the Nations to be at liberty. But
the cappadocians refusing this gift of freedom, returned to the Senate
Artobazanes made king of Cappadoc^a.
that they nor their country, neither could nor would live and continue without
a k. whereupon Ariobarzanes was appointed to take the rule and pre-eminence
over them. There was at the same time one Tigranes k. of Armenia, kept in
hostage not long before by the Parthians, and now remitted by them into his
fathers kingdom: Him did Mithridates covet to allure to take part with him, in
the wars that he so long time had purposed against the Romans, Gordius he
persuaded (as one that knew not what it was to displease so imperious a people)
to make war upon them. Ariobarzanes, who was no other but an absolute coward,
and to the intent he would not have it appear, he did it either for fear or
policy, he gave him his daghter Cleopatra in marriage, while he himself, at
the first coming of Tygranes to receive her, conueying away all his stuff,
fled speedily to Rome; so by the means of Tigranes, Cappadocia was again
reduced under the Dominion of Mith^idates. At the same instant died Nicomedes,
whose son named Nicomedes, being driven out of his kingdom by Mithridates,
resorted to Rome for Mithridates (...) Cappadocia.
succor, upon whose humble suit it was decreed by the Senate, that both he
Ariobarzanes should be seated in possession of their kingdoms again. For the
persormance whereof, Aquilius, Manlius, and Malthinus, were sent to be
Lieutenants of the war. Mithridates having knowledge hereof, and intending to
answer this enterprized hostility of the Romans, allied himself with
Tygranes, betwixt whom it was couenaunted, that Mythrydates should have for
his part the cities and lands, and Tygranes for his share the men and
Mithridates and Tygranes confederate together.
cattle, and whatsoever else was moveable. After this, Mithridates considering
what a war he had undertaken, sent out his Ambassadors, some to the
Cymbrians, some to the French-greekes, some to the Sarmatians, others to the
Baslarnes, to request them oftheir aid and help: all which Nations he had
allured long before, by showing to them friendships and sundry favors ever
since he first purposed this war against the Romans, and which now he made
in readiness for. Moreover he raised an host of men in Scithia, and armed all
the East, against his so powerful enemies, whereby it was no marvel, that he
overcome Aquilius and Malthine, having none but the M^^^^dates sturetn other
Nations a^^^^ the To mains.
men of Asia on their part, and after the discomfiture of whom, and of
Nicomedes, all the cities were carnest suitors to be received into his favor.
There he found as it were stored up in readiness for the employment he had, great
plenty of Gold and silver, gathered and reserved by the kings in times past,
with much fvrniture for the war, which in that action he had in hand, he knew
both necessary and needful: and forasmuch that this provision made greatly for
his furtherance, and being now from al infirmities strengthened that he would
not seem also to be chargeable to the cities, he released them al their
debts, as well private as public, and exempted them freely from all charges,
as well of the wars, as of tribute and taxes for 5. years space. Then assembled
he his soldiers before him, and encouraged them with diverse Romans, otherwise
entitled the wars of Asia. The copy of which Oration, I have thought worthy
not to be severed from this work (albeit I desire to be short) in the same
manner as Pompeins Trogus has in directly set it forth, for that he finds
fault with Lyute The oration of M^^^^date^ to his me of waire
and Salust, for publishing Orations in their works as they were spoken, when
fewer words to so much purpose is as sufficient, and for that by so doing they
exceed the bounds of a History. He said he could gladly have wyshed, since it
was conuement, that he might have consulted upon this point before the violence
of the disquiet attained to this height, whether it had bin better for the
general good of them al, though not for the particular benisit Romans. But now
that there was no remedy, to redeem their slavery but by resistance; to have
liberty but by the law of war, to have peace, unless purchased now in so
aduenturous a sight, nor reap plenty, unless bought with the price of their
enemies blood: he did expect and hope from their honorable resolutions, since
al men will draw their weapons against thieves, though not to defend their wealth,
yet knowing them merciles, to revenge their deaths. But for as much as he
purposed not to debate, whether it were prositable now to be in quiet,
(considering they had a quarrel to answer, not against them that were suspected
enemies in heart but such as had professed themselves apparently, and were now
Romans might be overcome, his soldiers that vanquished Aquilius in Bithinia,
and Malthinus in cappadocia, were witnesses as well as he. But if he thought the
examples of other men's fortunes, could stir and inflame them more then their
own experiences, he had heard that Pirrhus K. of Epire, strenghned but with 5.
M. Macedons, vanquished the Romans, ^n 3. several pitched fields. He had herd
that Hannibal by the space of xvi. years, abode in Italy like a conqueror, and
had sacked the city of Rome it self, had not the secret malice, his own
countrymen bare to his fortunate successes, bin a greater hindrance to him, in
that cities overthrow, then the power of his enemies. He had herd that the
Frenchmen inhabiting on the otherside of the Alps, entered into Italy, and
there (notwithstanding the Romans) seated them selves in the most wealthiest
cities of all the continent, and seized into their Asia. Moreover the said
Frenchmen had not only vanquished the Romans but also taken their city; in
so much that they left them no more ground in all the world whereon to billet
themselves, but on a hill, from whence they were feign to remove their enemy,
not by battle, but by ransom. The which Frenchmen, (the report of whose name
since has bin so terrible to the Romans) he had to strengthen him and make
succesfull his war. For there is no difference between the Frenchmen that
inhabit Asia, and the Frenchmen that people Italy, but only the distance of
their dwellings asunder. As for their original, their prowes, and the manner of
ordring their fight was al one; Sclauont^ and Thrace, being a far painfuller
labor, and a means to train them up in a secure experience to make themselves
way, through allthose countries, then the other to settle their abiding where
they now inhabit. Furthermore that Italy it self, was never well pleased with
Rome since it was first builded, but that continually from year to year,
incessant war has bin made, by some for their liberty, and by others for the
right of the Empire. Insomuch that many cities of Italy had utterly destroid
the Roman Army by the sword, and soon compeld them snamefully to creep under a
yoke: and least he might seem to make too long Italy was up in Arms jointly,
together with the Marses, not to demand liberty, but society in the Empire,
and in the city it self. Neither was the city Rome, oppressed more by the wars
of their neighbors in Italy, then by the factions, and partakings of her
Noblemen at home, whereby the civil vprores were more dangerous, then the
foreign wars combersome. Besides these, the Cimbrians, that unmeasurable,
disordered, and huge rabble of savage and unmerciful rascalles, were swarmed
out of Germany, of al which Nations, although the Romans might be able to
withstand the brunt, yet by all at once, they must be so oppressed, to live in
misery ever after. For it was not by him in question, whether War ought to be
made or no, but how it might be so done to redound to their honor, and the
ruin of the Romans: neither did he seek occasion now to make war, for the
controversy was begun between them, from the time that they took from him in
his nonage Phrigia the less, which they had given unto his father as a reward
for aiding them in their battle against Aristomicus, but had continued till
now, and his greuances had been feign to digest wa^ghting times leisure, till
he should be abled in full measure so to rehearse his iniuryes he had
sustained, and one the causers thereof justly to be revenged. Besides, that
country they had rest from him, Seleucus Callinicus had before given in
Mithridates. They had also commanded him to depart out of Paphlagonia, or else
were ready to proclaim against him defiance, which Realm fell to his father
not by force of arms, nor by conquest, but by adoption, and as a Legacy of a
last will and Testament, made at the deaths of the rightful Kings, and so
consequently by inheritance: whereas notwithstanding al his humble obedience,
to their severe and bitter decrees, they were not at al moved to mitigate them,
but rather resolved to bear themselves more cruelly against him. What
impositions had they laid upon him which he had refused; or what submission
could they devise which he had despised, or had not used toward them? Had he
not at their institution, Phrigia and Phaphlagonia? had he not by their
appointment withdrawn his son out of Cappadocia, which he had conquered? And
therefore was his by the law of arms? Which labor of his was by them usurped,
as if the fruit of other men's chiualry should be no further their own, then
they list? that they having no Empire of their own, but that which they
purchased and held by the sword, should deny that liberty to others, which they
cherished in themselves? Did he not for their pleasure kill Creston King of
Bythinia, against whom the Senate had proclaimed war? And yet for all these
endeavors whereby he labored to be acceptable unto them, whatsoever Gordius or
Tygranes undertook, and was displeasing unto them, was imputed altogether to
be

Moreover in despite of him, the Senate had of their own voluntary will and
pleasure, set Cappadccia at liberty which country they themselucs had taken
from other Nations. Afterward when the people of Cappadccia sued to have
Gordius for their king, not being able to keep their country without
commotions, through the want of a governor, they could by no suit nor entreaty,
procure their consent thereunto, though having no other reason to withstand it
but because he was accounted his friend. Nicomedes at their commandment made
war upon him, after which precept of theirs being by Nicomedes begun, they
suffered him not to take such revenge upon him as befitted his

Whereupon unless he should sit still in his seat^, being provoked by these
means, and suffer every rumor to proclaim him a coward, or give leave to that
dancing Damsels son Nicomedes, to tear him from his Empire at his
pleasure, he could not be at content of them; neither was it the faults of
kings in their own particular person, which they were offended with, and lought
to redress, but their power and Majesty which they studied to suppresle whereby
to bestow it on their own confederats, and thereby, whosoever had the
possession thereof, the dignity they still reserved to themselves as theirs:
which practice of theirs he was not the first, nor had bin used against him
one^; for after the same manner his Graund-father Pharnax, by right of kindred
appointed as heir and successor to Eumenes King of Pergamus, and again,
Eumenes himself in whose shipping and by whose means, they were first
conuaied over into Asia; by the help of whose men of War, more then by their
own puissaunce, first they conquered the great Antiochus, and the Frenchmen in
Asia, and shortly after King Perses in Macedon. Al which favors of his, their
own Italy and (that which they thought they might not do to him for shame) they
made war upon his son Aristomic^s. There was never any King that had
deserved mo^e at their hand, or don more for them whereby to be respected, then
M^sinissa King of Numidia. To him and his labors they imputed the ouercomming
of their ^angeious enemy Hanniball; him they thanked for the the taking of
Syphax; him they commended for the destroying of Carthage, him they registered
among the two Affricans as the third preserver of their city: and yet with the
same man's Nephew, but even Affricke so deadly and merciless, that after they
had vanquished him they could not find in their hearts for his great
Graund-fathers sake, and in remembrance of the good he had done for them,
either to spare him, or pardon him, but they ymprisoned him, and led him
through the city in manner of a Triumph, and made him a wondering gazing
stock, to the unsatisfied eyes of the multitude. Thus had they made a law to
themselves to bear continual ha^red against al kings, for that they ever had
such to bear sovereignty over them as they were ashamed to hear spoken of;
that is to say, either shephards of Thaborigiens, Southfaires of Sabynes, or
Outlawes of corinth, or else (which is the honorablest name and title they can
ever challenge to have bin among them) proud men, and as (they themselves
report) Darius, and Cirus, the first founders of the Mo^archy of the Persians,
and on the mother side from great Alexander, from Nycanor an^ Selucus, ^he
first grounders and establishers of the flourishing Empire of M^cedon: or if he
should compare his people with theirs, he said he was a ruler of those Nations,
which Romain Empire, but also withstood the Empire of Macedon. For there was
none of the nations over whom he was ^uer, that ^ad bin at any time subdued by
forra^gne princes, or that ever submitted their s^biection to any King, unless
he were of their own country; ch^se whether they would name Cappadocia or
Paphlagonia, Pontus or Byth^ia, A^^^^ia the greater, or Armenia the less, of
which Countries neither Alexander (even he that conquered all Asia) nor any of
his successors, or posterity ever touched or disturbed.

As for Scithia, there was never but two kings before him, namely Darius and
Phillip, that ever durst so much as atempt to enter into it, who being neither
able ^o make any conquest, had much a do to wind themselus out with the
preservation of their lives, from whence also he had congregated a great part of
his strength, in this his expedition against the Romans. For himself, he had
more cause to have bin affraide when he entered into the wars of Pontus, as
being then but a young nouice in the wars, and a fresh water souldior

For the Scithians besides that they be well harnessed, and well hearted, are
also fensed, either with deserts and wast grounds, or else with cold and
extremity of weather, which bid the soldiers prepare, to abide both great
travel and peril: among which distresses, neither there was not almost any
hope of reward, os so wandering an enemy, which had not only no money, but not so
much as a house to hide his head, or shelter himself in.

When in this warfare they were now entered into, there was a more delightful
hope to he cherished, for neither was the air more temperate in all the
world, then in Asia, the soil more fertile, nor more plentye of fair and
plentiful Cities; so that they should spend a great part of the time, not
Attalus, now next unto them, or upon Lydia and Ionia, so greatly renowned for
their riches in ancient time, neither of which, they should need to go to
fight for, but to take possession of.

For all Asia was so desirous of their coming, that it seemed to him, he herd
them call, and cry aloud to them, make speed. So great hatred to the Romans,
had the greedy and ravenous dispositions of their Pro-consuls, the polling and
exacting of their tole-gatherers, the wrongful dealing in suits

Wherefore he willed them to do no more but follow him manfully, to take
president from him, and ponder with themselus what so great an army might be
able to effect, having such a captain as himself, whom they themselves had
seen, without the help of any of his soldiers, by his own industrye, only
slew the king of Cappadocia, and seyzed his kingdom: who only of all the men
and worthy Conquerors that ever lived, conquered all the countries, bordering
upon the sea of Pontus and Scithia also, which before his time were so
perrillous to all, that no man could travel through them, nor

As for his own Justice and liberality he would not refuse that his Soldiers
which had had sufficient trial and experience of them, should bear Witness
to the same, as of the which these were manifest tokens, that he only of all
kings, inioyed not soly the kingdoms that his Father possessed before him, but
withal for his bountiousnesse and royalty, was a dopted to be heir of other
foreign realms: as colchos, Paphlagonia, and Bosphorus, which he now
peaceable held. When he had thus encouraged his Soldiers, alter the three and
twenty year of his reign, he entered into war against the Romans. He returns
to the stories of Egypt
At that time in Egypt after the death of Ptolomy the King, Commissioners
seated the other Ptolomy which reigned at cyrene, in possession of the
kingdom; and contracted the Queen cleopatra, his sister to him to be his wife.

Ptolomy rejoicing that he had recouerd his brothers kingdom without battle,
the which he knew his mother Cleopatra', and certain of the Nobility, went
privately to assure unto his brothers son, to the great displeasure of all the
The cruelty of Ptolomy.
midst and height of all the feasting and Ceremonies of wedlock, and so he
went to his wife and sisters nuptuall led all bestained with the blood of her
son.

After which deed he was'as cruel and reuengsull to his other countrymen
which had stood for him and called him to the kingdom. For he gave his
Soldiers leave (which were strangers) to make slaughter of whom they would, so
that daily the massacre increasing and the channels for want of other current
were supplied with blood: he also put away his sister, and took to wife her
daughter, a faite young maiden having ravished her perforce, with which Tyrany

Ptolomy being left alone with his Soldiers, in so great a City, when he saw
himself Sovereign of empty houses and not of men, made proclamation that what
strangers soere, should freely come and inhabit the same; after whose
resortthither and that the city was again replenisned, he went forth to meet
the Roman Ambassadors, Scipio Affricanus, Suprius Mumius, and Lucius
Mettellus, which comforted the Senate, to see how the Realms of their
confederats were ordered. But look how cruel he had been to his own
countrymen, Romans. For he was ill visaged, a Ptolomy derided of the Roman
Ambassadors.
dwarffe by Stature, and had such a barell belly, that he seemed more like a
beast then a man, which unaccustomed deformity, his small shrill voice, and his
thin garments did more increase, as though of set purpose, he had garnished
those things to be seen, which if he had any modest reguard of shame, he
rather ought with all care to have concealed.

After the daparture of the Ambass. (of whom Affricanus whilst he beheld the
city, was himself a spectacle to the Alexandrians) Ptolomy being for his former
cruelties, now hated of his alliance also, fled secretly out of the realm with
his Cyrene, and because the Alexandrians should not make him King against him,
which he only misdoubted he put him to death.

Whereat his people no longer containing themselves to be sufferers of his
murders, the more to despite him, brake down his Images, and tore down his
pictures, set up to continue the memory of him in their minds: which outrage
he thinking to be done by the procurement of his sister, he slew the son whom
he had begotten by her, and cutting the body in pieces, closed it in a basket,
and sent it for a present to the mother, as she was making a seast to
solemnize the remembrance of her birthday.

Which lamentable spectacle, and sorrowful sight, not only to the Q. her
self, but also to the whole City, cast such a grief amongst their joyful
meeting, that suddenly in all the Court, was nothing heard but mourning

Cleopatra, after that the sorrow of her son was abated, perceiving her
(...) in the ^6. ^ooke.
selse grievously pursued by her brothers war, demanded help of Demetrius
king of Syria by his Ambassadors, whose fortunes were strange and worthy to be
spoken of. For Demetrius as it is showed before, making Warreagainst the
Parthtans, and getting the victory in many encounters, was suddenly surprised
by policy, and besides the loss of his Army, was also himself Arsaces k. of
the Parthians sent into Hir^^^ia, and of his Noble and royal courage, not only
gave him entertaiment like a king, but also preferred him his daughter in
marriage, promising moreover, to restore him to the kingdom of Syria, which
Trifo had usurped in his absence.

After whose death Demetrius being past hope of recovery of his kingdom growing
weary of his captivity, and the priuatnes of his life being loathsome to him,
though he lived never so wealthily, began to consider with himself, that he had
bin a king, sovereign of many things, where now his captivity made him Lord of
nothing; the ground he walked on, the place he lay in, the

His counselor and companion in this Enterprise, was a friend of his called
Calimander, who after his masters long captivity, corrupting guides with mo ny,
and disguising themselves in Parthians apparel, Demetrius with himself,
escaped out of Hircania, through the deserts of Arabia, unto Babylon. But
Phrahartes Arsaces, sent Posthorses after him, who made such speed by nearer
and directer ways, that having overtaken him they brought him back again. When
they came before the king, Callimander his servant was A^ ex^mple (...).
not only pardoned, but highly rewarded for his faithfulness toward his may.
But Demctrius with a great rebuke, was sent again unto his wife into Hircania,
and there attended more straightly then he was before.

In process of time when his wife had increased children to him, it was
thought, that the love of them, and the content of his wife, would rather
settle his stay, then the desire of absence entice him thence; whereupon, his
liberty was enlarged, but he cherishing his former desires, accompanied with
his trusty friend escaped again.

But even with like pursuit as before, he was overtaken, near unto the
borders of his own kingdom, and being apprehended, was brought back (...)
taken again in a 2 ^^^ght.
again, before the king, who commanded him out of his presence in great
displeasure. Nevertheless granting him again his wife and children, as
fellow and obedient comforters to him, he was again sent back into Hircania,
his former place of penance, and rewarded with a pair of gold ^hooes,

But this so gentle and favorable demeanor of the Parthians toward Deem trius,
proceeded not of any mercy naturally engraffed in that Nation, or in respect of
alliance or affinity, but because they coueted the kingdom of Siria, entending
to use Demetrius as an Instrument against his Brother Antiochus, according as
either the matter, the time, or the chance of the War should importune.

Antiochus hearing thereof, thought by wisdom and foresight to prevent their
subtle practice, and thereupon led his host (which he had hardened, Antiochus
leads an host against the Parthia^
to encounter with the Parthians. But in this enterprise he made as much pre
paration for riot, as for War. For whereas he had in his host eight hundred
thousand men of War, he had evermore three hundred thousand others, that
followed with him. Of which the most part were Cooks, Bakers, Minstrils, and
players of Enterludes. Of Gold and Silver, he was so enriched with so great
abundance, that even the common soldiors ware their clothes embrodered with
gold; nay their plenty was so great, that they trod under their feet the
Mettel, for the love and desire of which, kingdoms have bin dispeopled,
children have bin fatherles, and men have willingly killed one another.

Moreover all the furniture of his riches, were of clean Silver, as though he
had prepared to banqueting and not to battle. At Anticchus first arriual, many
kings of the East saluted him, and yielded themselves and their kingdom as his
tributaries and defenders. Fnally detesting the pride of the Parthians, it was
not long ere it came to the encounter, wherein Antiochus getting the vper hand,
in three several pitched fields, and thereupon subduing Babylon by force, was
accounted great: by Fortune whereof, all countries revolted so greedily unto
him, that the Parthians had no more Dominion left them, then the bare soil of
the realm of Parthia.

Phrahartes now upon this success of Antiochus, sent Demetrius into Syria with
an hoaste of Parthians, to invade the kingdom; to the entente that by that
policy, Antiochus might be enforced to withdraw himself out of Parthia, to
the defense of his own Realm. In the mean time because he could not overcome
Antiochus by force, he sought means to surprise him by policy. Antycchus by
reason he had such a multitude, dispersed all his army into the Cittyes, during
the Winter season, which speaciall care of his was his utter overthrow. For the
Cities, finding themselves burthned with victualing of his host, and also
injurious demeanor of the Soldiers, revolted again to the Parthians, and at a
dayappointed for the stratigem, all at one hour by traiterous conspiracy set
upon the host, as it was divided in every of there cities, and billeted in
places severally, to the intent they being assalted all at once, A sudden co^
spiracy against Antiochus.
they should not be able one to come to the rescue of another.

When tidings hereof came to Antiochus, he assembled such as Wintered with
him, and went to labor the relief of such as were nearest him. But in his
Parthians and his power, against whom he fought more valiantly himself, then
did his host; wherein his valor not preua^ling, for as much as his enemies were
more in number, and of more force and courage, his men forsook him, and in
that battle he was slain. For whom Phrahartes made a royal hearse, and kept
funerals for him as befitted the prosperity of so royal a Prince; withal
falling in love with the daughter of Demetrius, The death of Antiochus
whom Antiochus had brought with him, he took her to wife.

By fortune of which good hap, it repented him that he let go Demetrius, and
sent his men in post either to call him by entreaty, or if he denied compel
him back. But Demetryus dreading so much which after was approved, made such
speed, that he recovered his own kingdom; whereby Parthians being thus
disappointed of their travel and expectation, returned to the king.

The end of the xxxviij. Book.
THE XXXIX. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
Demetrius, while he goes about to conquer the whole realm of Egypt, loses
his own Realm by sudden rebellion. The king of Egypt subborneth one as
adopted by Antiochus to challenge the king dome of Siria, proclaimed him by the
name of Alexander, who overcomes Demetrius and kills him. Grypho the son
of Demetrius is crowned king by name, (his mother bearing all the rule) He is
supported by the power of the Egyptians against Alexander, whom he vanquisheth.

AFter that Aotiochus with all his army was thus destroyed in Parthia, his
brother Demetrius being delivered from captiuety of the Parthyans, (when as al
Siria as yet mourned for the loss of the army, as though the wars, that he
and his brother had made in Parthia, in the which the one was taken prisoner,
the other slain, had concluded with prosperous seccesse) he purposed to make
war in Egypt, at the request of Cleopatra his wives mother, who Egypt in
recompense, if he would support her against her brother. But whilst he went
about to gain that which was another right he lost his own, by means of a
sudden insurrection in Syria. First the Citizens of Antioch, through the
instigation of their Captain Trifo, detesting ^he kings pride, (which by his
conversation, among the cruel Parthians was become insufferable) and shortly
after the Apemenians with all the rest of the Ctties following their exsample,
took occasion upon their kings absence and rebelled against him.

Ptolomy also king of Egypt, against whom the said Demetrius made War, when
he understood, that his sister Cleopatra had shipped all her goods, and
treasure, and was sled into Syria to her Daughter and son Demetrius, suborned
a young man of Egypt, the son of a Merchant called Protarchus, to challenge
the kingdom of Syria by battle, forging a pedigree, as though Antiochus had
adopted him into the blood royal. And the Syrians carl^sse who were their king
so they might be delivered from the pride of Demetryus, the young man was
proclaimed by the name of Alexander, and great succors were gathered An
Egyptian (...) king against Demet^^^^
Egypt.

In the mean while, the body of Anticchus slain by the King of Parthia was
sent into Syria in a cossin of silver to be buried, which was received with
great solemnity by the cities, but chiefly by Alexander himself, to the
intent to make men credit the tale, and the better to confirm in them a
belief that Antiochus had adopted him his heir. And at his funeral he in
such sorrowful habit behaved and fashoned himself, that he wan much favor of
the commons, and every man endeavored his thoughts how to make his duty, love,
obe dience and alleagiance encrese to him, accounting that his outward
sorrowful mourning to be sincerity, which indeed was no other but hipocritical
dissimulation.

Demetrius b^ing vanquished in battle, by this vpstart Alexander, and
environed on all sides with unavoidable dangers, was at the last sorsaken of
his own wife and children. Being then le^t desola^e saving a few servants, as
he was purposed to have fled to to the Temple o^ Tyrus, there to regester
himself a sanctuary man, hoping the reverence of the place though not reguard
of him, ^^ight preserve his life, when he went out to land, he was slain by
the comma^ndement of the master of the ship.

The one of his sons whose name was Seleucus, because he crowned himself
King without his mothers consent, was by her slain; the other of his The (...)
of (...).
sons, who for greatness of his nose was sur-named Grypho, was created king
by his mother, but upon this condition, that he should bear the name, and she
all the authority. But Alexander the vs^rper of the kingdom of Syria, being
puffed up with continual success in his affairs, began by the norishment of
his pride to despite Ptolomy himself, by whom he was muested in that kingdom.

Ptolomy hereupon, reconciling himself to his sister, endeavored by all means
he could devise or be instructed in, to depose Alexander from his royalty, the
which he had obtained by his help, for the haued he in his life bare toward
Demetryus. Whereupon he sent aid to Gripho into Gre^ce, and his Gryphin also
to be his wife, to the ent^nt he might allure the people to help his Nephew,
not only by confederacy, but also by alliance of affinnity, which as he
intended came to pass: for after the time they perceived, that The Egypti(...)
^^^^ng put (...).
Gripho was supported with the power o^ Egypt, they began by troops to revolt
from Alexander. After there was a battle fought between them, in which
Alexander being put to the worse, ^led into Antioch, where for want of money
wherewith to pay his soldiers their wages, he commanded an Image of victory,
of Massy gold to be taken out of the Temple of Jupiter, couloring his
Sacrilege with a pleasant scoff, saying that Jupiter had lent him victory; so
escaping for this wickedness unpunished, he thought it rather benefit for him,
to go forward in that practice he had begun, then to be sorry for what was
past: so having given commandment to have the Image of Jupiter rest out of
the Temple also, formed of clean Gold and of unknown weight, and that being
withstood of the act of this evil, he was put to flight by the multitude
that came to the rescue, and in his hope to escape was oppressed by the
violence of a Tempest, forsaken of his followers, taken by Grypho, and there
received his deserved death.

Grypho by his fall, having fully recovered his fathers kingdom, and being
delivered from outward dangers, was assaulted, by the treason of his own
Mother, who being inflamed with the desire of Soucraignety, after she had
betrayed her husband Demetrius, and murdered her other Son, for spite and
malice, that her former authority should be diminished, by the victory of
this her other son, she offered him a cup of poison, Desire of so^^^^.
as he returned in Tryumphe from his conquest. But Gripho having intelligence
of his mothers treason (as though he had striued with her for courtesy)
desi^ed her to drink to him, which upon her refusal he requested

The Queen being by this means, convicted of her mischievous cntent by
receiving inwardly the poison, she had prepared for her Son, was deprived of
her life. Grypho having thus brought his Realm in quietness, The death of the
Queen.
not only lived himself at hearts ease, without either disturbed with
foreign invasion, domesticke insurrection, or private treason, but also
governed his kingdom in happy peace for the space of eight years after. The
Cyricenus, borne by his own mother, but begot on her by his uncle Antiochus.
Whom whilst he went about to bring to destruction, and rid out of the way by
poison, he stirred him the sooner to contend with him for the kingdom.

Among these inorderly discords of the Realm of Syria, dyed Ptolomy King of
Egypt, leaving the Government of the kingdom to his wife, and The death of
Ptolomy.
one of his Sons, which soever she should choose and account most fit off,
as though the state of Egypt should be in better quiet, then the Syria, when
the Mother by giving the kingdom to one of her Sons should make the other
her enemy. Therefore whereas she was of her self most inclined to the younger
son, the people compelled her to make choice of the elder. From whom (before
she gave him the kingdom) she took away his wife, and having enjoined him to
forgo his most dearly beloved sister Cleopatra, she constrained him to take
in marryage his younger sister Seluce, wherein she dealt not like a mother
betwixt her daughters, considering she took her husband from one, and gave him
to the other.

Cleopatra thus being not so much put away by her husband, as by a violent
deuorce separated from him by her mothers means, was married to Cyricenus in
Syria. And to the intent she would not seem to have brought nothing else unto
him, then the bare name and title of a wife, she raised an host of men in
Cyprus, and brought it to her husband for a doury.

Cyricenus being now made as strong as his brother, encountered with him in
open si^lde, where being vanquished and put to flight, he came unto Antioch,
whether Gripho pursued and b^siedged him in the City. At the taking War
betwixt G^iphus and hic brother Cyrecenus.
thereof, Gryphin the wife of Grypho, l^b^red by all means to enquire and find
out her sister cleopatra, not by manifesting a sisterly love to p^eserue her
out of captivity, but by expressing her unnatural hate, desired her, to the
intent she should not escape the miseries thereof. Because as she thought in
disdain of her estate, she had entered forceably into that kingdom, and by
marrying her self to her sistres husbands enemy, had made her self an enemy
to her; alleging against her moreover, that she had raised foreign powers
against her brother; and married her self out of Egypt against her mothers
will. On the contrary part Grypho besought and persuaded her, that she would not
constrain him to commit so shameful an act, which she continually importuned
A disswasion o^ Gryp^us from cruelty.
heard that any of his ancestots, amongst so many civil, and so many outward
Wars, did after the victory obtained, extend cruelty against women, which for
weakness of their nature, had ever bin exempted both from danger of Wars,
and also from the cruelty of the conquerors.

And now in this case besides the laws of arms, there was also the bond of
aliance to withhold him from doing such a wickedness. For on the one side she
was her own sister, and on the other side she was his Cosen German, whose blood
she sought so cruelly to have him shed: yea and moreover, she was Aunte to the
children of them both. Besides all those bonds of kindred and

For neither by the killing her, could he any thing abate the strength of
Cyricenus, neither by preserving her life increase his power. But the more
unwilling that Grypho was to offer her offense, the more she of her womanly
malice incensed him against her sister, supposing him to speak so much in her
behalf not of compassion, but of love. Whereupon what more incensed Gryphin
sends to will her sister Cleopatra.
out, they cut off her hands, as she had clasped them about the Images of the
Goddess.

When Cleopatra cursing those wicked murthere^s, and beseeching the a prince of
excellent prowess and actiuity. This Pharnax, thus disposing his Dominion from
his children, was of opinion, that the kingdom and safety thereof, ought more
by him to be regarded, then the name of a Father, and it behooued him rather to
provide for his native country, then for his children, which he supposed he
carefully did, in thus distributing his kingdom. Thus then at one time
Mithridates in Parthia, and Eucratides in Bactria, both notable and worthy
princes, began their reigns. But the Parthians had the happier fortune. For
through the politic governance of their king, they aspired to the sovereign
pre-eminence of the Empire. Whereas the Bactrians being tossed too and fro with
the uncertain fortune of the wars, lost not only their kingdom, but also
their liberty. For after they had wearied Sogdians, Drangamtans, and Indians,
last of all as men, half dead and out of heart, ere they were encountered, they
were subdued by the Parthians, which were reputed weaker then themselves.

Yet notwithstanding Eucratides, atchiued many battles by his prowess The
(...) prow^^^^ o^ Eucratides.
and Nobleness of courage, yet at the last being brought to low estate, and
that Demetrius king of India had besiedged him, he having no more but
3-hundred soldiers about him, by his often issuing out privily upon
advantages, vanquished threescore thousand of his enemies. Whereupon, being
India under his subjection; from whence as he was returning homeward, he was
slain in his journey by his own son, whom he had made fellow with him in the
Empire: who nothing dissembling the unnatural murder, but rather rejoicing, as
th^gh An inhumain murder
he had killed some foreign enemy and not a father, drove his chariot through
his blood, and commanded his body to be thrown away unburied.

In the mean space, while this cruel change happened among the Bactrians, there
arose war between the Parthians and the Meades, in which after the diverse The
co^quests of Muhridates the 4. king of Parthia.
adventures of both Nations, at length the victory was yielded to the
Parthians. Mythridates being increased in strength by their power, made one
Bachasus regent of Media, and himself went into Hircania: at his return
Elymeans, whom he overcame and annexed that realm also to his kingdom. And
thereupon receiving many countries by composition, he enlarged the Empire,
from the mountain Cancasus, even unto the river of Euphrates. Finally being
taken with sickness, he dyed honorably in his old age, of no less fame and
renown then his grandfather Arsaces.

The end of the xli. book.
THE XLII. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Scithians make war upon the Parthians. Phrahartes King of Parthia for
his cruelty is betrayed and slain. Artabanus succeeds, after whose death
reigns Mithridates, sur-named the great, who greatly enlarged the Parthian
Empire. The original and description of Armenia. The History of Jason and
Medea, and of the Argonantes. The Origniall of the Albanes in the East. The
description

AFter the decease of Mithridates king of the Parthians, his son Phrahartes
was crowned king, who being fullye Syria, and thereby to be revenged of
Antiochus; for attempting the sovereignty, of the kingdom of Parthia, was by
an insurrection of the Scithians, revoked to the defense of his own. For the
Scithians being sollicitted to the aid of the Parthians The (...) (...) of
P^^th^^.
against Antiochus king of Siria, upon promise of Wages which should be given
to them, consented to come to them, but yet the Wa^re being finished ere their
arrival to stand him in sted, they in reproose of their late coming, were
detained of their hire; where with being grieved, to have tranciled so far,
to so little purpose, and that they demannded, P^thia.

(...) therefore in readiness to take his journey against these Scithians,
left to gouernehis realm in his absence, one Himerus highly in favor, for
suffering him to have the abuse of him in the flourishing prime of his
childhood. Who forgetting his own former life, and the person he presented,
through his tyranous cruelty vexed importunately both Bahylon and many other
cities.

Phrahartes himself, led to the Wars with him the Greekish host which he had
taken in the Wars of Antiochus, and those whom in their captivity he had
entreated cruelly and proudely, quite forgetting that his Tyrany toward them in
their bondage, had not mitigated their enemies minds so much, but that the
remembrance thereof, had more inflamed them to inordinary displeasure against
him, as after they approved: for when they perceived, the Parthian battle
began to have the worse, they turned themselves and tocke part with the enemy,
in that battle taking revenge upon them had been oppresfull to their misery,
and who lead them to be defenders and partakers of their quarrel, so with the
bloody slaughter of the Parthian host, and the death of King Phrahartes
himself, they executed their will for their wrongful Captiuitye, and
purchased the liberty which they had so long desired.

In stead of him, his uncle Artabanus was created King. And the Scithians being
contented with the victory, after they had wasted Parthia, returned into The 6.
Emp.
their own country. But Artabanus died immediately of a wound in his
Colchatrians. After him succeeded his son Mythridates, who for his Noble acts
was sur-named the great. For being enflamed The 7. Emp.
with an ardent desire to excel in prowess, and to have his name worthy to be
registered with the Noblest, he behaved him so worthily in war^e, and so
uprightly in peace, that in princelines he surmounted all his progenitors.

Whereby he accomplished many wars against his neighbors, with great
dexterity, and subdued many Nations under the dominion of Parthia. He fought
diverse times to his advantage against the Scithians, and revenged the
displeasure done to his predecessors, and at the last he enterprized war
against The Original of the Armenians.
Artoadistes King of the Armenians. But forasmuch as by lawful truth of this
Armenia, I think it necessary as of other kingdoms to repeat the original,
thereof and not with silence to pass over so great an Empire, considering that
next unto Parthia, it surmounteth all other Kingdoms, in ground and people.
For Armenia is in length from Cappadocia The s^^tuation of Armenia.
unto the Caspian Sea, eleauen hundred Miles, and in breadth seven hundred
Miles.

It was founded by Armenius, one of the companions of Jason the Thessalian,
whom King Pelias coveting to destroy for his notable meant, and whereby he
seemed dangerous to his kingdom, for fear least he should depose him, told
Colchos, persuading him to take the enterprise upon him, and to fetch the
Golden fleece, that was so famous and notably talked of in all the world,
hoping that either through so long The voyage for the gold^ Fleece.
and perilous sailing, or else by fighting against so barbarous a people, he
might bring the aduenturous knight to confusion.

Jason consenting thereunto made proclamation of this his intended voyage, to
whom the Noble youngmen, almost of all the whole world, resorted in great
number unto him, of whom he assembled an Army of the most valiant knights,
which he called by the name of Arganants.

But when Jason after the accomplishment of his aduenterous enterprises, had
brought home again in safety, that his selected Army, he was expalsed again
out of Thessaly by the sons of Pelias. Whereupon with a great multitude
(which for the renown of his acts resorted to him out of al Nations) having in
his company his wife Medea, whom after his late deuorcement for pity o^ her
exilement, he had received again with her son Me^eus begotten by Egeus king
of the Athenians, he went again to Colchos, The act^s of Jason.
and restored his father in law to his kingdom, from whence he was deposed.

After which, he fought many battles with his Neighbors, and their cities
which he subdued: he partly annexed to the kingdom of his father in law, (to
the intent to abolish the reproach he had drawn upon himself, by his former
War, wherein he had both led away his daughter Medea, and also slain his
son Aegialus) and partly gave them to the people, that he brought with him to
inhabit.

By report he was the first of all men next after Hercules and Liber, which as
the fame goes were kings of the East, that conquered that climat of the
Phrigius and Ansistratus, The estimation o^ Jason.
the waggoners of Castor and Polux, he made a league with the Albanes, who as
it is reported, followed Hercules out of Italy, from the Mountain Albanus, when
after the slaying of Gerion, he drove his cattle thorough Italy, who also
bearing in mind that they came from Italy, saluted the Army of Pompeius by the
name of Brothers, when he warred with Mithridates. By means whereof, all the
whole East almost, builded Temples, and divine honors to Jason, as to their
first founders. The which, Parmenion one of the Captains of great Alexander,
many years after, commanded to be beaten down, to the intent that no man's name
should be had in more honor in the East, then the Alexander. The original (...)
the Medus.


After the death of Jason, Medus being an earnest follower of his Fathers
ver^res, in honor of his Mother Medea, he builded the City Medea, and
established the kingdom of the Meades, calling it after his own name, which in
continuance of time, grew to that estate, that all the East was in subjection,
to the Empire thereof.

The (...) are next neighbors to the Amazones, whose Queen Thalestris many
authors have reported, to have desired the carnal company of great (...).
Armenius being also a Thessalian, and one of the number of Iasons Captain,
having gathered together the multitude, which after the death Jason their King,
wandered up and down, scatterred as people without a guide, and founded the
town of Armenia, in the Mountains out of which The original of the (...).
springs the river Tigris, which at the first is a very small stream, and a
good way remo^e from the head, it sinketh into the ground, and five and twenty
mile beyond, it rises up again a great stood, in the country Sophone, and so
is received into the lakes of Euphrates.

Mythridates King of the Parthians, after his war in Armenia was for his
cruelty deposed from the kingdom, by the counsel of the realm. His brother
Horodes taking to him the power, (the royal seat being vacant) besiedged
Babylon because his brother Mythridates was fled thither, so long until he
constrained them for famine to yield up the town. Mythridates upon confidence,
that The S. king of Parthia.
he was so near of his kin, willingly submitted himself to his brother
Horodes. But Horodes taking him rather for his enemy then a brother, commanded
him to be cruelly slain before his face. After this he made War with the
Romans, and destroyed their Graund-captaine Crassus, with his son, and al his
Roman host: his son Pacorus being sent to pursue the remnant of the Roman
battle, after that he had atcheiued many enterprises in Syria, he Horodes
cruelty toward his brother.
Parthians that he left behind him in Syria, was withal the Captains
thereof slain by Cassius Lieuctenant to Crassus.

These affairs thus ended, there arose the eiuill Wars between Caesar and
Pompey, in which the Parthians took part with Pompey, both for the Wars
between Caesar and Pompey.
friendship that was between them and Pompey in his Wars against Mythridates,
and also for the death of Crassus, whose son they heard say took part with
Caesar, whom they suspected had fallen to him, in hope to revenge his fathers
death, if Caesar should chance in this War to have the upper hand. Pompey, and
his adherents had bin given the overthrow, they both ministered aid to cassius
and Brutus, against Augustus and Anthony, and also after the end of the War,
entering into league with Labienus, under the conduct of Pacorus they wasted
Syria and Asia, and gauca proud assault upon the camp of Ventidius, who after
cassius in the absence of Pacorus had given the Parthian army an overthrow.

But Ventidius pretending a counterfeit fear, for all their alarm offered
him, kept himself in, and suffered the Parthians a while to vaunt of their
prosperity, The policy of Ventidius.
and the cowardice of their enemies, at length when he thought them most merry
and careless, he sent out part of his host upon them, with whose sudden, and
unexpected assault, the Parthians being dismaide fled scattering

While Pacorus supposing that his men which were fled, had withdrawn the
Roman Legions after them, assailed in have the camp of Ventidius, in hope
that he should have found it without defendants. But Ventidius being prepared
for such a skirmish, lead out the residue of the Legions which he had reserved:
and in the conflict slew the whole band of the Parthians with their king
Pacorus himself.

Neither did the Parthians at any time receive a greater loss. When tidings
heerof was brought into Parthia, Horodes the father of Pacorus, who lately
before (hearing the Parthians had wasted Syria and invaded Asia) had boasted
Pacorus was a conqueror of the Romans) when he now heard of his death, and of
the slaughter of his Army, soddainely for sorrow fell mad.

Many days after, he would not converse with any man, he would not take any
sustinance, nor speak one word, whereby a man might suppose, he had bin as
well taken dumb, as frantic. After many days expired, when sorrow had
losened his tongue, he spoke of nothing but of Pacorus, he thought he saw
Pacorus, he thought he heard Pacorus, and to his imagination would make
answers, and talk, as though he had been in familiar communication with
Horodes salleth mad.
him; he would stand still as though he had stood with him, and by and by
lame^tably bewail the loss of him. When long together he had thus mourned,
another heaviness redoubled grief upon this miserable old man, namely which of
his thirty sons he should ordain king in Pacorus stead.

He had many concubins, of whom he begat all that youth, of which every one
making suit for her own child, did as it were besiege the old man's mind, being
at commotion within it self. But it was the destiny of the Parthians (in
Phrahartes was substituted sovereign; who no sooner in the regal seat, but as
though, The ^. ^^mp.
he thought it to much happiness for his father, to die his natural death, who
already had his foot at the brinke of the giaue, forthwith killed him, and then
Eorodes put to death by his own lon.
put his thirty brothers to death.

Neither ceased he his slaughter in the children. For when he perceived the
Noble men hated him for his outrageous cruelty, continually practicing against
him, that there might be no man left to be nominated king, he commanded his
own Son who had attained to man's estate, to be put to death. Against Anthony
with sixteen of his strongest Legyon; made War, for ministering aid against
himself, and Caesar. But he was so contrariously afflicted in many battles,
that he was enforced to make his retreat out of Parthia. Thorough which
victory Phrahartes being made more proud, and that he persisted to dealemore
cruelly then before, he was driven into exile by his own subjects. Phrahar^es
is deposed, and restored again by the Scyt^^^ns.


Whereupon after long and earnest suit made by him unto the countries bordering
upon Parthia, at the length he so persuaded the Scithians that thorough their
aid he was restored unto his kingdom again. In the time of his absence, the
Parthyans had constituted one Tyridates King, who hearing of Seithians coming,
fled with a great power of his friends to Caesar Augustus, who was making War
at that time in Spain, and brought with him to The x. Emp.
the Emperor, the youngest son of Phrahartes for a pledge, whom thorough the
negligence of such as were put in trust with him, he had stolen away.

Upon knowledge whereof, Phrahartes forthwith sent his Ambassadors to Caesar,
requiring of him to send him home his servant Tyridates, and his son with
him. The Emperor when he heard the Ambassadors of Phrahartes, and understood
the requests of Tyridates (who also desired to have aid of him to reseate him
in the possession of the kingdom again, assuring that Parthia for such grace
should ever after be at the commandment of the Romans) answered, Tyridates
into the hands of the Parthyans, nor yet minister aid to Tyridates against
them.

Nevertheless, because it should not seem to both, neither had obtained a
part of their demand, he sent Phrahartes his son without ransom, and
allowed Tyridates honorable entertainment for him and his, so long as he
should think fit to bide with the Romans. After this having finished his
wars in Spain, when he came into Syria to set a stay in the affairs of the
East, he put Phrahartes in such amazement, that to the intent he should not
make War upon Parthia, all the prisoners that were in the realm taken either
of the army of Crassus, or of the army of Anthony, were gathered together, and
with all the banners and ensigns, that were suprized at those times, sent
again to Augustus. Moreover Phrahartes gave to Augustus, his sons and
Nephews in hostage: so that Augustus did more with the majesty of his name,
then any other Emperor could have compelled by force of arms.

The xliij. Book of Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe first inhabiters of Italy. The coming thither of E^ander and Eneas, and
of his wars there. The building of long Alba, with the succession of the
kings thereof. The building of Rome by Remus and Romulus. The building

COncerning these histories, Trogus Pompeyus, having finished in this form of
discourse, the monumentall doings of the Parthians of the East, and of the
greater part of the whole world. Returns as it were after along continued
pilgrimage, home to the foundation of the City Rome, accounting it the part of
an unthankful citizen, to draw a module, or paint out the acts of al other
Nations, and speak or record nothing me^o^^ble of his own native country. To
avoid which imputation, or rather defamation, he here touches breefely (by
the way) the beginning of the Roman Empire, wherein be neither exceeds the
bounds which he had before propounded to himself in the course of his work,
nor yet passes over with silence the foundation of that City, which without
question is the head and chief of the whole world.

The first Inhabiters of Italy, were the A^origines, whose king Saturn is
reported, to have bin of such Iust^ce and uprightness that during his reign,
there was not (any though slave or bondmen) nor any man that had substance
private to himself, but althings were common and undivided, to all men alike,
as though it had been one Patrimony, and one Inheritance, equal to all men.
In remembrance of which example, it was enacted, that at the feast of Saturn,
no man should be set by or held of estimation more then the other, Italy of
long also called Saturnia, and the hill on which he had his courtly residence
was called Saturn, on the which at this day The ^^^st of (...).
(Jupiter having as it were removed Saturn out of his seat) stands the
Capital. After him in the third place, as is confirmed by report, reigned
Faunus, The capital. The (...) (...) (...) (...) Italy.
in whole time Euander with a small company of his countrymen came from
Palantium, a city of Arcadye into Italy, to whom Faunus of gentleness, assigned
lands to inh^bit and increase upon, and the Mountain also which afterward he
called Pal^ntine. In the foot of this h^l he edesied a Temple to Ly^cus, whom
the Greeks call Pan, and the Romans Lupercus. The image of the Gods being Rome
are acustomed to run up and down the streets of Rome, in the celebration of
the feasts kept unto Pan.

Faunus had a wife named Fatua, which being continually inflamed with a holy
spirit, in the fury thereof prophesied of things to come. Whereupon such as are
wont so to be inspired, are said to play Fatua unto this day, of the daughter
of Faunus and Hercules (who the same time, having killed Gerion drove his
cattle which he ha^ gott^n in reward of his victory through Italy) was
vnlaw^ully b^gotten Latinus. During whose reign, Aeneas after that Troy was
destroyed by the Greeks, came from thence into Italy, where at his first
ar^iuall The ^oming (...) (...) (...) into Italy.
he was b^dden battle.

But when he had brought his men in readiness into the field, before the
encounter they ^ell to conference. In the which he brought Latinus in such
admiration of him, and with his pers^asiue oratory so wrought with him, that
from an enemy against whom he was prepared in barr^^l, he was pleased to make
him partner of ^is kingdom, and also m^de ch^^se of him for his son in law,
by giving his daughter Lau^nia in marriage. After this friendly conjunction,
they made War jointly against Turnus King of the Rutilians, who challenged
them b^th for defrauding him of Lauinia, who by promise from the father should
have been his wife and whom the other had accepted contrary Turnus and Latinus
were sl^ine. (...) therefore obtaining both the Nations by the law of Arms,
founded a City and ^alled it by the name of his wife.

Afterward he made War against Mezentius king of the Hetrusci^ns, in which
he himself was slain, leaving his son Ascanius to succeed him Who leaving
Lauinium, builded Alba longa, the which for the space of three hundred years
together was the chief and principal seat of his kingdom. (...)
After many kings of this city at length reigned Numitor and Amultus. But
Amulius having wrongfuly deposed his elder brother Numitor, to the intent no
issue male snoulde arise from the stock of his brother, to challenge the
crown, compeld his daughter Rhea into a Nunry, there to lead all her life in
vowed virginity, cloking his injury with an honorable color, that men might
suppose she was not put there as a condemned persoane, but rather made chief
prioresse of the place by election. Being therefore as a recluse in (...)
the Grouc consecrated to Mars, she was delivered of two sons, whither she
conceived them by adultry, or by Mars, no man is able to say of a truth.
Amulius upon knowledge hereof, being in more fear then ever he was, by reason
Romans; sent a s^ee Wolf to Nurce the children, the which having lost her
whelps, for desire to have her dugges drawn, that were pained with too much
abundance of milk, offered her self to be nurce unto those children. As she
came and went oftentimes to the children, like as if it had been her whelps, A
shepherd named Faustulus, perceived the matter, and stealing them from the
Wolf, brought them up like shepherds among his Cattle. Now whither it were
Mars, or for that they were nourished by a Wolf, which is in the jurisdiction
of Mars, it was believed for a manifest proof, that they were the sons of
Mars. The one of these was named Remus, and other Romulus. When they came to
man's estate, they accustomed to try Maistries daily one with another, whereby
they increased as well in strength, as in nimblenesse and swiftness. Wherefore
when they had oftentimes manfully and pollitickly chased away thieves from
stealing their cattle, Remus was taken by the said thieves, (and as though he
had bin the the same himself, which he had prohibited others to do) was
brought before the king, and there accused for a stealer of Numitors cattle.
Whereupon the king delivered him to Numitor, to punish him as he thought good.
Numitor having pittye of the youngman, had half a mistrust that he should be
one of his Nephews that were made away, by reason he resembled his daughter so
much in favor and making, and also by reason, that the time of her deliverance,
was agreeable unto his years. (...)


As he was in doubtful perplexity with himself, Faustulus came suddenly in
with Romulus, by whom being further instructed of the birth and bringing up of
the children, the youngmen made a conspiracy, and took weapon in hand, to
revenge their Mothers death, and Numitor to recover the kingdom wrongfully
withheld from him. Amulius being slain, and Numitor Rome. Which being
finished, there was ordained a Senate of a hundred Elders, which were called
fathers of the commonweal.

Then because their Neighbors disdained to marry their daughters to
shepheardes, they rauisned the maidens of the Sahines, and having subdued the
people that were next about them, first they won the Empire of (...), and next
after that, the Empire of the whole world. In those days, the kings had
instead of Diadems, Maces, (which the Greeks call Scepters. For even from the
beginning, men in old time did worship Maces for Gods, in remembrance of
which Religion, the images of the Gods, are yet still made with Maces in
their hands.

In the time of Tarquine, a company of the Phocenses coming out of Asia,
entered the mouth of Tyber, and joined amity with the Romans. From thence
they went by Water to the uttermost coast of France, and there among the
^^guriens and the cruel Frenchmen they builded the city Marsielles, (...).
and did many worthy acts, both in defending themselves by the sword against
the savage Frenchmen, and also in assayling those that had assailed

For the Phocenses by reason of the barrenness of their Country, were
compelled to set their minds more earnestly upon the Water, then upon the
Lands: and so they lived by Fisning, by traffic of Merchandise, and
oftentimes by robbing on the Sea, which in those days was counted for a praise.

By means where of they adventured to the uttermost border of the Ocean, and
arrived upon the French coast by the river of Roane, with the pleasantness of
which, they were so taken in love, that at their return home, they reported
what they had seen, and procured more of their contrimen to go Furius, and
Peranus. Who with their company presented themselves before Senanus king of
the Seger^gians, in whose territory they coueted to build them a city,
desiring his amity and friendship By chance the very same day the k. was
occupied in preparation, for the Marriage of his daghter Giptis, whom according
to the custom of the country, he purposed to marry to such a one, as she A
(...).
her self at the feast would chose to be her husband. Among other that were
bidden to the marriage, the strangers of Greece were desired to the feast also.
Anon the young Lady was brought in, who being commanded by her father to reach
a cup of water to him whom she would have to her husband, passed Greeks, gave
the water to Peran. Who by this means being made of a stranger the kings son in
law, obtained of his Father a plot, to build a city upon. So was the city of
Marsiell^ (...).
builded hard by the mouth of the river Roan, in an out-nook, as it were in a
creek of the Sea. But the Lagurians envying the prosperity of the City,
di(...) bed the Greeks with their continual wars. Who through valiant
de^ending of themselves, became so renowned, that after they had vanquished
the^ enemies, they builded many cities in the grounds that they took from
them. A^ their hands, the Frenchmen learned a more civil trade of living
thro^^h the which their Barbarousnesse was laid aside, and as it were

They framed themselves to live by Laws, and not by force, then they learned
to shredde their Vines: then they learned to plant and graffe their Olives.
Fi^^llie both the men and all other things were so exquisitely polished, that
Greece seemed not to be removed into France, but rather France was translated
into Greece. After the death of Senanus king of the Segoregians (by whom the
place to build the city upon was granted) his son Comanus succeeding him in
the kingdom, was inucgled against the Massilians by one of his Lords,
alleging that the time will come, that Marsielles should be the destruction of
the people, that were next neighbors about it: wherefore it was to be
suppressed now in that very rising, least afterward being suffered to grow
stronger, it might oppress him.

For the further manifestation whereof, he repeated this fable, how upon a
time, a bitch being great with whelp, desired a shepherd to lend her house

In the like sort the Massilians, which then seemed to be soiourners, would
perchance hereafter become Lords ofthe country. The king being provoked Treas^n
against the Massilians.
by this instigation, devised how to surprise the Massilians: So upon a solemn
feastiful day of the Goddess Flora, he sent a great sort of strong men into
the city, as it had bin to make merry, causing a number more to be conveyed
in Carts and Wagons, hidden with rushes and leaves, and he Greeks, as she
embraced him, having pity upon him for his beauty, vtterred the matter unto
him, and councelled him to avoid the danger, and he forthwith declared the
whole matter to the Officers of the city. By means whereof, the treason
coming to light, the Ligurians were laid hand on, and they that lay hidden in
the rushes, were pulled out by the heels, and put every man unto the sword,
Massilians slew the K. himself, and seven thousand of his soldiers with him

From that day forward, the Massilians upon their feastifull days, kept their
gates shut, made good watch, set men to ward upon the Walls, searched all
strangers, took good heed, and even as if they had made war, so The
fortunate success of the Massiliens.
kept they the city in time of peace, such good order kept they among them
selves at altimes, not so much in time of need, as to be ^uer in readiness.
Afterward they had sore Wars with the Lycurians, and the Frenchmen, which both
increased the renown of the City, and also (by atchiuing so many Greeks
famous and redoubted among their neighbors.

Moreover they diverse times overcame the Armies of the Carthagenians, when they
made war upon them for taking their Fisher botes, and gave them peace at
their pleasure like conquerors. With the Spaniards they entered a league of
amity, and with the Romans they made a continual confederacy and aliance,
almost from the first beginning of the foundation of the City, the which they
observed most faithfully, and to the uttermost of their power, aided them as
their confederates, in all their enterprises. Which thing, both made them to be
bolder to trust to their own strength, and also purchased them peace of their
enemies. Wherefore at such time as Marsielles flourished most in renown of
chiualry, and in abundance of riches, and was in the chief flower of her
strength, suddenly all the people bordering about them, gathered themselves
together, to root up the Name of the Massilians.

A Noble man called Carmandus, was by common consent chosen to be The vision of
Caramandus.
which said she was a Goddess: At whose sight he was so afraid, that of his
own voluntary disposition he made pease with the Massilians, making request
that he might enter into their city to worship their Gods.

When he came into the Temple of Minerua, espying in the porches the image of
the Goddess, which he had seen in his dream, he cried out suddenly that it
was even she that had feared him in the night, and surely it was she that
commanded him to raise his siege. Whereupon greatly rejoicing Massilians,
because he perceived that the Gods had such care and regard over them, he
gave the Goddess a chain of Gold for an offering, and made a bond of
friendship with the Massilians, to continue for ever.

After that they had thus gotten peace, and established quietness, the the
Massilian Ambassadors returning from Delphos, (whither they had been sent to
catry presents unto Apollo,) heard say that the City of Rome was taken and
burnt by the Frenchmen. Which tidinges when they had brought home, the
Massilians proclaimed an universal mourning, as if it had bin for the death
ofsome special friends, and gathered all their Gold together, as Frenchmen
demanded of the Romans for their ransom, and to grant them peace. In
recompense of which good turn, they were made free os the city of Rom^, and
placed among the Senators at all solemnities. And their aliance was so knit
with them, that they were continually reputed as Romans. In his last Book,
Trogus declares, that his ancestors fetched their Petigree srom the Volces,
that his Grandfather Trogus Pompeius in the Wars against S^^^o^ius, did save
the city to Eneus Pompeius, that his uncle had the leding of the horsemen under
the said Pompey in the war against Mithridates, and that his father also
served in the wars under C. Caesar, The (...) of (...) (...) ^^om (...).
in the room of Secreatary Lieutetenant, and keeper ofhys Seal.

The end of the xliij. book.
THE 44. BOOK OF Iustine.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe situation, fertility, and description of Spain. A wonderful example of
patience. The deeds of Viriatus Captain of the Spaniardes. Of the genettes.
The steel that is in that country. What things were invented by Gargoris. How
Gargoris assayed by all means to put his daughters child to death, and could
not,

Spain being by account the utmost bonds and limits of The ancient names of
Spain.
Europe, even so therewith I mean to shut and close up the end of this book.
In ancient times it was called Iberia, of the River Iberus: afterward it was
called Spain after the name of Hyspalus. It is a country that lies between
Afric and France, enclosed round about with the Ocean Sea, and the Pirenian
Mountains. Though it be not to be compared with the other lands, for scope and
bigness, yet does it yield more abundance of commodities and fruit, then The
seituation
both the other, being joined together. For ^^^st it lies not within the
raging heat of the Sun, as Affricke does; neither is it violated with
outrageous winds like France: but as it lies in the mean and midest between
them both, so on the one side, by moisture distilled on the land by moderate
shewers, falling in their season, it becomes exceeding fertile in all manner
fruits and grain: Insomuch as the inhabitants thereof content themselves in
all abundance, Italy, Rome and all the countries thereabout. From thence there
passes not only great store of corn and grain, but also Wine, honey, Oil,
and many such like commodities: But there is also great plenty of Iron, and not
the basest and wor^er sort, but the best iron and Steel, is accounted to be in
these regions.

Also many an excellent race of Horses, both sound and swift are there in great
plenty. Neither will we content our selves to speak of those commodities only
that grow above the ground, but also their plentiful and rich Minerals,
which lies hidden underneath within the bowels of the earth. Of Flax and Baste
there is great plenty, and as for Vermilion, no land under the sun yields
more abundantly.

In this land are many excellent rivers, not violent and outragiously ebbing
and flowing, whereby many dangers are often threatened, but gentlye falling and
moistning the vineyards and cornesieldes in all abundance of pleasure, and as
for those places where the Ocean brings in the rising and falling of the
tides, full of all variety and kinds of Fish as the appetite of man France, by
the ridge of the Pirenean Mountains, being in every other place environed
round about by the Ocean Sea.

The plat of the land is in manner foresquare, saving that the sea beatinge on
both sides, does gather it up somewhat narrow at the Pirenean Mountain:
Moreover, whereas the Pirene Mountains runs, it is in breadth six hundred
Miles. It stands in a pleasant air, throughout the whole country, and the
winds do blow there so cool and temperate, that there arises The (...) of
(...)
no stinking Fogges, and mistes, out of the lower marish grounds, either to

The bodies of these inhabitants do well away with these two vnwelcom The
disposition of the Spamaides.
guests, hunger and pain, and their minds can well away to know they must die.
They generally liueal very niggardly and hard. They also rather covet war
then peace: of which if they cannot employ themselus upon a foreign enemy, they
will neaer rest satisfied till they ceize upon one at home.

They are well accounted of for secrecy, for oftentimes they have rather
chosen death upon the Rack, rather then reveal the secret trust in them
reposed: So much deerer do they prize secrecy more then their very lives.
That th^^ is so, It may be well observed by the sufferings of that servant in
the Wars of Carthage, who having revenged the death of his Master, in the
midst of all his torments, laughed and rejoiced, and with a merry and
pleasant countenance, overcame the cruelty of al his tormenters.

The people of this country is exceeding swift of foot, unquiet of mind, and
the greater number of them, make more account and reckoning of their horses,
and of their arms, then they do by the best blood in their bodies. Romans,
after their second wars with carthage.

Daring the continuance of many hundred years, they never had other Captain
of fame save only Viriatus, who for the space of ten whole years, held the
Romans at the staves end, one while he gained, and again at another time he
lost (so much were they of nature more like brute bests, then men) yet they
rather consented to follow him, not as one chosen by the discretion or
government of the wiser sort, but only for that he was generally held amongst
them exceeding pollitique and ready in avoiding of emminent danger: Again he
was esteemed of a very virtuous and stayed behavior and courage, and that he
often overcame many of the consuls with their whole powers and strength, being
not any way able to match him in the least of all his fortunes, so many and
great enterprises did he purchase from them: yet was he noted not The great
commendation o^ V^^^atus.


It is reported amongst diverse writers, that about the River Tagus in
Portingall, there is arace of Mares, that do conceive by the wind. Which fable
(for so I may reckon it) first sprang upon the fruitfulness of Mares, and of
the multitude of races, that are acounted to be both in Gallicia and Portugal:
Of Spanish l^nu^^*
whereof there are such store to be seen, and those so swift, that (not without

The Gallicians account themselves as from the right line and descent of the
Greeks: For (say they) after the battle of Troy, that Teucer having incurred
the hate and displeasure of his father Telamon for the death of his brother
Ajax, was never after suffered to enter into the Realm: thereupon departed and
came to Cyprus, and in the end builded there a City, which he called
Sallamyne after the name of his own Native Country, from whence he was
banished.

At last, having knowledge of the decease of his father, he returned again
back to his country, but being withstood in his arrival by Eurasaces the Son
Ayax, he was forced to make his ariuall in Spain, and there seyzed upon that
plot of ground where new Carehage now stands: from whence he removed to
Galicya where he fully planted himself and all his company, giving name unto
that country.

There is one portion of Gallycia that is called Amphilochians. A country very
plentiful of many worthy commodities, as Brass, Lead, and Vermilyon, whereof
became the River so called. Moreover, it is very well stored of Gold, insomuch
that diverse times they raise up very clots of Gold, as they are in The
fruitfulness of Gallicia.
labor of the plough.

In the bounds of this Country, there is a hill (called the Holy hill) the
which is made utterly unlawful for any man to use an instrument of yorn nee^e
about the same hill. But if it so happen that by Thunder or lightning the earth
be broken (which is very common in those places) then they are permitted to
gather up all the Gold thereabout, holding and esteeming thereof as the gift
of God. In these parts the Women are wholly employed in the carriages of al
manner of businesses, as housekeeping, and bargaining: and the men do only
employ themselves to Wars, and violent robberies. The iron here to be found
is of an excellent hard temper, but their waters is of far more force then
they iron for by tempering their Mettell therewith, it is by virtue thereof
made more tough and sharp, and they generally hold that weapon of no good
temper, that is not dipped either (...).
in the river Bilbo, or in the river Chaltbs: Whereupon the people that have
their habitation near unto these rivers are called chalybs, and are esteemed
the best Masters of iron, in that whole kingdom.

In the plains o^ the Tartesians, (where it is reported the Titans made war
against the Gods,) dwelled sometime the currettes: an ancient king of the
which people named Gargoris first invented the manner to gather Hunny. This man
perceived that his daughter had played the harlot, and for shame of her wicked
deed, attempted diverse ways to have destroyed the child. But The (...) o^
Gargo^is.
through good fortune he was preserved from all those dangers, and at the
length for compassion of so many perils, was created king. First of all when he
commanded him to be cast away, and certain days after had sent to secke
his body, he was found nourished with the milk of sundry wild^ beasts.

Secondly, when he was brought home, he commanded him to be laid

Finally when they not only did him no harm, but also some of them gave him
suck, last of all he threw him in the sea. Then as it were by the open
manifest providence of the Gods, among the r^ging sourges, and the wallo ing
waves, as though he had been carried in a ship, and not in a stream, the calm
sea bare him up alofte, and brought him shortly to shore. By and by

At length being overthrown in a toil, he was presented before the K. for a
gift. There by reason of his stature and making, wherein he much resembled the
king, and by certain marks that were grown in the child from his bir^h, the
king knew him to be his Nephew. And because he had so wonderful* escaped so
many perilous chances, he proclaimed him heir and (...) (...) of (...).
successor of his kingdom. His name was called Habis, who after that he had

He ^ir^^ ta^ght them to break Oxen to the plough, and to till and sow the
ground, he first (for tediousness of such things, as he had suffered himself)
caused men to forsake their beastly meats, and to feed upon better. The
chances of this man might seem to be but a fable, if the builders of Rome had
not been nourished by a Wolf, and Cyrus king of Persia norished of a bitch.
This man forbad the people all seruill occupations, and divided the commons
into seven cities.

After the death of Habis, the kingdom remained in his posterity many C. years.
In another part of Spain, which consists of the Isles, Gerion wask in the
which part there is so great plenty of sweet pasture, that unless the cattle
were kept hungry, and not suffered to feed their fill, their bellies would The
^^o^y of G^^ion.
burst. In the same place were the cattle of Gerion (wherein in those days
Hercules allured with the richnes of the booty, came out of Asia thither.

Moreover Gerion was not triple as the fables report, but three Brothers which
accorded so friendly one with another, that it seemed as though one soul and
one mind ruled them al three. Neither did they of their own motion make war
upon Hercules, but when they saw their cattle driven away, they fought with
him for the recovering of them. After that the kings ceased in Spain, the
Carthagenians first took upon them the Dominion and rule of the country.

For when the Gaditans (commanded so to do in a dream) had brought from
Tyrus. out of the which City the Carthagenians had also their beginning, the
sacred ceremonies of Hercules into Spain, and there builded a city, through
the malice of the people of Spain their next neighbors, envying the
encreasement of their new city, and thereuppon infesting the Gaditans with
war, they sent to their kinsmen the Carthagenians for help: Who having a
prosperous iourny, both defended the Gaditans from taking wrong, and also
subdued the more part of the country under their Dominion. Afterward also
encouraged by the fortunate success of their first voyage, they The doings of
the C^rthagenians. in Spain.
sent Hamilcar, as graund-captaine with a great host, to conquer the whole
Realm, who having atchiued many great enterprises, whilst he followed
Hasdruball, who also was slain by a servant of a Spaniard, in reuengement of
his Masters death.

Hanniball the son of Hamilcar greater then both, sacceeded in the
captainship. For he surmounting the acts of them both, conquered all Spain.
And then making war against the Romans, vexed Italy with sundry slaughters,
by the space of sixteen years together. Whereas in the mean season the
Romans, sending the Scipios into Spain, first drove the Carthagenians out of
the country, and afterward had sore wars with the Spaniards themselus. How
the (...)
Spain could never be brought under the yoke of bondage, until that Caesar
Augustus having conquered the whole world, came against them with his
victorious army, and brought those Ba^barous and cruel people, to a more civil
trade of living by order of law, and substituted a Lieutenant over them, like
as was don in all other Prouin^es of the Empire.

FINIS.
AN EPITOMIE OF THE Lives and Manners of the ROMAN EMPERORS. FROM THE REIGN
OF CAESAR AUGUSTUS, to the Reign of Rodulphus the Emperor now living: taken
out of the Books of Sext. Aurelius Victor.



Printed at London by William Iaggard, 1606.

The life of C. Julius Caesar.


CIulius Caesar, the son of L. Caesar and Aurelia, was born Rome, C. Marius,
and L. Valerius Flaccus being Consuls, on the 4. of the Ides of Quintile, the
which month after his death, was by the commandment of Anthony, for that
cause called July: He was brought up with his mother Aurelia, the daughter of
C. Cotta, and his Aunt Iulia, the wife of C. Marius: Whereupon he being Silla.
This man was the first that sought after the pepetuall dictatorship: For France
being conquered by him, within the space of ten years, and Britanny being then
first assailed, and the Germans being driven into the woods and moors; he
departed into Italy, and with the same his accustomed celerity appeased the
Spanish tumultes he overthrew Pompey the great, in a battle at Pharsalis, and
when he had triumphed over all his enemies, at length he being wounded, with
23. wounds, by the conspiracy, of his dearest friends (as he esteemed them)
died, in the Ignatius reports of him. Nothing was wanting in this Caesar,
which ought to be in a Nobleman: in him was wisdom, eloquence, courage,
constancy, and the study of mili^arie discipline, and of all the chiefest arts;
and that which most of al prevails, to get the goodwil of the people, a
certain wonderful kind of liberality, by the which, as by degrees, he arose
from a low estate, to the highest degree, of human affairs.

D. Caesar Octauianus Aug.


IN the year 722. from the time that the city was built, and in the 480.
year Rome was restored again, to the obedience of one alone, and to an
Emperor in stead of a king, being otherways called by amore honorable name
Augustus. Therefore, Octauianus was begotten of his father Octauius a Senator,
who by his mothers side, was descended from Aeneas, through the family of
Iulia, but by the adoption of C. Caesar the elder his great Uncle, he was
called C. Caesar, and afterward for a certain victory he was caled Augustus.
This man being placed in the imperial sea^e, executed the authority of the
tribune by himself alone. He brought the country of Egypt, into the form of
a province, being uneasy to be entered Nilus, and without passages, by reason
of Marshes; which that he might make p^^ntifull of victual for the city, he
laid open the ditches thorough the labor of the Soldiers, which by the
negligence of antiquity were ^i^led with du^^. In this man's time, 200000.
Measures of corn by the year, were brought out of Egypt into the city. This
man joined to the number of the provinces of the people of Rome, the people of
Biscay in Spain, and the people of Guien in France, the Rhetians, Vandales,
and Dalmatians; Hevanqui^hed the Switzers, and the Cattaiens, and translated
the people of Gueldrois in Germany into France, and joined the Hungarians to
his tributaries, and compelled the Goths and the people of Salmatia in Europ,
being wearied with Wa^res unto an agreement. The Persians brought pledges unto
this man, and granted him the leave of making them aching. Moreover, the
Indians, the Scythtans, the Blackamoores, the Aetheopians, sent Ambassadors
with presents. He so much abhorred insurrectious Wars, and flatteries, that
he would never move War against any Nation without just cause: and he said,
that it shows a vainegloryous, and almost unconstant Roman army beyond
Rhine was destroyed, and the trybanes, Propraetor slain: Which he so greatly
lamented, that thorough acert^ine strong violence of his brain, he beat
thorough a wall, wearing deformed apparel, hair, and other tokens of sorrow.
Also he greatly blamed the invention of his great uncle, who calling the
Soldiers after a new slattering, or fair speaking manner, sought to become
dearer unto them, and weakened the authority of the Prince. Finally he behaved
himself very gently toward the Citizens. He was faithful toward his
friends, the chief whereof was Maecoenas, for his secrecy; Agrippa, for his
enduring of labor, and modesty. Moreover he loved Virgill, and yet was
doubtful to entertain any into his friendship, but most constant in keeping
his friendship, applying himself so greatly to liberal studies, especially to
eloq^ence, that no Rome with many buildings, glorying in this saying, I found
the city made of Brick, but I leave it of Marbell. He was mild, thankful, of
a civil and pleasant nature, beautfull thorough out all his body, but most in
his eyes: the brightness whereof he cast forth after the manner of most
clear stars, and therefore, he did willingly endure to have men beat the
beams therefore with their hands, as sunn-beams: From whose face whiles a
certain Soldier turned himsel^e, and was asked of of the common peoples
talk. For he was wont to lie betwixt twelve Zodomiticall boys, and so many
maids. Also his wife Scribonia, being divorced and he possessed with the love
of an other man's wife, joined Liuia unto him, as though it had been with her
husbands will; which Liuia at that time had two sons, Tyherius and Drusus:
and albeit he was subject to lust, nevertheless he was a severe puinisher of
the same vice: after the manner of men, who are severe in punishing those
vices, which themselves do greatly embrace. For he banished the Poet Ovid, who
was also called Naso, for that, he wrote three books of the Art of love: And
which is the p^rte of a large or pleasant mind, he was delighted, with all kind
of sightes, ^speciall with the unknown forms Nola: albeit, some write that he
was slain by the treason of Liu^a, fearing, because his daughter in law had
understood his son Agrippa to be returned home whom he had banished for the
hatred of his stepmother, having obtained the Empire, he shoul suffer
punishment.

Therefore whether he died, or was sl^ine, the Senate adjudged him to be honored
with sundry new honors: For besides that he had before called himself the
father of his country, they consecrated a Temple unto him, as well in Rome, as
through out the most famous cities; all men commonly saying, I would he had
never been borne, or might never have died. For the one was of a very bad
beginning, and the other of an excellent ending. For in obtaining Anthony, but
sour and forty alone: who truly should never have gotten the government of
the commonwealth to himself, nor have enjoyed the same so long, unless he
had abounded with great guiftes of

Claudius Tyberius.


Claudius Tyberius, the son of Lyuia, and the son in Caesar Octauius,
reigned twenty four years. This man whose name was, Claudius Tyberius Nero,
was eloquently caled of Iesters Caldius Biberius Nero, he was skillful enough
in millitary discipline, and fortunat enough under Augustus before he was made
Emperor, so that the government of the commmon-wealth was not without

He had a certain knowledge of learning, wherein he was more excellent then in
eloquence; but he was of an evil nature, of a cruel, covetous, and treacherous
disposition, faining that he would do those things, which he near meant;
seeming offended with those, of whom he took counsel: and seeming to bear
goodwill, to those whom he hated. He was better for sudden answers, and
counsels, then long deliberated. Finally, he fainedly refused the Empire,
derived from his ancestors, the which thing he had subtilty brought to pass,
cruelly searching out, what men did say or think of him, which thing
Cappado^ians into a province, their King Arceslaus being deposed: he repressed
the thefts of the Getulians, and crafryly entrapped Marobaelius King of the
Switzers. When he pun^^he^, the guiltless, and guilty were all in one state,
and in like manner both his own friends, and strangers; the discipline off
warfare being left, Armenia was taken away by the Parthians, Maesia by the
Dacians, Hungaria by the people of Sarmatia, and France of the bordering
Nations. This man after the 78. year, and 4. month of his age, was murdered
by the treasons of Caligula.

Caesar Caligula.


CAligula reigned four years, this Caligula was the son of Germanic^^,
Caligula. Before he took upon him the Empire, he was dear, and beloved of all
men: but in his reign he was such an one, that it was rightly said of him,
amongst the common people, that there was never a more cruel Lord then he.
Finally he defiled his three sisters. He went in the habit of his Gods, and
affirmed himself to be Jupiter for his incest, and amongst the drunkards he
affirmed himself to be Bacchus, of whom I

Claudius Tiberius


Claudius Tiberius, the son of Drusus, the brother of Tiberius, and uncle ^
Caligula, reigned 14. years. This man when the Senate had decreed, that the
stock of the Caesar's should he rooted out, lying hid in a filthy hole, being
found of the soldiers, because he was timorous and did seem tractably mild,
was made Emperor. He was subject unto drunkenness, gluttony, and lust, being
cowardly, and almost blockish, sluggish, and fearful, and at command of his
free servants, and of his wife: In this time Seribonianiu Camillus being made
governor amongst the Dalmatians, was forthwith slain.

The Moors were expelled from the provinces by Caesar, and the Army of the
Musalamites was discomfited, out of the which, Claudia was brought to Rome.
This man's wife Messalina, at the first privily used adulteries, but afterward
openly, as though she had done it by law or right: from the which fact with
hi^, many abstaining for fear, were put to death. Afterward she being more
cruelly stirred up, she appointed all the Noble Virgins and Matrons to be with
her, after the manner of Whores, and many men were constrained that they should
be present. But if any man did abhor such silthy deeds, this crime being set
upon him, he was punished on himself, and all Faelix governor of the Legions
of Judea. He gave for a gift unto Possidius the Eunuch excellent Weapons, as a
partner of the victory, amongst the most valiant of his soldiers after the
triumph of Britanny, he caused Polibus, to go in the midst of the consuls.
Narcissus did excel all these for his Epistles, carrying him^else his masters
master: Pallas being honored with the robes of a Praetor, was grown so
exceeding rich, that it was most pleasantly noysed abroad in a famous speech,
that he could have money innough, if he could be received into society of his
two free servants. In this man's time there was a Phaenix seen in Egypt, which
bird men say did fly out of Arabia in the five hundred year to certain
memorable places, and suddenly an Island was drowned with the Aegean^ca.

This man married Agrippina, the daughter of his own brother Germanicus, who
procured the Empire to her son, and first killed her son in Law, by diverse
Tarquinius Priscus) a long time concealed, whilst that his keepers being
corrupted by the craft of the Woman ^ained him to be sick, in the mean time,
his son in law Nero took upon him the Empire.

Domitian Nero.


Domitius Nero, begotten of his father Domitius Aenobarbus, and his mother
Agrippina, reigned thirteen years. This man for the space of five years
seemed tolerable, whereupon some report that the Emperor Traian was wont to
say. That all Princes do sarre differ from the five years of Nero. He builded
in the city an Amphitheater, and certain Banes. He brought Pontus into the
order of a province, by the permitting of Polemon Regulus, of whom it was
called Domus of Polemon: and the same thing did Cottius to the Alps, their
king Cottius being dead, he lead the rest of his li^e with such dishonesty,
that it would shame any one to re^earse the like things.

He went onwards in his wickedness so far, that the spared neither his own,
nor others modesty, last of all being cl^d after the manner of Virgins ready to
Marry, the Senate being openly called together, and a doury being bidden, he
was married to all men coming thither, as it had been to a seast, and being
covered with the skin of a wild beast, showed his pri^ities to both sexes. He
desiled his mother with incestuous fornication, whom he afterward he put to
death. He married Octauia and Sabina, by s^r-name Poppea, their husbands being
slain. Then Galba a far of in Spain, and C. Julius took away the Empire.
As Soon as Nero had understood of Galbaes coming, and that it was ordained by
the senteuce of the Senate, that his neck being put within a (...) after the
manner of his ancestors, he should be whipped to death with rods. Pbaon
Epaphroditus, Nephitus, and Sporus the Euunuch following him, whom s^mtimes
Nero had assaied to turn into a woman, being gelded, he thrust himself
thorough with a sword, the filthy Euunuch Sporus, of whom we have spoken,
helping his trembling had when truly before none being found of ^ hom he might
be stricken he cried out, Is it so that I have neither friend, nor enemy? I have
lived dishonorably, and shall die more dishonorably. He died the thirty two
year of his age: the Drusians so greatly loved this man, that they sent
Ambassadors requiring leave to build a monument for him: But all the
prouincesand Rome so rejoiced for his death, that the people being clad with

Sergius Galba.


GAlba sprung of the Noble stock of the Sulpitij, reigned 7. months, (Viz)
lunius, Cornelius and Caelius: so that in his palace, and likewise amongst the
common people, that were called his Poedagogi or instructors. He before he
took upon him the Empire, he governed many provinces excellently well,
handling his soldiers most severely, so that as soon as he had entered the
tents, it was straightwaies spoken abrod. O my soldiers learn to War, Galba
is not Getulicus. When he had lived seventy 3-years. He being covered Oth^, was
slain at the Lake Crutius.

Otho Siluius




SYluius Otho borne of Noble ancestors, out of the town Ferentinum, reigned
four months, dishonest in all his life, especially in his youth. This man
being overcome of Vitellius first at Placentia, and afterward at Labina, he
thrust himself through with his sword, in the thirty seven year of his age.
He was so beloved of his own Soldiers, that many of them having seen his
body slew themselves with their own

Aulus vitellius.


VYtellius borne of a Noble famile, whose father was Lucius Vitellius the
Vespasianus took away the gouerement in the East: of whose Soldiers he was
overcome in a skirmish made under the walls of the city, and Vitellius being
brought forth of the P^llace where he had hid himself, his hands being bound
behind his back, he was lead about for a spectable to the common people. But
the impudent man, in the extremest of the evils that he had done, would not
hang down his head for shame, for a sword was put under his chin, he being
half naked, many Gemoniae scal^, where he had caused Sabinus the brother of
Vespasyan to be slain, and being there wounded with many strokes died. He
lived fifty seven years. All those Emperors whom I have breefely spoken off,
especially the stock of the Caesar's, were of such learning and cloquence, that
unless they had too much abounded with all vices, (except Augustus) truly they
should have suffered immoderat dishonor.

Vespasian.


VEspasian reigned ten years. Amongst other virtues of this man; this
Vitellius, being most largely endoured. He patiently endured the insurrections
of his friends, answering with sporting speeches, to their reproaches, for he
was a most pleasant prince, Licinius Mucianus presuming overmuch of his merits,
because by his aid the Emperor obtained the Empire, he altered that opinion,
by using one that was samiliar to them both, saying only to him, you know I am
a man.

But what wonder is it that he did so to his friends, since he also despised
the oblique sayings of Lawiers, and the reproach of Philosophers. This man in a
short time refreshed the whole world, being a long time as it were without
life, and wearied. For at the first he turned the guarders of Tyranny, unless
those which had gone on far more cruelly, then to ex^inguish them being
vexed, thinking very wisely that wicked deeds are restrained through

This man repaired Rome, being deformed with old burning^^, and r^ins, leave
being granted to those that would build the houses again, if that masters of
them should be wanting, he also repaired the Capital, the Temple of the
Goddess Pax, and the monumentes of Claudius; and builded many new monuments
through all the Lands, where the right of the Romans lay, and the cities were
renewed with excellent trimming, and the streets were fortisied with great
labor.

Then the Mountains by Flaminia were made hollow, for an easy and ready
passing down, which is commonly called the rock Pertusla. A thousand Nations
being invaded together, whom he had hardly found two hundred, the most part
being extinguished through the cruelty of the tyrants. Vologeles ^
king of the Parthians, was constrained through fear only to make peace:
Syria or Palesthina, and Caramania, Tracheta, and Comagene, which to this day
we call Augustophratenses, were added to the Rom^in provinces. Also the Jews
were conjoined with them. His friends admonishing him that he should beware of
Metius Pomposianus, of whom there was speech he would be Emperor, made him
Consul, jesting at such a sentence. Sometimes he will be min^full of so great
a benefit. He governed all his Empire under an uniform order. He watched in
the night time, and his matters of state being performed, he suffered his
friends to come unto him, putting on his buskins whilst he is saluted, and his
princely robes. But what thing soever had happened after Romaine-Commonwealth,
for the space of six and fifty years, after the death of August us being at
the last breathe, through the cruelty of the tyrants, enjoyed, as by a certain
destiny, that it might not utterly fall to decay. He living seventy years
lacking but one, joining sports, or jests, with his earnest affairs, wherein he
was delighted, died. For as soon as a blazing-starre with long hairs appeared.
This says he pertains to the king of the Persians, who has the long hair.
Afterward

Titus.


TItus called also Vespasian after the name of his father, borne of his mother
Domicilla a freewoman, reigned two years, and two months, and twenty days.
This man from a child most diligenly applied himself, to the excellent studies
of virtue, military discipline, and learning, which he euedently showed forth
by the g^ifts of his mind, and body. This man when ^^cinna being at supper who
had borne the office of the consulship, and being scarce gone from the table to
be slain, for suspicion of defiling his wife Berenices. But all men took
grievously his bralles that he revenged in the time of his father, and also
that he was covetous of spoils. Whereupon all men both said and thought that
Nero had again gotten the Empire.

But these things sallyng out otherwise, got him such an immortal glory, that
he was called the delights and love of mankind. Finally as soon as he had taken
on him the affairs of the Empire, he commanded Beronices hoping for his
marriage, to return home, and all the companies of gelded persons to depart:
which showed a token of his intemperance being changed.

Moreover since that, what things were given or granted of former Princes,
their fac^^ders in the Empire were wont to confirm, he of his free will
confirmed and granted such things to the possessors thereof, as soon ^he had
gotten the Empire. Also on a certain day, he calling to mind, that he had given
nothing to any one, he straight ways cries out, with a reverend, O my friends
we have lost the day, because he was of a magnificent liberality. And he was of
so great clemency and mercy, that when two men of great honor had conspired
against him, neither could deny their in^^nded treason, he first admonished
them afterward they being brought it into an open place, he bids both of
them to sit by each side of him, and a sword being reached by the industry of
the M^^illiaus, whose sights were seen, as it were to make a battle, he
committed the same to one and afterward to the other: wherewith the beholders
being stricken, and wondering at his constancy he said, See you not that power
is given to the destinies, and that it is in vain to assay a wicked deed for
hope of bringing the same to pass, or for ^eare o^ loosing the same.

Moreover he oftentimes requested with weeping eyes, his brother Domitian
preparing treasons, and seeking after the goodwils of the soldiers, that he
would seek to get that as a paracide, which should come unto him, with his
own will, since that he was a partner of the Empire. In this man's time the
Mountain Vesunius in Campania began to burn and there was a burning at Rome
for three days both day and night: and also as great a plague as ever had bin
before. With the which misery many being vexed, he bought al kinds of remedies,
with his own money: sometimes comforting the sick in his own person, and
sometimes such as were afflicted with the deaths of Sa^ines where his Father
died. It can hardly be believed, how great a mourning this man's death brought
to the city, and the provinces, so that they calling him as we have said,
their public delights, bewailed him as if the whole world had been deprived
of a continual preserver.

Domitianus.


DOmitianus the son of Domicilla a freewoman, and the brother of Titus,
Cattians and the Germans, and made most just Laws. He builded many houses in
Rome, either Alexandria. He was so skilful an Archer, that he would shoot his
arrows betwix: the fingers of a man's hand being stretched out a far off.
Afterward he waxing cruel through murders, began to punish good men, and after
the manner of Caligula, he constrained men to call him Lord, and God, and all
tokens of honor. Being ridicolously left off, he followed swarms of flies: he
raged in lust, the filthy exercise whereof, the Graecians ever named
Clinopalen. Whereupon it was answered to one, demanding whether any one was
in the Palace, Not a fly, With these his cruelties, and especially with the
Anthony being stirred up, having the government of the higher Germ^ny, took
away the Empire. Who being slain in a battle by Normannus Appius, Domitianus
waxing far more cruel against all kinds of men raged even against his own
friends, after the manner of brute beasts.

Coccius Nerua.
HItherto such as were borne in Rome or through Italy, governed the Empire,
from hence strangers. Whereupon it is gathered that the City of Rome has
increased through the virtue of strangers. For who was more wise, or moderate
then Nerua? Who more divine then Traian? Who more excellent then Adrian?
Cocceus Nerua, was borne in the town of Neruia, Reigned twelve months ten
days. This man when he took on him the Empire, forthwith there was a rumor,
that Domitian lived, for which cause he was so afraid, that his countenance
being changed, and his voice being lost, he was scant able to stand: but he
being encouraged by Perthenius, and fresn confidence being taken, he returned
to his accustomed mildness. Who being Arrius Antoninus alone of al men (being
a stout man and most friendly to him, wisely observing the estate of those that
bear rule) embraced him; saying, that he greatly rejoiced for the Senate, the
people, and also the provinces; but for himself nothing at all: For whom, it
was better always to sport at evil Princes, then that one sustaining the
weight of so great a burden, should be subject not only to troubles and
dangers, but also to the report of all enemies, and friends, who since they
presume that they deserve all things, if they have extorted any thing, are more
cruel then very enemies themselves.

This man pardoned and forgave, whatsoever had been added to his trib^^s under
the name of penalties: he released the afflicted cities: he commanded Italy
at the cost of the whole commonwealth. This man to the intent he might not be
terrified by the access of ill-willers, is so admonished by the saying of
Mauritius a constant man, who being familiar with him at supper, when he saw to
be present Vetentones who had been Consul, notwithstanding had persecuted many
with Domitian with secret objections, amongst their talk mention being made
of Catulus, a great brauler, Nerua said, What would he have don now if he had
lived with Domitian? he would said Mauritius have supt with us. This Nerua a
very often and most skillful taker away of discords, Calphurnius Crassus to
Tarentam with his wife, temting the goodwils of the Soldiers with great
promises, the Senators blaming his overmuch linity, and when the murderers of
Domitian were required to be put to death, he took so great griese thereupon
in his mind, that he could not avoid vomit, nor the violence of his belly,
also he vehemently withstood the same; saying that it was better to dye, then
to defile the authority of the Empire, the authors being b^trayed in taking the
power. But the Soldiers, letting alone their Prince, they killed Petronius,
with one stroke, but Perthenius his members were first cut off and cast in his
face: Gasperius being redeemed with great costs, who being more insolent in so
cruel a wickedness, constrained Nerua to give thanks to his Soldiers before
the people, because they had taken away the Traian in the place of a son, and
for part of the Empire: with whom he lived three months: who on a certain
night waxing angry when he cried out agninst on Regulus with a very loud voice,
he was taken away with sweat. The same day wherein he died there was an
eclipse of the Sun.

VLpius Traianus borne in the city Tody, was called Vlpius of his Grandfather,
Traianus of Traius the first of his Mothers stock, or else so called after the
name of his father Traianus, and he reigned 20. years. This man showed himself
such an one to the commonwealth, as the wonderful wits of most excellent
authors were hardly able to express. This man took on the Empire at
Agrippina, a Noble Colony of France, using diligence in warlike affairs,
lenity in civil affairs, and liberality in helping the cities. And seeing
there are two things which are desired of excellent Princes, Deuotenesse at
home, valor in War, and wisdom on both sides, there was so great a quantity
of the Noblest gifts in him, that he seemed to be mingled with a certain
temperature of virtue, but for that he was a little given to meat, and

This man in the honor of Sura, by whose industry he had gotten the Empire,
builded certain Banes. Of whom it seemed vain to endeavor to declare al things
particularly, since that it was sufficient to have spoken of him; for he was
patyent of travel, studious of every best thing, and warlike, and did love
more, more simple wits, or most learned; although himself was of small
knowledge, and a little eloquent. But as well an inuentor of Justice, and of new,
humain, and Divine right, as an obseruer of ancient. Al which seemed Roman
estate, being as it were clean destroyed and cast to the ground by many and
cruel tyrants, he was thought to have been fitly sent by the divine providence
for a remedy of so great miseries, even for that many wonders did foreshew his
coming into the Empire: Amongst which an especial one, that a Crow spoke from
the top of the capitol in the Athenian tongue, Kalos estai. The ashes of this
man's body being burned were brought to Rome, and buried under his pillar in the
toomb of Traian, and his Image being laid on him, as those that triumph are
wont to do, was carried into the citry, the senate and the army going before the
same. At that time the river Tyber oueflowed much more perniciously then in the
Nerua, with a great destruction of houses and a grievous Earthquake, and a
cruel pestilence, and famine, and burnings, were made through many provinces. Al
which Traian very much helped by exquisit remedies: ordaining that no house
should be higher then threescore foot, by reason of the easy downfals, and the
great charges to repair them if any such things should happen. Wherefore he
was worthily called a Father of his country. He lived sixty four years.

Aelius Adrianus.
Aelius Adrianus of the Italian race, being a cozen to Traian the Prince, was
borne at Adria, which town standing in the country of Pua gave name to the
Adriatique sea. He reigned 12. years. He was devoutly affected to the Greek
tongue, and was for that cause termed in derision Graeculus. He augmented all the
Athenian studies, not only with his Poetry, but with all other sciences of
singing, playing, and physic, geometry, painting, and liming, and next to the
Policleti and Euphranorae. He exceled in works of brass and Marble, insomuch
as one would have thought he had bin made for these only purposes, for never had
humain affairs such an exquisite curious elegancy,

He counterfetted chastity, (...) and clemency, and on the contrary closely
carried his ambition, wherewith he was wholly infla^^ed. He was ingenious,
either provoking other to answer, of else himself, both in iestes earnest,
and tauntinges: giving verse for verse, and sentence for sentence extemporally,
in such sort as if he had studied or meditated for all that he spoke. His wife
Sabina was by servile and base injuries, constra^ned to (...) self, who did
openly boast, what an inhumaine disposition of her husband^ she had endured,
and therefore she had labored that the ruin of mankind Constantine. He lived
Lx and 2. yea^^ and then being consumed by a griuous torture of al his members,
insomuch as he o^^ered himself to the dearest of his servants, ^^ying them to
kill him. But he was safely kept by his friends from doing violence to
himself, and afterward died miserably.

Anthoninus Pyus.
ANthoninus first called Fuluius and Boionius and afterward surnamed Pyus,
reigned 23. years, being the son in law to Adrian, and his adopted son, showed
so much goodness in his reign, that he lived without al example no man ever
paragonizing him, and might be compared to Numa, for he ruled the whole world
23. years, by his own authority without al watre, so that al princes, states,
and people stood in awe of him, and yet loving him withal, that they rather
held him for their father and patron, then their Lord and Emperor, and all of
them with one consent, desired his determination of all their controversies,
wishing for the same as for the favor of the heavens. The Bactrians, Indians,
and Hireanians, upon proof of the justice of such an Emperor, sent Am. unto
him, who adorned his actions with beauty and pleasantnes of his person, being
both tall and valiant. His manner was before he went forth of his chamber to
salute any man, to eat a morsel of bread, least by the cooling of the blood
about his inward parts, he might be overmuch weakened, and by that Rome, at a
town of his own, called Lorium: for whose Roman people for want of corn
would have stoned him, he rather chose to satisfy them by reason then to
revenge that indignity.

MArcus Antoninus reigned 18. years, who lived a sincere maintainer of virtue
and of all good disposition, being a protector of the world in all common
calamities, and truly if he had not been borne at that time, all the glory
of the Roman Empire had been utterly crushed with one fall. For in his
government there raged war in the East, Illirya, Italy, and France, such
earthquakes were felt as did overthrow Cities: with inundation of wate^s,
often pestilence, and swarms of locusts devouring the green fields, so that
Antoninus Verus his kinsman partaker of the Empire, by a new kind of
boneuolence, the which Verus afterward as he travailed betwixt Altinum and
Concordia, died of an Apoplexey, in the xi. year of his reign, being before
time of a sharp and wanton disposition, yet very studious in poetry. After his
death M Antoninus reigned alone, being from his infancy a quiet spirited man,
for it was observed that neither joy nor sorrow, did ever make him change his
Gracyan language. He permitted the noble men and his own servants to use the
same manner of behavior and attendance at their banquets, which he himself
accustomed. When the coffers of his treasury were empty, and he had not
wherewithal to pay his Soldiers, being not willing to raise any tax upon
the Princes or the Senate, in the open Market of Traianus set to sale for the
space of two months together, all the princely hangings, golden and christaline,
Myrrhi^e vessels and pottes, his own and his wives silks, and garments of
cloth and gold, and many chains and other ornaments of pearl and precious
stones. Whereby he gathered together an exceeding Mass of gold. And after the
victory obtained, he gave the buiers there money again, so many as would
redeliuer their several bargains, being not offended with any one, that would
not part with that which they had once bought. In his time Cassius the Tyrant
was put to death. In the 59. year of his life he died of a disease at
Bendobona, and when news there of was brought to Rome, the whole city most
lamentably Romulus, every man with one consent presumed publicly, that Marcus
was received into heaven, for whose honor they builded Temples, Columes, and
many other Monuments.

Commodus
AVrelius Commodus the son of Antoninus, called also Antoninus, reigned 13.
years, by whose first entry it was coniectured what an Emperor he would
prove, for being warned by his father on his deathbed, that he should not
suffer the Barbarians to grow in strength; answered enigmatically,

He was more given to lust, avarice and cruelty then any man, keeping promise
with none, being most fierce against them, whom before he had called to honor,
or given rewards unto, being so highly depra^ed that he would oftentimes in the
Theater combat with fensers, or sword-plaiers weapons, Martia a singular
beautiful whore with whom he was wholly, enamoured, as he came out of a bath
gave him a cup of empoysoned drink, and at the last in the two and thirty
year of his age, there was sent unto him a valiant and most strange wrastler,
who held his chappes so fast together that he died.

Heluius Partinax
HEluius Partinax reigned 85. days, who against his will was forced to be
Emperor, and for that cause was sur-named Partinax. He was of a mean and base
parentage, and from the government of the city was he advanced to the Empire
of the world: at the last in the 67. year of his life, after many wounds were
given him, he was beheaded by the conspiracy of Julian, and his head was
carried about the whole city, and by this manner of death was that man (an
example of human frailty) after intolerable labors, consumed so that he was
prouerbially termed the bal offortune. For his father being a libertine
Ligurians in the miery country of Lolium Gentianum, whose vassal even in the
time of his perfectureship he freely confessed himself to be. He was a
schoolemaister of the grammar, more affable, then profitable, for which cause
the Grecians called him Chreslologus, he never reue^ged wrong but loved al
simplicity, making himself open and common to all people both at table,
conference, and walking. Being dead, they decreed that he should be called
Diuus a Saint, or man deified, in whose praise with publik acclamation redobled
until they were able to speak no more, this people proclaimed this
commendation. While Partinax reigned we lived in security, we feared no man. To
the Godly father, to the father of the Senate, to the father of all good men.

Didius Iulianus.
DIdius Iulianus being a Millanois reigned seven months, he was a Noble man,
and an excellent Lawyer, but factious, rash, and ambitious of rule. In that
time Nigier Pesceninus at Antioche, and Septimius Seuerus in Pannonia Sabaria,
were both created Augusti. By this Seuerus was Iulianus, led into

Septimius Seuerus.
SEptimius Seuerus reigned 18. years, and first killed the filthy beast
Pescenninus, and then Albinus at Lavis because he made himselse Emperor, and
left his sons Bassyanvs and Geta his successors. He made a wall in great
Brittayne, cross the land from sea to Sea, containing at the least 32. M.
paces He was the least Soldier of all the Emperors that ever were before him,
quick of conccit, constant in all purposes until he had accomplished them, and
where he inclined to favor, he did it with a wonderful and perpetual grace,
being diligent to seek out secrets, and liberal in his rewards. He was alike
vehement toward his friends and enemies, for he enriched Lateranus Chilo and
Amilynus Bassvs, and in the chief and memorable houses of the Parthyans, and
the Lateranes. He permitted no man in his dominion to sell honors, he was
sufficiently well instructed in the latin, but more eloquent in the Afric
tongue, for he was borne at Liptis in Africa. Being not able to endure the
extreamety of pain in all the members of his body, especially in his feet, in
stead of poison which he was denied, he fed upon in greedy manner

Antoninus Caracalla.
AVrelius Antoninus, Bassianus Caracalla the son of Seuerus, was borne at
Lions, and reigned alone six years, he was called Bassianus after the name of
his mothers father. And when he had brought a large garment France, and made
thereby their Caracalla hanging down to the ankles, he constrained the people
to salute and welcome him home, araied in that garment, whereupon he was called
caracalla. He killed his brother Geta, for which cause vengeance followed him
and he fell mad, of which he was afterward recovered. When once he saw the
body of Alexander the great, he commanded that his followers should call him
great Alexander, and by flatterers he was brought to this pass, that he walked
with a dreadfu^l face, his neck bending to his left shoulder, look what he
had observed in the countenance of Alexander, the same he firmly persuaded
himself that his vysag: was of like proportion and grace.

He was given to lost, and therefore married his mother in law. When he
iourneied to Carris, being at Edissa, r^ady to do the wo^ke of nature in the
easement of his body, h^ was sl^ine by a S^^l^ier, who followed him as if he
had been one of his guarde. He lived about th^^ty years, and afterward his
corpse was brought to Rome.

Opilius Macrinus and Diadumenus.
MAcrinus and his son Diadumenus were made Emperors by the Soldiers, and
reigned but 14. months. A ^erward they were by the same Soldiers both
beheaded, because M. crinus did seek the abat^ment of their stipends, and
labored to repress their ^^ot and luxury.

Aurelius Heltogabalus.
AVrelius Antoninus Varius, was also c^ll^d Heliogabalus, the son of
Caracalla by his Cozen Semea begotten in adolte^y, reigned two years and
Bassianus, Graund-father to his mother Semea, was a priest of Jupiter, or as
some say of the Sun. When the said Heltogabalus came to Rome with great
expectation of s^ldiers, he dishonored himself and incurred the reproaches of
all sorts. when by the d^fect of nature and age he was not able to taste of
lustful pleasure, turning unto h^mselfe, he commanded men to call him by the
name of Bassiana a woman, in sted of B^ssianus a man

He sac^ificed himself to the great moth^r by cutting of his pr^uy parts,
having first of all married with a Vestall vergin. He made Marcellus (who was
afterward c^lled Alexander) his fellow-Emperor, and was slain in a tumult of
the S^uldiers, whose b^dy was by a Soldier drawn thorough all the streets
Rome, lik^ the c^^c^s^e of a dog, with a millitary proclamation, saying: The
wh^lp^ of untamed and rau^ning lust. At last when the q^antity of his body was
great^r then would enter into the stool of a privy, wherein it should have
b^ene bu^^^d, they d^^w it to Tiber, binding it to an heavy weight, and so cast
i^ into the River, that it might never rise up again for mortal men to
behold. H^ lived b^t 16. years, and for these things called Tibarnius, and
Tractitius.

Seuerus Alexander.
SEuerus Alexander reigned 13. years, being a waster of the Goods of the
Commonwealth, and in his time Taurinus was made Augustus, who for Euphrater.
At that time Maxim^nus took on him the Empire, corrup^^ng many of the
Soldiers, but when Alexander saw himself fo^saken of his followers, he cried
out upon his mother, as the cause of his death, and so off^red his neck with
great confidence to the hangman to be stricken off, in the 26. year of his age.
His mother Mammoea br^ught her son to that pass, that if any thing r^mained
vnto^^hed at the tabl^ or at dinner, were it never so small, she her self
reserved it till another banquet.

Julius Maximinus.
IVlius Maximinus a Thracian and a military man, governed 11. years, who while
he persecuted the coiners of money, killing both the guilty and guiltless, was
torn in pieces at Aquileia in a sedition of the Soldiers, together with his
son, the soldiers making proclamation in a jest, Of a bad kind keep not a
Whelpe. Under his government Gordianus the Father, and Gordianus the son, one
after another took upon them the Empire, and one after another perished; and
in like sort, Pupianus and Balbinus affecting the principality, came to
confusion.

Gordianus.
GOrdianus the graund-child of Gordianus by his Mother, borne at Rome, and
son of a Noble father, ruled six years, and was slain at Ctesiphon in a
sedition of the soldiers by Phillippus the governor of the palace in the xx.
year of his reign, and his body being buried in the confines of the Romans
and the Persian Empire gave a name to the place, which was for that cause
called Sepulchrum Gordiam.

Phillippus.
MArchus Julius Phillip. ruled 5. years, was slain at Verona by the soldiors,
Gallus Julius Saturninus being about 12. year old was slain at Rome, having
been of such a melancholy and sullen disposition, that by no sport or
merriment, he could never be moved to laughter after he was 5. years old, and
seeing his father tickled with laughter in certain secular games, although he
was but a child, yet did he turn away his face. This Phillip was borne of
mean parents, his father having been a captain or leader of robbers.

Decius.
DEcius borne in Pannonia Bubalia, reigned xxx. months, and made his Caesar:
he was a man well earned in all the Arts, devoted to virtue, pleasant and
familiar at home, and apt to all kind of Arms. He was drowned among many
other in a gulf upon the coasts of Barbary, and his body could never more be
found. His son was slain in wars. He lived fifty years. In his time was
Valens Lucinianus made Emperor.

Virius Gallus.
VIrius Gallus with his son Volusio ruled 11. years, in their time the senate
created Hostilianus Pepenna Emperor, who shortly after died of the Aemilianus
created Emperor in Moesia, against whom both the father and the son went
with an Army, and by their own soldiers were both slain at Iatcramna, the
father being seven and forty years old, and they were made Emperors in the
Island Menyngis now called Girba, and Aemilianus was slain at Spolitum or
Pontus, which for that occasion was called Sanguinarius, being in equal
distaunce be^wixt Ocriculum Marina, and the city of Rome. He was by kindred a
Moore, a valiant souldior and not temerarious 71. years.

Licinius Valerianus.
LYcinius Valerianus sur-named Colobus, ruled 15. years, being of Noble
parentage, but a solid and blockish man, never borne or qualified for any
public place, either in counsel or action. He made his son Galianus,
Augustns, and Cornelius Valerianus his sons son, Caesar. While all these
reigned Regilianus in Moesia, Cassius Labianus Posthumus in Gallia (Cornelius
being slain) were made Emperors. In like sort Aelianus at Moguntia. Aemilianus
Egypt, Valeryus in Macedonya, and Aurelius at Millayn, invaded the Imperial
title. But while Valerianus, Warred in Mesopotamia, he was taken by Sapores the
king of Persia, and served him among the Parthyans in base servitude, for as
long as he lived the king set his foot upon his neck when he mounted on
horseback.

Gallienus.
GAllienvs substituted in the place of his son Cornelyvs Salonyanvs, his other
son being adicted to the inconstant love of harlots Salonyna, and Pipa. The
which Salonina he colord under marriage, her father the King of the Marcomanni,
g^aunting unto him one part of Pannonia superior Avreolvs whom he besiedged at
Pontvs and obtained it, being for that cause called Avreolvs, and he also
besieged Myllain; but by a devise of Aureolvs, he was slain of his own
soldiers. After he had reigned 15. years, seven with his father, and 8.
alone, and he ilved 50. years.

Clavdyvs.
CLavdyus ruled 11. years. This Clavdyus some are of opinion that he was the
son of Gordianvs, while he was taught by Lycensa that grave Matron. He was
appointed Emperor by the will of Galerius being ready to die, unto whom by
Gallonius Basilyvs, he sent the Imperial robes to Tycim. Avreolvs being slain
by his own company, he received the govern meant of those countries, and
fighting against the Almanes, not far from the lake of Benacvm, he overthrew
more then half the multitude of his enemies. In those days Victorivs was
madek. And when Clavdyvs understood by the books of the destinies which he
commanded to be looked into, that some principal man of the Senate must die,
and Pomponivs Bessus (who was then present) offering himself to that purpose,
he without admitting any contradiction gave his life for the good of the
commonwealth, with protestation that no man of that order could be the
principal but the Emperor. Which thing so pleased every one, that he was not
only honored with the title of Diuus a saint, but also they made him a statue
of gold and set it near to the Image of Jupiter, and the Magistrates or peers
did likewise erect in the court for his remembrance a golden Image.

Quintilius.
QVintilius was the successor of this man who held the Empire but very few
days and then was slain.

Aurelianus.
AVrelianus borne of mean patentage, and as some say his father was a Colone
or tenant to the famous Senate Aurelius betwixt D^cia and Macedonia, he raignd
fi^e years and was not unlike to Alexander the great, or to Caesar the
Dictator, for he received the City of Rome, and delivered it from her
opposites within three years, whereas Alexander by great victories traveled
13. years, before he came into India. Caesar spent ten years in ouercomming
Gallia, and 4. years in vanquishing the Romans. This man did obtain three
several battles in Italy, at Placentia near the river M^taurus, Fortune, and
in the fields of Ticim. In this time Septimius was proclaimed Emperor among
the Dalmatians, but he was presently beheaded by his own people.

When the coiners or monyers in his time rebelled, he repressed them, sparing
no cruelty. He was the first man among the Romans which did wear a crown on
his head, and also used garments of gold, and precious stones, which before
that time the Romans were not acquainted withal. He compassed about the
city with stronger and larger walls then before, and commanded the people to
eat swines flesh, and advanced T^tr^cius to be the provost of Lucania, who
before that time had bin declared Emperor by the Gallia, telling him merrily
that it was more Noble for him to rule some part of Italy, then to be a king
beyond the Alps. At the last one of his servants having deceiptfully set down
the names of his ^riends and military men, and co^nterfetted Emperor, made as
though he me^t to kill them; the which he secretly conveyed to them, they upon
sigh^ thereof, thinking to prevent the worst, slew him in his journey betwixt
Her. clia and Constantinople. He was a crvell and bloody man, dreadful at all
times, and a murderer of his own sisters son, after his death there was no
Emperor in seven months.

Tacitus.
AFter him Tacitus received the Empire, being a man well disposed, who when he
had ruled but two hundred days, dyed of a Fever at Tarsus.

Florianus.
FLorianus succeeded him, but when the greatest part of the Army of horse men
had chosen Probus who was very expert in warfare, Florianus having as it were
in sport swayed the Empire but 60. days, by cutting and launcing his own
veins, out of which his blood yss^ed abundantly, he

Probus.
PRobus was borne of a Father, who was a husbandman and a Governor, of the
blood of the Dalmatians, he reigned 6. years. He overcame Saturninus in the
East, and Proculus and Bonosus made Emperors at Colen.

He permitted the Gauls and the Pannonians to have Vines, and by the hands of
his soldiers he planted the hill of Almus at Syrmius, and Aureus in upper
Moesia with vines, and was afrerwarde slain in Sirmius in h^^ tower enclosed
with iron.

Carus.
CArus was borne in Narbon, and reigned xii. years. He presently created
Carinus and Numerianus Caesar's, and by a thunder bolt was slain at Ct^siphon.
His son Numerianus being taken with a pain in his eyes, and carried up and down
in a little couch, was slain by treachery, at the instigation of his father in
law Aper. And when his death was by deceit concealed, Aper should get strength
to invade the Empire, at the last the treason was discovered by the stink of
the dead corpse. Whereupon Sabinus Iulianus attempted to be Empe. but Carinus
slew him in the fields of Verona. This Carinus wanted no faults, and caused
honest innocent men to be put to death up on his own false invented crimes, he
defiled the marriage bed of Noblemen, and he punished his felow-scholers, who
taxed him in the auditory for not observing his word. And last of al he was
slain by the right hand of Tribunus whose wife he had ravished.

Diocletianus.
DYocletian a Dalmatian made a free-manne by Amelinus the senator, his mothers
name and the name of the town o^ his birth was Dioclea, by Diocles, and being
made the head of the world, he changed his Grecian name into a Roman, and
reigned 25. years. He made Maximianus Augustus, and created Constantinus and
Galerius s^rnamed Armamentarius, Caesar's. Giving Constantinus to wife Theodora
the daughter in law of Herculius Maximianus, putting away his former wife. In
this time were proclaimed Em. Carausuis in Gallia, Achilleus in Egypt, Iulianus
in Italy. but they al perished with several destructions. Among whom Iulianus
having a dagger through his ribs, threw himself into the fire. But Diocletian
gave up the empire of his own acord at N^comedia, and so spent Hirculius and
Galerius to take unto him the Empire again, like a man flying some great evil,
he answered in this sort. I would god you could go to Salon to see the
Oliuetrees, I have planted with my own hands, then would you never tempt to this
action. He lived 68. years, wherein he spent 9. in private estate. He dyed (as
was manifest) by a voluntary fear. For when he was called by Constantinus and
Iaciuius to their marriage feasts, he excused himself, that by reason of his age
he could not be pres^t they wrote back again to him thretning letters, wherein
he was charged to favor Maximinus and to have showed favor to Maxentivs,
whereupon fearing some shameful death, he poysond himself. In his time
Constantius the father of Constantine, and Armamentarius were commonly C^sars.
When Seuervs for Italy, and the sisters son of Maximinus Galireu^ for the East
at the same time was Constantinus also made Caesar. Maxentius in a village six
Miles from Rome, in the way to Lavicanum was made Emperor, afterward
I^icinius, and in like manner Alexander at carthage. And so also was Vale^s
created Emperor. But Seuerus was slain by Hercvlius Maximinus at Rome in a
Tavern, and his corpse was then put into the sepulcher of Galerius distant
from Rome, by the way of Apius about twelve Miles.

Galerius Maximianus.
GAlerius Maximianus died by reason his privy parts consumed, Maximianus
Herculius was besiedged by Constantine at Massilia, and there taken, and by him
put to death, and Alexander was strangled in a halter by the army of
Constantine. Maxentius when he was to fight against Constantine, having made a
bridge with boats a little above the bridge Milinus, while he hastened into one
side thereof on horsebake, he with his horse fell into the River, and there
perished, and by the weight of his breastplate he he did Maximianus died an
ordinary death at Tarsus. Vallus was put to death by Licinius. Now these were
their manners and conditions. Herculius Maximianus was cruel by nature, given
to filthy lust, and foolish in counsel, being borne in the wild part of
Pannonia, for there is a place not far from Syr^ius where now stands a
palace, wherein the parents of Herculius exercised Mercenary labor. He died in
the 60. year of his age, having been Emperor 20. years. He begat upon
Eutropia the Sirian woman, Maxentius and Fausta the wife of Constantine, to
whose father Constantius he gave his daughter in law Theodora. But Maxentius by
the cunning of a woman, was brought from another place by cause she knew that
it would be most acceptable to her husband to have a son, whereas indeed he
was not the son, of Maximianus, and therefore she did that, to keep fast the
mind and love of her husband. That Maximianus was never beloved of any, nether
of his own father, nor of his father in law Galerius.

Galerius Armamentarius.
THis Galerius was a landable man, of a beautiful body and a happy Soldier,
but of indifferent justice: his parents were country people and keepers of
herds, from whence he had his name Armamentarius. He Dacia Ripa, and there
buried: the which place they call Romulia, and after the name of his mother
Romula. This man in his insolency would affi^me, that his mother was gotten
with child by a Draggon, when she conceived him, as was Olimpias the mother of
great Alexander.

Galerius Maximinus.
GAlerius Maximinus before he was proclaimed Emperor was called Daza, and was
the sisters son of Armamentarius. He was Caesar four years, and Augustus 3
years in the East. By his birth and education a

Alexander.
ALexander was by birth a Phrigian, fearful in his disposition, and by reason
of his old age not fit to labor, so that all these last before rehearsed being
consumed some one way, some another, the imperial rights descended to
Constantinus and Licinius.

Constantinus.
COnstantinus the son of Constantius, the Emperor and Helena reigned Rome
under Galerius for Religion, fled away and to avoid them that pursued him to
take him, slew all the common beasts he met by the way, and so came to his
father into Britannia, and so it happened that at that time Constantius his
father died. After whose death, by the consent of all his present friends,
especially Erocus King of Alemanes, who accompanied his father constantius, he
took upon him the Empire. He married his sister constantia to Licinius at
Millane, and made Caesar's his son crispus, borne by Mineruina his concubin,
and constantius his son of the same age, and Licinius the son of Licinius
being twenty months old. But as Empires do hardly continue in concord, so
there arose dissension betwixt Licinius and constantinus, and first of all
constantine, fell upon Licinius at Cibalae in the night time, near to the lake
Hiulca, whereupon Lycinius sled to Bizantium and there created Martinianus
caesar. Afterward constantine having a stronger army, constrained Licinius to
offer up his imperial gown by the hands of his wife, upon condition of his
own life. Then was he sent to Thessalonica, and not long after, both he and
Martinianus were strangled. Licinius being 60. years old, and had reigned 14.
years, being of infinite avarice, subject to venery, very sharp, and not a
little impatient. He was a great enemy to learning, especially foraine studies,
calling it thorough his ignorance a poison and public Pestilence. He was well
affected to husbandry and poor rusticks, because he was norished among such
people: He was a diligent repressor of Eunuchs and Courtiers, calling them,
the mothes and frettes of the Palace. Constantine having thus gotten the whole
Empire, being happy in government, and prosperous in the Wars, by the
instigation (as it is thought) of his wife Fausta, put his son crispus to
death. Afterward he being blamed by his mother Helena sor that action, caused
his said wife Fausta to be killed in a scalding bathe. He was above measure
desirous of praise, and finding the name of Traian written upon the walls of
many of the palaces, he called him a wall-flower. He built a bridge over
Danubius, setting forth the Imperial robes with precious stones, and He was
qualified and enabled for many things, taking away calumniations by sharp
laws, nourishing a good leters, arts, and learning. He himself would read,
write, hear Ambastages, and the complaints of the provinces. He made his own
sons and Dalmatius his brothers soon, Caesar's, and lived 71. years,
reigning almost half of them alone, 13. years and so died of a natural
disease, being more given to derision then to affabilaty. Whereupon it was
prouerbially called Tracalla, who in his first ten years was excellent, in his
next twelve years a robber, and his ten last years a child and ungoverned
puple, spending immoderately. His body was buried in Bizantium which after his
name was called Constantinople, after whose death the soldiers slew Dalmatius:
By which accident the Roman Empire was divided into three parts. Betwixt
Constantinus, Constantius, and Constans, his three Sons, Constantine had al
beyond the Alps, Constantius began at the shore of Propontus, and so ruled all
Asia and the East. Constans reigned over Italy, Illiricum, Affricke, Dalmatia,
Thracia, Macedonia, and Achata.

Annibalianus Constantius and Constans.
ANnibalianus the kinsman of Dalmatius Caesar, governed Armenia, and the
Nations adjoining to it. In the mean time Constantius and Constans fell at
variaunce about the right of Italy. While that Constantius being drunk, and in
the likeness of a robber, ranged into his brothers country, he was taken and
beheaded, and cast into the River Alsa, not far srom Aquyliea. Constans given
much to hunting, while he wandered thorough forests and wild Woods, Chrestyus,
Marcellinus, and Magnentius, with some other Marcellinus did inuit many to
supper as though he would celebrate the birth day of his son. Wherefore the
banquet being late in the night Magnentius a rose, saying that he would go
ease his body, and then put on a venerable habit. Which when constans
understood he made means to fly away, but was overtaken and slain by Gayon,
at Halena near Pyrence, 13. years after he was made Emperor, for he was
Caesar 3. years before, and so he lived 27. years. He was a lame man in his
feet, and had the gout in the joints of his hands, he was fortunate, for the
temperance of the air in his dominion, for abundance of fruits, and for not
being annoyed with the Barbarians, which benifites had been greater if he had
advanced worthy men Lieutenants, and not sold those Petrainus, the general of
the Soldiers, took upon him the Empire in Pannonia at Mursia. From whom
Constantius not long after took away the kingdom, who lived to a great age
giving himself to all voluptuousness, being easy to be overtaken with folly.

Constantius.
COnstantius made Gallus his uncles son Caesar, marring him to his sister
Constantina: and Magnensius, at that time created Decentius his kinsman eaesar,
Beyond the Alps, at which time Nepotianus the son of Eutrophia constantinus,
sister, by the persuasion of leude persons took upon him at Rome to be
Emperor, whom in the 28. day of his usurped title Magnentius overcame. Then was
there a great battle at Mursia, betwixt Constantius and Magnentius, where
Magnentius was overcome, in which conslict the greatest ability of the Romain
Empire, was almost o uerturned. After that Magnentius fled into Italy, and slew
many of his persecutors at Thicanum who followed him audauciously, without any
good counsel, as it often falls out in victories. Not long after being in a
straight at Lions, a piece of a Wall being thrown down upon him, by thrusting
a sword in secret against it, He was wounded to death, continually bleeding
at the nose, until his expiration which was in the two and fiftieth month of
his regiment, and the fiftieth year of his age. His parents were of Gallia, he
was learned and a good Orator, but of a proud mind, and immoderately
fearful, yet politic to cover that passion with precepts of audacity.
Decentius when he heard of his death strangled himself Gallus Caesar was
slain by Constantius, in the 4. year of his government.

Siluanus.
SYluanus being made Emperor was slain in the eight and twentieth day of his
government. He was of a most pleasant wit (although he was derived of a
Barbarous father) after that he had learned the Roman manners.

Constantius.
COnstantius took Claudius Iulianus brother of Gallus, and made him Caesar.
Argentoratum in Gallia, with a few soldiors slew an innumerable company of
enemies. They stood like the tops of Mountains while they were alive but being
dead their blood ran away from them like a river. Their Noblek. Nodemarius
was taken. The Nobles were all overthrown, and their borders rendered to the
Roman possession, and afterward fighting with the Almains, took their king
Badomarius. He was made Emperor by the soldiers of Gallia, but Constantius
urged him by Ambassadors, to leave off that honor, and to return to his former
seat and dignity again.

Iulianus.
IVlian assirmed that he could more readily give obedience to the gentle
command of the high Empire, whereat Constantius greatly offended (because he
was impatient of all such grief) fell into a most sharp fever, which his
indignation and great watching increased, and thereof he died in Mopsocriue, at
the soot of the Mountain Taurus, in the four and forty year of his age, and
the nine and thirtieth year of his reign, having been Augustus twentye and
four years, whereof with Magnentius and his own brothers sixteen years,
Caesar. He was happy in all civil Wars, but unfortunate in foreign, being
woonderfullie skillful in casting of darts, abstaining from all abundance of
Wine, meat, and sleep, of great ability to labor, and desirous of
cloquence, which being not able to obtain, he envied other. He loved his
Courtiers and Eunuchs very dear, also his with whom he lived very contented,
not turning his lustful affections unto any other. But among all his Wives he
had loved Eusebia best, who was very beautiful, yet by her Amantiae, and
Gorg^niae, and other importunat se^uices, she much blemished the Emp. fame,
contrary to the custom of modest women, whose wholesome precepts do often help
their husband^. For to omit other, it is almost increadible how much Pompeia
Platina increased the glory of Traian, whose Task masters did complain upon
their provinces, so that one of them was said to meet with every rich man
asking him what have thou at thy Table? Where hadest thou it? Deliver that thou
have. She blamed her husband by cause he was careless of his own praise, and
made him detest such exactions, so that he called his exchequer the Melt. Which
is it a bounded al Iasianus having thus gotten unto himself the government of
the Romayne Monarchy, being des^^ous of vain glory made War upon the
Persians, there he was deceived by a fugitine sent for that purpose.

When the Parthyans fell upon his Camp on every side, he Armed with his
shield, ran out of his tents, and while he inconsiderately endeno^d to
dispose his forces for battle, he was stricken with a darte by one of his
enemies as he rose from the ground, and being carried into his tent, he came
out again to encourage his Soldiers to fight, but his blood continually
ysluing Graecia.

He was short in Sature, and not strong, yet able through exercise. There was
in him a great neglect of some things which did diminish his former virtues. As
for example, his immoderat desire of praise, his superstitious worship

His ardent humor of glory did so much overcome him, that he could not be
diswaded by any earthquake, or other presage from going against Persia, no, not
by seeing in the night a great Globe fall down from heaven, could he be drawn
to to appoint a more happy time for that War.

Iouinianus.
Iouinianus was the son of Varronianus, who dwelt in an Island of Singidonia
belonging to the Province of Pannonia. He was Emperor eight months. His father
having lost many Children, was presently admonished in a dream, that the Child
wherewithal his Wise was then conceived and ready to deliver, should be called
Iouinianus. He was of a gallant great body, pleasant in his wit, and very
studious. Coming from Persia to Constantinople in the midst of Winter, he
^el into a crudity of his stomach and so oppressed in the carriage of his new
dignity died suddenly, near 40. years of age.

Valentinianus.
VAlentinianus ruled xi. years, and almost 9. months: his father Gratianus,
was meanly borne, and among the Cihalae was called Fanartus, because carrying
about cords to sell, five soldiers could not take one Praetory: for whose sake
the soldiers bestowed the Empire upon Valentinian his son, although he
denied to accept it. He made his cozen Valeus companion of his Empire, and
afterward his son Gratianus, who being yet a child through the persuasion of
his mother in Law, and wise, he created Augustus. This Valentinianus was of a
comely presence, of a quick wit, and most eloquent in speech, although he spoke
seldom. He was severe, vehement, and an enemy to vices, especialy
couctousnesse, whereof he was a sharp punisher, and in all things I have related
of him, he was most ^ik to A ^^rianus. He remembered his ance^^ors, F^rmus
slain, who did attempt the Empire in Mauritania. Valentinian giving audience
to an Embassage of the Guadi at Bergention lost his voice, through a Flux of
blood, and so in the 5. and 50. year of his age, being of perfect sense and
memory, gave up the Ghost. The which disease some affirm happened unto him
through surfeit of meat, and saturity stretching his sin^wes. He being
Valentinian his son of four year old being with his mother, by the
procurement of Equituis and Mcrobaudus was created Emperor.

Valeus.
VAleus reigned with his cozen Valentian aforesaid ten years and fine
months. This Valeus waging an unhappy war with the Goths, was wounded and
carried into a base cottage, upon which the Goths came and set fire, wherein he
was burnd. He was to be commended in these things. First a good counselor to
the rich, in altering of judgments just, trustye to his friends, not angry to
any man's harm but yet very ^earefull. In his time Procopius the Tirant was
overthrown and put to death.

Gratianus.
GRatianus was borne at Sirmium and reigned with his father Valentinian eight
years, and eighty five days with his uncle, and brother three years, with
the same brother, and Theodosius four years, and with them all and Arcadius
six months.

This Emperor overthrew thirty thousand Almans at Argentoratum in Gallia.
When he understood that the Goths, Triballians, the Hunnes, and Alant the
basest people of the world, did possess, Thracia and Dacia, as though those
lands had been their inheritance, so that by their means the name of the
Romans was in danger to be utterly extinct. He called for Th^odosius out of
Spain, and by the consent of all men, in the three and thirtieth year of his
age gave over the Empire to him.

This Gratian was not meanly learned, for he was able to make an artificial
Alanes, before the ancient Romain soldiers, and became a companion and friend
to the Barbarians, so that he would travel in their habit, he drew upon him
the hatred of the soldiers. In his time Maximius, which Britannia, came into
Gallia, and was there received by those Legyons which were discontented with
Gratian, and so put him to slight, wherein he dyed after he had lived only 28.
years.

Theodosius.
Honorius was the father of Theodosius, his mother was Thermantia a Sp^niard,
descended from the Emperor Traian. He was made Emp. by Gratian the Emp. at
Sirmium, and ruled the world 27. years: and men Theodosius, which signifies as
much as Given of God. And there was an Oracle in Asia, that one should succeed
Valeus in the Empire, whose name should begin with the Greek Letters, Theta,
Epsilon, Omicron, and Delta wherwithall Theodosius was deceived and justly put
to death for his ambitious desire of rule. Theodosius was the most famous
enlarger and defender of the commonwealth, for in diverse battelles he
overthrew the H^nnes and Goths which oppressed the Empire in the time of
Valeus. At the request of the Persians, he made peace with them, and slew
Miximius the Tyrant (which had slain Gratyan) at Aquilei, with his son
Victor, whom he had made Emperor, within the years of infancy: Eugenius the
tyrant, and Arbogastes with their ten thousand fighting men. This Eugentus
being confident in the forces of Arbogastes, after he hade slain Valentinianus
at Vyenna, called himself Emperor, but shortly after he lost his life and
Empire together.

This Theodosius was in quantity of body and condition very like Traian as
Writings and Pictures restifie, such a very tall Stature, such members or
lims, a like hair and mouth, but not so wide as Traians: lean cheeks, but
not so great eyes, and I know not whether he had such a grace or beautiful
aspect, or such a Majesty in his going, but I am sure their minds were most
alike, so that nothing could be alleged out of any author, but i^ seemed he
considered and read the same. He was gentle, merciful, affable to all, thinking
that he differed from other men only in his apparel: he was honorable to al
men, but toward the good he exceeded himself. He lo^ed mean wits, and admired
the great if they were harmeles and well applied, he gave great matters
liberally with a great spirit, he embraced his ci^izens, and them that lived
with him in private society most lovingly, and (...) head them with money and
other rewards, especially those who had regarded Traian was infected, he much
detested, for he stirred up no wars but pacified them he fo^nd, and made
public laws against wanton and lascivious persons, forbidding ^ilthy songs
at banquets, being so great an enemy to immodesty and incontinency, that he
forbad the marriage of kindred or cozen Germans, as an unlawful thing. For
his learning it w^^ not great, being compared to them that are excellent, but
yet he was sage, and delighted to observe al men's manners. Never ceasing to
execrate the proud, cruel, and oppressing words and deeds of the ancient,
derogating from true liberty of honest men as Cinna, Mari^s, Silla, and
especia^ly

Sometime he would allege sharp precepts out of Liuye, as that Augustus was
admonished by his Master, that if it happened he were angry at any t^me before
he attempted to revenge his displeasure, he should say the four and twenty
Greek Letters; by means whereof, a little tract of time would save him a
great deal of wrath. And that the Princes virtue was better which he go^ by
enlarging his regal power, through civil victories, meaning his own viol^nt
passions. He ought to attend to provide corn ^or his svbiectes, and when they
have bin pilled by Tyrants of their Gold and Silver, then to He must reverence
his uncle like his father, and nourish the children of his dead Brother and
Sister like his own, and also the kindred of his Father. In feasting, let the
banquet be sufficient and delic^ but not sumpt^ous. Let him frame his talk to
the quality of the person^, and his endeavors to dignities, with a pleasant and
grave discourse. If he be a Father let him be affable, if a husband, amiable.
^e exercised himself in sport, neither to be thereby engaged or wearied and when
he had leisure, Millaine, leaving the two parts of the Empire, and one sound
and pe^ceable commonwealth, to (...) two ^^^nes, Arcadius and Honorius, whose
body the same year was conu^yed to Constan^ople, and there buried.

Areadius.
AFter the death of Theodosius, Arcadius ruled at Constantinople, and Honorius
at Rome, dividing the Empire betwixt them: for while their father lived he made
the his co-paiteners in the Empire, and because at the time of his death, they
were not of age to sway so great a state; by his Testament he committed the
tuition of Arcadius, to Rufinus, and of Honorius to Stilico, and made Gildo
governor of Affrique. Rufinus first of all breaking the trust to him committed,
which in all antiquity remained inviolable, sent to Alaric^s King of Goths to
attempt War against Arcadius, thinking by this means to procure to himself
the Empire of the Fast, and for this cause he gave him many Caianus following
the plot of Rufinus, by the aid of the Goths, raised c^uil war, and being
overcome in a battle by sea he fled away, and in that flight lost his head;
which being set upon a pole, was brought to Constantinople. When Arcadius had
ruled thirteen years, he departed this mortal life, leaving behind him his
son Theodosius, whom in his life time he had made Caesar. This was a prince
of a softly wit, having no resemblance of his f^thers or his Graund-fathers
virtue; wholly addicting himself to please his Wife Eudoxia, for whose sake
among other evil things, he bainshed Chrisostem the Constantinople a man very
famous for his learning and holiness.

Honorius.
HOnorius was not so happy in his rule as his father. Theodosius was made
Emperor at Rome the very same year that Arcadius was crowned at
Constantinople. Gildo being the governor of Affricke, killed his brother
Mascerelis sons, who fled into Italy to Honorius from whom he had five
thousand Soldiers, by whose aid he overthrew Gildo, and took him in his
flight, commanding his Soldiers to pull out his throat, or as some, say, to
strangle Honorius sent unto Stilico, his pernicious tutor, his successor and
murderer, because he had called the Vandals secretly into Gallia, and would
have transferred the Empire to his son Eucherius, after he had fought
unhappily with the Goths at Rauenna, was slain with his son Eucherius at
Rome in the Market of Pax. He overthrew Iouius Maximus, and Sebaslianus,
rusfling for the succession in Gallia, by Heraclius the governor of the Army;
and lastly he removed Constantinus which succeeded Gratian the Tyrant, in the
usurpation of Britannia, at the city Arelatum, by the labor and service of the
Ea^l^ Constantius, to whom for his often approved setuice and fidelity, he gave
in Marriage his sister rlacidia, once married to Atarphus the King of Goths,
which Pl^cidia was the mother of Valentinianus the younger, who succeeded
Theodosius Arcadius in the Empire. He died at Rome, having reigned thirty two
years In his time was the Iewishe Talmud compiled by two Rabbines, and the
French passed over the Rhine, and obtained a great part of Gillia, and the
Jews fought with the Christians at Alexandria. by the whole and generail
consent of all the most greatest Princes, created Emperor, after Zeno, and
advanced of a mean and low estate. He gave the soldior^ a benevolence of money,
gave audience to the Jewish Am. and with favor, receiving their gifts. He
bestowed upon Clodoueus king of Frenchmen, the titles of Senator and Consul,
because he had overcome the Goths in Gallia, and taken the Town Burdegala. He
made a wall from the sea to Se(...), to stop the incursions of the Moesians,
Bulgartans and Seithians, and repressed by s^arpe punishment diverse tyrants
throughout the world. A souldior set up the head of Atheuodorus upon an iron
pointed dart, before the gates of Tharsus, which there dried away. Longinus was
torn in pieces Vitalianus that moved sedition in the East, was appeased with
money: the Hunnes made some spoils, and the Goths overcame Mace^onia, Epirus
and Thessalia, to whom Anastasius sent money to ransom the prisoners they
haddetaken, but when it answered not their expectation, the cruel Barbarians
slew the prisoners openly. This Anastasius might have been remembered amongst
good Princes, because he so often bought peace, had he not favored Eutiches
heresy, by the persuasion of his wife Ariadue, for which cause he got great
hatred. In the eighty and second year of his life, and the twenty seventh of
his Empire, he peri^hed by a flash of lightning, the divine power by this
means, taking revenge upon the Prince, who had so often violated that Majesty,
although Ma^cellinus assirme, he died of another sudden

Inslinius thrax.
IVstinius the Thracian, diseended basely by Father and Mother, being first a
swine-hearde, then a Neat-hearde, and last of all a servant to a Woodmonger.
He became a souldior being but sixteen year old, and growing active and
prompt, therein to offend the enemy, was taken in the Army, from whence arrising
through all offices, to the government of the Pretory, he was made
Consail-After the death of Anastasius, a certain rich Euunuche came unto him
who was a servant to the sormer Emp. bringing him a great Theccritianus might
be made Emp. Iasinius biting at this bait, and knowing how to help himself
with that money, bo^ght the Empire for himself, and then put Amantianus and
Theocritianus to death for conspiring against him, and in the ninth year of
his reign, he adopted his sisters son Iustinianus in the Calends of April, and
made him co-partner in the Empire, and then dyed in the fourth month after
that. He raigne^ nine years and two months, being of a good and so and
religion, for he b^^ished all the Ar^iaus, received Germans very courteously
sent unto him from H^mis^la Bishop of Rome, for restoring right believing
christians to those plac^s from which Anastasius had removed them. He ordained
the counsel (...) should be inuiolably observed: and he restored to his great
(...) and carynth ouerthrown by Earthquakes.

Iustiniuses.
(...) was the adopted son of Iustinius began his reign. In the four and
(...) year of his reign, wherein he continued forty one years and wonderfully
enlarged the ancient glory of the Roman Empire. Surely he had bin a Noble
Prince but that he was guilty of Avarice and the Eutich^an heresy, and also
for putting out of the eyes of Bellisarius, a slender suspicion and without al
cause, by whose service he had accomplished great matters and so driving him
away he was constrained to beg his living of passengers. In his time the use of
silk came from the Parthians among the Graecians, and now of late is left
again. Iustinianus being sick, made his daugh^ers son Justinius Caesar, and
not long after his sickness growing upon him, and falling destracted, he
departed his natural life when (as Eutropius says) he had made animpions
edict against verity. This Iustinianus commanded that the Temple of Sophia
should be built at Constantinople, and in his time, there was so great a famine
in Italy, that the people were forced to eat man's flesh. Siluerius the Bishop
of Rome, by the fraud of Theodora Ivstinianus wife, was convicted by false
witness, and by Bellisarius sent into exile, wherein he dyed.

Justinius Junior.
IVstinivs the Nephew of Iustinianus by his daghter, and an earnest follower of
Iustinius, was for that cause always nourished in court. He was of an easy
disposition, and given to deserve the good opinion of men, by hie own
liberality, by Iustinianvs he was proclaimed Emperor. He made a leagu with
Persians, remitting the annual tribute which was paid to them by the
Romans. The Lumbards a people of Germany, by the persuasion of Narses, whom
the Emperor had unjustly prescribed broke into Italy, which from Albuinvs unto
Desiderivs by the space of three hundred and four years they held
distinguished into several regiments. For Sophia wrote unto Narses, who was an
Euunuch that he should reture to spin women's work. To whom Narses returned
to this answer, that he would spin such a thread, as she should never be able to
break. Iustinivs fell from his liberality to avarice, and also from true
christianity to the heresy of Pelagivs, sending Longivs into the place of
Narses (whom he had set at liberty) and instituted the Exarchatship

This was ordained after christ five hundred threescore and eleven years, and
in the four thousand five hundred and thirty fourth year of the world. By this
Iustinyus, that he should be the Viceroy of the Empire in Italy, and should
have power to confirm the election of Popes, it endured one hundred threescore
and four years. This Iustinius dyed through a sickness in his feet, in the
eleventh year of his reign. In his time the Armenians received the christian
faith, and Monothelites spread their heresy, against whom he assembled a
hundred and fifty Bishops at Consiantinople in counsel to condemn them. In
which sinode it was permitted to the Greek priests to retain

Tiberius.
TYberius the second unlike to Iustinius yet adopted by him, gave to the poor
the tribute which Iustinius had couetously enchroched and delivered to him by
Sophia, and all the treasures of that famous captain which were long hidden in
a lake of Water, and discovered unto him. In the East he often time constrained
the Persians to keep within their borders, and received Mesopotamia, sending
back the Persian captains honorably clothed into their own country, when
the Lumbards breaking their league had along time besiedged Rome, and pressing
to the Walls to take it, they were repelled by strange and unwonted shewers of
rain, and there followed after those shewers as great a drought, whereby all
manner of victual grew exceeding scarce. If the affairs of Tiberius had as
well succeeded in the West, as they did in the East, his happiness had bin of
singular note. He adopted his son in law Mauritius and committed to him the
present government of the constantinople, who crowned him, and of the whole
Senate, and so reigned seven years, living in all good opinion of piety and
liberality.

Mauritius.
MAuritius the successor of his Father in law Tyberius, was a cappadocian, and
governed twenty years. At the beginning he was happy in the Empire over
coming the Armenians and Persians by his lieutenants, driving the Scithians
out of Moesia, and repressing the Lumbards in Italy. After Theodosius and his
Father in law Germanus, he drove the conquered Hunnes ont of Pannonia, into the
Wilderness, and called the Patriarch of Constantinople, the universal governor
of the church. This Prince for his diligence was advanced from a notary by
Iustinius, and made the ruler of the Watchmen, afterward the son in law of
Tiberius, lastly Emperor, and being honored with many victories, did happily
for a season sway the whole e^^ate. Afterward giving himself to an insatiable
desire of money, and grew offensive to the soldiers of Sarmatia, who lived in a
barren and cold place, yet received not from him their stipends. He was warned
in a dream to beware of Phocas, who was a Centurion, on the Scithian coasts, He
was an example of patience and fortitude, for seeing his wife and sons slain
before his face, he cried out saying. Thou art just O Lord, and thy
judgments are right, bearing it without show of impatience. In his time began
the name of Turks, to be first heard of in Asia, and the Goths and Angles
were turned to the christian says.

Phocas.
PHocas captain of the band, on the borders of Scithia, was chosen Emp. by the
damned Army which he led, who quickly forgot M^uricius, and Persian manner
disposed all things for they gave audience to Ambassadors, sat in judgment
and bestowed Offices, then which things is more wretched and blameable in a
chiese ruler.

They were his greatest favorites, who made the greatest hauock of the common
people, and he paid the Soldiers very sparingly. H^ declared the Roman
Bishop, by the solicitation of Bonifacius the thi^d, vni^ersall and ch^efe
Bishop of the world. And by his sloth and negligence, the Empire of Rome lost
all strength, consisting only in a bare title, and it was brought to pass
that either the name of an Empire must be laid aside, or else Ph^cas must d^e.
There was one Priscus Patricius the son in law of Heracleonas, a great (...)
of the Emperor, his son Heraclius was P^opraetor and governed A^^rique, these
three conspired to kill the Emperor, Heracleon who was capta^^ o^ the Wa^re,
raised an army and brought it into Thracia, under color to resist the
Barbarians, and to defend that region. Heraclius came out of Affrique into
Constantinople,

Heraclius.
HEraclius Propraetor of Affrique, and son of Heracleonas, after the death of
Phocas was made Emp. by the Soldiers, and appl^use of the people, and in one
and the same day was crowned by Sergius the (...), and married to Fabia
Eudoxia, celebrating together his (...) and ma^riage feast. He restored
Jerusalem, Siria, and Egypt, to the Empire, ^^^rcame the Persians, their K.
Cosdroa being killed by his own son, became he preferred his Heraclius
committe^ the affairs of the commonwealth to other, g^uing himself to ease
and idleness. He constrained the Jews to be baptized against their wills, and
gave himself to the study of Mathematiques, to wisards and impostures of the
Devils, and so fell into the heresy of the Monothelites: he married with
Martina his brothers Daughter, and made a law that every man might do the
like, he taigned thirty and one years, and some say he died of a dropsy.
Other affirm he perished by a new and strange disease, namely that his cods
were turned upward, and his vi^^l member always standing, that so often as he
made water except a board was

Heraclius Junior.
HEraclius the younger called also Constantinus, the son of Heraclius, the
Emp. succeeded his father, and was a true obseruer of piety, but yet by the
treason his stepmother Martina, was killed by poison in the fourth month of
his government.

Heracleona.
HEracleonas son of Heraclius and Martina, after the death of Constantine,
ruled in the East with his mother two years, when the Se^a^ and people of
Constantinople understood how they had poisoned Constantinus, they took both
the mother and son, cutting off his nose, that so he might rec^iue no
comiseration by his beauty and grace, and her tongue, that so she might no more
by her cunning speech move the peoples minds, and so with the Patriarch that
was privy to the treason, they were all sent into ba^^shment.

Constans.
AFter that Heraclionas and Martina were driven away, Constans otherwise called
Constantinus the third, was declared Emperor by the Senate, without the
Soldiers, which seldom happened. He walked in the steps of his
Graund-father, following the herisie of the Monothelites. He caused Olimptas
the Exarchat to apprehend Martin the first of that name, Pope of Rome, and to
send him into exile wherein he died, by cause in a sinode, he deposed Paul
the patriach, and allowed the condemnation of Cirus, Alexandrius, Sergius, and
Pyrrhus. He was overcome by the Saracens and ran away. Afterward Italy, and
to deliver it from the Tyranny of the Lumbards, leaving his son Constantinus
at home, he came by sea to Tarentum, took Luce^a and razed it, and besieged
Beneuentum. Leaving that siege he went toward Capua, where by the way he met
with Mitiola the Duke of that city in A^mes, of whom he was put to slight, and
so went toward Rome. Vitalianus the Pope met him without the city, and
whatsoever he found there in the ancient Monuments, precious or rare, he made
spoil thereof, and took it away with him, not sparing the brazen tyles of
Pantheon. After twelve days he went into Sicily, where he was slain by his
own followers, because of his covetous exaction of trybute, having lived in
the Empire twenty and seven years.

Constantinus.
COnstantinus the fourth was eldest son of Constans, and took upon him the
Empire at Byzantium which he had governed in the absence of his father. So
soon as news was brought unto him of his fathers death; he went into Sicily
and slew Mezentius the Tyrant, as the author thereof. Seven years together he
warred with the Saracens by Sea and land, and in one battle slew of them
thirty thousand, and so weakened their forces thereby, he constrained them to
seek peace of the Emperor, which they obtained upon condition that they should
pay to him yearly a certain tribute. The Bulgarians invaded Thr^cia and
Pannonia, and by the permission of the Emperor, they inhabited constontinople
against the Monothelites, by the persuasion of Pope Agothon, where met together
the Greek and latin Church. He cut off the noses of his brethren, being
children, that they should never affect the Empire, and as Platina says. In
his reign was the King of Persia with his wife Caesarca and many thousand of
their followers, Baptized at constantinople. Lastly he was overcome with
sickness (or as other say) he was thrown out of the palace headlong, and so
died in the eightee^e year of his reign. He was called Pogonatus because he
had no ^^ard when he went in to Sicilia, and returned again bearded, for
Pogona in Greek is a beard. In his time there was a great famine in Gallia,
for succor clodoueus took out the riches and ornaments out of the church of
S. Dennis, which his father had therein bestowed.

Iustinius 4.
Iustinius the fourth was the son of constantine, and his heir. The last of
the line of Heraclius and was made Emperor, when he was sixteen years old, he
was a wild and wicked young man, erring from the true faith, abolishing the
authority of his fathers Synod by another, the which Sergius Bishop of Rome
would not allow, for which cause he sent Zacharius Portospatarius to apprehend
him, who being resisted by the Bishop, came again without doing any thing, and
was punished for his other faults. He was by his Dukes Leontius, Tyberius and
Absimarus, and Callinicus the Patriarch, deprived of his nose and ears in the
tenth year of his regiment, and so dispossessed of the Empire, banished into
Chersonesus. About this time Childeric the second, King of France with his wife
great with child was slain by Rodillus, whom a little before he had caused to
be whipped at a post.

Leontius.
LEontius or Leo the third being made Emperor, ruled most ungodly eleue^ years,
and at the length had his nose cut off by Absimarus, and was put into prison.
At this time the Arisians were overcome with their Captain Rabodus, and were
made Christians by Pipinus the general of the horsemen of Gallia.

Tiberius 3.
TYberius whose surname was Absimarus declared Emperor by the Soudiers. He
banished Philippi^us into Pontus, whose aid advanced him to be Emperor,
because he suspected him, for that an Eagle shadowed his head sleeping. He
swayed the Empire seven years. After which time Justinius the fourth banished
(as aforesaid in his history) by the help of Bulgarians, was recalled from
exile and came to Constantinople with a great army, and reigned with his son
six years more: commanding Leontius and Tiberius to be slain in his own
sight, pulling out the eyes of the patriarch Callinicus, and banishing him to
Rome. After this he sent for Constantinus Bishop of Rome, and received him with
great reverence, Kissing his feet, and confessing his former errors craving
pardon for them, and approved the Roman Religion. Lastly waging War with
Phillippicus (that was before banished to Pontus) Tiberius overcome and slain.
This year the Saracens invaded Affrike, and a great part of Spain which they
held seven hundred years.

Philippicus.
PHilippicus Bardesanes after the slaughter of, Iustinius and his son took
the Empire and caused all Images and relics to be thrown out of the temples,
weaking the decrees of the 6. Synod with another, to gratific a certain Monk
which had prophesied that he should be Emperor, and desired this action for
his reward. He was cloquent, but not wise, for he dissipated the wealth of the
Empire, suffering the Bulgarians to depopulate Thracia. Constantinus the Bishop
of Rome, and forbid to communicate. He was deprived of his eyes by Anthemius his
chief captain, and so brought again into good order, having reigned one
year and six months.

Anastasius 2.
ANastasius the second sur-named Anthemius, was made Emperor by the Soldiers,
and approved all the decrees of the Bishop of Rome for holy and just, and did
many things according to true piety, at length by the persuasion of the Bishop
of Rome, he sent a great sleete against the Arabians to Alexandria, but his
Soldiers hating him, returned home again and made The^dosius a man so base
condition Emperor, who took Constantinople and deposed Anastasius, shutting
him up in a Monastery, when he had reigned one year and three months.

Theodosius 3.
THeodosius or Adramitian was constrained by the Soldiers to be Emperor,
Philippicus had dejected. He ouerthre^ Artemius in a great battle near Nice,
and gave over the Empire to ^co who was made Emperor by the Soldiers, and came
against him to fight, but Theodosius was weary of civil War betwixt him and
Leo, and so entered into a Monastery after he had reigned two years, where he
lead a long and happy life.

Leo 3.
LEo the third was called Iagnus or conon, a man of a base kindred and made
Dice where he was borne, he reigned together with his son Theodosius,
Iconomachus, because he destroyed all the Images of the Saints out of the
Temples, by the authority of a counsel at Bizantium, that he might gratify
twoe Jews, that foretold him he should be Emperor, and deposed Germanus the
patriarch of Constantinople for maintaining them, and likewise caused Stephen
the Bishop of Rome which disallowed that action, to be apprehended and put to
death. In his reign was Constantinople besieged eight years by the Sara^^ns,
who were constrained through great pestylence and famine to depart, their
ships being all burned, by an artificial fire, which was made to burn
under the waters. After this he recovered the desection of Sicilia, thorough
the labor of Sergius. He reigned twenty-fiue Bythinia and Thracia were
grieuosly shaken with an earthquake, and the walls of Constantinople, were
almost all overthrown thereby. Gregory the third of that name, Bishop of Rome,
did forbid Leo to communicate, by cause he would restore the images, and not
regarding him, sent for Carolus Martellus a King of France, against the
Lumbards into Italy, who made peace with the Romans without the Emperor. The
Saracens possessed Aquitane, but they were driven out by the French, and above
three hundred three^core and thirteen thousand, slain.

Constantinus 5.
COns^^ntine the son of Leo Isaurus ruled the East, and was zealous as his
father against images, yet was he charged with magic, and that he was
neither Christian, Greek, or Jew, but given over to all impiety. It is likely
the resisting of the Roman Synod in the days of Gregory the third, was the
cause why the bondslaues of that see have defamed him so much in their
Cronicles. He put to death two Patriarchs of constantinople. He waged war
against the Bulgarians, who destroyed Images in their churches.

He also put out the eyes of Artabasdus who was made Emperor, by them that
favored the Pope and Images, and likewise of al his kindred. He held a counsel
at Constantinople of 330. Bishops, whereby all the people were compelled to
swear that they would never offer any more to any image of God and Saints, and
condemned all them to death that worshipped or prayed to the Virgin Mary,
orkept the relics of Saints in their houses; and commanded Moonkes and
Nuns to marry, and not to vow a single life: for which cause he was
reported to have made water in the Font at the (...) of his Pipin King of
France, who at his request, made War upon the Lumbards, and constrained
Arstulphus to yield to the Popes requests.

And the pope to gratify Pipinus the K. translated the Empire of constantino^e
into France, and Pipin gave the Exarchat of Lumbardy to the Pope, and although
he were sent unto by the Emperor, with many rich gifts to redeliue^ again
the Exarchatship, who answered that his coming into Italy was to guard the
church, and to give Rauenna and the Exarchatship to the Pope. At this time
S^it^ia coming from the Hiperborian Mountains invaded the Armenians, Colc^^,
and Alain. The Emperor reigned 35. years, and died as some say of a leprosy.
In his time began the Popes to be greatly honored, by cause that Pipin lead the
Popes horse by the bridle, the Pope sitting on his back till he came into the
Emperors Palace.

Leo 4.
LEo followed his fathers steps in detestation of images, and sat in his seat,
having a wife an Athenian, called Irene, of an exceeding good spirit and
beauty. He made one voyage into Siria where he receined a repulse in a Sophia a
crown full of those stones, he set it on his head, by the coldness where of
he fell into a fever and died. In the fifth year of his reign.

Constantinus 6.
COnstantine the sixth son of Leo, ruled with his mother ten years, at which
time there was a sinod at Nice, wherein the matter of images was agreed betwixt
them and the Pope at the instance of Irene, who had a great Virgin Mary. But in
the tenth year of his government he deprived his mother of all rule, exhorting
her to live privately, and not in public administration of justice, casting
down again all the images the had erected, which was consurmed by a counsel
of Eliberus in Spain. Irene suborned certain captains to kill her son, who
took him put out his eyes, and put him in to prison, wherein he died, she then
reigning three years till she was expelled by Nicephorus, in which time she
caused her husbands fathers body that had destroyed Images, to be taken out of
the grave and publicly burned to ashes, for that cause after his death twenty
years. In her time was also Charlema^gne crowned Emperor at Rome, and in the
reign of Constantine her son, and hirs together, there was found a Beazen
plate laid upon a dead man in the earth, with this in^^^ption: Christ shall be
borne of a Virgin in him do I believe, and in the time of Constant me and
Irene, O sun thou shall see me again. At last she was b^^ished by Nicephorus
to Leshos, and there died. Constantine ruled fifteen years; ten with his
mother, and five alone.

Nicephorus.
NIcephorus reigned in the East, after the banishment of Irene in Lesbus, and
rati^ied that peace with charles the great, which Irene had made: which was,
that he should have Sicili^, calabria, and Apulia, and charles all the residu^
of Italy. He also agreed with the Venetians, that they should neither
besub^^ct. to the East or West Empire, but remain friends to both, and help
bo^hina' Wars. He turned back again, Admiratu^ King of Saracens, which (...)
gat^^st him with three Cahonsand men, b^ y^lding him a yearly ^^ybute. He
ho^pe the Venetians against the Gauls, to y^^ng fleet to ^leete by Sea.
Herazed Apo^loma which he took by a tea force, partly by violence, and partly
by ^raud, and made his son Stauracius co-partner of the Empire, and
Bulgarians in the superiou^ Mas^a, in the nynth year of his government.

Stauratius.
STauracius the Son of Nicephorus being wounded in the battle of the
Bulgarians, as soon as his father was dead he came to constantinople, and was
crowned Emperor. He received many hurts by the Saracens, who brake the peace
made with his father. At last he was th^ust out of the Empire, by M^chaell
curoplate, who married his Sister Pr^cop^a, and shut up in a monastery,
ra^gined but a few days after his father.

Mychaell.
MYchaell curoplate sur-named Ran^^hes. The son in law of Nicephorus
^^^^saide, and married the sister of Stauratius. In the beginning of his Empire
made a league with charlemaigne that he should hold the west, and Mychaell the
least. ^he Venetians fell to the Gracians, upon that condition to en^oy all the
(...) ledges granted unto them by charlematne. When for a little (...) space
(...) (...) war^ed. against the Bulgarians, and over came them, at last being
ou^ (...) own an^ put to flight at Hadrionopolis, he returned home with the
losle of his Army, and presently he was taken by the treason of Leo the
Arme^^an, Protes, and there ^^ued in a monastery, after he had reigned two
years. And thus Empires by the providence of God, thorogh sundry altera^^ons,
pass from one to another, with their wealth, glory, pleasure, commoci^es, and
discommodities.

Leo. 5.
LEo the Armenian, son of Pardus Patricius, who was governor of the ^asterne
Army, was chosen Emp. by the people, because he was thought worthy to sway the
world. At that time, he slew crumnus king of the bulgarians, who had obtained
^^adrioncpolis, and turned his power against Constantinople, having made a
breach in the wall: which thing did for a season give peace to the eastern
Empire.

When he had gotten this victory, he turned his power to overthrow and kill
many at home, and yet abolished all the images of the Saints; and being warned
by the presages and dreams of his Mother, co^lde not avoid the fate appointed
for him, for in the night time being at prayers he was slain by Mich^ell
Thraulus (whom he had detained prisoner) through many wounds, after he had
reigned seven years and five months. His wife was constramed into a Monastery,
and his sons banished. He had many virtues, and waged the affairs of the
world very excellently, had he not been justly accused of much cruelty.

Michael Thraulus.
MYchaell Thraulus or Balbus, because of his stammering tongue, was a Phrigian,
borne of a mean and base kindred. He was infected with Leo, by whom he had
been advanced to great honors, sending his sons into banishment, invaded the
Empire. He o^ ercame Thomas captain of the so^ldiors in the East, and slew him
with all his traitorous compa^^ons. He overcame the Sar^cens, in^^ding creta.
He was not loved of Monks or clarks, and dyed in the ninth year of his
reign, through the loose^es of his belly, and so was the Oracle fulfilled,
that when a slammering and covetous prince ^aigned, then should the Empire
fail.

Carolus.
CHarles the son of Pipin king of Fraunc^, the first of that name, and was
called most Christian, by Leo the Bishop of Rome, of whom he was crowned
Emperor, for his great zeal toward christians. At the entrance into his
reign, being delivered from the Wars of Aquitane, he went into Italy and
made the Lumbards subjects unto France, taking their k^ Desiderius. He many
times overcame the (...) Saxons, in thirty years Wars, and did instruct them
in christianity. He drove the (...) out of France, and consined the
Sclauonians, Danes, and Boemians, within their own territories.

He went the second time into Italy, repressing them of Beneuention, which
resisted the Pope^ile restored Leo the Pope, who was expelled by the Romans,
Hunnes. Whereupon after all his Noble acts, he was called Charles the great.
And after all this, he returned into France, making his son Jews co-partner
of his Emp^re, and so d^ed at Aguisgrue being seventy one year old, and having
bin Emperor th^rteene years. He founded three Universities, one at Ban^^^a,
another (...) (...), and the third, at Papia; storing them with learned men
from al places. He erected many monasteries in Germany, for the education of
christian youngemen instead of scho^^s, he celebrated sieve counsels or Synods
for the state E^^lesiasticall, and i^ superstitiously worshipped of many for a
Saint.

Jews Pius.
Jews the son of Charles the great, because of his great piety, was called
Pius the godly, hearing of his fathers death, went to Aquisgra^e, where he gave
audience to the Ambassadors, of the Greek Emp. Leo, and renewed the league,
ending the Dacian war, as he wished. He cut of^ the the head of Bernardus k. of
Italy, and Nephew of Pipin, because he aspired to Britans and Bulgarians, as
troublers of common peace. He received Stephen the 4. coming from Rome into
France with great pomp, and was anointed and crowned by him at Orleance. He
referred the Ambasof Michaell the Grecian Emp. about Images to the Pope. He
had four sons, Loth^^ius, whom he made k. of Italy, in Bernardus place, Pip^n
of Aquitane, Jews of Bauaria, and Carclus Caliuis, by his wise Judith, whom he
made kings of France and Burgu^^y, and of whom afterward the religious ^^^her
received many hurtes, for he was taken by them, and imprisoned him most
v^^aturally at Soyssomae Medardus. And after a year he was again restered
(...) liberty, Meth, in the 17. year of his reign, being threescore and four
year old. He gave Paschall Bishop of Rome power to elect Bishops and decreed
that clearg^men should wear no precious stones, o^ other sol^ and chargeable
a^^ires.

Theophilus.
AFter the death of Michaell Balbus, his son Theophilus was made Emp. at (...)
He was mild and temperate to his subjects, but yet punishing them with death
that worshipped images. He sought twice with the (...), who depopulated Asia,
and was by them twice overcome and Amorium, from whence he arose and died,
after he had reigned xii. years of a bloody slix. He was a good and gentle
Prince, and left behind, a son called Michaell.

Michaell.
MYchaell was made Em^being a child, and was in the tuition of his mother
Th^odora, and other the principal men of the (...) who governed the Emp^^ for
him. As Soon as he was of age, and his mother had yielded to him, he sent his
Am. to Rome to Nicelas, the^. Pope of that name, to salure the (...) of the
Apostles, with a golden cup of wonderful weight. He was more like his
grandfather, then his father, and so distressed the state again Bardas, who was
^^^in at B^rriers, whereunto he was addicted like a mad man. He made Basilius
the Macedonian co-partner of the Empi^ by whom he was shortly after slain, in
the xii. ye^re of his reign, whereof he reigned three with his Mother, And
while his mother Theodora had the government, the Bulgarians a peoof Scithia,
did commonly profess christian religion.

Lotharius.
LOtharius the eldest son of Jews the godly, after a skirmish among the
brethren, took upon him the Empire, Charles had France, and Jews had Germany,
which concord of brethren lasted not long, for on Easter day, they violently
met in Arms at Fountague, a village Altissedorum, wherein their was so great a
slaughter, that there was little difference betwixt the conquered or the
conqueror, but yet the side of Charles had the better. Afterward by the help
of Sergius the second of that name, Bishop of Rome, Lotharius should enjoy
with the title of Emperor all Italy and Gallia Narbonensis, Jews should have
Germany, and Charles France to the Ocean, and there was added to the ^m.
Austrasia, which is now called Lotharingta, after his name. He left 3. sons
Jews, Charles, and Lotharius. There were many Cometes seen before the fight of
the brethren. Afterward in the fifteenth year of his reign, he departed this
life, leaving the Empire to Jews his son, whom 5. years before he had made
co-partner of his Empire, etc. and being induced with remorse of adverse
desseigues (as some men suppose) he relinquished the Empire, and led a
monastical life in the monastery of Pruma.

Lodowich 2.
Jews the second the son of Lotharius, was crowned king of Italy at Rome, by
Sergius the Pope, in the life of his father. At Beneuent he defeated the and
overcame Saracens, who in huge troops had descended into Italy. Leaving Italy,
at his return into Germany, after the death of his father, he lived at
continual discord with Charles king of France for the kingdom of Austrasia,
which belonged to Lotharius, and Charles did absolutely challenge. But the
difference compounded, he presently after dyed at Millain, when he had reigned
xxi. years, leaving behind him two sons, Charles and Jews; this king of
France, that of Germany. Before all men living, he most esteemed Nicolas the
first, gracing his inauguration with his presence, and in all

Basilius.
AT that time when Basil the Macedonian, who slew Michaell, governed the East,
then was Jews the 2. Lord of the West. At his coming to the Empire, he
revoked the excessive dona^^^es of Michaell, and consiscated the half of them
that were already received into his treasury. By the consent of Adrian the
second he assembled a general counsel at Constantinople, about the
receiving of the Bulgarians into the christian congregation, where after long
contention; at last, it was concluded, that they Roman papacy. By his
Lieutenant Nicephorus Phocas, he quited Ancona and Dalmatta of the Saracens. He
was very thrifty and lived upon his country Domanies. He died when he had raig.
20 years, leaving the Empire to his two sons Leo and Alexander.

Leo.
Leo the son of Basilius, aided the Bulgarians against the Turks, but
received the overthrow, under the conduct of Simon his Lieutenant. He likewise
gave battle to the Saracens, inuading Leuos. He was an excellent Philosopher,
well seen in all sciences, but especially so profoundly studied in Astrology,
that thereby he foretold that his son Constantine should succeed him in the
Empire. At his death he bequeathed the Empire to his Brother Alexander,
commending unto his protection the tuition of his son Const^ntine, whom a
little before, he had caused to be crowned by the hands of Euthimus the
Patriarch. He had two wives Theophania, to whose name he dedicated a chapple,
and Zoc. He likewise builded the church of S. Lazarus, and there he translated
his body. To make experiment of the faithfulness and industry Dalmatia and
Selauonia received the christian religion.

Charles the Bald.
CHarles the Bald the youngest son of Lodowick Piu^, k. of France, a prince
exceeding curtcous, but above measure ambitious, before his coming to the
Empire, contended along time at uncertain hazard of war with the Britans and
Normans. Being sent for to Rome by Leo the fourth, he expulsed the Saracens out
of the city. A few years after, hearing of the departure of his Nephew Jews,
he descended into Italy, and there was crowned Emperor by John the 8. Upon his
return toward France, he deputed his wives brother Governor of Italy, but
returning thither again, he found his Nephews the sons of the Emp. Jews in
arms against him, with whom he joined battle at Verona. But being ouerthrown,
he retired to Mantua, where Zedech^as a lew, his Physician, he died, when he had
reigned six years.

Jews the Bald.
Jews the bald, and third of this name, King of France, (whom some men will
have to be the son of Charles the balde, others of Jews the King of
Germany, but most likelye, the son of Caluis) was anointed and crowned
Emperor in a Counsel assembled at Tricasses by John the eight, then living in
France, and lastly escaped out of the safest hold or Romans, much against
the Wills of the Italian Princes. Being of an unhealthy body, he scarce
governed the Empire two years. He died at compendium, the same day christ
suffered, leaving behind two children, Charles the simple, king of France, and
Charlemain the father of Arnulphus. About this time the Normans, who vexed the
French with continual inrods, were defeated by Richard Duke of Burgundy, and
Robert Earl of Parris, who afterward became king of France.

Charles the gross.
CHarles for his burly body, sur-named Crassus, the son of Jews, the eleventh
k. of the Germains, was crowned of John the 8. Bishop of Rome. An accident
seldom happening to any one Bishop, as to be said, with in four years, to
have crowned 4. Emperors. In many battles he overthrew Pannonij, and christened
Robert Duke of Normandy, to whom afterward he gave his daughter in marriage,
with a parcel of France. But being neither profitable for the state, nor well
in wits, he was deposed, and Arnulph Charlemaines son was crowned in his steed.
So after ten years of his reign he died, and was buried at Angea. His
devotion and love to learning and learned men, whom he would incorage to write,
was very commendable in him.

Arnulph.
ARnulphus the son of Charlemaine, the Nephew of Charles the gross, who had
appointed him a protector, was chosen Emper. by the Nobilitye, and pacified
with an exceeding great slaughter, the rebelious Normans. Presently being given
to rapine and covetousness, ransaked churches, and after he had reigned xii.
year, by the just judgment of God, he died of the lousy disease. Under him
the majesty of the Roman Empire, devolued to

Lodouicus.
Jews the son of Arnulph, as heir to his father, was elected Emp. by the
French and Germans, but never crowned. He reigned six years. After the death of
his father, he defeated the Hungarians, inuading Germany with a great
slaughter, at the river Licus. A while after, himself was overcome by the said
Hungars.

Berengarius.
BErengarius prince of Forum-iulij, a Lumbard, of an excelent good wit, and
mighty in Arms, partly to withstand the continual in cursions of the
Barbarians, into Italy, and partly, not to loose their ancient title, and
majesty of an Empire, was by the Italians nominated successor of Arnulph. He
overthrew Lodowick son of Arnulph at Verona, and taking him captive, put out
his eyes. By bribes he cleared Italy of the Pannonij. He slew Guido prince of
Spoletum. He governed the state 4. years.

Berengarius 2.
Berengarius the second, succeeding the first, after three or four years
usurpation, was deposed by Rodulph king of Burgundy.

Alexander.
ALexander being xx. years old, neither like his Father Basil, nor his brother
Leo, succeeded in the Empire of Constantinople. A man given

Constantine.
COnstantine the son of Leo, Basilius at seven years of age, after the death
of Alexander his Uncle, was left by his Father to succeed in the Empire, under
the protection of his Mother, and certain of the Nobility, by whose valor
Andronicus D^^as intending by tyranny to vsurp upon the state, was suppressed.
His step-father Romanus being banished, and his son Christopher, with the
whole kindred of the Lee^peni, being extinguished, he governed the Empire one
and fifty years, to good commendation. He took Beneuent from the Lumbards, and
suppressed certain tyran^s. He enforced the princes of the Turks, to become
christians. Being a friend to learning and Romanus a book, wherein he
acquainted his son with the whole estate of the Empire, the leagues of
confederats, the strength of the enemies, their gouernementes and counsels;
which the Venetians to this day, keep in their library, as a Jewel of great
worth, because he entreats much of their affairs.

Conrade.
COnradus the Nephew of Lodowick, by a brother the son of Arnulph, the last of
the royal race of Charles the great, king of Germany, was created Caesar, but
not crowned of the Bishop. He overthrew the hungars, Berengarius usurping the
name of Emp-in Italy, had incoraged again to invade Germany. By the aid of
Otho Duke of Saxony, his son Henry was declared Emperor by Conrade, upon his
deathbed, in the seventh year of his reign.

Henry.
HEnry son to Otho Duke of Saxony, called Aucuparius, after the death of
Conrade, governed the Empire of the Germans, after it was translated from
Charles the great to the Saxons: he over came the Hungars, and subjected the
Sclauons: he made the Dalmatians tributaries, and governed the Bohemians by the
Laws of the empire: he took Brand-berry, and Vandals (who at that time had
received the christian religion) gave firm peace to the provinces of Germany:
he recovered Lotharing. Being near his death, he appointed his son Otho his
successor, when he had reigned eighteen years. In his time ambitious
sovereignty maintained strong factions, for the space almost of lx. years,
from the death of Arnulph to the first Otho.

Otho.
OTho the son of henry Aucups, a man of an excellent wit, and wild nature,
was chosen emperor by the agreement of the whole Nobility of Germany, and was
crowned at Aqui^^graue by the Bishop of Mogunc^^: Italy by Agapitans the Pope,
and most of the (...) Nobility, to whom the tyrranny of Berengarius the third,
and his son Albert were hateful, with fifty thousand soldiers, where he
disposessed Berengarius of the Empire, and Albert of his government in Italy,
yet conditionaly that by way of liberality, they should enjoy possessions in
Galia Cisalpina beyond Po. Departing from thence, he restored Jews King of
France to his pristinate estate, whom some of his Nobility had before
deposed, and cast into prison. He deposed Pope John accused of many crimes, and
in his steed placed Leo. He drove Beslaus from the kingdom of Bohemia for the
slaughter of his brothers. He plagued the Hungars which wasted Italy, in one
conflict whereof, three petty Kings of Hungary being taken by the Germans, were
hanged much against the mind of the Emperor. Berengarius and his son Albert
being overthrown in battle, the one fled into Constantinople, and the other
into Austria, and there ended their days in misery. And this was the end of
the Emperors, or the kings, or the tyrants (term them as ye will) which arose
in Rome, in Constantinople and Italy. Things thus dispatched, he came to Rome,
and there being saluted Emperor and Augustus by the Rome: he died after he had
reigned 36. years. he was the first of the Emperors that gave that form of
oath to the Pope, which is extant 63. distinction. Can. Tibi domin^ Iohanni.

Romanus.
ROmanus Lecapenus obscurely born; notwithstanding his mostreligious oath, that
he would not make claim to the Empire, neither for himself nor his son
Christopher, going about to betray his father in law Constantine, and to thrust
him into a cloister, as he waged an unfortunate Bulgars, and had now reigned
six and twenty years, and was taken by Stephen his son, and shut up in an
Island. A while after, both he and his sons being taken by Constantine
(intending the like against constantine, as they did against their father, fell
into the same pit, which they dug for another, the one was confined into
Proconesse, the other into Lesbus.

ROmanus the son of constantine, called the younger, the Nephew of the elder, a
man wholly given to riot and idleness, being created Emperor after the death of
his father, committed the government of the state to one Joseph Bringa. In
other affairs where he would apply his mind thereunto, wise and diligent
enough: he drove the Saracens out of creet, and the Nicephorus Phocas: he
sequestrod from his company his mother hellen: his sisters he banished the
court, taking from them their rich apparel, in grief whereof, they
afterward maintaind themselus by prostrating their bodies for lucre: himself
at last admidst his wantonness and idleness, was poisoned in the 13. year of his
reign.

Nicephorus Phocas.
NYcephorus Phocas having obtaind the Empire after the death of Romanus the
younger, rigged out a fleet against the Saracens that had conquered Sicily, and
led an army against the said people, wasting Asia. The war in Sicily under the
conduct of his lieutenantes prospered not, but Cilicia, and a great part of
Asia, he recovered fortunately, and by night surprised Antioch, expulsing the
Saracens. At last under the pretense of war, for grieuing the people with
subsides, and the church with tributes, for abasing the coin, and lessening
the weight, he became odious to al men, and was slain in his bed by John
Zimisees, Theophania his wife letting in the murderers. He reigned x. years, or
as Ignatius writes, six years and so many mon.

John Zimisees.
John (...) having slame Nicephorus Phocas, succeeded in the Empire, and ^^ue
all the ^^ndred or Nicephorus, and recalled al those that were in (...). He
^reated Dasilius and Constantine brothers, and the sons of the younger (...)
Caesar's, and his consorts in the Empire. He slew sph^^^^^^ king of the
Ro^^lani, who had almost conquered al Bulgaria, and his whole (...). The
Trophies of which victory, he dedicated in the church of (...), and writ upon
the image of our fauiour, To Jesus Christ the King of kings. He was poisoned in
the sixth year of his reign.

Otho 2.
OTho the second, the son of Otho the first, by Adelanda, after his good
Bauar, and converting his forces against Lotharius, king of France, which
challenged (...) he entered France, and cruelly spoiling the territories of
Laudue and (...), he sicred the subburbs of Parris, but in his return toward
Germany, he suffered a grie^ous loss by the Frenchmen, as he was to pass the
ry^er. Izo b^ ^oord, many of his people being swallowed by the waters, many
slain by the multitude o^ pursuing enemies. A while after, understanding that
the Saracens had re-infested Calabria, he speeded thither, and was overthrown
B^sentell, his Battalions being almost al utterly slain. Himself getting a
board a small shallop was taken by Pirates, and carried into Sicill, where
being known by the promise of a large and bountiful ransom, he obtained to
be conveyed to Rome: Afterward the Pirates were hanged by the Sicilians. At
Rome gathring together the relickes of his scattered forces, he assaulted the
Beneu^nts, for saking their colors, and at unawares took their city, fearing no
such calamity, sacked it, and burnt it: having thus ruinated Beneuent, he
returned to Rome, and there died, after his sole reign, and hi^ father^ death,
ten years, some men report, that he was poisoned by the Italians, for his
severe government.

Constantine.
COnstantine and Basilius brethren, the sons of Romanus the younger, governed
the state after John, for the space of (...). years, to the times of the
second Otho. Basilius first reigned alone L. years, and getting (...) (...) a
rebellious Duke into possession, put out his (...). The mutinous (...) he
overthrew in diverse great battles. And taking Sa^uell their leader, and fifteen
thousand prisoners, bereft them all of their eyes, leaving on ly one his sight,
to conduct Samuel: Samuel died for grief a while after. (...) having
enlarged the bounds of the Empire, departed this life at Lxxii. ye^res of age,
and the Lii. of his reign, leaving Constantine his brother,

Constantine.
COnstantine reigned three years, after the death of his brother, a man of al^
other mo^^ sloathfull, and committing the charge of the Empire ^ther men^ care:
he died at seventy years of age, leaving behind him three daughters, Eudochia,
Theodora, and Zoe, married to Romanus Argiropylus, who succeeded him. About
this time Henry Duke of Burgundy, leaving no issue behind him, bequeathed his
duchy to thek. of France by testament.

Romanus Argiropylus.
ROmanus Argiropylus the son in law of constantine, and his heir, altered the
form of many things to the letter, and was very liberal to al men. But after
his journey into Asia against the Saracens, which happened not according to his
hopes, he suddenly changed, and gave himself wholly to sloth and avarice. And
a while after, by the treason of Zoe, a most lascivious and barren woman, and
Michaell Paphlagon the adulterer, he was drowned in

Otho 3.
OTho the third, duke of Saxony, the son of Otho the second, being nominated
Emperor by the German Princes, was crowned Emperor by Gregory the fifth, his
kinsman, (sur-named Bruno) and whom he had preferred to the papacy. But the
Emperor returned into Saxony, Gregorye the. 5. was forced from the city by
John the Antipope. Which Otho hearing, in a rage, gathered his forces,
returning into Italy, and took Rome by force. Crescentius the Consul and
author of the sedition he took, put out his eyes, cut off his ears, and set
him on an Ass with his face toward the tail, to be John, and restored his
kinsman Gregory to his former dignity. It was this Gregory that made the Law,
which is held inviolable to this day, in this form. None of the Emperors
hereafter shall claim the Empire by in heritance. Let six Princes, whereof
three to be of the clergy, and three of the Layty be chosen: If these cannot
agree, Let the King of Bohemia be Vmpier. When he had reigned xix. year, he
died at Rome, not without suspicion of poison. He married Mary the daughter of
the king of Aragon, and as report went, an intemperat woman. For his quick wit,
and singular wisdom, he was called the wonder of the world. About this time
the city of Soysons by the treason of Retgnold escheted to the crown of
France.

Henry 2.
HEnry the second of this name, a Bavarian, surnamed claudus, either the son
of the first Otho, or Nephew by his daughter, being chosen Emperor by the
electors, according to the instituion of Gregory, in the year of our Lord
1003. deferred his journey into Italy, by the space of xii. years. He had much
to do with the French, but more with the people of Mets. Being crowned at Rome
by Benedict the eight, he removed to c^p^a, and expulsed the Saracens out of
Italy. He besieged Troia in the borders of Apulia, Hanniball pitched his camp,
and was builte by the Greeks, and took it by composition. Historians do much
commend this Henry, that being a most christian prince, he lived always chaste
with his wife (...). Having ouerthrown the hungars, he petswaded them to
christianity by reasons and importunat entreaties, giving withal his daughter
in marriage, to Stephenk of hungary: when he had gouernd the Emzelously and
religiously eight years he died, and was buried at Vra^berg, Conradus the ii. a
Frenchman, being lawfully chosen his successor by the electors, for the
integrity of his life, and the miracles after his death, he was admitted into
the Cathalogue of Saints.

Conrade 2.
COnrade a Frenchman, the second of the name, after three years interreigne, at
last by the lawful suffrage of the princes electors, was chosen Emp. for his
virtues and military discipline. In the beginning of his reign, finding all
things out of order, he wrought his son into the copartnership of the Empire,
least in his absence in Italy, his subjects in Germany for want of an head
should mutiny. He besiedged Millain along time, Millain, he came to Rome, where
he was crowned with the crown of gold by John the xii. He fought happily
against the Sclauonians and Pannonians, who had aided him in pacifieng Italy.
He builded the church of Spire, with great cost, wherein with Gisclla his Wife,
upon whom he begat Henry the second, he lies buried, in the xv. year of his
reign. In his reign, the Counsel of Triburgi was held at Mogunce, and Burgundy
was divided into a Dukedom and an Earldom, the Dukedom to appertain to the
house of France, the Earldom

Michaell Paphlago.
MYchael Paphlago, the adulterer of Zoe, and who had slain her husband, was
preferred to the Empire of Constantinople, by the said Zoe. A woman nothing
beautiful, but of a stirring spirit, wavering upon all occasions, and of a
stinking breath, Who would not curse such immoderat affections in a woman of
fifty years of age? Or nor admire the inconstancy of Fortune in a price of
such worth? At last she arrogated to her self all imperial jurisdiction, and
used Michaell as her vassal. But this submissiue slatterie Edessa from siege.
At last, falling sick of an Ague, he nominated Michaell calaphet his successor
in the empire, when he had almost reigned 7. years.

Mychaell calaphet.
MYchaell calaphet, a man most ignoble, was adopted by Zoe, whose parents
caulked Ships in Paphlagonia, from whence he took his surname. He was a
Prince subtle and deceitful, a dissembler every way, Zoe, pretending that she
went about to poison him, from thought whereof, she was most innocent. But the
people taking her banishment in evil part, called Zoe from banishment, created
her Empress, and reconering Michaell in his flight, put out his eyes, as also
his brother Constantius, a familiar kind of punishment amongst the Greeks. He
was Lord 4 months and so many days.

Henry 3.
HEnry the son of Conrade the Frenchman, surnamed Niger, when he was crowned
Emperor, by the consent of the Prince, insorced Vldaricke Bohemia, weary of
war, to become tributary: he restored Peter king of Hungary deposed by his
subjects. At Capua he ouerthrewe the Saracens, but being weary of the
controversies of Rome, he banished all the counterfeit pretendants to that see,
and elected Sindeger bishop of Bamber sole Pope, afterward called Clement the
eleventh, by whom in the assembly of the Synod, he was consecrated Emperor
Agustus. And to give future security in the election of Popes, he enforced the
Romans to take an oath, that ever after they should not meddle with choosing of
Popes. After that he put a new Garrison into Capua, to withstand the attempts
of the Saracens. Returning into Germany, he procured his son, but five years
old, to be nominated Caesar, and crowned at Aquisgraue. He died the xvii year
of his reign: he married Agnes the daughter of William Prince of Aquitan. In
his reign arose the heresy of the Manichees in Gostar, who accursed the eating
of al sorts of living creatures.

Zoe.
ZOe being restored and called from banishment, thanked the people, and to
their good liking governed Constantinople. She countenanced her sister
Theodora, and was married the third time to constantinus Monomachus, restored
from banishment. And scarce 3. months were ouerpast, but she nominated him
Emperor.

constanstinus Modo.
COnstantinus Modo. being graced with the titles of an Emperor, proved
asloathfull Prince, and wholly given to wantonness, kept a concubine in place of
his wife, a woman of an excellent beauty he bore out 2. most grievous civil
wars, the one raised by Maniaces Georgius, the other by Leo Tornicius,
besides many foreign. In his time began the armies of the Turks to prosper in
Asia, and he yet ouercam the Roxolani and the Patzinacae a kind of Scithian
people. From this Princes cowardice, the ensuing miseries took

Theodora.
THeodora the sister of Zoe without the agreement of the Senate, governed the
Empire 2. years, by the potency of her fathers Eunuhs, who confirmed her in
despite of one Nicephorus, governor of the Bulgarians, whom the Senate had
chosen Emperor. Daring her government the peace at home and abroad was so well
kept, and the people found such ease and plenty of all things, that no man
repented a woman's government. But age coming on, and her disease incresing, by
the flatteries of her Euunuches, she elected Michaell a very old man, her
partner in the Empire.

Michaell the elder.
MYchaell the elder, a man very famous for his birth and wealth, but by reason
of his old age, unfit for government, after the death of Theodora,

Henry 4.
HEnry the 4. (but with Ignatius the third) son of the last Henry, was a
Prince addicted to all wicked and ungodly course, and by Gregory the seventh
(otherwise called Heldebrand, to whom he was adversary) declared an enemy of
the church, and interdicted. Where at finding himself agreeued, he levied an
Army, and taking with him Clement, whom he had S. Peter and Paul, and
besiedged Gregory. His mother Agnes, a woman of excellent Wisdom, he deprived
from all government, for that she rebuked him in these his courses. He
overthrew Rodulph, elected Empe. by the Princes, at the instigation of Gregory.
What in him lay, he hindered the iourny of the christian Princes to the Holy
land. At last being taken by his son Henry, whom he had chosen Emperor, and
committed to prison at Leyden in the xlviii. year of his reign, he departed
this life, through the loathsome stincke of the prison. Heldebrand sent the
imperial crown to Rodulph with this inscription: Petra dedit Petro, Petrus
diadema Rodulpho, meaning,

Henry V.
HEnry the fifte, the brother of the fourth, received the ensigns of the
Empire after the death of his Father, whom he persecured with war, and retained
the same spleen, especially against the Sea of Rome, in regard whereof, Pope
Pascall did what he could to debar his entrance into the city. Which the
courage of the young Prince taking in scorn, got the Pope into his power,
enforced his coronation, and dealt cruelly with the residue of the Roman
clergy. Which when the bishop in the next counsel had Bachar. At his third
journey into Italy, he expulsed Gesalius the second out of the city. At his
return into Germany. he died: leaving no children behind him, in the fifteen
year of his empire, and was buried at Spire, amongst his predecessors.

Isaac Conuenus.
ISaac Conuenus borne of a Noble house, quick of dispatch, strong, valiant in
war, provident in peace, resolute, and maiesticall, by the favor of the
Patriarch (toward whom afterward he proved an ingrate prince and banished
himself and his kindred) after Michaell governed the Empire. Being taken with
a pain in his side as he rode on hunting, and disparing of help, he took
orders, and resigned his Empire. Being accused that he used Michell
tyrannously, he answered he did it for the commonweals sake. He governed the
Constantinopolitan Empire two years and three months.

Constantine Ducas.
COnstantine Ducas was no sooner declared Emperor by the suffrages of
Eudcchia: he was zealous of religion, an obseruer of equity, an indifferent
good statesman, but conerous above measure, and therefore is beloved of his
people, and scotned of his enemies, on al sides vexing him and his dominions.
To these former miseries were adjoined homebred calamities, (: Viz:) that
lamentable earthquake which overthrew Churches and houses. He died in the
sixty year of his age, and in the xii. year of his reign: Some say the
first.

Eudochia.
EVdochiea the wife of Constantinus Ducas together with her sons, as yet not
fit for government: succeeded her husband, her private matters she had been
able to govern easily by her own womannish wisdom, if that the Wars had
given over abroad: but the Barbarians being every where ready to assail, and
spoil many parts of the Empire, being compelled of the Senate and the people to
choose a most valiant Prince, who should defend the commonwealth with wisdom
and fortitude, in preventing so great dangers, and brideling the forces of her
enemies, after she had governed seven months, by her sons consents, she took
for her husband a Roman sur-named Diogenes.

Romanus Diogenes.
DYogenes the Roman having undertaken the Empire, when he had conquered the
Turks, and had freed the commonwealth from fear, being taken of the Senate
(because he would seem to deprive his sons in law of their right to the
Empire) and his eyes being put out, he was banished into an Island wherein he
was buried by his Wife Eudochia, after he had reigned three years and eight
months. His father Patricius governed the states, and for sedition was banished
into Sardinia.

Michaell.
MYchaell the son of Constantinus Ducas, sur-named (for the great famine
Parapinaceus succeeds the Empire, being not fit to govern, the care of his
matters delivered unto two Eunuchs, he applied himself only to the study of
letters, and making of verses. Wherefore the Turks every where assailing the
governors, as it were compelled, chose for their Emperor Nicephorus Botoniates,
discending from the Emperor Nicephorus Phocas, whom the Citizens of
Constantinople easily admitted, by cause of the displeasure they bore their
sloathful prince, first having thrust Michaell with his wife and son into a
Monastery, and taken for a Monk: he reigned six years.

Nicephorus.
NYcephorus elected in the place of Michaell, having taken Constantine the
son of Constantine Ducas, who challenged the Empire for his right, he shaued
him and anointed him priest. But not long after being deceived by Alexius
Conuenus who was better believed of the Soldiers, he was cast out of the
Empire in the third year of his reign, the city being taken by the God-frey of
Bolein Duke of Loraine took his voyage into Judea against the Saracens,
attended by the most famous, and most excellent prince of France, having either
sold or pauned their goods.

Alexius Conuenus.
ALexius Conuenus the successor of Necephorus, as it were a professed enemy to
the Latins, more then for the war that he unhappily achieved with Robert
Viscardus, being helped also by the Venctians, he fought to hinder that
memorable voyage of the Frenchmen, whom he seemed always to suspect
Boamundus the Norman. At length having betaken himself to peace, he built a
house for fatherless children to be kept in, and a school wherein they might
be instructed in learning, giving the expenses out of his own revenues. He
was exceedingly given to prayer, well ordered in his manners, in the end being
much troubled with a disease, he died when he had reigned thirty years four
months and a half, leaving the Empire to his son John, his mother at

Caloioannes.
CAloioannes the son of Alexius conuenus his father being dead obtained the
Empire, he gave many dignities unto his kins folk, but especially unto his
brother Isaac, who with increadible love he affected, he was wonderfully
cumbred with the Frenchmen and Venetians. He obtained many and famous
victories in the East against the Turks, at the length when he was a hunting,
he wounded a finger of his right hand with a dart, by himself poisoned which
he cast at a bar, he died the twenty five year of his reign, he named
Manuell his younger brother Emperor, because Isaac was not yet so fit to
govern,

Lotarius 2.
LOtarius the second whom some call Luderus Duke of Saxony, was created Emperor
by the electors, there was great difference between him and conrade (who after
was Emperor) for the Empire, which afterward was appeased by the industry of
S. Barnard. He made a voyage against the Bohemians, but the matter being
unadvised done, he lost many of his men, at length peace being desired
between them, it was concluded. He went twice into Italy, the first to appease
rebellions stirred up in Rome against Innocent the second (of whom he was
Crowned) for the election of a new Bishop, the next time against Roger who
unjustly held Campania and Apulia, him he drove from Italy. These things being
finished, in his journey he died of the plague, when hehad reigned eleven
years.

Conradus 3.
COnrade the third borne in Sweuland, King of Bauaria, Nephew to Henry the
fourth by his daughter, obtained the Empire by the consent of the princes,
Saracens, the which journey Jews the younger, son of Jews sur-named Crassus
King of France, and Richard king of England had attempted once before, but
Bosphorus the Thracian being conveyed over, they were compelled to raise their
siege of Iconium before they had brought any thing to pass, and to depart to
their great dishonor, by the deceit and treachery of Emanuel Emperor of
Constantin. as it shall be reported in his subsequent life. Conradus having
gotten no reputation returned into Germany, not having received the diadem of
the Empire, he died in the fifteenth year of his reign.

Emanuell.
EManuell or Manuell Brother of Coloioannes, or as some will have it his son
Emperor of Constantinople, a most wicked and pernicious man to the christian
commonwealth, when conradus made his voyage to Ieru salem, his Soldiers were
almost consumed by famine, faining to help them with provision, by wicked
trachery he gave them meat mixed with lime and stones beaten small: in the
like manner perfidiously he deceived Jews the French King, so that in a short
time the great strength of our Soldiers was consumed, so that of the great
multitude scarce the tenth escaped, he stirred up Stephen the King of Pannonia,
against the Venetians, and put out both the eyes of Dandalus their Ambassador,
offering his mind somewhat freely against the law of all Nations: being a
breaker of leagues, he calls forth the fautors and Venetians, having promised
full restitution of their goods, he obtained by request that he might
restore them by annual pensions. He fought a most deadly battle with the
Turks, in the which he was almost taken prisoner, at last when he was
accounted a most skillful Astrologer, and had promised himsefe long life, and
prosperous reign, having lived amongst a society of Moonks, he died when he
had reigned thirty and eight years.

Alexius.
ALexius being yet very young succeeded his father Manuell: his father
appointed Andronicus to be his protector, who behaved himself craftily, and
pernitiously toward him, for he drove out the Latins who were the Emperors
greatest friends, and then being blinded with the desire of the Empire, he
privily murdered his kinsman Alexius, being eleauen years old, when he had
reigned three years, having first cut off his head, the body being put into a
sack, he cast it into the sea.

Fridericus.
FRederick called. Aenobarbus, by reason that his beard was red, was borne in
Sweuland, his father being Frederick brother of Conradus the King: sailing into
Italy he overthrew Mediolanum, Derthona, Creniona, and many Cities which
rebelled against him: entering Rome the gates of Vaticane being shut, he was
crowned by Pope Adrian the fourth: but the Romans rebelling, he was not able to
avoid them, at length having destroyed many places, returning after some years
he went toward Rome again, where he drove Alexander into the city, and
took Vatican with the Cathedral Church of S. Peter. In the end going
unfortunately to the city of Mediolanum which was assisted by the Venetians, he
scarce escaped by flight, al private grudges being ended, and peace concluded,
he intended to make a voyage into Siria, but in sailing thither it is said he
was drowned when he had reigned thirty seven years.

Henry 6.
HEnry the sixth by reason of his cruelty called Asper, his father living was by
the consent of the German Princes crowned King of the Romans at the city of
Aquisgraue. Afterward his father being dead he was married (...) Constance the
daughter of Roger a Norman being a Nun and now ready for a husband, by Pope
Clement the fourth, upon this condition that for Tancred out of the kingdom of
Sicily, the which as the Pope alleged pertained to him; therefore Henry having
provided an army in short time vanquished Tancred, and by force took and
sacked Naples, killing two daughters of Tancred that were as yet unmarried.
There are some notwithstanding that write that the Emperor was hindered from
his enterprise by the plague, and that he obtained the kingdom by the death of
Tancred: after these things, falling sick at Messana he died, having a son
named Frederick by his wife constance, when he had reigned eight years.

Andronicus.
ANdronicus Conuenus having slain his Cozen Alexius. He obtained the (...),
at length contrary to al men's oppinion and his own, he was conquered in
battle, by Isaac sur-named Angelus, and east out of his Empire, being ta^^n,
and riding through the city upon a Camel, carried about with his hand cut
off, and his eics put out, upon his head a wreath of garlike placed in steed of
(...), (...) by the rage of multitude and common people, he died, when he had
(...) two years.

Isaacus Angelus.
ISaac sur-named Angelus, borne of the middle stock of the Conueus, when he had
contrary to all men's hope conquered Andronicus, he to no purpose gathered a
name against ciprus. He likewise infortunatly, waged war with the Mysians. He
entertained Frederick Aenobarbus Emp. of the Romans sailing into (...) very
honorably He redeemed his younger brother Alexius taken by the ^urks for a
great sum of money, by huge treachery, he was by him deprived of his eyes and
Empire, castinto prison, with the like treachery, he would have slain his
Nephew Alexius, being his agent the twelueth year of his reign. At length
when he endured long captivity, he was redeemed by his son Alexius, and
restored to the Empire, he died by the contagion of the air, as it thought
drawn together by seldom use of the same, when he had reigned sixteen years.

Phillip.
PHillip the son of Frederick, Barbarossa brother of Henry the sixth, was chosen
Emperor by the greater part of the German princes, but Pope Innocent the
third confirms, annoynteth, and crowns with the Imperial di^dem the Duke
of Saxoni, elected by some of the Princes, because his progenitors Otho being
aided by the King of England, and Phillip by the French King: yet Phillip
always preuaild, and Otho being vanquished he obtained the Empire: Afterward
when Phillip had reigned nine year, (happening as a man would say by the
appointment of God) he was miserably slame by Otho, of Vuittelspack, County
Palatine at Bamberge, upon that day that he was let blood by his Physician.
Frederick the first the father of Phillip, giving that famous nobility and
kindred to Otho of Vuittelspack.

Otho.
OTho Duke of Saxony, whom Innocent the Pope (Phillip being dead, even in
malice toward him) had chosen Emperor, for the taking away of discord, was
easily elected of the German Princes, and fourthwith Crowned at Rome by every
man's consent, by the said Pope Innocent, but because he took certain
buildings from the Popes Dominions, and invaded the kingdom of Frederick the
younger, King of Sicily, he was excommunicated and driven out of his Empire,
and Frederick his prosessed enemy, Pope Innocent laboring for him, and the
Italians assisting him was created Emperor in his steed, being vanquished he
went into Germainy, to set matters in good order, and proclaims war against
Phillip the second, King of France, Bononie being dishonored, he betook
himself to his country, where not long after he died when he had reigned but
four years.

Alexius Angelus.
ALexius Angelus murderer of his brother, a Prince altogether addicted to
wickedness, having as it is said before, deprived his elder brother of his
sight and Empire, possessed the Emp. endeavoring by all means to destroy his
Nephew Alexius, the soon of Isaac, which not long after he most grievously
reuengd, for having vanquished and obtained Bazantium by siege, he redeemed his
father from prison, and placed him yet living in the empire, Alexius which
murdered his eldest brother, about middle of the night fled away: his Nephew
Alexius after the sudden death of his father, by the French men and Venetians
being ordained Emperor.

Alexius the younger.
Alexius the younger restored to the empire of Constantinople, established a
league with the Frenchmen and Venetians (by whose help is said he obtained the
Empire) upon condition that the Patriarch of Constantinople should give place
to the Pope of Rome as his better, and that he should restore the damages the
Frenchmen and the Venetians had received by Manuel. Who when he went about to
perform what he had promised, he was slain of Murziphilus a base companion,
whom he searce a month after his restitution, being a very child, had eleu^ted
to the greatest step of honor: but Murziphilus having possessed the Empire,
and ouersl^pping the city of Bizantium, was taken of the Frenchmen and the
Venetians, and brought back to Constantanople, where through shame and grief,
he miserably died: the excellent Venetians having easily assured the Empire to
the Italians, which the factious and troublesome Nation of the Gracians had so
many years possessed.

Balwin of Flaunders.
BAlwin Earl of Flaunders, (the city having been took since the flight of
Murziphilus fifteen times) by help of the multitudes (with which, and the
counsel of the Princes the power of creating the Emperor, and chosing the
Patriarch, was attributed to be irrefragible) was chosen Emperor of
Constantinople, and the Venetians chose Thona Mauronus to be Patriarch:
according to the agreement: to wit (that if the Frenchmen chose the Emp. the
Venetians shall choose the Patriarch) he went withal expedition to Rome with a
Apostolic authority Balwin Emperor with a diadem, who searce a year being
ended, when he had undertaken all things by Adrionopolis, he dying appointed
his brother Henry to be his successor.

Henry.
HEnry hearing of the death of his brother Balwin, raised his siege of
Adriopolis, and returned to Constantinople, being made Emperor, he Walachia,
and married the Dukes Daughter, thence going into Thessalie, he made William
the son of Boniface king of Thessaly: a little after having disposed and set al
things in order, dying of an unruly disease, he left to be his heir Iolanta
his Daughter, Married to Peter Autifiodorensis when he had reigned cleauen
years, or as others say thirteen.

Frederick 2.
FRederick the second begotten by Henry the sixth of his mother Constance, that
most excellent woman, not so full of years as wisdom, not much unlike his
Graund-father Baharossa, both in his importunat desire of war, as also in
wisdom and counsel, by which he overcame all dangers Otho the Rome by
Honorius the third: his mother Constance being dead, he pursued three Roman
Bishops, to wit: Honorius the third, Gregory the ninth, and Innocent the second
he divided all Italy into the factions of the Guelphes, and Gibellines, which
then newly began in Hetruria by Guelph and Gibell two Almain Captains, which
captains likewise most pernicious to the Italians, pursued two Bishops till
death: he overcame the Millanois in battle which favored their Bishop, having
taken their captain Peter Teupolus he cruelly slew him: by the means of Pope
Innocent the sourth, he was compelled the Empire, and excommunicated. Henry
being Lanthgraue of Thuring, (which Lanthgraue is a dignity amongst the
Germans) is declared Emperor, which he little esteeming off, possesses the
kingdom of Sicily, which when he had governed thirty two years, being
troubled with a disease he was slame by the treachery of his bastard son
Manfredus, this man removed the university of Bononia, unto Patauie, because
the Citizens did not presently obey things that were commanded. He cast also
the Guelps out of Florence, he had Jerusalem, whence the title of the kingdom
does for ever remain to the kings of Sicily: about this time Duke Robert the
brother of Jews the French King, erected the college of Sorbon at Paris.

Peter Altisiodorensis.
PEter Altisiodorensis in the right of his wise when he had no man child
accepted of Honorius the Bishop the estate of the Empire, at S. Lawrence
Church, thence returning when he assailed in vain Dyrrachium in the behalf of
the Venetians, through a peace dissembled, being courteously invited into
Tessaly, in the middle of a banquet he was slam contrary to the solemn Theodor
Lasearas, who being of Adrionopolis had declared himself Emperor of
Constantinople. When he had reigned five years.

Robert.
RObert succeeding his father Peter Altisiodorensis, and behauing himself well
to the Ambassador of his fathers captivity, flew to Byzantium. This man took
away the wife of one of his Peers of Burgundy by her mothers consent, which
the Burgundian stomaching, he with his servants brake voylently into the
Emperors Palace, and cut off the nose of his wife, and cast her mother (which
was the occasion of the new marriage) into the sea: which injury Robert being
about to revenge, he went to Rome, whence returning, he died in Achaia when he
had reigned seven years.

Baldwin.
BAldwin the second succeeded his father Robert, who because he was very
young, he had John Brennius King of Jerusalem, his father in law to assist him
in governing the Empire, who being ded, Balwin governed the Empire alone, and
at the length lost it: for the Grecian forces prevailing, he paund his son
to the Venetians, and part of the holy cross, and also all the donaries of
churches, and obtained a huge army against Bosphore: but the war perseuering,
and Michaell Paleologus being importunate against him, he was compelled to
return into his own kingdom, and he with others to fly, by which means the
Grecians recovered their ancient state, so that whlies he feared foreign

Alexius.
ALexius sur-named Angelus, or as other say Murziphilus, governed the Empire
some few years, he had no male-child by his wife but only a Daughter called
Irene. He succeeded Balwin.

John Diplobatazius.
John Diplobatazius Married Irene the daughter of Alexius, by which means the
Empire was delivered him, he had a son called Theodor.

Thoodorus.
THeodorus had three children by his wife, who being broken and wasted in
France by war, sent them to Nicenis for their better safety: where they were
not suffered to enter but upon much entreaty. For the Citizens shut their
gates against them. In the mean time he took Adrinople. He married one of his
daughters to the King of the Poeons, another Adronicus Lascarus Despot: after
whose death she was again married to John Bataza.

John Bataza.
John Bataza held the title of Emperor 33. years at Zacynthus out of the
bounds of his own country: he had a son called Theodorus Lascaris, whom his
father upon his deathbed committed in trust to Michaell Paleologus, a man
valiant in arms. But he murdering his pupil, usurped, and confirmed the state
to himself and his posterity

Michall Paleologus.
MYchaell Paleologus born at Viterbium taking Bizantium, and having slain
Theodor, usurped the Empire. Amongst his other acts, he despoiled one William
a Frenchman of the principalities of Achaia and Bythinia: he was enemy to the
Venetians, by whom he had been stripped of his imperial dignity, had not the
Genooise withstood them. In requital of which good service, he gave them the
city of Para. After that he went to Lions, to be present at the counsel which
Gregory the x. had proclaimed: whereby forsaking the rites of the greek church
he incurred such hatred of his countrymen, that after his death they would not
voutsafe him a place of burial: he governed the state forty years and
upward.

Rudolph.
RVdolph of Habspurg, two and twenty years after the death of Frederick (for
so long continued the interreigne) was elected Emperor, and Alphonse of Castile
refused: he was confirmed at Lansana by the Pope, and ouercomming Othocar King
of Bohemia in battle, slew him. A false Frederick, who had proclaimed
himself in Sweuia, he burned at Nouesium. By his Lieutenant he forced the
cities of Hetrucia. For he never came into Italy, neither according to the
custom of his predecessors was crowned at Rome, reciting a tale in Aesop of the
Fox, who answered the Messenger of the sick Lion, in Commend me to thy
Master, and say, that withal my heart I wish his recovery, and therefore will
I make my devout orisons to the heavenly powers: but for that I see all the
foot prints of those beasts which of kindness have visited thy love, to go
forwards; but none to return backwards, I have apprehended so extreme a
fear, that I doubt me, not one of those who have entered his den, have ever
returned again. In like manner Rudolph considered, that his ancestors had
made many toilesome iournes with most flourishing Armies into Italy, but they
ever returned with loss and dishonor. Having subjected Austria under his
obeysans, he created his son Albert Duke thereof, from whom the now Princes
of Austria derive their petigrees. He departed in the 18. year of his Empire,
in whose time Albertus sur-named Magnus lived.

Adolphus.
THe first action that Adolphus count of Nassan titularie Emperor undertook,
Columbarienses. After that, in his expedition against Albert the son of
Caesar Duke of Austria, he was deposed by the German Nobility, being weary
ofhis Ambitious and sensual life, in whose steed they preferred Albert. But
when Adolph would not surrender, they fought it out near Worms, in which
conflict Adolph perished, in the eight year of his reign.

Andronicus the elder.
ANdronieus Paleologus the elder succeeded his father Michael, and returned
again to the Greekish Rites. By his wife of the Hungarish race he had one
son sur-named Michaell after the name of his Graund-father.

Andronicus the younger.
ANdronicus the younger a man most ungodly succeeded his father, and by the aid
of the Genooise, defeated his Graund-father Andronicus, and took the absolute
government upon himself. But afterward by the help of the Venetians, the
elder Andronicus was restored to the Empire. Whereupon arose cruel differents
between the Genooise and the Venetians. But the elder being dead after he had
reigned eighteen years, the younger Andronicus governed solye, and performed
many worthy services against the enemies of the Roman name. In the sixty and
one year of his age he died, of an Ague and a pain in his head in the space
of four days, about the 16. year of his Calo-ioannes and Manuell, whom he
entrusted to the tutorship of John Catacunzenus.

Albertus.
ALbertus the son of Rudolph Caesar, Duke of Austria, having slain Adolph,
was created Emperor by the suffrages of the Princes, and consent of Boniface
the eight (having before stoutly denied their voices to Phillip the fair King
of France) but upon new condition, he should challenge the kingdom of France to
himself. But Phillip having given his daughter in Caesar, was the cause that
Albert sur-ceased his determinations. At last he was slain by John his brothers
son near the Rhene, when he had reigned ten years.

Henry the 7.
HEnry the 7. Earl of Lucembourg, after the death of Caesar was declared
Emperor of Romans, and utterly undid the Earl of Wittemberg, for that he would
not subject himself to the Empire. Clement the first ratified his
inauguration, upon condition, that he should descend into Italy, which was
then all in combustion: wherefore taking his journey toward Italy by the woods
of Taurinus, he took Lumbardy. He suppressed the factions of Turriana, and was
Crowned with the Iron crown at Millain. Thence going to Rome, and after his
Crotonation being expulsed by the Vrsins, and had pressed the Florentines to
utter despair, he was poisoned by a preaching Moonke as he received the
Sacrament.

Lodowick.
LOdowick the Nephew of Rodulp by his sister, and Frederick Duke of Austria,
Bauarian having taken and slain the Duke of Austrich, reigned alone, and that
without the consent of the Roman Bishop. Whereat three successiue Bishops,
John, Benedict, and Clement, being highly offended, excommunicated him; but he
setting light by these Bulls and Church Censures, desended into Italy, and was
crowned at Millain with the iron crown, and at Rome with that of Gold, by one
Stephan. He created Peter Corlarius a Minorite, Pope, and called him Nicholas.
He changed the governors of the city, and in dispight of the Bishop, created
many pety Kings in Gallia Gisalpina: he died in the 33. year of his

Charles 4.
CHarles the fourth a Bohemian, the son of John of Lucemberg King of Bohemia
(Edward of England, and Gunther Roitelet of Monteniger, being nominated) after
their deceese was saluted Emperor: he overthrew Eleard Earl of Wittemberg in a
famous conflict, and utterly undid him: he beautified Prage with great
magnificence and colleges of learning, neglecting his emperial Majesty: he was
crowned at Rome by two cardinals, at the appointment of Innocent the sift, but
upon this most base capitulation, that he should He died in the 32. year of
his reign, his son Venceslaus being first declared Caesar.

John Catacunzenus.
JOhn Catacunzenus the tutor of Calo-ioannes and Manuell, took unto him his
Cozen Calo-ioannes, unto whom he gave his daughter in marriage. But falling at
ods with his cozen, he expulsed him and reigned Emperor alone. At last himself
was banished, made a Moonke, and Calo-ioannes restored to the

Colo-ioannes.
COlo-ioannes after the injury received by Catacunzenus went into Tenedos, who^
the Genooise undertook to restore to the empire and his former dignity. By some
he is called John and not Calo-iohn, whom some men affirm, to have used the
aid and favor of the Turks, and that he was the first that gave them footing
in Europe. At his death he bequethed the empire to his son Manuel. This
Manuell the son after the death of his father, obtained the Empire, and begot
seven children. John: Michaell, Theodor, Demetrius, and Constantine. Any other
memorable act of his is not recorded.

Venceslaus.
VEnceslaus the son of Charles the fourth, a man. unlike his father and
Graund-father, through his sloth and cowardice afflicted the Empire, and had
utterly undone the state thereof, had he not been taken by Sigismund, and in
his stead Robert of Bauier presently proclaimed Emperor by the whole consent of
the German Nobility. This man created Galeaze first Duke of Millain, who had
conquered a great part of Italy, and which inheritance descended to his
Nephews even until our times. He was cast into prison by his brother, and
died in the two and twenty year of his reign.

Robertus.
RObertus or Rupertus Duke of Bauaria was made Emperor in the place of
Venceslaus, and soon after he was called into Italy of the Florentines, to
Galeatum, and skirmishing with him at Benacum, he was easily driven back
again. Afterward he went to the Venetians and Citizens of Trent, of whom he
was most honorably entertained, and so against the will of the Florentines,
went out of Italy into Germany without doing any thing, and there resigned
himself to peace and religion, until the tenth year of his reign, wherein
he died, leaving the Florentines in great troubles.

Ioannes.
IOannes the son of Manuell reigned after his father, being studious of peace
and concord. He came into Italy and was present in the counsel of Florence,
with Eugenius the fourth, afterward returning home he lived but a small time.
Iosippus the Patriarch died at Florence.

Sigismundus
SYgismond son of Charles the fourth, and brother of Venceslaus, while he was
a child married with Mary the daughter of the King of Pannonia. When his
brother Venceslaus was taken he was made King of Bohemia. And Robert the
emperor being dead, he was chosen by general consent into his place. In three
years he went over the greatest part of Europe to make peace, and in that time
he removed the schism of the two Popes. He oftentimes accused the princes of
Germany for their hatred of Latin writers. He provoked his own country to
envy him, and was often provoked to War by the Turks Bohemians, and when he
saw he should have no son, he made Albertus Duke of Bauaria and his Daughters
husband his heir, in the seven and thirty year of his reign, and was buried
in his regal Albe in Vngaria.

Albertus.
ALbertus the son in law of Sigismund, reigned happily for the space of two
years. Compelling the Morauians and the Sarmatians to rest within their
borders. He ended the factions of Bohemia, and drove Amurath the Turk out of
Hungaria, he took the city Sindoronia and went into Greece, where he raced
Thessalonica. At length he returned into Austria and dyed of a blody slixe at
Longeuille, leaving behind him his son Laodislaus.

Constantinus.
COnstantinus the youngest son of Manuell, and when his brother John died
without issue he was made Emperor, when the most savage and cruel Turks had
taken Constantinople spoiling and racing it down, Nicholas the fifth was Pope,
and Frederick the third was Emperor in Germany.

Frederick 3.
FRederick the third was Duke of Austria, and highly devoted to peace and
quietness: he easily pacified the Austrians which moved sedition. He married
Eleanor sister to the king of Portugal, and went into Italy with his wife unto
Nicholas Pope of Rome, who set upon their heads the imperiali crown in the
twelueth year of their reign, and in the year of salvation, one Maximillian
Caesar.

Maximilianus.
MAximilian was made a King of Romans in his fathers life, and entered into
Burgundy with a great Army, and took Mary the Daughter of Duke Charles to
wife, who was dead and left his Dukedom to her. And after that he got the
Empire, and when Mathias King of Pannonia was dead without issue, he challenged
that kingdom for his right, entering thereinto with an army, and took the
regal Albe by force, but soon after he was beaten out by the enemy, and so
returned into Germany where he found them against Heluetians with whom he waged
War. Afterward the Basilians who utterly shook off their subjection to the
Empire, whose example drew many of the neighbor people to do the like, whereby
a great part of the Roman majesty was abated. He did not take the crown
after the manner of his predecessors, nor ever saluted the Bishop of Rome or
the Apostles Monuments. He was the father of Phillip Archduke of Austria by
his wife Mary, who was made the son in law to the King of Spain and his
succession: his daughter Margaret first contracted with Charles the eight, King
of France, and then refused was married to Phillibert Duke of Sauoye. He
married with the daughter of viscount Galeacius, after the death of his first
wife, and at length Austria in the nine and fifty year of his age, and the
three and thirtieth year of his Empire.

Charles 5.
CHarles the fist was son to Phillip Archduke of Austria, and Nephew to
Maximilian, he was K. of Spain, and being Prince of Austria he was declared
Emp. at Francfort, by the princes electours in the year of our salvation one
thousand five hundred ninteene, and was crowned at Bononia by Clement the
seventh, although he first denied his confirmation, except he would resign
into his hands the kingdom of Naples, because he affirmed that the kings of
Naples were bound unto the Pope to renounce the Empire whiles they should be
kings of Naples. In his time was Rhodes taken by the Turks after seven months
siege, to the dishonor of all Christendom: afterward Frauncis the French
king was taken prisoner at Pauy in Italy, by the Empe. Lieutenant, and so sent
into Spain. After the Emperor had bin in England, and made league with king
Henry the eight at Windfor, and the French K. Lutherans. About which time the
Emperor married with the daughter or Emanuell king of Portugal, and shortly
after the Duke of Bourbon having bin formerly called into Italy (to assail
Naples) by the Empe. he besieged and took Rome; and in the sacking thereof,
his soldiers observing no honesty, or decorum, as commonly it falls out in
such exploits, he was slain with a bullet, and afterward Clement the Pope was
besieged in the castle of saint Angelo, until he was delivered by the ransom
of 40000. Dacates. But the King of France sent into Italy his forces to relieve
the Pope. The king of England France demanded of the Em. his two children whom
he had left for hostages with the Emp. offering silver for them, and so they
were delivered for twentye hundred thousand Skutes: out of which money was the
k. of Englands debt to be discharged, and so apeace was concluded betwixt the
Emperor, and the french king at Cambray, by the mediation of Margaret the
Emperors Ant, and Loyse the French kings mother.

The Florentines having banished out of their city the family of Medices, were
besieged by the Emperor and the Pope, and driven to a composition to receive
Alexander de Medices for their Prince, unto whom was promised in marriage, the
Emperors bastard daughter. Ferdinand the Emperors younger brother, was declared
king of the To. at Collen, and shortly after crowned at Aix, and the Turk
coming the second time against Vienna, was forced by the Emperor and Ferdinand
to retire, and afterward when he came with agreat Army and besieged the town
and castle of Ginute near Belgrade, he was made by Nicholas Inrixe then in the
town to leave the siege, when as hungary the Em. sister was placed in that
honor. The Emperor went into Affricke, and there took the town of Tunis,
and the Forte of Golete, and made the king Muleasse tributary: where
Barbarosse the Turks lieutenaunt, escaped unto Argile. Afterward the Emperor
retired into Sicily, and then with a great power into Prounce, where he was so
sore distressed for victual, that he was forced to retire into Genes, and
from thence by sea into Spain, leaving the Count Nassau to besiege Peronny,
and afterward Terouanne, but could not take it, and then a peace was concluded
betwixt the Emperor and the French king at Nice for ten years, and afterward
Castelubro, atowne of Illyria was taken from the Turks by the Emperor and the
Venetians; and Castelnoue was taken by the Turk Barbarosse from the Emperor,
and all the Spanish garrison slain. Whereupon the Emperor and the French king,
sollicitted the Venetians to ioyn with them in war against the Turks, who
were not moved by that Embassage, but sent to make peace with the Transiluania.
The Emperor to hinder the Turk, and to draw him out of Hungaria, made fail to
Argiere, but through agreat tempest he lost almost all his artillery and
furniture of War, and so was forced to retire back again into Spain: upon
which occasion, the French were moved to take war against him, and in the
month of July following they pilled all Brabant.

Then the Emperor crowned his son Phillip k. of Spain, and married him to the
daughter of John king of Portugal, and afterward the Emperor and the England,
made war upon the French king, and the Duke of Cleue was drawn from his
aliance with France by the Emperor. But the Empe. forces were discomfited at
Carignan in Pieniont, by the Prince of Auguien. The Emp. took Luxembrrough,
Ligin and S. Dedier, and the king of England took Bullen. When as the Duke of
Saxony, was taken prisoner by the Empe. and condemned to death, yet spared at
the request of the elector of Brandebourge, upon condition that he should
subject himself to the Pope, touching religion: he rather chose to die, then
to yield to that extremity. Whereat the Emperor marueiled, and remitted him
that Article, yet was he deposed from his Dukedom. Finally in this Emperors
reign, was there Lutherans, Zwinglians, Oceolampadians, caluinists, and other.
There sprung up in his time many damnable heretics to disgrace the Gospel,
either by opposition, or perdition. But of the most damnable Sects that ever
arose were two, Anabaptists denying all good policy in the world, trusting unto
illuminated revelations; and the Jesuits instistuted by Paul the fourth, first
called Peter Carapha, (a notable Hipocrite) who in a book of his own writing
before he was Pope, taxed the church of Rome unto Paul the third, for all the
abuses, or the most part of them condemned by the Protestants. These Jesuits
have taught the Roman catholics equivocation, to dissemble with Magistrates,
that are not of Romish Church to poison all the commonwealths of Christendom.
This Em. resigned his imperial crown into the hands the Electors by Ambas.
for the behalf of his brother Ferdinande, and after he had reigned 37. years
he died, at a monastery in Spain, of the order of Ieronius, in the year of
salvation. 1558.

Ferdinandus.
FErdinandus brother of Charles, was consecrate Emper. in the town of
Francfort, by the Princes electors. In whose time the wars betwixt the late
Em. descended by hereditary envy, to Phillip king of Spain, and the Frenchking,
were composed by reason of a marriage betwixt the said king of Spain, and the
French kings daughter. In his time were raised great wars in Germany, France,
Flaunders, Artois, Lorraine, and in Italy, by the instigation of Pope Julius
the third. Then began the Spanish inquisition to be directed against
christians, which was first of all set up against Jews which kept the
Montgommery. The Tyusuffeldians renewed the heresy of Eutiches, confounding
the two natures of Christ. The counsel of Trent which continued at sundry
Sessions eighteen years, after it had established the Roman religion, in
whole was dissolved. Sundry bloody battles were sought by sea and land betwixt
the Danes and the Suedes. The Turks assailed Malta, and were repulsed.
Afterward Hungaria, where the Germans resisted them valiantly. In this time
flourished Melancthon, Musculus, Hiperius, calvin, Peter Matir, and Conradus
Gesnerus, men of singular learning and piety, zeal and good life, for the good
edification of christ's church, whose works and books shall never cease to
commend all religion to posterity. This Emperor was a peaceable Prince, and
not turbulent, and died in the sixty one year of his age, and seventh year
of his reign at Vienna in Austrich, leaving his son Maximilian to succeed
him.

Maximilianus.
MAximilianus son of Ferdinand, king of Romans and Bohemia, was chosen
Emperor-In his time Soliman the great Turk troubled Hungaria, Zelim. The
Emperor moved war against John Frederick Duke of Saxony, and took him
prisoner upon the same day twentye years, after that his father was taken
prisoner by Charles the fifth. The duke of Alua, came into the low countries,
and afterward there grew very hot wars because of the inquisition. The
people wore a piece of money about their neck, having on the one side the
kings image, and on the other a beggars dish, with this inscription: Faithful
to the king, even to the beggars dish. The second civil wars in France began,
wherein the Constable was slain. The king of Spain imprisoned charles his
only son, whereof the Fle^^nges Alua his cruelty in the low countries, and
this Prince dyed in prison. There were seen in the heavens three Moons, one in
equal distance from another. This Emperor permitted the Lords and Gentlemen of
Austrich to have free liberty to exercise their reformed religion, after the
doctrine in the confession of Ausburg, intheir castles, towns, and houses. The
Turk took a part of Ciprus from the Venetians, as Nicosia and Famagota, yet
they lost a famous battle at Lepanto by the christians confederate. It rained
Wheat, Turnup-rootes, and pease in Slesia, which much comforted the poor
people, in the extremity of famine. In this time was the massacre in France,
Charles the ninth being king, who afterward dyed bleeding, wherein was slain
for religion, above threescore thousand. This Maximilian was a good Prince, and
endeavored al his power against the Turk. Finally having made his son Rodolph
king of Romans, (...) died at Ratisbone, in the fifty five year of his age,
being the x.

Rodolph.
ROdolph the second, eldest son of Maximilian, was sacred Emperor in the year
1577. As Soon as he was crowned, he made peace with the Turk, whereunto the
Turk easily yielded because of his Wars in Persia. A great battle was
fought in Affricke by Sebastian, before which battle, was the greatest Comet
that has bin seen in this latter part of the world, which the Portugal
Captains interpreted to be a good sign to that war, telling the soldiers,
that the Comet spoke to the King Accometa, that is in the Portugal tongue. Let
him assail them, which fell out otherwise, for Sebastian was one, leaving his
kingdom of Portugal to Henry a Cardinal, who dying, nominated thereunto
Phillip king of Spain. Pope Gregory made a calender in An. 1583. which is
called the Gregorian, cutting off ten days in the month of October, to bring
the year again as it was in the time of our Savior Christ (as they sondly
imagine) for the imagined, that since that time, by just computation of
minutes, ten days are increased. This Emperor is now living, having seen
the death of five Popes, one Queen of England, the first borne of all the
kings of the earth, and rarest in perfection; one king of Spain; one of
France, diverse Princes of Germany: threegreat Turks: Zelim, Amarath, and
Mahomet, 3. And his companions in the government of the world, are James King
of great Britane; Henry king of France and Navarre, Phillip the 3. king of
Spain, Sigismund king of Polonia and Suesia, Frederick king of Denmark,
Demetrius Emp. of Rushia, Mahomet the great Turk, Phillippus Julius Duke of
Pomeria, Albertus and his wife Isabella, Cl^ra, Eugenia, Dukes of Burgundy with
diverse other great Estates governing other places.

FINIS.

