A godly and necessary admonition of the Decrees and Canons of the Counsel of
Trent, celebrated under Pius the fourth, Bishop of Rome, in the years of our
Lord. M. D. LXII. and. M. D. LXIII.

Written for those godly disposed persons sakes, which look for amendment of
Doctrine and Ceremonies to be made by general Counsels. Lately translated out
of Latin.

Psalm. xxvi. Odi ecclesiam malignantium I have hated the Congregations of the
wicked.

Math. xv. What soever my heavenly father has not planted, shall be plucked up
by the roots.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Martins.

Cum gratia et priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis per septennium.

The. xix. of February. 1564.

These books are to be sold at his shop under the Gate.

The Preface to the Reader.
OUr Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, when he had confirmed the minds of his
Disciples, against the dangers of persecution, which they should be in
danger of, for the confession of the truth of his doctrine, with a spirit
thurstyng our salvation, brake forth into these words: What profits it a
man (said he) though he win all the world, if he lose his own soul: Math. 16.
Or what recompense shall a man give for his soul: And his meaning was to
admonish not only his Disciples, but also al us together with them, how much
the salvation of souls is to be made of, which being delivered from the body,
and once abiected from God, can by no price or recompense he redeemed again.

But then are they most of al endaungered, when they straye from the true
knowledge of God, and his sincere woorshipping. For God is life and truth, and
therefore the death of the soul is, to decline from the rule of the will of
God, revealed in Christ. But because the Lord speaks not unto us from
heaven, but has upon earth instituted the ministry of teaching, whereby men
are instructed of the will of God, we see that for that cause (I say) men are
diversely affected. For they which teach in the church of God do not every
where profess one and the self same doctrine.

And when Christ said of true teachers: He that hears you, hears Luke. 10.
Math. 18.
me. And again: If he shall not hear the church let him be unto thee as an
Ethnicke and a Publicane, they excedinglye doubt, unto what congregation, in so
great a diuersitye of opinions they ought to soyne them selves.

For on the one side, they are holden by ordinary succession (as they ca^ it)
and custom and consent of very long time, in whose congregation yet
nevertheless they see very many errors, and no small abuses, which they them
selves understand, and judge that they ought of necessity to be amended. On the
other side against humane traditions they hear the express word of God
brought forth and urged, but for as much as they find among those me^ also
occasion to be offended, and chiefly because they think that the changing of
doctrine and ceremonies pertains not unto every man, but unto the ordinarye
power, they can scarce tell which way to turn them selves.

They fly therefore unto the authority of a Counsel, as to an only sanctuary,
whereby they judge that dissension sprung in the Church may most commodiously
be taken away. Of which thing when deliberation was had long time and often by
the orders of the Empire, neither yet by any conditions whereby on either side
it was required, it could be obtained, the salvation of many men, has by the
stay of so long time been miserably endaungered.

And although such are justly to be reproved, which neglecting the very
sounding from heaven of the son of God: Hear him, have a regard unto the
authority of men: for the consideration of our salvation is not so obscurelye
taught, but that even the most simplest in faith may comprehend it, yet I
think not that this kind of men is to be abiected. But rather in that part
wherein we see that they are sick, we must after the example of the Apostels, to
our power study to heal the^. Acts. 2.


For that happens in this our time, which we read happened at Jerusalem on
the day of Pentecost, after the ascension of Christ into heaven: For when the
people saw and heard the Apostels with sundry tounges celebrate the wonderful
things of God, whom yet the Priests, Scrib^s, and Phariseis had a little before
condemned and persecuted, they were utterly at their wyts end and in doubt
whose doctrine they should embrace. For Christ seemed no less to commend the
doctrine of the Phariseis, than the doctrine of the Apostels. when he said:
Upon the chair of Moses sit the Scribes and Phariseis, that Math. 2.
which they say, do ye. What marvel is it if the rude and unlearned people
were doubtful? For the Phariseis unto whom they were so long time addicted in
learning the woorshippyng of God, taught one thing, and the Apostels an other
thing. The self same thing undoubtedly we see happens in this our age. For
with our Elders great has been the authority of the Church of Rome, wherewith
the eyes of many men are yet still blinded. But no less. yea rather far
greater is the authority of the word of God, whereby are reproved errors and
abuses, which have through the negligence and avarice of men crept into the
Church. A man that will ryd him self our of these difficulties, ought not
utterly to be unskillful in holy matters, and so to be addicted unto the Church,
that in the mean time he same not against the manifest will of God, expressed
in the word of the Gospel.

But there are two rocks, between which godly men must with great care and
diligence sail. For some by reason of lightness of mind, without judgment and
true faith embrace every manner of religion. But other some to stubbornlye
resist, and will not once so much as vauchsafe to know the doctrine set
forth, because their mind is bent unto an opinion, which they defend for the
truth. Or bring overcome with the pleasures of this world, they have no care
of the truth, nor salvation of their souls.

But there is none amongst them that are truly godly, so rude to think that
so great inconstancye of mind in the doctrine of religion, or stubbornes in
errors should be numbered among virtues, but by the holy scriptures they are
taught that either of them is to be avoided. For against inconstancy the
Apostle speaks: Let us not be as ^ytile Ephesi. 4. John. 4.
ones wavering, neither let us be carried about with every wind of doctrine.
But against stubbornes in error John has left in writing: Prove the spirits,
whether they be of God. Wherewith the self same Apostle agrees: Quench not
(says he) the spirit, despise not prophecies. 1. These. 4,
But prove ye al thing, that which is good, hold.

But because it is a singular gift of God, to prove spirits, and as the
Apostle says prophecye, that is, the natural interpretation of the holy
scripture belongs not to every man. Many suppose that this care pertains
only to Bishops and Priests, that a Synod being assembled, learned and
modest men on either party, and such as are addicted to nothing but unto the
truth and health of the Church, should temperately confer together of
articles in controuersye. For they think them selves far inferiors, than
that they should take upon them to judge of so great matters, where
disputacion is had of the salvation of souls.

Although these men which thus judge touching matters of religion, be in some
part woorthye of pardon, or rather compassion, yet me thinks they are gentlye
and modestlye to be admonished of certain things.

For first in that they judge that it is profitable and necessary, that godly
and learned prophets (for so the Apostle calls the interpretours of holy
scripture, and Bishops) should assemble together in a Synod and confer
their sentences together concerning the articles proposed, in this part they
seem not to err. For we read that not only the successors of the Apostels
did so, but also the Apostles them selves, as the Acts of the Apostels and
Counsels do testify.

So straight way after the ascension of Christ into heaven, when at Antioche
there arose a question as touching the observation of the Acts. 15^
law of Moises, as a thing necessary to the rightcousnes of man, which is
auayleable before God: Paul and Barnabas by the consent of the Church of
Antioche went up to Jerusalem to the Apostels and Elders, that it might be
manifestiye known unto the Churches, that they in all points agreed with the
rest of the Apostels, against the fained lie of the false Apostels. For the
false Apostles had every where abroad in the Churches accused Paul and
Barnabas of this thing, namely, that they under the name of the Gospel
delivered an other, and far diverse doctrine unto the Gentiles.

Likewise also in the primitive Church* there were by the authority of godly
Emperors assembled the Counsels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and
Chalcedonia, against Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, and Eutiches, to retain
still a godly consent in doctrine of the deuinity of Christ, Of his two
natures divine and humane in one person, Of the person and deuinity of the holy
Ghost.

So also after that, for the taking away of dissentions between the In the
counsel of Basil S^ss. 1.
Clergy, and offenses out of the Church, there were Synodes had not only in
every province, but also there was a decree made, that from that time for ever
there should with in ten years he celebrated an universal Counsel. For
that thing is accustomed to happen in the Church, which happens in houses,
which unless they be with beasoms often made clean, they will be covered with
filthynes and dust: So also unless the Teachers of the Church do with a
perpetual care and diligence give vigilant heed, and continuallye institute
godly conferringes together of sentences, easy is the fall of doctrine and
manners, and except they be in time corrected, they are accustomed to draw a
wonderful great ruin unto the Church.

But in this thing they seem not to indge well, in that they think that the
peace and tranquillity of the Church may by this means be recovered and
preserved firm. For although the disputacions and decrees of godly Counsels
have brought great unity unto the Church of God, in which the perverse and
ungodly opinions of heretics have been by testimonies of the holy scripture
vehement^ye reproved, yet the Ecclestastical history testifies that no less
contentions, yea also sometimes greater contentions have happened in the Church
of God after the Counsels had been celebrated. Upon which occasion Gregorius
Nazianzenus being moved with the event of the Counsels writes, that from that
time forward he determined, to eschew all Synodes of Bishops, because he found
that no Synod had a good end: or which rather brought not increases of euyls,
than an end of them. Although that this good man in this point seemed somewhat
to err, for that he there for that cause judged that Synodes are utterly to be
avoided, because he saw that the peace of the Church could not by Counsels
be made firm.

For although it were to be wished, that al men should rest in the explication
of the truth, which is in godly Synodes instituted by testimonies of the
undoubted holy scripture, yet this is not the sole and only end of Counsels.
For there always have been, are and shall be contentious wits, which endeavor
them selves to perturbe the peace and concord of the Church. But the
principal end of Counsels is the explication and confirmation of sound
doctrine, and the confutation of errors and peruers opinions. Which although
it satisfies not all men, yet it satisfies all the godly, whose simplicitye
is correspondent unto a godly explication of the truth.

Therefore, whether the peace of the Church be restored, or whether it be
not restored, yet a godly conferring of sentences in godly Synodes is both
profitable and necessary. And unless such a conferring were had, it were to
be feared, least the multitude and variety of opinions should at the length
bring no less cuyll and discommoditye unto the Church of God, than brought the
superstition of time past.

And because some danger comes of disputations that are to vehement, godly
princes may by their authority easily remedy this evil, who of necessity must
be present at them: as we read was done in the Counsel of Chalsidonia, that
by their authority contentions and wanton wits were restrained within the
bonds of Christian modesty. For even as it is truly said: that by to much
alteration the truth is lost, so also seems it no less to be truly said: that
by quiet disputing, and godly conferring of sentences, the truth is brought
forth, whereunto the son of God has promised that he will be present together
with the father and the holy Ghost, yea if there be but two or three gathered
together in his name. And it is better presently to entreat of matters with a
modest conferring together being appointed, than by mutual writing to inflame
the hearts of either party.

Farther, in this thing also they judge not ryghtlye, for that they think,
that in such Counsels are matters entreated of, which utterly and wholly pass
the capacity of the laity.

For although all the Laity neither can, neither are bound exactly to know the
reasons and arguments of al and singular controversies, yet no godly Counsel
has decreed of any thing, which of necessitye pertains unto the salvation
of al and singular men, which also such as are but even meanly instructed in
the chief points of their Christian faith understand not well, and as much as
to them is sufficient is plain enough.

The ten commandments are known, the articles of faith are known the form
of the Lords prayer is known, the manner of baptism and institution of the
Lords supper are known, the ministerye also of remitting and retaining sins
in the name of Christ is known. In which principal points are contained,
almost all manner of controversies that the world has in religion.

Wherefore the Laity ought so to stand and lean unto the authority of Counsels
that in the time they know that it is no less subject unto the word of the
Lord, than are men which be most simple in Christian faith. And by this
means there should be no new thing ordained in Counsels, or which is repugnant
unto Christian faith, but forasmuch as it is a very easy thing to fall from
Christian faith into sundry and pernicious errors, it is nedeful that these
errors should in godly Synodes by men of understanding be known and
confuted, least the faith of the simple should decay, which are not able to
understand and to attain unto scholastical and synodical disputations, if men
would there use them.

Wherefore the ruder sort of the Laity depend not upon the decrees of Counsels,
to believe this thing or that thing, but upon the simple and plain doctrine,
which is most briefly contained in the principal points of the Cathechis^e.
Unto which also the Counsels give help, least they should be troubled with the
subtle reasoning of ambitious men, which being neglected, they content them
selves with the most plain and most simple doctrine of the Cathechis^e,
according to which they may for their simplicity judge of al doctrines as much
as is sufficient for them.

But this woorthily much greueth godly men, that when there is mention wade ^f
Papisticall Synodes, the true judge cannot execute his office. For in the last
former communication celebrated at Worms in the year. 1557, they which were
appointed collocutors on the Bishop of Romes side, by apert and manifest
words affirmed that the holy scripture is not the voice of the Judge, by whom
only sentence should be given in knowing and judging of controversies of
religion, but that it is matter of strife. Which their sentence if they should
still stand unto, then should godly Teachers come with no fruit to institute
a conferring with them, for they have no other rule to know the truth besides
the holy scripture. For this is a perpetual rule. Whatsoever is found to be
repugnaunt unto the scripture of the prophets and of the Apostels, of what
authority so ever it be, it must be rejected. But they which can not abide this
sole and only Judge, it is manifest that these have a mystrust in their cause:
Unto which the holy fathers have made all their writings subject: which in
all parts agrees with it self, when as the fathers often times, are not
only repugnaunt one to an other, but also unto themselves, which thing
besides other things Augustines books of retractations do testifye.

But the doctrine of the Prophets and of the Apostels is an undoubted
testimony of the will of God, and a most certain rule of the truth, and the
very express voice of the Judge. If we (says the Apostle) or an Angel from
heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed. And again: Gala. 1.
If any man come unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into
your house, neither say ye so much as God speed unto 2. John. 1. Math. 7.
Luke. 3.
him. And the father from heaven speaks: This is my well-beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased, him hear ye. Wherefore there can be no other Judge in
controversies of religion, than the word of God delivered in the scripture of
the Prophets and of the Apostles, unto which al Canons, al constitutions, all the writings of all the fathers ought to be subject and bound unto this voice
of the Judge, whereby they should be either approved or rejected. In this
matter let nothing be attributed unto the arbitrament of a private man: let
there be a godly and modest conferring together of sentences instituted, of the
matter of strife, which are the sundry opinions of men, and not the holy
scripture, which in all parts agrees with it self, being spoken by the
spirit of truth. If it only might bear rule in Counsels, controversies
would easily be quieted.

Wherefore forasmuch as even from the beginning of the spreadyng abroad of the
Gospel through out the whole world Synodes of learned and godly men have been
judged of all the godly not only healthful, but also necessary: Of which
Synodes this ought to be the only purposed scope and end, namely that the
doctrine of the Church may be purged to the praise of almighty God, and
offenses taken away, and discipline worthy for the Gospel restored and
preserved in all orders. The bishop of Rome Pius the fourth has again called a
counsel of Cardinals, bishops, and Monks at Trent: wherein he with great glory
and magnificence, promises both the purging of doctrine from al errors and
heresies, and also a sooner amendment of manners, and worthy for the Gospel as
well in the Clergy as in the people. And to the end the unlearned should not
deubt of the diligence of the Fathers of the Counsel, they are not afeard not
only to accuse themselves of dissolute life, but also to make them selves
gyltye before the whole world as the fountain and authors of al euyls: as the
acts of this Counsel shall declare in their place.

And who would not be glad to help such a one which promises repurgation of
the doctrine of the Church and manners with such carefulnes and endeavor,
chiefelye in such a dissipation of Churches? Who would not to his power help
so godly and holy an enterprise? But if we examine the Canons and decrees,
which not long since came forth from this Counsel, every Christian man shall
easily perceive, that these good holy Fathers entende nothing less: yea rather
all their labor and endeavor is only to this purpose, to oppress sound
doctrine, and that being oppressed, stubbornly to defend idolatry,
superstition and abuses which are brought into the Church of God.

When I understood these things, of such things which are every where carried
about in many men's hands, and there wythal saw very many to hang in doubt and
suspense by expectation of this counsel and authority thereof, and earnestly to
hope for a simple, godly and plain determination of controversies of religion,
of which number yet in the mean time (whilst they have been decreeing of all the controversies) many have not without great danger of their souls
departed out of this life: I thought I should do a worthy act, if briefly and
perspicuously I should declare by the word of the Lord, what is to be judged
of their disputations, decrees and Canons, and what is to be hoped for of the
event of this Counsel. And I trust I shall declare, and that most manifestiye,
that all Christians are by Pius the fourth, bishop of Rome, called to this
Counsel, not as lost sheep to be sought (...) healed of the Pastor, but under
a most pleasant and ^eke form of a Cat, the salvation of the faithful is
laid in wait for, and the sheep of Christ are like to be torn in pieces,
even as it were of Wolves clothedin sheep clothing, as many as (...) them
selves to be brought to this amity and familiarity.

And I desire the godly and Christian Reader, that remouyng away perverse
affections, which otherwise even in things humane ar most wicked counselors,
he bring to (...) of this cause an upright mind, which subdueth it self not
to (...) persuasions, but soly and only unto the word of God. For by that
means I trust it shall come to pass, that he shall easily be able to
understand, what is to be judged of papistical Counsels. Now therefore by Gods
help and furtheraunce, we will come to the matter it self.

The things that came to my hand being sent from Trent, are not all of one
kind. For certain things were proposed to deliberate upon for the
reformation of the Church, certain things are decrees of the Counsel and
Canons appointed to be observed (...) the Church. But how few so ever they be
in number, yet they so open unto us the heart of the Fathers assembled at Trent,
that we may easily perceive what affection they bear unto the true and sincere
^yth and religion, which we profess.

But least any man having little say the to our sayings, might doubt of the
truth of the thing, I thought it good to annexe to this writing all and
syngular things, as they came to our hands from Trent being printed by the
Printers longyng to the Papacye. that the godly Reader may see, that we speak
nothing but with such fidelitye as is convenient, neither do we of purpose or
will cau^ll in any thing, but only aid and desende the truth of the heavenly
doctrine, and desire to farther all them that are ^dious of the doctrine of pi^.

The first Decree published in the first session of the sacred Council of
Trent, holden under Pius the fourth the most high Bishop the 18. day of January
in the year of our Lord God. 1562.
MOst noble and most reverend Lords, and reverend Fathers, may it please you
to the praise and glory of the most ho ly and indeuisible Trinity, the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, to the increase and advancement of faith and
Christian religion, that this sacred, economicall and general Council at
Trent, lawfully assembled together in ye holy ghost (from this day which is
the 18. of the month of January of ye year from the birth of our Lord. 1562.
Dedicated to the Roman chair of blessed Peter prince of the Apostles, all
suspension taken away, according to the form and tenor of the letters of our
most holy Lord Pius the fourth the most high Bishop) should be celebrated, and
that in it (a due order being kept) should be entreated such things, which
being proposed by the legates and presidentes, shall seem apt and mete to ye
holy Sinode, to assuage the calamities of these times, to quiet the
controversies of religion, to restrain disceatfull tongues to correct the
abuses of corrupt manners, and to re store the true ecclesiastical and
Christian peace.

And they all answered: It pleases us, etc. So that others also may propose
such things which to the Synod may seem to be lawful and honest.

Thou see Christian reder that the fathers of the Counsel of Trent do in the
first Session with great magnificence promise that thing, which al
Christendom has now many years most earnestly looked for: namely, the
increase and advancement of faith and Chri stian religion, the asswagement of
the calamities of our time, the quieting of controversies of religion, the
abolishyng of perverse doctrine, the correction of corrupt manners, a true
Ecclesiastical and Christian peace and concord etc, What can the mind of man
desire more, if in so great a multitude, variety, and confusion of opinions of
the Church of God, it might se a godly peace restored, doctrine purged from
all errors, the true worshipping of God (all idolatry and superstition being
taken away) renewed, and most corrupt manners in all orders amended? For the
holy Scriptures do teach that by this means only public evils and calamities
are assuaged. If simple and unlearned men should read and hear these things,
what golden mountains, what golden and heavenly world would not they pro mise
unto them selves?

But if we shall diligently weigh a few words which go a little before the
things which we have now rehearsed (namely, that the Council must be
celebrated, al suspension taken away, according to the form and tenor of the
letters of our most holy Lord Pius the fourth the most high Bishop) we shall
easly understand, that the Bishop of Rome with his Council of Trent mocketh
and dallfeth with all Christendom.

For whe^as in his letters of Indiction and Indulgences, he openly shows that
he is minded to continue and prosecute the Counsel be go^ under Paul the third
and Julius the third and not finished, in this he testifies, that he ratifieth
all the ungodly Decrees of the former Counsel: which thing also the manner of
the order so diligently obser ued, confirms. For in that place where the
above named Fathers left, have they begone both to deliberate, and to decree,
and also to ordeyne Canons.

But lest a man should think that it skilleth not much whether the Council be
continewed or begone, it shall be good briefly to repeat things, which were
ordained and decreed in the last former Sessions.

Howebeit I will not curiously search out all things, but only make mention
of the principal points, which are directly contrary unto ye doctrine of the
Prophets and of the Apostles.

In the first decree of the 4. Sessio^ the Synod decreed, that unwritten
Traditions usurped by co^ntinuall succession in the Catholic Church, shall be
received and reverenced with as great an affection of piety and reverence, as
if they had come from Christ's own mouth, or had been spoken by the holy ghost.

They strike also with their curse al those which in their disputations, and
expositions receive not the books called Apocripha, or the vulgar translation.

Concupiscence (says he) which y^ Apostle calls sin, the holy Sinode
declares that the Church never understood Sess. v. Decr. i.
it to be called sin, that properly and truly in deed it is sin in those
which are regenerate.

Free will is not extinguished in men, although the Sess. vi.
strength of it be empayred and diminished.

If a man say, that other works which are done before I^tification, howsoever
they be done, are sins, let him Can. vii Can. xii
be accursed.

If a man say: That Justification is nothing else. But Can. xii
the confidence of the mercy of God which forgeueth sins for Christ's sake,
or, that this confidence is it only where by we are justified, let him be
accursed.

If a man say, that it is necessary for every man that Can. xiii
will obtain remission of sins, to believe certeynely, and without any
doubtfulnesse of his own infirmitye and vnaptenesse, that his sins are
forgeuen him, let him be accursed.

If a man say, that the precepts of God are impossible to be observed even of
a man that is justified and set under Can. xviii
grace, let him be accursed.

If a man say, y^ grace being lost thorough sin, faith is Can. xxviii.
also together there with all lost: or that the faith which remains is not a
true faith, although it be not a lively faith: or that he which has faith
without charity is not a Christian, let him be accursed.

If a man say that after the receauyng of the grace of justification, the
fault of every repentaunt sinner is so Can. xxx
forgiven, or y^ guiltennesse of eternal punishment so wiped away, ye there
remains no guiltiness of te^porall pain to be paid, either in this world
or in the world to come In Purgatory, before the way can be made open unto
the kingdom of heaven, let him be accursed.

Let these curses suffice, and leave of to speak of other, for by these the
godly reader may see, that the principal points of faith and Christian
religion are not so much cor rupted and perverted, as utterly condemned of the
fathers of the Council of Trent celebrated in the year of our Lord. 1547. Of
all which we thought good briefly to admonish the reader, before that we
examine the Decrees and Canons made by the Council of Trent under Pius the
fourth Bishop of Rome.

They have laid a foundation to defend all superstitions, idolatries and
abuses upon the authority of humans traditions, under the name whereof they
understand all those traditions, which have now a few years past crept into
the Church of God and are therein usurped.

And although our men have never earnestly contended against traditions, which
are not manifestly against the word of God, but thought that they might be
retained without offense to God so that yet they were not vitiated with the
opinion of the service of God, as it is said: They worship me in vain with the
commandments and doctrines Math. xv,
of men: yet will our adversaries never be content. And therefore they have not
only made all tradicions and supersticions, yea even those which are repugnaunt
unto the doctrine of the Prophets and of the Apostles, equal with the holy
scripture, and have referred them unto Christ Esaias. xxix.
as to the author of them, but also they have malepertely contended contrary to
the express word of God, y^ God is worshipped by these humane traditions which
they have brought in.

Farther they are not ashamed to make equal y^ books called Apochripha, which
are disallowed even by the testimony: Ierom upon the. (...) Chap. of Daniell,
and in his preface, upon Daniell.
of the fathers (some of the which books S. Jerome counts among fables) with
the authority of the other sacred books, which are Canonical. And in like
manner allege they of the books of the Machabees, in the latter book,
whereof the author desires pardon, if he have discribed any thing y^ is not
well, which phrase of request agrees not with the holy ghost, whose oracles
are al true and not to be doubted at.

As touching the Epistle unto the Hebrews, the second Epistle of S. Peter, the
two latter Epistles of John, the Epistle of James, and the Apocalips, we are
not the first yt have been in doubt of them, for even from the primative church
there have been sundry opinions of them.

But there is none y^ is in very deed Godly, which is so unlearned, that he
understands not, what these holy fathers chiefly intended in this decree. For
they see that in them they have defenses for certain of their errors, by
which yet they can not extinguishe the light of the truth shining in ye
writings of ye other Prophets and Apostles. As it is in an other place
abundantly showed.

In y^ also they strike with their curse al those, which in all things receive
not the common tra^slatio^ in disputatio^s, what more madness is there than
this, and more repugnant to the meaning of ye holy ghost? I say moreover it is
full of many errors. Will they also put under the thu^der of their curse ye
holy fathers, which used an other translation than it? Or what impiety or
disco^moditie has it, if men have access to the springes of the Hebrewe and
Greek tongue, wherein the mysteries of the heavenly doctrine are written? Unto
the which S. Augustine has diligently admonished us oftentimes to have
recourse and access.

But they manifestly declare their mind and if it were but in this decree
only, in yt they desire to prohibit all those that are studious of the
heavenly doctrine, from the entrance to the knowledge thereof, lest the errors,
and impieties with which the church of Rome has hitherto under the most
thick darkness been sick, should be brought to light.

For as much as the Synod of Trent denies that co^ cupiscence is in very
deed sin, notwithstanding, neither Sess. v. Decr. i.
having any regard, that the Apostle calls it sin, what would it not permit
in things more obscure to oppress and tread down the truth. The law says
manifestly. Exodus xx Deuteronomy. vi. Romans vii.
Thou shall not lust, And the law prohibiteth nothing but sins, If therefore
lust be not in very deed of the number of sins, it can not be prohibited, and
the commandment of the Lord twice with so great seueritye repeated is in
vain. Again I say that these good holy fathers will think that there is
nothing not lawful unto them, if the faithful should grant unto them so
manifest an error and sacrilege.

Likewise also that opinion is repugnaunt to the doctrine Sess. vi.
of Christ and of the Apostles, which they go about by the thunder of cursyng
to establishe, their false (I say) and ungodly opinion concerning humane
strength and freewill: namely that freewill is not extinguished though it be
appayred and diminished. When we were dead unto sins (says the Apostle) he
has quickened us together Ephesians. ii.
with Christ: look how much a dead man is able to accomplish to recover
corporal life, so much does the Apostle attribute to man's strength in his
conversion to God. And Christ says: Without me ye can do nothing. And to the
Corinthians the Apostle writes: we are not John, xv. ii. Cor. iii.
able to think any thing of our selves, as of our selves. Against these
most manifest testimonies, because they would attribute somewhat to man's
strength, they are not ashamed to diminyshe the grace of God, which both
changes and moves the will of the electes to obey the Gospel.

To the same end also tends the. vii. Canon of ye same Session, where in the
works done without faith, justify from sin, contrary to the manifest
sentence of Paul Romans xiiii.
which says: Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and those which with the
Apostle think otherwise they strike with their curse.

In the. xii. Canon they utterly overthrow the head and foundation of the
doctrine of the Gospel, and they rob afflicted consciences of the only
comfort which they have in ye blood of Christ. For they manifestly condemn
althose y^ think ye our ryghteousnes before god is ye confidence in yt mercy
of god forgeuing sins for Christ's sake. The Apostle unto the Romans writes: unto
him which works not, Romans iiii.
but believes in him which iustifyeth the wicked, his faith is imputed unto
righteousness. And again. Therefore In the same place Psalm. xxxij.
we are justified by faith, that the promise should be firm according to grace.
And David says: blessed is the man unto who^ the Lord has not imputed sin,
And in an other place the same ^postle says: By grace you are saved, Ephesians.
ii.
through faith, and that not of your selves, for it is y^ gift of God, not by
works, least any man should boaste. But what need we to bring forth many
testimonies of ye scripture, when as the Prophets do every where teach that the
whole consideration of our righteousness is to be sought for in the mercy of
God applied by faith for Christ's sake? In the knowledge of himself shall my
righteous servant Esa. liii. Act. iiii.
justify many, and he shall bear their iniquityes: There is no other name
under heaven given unto men, wherein we ought to be made safe. This doctrine of
Christ, of the Prophets and of the Apostles concerning the free remission of
sins by faith for Christ's sake, in his only passion and death, and utterly
obtained for us by his obedience, the Council of Trent condemns as
erroneous, heretical and deuilishe.

Wherefore howsoever they should grant unto us all other things, and should in
all things come to our opinion, yet can there be no agreement made between us
and them, so long as they persevere in this their wicked opinion, which (as I
have said) utterly overthrows the chife head and foundation of the doctrine
of the Gospel.

No less impiety has the 13. Canon wherein we are taught by reason of our
infirmity and unaptness, continually to doubt of the remission of sins before
God.

But this opinion is repugnant to the manifest testimonies of the Scripture,
and also to the definition and nature of faith. For to believe is nothing else,
than fyrmely and assuredly to appoynte and not to doubt, and with confidence to
give assent: and by y^ means doubtyng is contrary unto faith. Wherefore when we
are bidden to believe, we are prohibited to doubt. Repent (says Christ) and
believe Mark. i Romans iiii
the Gospel. And of Abraham it is written: And he was not weak in faith,
neither considered he his own body which was now dead, etc. But he doubted
not at the promise of God thorough unbelief, but was made strong in faith,
giving the glory to God, being fully assured, that he which had promised, was
also able to do it. And therefore it was imputed unto him unto righteousness. I
am assured says Paul y^ neither death nor life, etc, nor any other Romans viii
creature can separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. He writes also unto ye Ephe Ephe. iii
sians. In whom we have boldness and entrance with confidence thorough faith.
And James says. Let him aslte (says he) with faith, nothing doubting, for he
which James. i
doubts, is like unto a wave of the sea, which is moved and carried about of
the wind: let not that man therefore think that he ca^ receive any thing of
the Lord. Also: Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of his grace, yt we
Heb. iiii
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

These and like testimonies of the holy scripture, teach, that by no means we
ought to put doubt or diffidence in the mercy of God toward us, and of the
obteynement of remission of our sins, but we must firmly settle our selves
without any doubting or distrust, that thorough faith our sins are forgeuen
us by the free mercy of God for Christ's sake.

But in that they add: having no regard to our own infirmity or vnapt^,
these holy fathers will not in deed have us to doubt of the promises of God,
which is most certain and most firm, and abides always in one sort, but
if we look upon our own infirmity in granting and perseuering, for this our
infirmity (I say) we must continually doubt so long as we live here.

To this we answer, y^ we must in deed have a great regard to our infirmities
and unaptness, and we must acknowledge and diligently consider it, for by it
we are unapt and unworthy to receive and to be partaliers of the grace of
(...): as the Ce^turion speaks in the Gospel. Lord I am not worthy that thou
should enter under my roof, etc. and David says: Have mercy upon me O God,
etc. Also: As thou Lord look upon our iniquities, Lord who shall be able to
abide it. Also: I am a worm and no man ^c. And the Apostle says: I am not
worthy to be called an Apostle, because I have persecuted the Church of God.
David (...). Cor. xv.
also: Lord enter not judgment with thy servant because no living man shall be
justified before thee. And is not Psalm. 143
this to acknowledge his own infirmity and unaptness? But the end of this
acknowledgyng is not a diffide^ce or doubting of y^ will of God toward us, but
it rather ought to stir us up, that we utterly dispairying in our own
strengthes should with a sure and firm faith without any doubting seek
righteousness, life, and eternal life, in our only Lord and savior, and if
there remain any doubtyng in the flesh, let us say with him in the Gospel.
Lord help Mark. ix
my unbelief.

Wherefore the holy scripture teaches, that men ought so to be assured o^ y^
grace and mercy of God toward them, that in the mean time they forget not
their own infirmity, and study to make their election firm by good works,
and not, that by consideration of this their infirmity they should doubt of
the favor of God toward them. For the taking away of which doubt the
Sacraments were instituted by Christ, by which the promyses of God are applied
unto every man, and their hearts are sealed by the spirit of Christ. Of
Baptism Peter writes. That Baptism (...). Peter. iii
also makes us fast, not the puttyng away of the filth of the flesh, but
the taking to witness of a good conscience with God, by the resurrection of
our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead. For even as by taking witness c^uenantes
are performed, so God in Baptism as it were taking us by the right hand,
confirms, that he will be a merciful God unto us in Christ, that he will
forgive our sins, and receive us into grace. For this cause also the Romans viii
Apostle says: ye have not received the spirit of bondage again in fear,
but ye have received the spirit of the adoption of the sons of God, by whom
we cry Abba father. For that spirit bears witness to our spirit that we
are the children of God. Also: Ye are scaled with the holy spirit of promise,
which is the pledge of our inheritance. Ephe. i


Wherefore it is both extreme impiety, and also ignorance of holy
Scriptures, to bring men into a continual doubt because of their infirmity,
wherewith also the nature of the saints is infected. Which thing this
present Canon does, wherein all the doctrine of the Prophets and of the
Apostles is condemned.

And even by this only article, though all the other were convenient, the
godly reder may judge, that the Papists and we strive not (as the saying is)
about moon shine in the water, but about a thing most wayghty. For the
foundation of our salvation, the most proper end and scope of the Gospel is,
to teach, that men, being penitent and believing from the heart, having no
regard to their sins or to their own infirmity and unaptness, should
assuredly appoint and without all doubtyng firmly believe, y^ for Christ's sake
they have remission of al their sins, that they are in the favor of God, and
have eternal life. This foundation of our salvation, and this only
consolation of afflicted consciences the fathers of the Counsel overthrow by
this their decree of perpetual doubtyng. where unto all y^ Idolatry and
superstition of the Papacy leans. For take away doubtyng, and Purgatory is
taken away, Peregrinations or Pilgrimages to the Images of Saints, the
opinion of Merits, of Fastings, and prayers, the sacrifice of the Mass for
the quick and the dead, invocation of saints and such like, al these things
(I say) if you take away doubting, are taken away. But contraryly to affirm
and defend doubting, is to take away faith, and to abrogate the promises of the
Gospel, and utter ly to blot it out of the hearts of men.

The like pernicious error is stablished in the 18. Cano^. That a man being
justified, and set in grace, may perfectly fulfill the law of God. For although
the regenerate do receive the holy ghost, yet continually, as long as we live
in this life, there cleaves to our nature a natural corrup tion, whose
guiltnesse is forgeuen in Baptism, by reason of which corruption the godly can
not perform that which they would. For this cause made the Apostle this
exclamation: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
subject unto death? For he had a Romans vii
little before said: That which I would, I do not, but that which I hate,
that I do: but I know that there dwells no good in me, that is, in my
flesh. For to will is present with me, but I find no means to do good. For
I do not the good thing which I would, but the evil which I would not, that
I do. And again: The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against Galat. v
the flesh: and these are contrary one to the other, so that ye can not do the
same things that ye would.

This doctrine is necessary, whereby also they y^ are in deed godly, do
understand, y^ howsoever they are regenerat yet they ta^ not perfectly
accomplish the law of God, lest peradventure they should fall into a
pernicious doubt, if they should see in them selves also this imbec^llitie of
humane nature not utterly and wholly regenerate, against which infirmity we
must continually thorough y^ grace of the holy ghost fight with a true faith.

The 28. Canon, manifestly teaches that the Counsel of Trent is not governed
by y^ holy ghost, but is infected with the spirit of error. For they teach
that a dead faith is a true faith, and that he which is endewed with a dead
faith is nevertheless a Christian, and the^ that think otherwise they curse.
But these two points are plainly and manifestly contrary and opposite unto the
doctrine of the Apostles. For a true faith is a lively faith, the gift of the
holy ghost, whereby man is joined unto Christ, but that faith which is not
lively, can not be a true faith. And here let ii. These. iii. ii. Cor. xiii.
Ephesians. iii.
them hear what James says, whose authority in other places they so much
extol. Thou beleu est (says he) that there is but one God? Thou do well,
the devils also believe and tremble, wherefore it is the faith of devils, and
not a true faith, which is not a lively confidence in the James. ii.
mercy of God promised by his son, and so is it nothing else, than a humane
and vain persuasion, wherewith the greatest part of the world being deceived
falls into eternal destruction And even as thou may call the pain ted
image of a man, a man, so may thou also call such a persuasio^ or opinion,
faith, which yet is not a true faith.

But what a madness is it, to call him a Christian, which is endued with this
dead faith without charity? Gala. v.
Saint Paul says: In Christ Jesus neither circumcision is of any force nor
uncircumcision, but faith workyng through love. And to the Cor. he writes. If
I have not i. Cor. xiii.
charity I am become like brass yt sounds, and as a cimball y^ ryngeth. But
the council of Trent acknowledges y^ man to be a Christian which is without
charity.

Hitherto they have imputed to our teachers y^ they teach a naked faith
contemning charity, wherein they do unto them great iniurye: But now these
good holy fathers themselves acknowledge them for Christians, which are without
charity, and they count a dead faith for a true faith: Omittyng to speak
more sharply, what blyndnesse is this?

Thou see now Christian reader, in how thick darkness the fathers and
brethren of this Counsel do sit, who are utterly ignorant of the whole manner
of Christian Religion and of the power of faith, wherein the whole strength of
our salvation consists. Wherein also the just judgment of GOD is to be
considered: for for as much as they of purpose and obstinatlye oppose them
selves against the light of the truth, and do hold it back in
unrighteousness, they are worthy of such so great blindness, whereby God
punishes sins with Romans i.
sins.

In the 30. Canon they confirm satisfaction for the guiltnesse of temporal
pain and also the fire of Purgatory, wherein may be satisfied the Justice of
God for the guiltnesse of temporal pain.

Either of these errors are a derogatio^ to ye merit of y^ pas sio^ and death
of Christ, and they declare also, ye the Counsel is utterly ignorant what it
is to obtain or to have remission of sins. For the holy scripture does
testify, that al they whose sins are forgeuen the^, are in the grace and
favor of God as it is written: I will be mercyful to their iniquity, Ierem.
xx^i.
and will no more remember their sin, that is: God does so forget sins, yt
in no part he desires to take vengeance of the^, whom being repentant he freely
forgeueth thorough faith for Christ's sake. As touching temporal pain to
satisfy perfectly the Justice of God, all ye is laid upon Christ's Esaias. liii
shoulders, as Esaias testifies. The Lord has put all our iniquities on him.
He has in deed horn our infirmities and carried our sorrows. He was wounded
for our iniquities, and broken for our wickedness. The chastisement of ou^
peace was upon him. And John in his Canonical Epistle ii. John. i ii. John. ii
writes: The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin.
Also: He is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world. These
testimonies of the holy Scripture of the old and new Testament do
manifestlye teach that besides the obedience of Christ made in the flesh
there is no other satisfaction for sins: and that they are fowlely deceived
which do put some part of satisfaction either in their own passions or else
in their fained purgatory.

To divide in half the merit of the passion of Christ, is utterly to abolish
his merit: for he is no half or imperfect redemer but a perfect redemer, with
one oblatio^ (says the Epistle to the Hebrews) has he for ever made perfect
those, which are sanctified. Heb. x.

But because they see that the expiation or satisfaction for sins is by most
manifest testimonies of the scripture attributed only unto Christ, they go
about to avoid them by a vain distinction, when, they teach, that the
sins themselves are not expiated, but that for the eternal pain dew unto
sins the satisfaction of temporal pain is expiation made, but in affyrmyng
of these things, they show in very deed that they are utterly ignorant,
what remission of sins is. For what other thing else is remission of sin,
than that God first receaueth us into favor, and forgeueth the fault of
sins, then also he remitteth the punyshemente which we have deserved by our
sins? Wherefore where there is not a full and perfect remission of pain, but
that some satisfaction is required, there also is not a full and perfect
remission of sins. I know the Council of Trent can not unloose this knotte,
and if this be manifest to be the doctrine of the holy Ghost, then will fall
away their satisfactions for sins and the fire of purgatory shall easiy be
quenched.

And although the Lord sometimes do some what more severely chaste^ those whose
sins he remitteth according to his will, as he understands to be
expediente for them, yet is that by no means to be counted a satisfaction for
ye pain of sin, but a healthful discipline, to keep them in doing their
duty, and to cause them to work their salvation in fear and trembling. When
we are (...). Cor. ^i.
judged (says the Apostle) we are corrected of the Lord, least we should be
condemned with the world: He says not that we are corrected, to the end we
should satisfye part of the justice of God, but to the intent we should not
sin hereafter or flatter our selves in sins.

Also yt feigned fire of Purgatory is manifestly against this sentence of
Christ, wherein he says: Uerely I say unto (...). (...).
you, he which hears my word, and believes in him which sent me, has
eternal life, and shall not come to judgment, but has passed from death to
life. It is also contra ry unto the most sweet consolation of the Apostle
which is written unto the Thessalonians, where the death of the Godly is called
a sleep. I will not (says the Apostle) that you should be ignoraunte
brethren of those which have fallen on sleep, etc. But it might be called a
wonderful sleep if it were joined with so great a tormente of purgatory
fire? Which the Sophisters affirm differs nothing from the infernal fire
but only in respect of duraunce of time. Whereof you shall hear what the
Disciple says in his Sermon of souls, whose words are these. For if all the
coals of the whole world being gathered together upon one heap were on fire,
and if a man should stand in the midst of them, he should not susstaine so
great heat, as the souls sustain in purgatory. Of this feigned fire of
purgatory the holy prophets and Apostles know nothing, ye holy scripture is
ignorant thereof, neither knows it of any other fire after this life than of
the infernal everlasting fire of the damned, which shall never be quenched but
all the misery of those y^ shall be saved ends in this world, wherein yet also
is the beginning of eternal life.

And although y^ Bishops of Rome with their Cardinals, Bishops, Sacrificers
and monks were man^ years ago admonished of all these pernicious errors, ye^
se great is their stubborn^es and security in defending of errors that in s^
manifest a light of the doctrine of ye Gospel, they are bold to obtrude them
again unto Christian people: so much are they bewitched by the spirit of
lying, that they should not give place unto the truth of the heavenly doctrine
which the Lord has raised up again in the latter times, and has kindled the
true light in the hearts of many.

I thought good to admonish the godly reader of all these things before I
took in hand to confute the rest of the decrees and Canons, which were made
under the Bishop of Rome Pius the fourth concerning the Sacraments: all which
namely decrees and Canons seeing they were allowed by the Counsel gathered
together the last year, they which are but meanly instructed in the
doctrine of piety may most manifestly see, y^ there is no good thing to be
hoped for at their hands.

For what (but even briefly to repeat all things) piety or sound doctrine
can thou look for of them, which acknowledge not the disease of the corrupt
nature of man, and dare deny it to be sin contrary to the Apostle? Which
deny that man is dead thorough sin, and do attribute unto him strengthes
yet remaining, whereby he may apply him self unto grace? Which also excuse
works of the Ethnikes and infidels from sin? Which are ignorant of the
nature and difference of the law and of the Gospel? Which condemn the
righteousness of faith, which thorough the obedience of Christ rests only
in the mercy of God? Which teach a man continually to doubt of the grace and
favor of God? Which dream y^ the faithful can fulfill the law of God?
Which besides the passion and death of Christ do teach us to seek other
satisfaction in this life and in ye world to come. What good thing (I say) can
a Christian Public wealth hope or look for from such fathers? when as with
their perverse and ungodly decrees they do not only pervert the foundations;
and principal points of Christian Religion, but also, as much as lies in
them, utterly ^uerthrow them.

Where as there are five principal feast days, wherein the benefits of the
son of God are yearly celebrated in the Church: the feasts of the
Nativity of Christ, of his Passion, Resurrection, and Ascencion into heaven,
also the feast of Whitsontyde. Of all these feasts the Fathers of the Counsel
of Trent have left us nothing, but the names and truth of the historye, which
is also in the deuilles, unto which fathers thou may most aptly apply this
saying of Paul. They profess that they know God, but in deeds they deny him,
when as they are abominable, Titus. i.
and not harknyng to his word, and reprobate to all good works.

For the power and fruit of the holy Nativity of Christ is to purge and
make clean our vnpure Nativity, Psalm. li
which were conceived, borne, and dead in sins. The Counsel of Trent
extenuateth the power of this, whilst they extenuate the disease of original
sin, and deny it to be properly called sin.

The virtue and fruit of the Passion and death of Christ, is a perfect
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, and a full remission thorough
the mercy of God. Contrarily the Counsel extenuateth the virtue of this
merit, and teaches that for the temporal pain of sins, we may satisfy
both in this life by good works, and after this life in Purgatory.

The virtue and fruit of the resurrection of Christ is, that all they which
believe in Christ are justified from i. Cor. i ii. Cor. i
sin, and endewed with righteousness, not with their own righteousness but
with ye righteousness of Christ, as it is written: which was delivered for
our sins, and raised up for our Justification. Contrarily the Counsel Romans
iiii
decrees, that part of the Righteousness which is of force before God to
put away sins, consists also in our works.

The virtue and fruit of the Ascension of Christ into heaven, and of his
sitting at the right hand of the father (from whence also he sent the holy
ghost unto his Apostles) is, that he only and alone has opened the gate of
the kingdom of heaven, is a continual intercessor for us Ephe. iiii
unto the father, and seals our hearts with y^ holy ghost, as with a pledge
and earnest penny, y^ the faithful should be certain and not doubt of the
favor and mercy of God toward Ephe. i Romans viii. ii. Cor. i
them. Co^trarily the Counsel teaches y^ we should lay the consideration of
our infirmity against the promises of God, and yt because of it we ought
continually to doubt of the grace and favor of God: and they judge it to be an
arrogant confidence, whereby a man assuredly and undoubtedly promises unto him
self the favor of God for Christ's sake. Yea and yt more is, one of the Fathers
of this Counsel in the defense of his Catholic doctrine not long sins was not
ashamed to write. That there is no Stanislaus Hosius Bishop of Uarmienum
Cardinal against Brentius.
greater abomination before God, than if a man having no respect unto his own
infirmity should certainly appoint and firmly believe that thorough faith his
sins are forgeuen for Christ's sake.

Take away this firm consolation from a Christian ^an, and the benefits of
the son of God which we have rehearsed, which the Counsel of Trent
derogateth, namely the full remission of sins, ye is, of the fault and pain
gotten by ye blood of Christ, take away also y^ perfect right ousnesse which
we have by the resurrection of Christ, and the assure^ testimony of the holy
ghost, Whereby we believe without any doubtyng that we are in the favor of God
for Christ's sake: and what can be left or given him that is auaylable to
salvation?

But rather this ought continually to be the study of a Christian man, y^ we
should fight against this distrust and doubting, which is naturally in us, and
cleaves unto us even against our wills, and expel it, so far is it of, that
it should be a praise of piety modesty or humility, because of our
infirmity to doubt of the grace of God offered us in Christ. The holy fathers
of the Counsel judge, y^ it can not want the sin of arrogancy if a man
having no regard to his own infirmity do assuredly appoint of the grace of
God toward him self. In the mean time they consider not, how great a
wickedness it is to accuse god in his promises of vanity and lying, Who having
no regards to our infirmity promises and offreth his favor in Christ's to us
being unworthy and wicked, and does most severely admonish, and under the pain
of hell fire command us, y^ as repentaunt sinners, we should without all
diffide^ce or doubt, yt is, with a true and firm faith embrace it. He that
believes not, that is, that firmly appoynteth not, y^ for Christ's sake he
has God merciful unto him, shall be condemned. Mark. xvi


And thus much of the doctrine which the Counsel of Trent, in the year.
1547, confirmed against the express word of God to establish their old errors.

In the seventh and last session they began to make decrees also of the
Sacraments which are added as seals unto the heavenly doctrine, wherein the
promises of God concerning his free favor toward us, are sealed, and our faith
confirmed.

But I will not dispute long of these their decrees, whose true and manifest
confutation is of late set a bro^e: but I will only admonish yt godly reader of
certain things, y^ he may se, that the Counsel in this part also is not unlike
unto it self, ye having no regard unto the word of god, they appoint and decree
what they lust them selves.

In the first Canon they curse those which believe not, y^ there are seven
Sacraments, being so most properly called and instituted of Christ him self.
But who will not here straight way marvel at the rashness and boldness
(omitting to speak more grievously) of the Counsel? When as Christ has
instituted only two Sacraments, and not m^ or fewer, to feign to these other
five which are not proper ly Sacraments. For as for Baptism and the Supper of
the Lord the Evangelists testifye yt Christ instituted the^, to confirm our
faith, which have yt word, and promise, and outward simboles or signs. As
for y^ other which partly are kinds of life instituted by God, and partly are
ordinances, how dare they number them among Sacraments: When as either they
want outward symboles, or else they are not seals of promises of eternal
life? And because they dispute of the number of Sacraments of the new Testament
instituted by Christ, with what rashness dare they to bring into y^ number
either Repentance or Matrimony, when as the self same are found in the
people of the old Testament?

In the fifth Canon they decree: If a man say y^ the Sacraments were instituted
only to ye norishement of faith, Let him be accursed. What other thing I pray
you do they in this Canon, than utterly to overthrow the use of the
Sacraments. If the imbecility of our faith were not so great, that it would
firmly rest in y^ promises of God, what should we need Sacraments? by which
God would help our imbecillitie, as the Apostle has written of Abraham: Romans
iiii
he received the sign of circumcision, the seal of the righteousness of the
faith which was in uncircumcision. etc.

In y^ eight Cano^ y^ old impiety of ye monks is confirmed which taught y^
Sacraments co^fer grace by y^ work wrought, without y^ good motion of him
which receaueth. This Canon is against ye doctrine of y^ Prophets and
Apostles, which testifies y^ grace is not conferred but to those which believe
in very deed. For even as y^ word of promise nothing profits the unbelievers,
but hurts them, as y^ Apostle ^estifieth, it is the savor of death to death
to these that perish: so undoubtedly have the Sacraments the ii. Cor, iiii
self same consideration, which are added unto the promises of God, to
confirm and increase grace offered by the promises of God, and received by
faith.

^y this error Monks of the later time have endeavored them selves to comme^d
the celebrations of their Masses, and to persuade me^, that by the work
wrought they are profitable for those, for who^ they are celebrated, when as
they neither confer any grace to the live sacrificer, neither yet profit the
dead, or lookers on y^ stand by. This error being already oftentimes confuted,
the Counsel goes about to establishe.

In the xiii. Cano^ they confirm all magical and histrionicall rites, which
were by little and little brought-into y^ Church. of God, and they urge the^ with
so great a necessity as* though they were ye worshippyng of God, y^ they do
not only judge these to sin, but also strike the^ with their curse, which
have either omitted or changed any of the^. The words of ye Cano^ are these:
If any man say, y^ the received and allowed rites of the Catholic Church
accustomably used in the solemn administration of the Sacraments, may either
be conte^ned or at the ministers pleasure without sin omitted, or by any
other pastor of the Churches be changed into any other new rites, let him be
accursed.

In this Canon first is condemned the doctrine of Christ and of ye Apostles
concerning Christian liberty, whereof y^ Apostle has written. In the liberty,
wherein Chri^hath delivered Gala. v.
you, sta^dye, and be not ye wrapped ag^ (...) y^ yoke of servitude. Christ
also says. They worship me in vain tr^ thing ye doctrines and precepts of
me^. The practice of y^ Apostles is condemned, which not only by y^ testimony
of y^ ^gelistes, Math. xv
but also of the high Priests used, not these rites: they baptized with al
manner of water, Platina in y^ life of Sirtus y^ first, testifies ye Peter
celebrated yt supper of yt Lord, with the Lords prayer with out any other rites.
Not only all y^ pastors of our church are condemned, but also y^ primative
churches, which were utterly ignorant of these rites, which humane wisdom
has inverted, and superstition increased.

And thus much of the Sacraments in general: whereby we may conjecture that
the fathers of the Council will correct no error, abuse or Idolatrye, for as
much as they will not for peace and concord sake so much as remit the least
rytes and ceremonies, wherein there is none or small help, but have decreed to
retain the^ with tooth and nail.

Neither do we so earnestly dispute of ceremonies and outward rites, because we
would for them have the peace and tranquillitye of the church troubled, which
may be retained without sin, but ye the church should be instructed, y^ the
opinion of necessity and worshipping is to be taken away, which opinion also
conuerteth into horrible Ido latrye things that are of their own nature mean
and indifferente.

In their Canons of baptism although they leave unto us ye form prescribed us
of Christ, yet they so pervert the administration and use thereof, that the
faithful can hope for little consolation thense, unless they be more rightly
instructed.

For to omit their ware taper, savor of salt, spitle, chrisome, and such like,
in conferring whereof they are more occupied, than in pouryng on the water,
which things also do rather obscure and vitiate the benefyte of baptism, than
commend it: In the. vii. Canons they bind him ye is baptized to observe the
whole law of Christ in ye opinion, wherein the Scholemen have delivered it:
namely ye forasmuch as (after the Scholemens opinion) in the new law is given
a perfecter law than in the old, they affirm that he which is Baptized is
bound in work to fulfill this law. But what other thing is this, than to
give a sign of desperation in baptism? For the Sacraments are signs of the
promise, and of the grace offered in the promise, whereby they are received into
the favor of God which are not able perfectly to perform the commandments
of God. In the mean time yet are they bound to the obedience of the law of
God, whose curse is taken away by Christ, as it is written: Now you are not
under the law, but under grace. Gala. v.


No less ridiculous and ungodly are the fathers of the Council of Trent
concerning confirmation. For in that they attribute unto the oil the power of
the holy ghost which may not be given unto those ye are Baptized but by a
bishop, what other thing is this tha^ a humane tradiion and a magical kind of
inchantement? We read in deed in the Evangelist Mark, ye the Apostles
annoynte^ Mark. vi.
many sick folks with oil and healed the^, but this was a medicine of ye
body, and not an instrumente of giving or communicating the grace of the holy
ghost, which it sygnifyeth: we will not speak of the blessyng of the oil
which is altogether magical, before it can serve for this spectacle.

In the mean time how necessary the Catechism is in so great an ignorance and
rudenes of the common people that they might rightly be instructed in true
faith and religion, all the true Godly do see, and do deplore and deteste the
negligence of the Bishops and sacrificyng priests: concerning this thing the
Council is more dumme than a stone.

In sum y^ Council of Trent neglectyng the Catechism, thought by the
Sacrament of confyrmation to retain their gasyng spectacle, thereby to blind
the eyes of the rude, yt they also might seem to do somewhat in the church,
when as to teach (which thing also experience declares) they are most unapt.

But it is sufficient to have rehearsed at ye least the prin cipall points of
the former Counsel of Trent, wherein I trust I have she wed that the true and
heavenly doctrine of original sin, of free will, of yt law and of the
Gospel, of grace, and justification of the merit of the passion, death, and
resurrection of Christ, of the certaynty of our salvation, of faith and good
works, of the Sacraments in general, of Baptism and Confirmation, is not
only corrupted, but also the true use of them for the most part utterly
abolished and clean taken away.

All these decrees and Canons with a great many mo, which contain no less
impiety, which I will now with silence over pass, the fathers of this
Counsel of Trent, in the year from the birth of Christ. 1562, the xviii. day
of January, do as it were repeting the^ in these few words (should be
celebrated, all suspension taken away, according to the form and tenor of the
letters of our most holy Lord Pius the 4. most high Bishop) acknowledge and
reverence them in this their first decree as most holy, and do approve and
confirm them with their assent and authority.

By these things (as I think) all Christendom may easly understand that the
Cardinals, Bishops, Monks, and Sacrificers called together at Trent by the
consent of the Bishop of Rome Pius ye iiii. not to cle^se ye doctrine of the
Church from errors, which have not once with their little finger touched any
one error of y^ Scholastical or Papisticall doctrine, wherewith their books
and decrees over flow: but they are assembled together with this only purpose
and intent, to establishe and confirm the Popes tyranny in the Church, and
also deuilishe Idolatrye, and thorough out al Christendom to oppress and
utterly to over throw sound doctrine, and the folowers thereof.

Wherefore there is no cause why, that any man should be deceived wte these
their most flatteryng words, namely that they assembled together in this
Counsel so the increase and advancement of faith and Christian religion, to
assuage the calamities of these times, to quiet y^ controversies of Religion,
to restrain disceatful tongues, to correct the abuses of corrupt manners, and
to restore ye true ecclesiastical and Christian peace. For the sense of those
words is, yt the calamities of these times ca^ by no other means be assuaged,
or the controversies concerning reli gio^ quieted, unless the old and
au^cie^t superstition and idolatry be called again into the Church, and y^ al
godly teachers (whom they in this place understand by disceatful to^ges) should
euerywhere be put to silence; and yt such which hithert^ being instructed wc yt
word of God, have gain said their impiety and plainly co^uinced them of
manifest idolatry, of infinity superstitions, abuses, and all kind of most
pernicious errors, yea and also of most great impiety, should cruelly be put
to death.

But as touching the correcting of corrupt manners they are so far of to be
careful, yt they seem by all diligence to seek a greater license for y^
maintenance thereof, when as it is not possible y^ there should be a greater
dissolutio^ of life and manners in all orders, but especially in the Clergy.

And although as I suppose I have hitherto sufficiently and ple^tifully
declared yt the Counsel of Trent in this first decree has most briefly
condemned ye sound doctrine of ye Gospel in a manner in all his parts and
articles, so y^ I need not to rehearse any mo things, whereby to declare yt all
godly me^ ought to abstain from the amity and familiarity thereof, as from a
most deadlyope^ enemy of ye eternal truth and celesti all doctrine, yet
nevertheless because we would in other things also satisfy y^ desire of ye
godly reder, we will briefly also examine such things which they have decreed
of ye books of herctikes, of ye sacrifice of ye Mass, of ye communion under
both kinds, and of prebendes.

The first decree of the second Session of the sacred Counsel of Trent, under
Pope Pius the fourth the xxvi. of February. 1562.
THe sacred, oeconominall, and general Sinode of Trent, lawfully assembled
together in ye holy ghost (the self same legares of the Apostolical seat being
preside^tes in it) not trusting to humane strengthes, but cleaving to the help
and aid of our Lord Jesus Christ (who has promised to give mouth and wisdom
unto his Church) has principally a regard unto this, to restore at the length
to his pureness and ^brightnesse, the doctrine of the Catholic faith being in
many places corrupted and obscured by reason of the opinions of many which
disagree among them selves, and to revoke the manners which have declined from
the old institution unto a better manner of life, and also to convert the
heart of the Fathers unto the children, and the heart of the children unto the
Fathers. For as much therefore as it first of all considers, that at this
time the number of suspected and pernicious books, wherein vnpure doctrine is
contained, and far and wide spread abroad, has to much increased, which
thing in deed was the cause that many reformatio^s were with a godly zeal made
in sundry provinces, and especially in the high City of Rome, and yet could
no healthful medicine profit this so great and pernicious disease: It has
thought good ye the fathers which are ap pointed for this inquisition, should
diligently consider what were needful to be done concerning Censures, and
books, and that they should also in due time make relation unto the self same
holy Synod, that it may with more ease desseuer sundry and strange doctrines,
as it were tares from the wheat of Christian verity, and more commodiously
deliberate and decree concerning those things, which shall seem most opportune
to the plucking out of doubts out of the minds of very many men, and to the
taking away of the causes of ma ny complayntes. And all these things* it
desires to be brought to the knowledge of all men what soever they be, as also
by this present decree it gives knowledge abroad, that if any man shall think
that by any means these things pertain unto him, touching the matter of these
books and Censures or any other things which it has declared to be handled
in this general Cou^ sell, he should not doubt, but that he shall with much
favor be heard of the holy Synod.

But because y^ self same holy Synod wishes even from the heart, and
earnestly desires of God, those things that are profitable to the peace of ye
Church, yt all we acknowledging our common mother upon the earth (which can
not forget those who^ it has brought forth) may with one mind with one mouth
glorify God and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thorough the bowels of
the mercy of the self same God, and our Lord and al those which have not
communion with us, it allureth and exhorts unto concord and reconciliation
and that they would come unto this holy Synod: and embrase charity, which is
the bond of per fectio^, and prefer the peace of Christ which reioyseth in
their hearts, into which they are called in one body. Wherefore harkenyng unto
the voice not of a man, but of the holy ghost, let the^ not harde^ their hearts,
but not walking in their own sense nor pleasing the^ selves, let the^ be
stirred up and converted to so godly and healthful an admonition of their
mother. For the holy Sinode as it allureth them, so also will it embrase them
with all duties of Charity.

Furthermore the self same holy Synod has decreed that public faith or save
conduite may be granted in a general congregation, and shall have the same
force, and be of the same strength and wayght, as if it had been given and
decreed in a publicque Session.

The second Decree published in the self same. ii. Session.
THe self same sacred Sinode of Trent lawfully gathered together in the holy
ghost (the self same legates of the Apostolical seat being presidentes therein,)
has appointed and decreed, yt the next Session to come shall be had and
celebrated the (...). day after the most holy feast of the Ascension of our
Lord, which shall be the. 14. day of the month of May.

These things agree with the Originals, Angelus Massarellus Bishop of Thelesia
Secretary unto the sacred Counsel.
IN the beginning of this decree the Counsel makes a preface yt it regards
this thing only, yt ye doctrine of ye Catholic faith being defiled and
obscured with the opinions of sundry men might be restored to his pureness and
brightness. But how will they answer unto this promise, and to the
expectation of the Church, I think it manifestly appears by those things
which we have before spoken. Undoutedly this were a care mete for the Counsel,
which yet they in nothing perform, but rather go about with humane
traditions to obscure and oppress the doctrine of faith being now many years
by the labor of godly and learned men purged and cleansed.

Farther we neither ca^ nor ought to deny, but yt there are very many books
extant not so much suspected, as blasphemous and pernicious, but the Romish
bull has eye to very few of them, especially to such as are of his court and
faith, but by his Censure he notes those only as heretical, which contain a
healthful simple and plain explication of the truth, as we may see in the
cataloge of the heretics.

But in that the Counsel commits that matter (namely the examination of
pernicious books) unto a certain few friars, it seems therein to have small
regard or eye to the estimation of it self, when as it puts the judgment
of the doctrine of the Church to the arbitrament of a few Sophisters.

But with what conscience dares the Counsel condemn books wherein they never
looked, which they never read, nor never examined? But if they stand to ye
judgment of a very few monks, why are not ye Censures, unto which ye
authority of the Counsel is added as it were a viser, published under their
name and danger. For when such books are condemned and prohibited by the
authority of the bishop of Rome and of the Council, simple Christian men
think, yt all these writings have been diligently examined of the fathers,
when as they are nothing else but the perverse judgments of a few monks,
which either gape for a Cardinals hatte, or otherwise flatter the Bishop of
Rome, and are most deadly enemies of our doctrine. If they say time was so
short yt they themselves could not examine them, a goodly excuse I promise
you, which now being these two years gathered together have published abroad
five or six decrees.

This yt I have now spoken they observe not only in the examining of books,
but also in the examining of all their Canons. For the Monks dispute and
decree of the matter yt is put forth, which Canons are afterward confyrmed by
the authority of the bishops, so yt first the consent of ye bishop of Rome be
joined unto the^, by whose spirit al thigs ar there done by messagers coming
between.

When as therefore the writyngs of Godly and learned me^ are condemned of the
Monks (whose ungodly and perverse judgments ye council ratifyeth, and by his
authority confyrmeth) we ought no more to be moved tha^ (...) we should read
and here, yt the doctrine of Christ being comprehended in ye writings of ye
Apostles were condemned of ye Pharisees,

But in yt al me^ (unto who^ this matter seems principally to pertain) are with
such cleme^cy and humanity (if a man ^oke upon yt bare words) not only invited
to come to Trent unto ye counsel, but also promised saueconduite, how this
their good will ought to be taken, by these things which we have spoken, it
is not obscure. Forasmuch as almen are as yet bound by an oath unto ye bishop
of Rome, and do acknowledge the authority of ye Bishop of Rome to be above the
Council, upon whose back they also depend, if public faith and securitye
given should only be the cause, that our men would not come unto the counsel,
all men may see that there is no sufficient warrantise provided for the^. For
the bishop of Rome has not given saueconduyt but the council, and because the
spirit wherewith they are governed is a lying spirit, and a murderer, who
would commit his life and health unto them, which hitherto have horribly
persecuted our men omitting no kind of crueltye, and have put to death great
numbers of them? But we will remit this disputation unto the Lawyers, unto whom
the natures of public faith or saueconduit are better known. And it is the
destenye of Godly pastors, yt for the most part they are not brought to
judgment to plead their cause, but that under the color of right they
might be put to death: which though the examples of Christ, of the Prophets,
of the Apostles, and of ye Martirs John. xiiii:
do testifye. This process of the law (as they call it) must Godly teachers
look for in this world, which will not betray the doctrine of the truth unto
their enemies, of who^ they are no more heard, tha^ was Christ of the high
priests unto whom when he answered he pleaded all our causes: For being
demanded, whether he were Christ, he answered. If I tell you, ye will not
believe. And if also I ask of you, ye will not answer me, neither will ye let
me go. Luke. xxii.
No otherwise undoubtedly seems the council of Trent to deal with us. For if
our deuines (as they would have the^) should come unto Tre^t, to render a
reason of their faith, and would expound ye verity of their doctrine, either
they should not be heard at all as it came to pass in the year of our Lord.
1551. in the same place ye Bishop of Romes adherents being gathered together
under Julius yt third: or else there should no credit be given unto them,
when as they altogether are addicted unto the bishop of Rome by the bond of an
oath, and al things should be done in prejudice of the truth, which also
should be betrayed to the enemies thereof, which hardening their ears and
their hearts brought from home yt condemnation thereof, which dare not ou^e
hysse against the bishop of Rome.

Wherefore there is now no disputation of the faith public but of godly and
mete conditions of the Counsel, which hitherto could by no means be obtained
of the Bishops of Rome, no not by the Roman Emperors.

In the mean time whilst the fathers of the Counsel of Trent are busied not
in seking out the knowledge of the doctrine of the Gospel, but in condemnyng
it and in confirmyng their errors, let us both in prayeng and teaching
faithfully do our duty and be most assured yt God which is in heaven,
derideth their Counsels and laugheth them to scorn, and will before the end
of the world even spite of their teeth spread abroad his doctrine thorough but
the whole world.

Now let us also come briefly to confute yt other decrees which are set forth
concerning the sacrifice of the Mass, and the Eucharist.

Articles concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass to be examined by the divines.
1 WHither the mass be only a commemoration of the sacrifice which was made
upon the Cross, and not a true sacrifice.

2 Whither the sacrifice of the Mass do derogate the sacrifice that was made
upon the Cross.

3 Whither in these words (do this in remembrance of me) Christ ordained that
ye Apostles should offer his body and blood in the Mass.

4 Whither the sacrifice that is made in ye Mass profits the receauer only,
and can not be offered for other as well quick as dead, and also for their
sins, satisfactions and other necessities.

5 Whither private Masses, namely wherein the priest only and no other do
communicate, be unlawful, and to be abrogated.

6 Whither it be repugnant with the institution of Christ, that in the Mass
water is myngled with wine.

7 Whither the Canon of the Mass do contain errors, and be to be abrogated.

8 Whyther the rites of the Church of Rome, wherein the words of consecration
are spoken secretly and with a soft voice be to be condemned.

9 Whyther the Mass ought to be celebrated, but in the vulgar tongue only
which al me^ may understand.

10 Whyther it be an abuse, to attribute certain Masses unto certain saints.

11 Whyther the ceremonies, garments and outward signs, which the Church
uses in the celebration of Masses, are to be taken away.

12 Whyther it be one and the self thing, Christ to be offered up mystically
for us and to be given unto us to be eaten.

13 Whyther y^ Mass be only a sacrifice of praise and thankesgeuing and not
also a sacrifice propitiatory both for the quick and for the dead.

Let them declare whyther they be erronius, or false, or heretical and to be
condemned by the holy Synod.

And the xiii. Articles above written concerning the sacrifice of the Mass
which are now put forth to be examined of the divines, let them be so divided
amongst them, that the half part of the divines (of those namely which shall
speak first, which are in number 17) may answer only upon the 7. first
Articles: and the rest of the divines which shall speak after the^, to
answer upon the rest of the Articles followyng.

The decree for the examining of suspect and pernicious books, was as it were
extraordinary. But now for as much as the ^ucharist, is the third in number of
the 7. Romyshe Sacraments, and in the last Counsel of Trent ye last Canons
as touching confirmation were publyshed abroad, that all Christendom may see
that the first Counsel is continewed and not a new begone, now I say they
diligently observe their purposed order. And first are put forth the Articles
which contain the matter of the disputation concerning the sacrifice of the
Mass. And these Articles do declare that the doctrine of our Churches
concerning this matter is not unknown unto the Counsel. So that they are the
less to be excused from impiety, whilst wittingly and willynglye they
condemn the manifest truth, yea and even Christ him self and his Apostles.
But it were to be wished for that of these Articles proposed there should be a
disputation had in an assembly of all the orders of the empier, and of all the
nobilitye of whole Christendom, which matter namely of the sacrifice of the
Mass, amongst all the holy things of the Papacye is the chiefest. But now
for as much as only unlearned monks and friars, in a corner of ye City of
Trent, confer their sentences together, and that such as are not repugnant,
and also not seriously, but only to establishe this Romish idol, all godly
men ought to think it to be a trifling and vain action. And such is also the
arrogance of the Counsel, that it thinks a thing scarce worthy that it
should render a reason of his decrees and Canons to the Church of God euerywher
in the worlddispersed abroad.

But as concerning the preposed articles let us hear ye doctrine of the
Counsel, which the monks and friars ministered unto the Bishops, that it
being confirmed by their authority, the said Articles should be published
abroad by Canons.

The doctrine and Canons concerning the sacrifice of the Mass.
THe sacred Sinode, etc. (That the ancient, absolute and fully perfect faith)
and doctrine concerning the great mystery of ye Euchariste may be retained in
the holy Catholic Church, and be in his pureness preserved all errors and
heresies being put away) being instructed by the inspiration of the holy
ghost, teaches and declares of it, in ye it is a true and singular sacrifice,
these things which follow, and commands the same to be preached unto the
faithful people, and to be inculcated into their hearts.

Because under the first testament (as Paul the Apostle testifies) by reason
of the imbecility of the priesthode of Leui, there was no perfection, it
behooved (God the father of mercy so ordeyning it) that an other should rise
according to the order of Melchisedech, namely our Lord Jesus Christ, which
might accomplish and bring to perfection even as many as were to be
sanctified. The same therefore one God and Lord although he once upon the
altar of ye cross would by his death offer him self unto God the father,
there to work our eternal rede^ptio^, yet because by death his priesthode
should not be extinguished to the end that he might show that he was
appointed a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech, and to the
end he might (as the nature of me^ requires) leave unto his said spouse the
Church a sacrifice, wherein should be represented that bloudye sacrifice
which should once be done upon the cross, and that the memory thereof
should remain unto the end of the world, and that the saving power thereof
should be applied for the remission of those sins, which we daily commit,
in his last Supper, the same night that he was betrayed, offered his body and
blood unto God the father under the forms of bread and wine: and under the
Symboles of those self same things, he delivered them unto his Apostles, whom
he then ordained Priests of the new Testament, and commanded them, and their
successoures in the Priesthood to offer them by these words, Doye this in
remembrance of me, as the Catholic Church has always understand it and
taught. For the old Easter being finished, which the multitude of the
children of Israel offered for a memorial of their Departure out of Egypt, he
instituted a new Easter, namely that he him self should be offered up of the
Church by the Priests for a memorial of his passage out of this world unto
the Father: when as he has by the sheadyng of his blood redeemed us and
delivered us from the power of darkness, and transferred us into his
kingdom. And this is that clean oblation which can not be defiled by any
unworthiness or malice of the offerers, which also the Lord by Malachy
foretold should in every place being clean be offered in his name, which
should be great among the heathen, of which also Paul meant writing unto
the Corinthians, when he says that they which are defiled by participation
of the table of deuilles can not be made partakers of the table of the Lord,
understanding in both places by the Table the altar. This also is lastely that
oblation which was figured by the similitude of so many sacrifices in the time
of nature and of the law, as which comprehends all things by them
signified as it were the consu^mation and perfection of them all.

Because in this divine sacrifice which is done in the Mass, that self same
Christ is contained, and vnbloudily inuiolated, which once bloudily offered
him self upon the altar of the Cross, the holy Synod teaches that this
sacrifice is in very deed propitiatorye and by it is brought to pass that if
with true heart and fulness of faith, with fear and reverence, we come contrite
and repentant unto god, we may obtain mercy and find grace in help of
opportunitye. For the Lord being pacifyed with the oblation hereof, forgeueth
great crimes and sins, and gives grace and glory: For it is one and the
self same sacrifyce, the self same in number is offered by the ministerye of
the priests which then offered himself upon the Cross differyng only by the
manner of offryng the fruit of which oblation, (of the bloudye oblation I say)
is by this unbloody oblation most abundauntly received, so far is it of that
it should by any means by this be derogated. Wherefore (according to y^ tra
dition of the Apostles) it is ryghtlye offered for the faithful, not only
such as be quick but also for the dead in Christ, not yet purged to the
full, for their sins, for their satisfactions and other necessityes.

And although the Church has sometimes used to celebrate certain Masses in
the honor and memory of Saints, yet it teaches not that sacrifyce is
offered unto them, but unto God only, which has crowned them, wherefore the
priest uses not to say: I offer sacrifyce unto thee O Peter or Paul, but
geuyng thanks unto GOD for their victoryes, and imploring their aids, he
exhorts al men to imitate them.

Farther forasmuch as it is convenient that holy things should be administered
holily; and this sacrifice is of al things most holy, the Catholyke Church, to
the end it should worthily and reuerentlye be offered and received,
instituteth a sacred Canon, so pure from all manner of error, that there is
nothing contained therein, which does not give a great sweet sauoure of a
certain holiness and piety, and erecteth the mind of the offerers unto God.

And for as much as the nature of men is such, yt it can not easily without
outward helps be lifted up unto the meditation of things divine, for that
cause the Godly mother yt Church has instituted certain rites, namely that
certain things in the mass should be pronounced with a soft voice and other
certain with a louder voice, it has also adjoined Ceremonies, as mystical
benedictions, lights, incenses, vestments, and many such other like things,
taken out of the Apostolical Discipline and tradition, whereby both the
majesty of so great a sacrifice should be commended, and the minds of ye
saythful should by these visible signs of religion and pietye, be stirred up
unto the contemplation of things most high, which lie hidden in this sacrifice.

The sacred Sinode would in deed wyshe, that in all Masses, some of the
faithful should communicate, that the fruit of that most holy sacrifice might
come unto many: and yet though it come not always so to pass, does it not
therefore condemn those Masses, wherein the Priest alone sacramentally
communicates, as private and unlawful, but rather allows and comme^deth
the^, for that those Masses also ought in very deed to be counted common,
partly because in the^ the peo ple spiritually co^municateth, and partly
because they are celebrated by the publicque minister of the Church not for
him self only, but also for all the faithful, which pertayne unto the body
of Christ.

Farther the holy Synod admonishes that commandment is given from the
Church unto the Priests, to mingle water with the wine that is offered in the
chalice, both because it is thought that the Lord Christ did so, and also
because out of his side came forth water together with blood, which Sacrament
is by this mixture kept in memory, that for as much as peoples are in the
Apocalipse of blessed John called waters, ye union of the faithful people with
the head Christ should be represented.

And although the Mass contain great eruditio^ of the faithful people, yet
ye fathers thought it not expedient, that it should every where be celebrated
in the vulgar tongue. Wherefore the old rite of every Church and the rite
approved, by the holy Church of Rome being every where retained; least the
sheep of Christ should hunger, least the infantes should desire bread, and
there should be none to break it unto them: the holy Synod commands
Pastores, and all them that have cures of souls, that oftentimes between the
celebration of Masses they either by them selves, or by others expound some
what of those things which are read in the Mass, and among other things
declare some mystery of the most holy Sacrifice, and especially on the Sondayes
and holy days,

But because against this ancient faith and doctrine founded in the sacred
Gospel by the traditions of holy fathers, there are at this time many books
written, many things are also taught and disputed, the holy Synod after many
and wayghty entreys delitherally had concerning those things, has with one
whole consent of all the Fathers, ordained by these Canons followyng to
condemn and thrust forth out of the Church those things which are repugnant
unto this most pure faith and sacred doctrine.

Canons.
1 If any man shall say, that in the Mass is not offered unto GOD a true and
proper Sacrifice, or that to be offered is no other thing, than Christ to be
given us to be easen or that it profits the receauer only, let him be
accursed.

2 If any man shall say, yt the sacrifice of ye mass is only a sacrifice of
praise and thanks giving and not a sacrifice propitiatory, and that it ought
not to be offered for the quick and the dead, for sins and pains, and other
necessities, let him be accursed.

3 If any man shall say that by these words, Do this in remembrance of me,
Christ instituted not the Apostles Priests, or that he ordained not, that
they and other Priests should offer his body and blood, let him be accursed.

4 If any man shall say, that the most holy Sacrifice of Christ done upon the
Cross is blasphemed by the Sacrifice of the Mass, or that it is by it
derogated, let him be accursed.

5 If any man shall say, that it is fraud and deceate, to celebrate Masses in
the honor of saints, and for the obteynement of their intercession, as ye
Church intends, let him be accursed.

6 If any man shall say, that the Canon of the Mass conseyneth errors, and is
therefore to be abrogated, let him be accursed.

7 If any man shall say, that ceremonies, vestmentes, and outward signs,
which the Catholic Church uses in ye celebration of Masses, are
prouokeme^tes unto impiety, let him be accursed.

8 If any man shall say that Masses, in which the priest alone communicates
are unlawful, and therefore to be abrogated, let him be accursed.

9 If any man shall say, yt the rite of the Church of Rome, wherein the words
of consecration are spoken with a soft voice, is to be condemned, or the Mass
ought to be celebrated only in the vulgar tongue, or that water is not to be
myngled with wine in the Chalice, because it is against the institution of
Christ, let him be accursed.

At the first the Counsel endeuoreth to set forth it self with a shepes
clothyng: for it promises the old, absolute and fully perfect faith and
doctrine of the Euchariste. These things if a man that is in deed godly
should hear, what hope would not he conceive that it should come to pass,
that the true use of the Supper of the Lord should be restored according to
the institution of Christ, and doctrine of the Apostles, and practice of the
primative Church? For the doctrine of Christ and of the Apostles is most
ancient, and it is only absolute and fully perfect. Neither also is the
practice of the primative Church unknown, which religiously observed both the
doctrine and also the rites delivered them by the Apostles. Let us hear as
touching this thing ye testimony of ^Platina being one of the Bishop of
Romes favorers ^n the life of Sixtus the first, Bishop of Rome, how bare
and simple the celebration of the Supper of the Lord was, when as rites and
ceremonies were as yet viterly unknown, which the latter age added unto it
without the word of the Lord. This simplicity (I say) and pureness godly
men would think the Counsel promised by these their words, if they had not
straight way added things that are directly repugnant with the institution of
Christ and of the Apostles.

For it teaches that the Eucharist is a true and a singular sacrifice, and it
decrees that it ought to be preached unto all the faithful and to be
inculcated into their hearts.

Neither do we contend about this word sacrifice, the Eucharist also may
after his manner be called a sacrifice, because it comprehends the memory of
the sacrifice of Christ, and a thankesgeuing of the faithful. And that this
was not the meaning of the holy fathers, they manifestly show, when they
affirm: that it is a true and singular sacrifice propitiatory, and not only a
memorial of an other sacrifice, which thing they will a little afterward more
expressedly decree, and in their Canons confirm with a curse.

But let us briefly examine the reasons and arguments, by which they go
about to confirm the sacrifice of the Mass. The first argument is: In the
old Testament by reason of the imbecillitie of the sacrifice of Leui, there
was no perfection. Wherefore in the new Testament, it behooved that one should
rise, namely our Lord Jesus Christ which might accomplish and bring to
perfection even as many as were to be sanctified. To this we answer, that we
grant the whole argument, and with the Apostle we affirm that the self same
thing is accomplished in the Passion and death of Christ, The precepte (says
he) that went before was abrogated, because of imbecillitie, and among them
were many made Priests, because they were not suffered to endure by reason of
death. But this man, because he endures for ever, has an everlasting
Priesthood, wherefore he is able also fully to save those which come unto GOD
by him, ever living, to this end to make intercession for us. And least any
man should understand this of any other Sacrifice than of that which was
done upon the Cross, straight way he adds: This he did once, when he offered
up him self. And in the (...) cha^: Not that he should offer him self often,
as the high Priest entered into the holy place every year with strange
blood, for then must he have often suffered since the creation of the world.
But now in the end of the world has he appeared Once to put away sin, by
the Sacrifice of him self. And as it is appointed unto men that they shall dye
once and after that comes the judgment, So Christ was Once offered to take
away the sins of many. These testimonies of the Apostle do most manifestly
teach that the imbecility of the Sacrifices of Leui is taken away by the sole
and only sacrifice of the Cross. And so far ^t of, that the Sacrifice of the
Mass can be confirmed by this argument, that it can scarcely by any more
strong argument be overthrown. For if it should daily be offered by Priests,
which are as much mortal as were the Priests of Leui, and also have their
successors, how should it differ from the Leuiticall Sacrifice in consideration
of imbecility? For the Leuiticall Sacrifice because of imbecility was done
every year: but the sacrifice of Christ because of his perfection was done but
once.

The second argument is: The priesthood of Christ was not to be extinguished
by his death. Therefore the Eucharist is a sacrifice. The Answer. I deny the
consesequence. For the priesthode of Christ is not extinguished, although the
Eucharist be not converted into a sacrifice. For how Christ does the office of
an eternal priest in heaven, the scripture every where teaches. For for as
much as there are three offices belongyng to a Priest, namely to teach, to
offer and to pray: al these things he has not only fulfilled in his flesh, but
also the power thereof has endured even from the creation of the world, and
shall endure unto the end thereof. For concerning the will of his father he
taught from the. xxx. year of his age even unto ye. xxxiiii year. Farther in
the days of his flesh when with a Heb. v.
strong cry and tears he offered both prayers and also supplications unto him
which could deliver him from death, he was heard for reverence sake. Lastly
he offered himself upon the altar of the cross an oblation unto god Esaias.
liii. ii. Cor. v
the father for the sins of the whole world, for a sweet smelling savor
unto the Lord. Seeing therefore Christ Jesus is this day, yesterday, and for ever
(as the Apostle says) which was unto mankind even from the beginning the
word of the father the messanger of his will, by whose hand also the law was
given, by whom it was to be fulfilled. So also y^ power of the sacrifice,
which he wroughte upon the cross, has endured in all times, whereby all the
Gal. iii.
Patriarchs thorough faith obtained eternal life, which thing the Apostle
signified by this aduerb (yesterday) The Heb. i.
self same power of this sacrifice indureth not only now presently, but also
with all our posterityes, and that for ever. Likewise ye power of his prayer
and intercession indureth Romans viii.
for ever, who sitting at the right hand of the father, makes intercession
continually for us.

When as therefore yt true use of ye supper, which is an eating and not an
oblation of ye body and blood of Christ in ye supper, extinguisheth not this
his perfect, absolute, perpetual and eternal sacrifice, for y^ cause al ye
godly may judge yt this reason of ye fathers is weak to establsh ye sacrifice
of ye mass

The third argument: Christ is a priest according to the order of
Melchisedech. Melchisedech offered bread and wine, Therefore the Eucharist is a
sacrifyce for the quick and the dead. Thou will marvel Christian Reader at
ye form of this Sillogesmus, which in no point hangs together, but
undoubtedly such are ye reasons of al maintayners of ye papacye, otherwise this
argument will be no defense unto them. For if it were brought into a form,
this should be the argument. Melchisedech the priest offered bread and wine.
Christ is a priest according to y^ order of Melchisedech. Therefore in the
Supper he offered bread and wine. By this conclusion not only their
transsubstantiation shall fall, but also the sacrifice of the body and blood
of Christ shall utterly be nothing. For Melchisedech offered not the body of
Christ, but bread, but the papists say Christ offered his own body and not
bread. Farther to the mayor or first part we answer. That Melchisedech never
offered unto God the Father bread and wine which thing they can never prove by
the text, but offered them unto Abraham and his companions, whom as they
returned weary from the victory he refreshed, which thing this Hebrew word
Hotsia declares, which signifies not to offer, but to profer. And if
Melchisedech were to be compared with Christ in consideration of bread and
wine, the author of the Epistle unto the Hebrews whatsoever he was, being
undoubtedly a diligente searcher of the holy scriptures, would by no means
have left it unspoken of, whereof yet he makes no mention at all. But in ye the
holy fathers used not only this figure, but also the name of a sacrifice, it is
not to be doubted, yt they understood not on ly the memory of this sacrifice,
but also thought by this means to help their imbecilitye, which were
accustomed to the sacrifyces either of the Jews or of the Gentiles. There
withal also they labored to repel the importunity of those, which cried yt
Christian people contrary to the manners and custom of all nations and
peoples wandered without any outward and publicque sacrifyce. Wherefore they
opposed against all men as well Jews as Gentiles the Eucharist, wherein not
only all the godly and faithful communicated in the body and blood of Christ,
but also a public and solemn memorial of the sacrifice y^ was done upon the
cross was celebrated with Heb. 13.
thankesgeuing, that is (as the Epistle to ye Hebrews says) by him the
sacrifice of praise was offered unto God, that is, the fruit of the lips that
confess his name.

In this place also is diligently to be noted the inconsta^cye and short
memory of the Council of Trent, for that here it affyrmeth ye by the sacrifyce
of ye Mass is represented a sacrifice propitiatory, but afterward it stryketh
with a curse those which deny ye the sacrifice of the mass it self is the
very sacrifyce propitiatorye for the sins of the quick and the dead, whereof
we will speak in his place.

But whereas they say that in the sacrifice of ye mass is represented the
bloody sacrifice ye was done once upon the cross, what other thing do they
make of the mass than a Paschal or Easter play? From which in this thing only
ye mass differs, because in a Paschal play the historye of y^ passion of
Christ is represented by many persons, but in the papisticall mass, al things
are done by one only sacrificing priest. If a man should demand of them, by
who^ this sportfull and histrionicall representation was instituted, which
consists in outward gestures, they ca^ bring forth neither the Apostles, nor
Christ, as it is a little before showed out of Platina. For these histrionicall
gestures of these sacrifycing priests were utterly unknown unto the Apostles
and unto the primative church.

But whereas the holy fathers of the counsel say, that Christ in his last
supper offered unto God the father his body and blood under the forms of bread
and wine, that is by the same simplicitye of all the Godly rejected as of yt
Counsel it is affyrmed, for thereof they can neither bring out a testimonye of
the holy scripture, nor yet a testimony of any al^o wed writer as our men have
in other places aboundauntly declared.

Of the self same authority is yt which they affirm of the Apostles, namely
ye Christ by these words: Do this in re membraunce of me, ordained the Apostles
priests of the new Testament. For they feign that a peculiar kind of men was
ordained and instituted to celebrate this sacrifyce, namely priests, which
should daily for the sins of the quick and the dead offer the sacrifyce of
y^ mass in a players garment accustomed to be used in the Romysh church.

But there is none so rude in ye holy scriptures, which sees not ye the
counsel is to far out of ye way in this thing. For forasmuch as sacraments
ar added as seals unto doctrine, the administration of them is given in charge
unto them, unto whom the ministerye of teaching is committed. Wherefore even
as Christ by this word, Baptyze ye, ordained not a certain kind of life of
Baptizers, so also by these words (do this) he ordained not any certain
order of sacrifycers, which thorough out the whole papacye are as apt to
teach, as is an Ass to play on the harp. And such is the impudency of an
infinite number of sacrifycing priests that they are not ashamed to say, y^ it
pertayneth not to their duty and office to teach in the Church, which are
ordered only for three things in the mass (as a certain one of this kind of
great learned men spoke) and that by these formal words. Receive power to
offer sacrifyce unto God and to celebrate masses both for the quick In the pon
tifical book folio. 20 Exodus 12.
and dead, in the name of the Lord.

The fourth argument: In ye old Testament ye Paschall Lamb was not only eaten,
but also offered up. Therefore in the Supper of the Lord also, which was
signified by the Paschal Lamb, the body of the Lord is not only to be eaten,
but also to be offered up. I deny the consequence. For the Apostle Paul
comparing yt Easter of ye old Testament with the Easter of y^ new Testament,
writes: For our 1 Cor. 5
easter also was offered up eue^ Christ, he says not is offered up, and shall be
offered up in ye Eucharist, but was offered up, un dersta^ding the sacrifice ye
was done upon ye cross. For eue^ as the immolatio^ of the Paschal lamb was a
bloody immolation, so also Christ upon the cross offered unto the father a
bloody sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. Therefore ye immolatio^ of
the paschal lamb, does no way confirm the idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass,
which paschall Lamb, was a figure and type of the Sacrifice that should be
made upon the cross.

The v. argument in Malachy we read written: From y^ su^ne rising to the Su^n
set, great is my name among the Mal. 3.
gentiles, and in all places a clean oblation is sacrificed, and offered unto
my name, because my name is great among the gentiles, says the Lord of hosts.
If we say ye the prophet speaks this of the prayers of the godly, and of the
sacrifice of praise of which the Epistle to ye Hebrews thus speaks: by him
therefore let us always offer unto god the sacrifice of praise, that is the
fruit of the lips which con fesse his name, they will straight way answer
unto us, that this is an invention and fained tale of ye Lutherians, let the^
Jerome b^ on the. 3 chap: of Malachye.
therefore hear what Jerome says upon this place, whose authority is with this
counsel counted most sacred, who understands the se^te^ce of the prophet, to
be spoken of ye prayers of ye people of ye new testament, and by no means
understands he it, of the oblatio^ of yt body and blood of Christ. Wherefore
let them cease by this place to confirm the sacrifice of the Mass, which in
no part makes on their side.

The sixth argument. The Apostle writing unto the Corinthia^s says: ye cannot
be pertakers of ye table of ye lord, and of y^ table of devils. On yt tables
of devils were made obla tio^s. Wherefore also on the table of ye lord is an
oblatio^ of ye body and blood of Christ. There is no reason at al of this con
sequence. For ye apostle does of this thing only admonish y^ Corinthians, y^
they which communicate in ye supper of the Lord, wherein is celebrated the
memory of the sacrifice of the cross, ought not to communicate with the sacred
things of the gentiles in whose name so ever they come: For they were offered
unto devils and not to God, although the Gentiles thought they offered
sacrifices unto the true and lively God. But by this place the adversaries
shall never prove, ye the Eucharist is a sacrifyce propitiatorye, which ye
Apostle calls the Supper of the Lord, and in no place a sacrifice. And al me^
see how weak this consequence of the Council is: Paul in either place
understands an alter, therefore in either place is sacrifyce made. But what if
in either place he understood not an alter? He calls it the table of the Lord
and not an alter. These arguments in an evil cause are far sought and
fetched and they labor in vain by words and conjectures to establysh that,
which may be confuted by the institution of Christ and manifest testimonies of
Paul.

The last argument is taken of the custom of the Patriarchs and Jews,
unless peradventure they understand the Gentiles also under the name of
(nature) as in y^ last former Council in the year. 1551. A Monk at Trent
openly preached: ye the Gentles are by the law of nature saved without Christ.
The argument is. To a figure or shadow answers a body. The sacrifices of
y^ Gentiles and Jews signified ye sacrifyce of ye Eucharist. Therefore the
Eucharist is a sacrifyce. Of the sacrifices of ye Gentiles we will now say
nothing, whose gods are devils, and their sacrifices are sacrifices of devils,
and not of God. But only we will speak of the sacrifyces of the Jews, which
no Christian man denies but y^ they were types and figures of Christ. And they
were types of the sacrifyce ye was made upon the cross, as we have before
showed out of Paul: because the sacrifyce of the cross was the consummation
and perfection of all the Leuiticall sacrifices. Wherefore y^ minor or second
proposition is simply to be denied, for as much as ye Iewysh sacrifices
shadowed not the Eucharist, but the sacrifyce which was made upon the cross.

These things I thought briefly at the lest to touch, and not thoroughly to
entreat of, ye even the unlearned also might see, y^ the sacrifyce of the
papistical mass leans to no fyrme reasons or arguments, which sacrifyce y^
counsel of Trent (but I fear me to late) confyrmeth by their authority: now
let us make haste to examine those doctrines which follow. For I would not
hold the reader in those things which of themselves are manifest, and are of
other learnedly and aboundauntly confuted.

In the third doctrine is by these most manifest words taught, yt the sacrifyce
of the mass is in very deed prop^tiatory and ye through it is obtained grace,
by oblation whereof the Lord is pacifyed, and forgeueth great crimes and
sins: Of it one only reason is brought forth of the Council.

Christ is a sacrifyce propitiatory, In the Eucharist is Christ. Therefore the
Eucharist or mass is a sacrifyce propitiatorye.

CHildren ye have been brought up in schools, do see that in this argument are
four terms, for Christ signifies one thing in the mayor or first proposition
and an other thing in the minor or second proposition. For Christ is called a
sacrifice in y^ action, or rather passion, wherein he was offered upon the
cross unto God the Father for the sins of the world. But in the Supper he is
called the meat of the faithful. Christ therefore is but one in consideration
of the person, but diverse respects cleave unto him. And therefore he would in
the Supper be eaten and not offered as the Apostle expressedly expounds: As
often as ye shall eat this bread and drink of this cup, ye shall show the
Lords death, till he come. He says not, so often as ye shall offer this bread,
but shall eat this bread. 1. Cori. 11.
Wherefore even as it follows not: Christ healed Peter's wives mother. Christ
is in ye Eucharist. Therefore christ in ye Eucharist heals Peter's wives
mother: So also follo weth not this argument brought of y^ sacrifice of y^
mass. Thou will now laugh Reder (as I suppose) at their ridi culous
co^clusio^, but mark well, and thou shall see y^ the cou^ sell of ^re^t does
after this manner conclude and no otherwise. Who therefore would not deride
their decrees? It is neces sary ye they com armed with other arguments, if they
will with ex treme vnctio^ succor their mass being now sick, and in a man ner in all provinces and kingdoms giving up the ghost.

Howbeit they are not ashamed in ye mean time to affirm y^ the sacrifice of
ye mass does not derogate the sacri fyce of ye cross. If by virtue of ye
sacrifice of y^ Cross al sins ar forgiven (as ye doctrine of ye prophets and
of y^ Apostles every where teach, it follows, y^ by ye sacrifice of ye mas no
sy n is forgiven: but if certain sins are forgiven by ye sacrifice of ye
mass, as this decre manifestly says: The^ not al sins are forgiven by the
sacrifice of ye cross. Let al up right men here judge what a great derogatio^
it should be to ye sacrifice of the cross if they affirm ye in themas is a
sacrifice propitiatory for ye syns of me^? And unless ye whole world had been
bewitched with this opinion, y^ by y^ work of ye sa crifice of the mass sins
are erpiated, the rightes and yearly revenues of the sacrificing priests and
Monks, had not so increased, who have almost scraped unto them selves all the
treasures of the world.

Let all the godly readers also mark in this place y^ the mass which was
allowed by the Interim, is condemned of the counsel and utterly taken away:
under color where of many were deceived, especially for ye in the imperial
Miche^ Heldgug bishop of Sydon at the counsel of Auguste celebrated in the
year. 1548.
assemblies it had the bishop of Sydon as a trompet and open publysher thereof,
who persuaded men, that in the restoration of the mass, is not commended unto
y^ church a sacrifice propitiatory, but a sacrifice of commemoratio^ or of
thanks giving: for there was but one only sacrifice propitiatory which was done
upon the cross, but in the is a sacrifice of thanks geuinge or of
commemoration wherein the passion of Christ should be represented.

But whereas the council says, that the fruit of the sacrifice of the cross is
by the sacrifice of the mass applied to the beholders of the mass and is
received of them, thereof they bring no reason at all, whereas there was yet
most need of all. For the holy scripture in no place makes any mention of
this applicacion: Discipulus in deed in a ser Discipulus in his part of Saints.
mon of the. 12. fruits of the mass, makes mencio^ of this also but without
testimony of the scripture. The scripture teaches y^ the benefits of the
sacrifice of Christ are appli ed unto the beleuers, by the receiving of the
sacraments, but no where do they teach that they are applied to the beleuers,
by the receuig of the sacraments, but no where do they teach ye they are applied
by hering or seeing of mass. Wherefore it is a horrible prophanatio^ of y^
supper of the Lord which ye counsel in this place confirms, and y^ also ye
sacrifice Sacrifice for the dead.
of ye mass is to be offered eue^ for ye dead, and as the cou^ sell terms for
such as are not yet fully purged. For ye lord instituted ye Eucharist for y^
liui^g and not for y^ ded. Nether would we have only lokers on and herers, but
gests, eaters, and drinkers acordig to his institution, which shuldshew forth
his death.

But of ye error, y^ me^ are purged in ye fire of purgatory, we have before
spoken enough, namely y^ it is nothing else, but a vain feigned lie brought into
the church through ignorance of (...) power of ye passion and death of Christ.
For souls are not purged from sins by any fire either terrestial or infernal,
but by ye death and blud of Jesus Christ, as John 1. John. 1.
says: The blud of Jesus christ, his son cle^seth us from al sin

Even as therefore there is no purgatory fire, so also is it nothing else but a
prophanatio^ of y^ supper of ye Lord, to offer sacrifice for the dead, whom
also it should nothing profet, although it did much profit the^ ye be on live.
For y^ ministry of ye word and ye Sacraments was instituted for ye liuig and
not for ye dead. But it profits y^ dead so farforth as it was applied unto
the^ when they were on live, after death there is no more application by the
ministerye of them that be on live

In the which doctrine or decree ar confyrmed two pernicious errors: One is:
That masses are to be celebrated in the honor of saints. The other is: that
the aids and helps of saints are to be implored: both which are repugnaunt
unto the express word of God. For Christ instituted not the Eucharist to the
memory of saints, but for the commemoration of his death: do this (says he)
in remembrance of me, and not of my mother or of my saints. Paul calls it
the showing forth of the death of Christ's 1. Cor. 11.
and not of saints.

For although it be not of it self ungodly, even in the use of the Eucharist
to make mention of the saints, which have valtantly lost their lives for the
glory of Christ, and constantlye shed their blood, in confessing of him, as we
read was done in the primative church: yet is it sin and a horrible
profanation of the Supper, to teachy^ by this work wrought the aids and
helps of saints are deserved and applied unto them: When as in the Euchariste
Christ deals with the faithful, and the faithful with Christ, and not with
dead saints.

But of it self it is wicked and idolatrous to call upon saints. For
invocation of saints not only wants an express commandment and promise
of God, but it is ex pressedly commanded in the scripture: ye we should call
upon psalm. 50 Math. 1^
God only in all aduersityes. Call upon me in the day of tribulation and I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorifye me. Christ also: Come unto me all ye
y^ labor and are laden, and I will refreshe you. But of yt dead saints the
Scripture testifyeth y^ they are ignoraunte of things humane, as it is
written: Abraham knows us not, and Esaias. 63.
Israel has not known us. Thou Lord art our father, our redemer, etc. For
y^ meaning of the Prophcte is: we in vain convert our selves either to
Abraham, or to Israel which are dead, and are ignorant what is done on earth,
unto whom our cogitatio^s and temptations are not open: But thou God only art
the searcher of our hearts, and imbracest us with a fatherly affection, which
also only and soly can deliver us from all evil.

Wherefore forasmuch as it is of it self wicked to emplore the aids and
helps of saints, whither it be in spiritual things, or in things outward
and corporal ye impietye is by this decree doubled, whereunto the Eucharist
also is compelled to serve, which was not to this end instituted of Christ, but
rather neglecting the defense and invocation of saints, we are taught to seek
and repose al our defense against all manner of evils in Christ only.

In the sixth decree the Counsel affyrmeth: That ye Canon of the mass is so
pure from al error, ye there is nothig contained therein which gives not a
great sweet savor of a certain holiness and piety, etc. And afterward in the
vi. Canon it strikes with a curse all those which say y^ the Canon conteyneth
any errors.

What is impudency, if this be none? In so great a light of the truth of the
Gospel to deny, ye the Canon of y^ mass contains any errors? But I will not
make any long con futation of them, but briefly make mention of the principal
errors, which at the first sight the godly reader shall perceive are
repugnaunt unto the holy Scripture.

The first error: Straight way in the beginning of the Canon, the Priest
speaks thus: For who^ we offer unto thee, or else, which offer unto thee this
sacrifice of praise both for himself and for all his, for the redemption of
their souls. Thou see here Christian Reader not only a small error, but also
horrible impietye: a sacrifycing priest to offer the sacrifice of the mass
for ye redemption of souls when as all the souls of the Badly are by the
sacrifyce of Christ done upon the Cross redeemed from the anger of God, from
sins, and from hell, as it is written unto the Hebrews: Christ the high
priest of good things to come, by his own proper blood has entered once into
the holy Heb. ix.
place, having obtained eternal redemption.

The second error. After mention made of the Apostles and of certain saints,
the priest adds: By whose merits and prayers we beseech the grant, that in
all things we may be defended by the aid of thy protection.

What merits I pray you have the saints, by which we get the protection of
God? The saints could not deserve Luke. xvii.
any thing for them selves, how the^ ca^ they succor us by their merits? If ye
shall do al things (says Christ) say ye we are unprofitable servants. Paul
also: God forbid ye I should glory but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Gal. v. Phillip. iii.
Also: I think all things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Jesus
Christ my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do judge them
to be dongue, that I might win Christ. What shall the losses of saints be
merits unto us of the protection of God? which are protected by the merit
only of Christ.

In like manner also must we judge of the prayers and intercessions of saints,
when as by ye scripture we are sent unto Christ our only intercessor, who is in
heaven (says Paul) Romans viii. John. xvi.
and makes intercession for us. Christ also: Whatsoever ye shall ask ye
father (says he) in my name: he says not in ye name of my saints, he will give
it you. And John: If any i. Ioh. ii.
man shall sin we have an advocate with the father. Jesus Christ the just: he
says not we have many advocates, but many, yea all the saints have only one
advocate, Christ Jesus our Lord. The third and most horrible error is y^ the
priest after the consecration speaks thus of the body and blood of Christ: We
offer (says he) unto thy excellent majesty of thy gifts and rewards a
sacrifice pure, a sacrifice holy, a sacrifice immaculate, ye holy bread of
eternal life, and the chalice of perpetual salvation, Upon which we beseech
thee vouchsafe to look with a merciful and chereful countenance, and accept
the^, as thou vouchsafedst to accept the gifts of thy just child Abel: and the
sacrifice of our Patriarche Abraham, and the holy sacrifice and immaculate obla
tion which thy high priest Melchisedech offered unto thee.

Ca^ Christ be more blasphemed the^ he is here? can there be any thing spoken
more conte^ptuously of y^ sacrifice of ye bo die and blood of Christ? The
sacrificing priest prays, y^ God the father would with a merciful and
chereful countenance look upon his son. Is the father angry with Christ raignig
in heaven, unto who^ he must be reconciled by a sacrificing priest? Let ye
papists say what they will, and turn themselves into al forms, yet they ca^
not wynd themselves out of this. For when y^ consecration is done, he speaks
not of y^ bread and wine, with which God (especially if they remain in their
substance) is never angrye. Neither also speaks he of the persons, for who^
he offreth, but of y^ sacrifice it self which is offered, even of the body and
blood of Christ, y^ is of Christ himself. What greater blasphemye can there be
tha^ this. Farther how much they esteem Christ, let the godly reder diligently
mark. The sacrificing priest prays, ye Christ may please god the father, as
y^ sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedech pleased him. Abel offered of
the first borne of his flock. Abraham offered a Ram unless peradventure they
understand Isaac, whom he would have offered. Melchisedech offered bread and wine
not to God, but unto Abraham. Christ therefore is no better nor preciouser in
the sight of God the father, according to y^ Canon, tha^ a Goat, a Ram and a
piece of bread. Oh plasphemous impietye. Unless the father looked upon Christ
with other eyes and a more chereful countenance, then he did upon the sacrifice
of Abel, our eternal salvation were in an il case. For the sacrifices of Abel
and Abraham expiated not sins, but were shadows of the sacrifice of Christ
which should be done upon the cross. Wherefore in respect of merit, there is
no co^pariso^ or proportion of y^ sacrifices of Abraham and Abelto the
sacrifyce of Christ offered upon the cross. For the sacrifice of Christ has
made satisfactio^for all the sins of the whole world: but the sacrifices of Abel
and Abraham have made satisfaction for no sins at all. What impiety therefore
is this of ye sacrificing priest, which is not afeard to make Christ not only
like but manner also inferior unto the sacrifyce of Abel, Abraham and
Melchisedech?

The fourth error. The sacrificing priest prays: Command these things
(namely the body and blood of Christ) to be carried by the hands of thy holy
Angel into thy high alter, into the sight of thy divine Majesty. What
absurditye is this: Is not Christ with his body always in heaven and also in
the sight of the father? Does he day lie ascend and descend? Or is he by the
hands of Angels carried down from heaven into the earth, or carried up from
the earth into heaven?

But these good holy fathers say: That the body which is made of the substance
of the bread, was not before in heaven, because it is newly created by the
consecration of the sacrificing priest. If this be true, then have not the
sacrificing priests the true body of Christ which was hanged upon the cross:
For y^ is not of the substance of the bread, but of the substance of the
blessed Uirgine Mary. Wherefore there shall not be only two bodies but infinite
bodies of Christ in heaven, if as often as the priest says Mass, the body of
Christ created of a new substance of bread is by yt ministry of Angels carried
up into heaven. Who under stands not this gross error, which is ryghtly
instructed of ye supper of ye lord? In the which supper y^ same body of Christ
which is in heaven, is also after a spiritual manner agreeable to Christ's divine
majesty truly present to ye faithof y^ godly receauer, whersoeuer his holy
supper is celebrated

Neither also can the sacrifycing priests wrap themselves out of this two
horned argument. If the Aungel carry the body of Christ into heaven, there is
nothing then left Dilemma.
for the sacrifycer. But if the sacrifycer swallowe it up, the^ descends the
Angel in vain, and is sent away emptye. These things of the Canon are not
only erroneous, but also rediculous and childyshe inventions.

The fyfth error: In the Canon, purgatory and suffrages and sacrifyces for the
dead are confyrmed. Remember also Lord (says he) thy men servant and women
servant, which have gone before us with the sign of faith, and sleep in the
sleep of peace. N. we beseech thee Lord give unto them and all those y^ rest
in Christ a place of refreshing, light, and peace. This error even these their
own words confute, in which is contained manifest contradiction. For if the
faithful y^ are dead do sleep, and are in peace, light, and at rest, what is
it needful to desire it for them? But if they be in darkness, in pain and
most great terrors and sorrows (as it is before said out of Discipulus
touching the pains of the souls in purgatory) how are they then said to
sleep in the sleep of peace?

That prayers and sacrifices of the quick nothing profit the dead, we have
before showed, neither is it needful in this place to repeat it again.

The last error is comprehended in the last prayer of the Canon: Let this
performance of my service O holy Trinitye (says the priest) please thee, and
grant yt the sacrifyce, which I unworthy, y^ I am, have offered unto the eyes
of thy majesty, may be pleasant and acceptable unto thee, and may thorough
thy mercy be propitiatorye for me and all those for whom I have offered it into
everlasting life. Amen.

The same error also is before put in the beginning of the Cannon, but with
other words. For y^ which he there said he offered for the redemption of
souls, the same now he says, yt he offered it a propitiatorye sacrifyce. Does
he not manifestly in this place attribute yt to the execution of his service,
which is proper to ye death and passion of Christ He y^ sees not these things
is blind. He says John is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our
sins only, i. John. ii.
but also for the sins of the whole world, etc. The work of the cross was
expiable for our sins, and not ye work of the mass, or the ministry of the
sacrificing priest.

Let ye counsel go now and decree: ye the Canon wants al manner of error, y^
al thing contained in y^ are godly and holy: which overthrows ye foundation
of Christian doctrine, and co^teyneth so horrible errors of purgatory, of
merits and invocation of saints, of ye body of Christ, of prayers for ye dead,
of ye merit and application of the death and passion of Christ.

But I will stand no longer about these things, of which our me^ have learnedly
written: And amongst other y^ historye of the mass is most diligently
discribed of Valentinus Vannius bishop of Maulbrune wherein the above! mentioned
errors, and other many more, are at large and thoroughly confu ted. These as
principal I thought good as it were with my ^inger to show forth yt the godly
reder may understand, how great impiety, and how horrible errors ye Papistical
Counsel has confirmed, in allowing the Canon of the Mass.

Let kings and princes although never hitherto, yet now at yt last begin to
cast away all hope to have yt doctrine of y^ Church and manners reformed by ye
Papistical Counsel: which in their wicked Canon will not acknowledge so much as
the least error, so far is it of that they think to amend and correct any.

In y^ vi. doctrine or decree are confirmed al y^ papistical ceremonies, and
histryonicall gestures, hitherto used in y^ celebration of Masses. And
although also y^ chiefest strife between our men and the^ of y^ papacy is not
as touching these things, which are yet also in many reformed churches for yt
most part retained for ye weakes sake: yet this is erroneous and not to be
suffered, ye y^ Church had these things of ye discipline and tradition of y^
Apostles: For as much as it is manifest ly known, ye all of the^ for ye most
part were unknown unto ye Apostles, and in y^ primative church were not in
use, which (as yt scripture speaks,) are ye inue^tio^s and doctrines of men
brought in without y^ authority of y^ Apostles. Unto which if the opinion of
worshipping or necessitye be added, they serve not God, but an Idol, and are
to be condemned and avoided of all them that be in deed godly.

In y^ vii. decree are confirmed private Masses brought in for gaynes sake. But
the Counsel denies, yt those Masses wherein the sacrificer alone co^municateth
are private, and it goes about by two reasons to confirm it: The one is,
because ye people spiritually co^municateth. The other is, because they are
celebrated of y^ public minister of y^ church not for himself only, but also
for all y^ faithful which pertain unto y^ body of christ. But this is to
confirm a gross error by other ii. no less gross. For Christ in his last
sup per instituted not a private supper of one man only, but a spiritual and
celestial ba^quet, wherein he did not eat and drink for his disciples, but all
and singular did eat and drink together for them selves to depart from this
institution, and to institute a spectacle of one man only in the Church, and
that not only with out the word of God, but also against the word of God, is
sacrilege.

Farther ye custom of the primative Church is not unknown unto ye Counsel.
For as many as did not sacrame^tally participate in the body and blood of
Christ, were expelled out of y^ Church or temple, so far is it of, y^ the
Apostolical Church allowed this spiritual communication in the Mass, of
which the Counsel speaks. Howbeit in the mean time we deny not, but y^ they
which are truly godly do spiritually communicate with the body of Christ, as
often as with a true faith they think upon ye passion and death of In his 48.
sermon of the 12. fruits of the Mass.
Christ. But this spiritual eating confirms not private Masses, ye are not
instituted of christ. But I think it good in this place to recite out of
Discipulus what the Papists understand by spiritual eating. Whenever (says
he) any man devoutly hears Mass, being in grace, and without deadly sin,
and has a desire to be partaker of the Sacrament, and thinks thus in his
heart, O good Lord Jesus Christ how willingly would I receive the this day in
the Sacrament of the altar, but alas I dare not come nere, by cause I am feared
to offend y^ by reason of mine unaptness. Howbeit I humbly desire thee from the
bottom of my heart, yt thou will this day mercyfully bestow upon me also this
grace, which these devout me^ shall receive, which this day in the Church of
God worthily receive thee in the sacrament of the alter, and so such a one
spiritually communicates. But what Scholemaster had this Disciple which is so
famous in the Church of the Papacye, yt he is counted the Scholemaster of all the sacrifycing priests? Truly has he the name of a Disciple, for he has
need both of doctrine and a scholemaster, for he himself can not teach true
pietye. Or what is his authority yt we should believe him without the word of
God, whose opinions and fables are every where celebrated in Churches the popes
good holiness notwithstanding them? unless peradventure the authority of the
Council do now succor him. For of this communicating the holy Scriptures
teach nothing at all, but call all such as repent unto the sacramental eating
of the body of Christ.

The other is a much more gross and more in tolerable error, which the
Council in this place confyrmeth, namely, yt the sacrifycer may communicate
for other, either for the standers by or for the dead. For even as one man can
not be baptized for an other, so also none can communicate the body and blood
of Christ for an other. The Apostle says: He which unworthily eats, eats
damnation unto himself, unto himself (I say) and not to an (...). Cor. xi.
other. Christ also: Take ye (says he) and eat y^ ^e says not, let one eat,
and let the other be lokers on of it. Drink Math. xxvi.
ye all of this: he says not, let one drink for all. The fond tri^yng reason
of Gabriel Biell is worthy here ^o be spoken of, which peradventure the
Council has followed: Gabriel Biel upon the Cannon. of the Mass. Lect. lxxxi.
Who affyrmeth that the sacrifycer is the mouth of the Church in the
celebration of the Mass. For even as in a man's body every singular member
has not a singular mouth, but there is but one mouth only of the whole body,
All standers by at the Mass eat the body of Christ by the Priests mouth.
which receaueth meat to be distributed into all the members: so Gabriel
affirms yt in the Mass the sacrificer is yt mouth of al his lokers on, by
who^ yt body of Christ, pours being received forth his virtue into all the
poor rude me^ which are sta^ders by. Oh blindness and rashness in mat ters
of god. This forsooth is the reason, why private Masses of the sacrificers are
not to be called private. The reader yt is but meanly instructed understands
(as I think) this error, so that I need not to rehearse mo things thereof,
which other where is abundantly confuted.

In the eight decree, the holy Synod admonishes as a commandment of the
Church, that in offryng, wine shall be mingled with water. Whereof there are
three reasons brought, and yet none of them confirm this tradition. First it
says: because it is supposed that Christ the Lord did so. ^ut for as much as
faith leans unto the word of God and promise of God, where I beseech you is
the word that Christ mingled wine with water? or commanded it to be mingled?
How then can the Church believe without the word? It shall be good here to recite
that which was reasoned as touching this thing in the last former Counsel
the Cardinals and Bishops being present. For some of the disputers affirmed
that it must utterly be granted, that it can not be proved by any express
testimony of the holy Scripture, that Christ mingled water with wine, but yet
out of the Gospel may be brought an undoubted conjecture, whereby may be proved
that Christ did so. Because in Mark we read, that Christ said unto his
Disciples which went Mark. 14*
to prepare for the eating of the Paschal Lamb: Go (says Christ) into the
City and there shall come against you a man bearyng an carthen pitcher full of
water, follow him. Here says the Romish disputer, that in the earthen
pitcher was not brought water to wash their feet, but to mingle with the
wine, which in that country is very strong. And yt Christ mingled yt wine
with water is out of Christ and his Apostles in danger of dro^kennes if vva ter
had not ben mingled with wine.
al doubt, lest peradventure he should have been drunk, for that he had a long
sermon to make, which being drunk he could not have made it unto his
disciples: therefore it is a most firm conjecture that Christ mingled water
with ye wine, and the offrers in ye Mass are by the example of Christ bound to
do yt same. Thou will think peradventure Chri stian reader that I feign these
things of mine own head. But God is my judge, that our me^, which were sent
unto the Counsel of Trent did not only hear him reason after this manner, but
also testified, that this enormeous rashenesse and impiety above measure
displeased the Bishops of Germany, which thing the Bishops the^ selves ^f they
lust, can very well testify.

They can less prove it by the other reason, namely that out of the side of
Christ ^owed blood and water. I^ they lean unto the authority of the fathers,
they may by the same authority also be confounded* who by water Ergo by the fa
there is there are but two Sacra me^ts flowyng out of Christ's side.
understood the Sacrament of Baptism, as by blood, the Eucharist. For they
affirm yt out of the side of Christ flowed two Sacraments Baptism and the
Eucharist.

The third reason is altogether ridiculous, although it be not without his
authors. As though the union of the faithful people with the bed Christ can
by no other means be taught, unless this mixture of water and wine be brought
into the Eucharist without the word of God? Why have they brought matrymony
among the Sacraments wherein is represented the union of Christ with the head,
if the same thing may be done by the mixture of water and wine.

In the ninth decree, to the end they might seem to grant somewhat of their
right, the holy Synod commands the Pastors that in the celebration of the
Mass, some what of those things which are read in the Canon, should be
expounded in the vulgar tongue.

But what is the cause, why all things are not done in the vulgar tongue?
when as the Eucharist was instituted for all the faithful, that the Lord
might with one mouth be celebrated? Forsooth the holy fathers are afraid, lest
the holy mystery should be profaned, but let them declare unto us whether the
Greek Church used the Latin Canon, to avoid the prophanacion of the mystery?
Who sees not that the Counsel of Trent does not this, that the people should
understand the way to their eternal salvation, whilst with toth and nail
they go about to retain an unknown tongue in a sacred matter which
pertayneth to the universal Church of Christ, which only thing were not to
be suffered, though all other things in the Canon, as touching the thing it
self, were upright. For Christ whom Paul also followed, commanded that in
the use of the Eucharist we should show forth the Lords death. And because
the Bishops and sacrificers for the most part are ignorant them selves of that
thing, the Counsel commands that by other, something should be expounded out
of the wicked Canon, not that the true Church should thereby be instructed, but
that the impiety of ye sacrifice should be confirmed. But I pray you what
secret thing is there in the Eucharist, which may not without danger be set
forth in a tongue known Joan. 3.
to the vulgar people? This danger will I open by the words of Christ: Every
one that does evil things, hates Clerus which they turn cler gy signifies
a Lot, which Peter applies to al Christian me^. but Popish sacrificers apply
it unto themselves only.
the light, neither comes to the light, lest his works should be reproved.
And these deceauers seem herein not to have done unwisely. For so long as the
Canon of the Mass was unknown unto the common people, it was had in price and
honor, but when Christian people (who^ Peter calls the Clergy) perceived
this decease, they drove away the sacrificyng Priests together with their
sacrifice and Canon.

But we neglecting this decree of the Counsel, let us follow the example of
the primative Church, in which the Church Sacraments of God, were
celebrated in a tongue known unto the common people.

The xiii. decree is a lightening, going before the thunder and lightening of
yt curse of the doctrine of our Churches and teachers, which have by the word
of God truly, perspicuously, and thoroughly confuted this pontifical impiety
of the Papistical Mass. By this decree therefore are abolished all books
written and set abroad by all the godly and learned men against the Papistical
Mass, in which books is expressed the ancient doctrine of the Supper of the
Lord delivered by Christ and the Apostles.

But yt these decrees being for the most part all of them ungodly, should have
yt more authority, and should for ever be fyrme and ratified, there are by the
publicque authority of the Counsel published abroad brefe Canons, but yet such
as are utterly full of ungodliness, striking with a curse al those, that go about
to reprehend the lest error of the Mass.

Howbeit I will not make any confutation of these Canons, of which all and
singular although briefly, yet sufficiently is spoken in the confutatio^ of the
decrees: Of this thing only I thought good to admonish the godly reader,
diligently to waighe these horrible curses of the Counsel, wherein the
doctrine, and practice of Christ, of the Apostles, and of the primative Church
concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist is horribly cursed.

For upon those which think co^trarily unto their opinion, they give not
judgment yt they should be borne withal as weak ones, but they give sentence,
that they are to be ac cursed down unto hell and to be delivered unto Satan,
which go about to derogate eue^ the least point of the Papisticall doctrine in
this part.

For all they are condemned and cursed even as many as deny that in ye Mass
the body of Christ is offered not to God yt father, but is offered unto yt Church
to be eaten: which* deny yt the sacrifyce of the mass is a sacrifice
propitiatory, neither ought to be offered for ye quick, and yt dead, for sins
and pains, and other necessities: which deny yt masses ar to be celebrated in
yt honor of saints for yt obtein me^t of their intercession: which say yt the
canon of ye mass contains errors, for which it should be abrogated: which
judge that masses wherein the priest alone co^municateth are unlawful, and
utterly to be abrogated.

And that all the faithful may see, yt the council will not relent, no not so
much as in the lest of their rites, it curses those also which affirm, yt the
words of co^secratio^ ought to be spoken not with a soft voice but wc a loud
voice, or yt the mass ought to be celebrated in yt vulgar ^onge, as if there
were required to change no impiety at al. For as much as the words of the
supper are a part of the showing forth of the Lords death, will they also
prohibit the showing forth of yt death of yt lord? But here lies hidden the
magical impiety of consecration, which they attribute not to the institution
of Christ, but to yt magical pronunciatio^ of words, which if it were done in
the vulgar tongue, the people might imitate.

I think the godly reader does now sufficiently understand, how much yt
decrees of this counsel of Trent are to be esteemed, and what is to be hoped for
of it. Of al which forasmuch as we have sufficiently spoken in the confutation
of the decrees, we will here cease to speak farther. But let us hear somewhat
also what the council has decreed of the communion under both kinds, and of
the use of the cup.

The doctrine of the Communion under both kinds, and of the Communion of
infantes published in the v. Session, of the Sacred Oeconomical counsel of
Trent under our most holy Lord Pius the fourth most high Bishop the, xxvi. day
of July. 1562.
The Proheme.
THe sacred Economicall, and general Sinode of Trent, lawfully assembled in ye
holy ghost, the self same Legates of the Apostolical seat being Presidents in
it. Forasmuch as of y^ dreadful, and most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist
there are in diverse places sundry monsters of errors carried about by the arts
of the most wicked devil, by reason of which in diverse provinces many seem to
have departed from the faith and obedience of the catholic church, has
thought good yt those things in this place should be set forth which
pertain unto ye communion under both kinds and also of little children.
Wherefore it forbids all the faithful of Christ, y^ hence forth they presume
not either to believe, or to teach, or to preach otherwise of these things
than is expressed and determined in these decrees.

That the Laitye and Clergy which celebrate not are not bound by the law of
God to the communion under both kinds. Chapter. i.
Wherefore the holy Sinode instructed by the holy ghost (which is the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, y^ spirit of counsel and of piety) and following ye
judgment and custom even of ye church, decla reth and teaches, yt the laity
and Clergy which celebrate not, ar by no precept of god bound to receive ye
sacrament of ye Eucharist under both kynds, neither can it by any means (faith
being kept) be doubted, but y^ communion of ye one kind is sufficient for them
unto salvation. For although the Lord Christ in his last supper instituted, and
delivered unto his Apostles this reverent Sacrament in the forms of bread and
wine, yet that institution and tradition tend not to that end, yt all the
faithful of Christ should by the ordinance of the Lord be bound to receive
both kinds. Neither also is it rightly gathered out of that Sermon in the sixth
chap. of John, that the communion of both kinds was commanded by the Lord:
but either of the^ is to be understand according to the sundry interpretations
of the fathers and Doctors. For he which said: unless ye shall eat the flesh
of the son of man and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you: Said
also: If a man shall eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. And he which
said: He which eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life. Said
also: The bread which I will give you is my flesh, for the life of ye world.
And lastly he which said. He which eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
abides in me and I in him. Said nevertheless: He which eats this bread
shall live for ever.

The power of the Church concerning the dispensation of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. Chap. ii.
FArther it declares y^ this power has always ben in the Church, that in the
dispensation of the sacraments, their substance being saved, it should
ordeyne or alter those things that it judges more expedient for ye utility
of ye receauers, or for the reverence of the Sacraments according to the
variety of things, times, and places. And the Apostle also seems plainly to
signify the same, when he says. Let a man so judge of us as the ministers of
Christ, and dispensers of the mysteries of God. And that he in deed used this
power, it is manifest enough, as well in many other places as also in this
self same Sacrament, who having diverse things concerning the use thereof, the
other things (said he) will I dispose when I come. Wherefore the holy mother
Church knowing this her authority in the administration of the Sacraments,
although at the beginning of Christian Religion the communion under both kinds
was very much used, yet in process of time that custom being now every
where changed, the holy mother Church I say being led by wayghty and just
causes has allowed this custom of communicatyng under one kind, and has
decreed that it shall be counted for a law: which to refuse or without the
authority of the Church at pleasure to change shall not be lawful.

That the whole and perfect Christ, and a true Sacrament is received under
either kind. Chap. iii.
Farther it declares, that although our redemer, as it is before said, in
that last Supper instituted this Sacrament in two kinds, and delivered it to
his Apostles, yet we must needs confess, that under one kind only, whole and
perfect Christ, and ye true Sacrament is received. And therefore as touching the
fruit, they are defrauded of no grace necessary unto salvation, which
receive but one kind only.

That infantes are not bound unto the Sacramental Communion. Chap. iiii.
Lastly the self same holy Synod teaches, that infantes wantyng the use of
reason, are by no necessity bound to the sacramental communion of the
Eucharist: for so much as being by the lauacre of Baptism regenerate, and
grafted into the body of Christ, at that age they can not lose the grace of
the children of God already obtained. Neither yet is antiquity therefore to be
condemned, if in certain places at any time it observed that manner. For even
as these most holy fathers had according to the consideration of that time a
probable cause of their fact, so undoubtedly is it without co^trouerly to be
thought that they did it without any necessity of salvation.

Canons of the Communion under both kinds and of the communion of infantes.
The first Canon.
IF any man shall say, that by the commandment of God or of necessity all and
singular the faithful of Christ ought to receive both kinds of the most holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist, let him be accursed.

The second Canon.
If any man shall say, that the holy Catholic Church was not by just causes
and reasons led, that the Layty and Clergy which celebrate not should
communicate only under y^ form of bread, or that it therein erred, let him be
accursed.

The third Canon.
If any man shall deny that whole and perfect Christ the fountain and author
of all graces, is received under the form of bread only because (as some
falsely affirm) it is not according to Christ his own institution received
under both kinds, let him be accursed.

The fourth Canon.
If any man shall say y^ the communion of the Eucharist is necessary for
infantes before they come to years of discretion, let him be accursed.

But as for the two other Articles proposed and not yet discussed, namely,
whether the reasons, by which ye holy Catholic church was led, y^ lay men and
also such Priests which celebrate not should communicate under the form of
bread only, should so still be retained, y^ by no means the use of the cup
should be permitted to any. And:

Whether that for certain honest reasons and agreyng to Christian charity the
use of the cup is to be granted to any nation or kingdom under any
conditions, and what conditions they are.

The self same holy Synod does reserve to an other time to be examined and
defined as soon as occasion shall be offered.

For so much as the fathers of this Counsel have in the proheme decreed that
we must not otherwise believe, teach or preach of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, tha^ they shall think good: therefore their doctrines and Canons are
diligently to be examined. But y^ Counsel declares and teaches that y^ lay
men are by no precept of God bound to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist
under both kinds. This decree they confirm by a horrible Canon: If any man
shall say (say they) that by the commandment of God, or necessity of
salvation, all and singular the faithful of Christ ought to receive both
kinds of the Sacrament of the most holy Eucharist, let him be accursed.

This Cano^ must diligently be examined, y^ al me^ may see, not only the
audacitie and rashness of this Counsel, but also Math* 26. Mark. 14. Luc, 22.
their extreme and sacrilegous impiety. For where as Christ commanded not only
his xii. Disciples, but also al his faithful, y^ out of y^ cup they should
drink his blood. The Counsel of Trent presumptuously denies yt this precept
pertayneth unto all the faithful. But what an impudency, is this? It is
undoubtedly greater, than the impudencye of the Counsel of Consta^ce, which
when it could not deny, but that this precept by ye institution of Christ
pertayneth unto all men, inverted other reasons, whereby it taught, yt by the
abrogation of the cup no comfort is taken away from the lay men, which is no
less under the one kind, than under both. If we should demand of the
Counsel, by what precepte the lay men are bound to eat the body of Christ
in the supper, will they not answer, by yt institution of Christ because he
commanded: Take ye, eat ye? He therefore which commanded the laymen to eat,
the same also commanded the lay men to drink of the cup. Unless
peradventure the whole institution pertayne nothing at all unto the lay men,
and ye al things are given them of free gift, yea also the one kind, which
the sacrificers by no right, but of mere grace distribute unto the lay men? ^ut
least any man should think that these good holy fathers do sin of
ignorance, they themselves confess both that Christ instituted it under both
kinds, and also that the primative church religiously observed this
institution. But notwithstanding the institution of Christ, and practice of the
primative church, it seems good unto them thus to decree: If any man shall say
(although Christ did so, or although ye Apostles did so) that the lay men are
by the precept of god bound unto the use of the cup, let him be accursed. Thou
see Christian Reader, the steps of Antichrist, who extolleth himself above
God, and above that which is called The pope very Antichrist. These. (...).
his worshippyng: He that sees not these things is more than blind.

Farther that which is here said of the necessitye of salvation, let the
Counsel know, that here is not disputed of singular cases (as they call
them) which may happen thorough the imbecillitye of men, or by any other
chance unlooked for. For it is most certain, that even as in the primatyue
church many were suddenly drawn to martyrdom, before they were baptized, whose
salvation was nothing let, although they were not baptized with water: So
also we can not deny eternal salvation unto the faithful which of nature
abhor from wine, or by some other chance are taken away without the use of ye
Supper.

But of these cases we do not now reason, but of the common and lawful use
of the Supper of the Lord in a peaceable and quiet church: whether it be
necessary by the commandment of God to receive both kinds or no. Here we
expressedly affirm yt all the faithful of Christ are charged and bound to the
use of either part of the Sacrament, and the contemners of yt Sacraments, at
also deprived (as Augustine speaks) of ye grace of yt Sacraments. For it is
an express and manifest commandment of Christ, DRINK YE, and he adds AL,
namely they which eat the same also must drink: This perspicuity the
counsel can by no means make dark, howsoever they turn themselves into all
manner of forms like Proteus.

In the second Chapter they say: that the Church has power, (the substance
of the Sacraments being saved) to ordain and alter, such things as it judges
most expediente for the variety of things, times and places: and therefore also
has it power to abrogate the cup.

Here I can not tell, whether the ignorance of the counsel be greater, or the
impudencye. For what ignorance is this, that the substance of the Eucharist
being saved, the use of the cup may be abrogated? And is not wine required unto
the substance of the Sacrament of the Supper, which wine was of Christ
ordained to this most holy mystery? The cup being abrogated, ye institution
of Christ is not saved, but torn, changed, and maimed. For wine is no less of
the substance of this Sacrament, than bread. Neither can they wind themselves
hereout by this their Sophistication, that Christ is whole contained under one
kind. For although Christ be not divided, yet is the institution to be kept,
which being changed and torn, there is made no distribution neither of the
body nor yet of the blood of Christ.

But the Canon is far more horrible than this doctrine: If any man shall say
that the holy Church, was not by just causes and reasons led, that the Lay men
should communicate under the form of bread only, or that it has therein
erred, Let him be accursed.

But it shall be good in this place to recyte the reasons by which the
Counsel of Constance thought good that the use of the cup should be
abrogated, which reasons are so ridiculous and foolyshe, that it is wonderful
that in so great an assembly of Doctors there was none, which for the defense
of the authority of the church and of the counsel confuted them not.

And I will not recite them in mine own words, but in the words of Gerson
Chauncelour of Paris who was a man of no small authority in the Counsel of
Constance.

It is not to be doubted (says he) but ye amongst other, Gerson in his
treatise against ^he heresy of communica ting of the lay men under both kinds.
the Divines of the high university of Paris, are in a readiness, which in
great number are Presidents in this counsel: there are (says he) also of other
noble Uniuersities excellent Divines both in great number and of great
worthiness. Wherefore many of them which were gathered together upon this
matter, say, that the custom of not communicating the Laitye under both
kinds, chiefly after that the faithful have been so multiplied, was lawfully
and reasonably brought in into the Church. And that for the avoiding of
manifold dangers, irreuerence and offense about the receauyng of such a
blessed Sacrament. The first danger is in spillyng. The second in carrying it
from place to place. The third for the filthiness of ye vessels, which ought
to be sacred, and not commonly to be handled and touched of the Lay men. And
much less ought ye wine consecrated to be sold at the Uinteners, as it is
accustomed with such men. The fourth by reason of yt long beards of the Lay
men. The fyfth in preserving it for the sick, because it may being long in the
vessel be turned to Uineger, and so the blood of Christ should cease to be
there, neither should it be received, nor consecrated a new without a mass:
And if it might be possible that pure Uineger should be given in stead of the
blood of Christ, yet there is an other danger, because in the summer worms and
flies would engender, how close so ever the vessel were shut: sometimes also
it would putrify, and be made as it were abominable to drike, and this is a
reason of very great efficacy. And by an other reason also when many other have
drunk before. And it is demanded in what vessel so much wine should be
consecrated, as should serve at Easter for x. or xx. thousand persons: The sixth
danger should be in the costlynesse of ye wine, at yt least in many places,
where is scarcely found wine enough to celebrate, and in some places also, it
is very dear. Farther there should be danger in the congeling of it. Again
there should be danger in the bringing in of a false belief, and that manifold
ways.

First that the dignity of the Laymen touching the receiving of the body of
Christ, should be as great as the dignity of ye Priests. Secondly that so to
do, ^uer has been and is continually of necessity. And so all they yt think,
do, or teach otherwise have perished and do perish. And in general all as
well the Clergy, as teachers and Prelates, which have not to their power
resisted such a custom, by words wrttinges and sentences, and that they
perverted the holy Scripture. Thirdly that the virtue of this Sacrament is not
more principally in the consecration than in the receiving. Fourthly that the
Church of Rome judges not ryghtly of the Sacraments, neither should it in
this be imitated. Fifthly that general Counsels, and specially the Counsel of
Constance erred in faith and good manners. Sixthly it should be many ways an
occasion of Seditions and Schisms, in our Christianty, as experience now
manifestly declares in Bohemia, which sedition tends to the dissipation not
only of the spiritualty but also of the temporalty, unless the providence of
God, and the prudence of the king of the Romans should provide and order
things.

The same Gerson a little before these words in the self same treatise.
HOwbeit so long as it was so received of the Layme^, the Church so
commau^ding or permitting or counseling, it was well done, as also when the
Priests did consecrate in leuened bread.

But now for so much as upon certain consideratious a contrary custom has
grown in ure praised and commanded by the Church, which commandment is
apparent by such a custom, which is the best interpreter of laws: Such a
receiving therefore is rash, and presu^ptuous, offensive, seditious, and a
disturbing of Ecclesiastical order, Note ye hor rible blasphemy.
and consequently enduring eternal damnation. Neither is that of any force,
when they affirm, that the Laymen deserve more in receiving under both kinds,
than under the form of bread only. We answer it is false, because obedience
is better than sacrifice, etc.

But for the simples sake let us examine all these reasons by the rule of
Christian faith and heavenly doctrine: yt they may se yt they are not only
partly ridiculous and foolish, but also partly blasphemous, and horrible to be
heard.

First they fear the effusion or shedyng of the blood of Christ, if it should
be ministered in the cup, or be carried from place to place. But this
superstition sprang of the feigned lie of transsubstantion, which they have
taught contrary to the nature and definition of this Sacrament, namely that the
substance of the wine is changed and turned into the blood of Christ: which
thing the Apostle testifies to be false: For he calls bread (...) Corporis
Christi, that 1. Cor. 10. 11.
to ye communicating of the body of Christ, and the cup (...) Sanguinis Christi
that is, the communicating of the blood of Christ, and that with the bread and
wine the body and blood of Christ are exhibited, For even as ye body of Christ
can not be torn with teth, no more also can his blood be shed: It is a thing
spiritual and celestial, not of this world, but of an other world. Wherefore
this danger of sheding is not to be feared, as well in the dispensing of it,
as in the carrying it from place to place.

The third reason is utterly contumelious against the holy Church of Christ,
namely lest the vessels being touched with ye lips of ye Layme^ should be made
filthy, which ought to be holy, and not filthy. What do the mouths of the
Laymen cleansed and sanctified by the blood of Christ, seem still unclean and
filthy, or are the mouths of the sacrificers, purged with the kisses of their
harlots puret tha^ the mouths of the Laymen? And if it were but by this thing
only, al Christian Princes and kings may gather, in what estimation the
sacrificers have them.

The fourth cause why the cup is denied and abrogated is because of ye long
beards of ye Laymen, unto which ye blood of Christ may hap to clean. If this
be a sufficient reason and of efficacy, why are women debarred, which want
beards* And also as touching me^ which have beardes, were it not better they
should shave their beards, the^ yt the institution of Christ should be changed,
and his testament and last will violated.

The fifth reason is utterly ungodly which is le^t perad Christ his blood
turned into Uineger.
uenture it should be turned into vinegar, if it should be reserved for ye sick
ones. Oh thing most wicked. Ca^ ye blood of Christ be turned into vinegar? But
(say they) the wine and not ye blood of Christ is turned into vinegar. But they
ca^ not say so. For the co^secratio^ being done, they affirm, yt ye wine is
changed and turned into the blood of Christ, which mutatio^ they by a new name
call transsubsta^tiatio^. Where fore if ye opinion of transsubsta^tion be true
the^ the blood of Christ and substance thereof is made vinegar. But yt blood be
far from us, which can so easily (specially in so great a carelessness of yt
sacrificers) be turned into vinegar. It is maruayle yt the good holy fathers of
the Papacy are not ashamed of so foolish and ungodly reasons, which they most
manifestly oppose against the institution of Christ, to defend their
sacrilege.

Gerson adds a greater danger. Sometimes also (says he) it would putrifye
and be made as it were abominable to drink, and this reason (says he) is of
very great efficacy. How contumelious by this reason are the sacrificers
against the blood of Christ? For they speak of the cup being consecrated, and
so dare affirm that the blood of Christ may putrifye. If our men should
invent the like things, what thunders of ercommunications would they not lay
upon them. But they themselves for Christ his blood putrifyed.
that they be a nation holy, and a kyngly priesthode, handle at their pleasure
their new GOD fabricated of the substance of bread and wine.

But the reason which is brought as touching worms and flies, which they
affirm may in the summer time be engendered in the vessel, how close so ever it
be shut, in my judgment it seems rather to confirm unto the Papists the use
of the cup than to abrogate it. For for so much as the blood of Christ newly
created of the substance of the wine is lively, they may by the flies and
worms which are engendered of it prove the verity thereof. But away with
this impiety. For in a thing of so great and enormeous blasphemy, I dare not
call it folly, which dare ascribe so absurd things unto the blood of Christ:
I know how they go about to wynd themselves out, but they can not: For
worms undoubtedly can not be engendered of accidents, that is, of figure,
color and savor, but they must needs come of some substance and matter. But
because after the consecration they affirm that there remains no substance
of the wine but that it is altogether converted into the substance of the
blood of Christ, they blas phemously here among the dangers of the reservation
of the cup allege that of the substance of the blood of Christ being
putrifyed come worms and flies. And this putrefaction (says Gerson)
happens so much the sooner, if many other have drunk before, namely, because
of the touching of the skyn and flesh of man.

But grant that these dangers might happen, if the blood hallowed in the cup
should be reserved for the sick, by what testimony of the Scripture will they
prove that the cup hallowed for the sick ought to be reserved for certain
days or wekes? Christ said unto his disciples, drink ye all of this, and
straight way all of them drank as also did the Corinthians. If to establishe
their sacrifice Math. 26. 1. Cor. 11.
they use the Paschall Lamb, why do they not use the same also against these
dangers, where it was commanded, that nothing should be reserved against the
next day. It is a thing most certain, that bread and Exodus 12
wine without the use have not the nature of a Sacrament, and therefore the
dangers which are here rehearsed of Gerson are vain and contumelious
against the blood of Christ.

It is a wytty reason I promise you, which they bring concerning the
largeness and greatenesse of the cup, in which at Easter the blood of Christ
might be consecrated to serve xx. thousand men. Where can such a cup be gotten.
There is much spoken of the greatness of y^ bell at Erdford, they may take
that for this purpose. Who can here hold him self from laughing, unless this
blyndnesse were more to be lamented with tears than to be laughed at. There
afsembled together (says Gerson) out of the high university of Paris, and
out of other places, most excellent divines and that in great number and of
great worthynesse, of whom these reasons are allowed. The miserable
sacrificers are still bewitched with their Magical inchantement, whereby they
have persuaded the world that they can by breathyng the words of Christ upon
the bread and wine, convert the substance of the bread and wine into the body
and blood of Christ, being ignorant of the true manner of consecratyng, whose
power consists in the first institution of Christ* The Church is admonished
and reduced to the memory of it in the rehearsal of the words of y^ i. Cor. x.
supper, as often as ye supper of ye Lord is celebrated, which commemoration
the Apostle calls a blessing. For even as the power of ye word of God
endures, whereby he said: Let the earth bringforth greane herbs: So also the
power of this word yet endures whereby he said, Take ye, Eat ye, this is my
body, etc.

In the sixth danger they have a consideration of the poor. For, for that in
many places grows no wine, and if it should be bought, it would cost a great
price, the good holy fathers think it better, utterly to abrogate and deny
the use of the cup unto the lay men, than to put them to so great charges. I
will not stand about the confutyng of this folyshnesse, at which, unless a
man be out of his wits he can not but laugh.

An other argument.
Farther (says Gerson) the noble Chauncelor of ye high university of Paris
least the wine should congele. Here appears the most high providence of the
fathers of the counsel of Constance, which have with diligence considered all the times of the year, and have thoroughly weighed what dangers might come
unto ye blood of Christ: In the so^mer they have provided for it, ye it should
not turn to vinegar, putrifactio^, worms and flies: in ye winter they
provide to keep it from cold and congeling, least per adventure it should be
turned into Yse. Whom these so grave and wittye reasons cause not willingly to
abstain from the use of the cup, unto him can not the Catholic church easily
minister a remedy.

But let us hear the rest of the reasons which are far weaker than these, so
that in no part should any doubt remain: Again (says he) there should be
danger in bringing in a false belief, and ye manifold ways. First that the
dignitye of the lay men concerning the receiving of y^ body of Christ should be
as great as ye dignity of ye priests. A great danger I promise you. But by
this reason ye arroga^cy and pride of the sacrificers may manifestly he seen.
For Christ made no difference between the Pastors and the ^earers, between them
ye distribute this his supper, and them i, Cor. xi. The. 18. homely upon the
latter Epistle to the Corin.
ye receive it. Even as I have received of the Lord (says the Apostle) so
have I delivered it unto you. Now not so, (says Chrysostom) one true body is
set forth unto al me^, and one cup.

And Pope Gelasius: And we find y^ certain receiving only a portion of y^ holy
supper, abstain from the cup of y^ sacred blood: who undoubtedly (for I know
not, by what superstition they are taught to be bound) either let them receive
the whole sacraments, or let them be restrained from ye whole, because ye
division of one and the self same mystery can not be done without very great
sacrilege. De Consecratione. Did. 2. Chap: Comperimus. But least any man
should affirm ye these words are spoken of y^ celebrating sacrificers, Gelas^s
manifestly understands ye lay men. For he speaks not of ye teachers but of
the^ y^ are taught as his words declare. Here he ye ministers, nothing
differs from the receauer, unless peradventure we will have him to be
inferior. For the church receiving the supper is the maystres, and ye priest
is ye minister of y^ maistres, in so much y^ over it he dares not, to arrogate
any thing unto himself as Peter says, not bearing Lordship over the Clergy,
but being made a form of ye flock. Where the Apostle calls not the
sacrificers the Clergy, but the lay men, ye is, the Church collected of the
lay men, whose ministers he instituted the Elders. This reason therefore is not
only weak but also absurd: and there are other notes also, whereby the
ministers are discerned and known from the church whose ministers they are.

Secondly (says he) yt to do so was and is always of necessity. A great sin
to believe, y^ we must always communicate under both kinds, and never under
one kind only. But I pray thee my Gerson, if this be sin, then must thou
know ye Christ is the author of this syime, Chri^ the author of sin.
who instituted the supper under both kinds, and not under one kind only, and
most severely gave the Disciples this commandment: teach ye them to keep,
whatsoever Mat. 26. and. 28
things I have commanded you. But he has said: Drink ye all of this: this
precepte therefore must of necessitye be kept, neither can it or ought it by
any custom or authority to be abrogated.

But Gerson adds: and all in general as well they of the Clergy as teachers
and Prelates, which have not to their power withstand such a custom in
words, wr^tings and sentences, have peryshed, and all they have perverted the
holy scripture. Hereof come these tears.

Here the spirit of the holy Sorbonical fathers opens it self. Least they
should altogether seem to have erred, and to have perverted the holy scripture,
they judge notwithstanding the precept and institution of Christ, that y^
communion is to be retained under one kind only. This only they labor for,
the Papists will not seem to have erred, no not in the least thing, as I have
already often showed. But what is more manifest, what more plain, what more
bright, what more perspicuous, than that Christ instituted the last supper
under both kinds? Likewise also what is more manifest, what more plain and
palpable, than that the papists have torn in pieces this institution of
Christ: they have with folyshe ungodly and wicked reasons violated the last
will of Christ, they have in this part perverted the holy Scripture? Who is so
rude and so unskillful in the holy Scriptures that he understands not these
things? It lotheth me to rehearse the reast of y^ reasons, but because I have
once taken it in hand, I will yet take a little more pains therein.

If it were of necessity to do this, says Gerson, then al they that teach
and do otherwise have peryshed. When there is mention made of our Elders which
have lyned under this Babilonical captiuitye, I always remember that saying of
Christ, when he prophecieth of the false pro Math. 24.
phetes which should come in the last times. They shall give (says he) great
signs and wonders, so that if it were possible even the very elect should be
brought into error. Whereby I always gather, that God will always punish
those that teach perverse things. In the mean time God has at al times
wonderfully reserved unto him self his elect, ye they should not bow their
knees before Baal, 1. Reg. 19. 1. Cor. 3. Ephe. 2.
and are saved, as it were by fire, unto whom God also has forgeuen many
faults and infirmities, which have built upon the only foundation Christ. etc.

Unto their Judge therefore let us leave our elders, and with a thankful mind
let us receive so great a light, let us return unto the institution of Christ
and pray with Daniel: To us be confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Dan.
ix.
Princes, and to our fathers, which have sinned. But unto the Lord our God be
mercy and propitiation, because we have gone away from thee, and have not
harkened unto ye voice of the LORD OUR GOD, to walk in his law. etc.

Thirdly (says Gerson) it should follow, that the virtue of this Sacrament
should not be more principal in the consecration than in the receiving. Gerson
takes that as a thing granted, which is not true. For, for so much as the
Sacraments when they are used are of force, and unless they be used, they have
not the nature of a Sacrament, and therefore unless there be a receiving,
consecration is of no efficacy, so that consecration is for the receiving,
whereunto it is appointed.

Fourthly, that the Church of Rome should not think rightly of the
sacraments, and should not in this be imitated. Here my Gerson thou have hit
the nail of the head. A great danger undoubtedly might hereby be at hand unto
the Church of Rome, if it be proved so grosselye to have erred in this
sacrament, who would not doubt but it has also erred in many other things?
Which thing has been already oftentimes declared unto you of the Paparye in a
manner in all and the principal articles of christian religion.

Wherefore forasmuch as these good holy fathers, will not seem so much as to
have erred, so far is it of, that they have any care for the taking away of
errors: It is most safe for godly men to rest in ye simple truth and most
certain institution of Christ: the church of Rome is by no means to be
imitated, which does not only corrupt y^ sacraments, but also the whole
doctrine of the Gospel.

Fifthly, that general Counsels, and specially the counsel of Constance have
erred in faith and good manners. This is no bringing in of a false belief, but a
most certain and infallible truth, that the counsels of Constance and Trent
have not on ly erred in faith, but also have with a sacrilegious audacity
condemned the doctrine declared of Christ, as diuelysh, as it is before showed
in the confutation of the Canons. Wherefore there is no cause why ye should any
more extinuate their authority, which in the minds of many (the truth of the
Gospel being revealed) is fallen away. Bring ye forth a text of the scripture:
for the faithful will not any more be satisfied with your Miters.

Sixthly: it should be an occasion of seditions and sects in our christianity.
It is an old fable, y^ the Woulf troubling the water, lays the fault upon the
sheep. Who is the author of this schism, but ye you Papists by this your
sacrilege? Why have ye changed the institution of Christ? For if this had
continued inuiolate, there should have been no schism in the Church as
touching this thing. But now when the church requires his right, it is
answered of these good holy ones that she is seditious and schismatical.

All the godly know how to beware of sedition, and to give unto the Magistrate a
due reverence. But ye for so much as ye are not Magistrates, as it is written:
But ye are not so. etc. Luke. 22.
If the Magistrate being mindful of his office, do defend y^ priuelege and
right of y^ church delivered of Christ, he is by no means seditious, but
godly, and does his duty, which if he neglect to do, the lord his god will
punish him, as it is written in Deuteronomy. But now let us at the length brieflye
hear, Deuteronomy. 7.
what the Counsel of Constance does finallye judge of the use of the cup. In
such strife (says Gerson) may a man easly se (unless it be such as will
willingly be malepeart, or by affection frowardly err) that the receiving of
the sacrament under both kinds, of the laymen, is not now neither at a ny time
has been by the necessity of the commandment of the law of God under the
pain of eternal damnation. Howbeit so long as the laymen did it, the Church
so commanding it, or permitting it, or counseling it, it was well done, as when
the priests did consecrate in leuened bread. But now when as upon certain
considerations a contrary custom has grown in use, being by ye church praised
and com mau^ded, which commandment appears by such a custom, which is ye
best interpreter of laws, such a receiving is rash and presu^ptuous, offe^siue,
sedicious and a disturbing of Ecclesiastical rite and co^seque^tly inducing to
eternal dampnation.

Now have thou after ye reasons rehearsed, and here as it were in one word again
repeted, in a su^me, what the counsel of Co^sta^ce thinks of ye communion
under both kinds, namly that the receiving of it nether is nor ever was by ye
law of god. And yt they which endeavor themselves to put it in use ar rash,
presumptuous, seditious, and disturbers of ye church of God, which incur the
blame of giving of offense, and it judges them worthy of eternal destruction
and hell fire.

But thereason wherebye they prove the denial of the cup, and the use of one
kind, do not only want the word of Godde, but are moreover folyshe,
ridiculous, blasphemous against Christ, and contumelious against^ the church
of God, as it is manifest by those things which we have before spoken.

But grant that there were some danger, if the use of the Cup should be
retained, what was the providence of these fathers greater than the wisdom of
Christ and of his Apostles? Could not they also see these dangers? and
admonish the church thereof, that so great a Sacrament of God should not be
profaned?

Of these reasons sounds the second Canon of ye Counsel of Trent, where it
says: If any man shall say that the holy catholic Church was not by just
causes and reasons led, that the laimen and also the Clergy which celebrate
not, should communicate under the form of bread only, or that it therein
erred: let him be accursed. Thou see christian reader, that by the authority
of the Counsel of Trent, reasons that are foolish, blasphemous, and
contumelious against the Church of God, are counted and allowed for just
causes, which if any man shall gainsay, let him be accursed.

Many have hitherto doubted, certain also have utterly denied that the
Counsel of Trent is ruled and governed by the holy ghost. But I do not only
nothing doubt thereof, but am fulli persuaded ye the counsel assembled under
Pius ye. 4 B. of Rome, is not at al governed or ruled by ye holy ghost.

For men y^ ar sober, and left only unto humane judgment or sense, would
never ordain things so absurd, which hitherto have been mentioned to have come
from this counsel. But because the fathers of this counsel have once fully
determined, utterly to pluck up by the roots, blot out and extinguish the
doctrine which we profess, God punishes in them the syn of obstinate malice,
even with the sin of most gross errors, as ye apostle has left in writing.
God (says (...). These. 2.
he) sends on them the efficacy of illusion, y^ they should believe lies, to
the end al they might be judged which have not believed the truth, but have
consented unto iniquitye.

And this gross ignorance and blasphemy of the counsel is so directed of the
lord, that it profits the Church of God. For all ye true faithful do now not
only se, but also eue^ feel with their hands, ye the fathers of the counsel ar
delivered Roma. 1. Thessa. 1.
up into a reprobate mind, and that they defend most gross and palpable
errors, and tread under foot the manifest truth.

In the third Canon is confyrmed ye self same sacrilege and manifest idolatry:
that under the pain of a curse we must believe that whole Christ is received
under one kind only. But how can the faithful believe this, when as it wants
the word of promise? For faith leans unto ye word of God: but there was never
any word of God that Christ would in the bread only dispense his body and
blood, there is no where such thing extant in the Evangelical historye or
writing of ye Apostles. These subtilties as touching christ yt he is not
divided, ar of no force. We know that and fyrmly believe it. But here the
question is not of the integritye of Christ, but of the dispe^sation of his
body and blood. He receiving the cup said: Drink ye al of this, this is my
blood. etc. This cup being abrogated, how can thou wc a true faith settle thy
self, y^ in the use of ye bread thou art made partaker of his blood? For when
he took the bread, he said not, this is my blood, or eat ye my blood. How
subtle soever this impiety be, yet can they never defend and support this
sacrilege.

In the. 4. canon they deal very hardly with the holy fathers, and especially
with Cyprian and Augustine, and also with the church yt was at that time, wherein
was accustomed yt unto infants also of Christians the Eucharist was given. But
although we also disalowe this custom, neither think it mete to be called
again into the church, yet judge we y^ the holy Fathers ought more gentlye to
be dealt with in this matter. But far be it from me that I should prescribe
any thing to ye spirit of this counsel, which seeing it has upon just causes
confirmed this sacrilege in this sacrament, it shall also undoubtedly if God
will have most wayghtye and most just reasons of this curse, which reasons to
resyst is to sin against the holy ghost.

To these four canons they add other two articles: whither for any cause or
consideration the use of the cup is to be permitted unto any man. Also: whether
that for certain honest reasons and such which agree with Christian charity, ye
use of the cup is to be granted to any nation or kingdom, under certain
conditions, and what conditions they are. The examination and defini^g of these
they reserve to an other time

Undoubtedly a worthy deliberation and consultation of so long time in a thing
so obscure and doubtful, whereof children that are but seven years of age are
able to give sudgeme^t, if they be but well enstructed in their catechism.

But the words of the counsel are diligently to be marked, whither for any
cause or consideration the use of the cup is to be permitted unto any man.
The institution of Christ is with the counsel of Tre^t no cause or reason at al
why ye good holy fathers can bring or devise any other reason than the precept
and commandment of Christ, yea and his very expres will? What, will ye be wiser
tha^ Christ? tha^ the apo stles? than ye primative church? Or what sacrilegious
bold nes is this, that ye will not but upon certain conditions, and those (as we
shall a little afterward hear) most ungodly, grant the use of the cup not to
the universal church, but to some certain nations and kingdoms? ^e understand as
I suppose, Germany, England, Denmark, and now peradventure France also, which
for the most part, having left the fylthinesse of the babilonish whore, have
turned again unto their first husband, and neglecting humane traditions, have
returned unto the first institution of Christ.

They of the Papacy not long since miserablye handled Luther (a man of godly
memory) because he wrote, that if the Counsel would grant both kinds, he
would use but one kind only. But it was the farthest thing from his thought
to have the institution of Christ abrogated, or the Sacrament divided in
halfes. But his meaning was to have the Church admonished of the sacrilegious
holdnes of the Papists, and that it should not use both kinds, because of
the decree of the Counsel, but because of the institution of Christ. For it
lies not in the arbitreme^t of the Counsel, Church, or any other man to
abrogate or grant the cup, being of Christ not only granted unto his
Church, but also bidden and commanded. Wherefore the romish bishop may dispense
with whom it likes him, we care as much for his dispensation, as we do for his
curses, which we judge as vain things that are used to make children afeard
with, and as the saying is, a thunder clap made of a bladder. The testament,
institution, and last will of Christ suffices unto us, which is perspicuous and
manifest, wherewith if any man will not be content, let him then use the foolish
and wicked reasons of the Counsel of Constance, and the sacrilege confirmed by
ye authoriti thereof.

The decree concerning the use the Cup.
FArthermore, forasmuch as the self same holy Synod in the last former
Session reserved two articles before time proposed, and not yet dis cussed,
namely beginning: Whether the reasons. etc and to be at an other time examined
as soon as occasion shall be offered, and successively at the insta^ce of the
chiefest it was required that the same articles might be examined and defined
by the self same holy Synod, and that for waightye and manifold causes
agreing to christian charity, now laid before us, the use of the cup may be
granted unto certain nations upon the conditions under written, either
liberty for Ordinaries of places to grant it them, and moreover where
opportunity serves to be dispensed with them.

The holy Synod as a godly mother desiring healthfully (as much as is
granted in the lord) to foresee for the salvation of all men, knowing yet that
it self can not presently with safetye utterly absolve and define such a
matter, but the thing being first diligently vewed and examined and all things
maturely considered, it has at the length thus decreed: That our most holy
Lord, such knowledge of the cause had, which shall seem good to his Blessedness,
may grant unto those Nations and peoples, unto which his holiness shall
think to be commodious and profitable, upon the conditions under written (or
also upon other, which the holy ghost shall minister unto him, and if it shall
seem meet unto his holiness, also at the request, counsel, and approbation of
this holy Synod) the above said use of the cup, and may grant also the
power required, and may moreover also mercyfullye and according to his
Apostolical benignity dispense with them.

The conditions, upon which it is thought good that the use of the Cup may be
granted.
FIrst, that they which will communicate under both kinds, do agree in heart
and confession of mouth in all other things, as well touching this Sacrament as
the other Sacraments, also in any other matter what soever it be as touching
faith, doctrine and rites, yt they agree I say with all those things which are
received of the holy Church of Rome, and yt they also religiously admit and
observe all the decrees of this holy Sinode as well those that are already
published abroad, as those that are to be published abroad.

Secondly yt the Pastors and preachers of ye said nations, do believe and
teach, y^ the custom allowed and long time observed of y^ Church, namely of
the communicating under one kind only, is not repugnant unto the law of God,
yea rather that it is laudably to be observed, and to be kept as a law unless
it be otherwise decreed by ye Church: And that they which stubbornly think
otherwise are to be counted heretics, neither that they deliver the communion
under both kinds unto none but unto such which shall believe and confess
this truth.

Thyrdly that they ought with a faithful and sincere mind, as reverent
children, give al reverence unto our most holy Lord the Pope as to the
legitimate Bishop and Pastor of the universal Church.

Fourthly that they likewise, give due reverence unto their Archebyshoppes,
Bishops, and other their Prelates.

Fifthly that this use of the cup be permitted unto them only which are
contrite and confessed according to the custom of the Catholic Church.

Also that the ordinaryes do most diligently with all cautions provide, that in
the administration of the blood there be no sacrilege or profanation
committed, and upon all these foresaid things let their consciences be
burdened.

That which has been many years desired and wyshed for, the same now at the
length also certain kings and Princes (which yet hold on the Bishop of
Romes side) were bold to require of the Counsel, namely the communion under
both kinds, and the marriage of Priests, if in case they will that their
subjects should be kept in their due obedience.

But for as much as both these or either of them can not come to pass without
the consent of the Bishop of Rome, the holy fathers of the Counsel have
deliberated of certain conditions, upon which the Bishop of Rome may
dispense with certain nations for the use of the Cup. All the words of this
decree are diligently to be observed. For they are very ware, lest they should
seem to be Authors of this alteration, so great and heinous an offense is it,
to communicate under both kinds according unto the institution of Christ.
Wherefore they decree that the Popes good holiness may grant the liberty
required, and by his Apostolical benignity dispense therewith.

Let all ye faithful therefore know, that the use of the cup is in no case
allowed by ye Counsel, and that they think it ca^ by no right be required of
the laymen, but being required it may by the mere Apostolical benignitye be
granted. But they which are rightly instructed in the C^istian Ca thechisme,
plainly understand, that therein ^ey have no need at all of the Popes
dispensation, because Christ has not only granted unto his Church, but
also severely hydden and commanded, Drink ye all (says he) of this. Math.
26. For even as he has not commanded to drink his body, so also has he not
commanded to eat his blood. Neither is it any less absurd to eat the blood
of Christ, than to drink the body of Christ. For by distinct Symboles
Christ would erhibite these gifts of his body and his blood. But let us see
the conditions, whereupon the Counsel of Trent decrees that the use of the
Cup may be granted unto the Laymen, which conditions are not only unjust,
but also utterly ungodly and to be detested.

First: That they which will communicate under both kinds are compelled to
bind them selves unto all Papisticall Idolatrye, as well in this part as in
all other parts of doctrine, and religiously to admit and observe the
decrees both those that are already published and also those that shallbe
published by the Counsel of Trent. But who can number up all the Idolatryes,
Magical inchauntementes, superstitions, and traditions repugnant unto the
word of GOD, which have now many years been used in the Papacy, with all
which the minds of the Godly should be wrapped? Farther how great a
danger is joined unto this, for a man to subdue him self not only to the
ungodly decrees of this Counsel which are already published abroad, but also
unto them which shall be hereafter publyshed abroad* What if the Counsel
should decree that GOD is not God? Should it therefore be believed and
observed? But some Papiste will say, we need not to fear any such thing, or
to look for any of these things from so sacred a Counsel, which is governed
by the holy Ghost. But I think I have declared more bryghtlye than the noone
day by the decrees of this Counsel, that the fathers assembled together at
Trent with their Romish Bishop, go about nothing else than the oppression of
sound doctrine and the renewyng of Idolatrye and all kind of superstitions?
What true godlyman therefore can receive this condition?

The second condition is plainly repugnant unto the request that was made:
namely that they which will communicate under both kinds should believe and
profess, that the communion under one kind only is godly, they which believe
this, will never desire the communion under both kinds: but rather this is the
only, cause, why they should eschew the communion under one kind only,
because it is repugnant unto the doctrine and institution of Christ, and
should judge the custom and law brought in contrary to the institution of
Christ a pernicious and detestable error. In prescrybyng this condition, what
other thing does the Counsel, than dally and mock with the whole Christen
world, when as they know that none of the godly will ever upon these
conditions communicate under both kinds.

The third condition is, that they which will communicate under both kinds,
must acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for Christ his Uicare, and must as
faithful children give unto him all reverence. And what thing else were this,
than to deny Christ. For in the wrytynges of the Apostle it is manifestly
showed, 2. These. 2
that the Bishop of Rome is the Antichrist, which shall sit in the Temple of
God, and pervert all the worshyppyng of God. And what punishment is to be
looked Math. 10.
for of such as deny* the truth of the Gospel, Christ teaches. He which
will deny me before men, I also will deny him before my heavenly father. Let
them alone Math. 15.
(says he in an other place) for they are blind and leaders of the blind.

The same yoke is laid upon the faithful in the iiii. condition. For, for so
much as the Archebyshoppes, Bishops, Prelates, and Priests, are all addicted,
and by an oath bound unto the Bishop of Rome, they will not suffer any thing
to be brought in, that is repugnant unto the Pontifical impiety.

In the fifth condition they which will communicate under both kinds are
bound unto auricular Confession, which was the ungodly and miserable
slaughter house of afflicted consciences, whereby the adherents of the Bishop
of Rome may easily search out the thoughts of all men, and defend their
tyranny. But for so much as this is a mere humane tradition, neither
commanded of Christ, nor yet delivered of the Apostles, as it is in an other
place abundantly showed, this condition will no less fear away the
faithful that are every where dispersed in the Papacy from the Communion under
both kinds, than the former four.

The last condition pertayneth unto the Sacrificers, that in the
administration of the blood there should be committed no sacrilege or
profanation. And this in a manner was the principal reason, why in the
Counsel of Constance the use of the Cup was abrogated: but the reasons are so
ridiculous, that I am ashamed to rehearse them. The holy fathers forsooth were
afraid, lest peradventure the blood of Christ should be spilte upon the
earth, or lest it should cleave unto the beardes of men, or kerchtefes of
women, or else should be turned into Uineger. The cause of this fear is the
ignorance of the mystery, sprung of the feigned invention of
transsubstantiation. For the blood of Christ which is distributed in the
Supper, can not be spylte, as they think, when as without use it is not a
Sacrament. And Christ according to his wisdom could have fore seen all
these dangers, of which the Church ought to have been admonished. But
Christ having no respect at all unto these things wylled, that not only
Bishops and Math. xxvi. Mark. xiiii. Luke. xxii, 1. Cor. (...).
Pastors, but also their hearers should drink his blood out of the Cup,
which thing not only the holy Scriptures do teach, but also the custom of
the primatiu^ Church confirms.

These are the conditions, upon which the Counsel of ^rent judges that
certain nations may be dispensed withal in the use of the Cup. Which
conditions are such, that none that is good and godly can receive them without
denial of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And although all the good and godly ought worthily to be grieved at so great
an iniquity of the Counsel, yet ought Kings and Princes most of al,
diligently to look unto it, which are as Gods made rulers over the people of
GOD, to defend the true worshyppynge of GOD, of which they ought no less to
be kepers than of the second Table. For all Christendom sees now that the
Bishop of Rome together with the Counsel of Trent do but mock and dally
with Kings and Princes, which grant a thing so manifest, and so humbly
desired by the Orators of Kings and Princes upon such conditions, which they
know to be most wicked and ungodly. For what is in the Gospel more bright
and more manifest, than that Christ instituted his Supper under both kinds?
and that the Church of the Corinthians communicated under both kinds? And if
the Counsel would have done wisely, it had been more meet for their
authority and person, simply and utterly to deny the Communion required, than
to dispense with it upon such conditions, which they them selves ues
understand to be repugnaunte unto the thing required.

Let all the true Godly also and faithful which are every where dispersed
through out the world, consider, how little regard, yea rather none at all is
had to their salvation, if the use of the cup be granted unto the^ upon these
conditions, whereby they are compelled to approve and confyrme all papisticall
impietye. But rather it is much better for ever to abstain not only from the
Cup but also from the bread of the Supper, than with so great offense to
God, by their testimonye to allow horrible Idolatrye and sacrilege. For by it
they are not grafted into the liberty wherinto they are delivered by Christ,
but are cast into a greater bondage, the conscience is not eased, but
oppressed with a greater burden,

I trust I have briefelye and perspicuouslye showed that the Counsel of Trent
has not only allowed erroures that are repugnaunte unto the holy Scripture,
but has also confyrmed horrible impiety, Iolatrye, superstitions, and abuses,
and that not in doctrine alone, but also in the Sacrament delivered of Christ
unto the Church. Even as therefore for their sakes we have much cause to
lamente, for that the Fathers of this Counsel in so manifest a light of the
Gospel are enfected with so great a blyndnesse, that they will not
acknowledge or abolyshe no not even the least error: so also again on the
other side ought the Church of GOD and all we even from the heart to
rejoice, that even now at the last by the decrees of this Counsell^, we may
stay upon some certainety of the will and meaning of the pontifical
Counselles. For hitherto, the Christians which are every where dispersed
abroad in the papacye, have hoped y^ it would have come to pass, that by some
lawful Counsel and publiqu^ authority, errors and abuses, which thorough the
negligence of Bishops and avarice of sacrificing priests have exept in into
the church should be abrogated. For this office they thought to pertayne unto a
counsel and not to private men. Neither also thought they it the office of a
Magistrate to change or abolysh any thing in doctrine or ecclesiastical
ceremonies. Which thing for that many Kings and Princes, Earls, Barons, Noble
me and Imperial cities have done; very many were offended, because they tarried
not for some lawful knowledge of the cause and determination of a Counsel.
They confess that they acknowledge that in the Catholyke Church (as they call
it) are very many errors, but they affirm there withal that it pertayneth not
to the Magistrate to take them away, but that office belongs unto a
Counsel. And whereas many years and long time, a Christian, general and
(...) counsel has been required and promised, and even unto this year
suspended, now at the length the Counsel of Trent delivers us from al doubt
and farther expectation. For as be in Terence says Nulla circuitione vsum est,
rem aperte prolocutum est, that is, It has used no circu^ution, but has
opened the matter plainly, that they will not abolyshe the least abuse, the
least ceremonye or ryte, but rather have decreed to curse all those, which
even in the least thing accuse them of any error. So far is it of that they
think to abrogate and take away manifest Idolatrye, Sacrifice for the quick
and the dead, Carrying about and worshipping of the bread, Invocation of
Saints, pilgrimages to the Images of the dead, Doctrine of perpetual doubting,
Doctrine of the merit of good works, Of purgatory and such like errors.

Now also should we speak somewhat of the reformation of manuers, which
should be taken in hand and defyned by the Counsel, which thing the
Embassadoures and Legates of the Emperor, of the French King, and of other
Princes required most earenestly. For not only the Court of Rome abounds
with all kind of vices and wickedness, as Riot, Simonye, Avarice or
covetousness, and most horrible fylthinesse, but this mischief is so far
and wide spread abroad through out Christendom, that the Embassadoures and
Orators of certain Princes were not ashamed to declare unto the Counsel,
that the fylthinesse of the priests in their provinces was so great, that
amongst a hundredth priests could scarcely be found two, whose help and
industrye they might with honestye use in any civil rusticall judgments; so
far are they paste ^l shame of most horrible fylthynesse, whoredom, and
such like wickedness: And the Fathers of the Counsel being overcome with the
truth, testified, that for their sakes this garboyle and trouble is risen in
the Church, and that their wickedness is the cause of so great evils.

But if we diligently weyghe the requests of the Kings and Princes, we
ought even from the bottom of the heart to lamente that in the Council sit
not such Fathers, which should be affected which the considerations of these
things. For although the above mentioned Kings and Princes are still addicted
unto the Bishop of Romes kingdom, yet they see, that unless there be had a
more severe reformation of manners, and especially in the Clergy, the Popes
kingdom can not long continue safe and sound. Wherefore they urge and require
a reformation with as much faith and diligence as they can.

But what do they of the Papacye and the good holy Counsel of Trent? They
do even as if a man should go about to wash, one having the leprosye, or
if a man should endeavor him self to ryd an old scalde head from lyse, which
thing may manifestly be seen by the. xii. Articles set forth of reformation,
and by the decrees confirmed by authority of the Counsel.

Twelve principal points of reformation proposed the. xi. day of March, to be
considered of the Fathers, in the Counsel of Trent.
1 LEt the Fathers consider what means may be had, that Patriarchs,
Archbishops, bishops, and al those that have cure over souls should be
resident upon their Churches, and should not be absent from them, but upon
causes just, honest, necessary and profitable unto the Church.

2 Also whither it be expedient that none be admitted unto holy orders, unless
it be to some certain title of a benefice. For it is found by experience,
that much disceate is practiced by reason, that for the most part they are
admitted by the title of Saltimonium. That is (...) ^lse title.


3 And that they which give orders receive nothing for the bestowyng of any
orders, whatsoever they be, neither also the Ministers nor Notaries.

4 Whyther it may be granted unto them, that of the Prebendes of such as
serve not, they may distribute daily distributions in those Churches, in which
are no distributions, or else so slender distributions, that they are not
regarded.

5 Whyther all Parishes, which for their greatness require many Priests,
ought also to have tytles to be instituted of the Ordinary.

6 Benefices also that have cure which want a sufficient provision of living
for the Priest, whither they be to be reformed, so that of many by the
Ordinarye may be made only one.

7 Forasmuch as Persons of Churches are for y^ most part very vnm^ete, so that
either through ignorance or filthiness of life they destroy rather than edifye.
And somtymes they have Uicars far worse than them selves, it is to be
considered, how this evil may be provided for, and whyther it should be
expedient, that unto them should be given a meet fellow helper with the
assygnation of the fruits at the arbitrament of the Ordinary.

8 Whyther it may be granted unto Ordynaries, that they may give up into the
mother churches, benefices, and Chapels being by reason of auncientnesse
decayed, and which through pouertye cannot be renewed.

9 Whyther it be decreed, that benefices commended and also regular, ought to
be visited and corrected of the Ordinaries.

10 Also whether secret Matrimonies ought in time to come to be declared
void and of no force.

11 What conditions ought to be assigned to this, that matrimonies be not
called secret, but contracted in the face of the church.

12 Lastly, it should very diligently be considered, what is to be ordained as
touching the no small abuses of usurers.

The self same sacred Synod. etc. intending to pro secute the matter of
reformation, has in this present Session being the. v^. thought good to decree
as follloweth.
THere is nothing which otherwise continually more instructs to piety and the
worshypping of God, than the life and example of them which have dedicated them
selves unto the ministry of God For, for so much as they being from the
things of the world, exalted unto a higher place, are beholden, all other men
cast their eyes on them as on a glass, and of them take that which they may
follow. Wherefore it altogether so becomes the clergy elected unto the office
of the lord, to frame their whole life and ma^ners, that in apparel, gesture,
going, speech, and all other things, they show no example of any thing but that
which is grave, moderate, and full of piety: and that they eschew also eue^light
faults, which in the^ should be most great, that all their doings may bring
a recreation and reverence unto all men. Wherefore seeing that how much the
greater both commoditye and ornament these things are in the church of God, so
much the more diligently are they to be observed, the holy Synod has
decreed, that those things which at other times have been aboundantlye and
healthfullye ordained by sage Bishops, and by sacred Counsels, of the life,
honesty, and demeanor of the Clergy, and for the re taining of doctrine, also
of banquetynges, dauncinges, disinges, gamings, and such like faults, and also
of the avoiding of worldly affairs, that the self same should be hereafter
observed under the self same punishments, all which things ar revived by
this present decree. And the bishops if they shall find that any of these
things ar turned into a disuse, let them with speed study to have the^
called again into use, and diligently cause them to be observed of all men: for
God shall take vengeance upon them for the neglecting of the amendment of
such as are under them. Let no man from hence forth be admitted unto cathedral
churches, which besides that which is required of the holy Canons, shall not be
in the University Doctor or Licentiate, or otherwise Graduate in divinity, or
in both the laws or else in one of the^, or which has not received holy
orders, unless he be so adorned with that integrity of life, and there withal
such excellency in learning and nobilitye of birth, that these ornaments in
him, do nota bly counteruaile the public degree of a Doctor.

Let not cachedrall Churches also, the true va lure of whose fruits exceed
not the sum of 500. ducats of gold of the Chamber, be burdened with
pensions, yea in cause of resignatio^: but those which excede the said valor,
may never be burdened above half the fruits, nether also may they be so much
burdened, but that at the least 500. full be left unto the Prelate.

Let not parish churches also, whose fruits exceed not the sum of. 500.
ducats of gold of the Chamber, by no means be burdened with yearly pensions,
yea in cause of resignation: But those which excede that value may never
he^ceforth be burdened with pensions or reseruations of fruits above the half,
and let there always remain unto the Person of the parish Church at the least
500. ducats of gold of the Chamber.

Of the fruits of al dignities, unto which in cathedral churches or in churches
collegiate is due by law, or by custom any jurisdiction, administration or
office, the bishops may at their arbitreme^t divide the third part into
distributio^s to be assigned every festiual day, so that he which shall not at
the least every holy day personallye fulfill the service belonging unto him,
according to ye order to be prescribed by the Ordinary, shall lose the
distributio^ of y^ day, neither shall he by any means make claim unto it, but
it shall be applied to the reparatio^s of the church. Let these things be
understand to be ordained for those churches only in which there is no custom
or statute, y^ they which serve not should lose anipart which arises to the
third part of the said fruits, notwithstanding all customs, yea though they be
by time out of mind, and constitutions, although they be by an oath confirmed,
or with any authority whatsoever it be.

Let Canons deuide^ts, and whosoever peaceably obtain such prebends, unto which are annexed sundry duties, namely that some should sing Masses, some the Gospel,
some the Epistle, be bound (so that there be no just impediment to the contrary)
to take upon them orders requisite, any custom what soever it be to the
contrary notwithstanding, neither from henceforth let any be admitted but only
those which are well known to have full age and other abilities, otherwise let
the admission be void.

Whatsoever dispensations if they be to be committed out of the court of Rome,
let them be committed to the Ordinaries of those which have obtained them, in
those things which are graciously granted of the same, as delegates
Apostolical su^marily only, that it may be forth known iudicially whether the
requests expressed be true or no, which if they shall not find to be true,
let the dispensations lose their effect.

In alteryng also of last wyls (which ought not to be done, but upon most just
causes) they may as delegates of ye sea Apostolic search out, whether the
things declared in the requests be true or no, which if they shall find to be
false, let not the foresaid alterations be put in execution.

Let causes touching benefices, whose fruits in daily distributions excede not
the true valor of. 24. d^cates of gold of the Chamber, in the first insta^ce
be examined in part before the ordinaries of the places, which may proceed to
the definitive sentence, any clause or inhibition notwythstanding, and that no
appeal in y^ same be admitted, unless it be by the definitive sentence, or by
it which has the strength of a definitive sentence, either else from the grief
which may happen by the ap peale from the definitive sentence. Metropolitans
in appellations which happen unto them in all cases, both in admitting appeals,
and in grau^tyng inhibitions after the appeal, are bound to keep the common
law, according to the form and tenor of the sacred constitutions, and chiefly
the constitutions of Innocentius the. 4. in the Counsel of Lions, which
begins: Romana, etc. any custom, yea even time out of mind, or with in
memory, or privilege to the contrary notwithstanding, otherwise such things
as follow these inhibitions and processes, whatsoever they be, let them be by
the law of no force.

The Bishops may also in cases allowed by the law be executors of al godly
dispositio^s, yea also among them that be on live, and have power to visyte
hospitals, confraternities, schools, mountains of pity or of charity, and
all other godly places by what name so ever they be called, and also to take
acce^pt of al administrations, of those which ought to give them, also to
consider and to put in execution al other things of this kind, which are
appointed to the worshipping of god, or to the health of souls or to the
sustena^ce of the poor as they are bound by their office according to the
statutes of the holy Canons, any custom whatsoever it be, also any exemption
time out of mind, privilege, or statute, to the contrary notwithstanding.

Administrators as well Ecclesiastical as laicall with such as pertayne unto
them which have charge over the reparations of Churches, of Hospitals, of
mountains of piety, and of all other places of devotion, shall be bound to
give account every year of their administration to the ordinary, and to him
which obtayneth the chiefest dignitye of the Church, which shall be present
in the place for that time. But if by memorable custom or by privilege, or by
any custom of the place the account should be given to certain deputies for
that purpose, then let also the ordinary be with them, unless peradventure it
were other wise expressedly provided for in the foundation or dotation of such
buyldyng, all other customs, although they be customs time out of mind,
exemptions and privileges to the contrary notwithstanding, and absolutions or
grauntes otherwise made shall in no case help the said administrations.

For as much as by the unskillfulness of Notaryes many hurtes and occasions of
much strife a rise, the Bishop may (if they be created by the Apostolical
authority) as a delegate of the sea Apostolic, otherwise by the authority
thereof, after ordinary examination had) search out the sufficiency of them,
which if they be not found apt, may prohibit the use of exercisyng the
office perpetually, or for a time, or let their appeallation suspende the
interdiction of the Drordinarye.

If covetousness the root of all euilles shall so much possess any of ye
Clergy or Layty, that by violence or with fear, or also by any counterfayte
persons of the Clergy, or by what other craft, or under any other color
sought they date convert and turn to their proper uses the goods, fruits,
emolumentes, or any other profits of any Church, either of any secular or
regular benesice, which ought to be converted into the necessities of the
Ministers and of the poor, let him be under the execrable curse, till that
he shall fully restore to the Church and to the administrator thereof, the
goods, fruits, and teuenewes which he occupyeth, or which by any means
pertayne unto him, yea by the gift of that counterfayte person, and then he
shall obtain absolution of the Bishop of Rome: And if he be patron of the
same Church, besides the pains above said, he shall be also depryued of the
right of the patronage, and the Clerk which shall be a consenter to such fraud
and wicked usurpation shall be under the same pains, and also shall be deprived of
all his benefices, and be made unable to any other benefices, and at the
arbitry of his ordinarye shall be suspended from the execution of his orders.

These principal points of Reformation I thought good here to annere, not
that I would at large confute them, but that the Christian reader might see,
that the fathers of the Counsel mind not any carnest reformation.

For in Reformation of Churches the principallest care ought to be for the
restoryng and preseruyng of godly, sincere, and incorrupt doctrine, this the
Counsel in the former decrees has condemned as blasphemous and heretical.
The other care is touching the manners of yt Pastors and of the sheep, about
which the Fathers of the Counsel in these Articles and Decrees are occupsed.
For they persevere still in their opinion, that the life and manners of the
Clergy are not to be reformed according to the doctrine of the Gospel, but
according to the doctrine of their Canons.

Because therefore they should begin at the head, as the first, request of
the Emperors Ambassadors sounds, we must first desire that the high
Bishop would gently suffer hyu^ self and the Court of Rome to be reformed:
The Counsel of Trent aunswerethe: That the Sacred Canons of the Elders are in
this part to be observed: but amongst other Canons touching the reformation
of the Bishop of Rome is extant In the decree of Gratiane. Did. 40. Chap. S^
Papa. etc.
this Canon also which is horrible to be heard: If the Pope, having no
regard to his own salvation nor to the salvation of his brethren, be found
unprofitable and rem^sse in his works, and besides that void of goodness,
which is more hurtefull unto him self, and unto all men, although he ledeth
with him self innumerable heaps of people unto the chiefest bond sclaue of
hell, where with him they shall for ever be beaten with many stripes, yet the
faults of this man no mortal man presumes to reprove here, because he shall
judge all men, and be judged of no man, unless he be found to have strayed
from the faith. Let ye Counsel of Trent go now, and presume to reform ye
wicked. Acts of the court of Rome, whose faith in all things it allows. And
let the Ambassadors of Kings and Princes wait for amendment of the Court of
Rome That is never for they have no Calendes.
Ad Calendas Gr^cas.

If it be required that the vnclenlines, and fylthy lusts of the Bishops,
Sacrificyng Priests and Monks, should be corrected and amended: the Counsel
of Trent answers, that the holy Canons are to be kept, and that the
sacrificyng Priests are bound to keep the law of unclean sole life,
forswearyng Marriage: Which doctrine the Apostle calls the doctrine of
deuilles. 1. Tim. 4. If the ignorance and unskillfulness of Bishops and
Pastors be accused, they will have the matter remedied by Uicares that are
far more unskillful and by fellowhelpers: Why rather should they not be
removed from their office, and sufficient ones put in their place, which might
both in doctrine and also in example edifye the Church of GOD? In sum, the
authority of all the Canons of the Bishops of Rome is sacred holy and
inviolable in this Counsel of Trent.

In the mean time lest they should seem idle lookers on of those things,
which are every where practiced in kingdoms, they dispute of the residence of
the Bishops, and of the bestowyng of prebendes ryghtly according to the custom
of the Court of Rome, about which things they are more careful than about
the amendment of doctrine, and reformation of the perverse manners of Priests.

But what profit; I pray you redoundeth unto the Church of GOD, whether the
Bishops be resident here or in any other place, when as they neither teach
nor yet can teach the people of ye will of God, which thing ^et is the dewty and
office of Bishops? But they neglectyng that have turned this office into
Princely gouernamentes and under the rytle and name of Bishops they invade the
kingdoms of the world, having no regard unto souls, whose salvation tey
ought by teaching diligently to provide for. (...) ^he when they are preseut
they are more hurt than when they are absent. Which thing the Bishops them
selves vndersta^ better than my pen is able to express.

If they of the Papacy mind in the Counsel earnesssly to prosecute the matter
of Reformation, why do they not wayghe the griefs proposed by the Orders of
the Empire unto the Legate of Adrian the Bishop of Rome, in the Imperial
assemblies at Norimberge in the year of our Lord. 1523. Unto which unless
they (as it is mete) answer, who will believe that they have any regard of
this thing.

But whilst I exactely consider and waygh with my self all and singular these
things, I can not hold my self, but that I must talk a few words with the
Fathers of the Counsel. Ye remember (as I suppose) the most severe admonition
of the Lord made by Malachy unto Malach. (...)
the Priests of the old Testament: And now (says he) unto you is this
commandment, Dye Priests: It ye will not hear nor consider in yput heart,
to give glory unto my name, says the Lord of holles, I will send upon you
poverty, and will curse your blessings, and I will curse them, because ye have
not considered it in your heart. Behold I will corrupt your seed, and will
cast upon your faces the dongue of your solemn feast days, and it shall
cleave fast unto you. And ye shall knows that I have sent this commandment
unto you, that my covenant might stand which I made with Leuy; says the
Lord of hosts. I made a covenant of life and peace with him: and I gave him
fear, and he feared me, and was afraid before my name. The law of truth was
in his mouth, and there was no wickedness fou^ in his lyppes: he walked with
me in peace and equitye, and did turn many one away from their sins. For
the Priests lyppes should preserve knowledge, and they should se^e the law
at his mouth: for he is the Angel of the Lord of hosts. But ye are gone out
of the way, and have caused many to be offended at the law: ye have broken
the covenant of Leuy says the Lord of hosts. Therefore have I also made
you to he dispysed, and vile before all people, because ye kept not my ways,
but have been parciall in the law, but the Lord shall destroy both the
master and the scholar out of the tabernacle of Jacob, with him that offreth an
offering unto the Lord of hosses.

Know ye that this admonition pertayneth unto you, upon whom ye have turned
all the eyes of whole Christendom. For even as the Lord made a league with
the tribe of Leuy, whose office was to keep knowledge, that being demanded
concerning the will of GOD, they should answer and instruct the people of
GOD: So also would he have the Bishops to be diligent kepers of the
Apostolical doctrine, and to be successors unto the Apostles, not so much in
seat as in doctrine. But alas that thing has happened in our times, and in
the times of our Elders, which the Prophet complained of concerning the
priests of his time. For in stead of knowledge and the law of God, are kept
humane traditions which are repugnaunte unto the law and will of God. Ye have
departed from the way of the Lord, and have been an offense unto many in the
law of the Lord, which have embraced these doctrines. Christ said unto the man
that was Math. ix.
sick of the palsy. Have confidence my son, thy suns are forgeuen thee:
But contrarily ye Fathers of the Counsel of Trent say: Doubt my son, and
appoint not assuredly of the remission of thy sins. The Apostle says. Romans
viii.
The holy ghost bears witness unto our spirit, that we are the children of
God. Contrarily ye in your Counsel decree, that we must perpetually doubt, and
yt we must have more regard unto our own unaptness and weakness, then to
this testimony of the holy ghost. Christ says concerning the cup of the
supper: Drink ye al of this. Ye contrarily Math. xxvi.
say: Let not all, but the priests only drink of the Cup. John says Christ
is made a propitiation for the i. John. ii. i. John. ii.
sins of the whole world: And again: The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us
from al sin. Contrarily ye fathers of the Counsel say: That not only the
sacrifice of ye cross, but also the sacrifice of the mass is a propitiation
for our sins. Also that not only the blood of Christ, but also the fire of
Purgatory cleanses us from some sins. Christ teaches us to call upon God
only: Ye being gathered together Math. vi.
in this Counsel teach, and command tocal upon Saints also. Christ concerning
ye bread of ye supper says. Take ye eat ye: Ye contrary ordain ye it must be
kept til to morrow Math. xxvi.
included, and ear^ed from place to place. Christ says: That Math. 15
which enters in through the mouth, defiles not man, The counsel says: If
any man at certain times abstain not from the eating of flesh, let him be
accursed. S. Paul says: Led a Bishop be y^ husband of one wife, which has i.
Tim. iii. Tim. i.
obedient children. The counsel says: Let a Bishop have neither wife nor
children, and let such as be joined in matrimony be put out and suspended from
this so holy an office. But who can reckon up all the things, in which ye
papistical priests have departed from the law of the Lord? This also was the
cause why the Prophet said in this place: I have made you to be despised and
vile to all people because ye have not intended in your heart to give glory to
God. Therefore also is your glory trodden under foot, as in an other place the
Lord of hosts speaks unto Eli the priest: Whosoever shall glorifye me, I
will glorifye him, but they which contemn me shall be made vile. To y^ end
(...). Sam. ii.
ye would establish the glory of the priests, ye violate and tear in pieces
the Testament and last will of the Lorde^ namely y^ priests should be had in
honor and estimation, let the lay men be spoiled with the use of the cup, as
the Counsel of Constance has decreed.

It greueth you very much, that the glory, hon^ure and estimation of
priestesis every where decayed, which sometimes were most highlye esteemed of
Kings and Princes and of the people of God. Inipute this contempt unto your
selves: your own sin is the cause thereof, for that ye have forsaken the law
of the Lord, and have departed from the way of the Lord. Your manners are not
in this place reprehended, which are not agreeable unto the dignitye of a
priest. Here is chiefly entreated of the true worshipping of God, which ye
have corrupted, and contaminated, and therefore also according to this our
Prophet, all your sacrifyces are contaminated, and ye are in very deed made
vile unto all men.

Neither can I believe, that all you, which are assembled together at Trent are
a like so utterly ignoraunte of the holy Scriptures, that ye understand not
these things. Wherefore the greater danger and greuouser punish meant of God is
to be looked for, if against your conscience ye condemn the manifest truth.

But rather if ye desire to maintain your name, honor and dignity, return
unto the covenant and law of the Lord, that is to the doctrine of the
Prophets, of Christ and of the Apostels, see that ye embrace it, casting away
the inventions of humane traditions. Seek the glory of the Lord, eudeuour
your selves to extol his name and honor, and he will on the other side
glorifye you, and (which thing ye only desire) will subdue the whole world unto
your ministry. And ye shall be no more a reproach unto all your neighbors.
Neither think ye it to be a shame, to acknowledge an error.

The Priests of the old Testament also were bewytched with this opinion, who
said: We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us. Unto whom the Prophet
speaks: Put ye no confidence in the words of lying, saying: The temple of
the Lord, the temple of the Lord. Ierem. 8. Ierem. 7.
For they thought that God was so bound unto this temple, that his grace was
perpetually present, although they taught things contrary unto the law, and
woorshipped him otherwise than he had commanded them. Come said they, and let
us imagine some devise against Jeremy: Ierem. 18.
for the law shall not perysh from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise man,
nor the word from the Prophet: come and let us smite him with the tongue, and
let us not give heed to any of his words. Let not such thoughts for Gods
sake, possess your minds, that ye should harden your hearts against the word
of God, being falselye persuaded, that the law can not perish from the Priest,
that Psalm. 94.
is, that ye cannot err.

For I suppose that by this short admonition ye may understand that the law
is perished from the Priest, and y^ horrible errors are brought in into the
Church of God by your Prophets, that is, by your interpreters of the holy
scripture. Which errors if ye have determined with to oath and nail still to
retain, and if ye will not give heed unto all the words of the Prophets and
of the Apostels, then know ye, that according to the example of these
Priests, your destruction is at hand, unto whom God threatened perdition. I
beseech you, hate not your own souls so, that ye will be blind leaders unto
the blind, but remember the commandment of Christ. Teach ye the Church to
keep the things which he Math. 28
has commanded, that ye may at length shine as stars of the Fyrmament for
ever and ever. Which thing the Lord has by the Prophet promised unto godly
Teachers, which instruct other in the true righteousness. Dani. 12.


The Priests, Levites, and Scribes, and all the people could for a time oppres
the Prophets, whose doctrine Iere. 44.
they repelled, s^ying: The word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of
the Lord, we will not hear it of thee. (...). Unto whom the Prophet again
answered: Did not the Lord remember the Sacrifice which ye sacrific^d in the
Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, both you and your Fathers,
your Kings and Princes, and the people of the land, and has he not
considered it? And the Lord could no l^nger forbear, because of the
wickedness of your inventions, and because of the abominations which ye have
committed, and your land is turned into desolation, and made an astonyshment
and a curse, and without inhabitaunt, as appears this day.

So also may we pronounce of you, if you go on as you have be gonne, ye may
in deed condemn the doctrine of our Churches, which is Apostolical, and ye
may persecute the godly Teachers, but take heed, that ye also have not
experience of the self same fortune, which the people of God felt, whom he
abiected for their obstynate malice, whereby they endeavored themselves to
defend Idolatrye, and myghtely saved the Prophet, wonderful far above the
expectation of that people, and contrary to the will of all his enemies.

Be myndefull I beseech you of your salvation, and of the salvation of all
Christians, prefer not so little glory and pleasure that soon vanysheth
away, before the truth of the heavenly doctrine. I beseech you remember that
which was spoken unto Paul the persecutour from heaven: Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? Acts. 9.
It is hard for thee to kycke against the prycke. Your enterprise undoubtedly
shall be in vain, and turn to your own destruction, if ye shall endeavor
your selves to oppress the doctrine, which has put forth the beams of his
light into all the kingdoms of the world. And they myserablye deceive you,
which go about falselye to persuade you, that your authority is still of
force.

The eyes of all men in a manner are open, that they see what blyndnes of mind
ye are infected with. And your own men which yet you have for defendours,
even they accuse you, and godly admonish you to take in hand an other doctrine
and amendment of ceremonies and manners, than was instituted of you, in this,
and also the former Counsel of Trent. For they see that their Churches can
neither consist, neither their Subjects can be kept and contained in
tranquilitye and doing their duty, unless such things be granted unto
them, which thing even the Magistrates also which are on the Popes side,
understand to be neither unjust nor ungodly. Apply your minds I beseech you
unto the godly and true reformation of the Church of Christ, and to whom God
in this your assembly has revealed his will, lift up in the Counsel your
voices as a Trumpet, cry out and cease not, cry out (I say) Our fathers and
we have sinned, and have departed from the law of the Lord. Let us return unto
our first husband. Let the word of the Lord be the only rule and
Captain of our Counsels and Canons. Let us be addicted unto his glory, and
unto the health of the church: and let us restore unto it a godly peace being
disturbed with dissensions, and we shall receive a reward worthy the study of
peace and truth. But I shall desire you to pardon me, if I have held you
longer in consideration of this thing than I would, than which there is none
more holy, and more worthy and healthful both unto you and unto the Church of
Christ. He has reserved (as I think) unto himself and unto us many, which
both understand these things, and as it is written in Czechiel, are grieved at
all the abominations which are done in the church, ^zechi. 9.
whom the Lord in due time will bring forth together with Nichodemus and
Joseph, that they may set forth his glory, and with a constant mind succor
the Church now being sick.

Thou haste here Christian Reader the decrees of the Counsel of Trent
concerning the principal points of doctrine, Sacraments, and reformation of
the Clergy, in which decrees is condemned the true doctrine of Original sin,
of the strengthes of free will, of grace and justification, of faith and
works, of the sacraments, and specially of the Eucharist and Communion under
both kinds: there is no provision made for meet Ministers for Churches, but
ungodly decrees are confirmed, wherein against the word of God is prohibited
the marriage of Priests, vnpure sole life is obtruded, and the church and the
court of Rome are made free from al error: and it is provided for the bishop
of Rome by the self same Canons being repeated, that no man should presume
once to reprehende his errors, much less to correct and amend them.

By all which things as well our men, which have of late departed from the
papisticall court, as also even they which are still addicted unto the
papistical religion, may understand, that there can nothing be hoped for of
the papistical Counsels, that may serve for the taking away of superstitions,
errors and abuses out of the Church, and for the reformation of the manners of
the Clergy.

But forasmuch as by all men's judgment, the reformation of doctrine and
manners is most necessary, and the same ca^ by no means be obtained of the
bishop of Romes counsel (who least they should seem to have erred, will not give
place even in the least thing) it is nedeful that kings and Princes do devise
some other way and means to set an unity in religion, if in case they will
provide for their own salvation, and the salvation of their subjects. Unto
whom I commit such so great a matter, and so necessary, more deeply to be
considered and wayghed. And let them remember their vocation and office, that
God has not preferred them over his Church as Swyneherds and Cowherdes, only
to keep public peace and tranquilitye, and to administer justice, but also to
be nurcyng fathers unto the church of God, as it is written: And Kings shall
be E^y 49.
thy nurcyng Fathers, and ^uenes thy nurces. And in the Psalm: lift up your
gates, ye Princes, and be^e lift up Psalm. 24.
ye eternal gates, and the King of glory shall enter in.

Wherefore seeing they see the Pope so neglecting their own salvation and also
the salvation of their subjects, that by heaps he leads great number of
people into hell, let them take upon themselves this godly care, and confyrme
themselves according to the example of Godly Kings and Emperonres, which
judged that it pertayned to their office to apply them selves unto this godly
care, that idolatrye being abolished, and high places broken down, the true
woorshipping of God might be restored, as in the old Testament we read of Asa,
Ios^as, and Ezechias, and in the new Testament of the godly Emperors
Constantine, Theodosius, and such like, by whose authority most waightye
controversies of religion were most gravely, according to the word of God,
decided and quieted, when as the tyrranny of the Papacy was not yet known unto
the Church of God. And the way is not hard, so that godly Princes would with
one mutual consent take the matter in hand, that by the diligence of godly and
learned men, the doctrines of the Church may be purged from al errors and
ceremonies, being reduced unto the rule of faith, might be cleansed from al
superstition.

Whereas I said that it should be done with the mutual consent of Princes, the
same shall for this cause chiefly be very necessary, least whilst that al
singular persons do at their pleasures abrogate ceremonies and rites, there be
brought iu into the Church Anarchia, no less per^lous Anarchia is Jack or want
of a Ruler.
then was the pontifical impiety and tyrranny, by which means the pureness of
doctrine should easelye be corrupted, and Churches should be severed and
drawn into sundry sects and opinions, which Churches by a legitimate
authority might be kept in their due obedience.

But hither to neither is the hour come, neither has this day shined forth,
whose brightness yet we seem a far of to behold. For I verily believe that not
only God in heaven, but also in a manner the whole world lotheth at the
impiety and tyranny of the pontifical court, which already is decayed, and
threateneth a most great ruin unto the kingdom of the Pope. The Lord God and
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of his clemency deliver his ele^t (who^ he
has dispersed in this Babylon) from al error of (...), and bring them to his
son through the knowledge of the Gospel, that they forsaking the intolerable
yoke of the Bishop of Rome, may submyt and subdue them selves unto the most
sweet yoke of Christ.

Amen.
Imprinted at Lon don by John Day, dwelling over Alderigate, beneath Saint
Martins.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


