A RELATION OF SVCH THINGS AS were observed to happen in the Journey of the
right Honorable CHARLES Earl of NOTTINGHAM, L. High Admiral of ENGLAND, His
Highness Ambassador to the King of SPAIN:

Being sent thither to take the Oath of the said King for the maintenance of
Peace between the two famous Kings of Great Britain and Spain:

According to the several Articles formerly concluded on by the Constable of
Castilla in England in the Month of August, 1604.

Set forth by Authority.

LONDON Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for Gregory Seaton, and are to be
sold at his Shop under Aldersgate. 1605.

To the Reader.
Having collected together many general observations in that Honorable
journey into Spain, lately performed by the right honorable and worthy Earl,
The Earl of Nottingham; although amongst many reasons which persuaded me to be
therein to my self secret, and to the world sparing in diuulging this
Treatise, I found especially (and which I must of necessity confess) mine
own weakness in compiling the same and making it fit and worthy of so
general a reading, as by this consequence it must undergo: yet being
ouer-weighed with many especial motives which I could not well answer or
contradict, I thought rather to expose my self to the favorable censure of
the worthiest and best minded; (who rather respect a plain and homebred style,
yet true, than a tale consisting of eloquent phrases, but doubtful) than
pleasing my self in mine own fearful humor, give cause of offense to them
whom most I labored to content. The first of these motives being, That many of
my friends, knowing me to have been by especial appointment an Attendant upon
his Lordship in that honorable emploiment, and understanding of the care taken
by me in observing some particulars in the same; exceedingly urged me to give
them a perfect knowledge and satisfaction thereof: which as it was a thing
likely to be tedious, so could they not receive that contentment by a brief
Report, which a more ample Relation and Discourse might better afford. Another
was, That for that it came to our knowledge, how many false and ill contrived
reports had been bruted abroad after our departure from England; as well
derogating from that honorable enterteinment we received in general whilst
we were in Spain, as from the proceedings of his Lordship and his Company in
some particulars, I could not but (taxing my self of duty to his Lordship and
the rest) endeavor to satisfy all doubtful and unsatisfied minds with
relating and declaring the truth thereof. But a third and a more especial
cause is, That sithence our return, one not well informed having undertaken to
know much of the proceedings of that Journey, and mistaking himself in his own
understanding, lately published a Pamphlet of many false and erroneous
observations: thereby possessing the Readers with an untrue Relation of that,
the truth whereof they so much desired. Upon these former considerations
therefore, I was advised to tender unto your generous acceptance my wel-meaning
endeavors; which although they cannot give that pleasure and content in reading
you happily expect, yet shall they assure you what they promise: That is; A
true Relation of such things which happened in that honorable Journey. In
reporting whereof, I had rather be condemned for plainness, than once
suspected for reporting an untruth.

ROB. TRESVVELL, alias SOMERSET, Herald.

A RELATION OF such things as were observed to happen in the Journey of the
right Honorable CHARLES Earl of NOTTINGHAM, etc. his Highness Ambassador to
the King of SPAIN, being sent thither to take the Oath of the said King for
the maintenance of Peace between the two famous Kings of GREAT BRITAIN and
SPAIN, according to the several Articles formerly concluded on by the
Constable of Castilla in England in the Month of August 1604.
SO soon as the right honorable Charles Earl of Nottingham L. High Admiral
of England had taken notice from his Majesty, That it was his will and pleasure
to employ him in this great Embassage to the K. of Spain, calling to mind,
how honorably and richly the Duke of Fryas, Constable of Castilla and late
Ambassador for the said king, had formerly demeaned himself in England:
presently, with a most honorable resolution, neither fearing the hazard of his
person, being now aged, nor regarding the expenses, that so great and
honorable an employment should require: with what speed he conveniently might,
endeavored to perform his Majesty's designs and appointment herein. And
therefore by the advice of the Council of England, he first resolved both what
honorable personages and what number of them might be fitting, for
accompanying and attending him, in this his great employment. To whom when as
particular Letters from the Council, by his Majesty's especial commandment
were dispatched, to give them notice, to prepare themselves to attend the said
Noble Earl according as his Highness had commanded; they seemed so willing
and ready to perform their duty and service therein, that his Lordship was
far more troubled to deny many, and that of very good sort, who voluntarily
tendered their service in good will and honor of his Lordship to attend him in
this his appointed voyage, than he was at first in bethinking what company were
necessary to take with him. And therefore at last concluding of a competent
number, (not without displeasing many) he resolved upon these whose names
hereafter follow: The Earl of Pearth. The Lord Howard of Effingham his son
and heir. The Lord Willoughbey. The Lord Norrys. Sir Charles Howard knight,
his second son. Sir Thomas Howard knight, second son to the Earl of
Suffolk. Sir John Sheffeild knight, son and heir to the Lord Sheffeild.
Master Pickering Wotton, son and heir to the Lord Wotton. Sir Richard Lewson
knight, Admiral of the fleet and Viceadmirall of England. Master Thomas
Compton, brother to the Lord Compton. Hans Herman Van Veiscenbach, a German,
and of good esteem in England. Sir Robert Drewry. Sir Robert Maunsell,
Treasurer of the kings Navy, and Vice admiral of the fleet. Sir Edward Howard
his nephew. Sir Thomas Palmer. Sir Edward Swift. Sir William Smith. Sir John
Treuor, surueyor of the navy. Sir Robert Killegrew. Sir Richard Cowper,
Gentleman-porter of the Kings house. Sir George Buc. Sir Guylford Slingsby. Sir
Adolfus Carry. Sir Francis Howard, his Lordships nephew also. Sir Sackuyle
Treuor, Rereadmirall of the fleet. Sir Walter Gore. Sir William Page. Sir Giles
Hoftman. Sir Thomas Roe. Sir John Eyres. Sir Phillip Carry. Sir Henry Knowles.
Sir John Gueuarra. Knights.


Master Giles Porter his interpreter. Doctor Marbeck. Doctor Palmer,
Physicians. Master Pawlet. Master Carry. Master Barret. Master John Lewson.
Lewis Tresham. Captain Thomas Button. William Button. John Fearne. Hierom
Laments. Henry Butler. John Milliscent. Bernard Saunders. Philip Roper. Francis
Plomb. Roger Tailor. Captain William Morgan. Henry Minn. Christopher
Frederick. Thomas Buc. Captain William Polewheele. Edmond Fittou. Walter
Gray. John Atkinson. Dudley Carleton. Edward Smith, and many other gentlemen of
good condition and quality as well his Lordships private Officers and Servants,
as diverse whose names are not herein remembered.

The ships appointed to attend his Lordship and his company for transportation
of themselves, the followers and necessaries, were these: The Bear. being
ships royal. The Dew-repulse. being ships royal. The Wast-spight. being
ships royal. The Mary-Anne. The Amity. The Resistance. The great Hoy called
the George.


According to appointment, the said Lords, Knights and Gentlemen prepared
themselves to give their attendance whenever his Lordship should take his
journey, and therefore understanding that he intended to take leave of the king
on Thurseday the one and twentieth day of March according to the computation of
England; the greatest number of them being very richly apparelled themselves
and extraordinarily appointed for their servants, gave their attendance at
Nottingham house the said one and twenty day of March, his Lordship having
appointed many barges and boats for conueying himself, the said lords and
knights and their company to the Court, the Kings Highness then being at
Greenwich: the said Earl having ordained his own company to be in number as
follows: Six Trumpeters clad in Orange color Damask, with cloakes of cloth
of the same color, and Banners of Damask with his Honors arms thereupon.
Six Footmen in Orange Tawny velvet alike suited. Six Pages, clad likewise in
velvet of the same color, with their cloakes suitable. Thirty gentlemen with
cloakes of black velvet. Fourscore yeomen well apparelled with livery cloakes
of Orange Tawny cloth, guarded with silver and blew silk lace. The said noble
Earl being thus prepared went with his said company from Nottingham house the
said Thursday about noone, and so shooting the bridge, arrived at Greenwich
immediately after dinner: and there presenting himself and his company unto his
Majesty, was most acceptably and graciously enterteined. After some time spent
in receiving his Highness commandment as well concerning himself in his own
particular, as also touching the conducting and presenting of Sir Charles
Cornwallys knight, who was appointed for to be his Majesty's liedger
Ambassador with the king of Spain. The said Ambassadors, Lords, Knights and
Gentlemen humbly taking their leaves of his Highness were for that night
dismissed; every one taking himself to his lodging, there remaining and
expecting his Lordships further pleasure to be known when they should prepare
to set forward on this journey.

His Lordship having now dispatched his private counsels and intendments with
his Majesty and the Lords of the Council, gave warning to his said company and
followers to be ready against Tuesday morning being the six and twentieth day
of the said month of March. Which time he gave to prepare themselves; for that
day he intended to set forward. On which said day being both mindful and
forward for his intended Journey, he was early up in the morning, and taking
the time of the tide, and such company as were ready, being to the number of
80. persons, in diverse barges and boats passed from Nottingham house to
Grauesend, and there dined, staying for much of the company which followed.
After dinner they rode from Grauesend to Chatham where he lodged that night.
The same night the Earl of Mar came from the court of purpose to
congratulate with his Lordship, and do such like private offices of friendship.
The next day being wednesday his Lordship would have gone to the ships, which
were then fallen so low as Quynborow, there riding at Anchor and staying our
coming, but the weather fell out somewhat foul and the wind contrary, so that
he rested at Chatham that night. The next day being Thursday the eight and
twentieth of March, before seven of the clock in the morning his Lordship
having commanded to be ready diverse barges and pinnesses to carry himself and
his followers aboard the ships, took his barge, and about ten of the clock
the same day entered the ship called the Bear, lying in Quynborow Road as
before is said, together with the Dew-repulse and the Wast-spight, which three
ships kept company together and lay of purpose to transport his Lordship, the
Ambassador Lidger, and the other Lords, Knights and Gentlemen that were of the
company and train.

Now what by reason of staying for some of the Lords and Gentlemen, as yet not
come a board, for the better disposing and ordering all things concerning the
voyage, as also for placing and appointing to every man his room accordingly.
The weather likewise being not very fair to put to sea, we Anchored before
Quinborow till Sunday morning being Easter day and the last day of March. At
which time the wind coming about to the West and standing fair to put to sea,
his Lordship commanded to wey and to set sail, which was done accordingly:
Sailing as far as the tide would give them leave, which was to a certain
Road, between the Sands near to the Shoe Beacon, where they rested that night.
The next day being very foul and the wind contrary, they were feign to ride it
out til Tuesday morning being the second of April. At what time the weather
fell somewhat fair, and his Lordship being desirous to take all advantage that
might forward the iourny, commanded to wey again and put to sea, but the wind
being very slack, he was becalmed and so driven to a flat near the Spitts,
where for that the tide was much spent, and the flood coming on, they cast
Ancor about one of the clock in the afternoon, there staying in expectation
of wind till Wednesday morning, when although there was little or no wind
stirring, yet his Lordship set forward, tiding it as far as they could that
night. The next day being Thursday early in the morning the wind coming
somewhat toward the North, his Lordship caused to wey Ancor, and so with
expense of time and much pains, the ships recovered Dover Road, where they
ancored as well for the receiving in of many of the company as also for taking
in fresh water and victuals. So soon as the fleet was discovered and coming
near Dover Road, as well the forts and blockehouses as the castle of Dover
saluted them with many shot: his Lordship answering them again both out of his
own ship and out of the rest also with the like.

That night the Lords and Gentlemen for whom they made stay at Dover came
aboard, and that night also his Lordship minded to have set forward, had not
the Hoie called the George, by spending of her Mast, in her passage from
Quynborow to Dover, caused a longer abode.

Now for that the said Hoie was appointed to carry provision and necessaries
for the fleet, and could not be so soon made ready again for service, as was
desired, and for that, the wind standing at North-east was a fair and fit
wind for going forward: His Lordship advised with Sir Richard Lewson the
Admiral of the fleet, that some course might be presently had to forward the
journey; Sir Richard therefore with great care and extraordinary pains,
laboring all that night, being seconded by Sir John Treuor Surueyor of the
Navy, vnladed the said Hoie, of all such necessary provisions as they were
like to use in the voyage, and having that night and the next morning dispersed
her luggage some in one ship and some in another, and being returned to to
the ships, about ten of the clock a warning piece was given; and about two
hours after, they weyed, and sailed all that day being Friday, the fifth day
of April, until the next day being Saturday, and then being becalmed, were
feign to cast ancor again. That night the wind coming fair, they weied
ancor, and so failed all that night till the next day, the wind again
altering, they lay at anchor till toward the evening, and then set forward,
sailing until ten of the clock the next day, and then cast ancor. About
ten of the clock in the evening they weyed ancor again, and so sailed with
a fair wind that night and the next day. On Wednesday as we sailed, his
Lordship commanded to hayle a Bark which was discovered to be a Bark of
Barnstable in Devonshire, and came from Bayon in France, who declared for
news that there was a yongue Prince borne in Spain. Now it should seem, his
Lordship had received understanding by letters from the right Honorable, the
Vicount Cramborne, his Highness principal Secretary, delivered to him
whilst we lay at road before Dover; that his coming was expected, and
provision made for him and his company, by the King of Spain at Saint
Anderas. His Lordship having sent his provision of Horses, Coches, Lytters,
Hangings, and other his rich furniture and necessaries: together with his
Herbengers and other Officers to the Groyne in several Hoies appointed for
that purpose: the Kings ship called the Advantage, being their Conuoy. His
Highness presents likewise under the charge of Thomas Knoell one of his
Majesty's Ecquery, and appointed messenger for the delivery thereof to the
King of Spain, in their said company. And being uncertain, whether the Kings
designs were as well known to the said Herbengers and the rest, as to
himself: he commanded captain Morgan, and one Master Pet a Master
Shipwright, and a very good Mariner; to go on board the Resistance, being a
ship of London, and one appointed for carriage of provision in this journey,
to make what way they possibly could for the Groyne, to command the said
ships provisions and people, to meet him in the mouth of the harbor, thence
to bear in his company for Saint Anderas. But the said ship was becalmed as
was the rest of the fleet likewise, and could make no way, but kept company
with us till Sunday morning; after which time we had no more sight of her till
her coming to the Groyne, which was the next day after our arrival there.

On Monday morning early the land was discovered by the fleet, and about four
of the clock in the afternoon, they arrived into the road of the Groyne,
being a very safe and pleasant harbor.

We were no sooner descried from the land; but the Governor of the town Don
Lewys de Carilla de Toledo; Seigneur Peynte Cord de Carazena, and Governor of
Galicia, had commanded to make ready for interteyning his Lordship, which was
most royally performed, being upon entrance into the harbor, first saluted
from a fort on the North side the town with twenty great pieces of Ordinance.
Then from the fort lately builte upon the rock with six and twenty pieces of
great Ordinance; and from the town and castle with thirty great pieces of
Ordinance at least. His Lordship coming to ancor with the rest of the ships,
gave them their whole broad sides. Immediately upon his Lordships arrival, the
Governor of the Town sent the four principal officers, Commanders of the
Town together with his Brother don John de pacheco and Don Lewis de Carilla de
Toledo his only son to give his Lordship the welcome, wherein they demeand
themselves so exceeding kindly, and with the most affable and respective
speeches that might be, excusing their slender entertainment by reason of their
late understanding of his Lordships coming to the Groyne, for that they had
intelligence his Lordship meant to have gone to Saint Anderas. After a short
time spent in complement with these Commanders, the Governor himself (being
accompanied with diverse personages of worth came aboard in a barge which seemed
to have been made of purpose for this use. The Rowers and Mariners thereof
(being clad in blew silk Cassoks and Caps, and the barge covered with blew
velvet, and newly painted) reported to his Lordship, that the King his master
had especially written to him in these words; That he should have respect, what
person he was that was comen Ambassador, from whom he was come, and to whom he
was sent; and this he should do every thing for the honor of these three
persons without sparing any thing that might be fit for his Lordships
entertainment. And therefore the Governor entreated his Lordship to go on
Land, which he refused to do that night, but being much importuned, he promised
to go on shore the next day. During the Governors abode on the ship there came
many on board likewise, and they of all conditions. Doctors of Law, Churchmen,
Friars, and of all other sorts of people; who all seemed much to wonder and
admire the greatness and neatness of that Galeon as they termed her:
exceedingly commending and applauding the same. At the departure of the said
Governor from the ships, his Lordship gave many pieces of ordinance, which
were again received and answered from the town and forts. The whole town
indeed being but a hold and fort, but very strong. That night they sent from
the town unto his Lordship a present of fish and fruit, bread and such like
commodities as the country yielded, excusing that they were not able to show
their love in better sort unto his Lordship: for that Monday the day of his
arrival being Saint Marks day with them, and the Fishermen as then not going
to sea, and also having feasted as that day for joy of the birth of the young
Prince: they were the more unfurnished of better present and more fit for his
entertainment.

On Tuesday the sixtienth day of April, his Lordship prepared to go on shore,
to his lodging, which was prepared for him at the governors house, which house
is the whole pleasure of the town, for that it ouerlooketh the whole harbor
and is seated in the heart of the town. The governor likewise having taken
great care to receive his Lordship in the most honorable manner: and therefore
had upon intelligence of our coming to the Groyne, caused to be builded a
bridge of Timber above forty yards long and painted the same, yellow red and
blew, and garnished the same with many pencels of silk of like colors very
formally and planted the way into the town with bows of Baies and Orange
trees, and strewed the same with rushes and flowers. The whole company of the
town and many more of the Country (being as was supposed) drawn thither for
this purpose only, all ready to give his Lorship entertainment after the best
fashion; when the time came that his Lordship might conveniently land, for
until three of the clock after noone the flood was not, upon which he must of
necessity land, the Governor sent diverse of the Commanders of the town to give
notice, that he and other the Magistrates of the town would attend upon the
bridge, his Lordship thereupon took his barge carrying in the head thereof, an
Ancient of white silk, with the picture of the sun in the upper part
thereof; his Moto or word being Desir Na' Repos, written in manner of a Beud,
within the same, and so came in very honorable manner to the bridge, where
stayed for him the said Governor, Judges and Magistrates of the town,
enterteining the English as they landed, the whilst the music, being
Shagbots and Hoboyes and placed for that purpose upon the bridge, played sweet
and delectable melody, and so the Spaniards intermingling themselves with the
English according to their degrees, ever giving the right hand to the English,
passed into the Town in order as follows. First went four of his Lordships
servants, who were appointed Marshals for his train. After followed certain
of his officers in his house and chamber in their liueries. Next after followed
the gentlemen his servants and especial officers in their liueries of black
velvet. Then followed the Esquires and Knights every one according to his
degree: then with our Lords and Nobles, diverse Spanish Commanders and Judges of
the kingdom of Galicia. At their entrance into the town, there was shot off an
exceeding great volley of shot both great and small, and so they passed all on
foot to the Condies house, and at the entrance of his Lordship into the house,
there were shot off a great number of Chambers, being for that purpose, as it
should seem, planted over against the Condies gate. His Lordship being thus
received was exceedingly well appointed and lodged. That night what by reason
of the littleness of the room and the muchnesse of the company, he was both
lated, and could not but be much troubled at his Supping, wherein the Cond and
his officers, did make manifest their exceeding care and respect to have all
things to content his Lordship, and the company with so much attendance and
observance, as it was rather a trouble and offense to any well minded to see
their extraordinary pains taken in there service, than cause of exception in
any wise, especially for that it did appear, There was provided what the
country could any way afford.

There his Lordship rested from that time forward, sometimes riding abroad to
take the air on horseback, other times in his Carroch, and ever with much
applause and admiration of the people. So that it could not but give him much
contentment to observe how welcome he seemed generally to the whole country. In
his passages abroad he took occasion to show his bounty to the poor, which in
that place abound greatly, many of them being very miserable creatures to see,
and wherewith his Lordship was in mercy and charity much moved, not sparing his
purse one hour in the day; for besides what he gave abroad, he never showed
himself in his gallery but he provided good sums of money to give for
relief of those miserable poor people, who indeeed during his abode there
made little account of other living than of his relief.

Whilst we rested in the Groyne a certain mariner being one of the Repulse,
and having upon Wednesday the seventeenth day of the present month of April
brought on shore some company and staying in Town until amongst lewd company
he became tipled; that thereby he gave offense in his behavior, by violent
striking of one of the Churchmen of the town, although it was not directly
complained of by any, either of the Church or of the town, yet by chance came
to his Lordships knowledge, who for that he received such extraordinary kind
and liberal usage both for himself and his followers, and that generally from
all, if no other cause might move him but that, was much offended therewith,
and therefore thought good to take due punishment of that so foul a fault,
commanding that present inquiry should be made through all the ships; who of
them had been on shore, at last finding the offendour, he committed him
presently to the Bibboes, there to remain till the next day which was Friday,
what time he appointed Sir Richard Lewson, his Admiral and Marshall to call
unto him the other Admiralls and Captains of the fleet, and thoroughly to
examine the offense and accordingly to proceed without any respect or favor.
They calling before them the said offendour, and finding indeed that the fellow
was drunk and by no means could remember whether he had stricken the said
Churchman or no; and although the manner of his striking was so slight, and the
party said to be stricken so vile in reputation of the whole city, as they
generally pitied any man should once be called in question for so base a
person: the said Commissioners and Jury proceeded and finding him guilty of
striking the said Churchman, being contrary to Law and his Lordships former
decrees in that behalf, adjudged him to be presently hanged. Here it is to be
understood that the matter could not be so privately carried but many of the
Town and some Churchmen also, had made means to get aboard and saw the
proceeding so austere and resolute, that presently they solicited the Conde
and the Honorable Condesse his wife upon any condition to hinder the
execution. Whereof, when the Conde, but especially the Condesse and her
daughter had taken notice, they never left entreating his Lordship to recall
his auerred sentence and judgment: and which to do his Lordship could not
without offering much unkindness refuse or deny. Many reasons were alleged
by the Conde and the Condesse, that the party offended was a man vile in
reputation and esteemed as a man half Lunatike, that the offense was not a
malicious or determinate wilful offense, and therefore, the premises
considered, his Lordship could not but with more judgment pass it over, than
so severely prosecute the execution of Justice upon so mean a cause, especially
sithence no information or complaint was by the party offended, or by any other
of the Court prosecuted on his behalf. His Lordship thus urged, granted he
should be delivered unto the Conde, to be used as he thought good, and
therefore commanded he should be brought on land and delivered unto him, which
was done, one of the Masters going along with him, the Boatson leading him with
a halter about his neck, who when he came before the Conde, fell on his knees,
and would have made much protestation, but the Honorable Conde, took him up,
took off the halter from his neck, and commanded him to be carried to eat in
the Buttery, for that the doleful looks of the man, moved much pity in the
Conde.

On Tuesday the four and twentieth day of April, according to the computation
of England, his Lordship solemnized the feast of Saint George, which was done
in very solemn manner, and with the more regard for that the townsmen taking
notice of his intendment to feast, came in troops, to see and observe the
fashions of England: his Lordship therefore having desired sufferance of the
Conde, to use his own officers for that day, appointed to be served after the
fashion of England, both in service and diet. And whereas the Conde had for his
Lordships state, set up a cloth of Estate with his proper arms, his Lordship
commanded to set up a state of his own being rich of Bawdkim, without arms,
other then the arms of his Highness with S. Georges cross, as is the
custom, his own arms was placed a good distance off upon the hangings, and
on the right hand of the cloth of Estate, for that both the room was most
convenient as also it was thought the Conde would have dined with his Lordship,
as he was desired. After private prayers in his chamber, and that most of his
company was come to him, and dinner being served in accordingly, his Lordship
came forth in his robes of S. George, to meet the Conde. But the Conde fearing
to do any thing that might impeach the honor of his Master or be present there
to hear any thing pronounced, which might offend him in respect of the honor
of his Master, after that he had stayed to see his Lordship wash and set at the
Table prayed leave and so went to his private lodging. At the coming in of the
second course, according to the fashion of England, the Kings style was
proclaimed in three several languages by Somersett herald crying, Largess,
who had a liberal reward for the same. And so his Lordship being served very
honorably by persons of the better sort, and very richly in diet and in plate,
ended his dinner, sitting alone at the table, but diverse other Lords, Knights
and Esquires sitting in the same room at two other tables by.

After dinner, the Conde came to congratulate his Lordship seeming much to
repent him, that he kept not him company at dinner, sithence he had understood
by his brother (who stood all dinner time there, and well observing all) that
there was not any thing, that might give the least cause of offense or
exception. Therefore the Conde discovered that he much desired to keep him
company at Supper, which he did, his Lordship sitting as he did at dinner,
under the eskocheon of his own arms, the Conde on the same side but on the
left hand the cloth of Estate and at the lower end of the table. Whilst they
sat at Supper, much company came in to see them, diverse Ladies and other
Gentlemen of the better sort coming privately to observe the fashion of our
state, which his Lordship performed most honorably and orderly, to the glory
of our nation, and to no small honor of himself.

Wednesday, the four and twentieth day of the said month of April about
noone, there came a gentleman from the Court, who gave notice to the Conde and
his Lordship, that, that night Don Blasco de Aragon nephew to the Duke of Terra
noua: one that had been formerly in England with the Constable would be there,
who indeed about seven of the clock that night, came accordingly, to salute
his Lordship from the King his master, and to give understanding both of the
preparation for his Lordship and his company upon the way as also what order
should be presently taken, for their more speedy Journey.

Tuesday, the thirtieth of April, there was appointed a Communion on shipboord,
to the which resorted diverse Knights and Gentlemen, and as many as could
conveniently come to the same.

On Wednesday and Thursday his Lordship treated with the Conde, the said Don
Blasco and Don Iaspar de Bullion the Aposentador, Mayor to the King, which
said Iaspar de Bullion was lately come from the Court of purpose to provide
for his Lordship and his train with commission from the King to see them
furnished of all necessaries for their Iourneying.

In this conference (notwithstanding it had been formerly understood, there
should be no want of means or necessaries, for his Lordship and his people in
their journey to Court) it appeared that the company being numbered by the pole
to be 650. persons of all sorts, besides their carriages which were very many:
the country could by no means supply the whole number: therefore it was
thought good to lessen them, as much as conveniently they might, resolving to
leave diverse of his Lordships own people abord the ships, till they return:
some also were dispatched for England, with the Carroches, Litters and Mares,
and such other his furniture, as by Don Blasco was understood he should have
little use of. And for that, besides riding mules we understood there were sent
thither by the King four litters, and four coches which stayed for us at
villa Franca, for the more ease of his Lordship when he pleased and for
thereliefe of any Gentleman that might happen to be sick upon the way, which
in so long and tedious a journey was likely to be. And indeed as it happened
most of them were put to use, one coch and one litter being appointed for his
Lordships own use, another coch and litter appointed to the
Ambassadour-Leager, and the other serving sometimes one and sometimes another,
as occasion served and they desired.

Thursday the second day of May, there was prepared in the market place, a
certain piece of ground railed in square the space of twenty yeards or more,
with Scaffolds, built of purpose about the same: wherein the English were very
sufficiently appointed and placed, for the seeing of these sports. His Lordship
and other the Noblemen were placed in several windows, in a very fair room
in the Kings Statehouse, being for that purpose hanged with rich Arras and
several clothes of Estate over the windows, on the wall on the outside the
house: they being come to their standings, the Ladies and better sort of the
town being likewise placed in a convenient room for that purpose, they began
their sports after this manner. First, there was brought in a castle wherein a
Lady was enclosed, and kept by four monsters. The said castle being placed in
the midst of the Squadron, there appeared four Knights armed, with their
Pages going before them with Drums and Fife playing: who presently assailed the
castle, surprised the monsters, relieved the Lady and so set fire of the
castle. This devise being, as we understood of it, as much to show the
strangeness of the fire works, which indeed were many, as for any other reason
which we observed by the same.

These represented the judgment of Paris.
Then came Venus, Pallas, Juno, Cupid every one led severally by Savages, after
whom followed four other armed Knights, in colors painted blew and white.
Then came a third company being four in number, in colored armours likewise,
with crosses on their breasts in show like knights of Matta, bringing in with
them a chariot wherein the chief sat Peace, Plenty and other virtues, being
likewise planted in the same: with their several names written on their
backs. After whom likewise followed four other knights armed, with trumpets
sounding. When they had all appeared, they fell to Barriers according to the
direction of certain Gentlemen appointed to marshall the same. Some of our
English Lords and Knights being entreated by the Spaniards to assist them
therein also: they encountered one another single first by two, after
increasing their number according to the pleasure of the Judges and Marshals;
when they had broken their staves (or at least done their best to break them)
retiring, fell to it again with their swords, according to the manner of
Barriers, five blows a piece. In a Scaffold directly opposite against the
place, wherein the Lords stood, sat the Judges of these sports amongst whom
the Lord Howard of Effingham was entreated by the Magistrates of the town to
be one, which Judges upon every encounter gave reward to the best deseruer: as
Scarfes, Gloves, Choppimors, Ribbens, and such like which were by the Knights
thankefully received, and bestowed as favors upon their mistresses; at last
the Knights encountered pell mell, one another; and as it seemed in a very
furious manner. But the Bar being made in fashion like a trough, and many fire
works being cunningly contrived in the same, and duly took fire, and so with
flame and smoke they were parted.

These sports ended, there was a banquet carried up to his Lordship and other
the Lords and Ladies which were in another room next adioining, being indeed
both plentiful and costly, and served in by the chief Gentleman of the
Country and Town. The banquet ended, and night coming on there were brought
into the same place diverse fire works: one in the fashion of a Chariot, another
like the wheel of Fortune, another like a Castle, and such like guarded and
attended with diverse wild men, with clubbes and wheels, with several fire
works: men riding with spears in their hands all containing squibbes and
fireworkes, with which they ran at one another, as in manner of Tilt. The
diversities of the fire works were many, and for the strangeness and manner of
performance thereof, generally commended and so well liked as two hours spent
in that pastime seemed but a moment.

Friday the third day of May his Lordship having his company furnished, with
convenient Mules for riding, as also for carriage of their trunks and
necessaries, about eleven of the cloak accompanied with the Governor and other
the Magistrates of the town, set forward on his journey. Don Blasco de Aragon,
and Don Iaspar de Bullion the chief Herbenger for the King, accompanying his
Lordship for the purposes aforesaied: in the passage from the town the waits
and shagbots were placed playing all the while; at our departing from the town
and our leave taking of the Governor, they gave a small volley of shot out of
the town. His Lordship being half a mile out of the town and yet within
sight of the ships as they lay at Road, the said ships took their leave also
of us with many piece of ordinance.

The said Governor, as before is mentioned is named Don Lewis, de Carilla de
Toledo etc. and is of the country of Castilla, but appointed here by the King
as Governor of the Groyn and all the country of Gallicia: a man of very mild
and affable behavior, very courteous and most respective of the English in
general, as by the great care and good usage of us whilst we lodged in the
Groyn appeared.

That night being as is aforesaied the third day of May, according to the
computation of England we rode to Bytaunce, being distant three leagues from
the Groyn, where his Lordship and his company were well entertained and lodged.

Saturday the fourth day of May, we rode from Bytaunce to a certain town
called Villa Alua, 6. leagues, where our entertainment was such as the town
could afford, by reason of the means thereof.

Sunday the fifth day of May we rode forward to a very fair town called Lugo,
being distant from Villa Alua seven leagues. The Alcaylde and other officers of
the town, meeting his Lordship about half a mile without the gates, and
accompanying us into the town, the streets being decked with bows and the
walls of their houses garnished with their best hangings and furniture. In the
way coming thither his Lordship received letters of intelligence and
congratulations from the Conde at the Groyne, which he accepted very kindly.

The messenger being dispatched from Lugo, and rewarded with a chain of Gold
of good value: on Monday we rode to a certain town called Terra Castella
distant from Lugo eight leagues.

Tuesday the seventh day of May, we traveled all the morning up to a high
mountain by the space of six leagues, and dined at a little village called
cebrera, where we received such intertainme^t unexpected, as was altogether in
an arbor of green bows made of purpose of such a convenient length, that that
received his Lordship and all the better sort of his train. And after dinner
we rode to a certain town called Villa Franca, being distant six leagues,
where his Lordship was received with the townsmen, the streets by all the way
where we passed being garnished with bows and strewed with herbs and flowers:
music being likewise placed near the house where his Lordship should lodge.

Wednesday for that the company were somewhat weary, his Lordship disposed
himself to rest: chiefly, for that the Ambassador Leadger complained of
sickness, as also to relieve the Mules, forbearing to travel in so foul
weather as it fell out to be the same day.

Thursday the ninth day of May we rode by a town called Congusta, to Beubibre,
to bed, where his Lordship was lodged in a castle of the Conde de Alualista,
but very old and mean. The town being so poor and men also, as if the
officers of his Highness, had not then, as indeed they did, taken more than
ordinary pains and care, it had not been possible to have lodged half the
Company.

Friday the tenth day of May, we came to Astorga being a city walled and
standing in a pleasant and champion country, and containing in it many
Churches, amongst which one is a Cathedral, two Frieries and two Noneries. A
mile without the town we were met with the Alcayldy and Officers of the town,
over the gates hung diverse guidons and banners of silk: one of them being a
large white banner of Damask, in fashion of a Guydon and placed in the midst
of the rest. Music likewise playing all the way as we passed, the houses
garnished with their best hangings, and the streets strewed with herbs and
flowers.

Saturday the eleventh day of May his Lordship having had understanding of the
fairness of the castle there belonging to the Marquess of Astorga, and being
desired by Don Blasco to take view thereof, in passing out of the town,
alighted to see the same: the house indeed being a very strong castle and
having in it a very fair gallery with many goodly pictures and pieces of
painting both large and costly, and also a rich library with many fine rarities
in the same. After riding four leagues to a certain town called La Ban'esa,
where in the way coming we were met with diverse Gypsies (as they termed
them) men and women dancing and tumbling much after the Morisco fashion,
continued till we came to the town.

Sunday the twelfth day of May we rode eight leagues to a town called
Benavente, where a mile without the town Alcaylde and chief Officers of the
town met us: bringing with them a company of Gypsies likewise, singing and
dancing, playing and showing diverse feats of actiuity: conducting his Lordship
to the Conde of Benevante his house where he lodged that night.

Monday we rode forward eight leagues, to a certain town called Villa Garcia,
where we were received with a morrise dance of certain comely gentlemen,
being in number eight, as also with eight Boys attired like Satyrs or
Shepherds with Shepherds hooks, who as they daunced played with the same
after the fashion of Mattachyna.

In this Town is a very fair College wherein is only taught the rules of
Grammar, and grounds of the Latin tongue. It contains about 600. Scholars:
the Church a very fair Church, very richly set out with many goodly pieces of
painting: the Altar and Quier exceeding rich and fair. From hence his Lordship
received order by the Kings officers to go to a certain town called Simancas,
which though it was rather further in distance than Valladolid, yet for that
his Lordship should not come late nor his company ouer-wearied, this town was
appointed to receive him before our coming to the Court. Other reasons were
given, that is, in the right way between Villa Garcia and Valladolid, a bridge
was lately broken, whereby of necessity we must have passed; and also that the
King desired we should enter through the high street and the best part of the
town, which we did: and therefore appointed our way by Cimancas. Accordingly
we came to Simancas on Tuesday at night somewhat late, being overtaken with
extraordinary foul weather, and greatly annoyed with the same.

In the way between Villa Garcia and Simancas we passed by a very fair
monastery of Monks of the order of S. Benedick, being not long sithence
builded, but exceeding fair and rich: whereunto there is belonging enclosed as
much ground, as the wall thereof, being of stone, is in circuit, a league, or
better: within which is all kind of game royal as Phesants, Partridges, Hares,
Conies and such like. The Church here is very curiously and workemanly built,
and garnished with many curious pieces of painting, with Copes very rich, and
very curiously wrought.

That night at Supper, his Lordship had notice, that it was the Kings pleasure,
we should rest at Simancas all Wednesday, and not till Thursday come to the
Court.

On Wednesday after dinner, there came from the Court Don Iuan de Suniga eldest
son to the Conde de Villa mediana Ambassador in England: as also Don Pedro
de Tassis the new appointed Ambassador for England, accompanied with diverse
others, who having congratulated his Lordship, staying with him some half
hour or there abouts, departed.

That night we understood that it was the Kings pleasure, his Lordship should
come to Court on Thursday, whereupon every one taking notice thereof made
preparation accordingly.

Thursday being the sixteenth day of May, we staid till after dinner expecting
to receive more particular directions from Court, at which time there came to
attend his Lordship thither. The marquess of Camerassa, Don Pedro de Suniga,
Don Iuan de Tassis, Don Blasco de Aragon, and diverse other Knights and
Gentlemen of the Kings house and chamber, bringing with them diverse coches, so
that his Lordship was entertained by Don Blasco, and the Marquess in the first
coch; the Ambassador Leager, by some others in the second; other Knights and
Gentlemen filling as well the other coches, which came along from the Groyne, as
those which were brought from Court by these Lords. After we had traveled
about four English miles (for from Cimancas to the Court it was accounted but
six) and having been met with many of the better sort, in their coches, his
Lordship was moved by Don Blasco and the rest, to go into a certain banqueting
house which stood upon the high way, to see the delicacy of the orchards and
gardens, as to taste of the variety of fruits within the same. But we rather
suppose to make stay for such Nobles as were appointed by the King to give
meeting to his Lordship, and were not as then come forward. During his
Lordships stay in this garden there was a horse presented unto him from the
King, which the King himself did use to ride on. After they had stayed there
by the space of a long hour or more, there came from the Town diverse
Noblemen, the chief whereof was, the Duke of Fryas Constable of Castilla, the
Kings late Ambassador in England: the Duke of Infantasgo: the Duke of
Alberquerques: the Duke of Cea: the Duke of Sesa: the Duke of Pastraua: The
Marquess of S. German: the Conde of Chincou: the Conde of Punion en Rostro:
the Marq. de Lauanessa: the Conde of Aguyllar: the Conde de Berosa: the Conde
de Nieua: the Conde de Cornua: the Conde de Paredes: the Conde de Lodosa: the
Marquess del Carpio: the Marquessods Tauera: the Marquess de Villa Nueua: the
Conde Apala: Conde de Salinas: Marq. de Ceralua: Marq. de Fuentes: Marq. de
Alcanes: Conde de Galues, the Admiral of Aragon, and many other Lords and
Knights in great number. His Lordship setting forward in very good order,
accompanied with a great multitude of Nobles, Knights and Gentlemen, as before
is said. The weather being all that time extraordinarily hot, suddenly to the
great disordering of all the company, there fell so great a shewer of rain as
the like was not seen of long time before: and continuing till the company
could get to the town, notwithstanding which his Lordship kept still his horse
back, accompanied with many of the chief of the company, and riding forward
to his appointed lodging, which was in a very fair house of the Conde of
Salinas, and not far distant from the Court; an infinite number of people,
800. coches filled with Ladies were gotten out of the town to meet and see his
Lordship and his company, all which took part of this great shewer to their no
little discomfort.

The order of our going into the town was appointed as follows: First rode
two Trumpets, all the sumpter and carriages being about two hours before sent
into the town: after whom followed certain Gentlemen servants to the Knights
and Lords, as also the Leadger Ambassadors servants in liueries very fair to
the number of sixty. Then followed six Trumpeters of his Lordships in suits of
Damask holding their Trumpets in their hands, but not sounding. Then came
diverse Gentlemen of good sort, with whom also followed his Lordships Gentlemen
and principal Officers in their Liueries of black velvet to the number of
thirty. Then followed the Esquires, Knights and Lords every one according to
their degree, being accompanied with several Spanish Knights and Lords; after
whom came his Lordship accompanied with the Nobles before mentioned; which
order, for that the rain fell so exceedingly, could not be continued as was
meant, but by reason thereof, diverse made what have they could to their lodging;
and yet were thoroughly wet before they could get thither. His Lordship
accompanied as before and entering into the town at the Gate called La Puerta
del Campo, passed through the chief parts of the town and along by the Court
gate. The King, Queen and Ladies (as it was sa d) standing in several windows
to take view of the company; about six of the clock came to the place
appointed for his Lordships lodging.

That night came diverse Noble men as also the Mayordomo to the Queen to visit
his Lordship from her Highness, which was much wondered at by the Spaniards
themselves, for that (if they speak true) they never knew the like favor done
to any Ambassador whatsoever.

The next day being Friday the seventeenth day of May, there came to visit his
Lordship the Duke of Lerma, Don Francisco Gouees de Sandoual etc. a man of
especial regard and account with the King, accompanied with diverse Dukes and
Condes.

Thither also that day came the Duke of Medyna de Ryoseco, a youth of ten
years of age, Admiral of Castilla by inheritance, accompanied with diverse
other Lords and men of great account.

Upon Saturday the eighteenth day of May in the morning the King sent the Conde
d' Guklues, and diverse others of his Privy chamber to visit his Lordship the
same day.

The first audience somewhat before dinner; his Lordship had intelligence that
the Kings Majesty intended to give him audience in the after noone; whereof the
English Lords, Knights and Gentlemen taking notice prepared themselves to give
their attendance, although not in so good fashion as they desired, and would,
had they had understanding thereof over night: his Lordship therefore staying
his Highness pleasure, about three of the clock in the after noone.

The Constable accompanied with twenty Noblemen or more, whereof three or four
of them were of the Grandes of Spain; and diverse other men of dignity and
esteem in the Court, bringing with them many coches, came to conduct his
Lordship and the company to the Court; many people were gathered in the streets
to see the passage of his Lordship and his company. The number of the coches
was about twenty; but notwithstanding many of our Noblemen and Knights rode
upon their rich footeclothes, the Kings guard waited even from the uttermost
gate of the Palace to the Presence chamber door, being all newly suited in
colloured velvet yellow and red, but in several habits; that thereby they
might be the better distinguished being in number 300. whereof there are 100.
Swissers, 100. Spanish horsemen, and 100. Wallons. At the Palace gate stood
diverse Noble men, Knights and Gentlemen, amongst whom was the Duke of
Infantasgo, the Marquess of Vellada, and others all appointed to receive and
give his Lordship entertainment, and to conduct and guide the company up into
the Presence, where the King sat under a rich cloth of Estate, and by him
stood eight Grandes of Spain covered. It is not lawful for any to stand
covered in the presence of the King, except he be a Grande.
The care these Lords took to give contentment to the English was so great,
that we might easily perceive, they spared not to put out of the said room
all manner of people of what condition soever, of purpose to make way, and give
place even to the meanest of the English, which would press in to see the
King, not keeping out any of how mean condition soever.

His Lordship having delivered his mind in Oration by the mouth of Master Gyles
Porter his Interpreter, as also the Kings Majesty's Letters into his Highness
own hands: the King descending from his chair gave intertainment to his
Lordship with most kind and affable behavior, appointing him to sit down by
him and that very near, which especial favor was much observed, and reported
as a thing never used to any Ambassador before that time. Some short time
spent in conference with his Lordship, his Highness was pleased to take notice
of such Nobles and Gentlemen, as accompanied his Lordship in this his long and
painful journey: and thereupon required they should draw near, which they
did, each after other, to do their reverence, and, as they say, Besar las
manos, which was only in bowing low to the ground, without touching either hand
or foot, or any other part of his garments: this done his Lordship took his
leave, and the King appointed the Constable and others to conduct his Lordship
and company to the Queens side: where in a very fair presence, sat her
Highness with the Infanta by her, under a rich cloth of Estate, accompanied
with many Ladies and Maids of Honor, divided on either side the same room, a
good distance each from other, standing close by the wall, almost from one end
of the chamber to the other. The Gentlemen, Knights and Lords going along and
before his Lordshippe, were received by the Mayor domo to the Queen, and so
conducted to her presence.

After some conference and complement his Lordship taking leave of her Majesty,
for that it began to be late, all the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, were called
up to the Queen, as formerly they had been to the King, every one after other
bowing himself in obeisance and kissing the skirt of her Highness kirtle
departed: being conducted by the said Dukes and Lords which both brought them
to the Court and accompanied them back again to his lodging.

Sunday, the nineteenth day of May, the Kings Majesty went in procession, first
going into the Church near the Palace called Saint Paul's, and after through
the town to a Church called Saint Mary's; in manner as follows:

First went many Friars singing, bearing amongst them diverse crosses, banners,
and other ceremonious relics of the Church, the Sacrament being likewise
carried by four church officers.

Then followed diverse Noblemen according to their degrees.

Next before the Kings own person went the younger of the Princes of Sauoy.

Then the king himself in person: after whom followed the Cardinal being
Archbishop of Toledo, and with him the Prince of Sauoy the elder brother. Then
followed together, the Prince of Moroco, the Emperors Ambassador: the
Ambassador of France: the Ambassador of Venice: after whom followed diverse
Gentlemen of the Kings chamber, and the rest of the train. After dinner there
was preparation made for the christening of the Prince, and for that the Court
stood from the Church, there was set up of purpose, for a more close and
convenient passage, a very large Scaffold adioining to the end of a long
Gallery, and to the Church likewise, the timber whereof was all covered with
cloth of Gold very rich, and the Scaffold being high was a good means to give
sight to all the people. The manner of their coming to Church was in this
sort: The Kings Trumpets were placed near and before the Church, in several
companies, always sounding and one answering other: about four of the clock
in the after noone, there appeared, descending by the Scaffold before mentioned,
to go into the Church of S. Paul's, which, as is likewise said, adioining to
the scaffold; the Knights, Lords and Grandes going before: and some Dukes of
especial name, bearing diverse ceremonies likewise; as the Salera or Salt borne
by one, the Taper of wax by another, the Chrisome by another: then the Crown
borne by the Constable, before whom went the King of Arms. The Prince was
borne by the Duke of Lerma, in his arms; but tied to him with a rich scarf or
Band: he was assisted by the Prince of Sauoy and the Conde of Miranda. Then
followed the Infanta in a chair as it should seem made for that purpose, and
borne by diverse Gentlemen of the Kings bed and Privy chamber, on their
shoulders, assisted by the younger Prince of Sauoy. At the Church door the
Cardinal stayed for them in his Pontificalibus accompanied with three Bishops
and other especial officers of the Church: the singing men going before, and
so conducting them to the Font, which was richly prepared and covered with a
Canapy of cloth of gold; the Cardinal performed all the ceremonies according
to the order of their Church, and so with Church music, noise of Trumpets and
many other wind Instruments they finished their ceremonies, returning in such
manner as they went, being accompanied also with most of the great Ladies of the
kingdom, and those of the Court.

He was Christened Phillippe Domingo Victor.

His Godfather was the elder Prince of Sauoy, of whom he took his name, Victor.

His Godmother was the Infanta his Sister.

His Lordship was placed conveniently in the house of the Conde d' Rubadauia,
in the morning, both to see the procession, as also the going of the Prince to
Christening. But so soon as they were passed by, he with some other were
privately conveyed through a gallery on the backeside of a Monastery into the
Church, into a place appointed of purpose for him and the Lords that were of
his company.

On Monday in the after noone the Ambassador Leadger was by his Lordship
presented to the King, and by him graciously received and allowed. That day in
the after noone, came diverse Ambassadors to visit his Lordship: as first, Don
Francisco de Meschite Ambassador for the state of Venice; as also the French
Ambassador, Monsieur Baron de Barault Cheualier, who after some short stay
departed. At the time of the French Ambassadors being there, came likewise the
Ambassador resiaunt for the Emperor. His Lordship ever showing much
affability and courtesy and accompanying them on their way to their coches with
kind behavior of his, being greatly observed, caused an extraordinary respect
and an exceeding love of all men toward him.

That night also came to visit his Lordship the Cardinal of Toledo: being a
very stately Prelate, well descended, very rich, in his carriage very courteous;
and in his expense liberal, as by the apparelling of his pages and servants,
and by his rich Sumpter cloths, hangings and such like might well appear.

Tuesday, the one and twentieth of May, his Lordship was conducted by Don
Blasco unto the church called S. Mary's, to see the ceremony and state of the
Queens churching, whither the King and Queen came together; the King riding
on horseback, the Queen in a very rich chariot of cloth of gold drawn by
four horses all trapped and harnessed with cloth of gold: in which chariot
likewise sat the Infanta. Next followed in another chariot, the young Prince in
the arms of an ancient Lady. After followed two other caroches of black
velvet, wherein sat diverse Duchesses, Countesses, and other great personages,
widows.

Then followed four other caroches, all of one fashion, wherein sat several
Ladies the Queens Maids.

This was the first day of the Queens going abroad, and as we accounted of it,
her Churching day.

This day his Lordship was invited to dinner to the Constables, where he was
accompanied by the Duke of Alberquerque, the Duke of Cesa, and others. The
manner of feasting being not usual in Spain, and our company being many, could
not all receive that contentment which the Constable desired to give in
general. For the country considered, it is much to be marvelled, how they
could do what they did; but it plainly appeared, nothing was left undone for
want of cost, and that all preparation was made that the country could any way
afford for their enterteinment.

Wednesday his Lordship was visited by the Conde de Lemos, accompanied with
diverse Noblemen and men of good quality.

That day likewise, and Thursday, his Lordship visited as well the Ambassadors
before mentioned, as also diverse other Lords and Ladies in the town.

Friday, the four and twentieth day of May, Thomas Knoell Esquire, his
Highness servant and Messenger for the delivery of certain Presents to the
King of Spain, expecting and attending the Kings pleasure therein, was sent
for by Don Blasco to come and bring the said Presents into a private Garden
belonging to the Duke of Lerma, where the King and Queen came in person to
receive the same. The Presents were six Horses (three for the King, and three
for the Queen) with saddles and clothes very richly imbroidered and costly;
two Crosbowes with sheifs of Arrows; four Fowling-pieces, with their
furnitures, all very richly garnished and inlayed with fine plate of gold; and
one couple of Lime hounds of an extraordinary goodness. Which Presents were
acceptably received; the King and Queen very much observing and admiring the
richness and fashion thereof.

On Saturday the five and twentieth day of May, there came to visit his
Lordship the Bishop Salustius Taernsius Bishop of Montepolitan in Hetruria, and
Ambassador for the Duke of Florence. After dinner came likewise to visit his
Lordship D. Iuan de Bourch Conde de Figaroa, President of Portugal, with his
four sons. That day also came to visit him, together with the Constable, the
Conde de Oliuares accompanied with diverse Marquesses and Earls. This Conde was
one of them that was in England in the time of Queen Mary. The same day in the
afternoon his Lordship visited the Queen and delivered her a fair rich Jewel
as a token from the Queen of England.

Sunday and Monday his Lordship went abroad to visit diverse Nobles that had
formerly been with him, as also spending some part of the same time in
concluding with the Council of Spain of matters concerning his Embassage: and
of all things necessary for the effecting and performing the same.

Tuesday the eight and twentieth day of May, his Lordship and all the rest of
the company were invited to dinner to the Duke of Lerma; where they were most
honorably entertained, receiving there all contentment that might be, for
besides the plenty of his cheer the manner of the entertainment could not be
bettered. At the Table his Lordship was accompanied with the Duke of Lerma, the
Duke of Infantasgo, the Duke of Alberquerque.

They were attended upon at this feast by diverse Nobles, Marquesses and Earls,
with many Knights and Gentlemen of the Kings privy chamber and few others.

And besides the several sorts of music, during the time of dinner, his
Lordship and the rest having received what could be possibly given at the
Table, they were carried down into a fair court, paued with square stone, in
the midst whereof was a fountain of clear water. The whole Court covered
with canuas to defend and keep off the heat of the sun, which at that time
shone extremely. In this Court was of purpose a stage erected, with all things
fitting for a play, which his Lordship and the rest were invited to behold. The
King and Queen being in private likewise Spectators of that Interlude. To write
of every particular of the Dukes entertainment, were too much: for he took
exceeding care to perform al things with the greatest state, as well appeared
in this: that for that the kitchen was cross a square Court, there were set up
high posts of timber with canuas strained, to cover and defend the same in the
passage of the meat from the dresser. The ground being likewise covered with
hangings of leather that no dust should arise whilst the service passed by. At
this feast several Healths were druncke to the Kings of Great Britain and
Spain, and to the happy continuance of the peace: begun by the Duke of Lerma,
seconded by his Lordship, and performed by all the company at the table. Many
Ladies of great account came privately to see and observe his Lordship and the
company as they sat at meat, well allowing and applauding the plenty and
bounty used at this feast, being indeed such a one as the like was not seen in
Spain many years before.

Wednesday his Lordship concluded with the Constable and Alexander Rouida,
Senator of Millaine, as concerning all matters touching the taking of the
Kings oath.

Thursday the thirtieth day of May, being Corpus Christi day, the King went in
Procession, and for that he would be seen by the English, the course was
appointed by the gate where his Lordship lodged. The manner was, as follows:

First, came eight great Giants, three Men, three Women, and two Mores with a
Taber and Pipe playing and they dancing. Then followed certain Pilgrims clad
in blew. After who^ came many Crosses, being in number, 25. or 26. borne and
attended by the officers of the several Churches to which they belonged.
Amongst whom were also mingled diverse pictures of Saints: as Saint John, S.
George killing the Dragon, Saint Michaell, Saint Francis, Saint Andrew, Saint
Dominicke, Saint Martin, the picture of Christ in several forms, Mary
Magdalen, our Lady in diverse fashions also. Many holy and precious relics,
Friars Mories dancers, in manner of Gypsies, beasts with fireworks, Wild-men
and such like toies, as it should seem to draw the people more readily with
admiration. After these followed diverse other Church relics, Friars
Augustines. Other Friars of the order of Saint Francis with their relics.
Many Churchmen with lighted tapers in their hands; the Kings Pages bearing
torches: Then the Sacraments borne by four Churchmen in rich Copes: Then the
Lords and Grandes of Spain; Then followed the King bearing a lighted taper of
Virgin wax; after whom followed the Cardinal, the Emperors Ambassador, the
French Ambassador, and the Venetian Ambassador; the Prince of Sauoy, the
Prince of Moroco and others, all bearing their tapers lighted in their hands.

The same day his Lordship stayed till four of the clock after noone, until
his Highness pleasure were known, that he was pleased as that day to take the
oath formerly agreed on between them. About which time there came to his
Lordship Don Blasco de Aragon, who brought word that the King expected his
Lordships coming to the Court as that day, and therefore for the more
convenient passage of the Nobles and Gentlemen that were to attend him thither,
order was taken, that all should be supplied with Gennets that wanted and would
send to the Kings stable for the same. Every man being furnished, his Lordship
set forward to the Court, the Constable and Don Pedro de Suniga being sent to
accompany his Lordship thither, as also diverse other Knights and Lords, whose
names, for the sodainnesse of their coming and the number of them being so
many, could not be had. His Lordships own Gentlemen were in several coches
before and stayed at the Court gate expecting his Lordships coming thither,
where likewise great preparation was made: diverse Noble men and others staying
there to receive his Lordship and his company. Amongst whom were the Duke of
Lerma and some other Grandes and those of the greatest Lords in Spain.

His Lordship being thus received, was conveyed up through a long Gallery into
a Presence, and so into another inner room: the Gentlemen, Knights and Lords
ever going before in very good order. In which room his Majesty stayed for the
coming of his Lordship, receiving him with affable and kind congratulation,
and took him along with him by his side. The Kings Sergeaunts at Mace going
first, after following all the Graundes and Lords of Spain one among another:
then the four Kings of Arms in their coats of Arms: then the Duke of Lerma
bearing the Sword naked, wherein one thing is especially to be noted, that the
Duke bare not the Sword upright, as is the custom of England, but bare it
lying upon his right shoulder: so the King and his Lords went together into a
very fair banqueting house very lately built, the Ambassador Leadger, the
Lords and diverse others following.

The King sitting in his Estate, his Lordship and the Ambassador Leadger were
placed upon his left hand: the Grandes and other the Noblemen of Spain being
seated on the other hand, two degrees lower. Before the King was brought a
little Table, whereon lay the Bible and a Crucifix upon it. The Archbishop of
Toledo read the oath with a reasonable loud voice: at one part of the oath his
Lordship held the Kings hands between his: to which oath the King swear
kneeling and laying his hand upon the Book, and afterward subscribed to the
Articles and Agreements drawn and concluded by both Kings.

Friday, the one and thirtieth day of May, his Lordship dined early, for that
there was that day appointed a sport, which they call Inego de Toro, and also
Inego de Canas: and for that his Lordship and all his company from the meanest
to the highest, should have the pleasure of the sights, there were some
appointed to see every Englishman furnished of convenient room: which they
did; Don Blasco himself taking an especial care and respect thereof. About
the midst of the day came the King and Queen riding on horseback with many
Lords and Ladies all on horseback likewise, after the Spanish fashion, every
Lady accompanied with one or other man of worth: his Lordship was placed in the
standing with the King and Queen; and the other Lords were placed not far
off. There were that day killed fourteen Bulls; the manner whereof was in this
sort: First, the market place, being very square and of a great largeness, was
round built with Scaffolds very strong; the ground covered very thick with
sand, so that they were feign diverse times to bring in many carts of water,
both to allay the dust as also to cool the reflection of the sun upon the
place. In which, none were appointed to be but such as were designed to play
the sports. The Bull being turned out, they shot sticks with sharp pins and
pricks which might stick fast in his skin, thereby the more madding him, he
seemed to be most valiant that durst afray the Bull in the face and escape
untouched: but some escaped not well, for it cost them their lives. There was
another manner of striking the Bull in the face with short spears, to the which
diverse Lords and Gentlemen very well mounted, their pages following them with
diverse hand-speares for that purpose; wherein many showed good valor, and
struck the Bull very cunningly and manly: but yet some of their Gennets paid
dear for it, being both hurt and killed. To this sport came two Gentlemen one
after another, and as it was reported, supplying the places of Champions to the
King, riding on horses blinded, and so taking their stand, waiting for the
coming of the Bull against them, very manly with a spear of good length and
strength, struck him in the head, and escaped without hurt, though not being
without danger.

After this, began their sports of Inego de Canas, wherein the King himself
was an Actor. First came riding twelve Drummers with Kettle-drummes playing;
then followed thirty Trumpetters, all clad in red and white silk coats; then
followed twelve Acemulaes or great Mules with couerings of red velvet, bearing
bundles of Canes, tied and chained with great hooks of silver: then followed
the Kings Gentlemen and Pages richly suited, being to the number of two and
thirty or thereabout. After them were led by several Grooms six and twenty
riding horses richly covered.

For the two Princes of Sauoy were showed: First two Pages riding, bearing on
their arms Targets all white: after whom were led three horses covered with
caparisons of black velvet imbrodered richly with pearl: then followed twelve
other horses, clad likewise in black velvet, but imbrodered with silver.

For the Duke of Lerma were led six horses with caparisons of white and red:
the Grooms and Pages attending, and all alike suited.

For the Constable were led four and twenty horses of service covered with
white and green: his Pages and Grooms also alike suited.

The number of horsemen that showed themselves in these sports were fourscore,
whose names hereafter follow, according to a note thereof delivered by one of
good worth and of especial respect with the King.

1. Quadrill.
The King. The Duke of Lerma. Duke of Cea. Conde de Gelues. Marq. of S. German.
Don Hen. de Goseman. Conde de Mayalde. Don Petro de Castro. Marq. de la
Venessa. Don Garcia de Figuroea.
2. Quadrill.
Don Diego de Sandouall. D. Antonio de S. Fago. D. Alonso Lopes de Mella. D.
Diego de Sebro. D. Lewys de Alcarath. D. Galuan. D. Diego Nino. Don Pedro de
Aryetta. D. Diego de Lieua. D. Hieronomo de Sandouall
3. Quadrill.
Duke of Infantasgo. D. Diego Sarmiento. Conde de Barasa. Conde de Paredes.
Conde de Coruna. Conde de Lodosa. Conde de Nieua. Don Iuan de Tassis. The
Admyrall of Aragon. D. Lewys Enriques.
4. Quadrill.
The Constable of Castilla. Marq. de Cuelar. Conde de Aguillar. Marq. del
Carpio. D. Bernardino de Velasco. D. Fran. de Velasco. D. Antonio de Velasco.
D. Alonso de Velasco. D. Manuell de cuniga. D. Andreas Velasques.
5. Quadrill.
The Duke of Alua Conde de Salinas. Marq. de Villanueua. D. Martyn Valerio. D.
Pedro de cuniga S. de Flores. D. Manuell de Alencastro. Marq. de Tarara. D.
Diego Piementel. Conde de Ayala. Marq. de cerralua.
6. Quadrill.
The Duke of Pastrana. Conde de Cosentagua. Comendador Mayor de Montesa. D.
Carlos de Borsa. Marq. de Fuentes. D. Lewys Nino. D. Pedro de Fonseca. D.
Ferdinand: de la Cerda. D. Bernard de Rozas. D. Iuan Vicentela.
7. Quadrill.
Conde de Alualista. D. Bernard: de Toledo. D. Fernando de Toledo. D. Anto: de
Toledo. D. Philippo de Valencia. D. Fran. Congusta. D. Lewys de Gozman. D. Iuan
de Gozman. Marq. de Alcanes. Marq. de Fales.
8. Quadrill.
The Prince of Sauoy. The Prior of Ivan. Mar. Doste. D. Diego de las marinas.
D. Fran. de Cordoua. D. Iuan de Heredia. D. Aluard de Mendoza. D. Pero Mune. D.
Francisco Finea. D. Pedro de Licamo.
At their first appearance they came riding in by couples two after two, very
swiftly, richly attired with their Targets on their shoulders, holding and
shaking long staves such as the Moors or Arabians are described to use. When
they were all come, they divided themselves to sides, every side into four
squadrons, every squadron being ten in number; when they were ready holding
their staves in their hands, the Kings side gave the first charge; the other
side undertaking the same and charging on them likewise; thus they continued
still chasing one another, squadron upon squadron throwing their Canes one
after other, by the space of a long hour or better: and so their sports ended.

Saturday the first of June his Lordship was invited by the King to see a
muster of armed men, in a place called El campo, being lances, light horsemen
and Carbynes, to the number of two thousand, whereof the Duke of Lerma was the
General. His Lordship stood with the King and Queen, the rest of the English
were placed in a Scaffold, built for them of purpose: which said soldiers
being divided made some show of salies each upon other, very pleasingly and
warlike: and after a few skirmishes, drew themselves into a ring, and marching
along under the window where his Majesty stood, departed.

Sunday, Monday and Tuesday were used as days of rest after their great
feasts: and spent only in visitation and matters of complement with one or
other.

Wednesday his Lordship dispatched Sir John Treuor for England with letters of
intelligence to his Highness: who took with them the Advantage, which lay at
Saint Andreas with the rest of the Ships.

Thursday, the sixth day of June, his Lordship was appointed both to dine and
suppe early, which he did, because both his Lordship, as also all other the
English Lords and Gentlemen, were invited to see a mask, about six of the
clock therefore came Don Blasco to conduct his Lordship and the rest through a
private Gallerie of the Kings which joined to his Lordships lodging, to the
appointed place, which was the new built banqueting house formerly spoken of,
by them termed the Grandsala: where was appointed very convenient room for his
Lordship and the rest of his Followers. The room was garnished with three
hundred and twenty lights of wax, al set in standerds of silver, of diverse
fashions, some great and some small. After two or three several songs song by
diverse voices in parts, placed severally in the same hall for that purpose; the
mask appeared, and began as follows:

First came thirty Musitions clad in long garments of red Taffaty garnished
well to the show, playing on several instruments. After whom followed six
Virgins dancing: one bearing in her hand a Sun, another a branch of
Oliue-tree: another an Ancor: another a Sword with two points: on either point
a bunch of flowers.

Then followed a Chariot, made of an Antike fashion, being drawn by two live
horses, but exceeding little. In the upper part whereof sat the Infanta, with
a scepter of gold in her hand: with the picture of a dove on the upper end
thereof; at her feet sat two other Virgins, who attended her. On either side
went diverse Pages, bearing Torches of white wax.

At the upper end of the Hall was appointed a very rich State all of Masons
work, ascending up by degrees richly gilded, and garnished with diverse statues
all gilt over; in which were planted three chaires: two great, and one lesser,
and that between the other two. In which middle chair the Infanta being taken
out from her Chariot was placed. The two Virgins near her, and the other six
upon the degrees at the foot of the Estate. At the nether end of the said hall
stood the Maskers in a Gallery contrived for the purpose, who upon the drawing
of a Curtyn, appeared as it were in clouds. The number of them were eight and
twenty Knights and Ladies, beside torch bearers, whereof the King and Queen were
two: the rest all Grandes and men of great Honor. The Ladies were all the
Queens Maids. The said Gallery being built in manner of an arch, and fully set
with looking glasses, with the light of the torches shone as if it had been
garnished with infinite number of stars. The music playing, the Maskers
descended by four and four at a time in a stage made in fashion of a cloud,
and so dancing to the upper end of the Hall, before they could return back
other four appeared, and so joined altogether, until the number were come
forth and then daunced altogether in good form and measure.

After diverse daunces and measures appointed of purpose for this show; the King
and Queen, and so likewise all the company, unmasked themselves; the King and
Queen taking their seats in the places and chaires before mentioned: before
whom were diverse Galiards daunced by the several Lords and Ladies unmasked.
The Earl of Perth and the Lord Wiloughby were invited and daunced likewise.
The King and Queen diverse times salied out from their chaires of Estate and
daunced openly. At last they began a Calling dance, which was begun by the
Duke of Lerma holding a torch lighted in his left hand. The manner was; every
man called forth 2 women, choosing one especial, conducted the other to her
place, and left the chosen to call out 2. men, who likewise delivering the
torch to one especial, conducted the other to his seat. Thus it passed to and
fro amongst many of the great Lords and Ladies; at last the King was called,
and his L. likewise; but the torch being delivered to the King, his L. was
again brought to his seat. The King called forth the Queen and another, and
after a few trauerses, when the time came he should have chosen and delivered
up his torch, he delivered it to a Page standing by, and so the sports ended.

Friday, the seventh of June, his L. was appointed to take leave of the King,
and so to set forward on his journey for England; therefore taking notice of
his L. desire of return, ordered he should have audience in the after noone.
In the mean time his Highness sent by Don Pedro cuniga and some other, diverse
chains of gold to the number of 14. or thereabouts, to some of the Kings
servants and his L. chief officers: having likewise before sent by Don Pedro
cuniga unto the Lords and many other Knights and especial men of his L. company
and train several Jewels and chains, very rich. About four of the clock in
the after noone, his Highness sent to his L. a very rich present of Jewels,
both for himself and his Lady, which were presented to him by Don Blasco and
brought by the masters and officers of the Jewel house, who were by him well
gratified and rewarded.

Not long after, the Constable and others came to give his L. knowledge of the
conueniency of the time for our coming to the Court: whereupon his L.
accompanied with the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of his train in several
coches, went to the Court, where they were received by diverse Lords and
Officers of the Court, at the Palace gate, from whence the Kings guard made a
passage even to the kings Chamber. The King stayed to receive his L. in a
gallery, which was long but narrow, with whom his L. had conference in private
by the space of three quarters of an hour: and fearing to give offense by
tediousness, made motion to his Highness, that the lords* and others of his
company might likewise take their leaves. The king very well pleased therewith;
the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen took their leaves, being generally well
respected of his Majesty. To conclude all, his L. took his leave also,
receiving many gracious and kind words from his Majesty, as also a ring with a
Diamond, said to be of the value of 3000. pounds, which he put upon his L.
finger, and as he said in toke^ of wedding him in true love perpetually,
commanding the Duke of Infantadgo, to conduct his L. and the rest to the Queen
in like manner to take their leave of her Majesty.

Being brought to the Queen where she sat under a cloth of Estates with the
Ladies and Maids of honor, about her: for that it was late his L. made no long
stay, after a short time spent in complement took his leave of her Highness:
as also, so did all other the Lords and Knights of his train: to whom the
Queen most respectively bowing her self, with much favor and grace, gave them
a kind Farewell.

His L. being now thoroughly furnished of all convenient means for his journey,
about 5. of the clock the same day, being Saturday and the 8. day of June, set
forward, being accompanied in his coch with the Constable and diverse other
noblemen in other coches, accompanying his L. a mile or more out of the town,
where they taking their leaves departed. That night we rode 6. leagues to a
town called Duenas. The next day being Sunday we rode 9. leagues to a town
called Fromista, where for that Don Blasco and others were behind, his L.
thought good to stay all Monday, least the weather being very hot, might too
much trouble them in riding post, and that were to come after. That night Don
Blasco, ouertooke his Lordship at Fromista.

Tuesday, the 11. of June, his L. dined at Osorno, and somewhat late after
dinner rode to Herrera to bed, where he was lodged in a fair house of the
Constable of Castilla. Within this house are placed diverse pillars with letters
engraven after the manner of the Roman inscription, and so they plainly appear
to be monuments of the Romans, and left as relics of their being in that
country.

Wednesday, the 12. of June, his Lordship rode from thence 8. leagues and
lodged at a town called Aguilar de Campo: the Marquess of Aguilar being Lord
thereof.

Thursday, we rode forward 7. leagues to a town called Rynoso: a town seated
in the midst of the mountains.

On Friday, his L. rode to Villa Concha to dinner, being 3. leagues and very
ill way; after dinner we rode 4. leagues further to a town called Villa Civil,
to bed; being the worst way and the worst place of intertainment we had in the
whole country of Spain, being indeed seated amongst mou^tains which harbor
many bears, wolves and other wild beasts, and wherewith the country round
about is much troubled.

Saturday, the 15. day of June, we came to S. Andreas being distant from Villa
Civil 7. leagues, where his L. was received by the Magistrates and officers a
mile out of the town. All the streets were strawed with rushes and herbs, and
decked with bows, and at his entrance into the town, they gave him many great
ordinance, with volly of small shot.

That night the Ambassador Leadger, Don Pedro de cuniga, who accompanied the
King to Burgos, came also to S. Andreas, where during the time of his stay, his
L. expressed his bounty by rewarding Don Blasco the Aposentador and all the
Kings other Officers and servants with great chains of gold, fair jewels of
good value, and large sums of money, to their general contentment.

Sunday, Monday and Tuesday his Lo. rested at S. Anderas, as well for that the
horses sent by the King, his L. own horses, and the Ambassador Leadgers horses
came not till Tuesday, as also for furnishing the ships with fresh water and
victuals for his return for England. And on Sunday in the afternoon his Lo.
invited the Aposentador Mayor, Don Blasco de Aragon, and others, aboard the
ships, where he made them a very great banquet; and at their going off saluted
them with many pieces of ordinance.

His L. having on Wednesday the 19 of June, with all expedition that
conveniently might be, shipped the horses, and supplied the ships with all
needful provisions, about three of the clock in the afternoon came aboard his
ship called The Bear, lying at road a long English mile from the Town,
bringing also with him Don Pedro de cuniga, who tarried and supped with his
Lordship that night. After supper his Lordship commanded his Barge to convey
him to his appointed lodging, which was in the Repulse, where he entered, the
Trumpets sounding, and being saluted with many shot of great Ordinance.

In the same road his L. ancored till Thursday; and upon Thursday we put to
sea: but for that the tide was spent, and the wind falling out contrary, after
an hour or two sailing, we were driven to cast ancor; resting that night till
the next tide: at which time his Lo: hoisted sail and put to sea, and with
scant wind sailed Friday and Saturday. On Sunday the weather fell out very
foul and stormy, insomuch as the Wastspight spent in that storm her maine
mast, but escaped further danger. Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday we sailed but
with very unconstant winds, being many times becalmed. On Thursday afternoon
the land was descried, but very far off. That day and night we sailed within
sight of land: and upon Friday about four of the clock in the afternoon we
came to an ancor before Portsmouth, but somewhat far into the sea. That night
also came the Waste-spight, who made great means to come so soon, having
spent her maine-mast, as is aforesaid. Some of our company made hard shift that
night to go on shore, enduring the hardness of the weather, which fell out ill
all that evening.

On Saturday morning early his Lordship went in his Barge to the Repulse,
wherein Don Pedro was, and knowing that the said Don Pedro much desired to be
on land, having indeed endured much sickness at sea; took him into his Barge,
and so with the company of some other Boats and Pynnesses, came on shore at
Portsmouth before eight of the clock in the morning, where they were received
with many shot of great Ordinance from the Castles, Forts, and Walls of the
Town. On the shore stood Sir Lewis Lewkus knight, accompanied with the Mayor
and Officers of the Town, ready to receive the said Ambassadors, being (as it
should seem) appointed so to do by the King and Lords of the Counsel. That
day every one hastened to get off their luggage from the ships, preparing to
go forward likewise on their way toward London.

The next day, being Sunday, his Lordship rested there, went to the Church, and
heard a sermon publicly.

Monday his Lordship having as well by means of the Kings officers and
servants, who were sent for the purpose thither, as by his own care, provided
for all necessaries to supply him in his journey toward London; about eleven
of the clock set forward, riding in his Caroch, and taking the said Don Pedro
along with him: and so came that night to Alton, where they lodged that night.

Tuesday the second of July, his L. rode from Alton, and lodged that night at
Guilford, having taken especial care, both that Don Pedro the Ambassador
Leidger, whom his Lo. had brought along in company, should be respectively
provided for himself as was fitting, as also all other his followers most
plentifully supplied for all necessaries in their travel, and that freely
without charge or expense to any of them.

Wednesday they rode forward toward Kingston, where the Conde de Villamediana
and others stayed expecting the coming of the said Ambassador: and where also
his Lordship had bountifully provided for their entertainment in general.

Thursday his L. having appointed the L. Howard of Effingham and some others of
the better sort to accompany the said Ambassador and the Conde de Villa
mediana to London: he himself with the rest of his company rod for Windsor
castle, where as then the King lay for his pleasure of hunting, who there
presenting themselves to his Majesty, were of him most graciously entertained
and welcomed. At what time also his Lo. received further order from his
Highness when he would be pleased to give audience to the said Ambassador,
and to admit him to his royal Presence, according to appointment, which was
accordingly performed, at the Court at White hall, on Sunday the 14. day of the
said month of July following.

Now for that it does not fully appear by this former relation of his Lo.
travel and journey, how honorably and with what respect, he and his whole
company were received and entertained: Ye shall understand, that first, upon
our landing at the Groyne, the Governor of the country of Galicia, as is before
rehearsed; and as it should seem, by direct order from his Master; upon the
former arrival of certain ships, wherein were the horses and other presents
sent from his Majesty to the King of Spain; had drawn together much people,
and that of the better sort of the whole country, of purpose to make show both
of the strength of the country, as also to be the more ready to do service in
supplying the English with all necessaries; and for this purpose also, their
greatest care was, that during our abode there, there might appear no want of
any thing. His Lo. as is aforesaid, was lodged in the Governors house, which of
it self was very little, and not able to give intertainment to so great a
company. Therefore especial care was taken, that every man might according to
his estate, be lodged as conveniently and as sufficiently as the place would
give leave. The town being much decayed by reason of the late wars; nor as
yet reedified sithence the saccage thereof, by Sir John Norrys and Sir Francis
Drake. But we must acknowledge that for the greatest part every man was lodged
there without exception. The care for lodging was not so much as was their
exceeding care they had for provision of victuals and viands to serve the
company: that country of Galicia being indeed very mountainous and
unfruitful. And therefore, although his Lo. was very sufficiently provided for
at the Governors house, and that sithence the room there, being little, could
not by any means supply all: order was taken that in every house, wherein any
Englishman lodged, provision of diet was made for him and his servants at the
Kings proper cost, wherein of necessity we must observe both the great charge,
as also the great care, that was taken to supply all necessaries in the best
fashion: notwithstanding which, there was daily provided so large a table as
conveniently could be, for all such Knights and Gentlemen as would at their
pleasure come to attend and keep his Lo. company at meat. This interteinment
beginning the first day of our arrival at the Groyne, which was the 16. day of
April: and continuing all the time of our being in the Groyne, which was till
the third of May following, what time we set forward on our land journey, being
then likewise furnished of Mules both for riding and carriage, all upon the
Kings charge.

The number of Mules sent to his Lo. for riding and carriage were 800. or there
abouts, whereof 24. were great Assmuilas of the Kings provision, and appointed
for his Lo. own cariages: beside the mules for the Spaniards themselves and
their necessaries, which were esteemed above 400. the Muletters to regard these
Mules were numbered to be above 300.

The company of English were accounted 650. Besides these the king sent many of
every office in court, some with the Aposentador Mayor before mentioned as
diverse others Aposentadors or harbengers; Stewards, Vshers for the Chambers,
Sewyers and officers for the Table, officers of the Ewery, Pantry, Seller,
Chaundry, 40. of the Spanish guard to serve the Table, cook pastelers, and
such like. Every of these being particularly furnished with such necessaries as
belonged to his office, as we might well perceive, for that through the whole
journey, they were feign to carry by mules from place to place all the said
necessaries for their service, as plate, linen, bedding, hangings, chaires,
tables, forms, pastry boards, kitchen furniture, racks, spits, pannes, and
such like: as also, most of their provision of meal, wine, oil, vinegar,
herbs, fruit, sweete-meates, and such other. Wherein the said officers, did so
carefully and wisely behave themselves, that it appeared there wanted no will
in them either in care or pains, to give contentment to the whole company of
the English. This charge of the kings endured, until the return of his
Lordship to the ships at S. Andreas: with very little difference either of
meats or service at any time. Whither, for that the way from the Groyne was by
experience found to be both long and ill, his Lo. had formerly directed the
ships to go, there to abide and stay his return, being indeed not above
half the way from Vallodelid, in comparison of his journey from the Groyne.
Both in our going and return we might well observe, how ioifull our coming
seemed to the common people, both by their manner of behavior, which was
courteous, as also by their speeches, which were most kind: who for that they
found by experience the ill reports made heretofore of our nation altogether
untrue, admiring our ciuility and good behauiours; being clean contrary to
that which had been formerly preached unto them by their Churchmen and Friars;
we received that kind congratulation and usage, that was possible for them to
give and us as strangers and trauailers to receive. Insomuch, as well we
observed as we passed, the country had taken exceeding care to make the ways
both easy and pleasing for us to pass, digging down hills in many places, and
mending the ways with timber, stones and earth; no doubt to their great pains
and charge.

By which it most plainly appeared, with what joy and comfort they received the
peace generally, manifesting the same as well by their deeds as words. And no
doubt performed much more thankfulness to their King for procuring it, than
they would make show of joy to us for obtaining it.

And yet what words might express, that might we daily hear, for we might
observe, how they preached the same in pulpits and spoke of the same even in
their open plays and Interludes, making, as they said, many feasts and ioies
for the blessed peace.

The bounty of the King in gifts as well to his Lo. as to diverse other of his
followers, together with the great charge his Highness was at during our abode
there, gave us not so good contentment in general, as did the good esteem and
behavior we found in all from the highest to the meanest, upon every occasion
ministered to them to show the same: either in particular or in general. His
Lo. receiving all very thankfully, and not without a reciprocal show of his
bounty and good will again, being indeed of his purse not sparing, and (with
pardon be it spoken) as liberal in his degree as was necessary: whose carriage
and behavior during the whole journey being such, and upon good intelligence,
sufficiently known to his Majesty, who employed him, and by him is both
graciously allowed and accepted; he himself has cause sufficient of
gladness, and no other cause of exception in any sort. So concluding with the
blessing of our Savior, Beati pacifici, let us pray to Almighty God to make
his Majesty as careless of war, as he from time to time in his great
judgment shall find peace to be necessary; his people and subjects ever
obedient to all his designs and appointments either in war or peace, and his
Majesty himself blessed with long life, health and ability to undergo either,
as it shall seem best to the divine Majesty. Amen.


