A new and merry Interlude, called the Trial of Treasure, newly set forth, and
never before this time imprinted.

The names of the plaiers, First, Sturdines, Contentation, Visitation, Time.
The second, Lust Sapience, Consolation. The third, the Preface, Just,
Pleasure, Gredy gutte. The fourth, Elation, Trust, a woman, and Treasure, a
woman. The fifth, Inclination, the Vice.


Imprinted at London in Paul's Churcheyarde, at the sign of the Lucrece by
Thomas Purfoote. 1567.

printer's or publisher's device THOMAS PVRFOOTE


Do all things to edify the Congregation.
DIogenes which used a barell for his house,
Being fled from his father to ye city of Athe^s,
Comforted him self much in beholding ye mouse
which desired neither castle nor hold for her defense
Concerning sustentatio^, she made no difference,
But eat what soever to her did befall,
And touching her apparel, she had least care of all.
This poor mouses property noted Diogenes,
Which oftentimes also, he would have in sight,
And though he ware disciple unto Antisthenes,
yet he learned of the mouse as much as he might
In the science of Sophy he had great delight,
But concerning his state, and outward condition
The most can declare, if you make inquisition.
On a time he chaunsed accumpanied to be
With Alexander, which stood between him and the son
What requirest thou to have Diogenes (quod he?)
Is there any thing that by me may be done?
I pray thee stand aside, and make a little room
(quod Diogenes) that the sun upon me may shine,
Naught else requier I of that that is thine.
He used to say, that as servants be obedient
To their bodily masters being in subjection,
Even so evil men that are not content,
Are subjects and slaves to their lusts and affection,
This lesson unto us may be a direction,
Which way our inclination to bridle and subdewe,
Namely if we labor the same to eschew.
Thus see you how little this Philosopher esteemed
the aboundaunt possessions of this mu^daine treasure
Which yet notwithstanding at these days is demed
to be the original and fountain of pleasure,
this causes lust to reign without measure,
to the which men are subjects, Diogenes does say,
yet both lost and treasure in time wears away.
A Philosopher is he that wisdom does love,
Which before Pithagoras, wise men ware named
Now Diogenes being wise, this does approve
that some me^ of this age, ought as fools to be blamed
For where the one with treasure lack, his life framed
the other travail, care, and labor with gredines,
the same by all means, to enjoy and possess.
But as Lust with the luster, conuerteth to duste
And leaves of force, his pleasant prosperity,
So treasure in time, is turned to ruste:
As S. James in his epistle shows the verity
Hereof we purpose to speak without temerite,
Therefore our matter is named, ye trial of Treasure,
Which time does expel, with all mundaine pleasure.
Both merry and short we purpose to be,
And therefore require your pardon and patience,
We trust in our matter nothing you shall see,
That to the godly may give any offense,
Though ye style be barbarous, not fined with eloquence
Yet our Author desires your gentle acceptance,
And we the plaiers likewise, with all humilation.
Finis.
Enter Lust like a gallaunt, singing this song. HEy how care away let the
world pass
For I am as lusty as ever I was,
In flowers I florishe as blosomes in May,
Hey how care away: hay how care away.
Lust. What the Devil ailed me to singe thus,
I cry you mercy by my faith for entering,
Most like I have ridden on the fliyng Pegasus,
Or in Cock Lorrels barge I have been a ventringe,
Sing* why I would singe if it were to do again.
With Orpheus and Amphion I went to schole,
What, laddes must be lively attending on the train
Of lady Delectation, which is no small fool.
Hey rowse* fill all the pottes in the house,
Tushe man, in good fellowship let us be merry,
Look up like a man or it is not worth a louse.
Hey how troly low, hey dery dery,
Ha pleasant youth and lusty Iuuentus,
In faith it is good to be merry this may,
For of man's living here, there is no point endentus.
Therefore a little mirth is worth much sorrow some say.
But remember ye not the wise man's sentence, Enter Just
It is better in the house of mourning to be
The^ in the house of laughter where folly has reside^ce,
For lightness with wisdom can not agree
Though many have pleasure in foolish fantasy.
Ensuing their inclination and lust,
Yet much better is the life of one that is just.

Lust. Sir, in this you seem against me to inuaye,

Just. Nothing but reason I think I do say.


Lust. Mary you shall have a night cap for making ye reason,
Frinde have you not a piece of stockefishe to sell,
I would you had a dishe of butterd peason,
By my faith your communication likes me well,
But I beseech you tell me is not your name Just:

Just. Yes forsothe.


Lust. And my name thou shall understand is lust,
And according thereto I am lusty in deed,
But I think thou haste drunk of Morpheus seed,
Thou go like a Dromeldory dreaming and drousy,
I hold twenty pound the knave is lousy.

Just. Mine apparel is not like unto thine,
Disguysed and iagged of sundry fashion,
How be it, it is not gold always that does shine,
But corrupting Copper of small valuation
To horrible besides is thy operation,
Nothing more odious unto the Just,
Then the beastly desires of inordinate lust.

Lust. It is a shameful thing as Cicero does say
That a man his own acts should praise and commend,
Hypocrites accustom thee like day by day
Checking other men, when they do offend.

Just. Yea but it is an hard thing says the Philosopher,
For a foolish man to have his manners reprehended,
And even at this day it is come so far,
God grant for his mercy it may be amended.
For tell a man friendly now of his fault
Being blasphemy, pride, or vile fornication,
He will be as presumptuous as Haman the haulte
And repaye with revenge or else defamation.
Thus few men a friendly monition will bear,
But stoutely persiste and maintain their ill,
And in noble men's houses truly I do fear
There are to many have such froward will.

Lust. Wounds and hearts who can abide this,
Nay ye vile vylayne I will dress you therefore,
your lasy bones I pretend so to bliss,
That you shall have small lust to prate any more.

Just. Behold the Image of insipient fools,
There are not a few even now of thy property,
Until you be put into pouerties schools:
ye will not forsake this folishe insolency.

Lust. Nay soft, with thee I have not made an end.


Draw out his swoorde. Just. The Just against lust must always contend,
Therefore I purpose to wrestle with thee, Put it by
Who shall have the victory, streightwaye we shall see.

Lust. When thou will by his flesh: I shall hold the wag

Wrestle, and let Lust seem to have the better at the first. Just. I know
that lust uses not little to brag:

Lust. Thou shall find me as mighty as Sampson ye strong

Just. yea the battle of lust endures long.


Lust. Wounds and flesh, I was almost down on my back,
But yet I will wrestle till my bones crack.

Stay and then speak, Just. The end of thy presumption now does appear,

Lust. yet do what thou can I will not lie here,
No by his wounds you old doting knave, Cast him and let him arise again
think thou that lust will be made a slave,
I shall mete you in Smithfield or else other wheare,
By his flesh and blood, I will thee not forbear.

Just. Not of my power I do thee expel
But by the might of his spirit that dwells in me,
Inordinate lust with the just may not dwell,
And therefore may not I accompany thee.

Lust. Well goodman Just, it is no matter,
But in faith I pretend not with thee to flatter,
Go out, he must drive him out. Though from thy company depart I must,
I shall live in as much welthynes I trust.

Just. Where most wealth is and most dilectation,
There Lust is commonly of most estimation:
For where as wealth wants idleness does sla
But where idleness is Lust parts the slake.
Pause. Thus have you seen the conflicte of the Just,
Which all good men ought to use and frequent
For horrible are the fruits of inordinate lust,
Which in some case resemble Hybra the serpent,
Whose head being cut of an other ryseth incontinent.
So one of Lusts cogitations being cut away
There ryseth up an other, yea many we may say:
It is requisite therefore that every degree
Against this his lust, both strive and contend,
And though at the first he seem sturdy to be,
The Lord will convince him for you in the end.
Your cause unto him therefore holy commend,
Laboring to avoid all inordinate lust,
Go out, Enter Inclination the Vise. And to practice in life, to live after the
Just.
I can remember since Noes ship
Was made and builded on Salisbury plain,
The same year ye weathercock of Paul's caught ye pip
So that Bow bell was like much woe to sustain,
I can remember I am so old.
Since Paradise gates were watched by night,
And when that Vvlcanus was made a cuckold
Among the great Gods I appeared in sight.
Nay for all your smiling I tell you true,
No no* ye will not know me now,
The might on the earth I do subdue,
tush, if you will give me leave isle tell ye how,
How, in good faith I carenot greatly,
Although I declare my daily increase
But then these gentle women will be angry,
therefore I think best to hold my peace:
Nay I beseech you let the matter stay,
For I would not for twenty pound come in their hands
For if there should chance to be but one dalila,
By the mas they would bind me in Samsons bands
But what mean I first with them to begin,
Seeing that in all men I do remain,
Because that first I remained even within,
And after her Adam and so forth to Caine,
I perceive by your looks my name ye would know,
Why you are not ignorant of that I dare say,
It is I that do guide the bente of your bow,
And rules your actions also day by day,
Forsothe I am called Natural inclination
Which bred in old Adams fostred bones,
So that I am proper to his generation
I will not away with casting of stones,
I make the stoutest to bow and bend:
Again when I lust I make men stand vprighte
From the lowest to the highest I do ascend,
Drawing them to things of natural might.
Enter Lust, and Sturdines, singing this song. Where is the knave, that so
did rave:
O that we could him find,
We would him make, for fear to quake
That loute of lobbishe kind.
My name is lust, and let him trust
That I will have redress,
For thou and I, will make him fly,
Mine oulde friend Sturdines.

Lust. Where is now that valiant Hercules,
For all his bragges he is now run away:

Sturdi. By the guts of Golya, it is best for his ease,
Braggingly For he was most like for the pottage to pay.

Inclina. Cocks soul: what bragging knaves have we here,
Come ye to convince the mightiest conqueror,
It was I that before you now does appear,
Which brought to confusion both Hector and Alexander:
Look on this leg ye prating slaves,
I remember since it was no greater then a tree,
At that time I had a cupple of knaves
Much like unto you that wayghted on me.

Lust. Cocks precious soul, let us conquer the knave,

Sturdi. By his flesh and sides, a good courage I have,
Stand you therefore a little aside
And ye shall see me quickly abate the fools pride.

Draw out the swearde, make him put it up, and then strike him, look in your
spectacles. Inclina Nay I dare not I if thou look so big,
What should such a Bore fight with a pigge.
Put up thy swoorde man we will agree,
So lo: do so much as bear that for me.

Sturdi. Nay by his heart, then I will you dress.


Inclina. Be Good in thine office gentle friend Sturnines,
For though thou and I do seem to contend,
yet we are, and must be friends till the end.

Sturdi. Come give me thy hand I beshrowe thy heart.


Inclina. Nay you must take all things in good part,
Who stands yender captain Lust?

Sturdi. Yea mary.


Inclina. No remedy then to him go I must,
you have forgot I dare say your old friend Inclination
But let us renew acquaintau^ce again for cocks passion

Lust. Why man our acquaintance has been of old,
I am yours at commandment therefore be bold,
For Lust can do nothing without Inclination,
Chiefly in matters concerning a pleasant vocation.

Incli. In deed Lust may be taken for a thing indifferent
Except Inclination be joined thereunto*
But when that I once have reaueled my intent,
As I will men to work so commonly they do,

Lust. Ye have hard of the combat between me and Just.


Inclina. ye mary, I hard say that you lay in the dust.


Lust. What say ye.


Inclina. Neither one word nor other ye may me trust.


Lust. Of mine honesty my company he utterly refused,
And in wrestling with me he gave me the foil,
Saying: that I had my self and other abused.
Leading men in perplexity and marvelous toil.

Sturdi. By gogs wounds if we had found him here,
We should by his flesh have abated his chere.

Incli. I perceive Sturdines thou art no fool,
Tell me of fellowship where wentest thou to schole,

Sturdi. What to read or wrighte.


Incli. Nay to swear and fight.
For I think thou can neither write, read, nor spel,
But in swearing and fighting thou do excel.

Sturdines. Thou know that I am joined with Lust,
And Sturdy by nature I am in like case,
What let the world wag, all can not be Just,
Some must Natural inclination embrace.

Lust. All men Just: no, I remember the sentence of Tully
That no man is Just, that fears death poverty or pain,
which I do fear all and that marueilously,
For fortune is variable I do perceive plain,
And notwithstanding that Flix possessed great gain,
yet when Paul preached of the judgment day,
He trembled for fear and bad him go away.

Inclina. Does such passions often trouble your mind?


Lust. Nay not often, but sometime I do them find,
But then to the intent to drive them away,
I either go to sleep, or else to some play.

Sturdi. By gogs precious heart, even so do I,
But sometime they comber me pestilently.

Inclination. Well master Lust, such dumpes to eschew
My advise and request you must needs ensue,
That is to become disciple to doctor Epicurus,
And then you shall have mirth by measure and overplus
Tushe, I know a cupple companions in store
That ware marvelous mete for you evermore.
I wish you unto them.

Lust. Well then call them in.


Incli. Here they come each of them in a knaves skin.
Enter Elation and Gredy gutte. With lust to live is our delight,
In high estate and dignity,
Seeing that the Just put us to flight,
Let them alone in misery.

Sturdi* Nay, they be lusty laddes I tell ye.


Elation What Inclination, me thought I did smell thee,
Give me thy hand or we forther go.

Inclina. Now welcome in faith, and Gredy gutte also,
But syrs* are none of you both acquainted with Lust.

Lust. Yes that they have been both of them I trust,
welcome syrs in faith welcome unto me.

Elation* By my trothe I am glad your maistership to see
In health and prosperity, as presently you be.

Gredy. Bom fay zo am I wod all my heart,

Inclina* This cow bellied knave does come from the carte,
Ise teach you to speak I hold you a pound,
Curchy Lob curchy, down to the ground.

Gredy. Che can make curchy well enowe.


Inclina. Lower old knave or isle make ye to bow,
The great bellied loute me think can not bend,
yes so lo, he begins now to amend.

Lust. Well syrs, now I remember Esopes advise
which he gave to the Samies against king Crassus,
Therefore it is good to be witty and wise,
And being in liberty to keep me still thus:
I can not abide a life that is dolorous,
And seeing that my name is properly Lust,
I hate the conversation also of the Just.

Inclina Well master Lust, first join you to me Inclination
Next here with Sturdines you must you acquainte
Turn you about and embrace Elation,
And that wealth may increase without any restraint
Join you with Gredy gutte here in our presence,
That all these in you may have prosperous influence.

Bow to the ground. Lust. Out alas, what a sudden passion is this,
I am so taken that I can not stand,
The crampe, the crampe, has touched me ywis,
I shall die without remedy now out of hand.

Gredy. By my matens chese, our master is sick.


Inclina. Stand back Nycoll nody with the pudding prick,
More brains in thy skin then wit in thy brain,
Such Gredy guts in faith would be flayne,
This crampe does signify nothing in effect
But how he is bowed by me Inclination,
None of all your councels he will now reiecte,
And therefore fear not to make full declaration.

Sturdi. Then fear not the force of these that be just,
But labor your self to advance and augment,
Be iocound and lively sith your name is lust,
And then you shall easily obtain your entente.

Elation. Esteem your self always equal with the best,
And seek for promotion, power, and dignity:
It is good when men may live as they lust,
And unto the just bear hate and malignitie.

Gredy. O zur ye must be gredy to catch and to clawe.


Incli. Well said Gredy gutte, as wise as a dawe,

Gredy. Eat up at a mouthfull, houses and lands.


Gape and the Vise gape. Incli. There Is a vengeable mouth to,

Gredy. Never fear God nor the governors law,
But gripe gripe gredely all that comes in your hands.
By the Mass but Hew Howlet is pestilens witty,
What guttishe gredinesse the horeson can teach
That thou art not erected in faith it is pity,
As hie as three trees, and a halter will reach.

Lust. Mary syrs, but your councels has set me on fire.
Hey lusty lad, how fresh am I now,
Lead me Inclination to have my desire,
And then at thy request I will ever bend and bow.

Incli. He that bends to follow his own inclination,
Must needs live a wicked and vile conversation,
But go master Lust, I will lead you to a place
Where you shall have pleasure enough in short space.

Lust. yea, but shall not this company go thither.


Inclina. yes mary we four will all go together,
But Sturdines shall tarry to face out the matter,
If Just peradventure against you should clatter.

Sturdi. By the mass, and well said, but first let us sing,

Incli. I must tune my pipes first of all with drinking.


Elation Tushe what then, I pray thee help us bear a part.


Incli. yes I will sing the trouble with all my heart.
Lust shall be led by inclination
To carnal cogitation,
Where lust is led wholly by me,
He must fall to Cupidite,
For carnal cares shall him assail,
And spedely they shall prevail.
I Sturdines will face it out,
In his cause, sturdy stiff and stout,
Then Gredy gutte shall make him eat,
Both house and lands, like bread and meat.
Elation shall puff him hie
For to aspier above the sky,
Then natural and lordly lust,
Shall with his pour despise the Just.

Elation. Our song is ended haste thou other in store,

Inclina. I shall not have done this half hour and more,
yet I will now I remember, come in Lust
That I go before is but needful and just,
Go out all four. you shall be now led by me Inclination
to reason and talk with Carnal cogitation.

Sturdi. Is there more vanity under neath the son,
Then to be inclined after this sort,
well Lust does now as other have done,
yea, and do day by day, esteming it a sport,
this Lust is the Image of all wicked men,
which in seeking the world, have all delectation,
they regard not God nor his commandments ten
But are wholly led by their own Inclination,
First to inculcate with Carnal cogitation,
And after to the desire of all worldly treasure,
which alone they esteem the fulness of pleasure
with Elation or Pride he is also assotiate,
which puffs up his senses with presumption pestilent
then Gredy gutte makes them continually to grate
On ye mock of this world which he thi^keth permane^t,
I sturdines to bear out all things, am bent:
thus see you how men that are led by their lust,
Dissent from the virtuous godly and Just.

Go out. Enter Just and Sapience. Sapie^ce The advice of Aristippus have in
your mind,
which willed me^ to seek such things as be permane^t
And not such as are of a vanishing kind
For the one with the other is not equivalent,
Be circumspect therefore, forseing and Sapient,
For treasures here gotten are uncertain and vain,
But treasures of the mind do continually remain.

Just. This is the mind of Musonus also I remember,
Like as presently you have advertised me,
For the which I can not but thankefully render,
Such commendations as is requisite to be,
And as your name is Sapience, thus much I see,
That on heavenly wisdom you do depend,
And not on as time does bring to an end.

Sapie^ce Truth in deed, and therefore your name being Just,
With me and my documentes must be assotiate,
Where contrary such as are led by their lust,
To incline evil are always appropriate,
They have not as you have, battle and combat,
Against the cogitations that inwardly spring,
But rather are obedient unto the same thing,
And this is the occasion that men are so ambitious,
And so foolish led by the lust of their brain,
Sometime to covet, sometime to be vicious,
Sometime the council of the wise to disdain,
Sometime to clime till they fall down again,
Sometime to usurp the possessions of other,
Sometime to disobeye both father and mother.

Just. Alas what avails it riches to enjoy,
Though as much in comparison as Cressus the king,
What helps it to have Helene in Troy,
If the conscience of man continually sting,
Elation and Pride, no commodity does bring,
But is often known the forerunner of shame,
And the blotte of immortal memory and fame.
Now by my hallydome it is alone a, Enter Inclination the Vis^.
Better sport in my life I never saw,
It is trim I tell you to dau^ce with John and Ione a:
We pass not a point for God nor his law,
But Lust is lusty and full of porridge,
Cogitation and he, in one Bed does lie
When: here is master Just with his cancred courage,
What an old doting, Sapience then I am dressed I,
So often already Just has me restrained,
That I dare not entise him any more,
For through Sapience he has me clearly disdained
That my courage is spent, and I have no more.

Make a going back, Sapie^ce Nay soft sir we must talk with you or ye go.


Inclina I can not tarry at this time the truth is so.


Just. Nay, there is no remedy with you we must talk.


Inclina. By the body of me, I hold best that I walk,
Or else learn to speak language another while,
And so I may happen the knaves to beguyle.

Just. Turn back or you go, we have somewhat to say.


Incli. Non point parla fransois, nonne par ma foy.


Sapie^ce To deceive us now him self he does prepare.


Incli. Ick en can ghene english spreken vorwaer,
Body of me let me go, or else I shall piss,
Iwis master Just, you have loved me or this,
Therefore now be ruled after my council,
And godly things for your commodity I shall you tell

Sapie^ce Let him that is Just not lightly ensue,
His vile inclination and carnal concupicence,
But let him rather contend the same to subdue,
And chiefly those that have knowledge of Sapience,
Therefore to bridle this lust do your diligence,
His crafty prouocations utterly to restrain,
That Just may live while life does remain.

Inclina. Godd man hoball speak you in earnest:
What do thou say, shall the Just bridle me,
No, no, brother snappes, do the worste and thy best,
I will not be bridled of him nor of thee.

Just. Seeing Sapience consists in heavenly document,
And that heavenly document consists in sapience
To bridle this wretch I can not but consent,
Sith I of his purpose have had often intelligence.

Inclina. Yet again bridle, it does not prevail,
I will not be bridled of the best of you both,
See you this gere here is one will make you to quail,
Stand back, to kill you master just I would be loath
you have been so burned and fried of late,
That it were pity to hurt you any more,
Back I say, or my dagger shall about your pate,
By the mass but I will sir, isle make your bones sore.

Struggle two or three times, Just. I will bridle thee beast for all thy
bragging.


Incli. In faith good man Just, isle hold ye wagging,
Nay brother, ye shall find me a curste colte to bridle,
Nay in faith, better yet I will make thee to struggle.

Sapie^ce Never leave him but ensue the council of sapience.


Just. Lo now I have brought him under obedience.


Bridle him. Incli* Not so obedient as thou think me to have,
Nay brother, ye shall find me a coltishe knave,
We he, he, it is good for you to hold fast,
For I will kick and winche while thy life does last*

Sapie^ce Thou shall kick in deed but no victory win,
Neither to conquer the Just to ungodliness nor sin,

Incli. O yes, O yes, I will make a proclamation.


Just. What shall that be?


Incli* If ye will give me leave then you shall see,
O yes, is there any man or woman that has lost,
A gambolling gelding with a graye tail,
Let him come to the Crier and pay for his cost,
And he will tell him tidinges without any fail.

Sapie^ce To the intent that you may him sharply restrain,
Let him not enjoy so much of the rain.

Bridle him shorter. Inclina Cocks soul, now the snaff^e cutteth my lip,
I would this suberly knave had the pip,
I shall leap no hedges while this bridle is on,
Out alas, I think it will fret me to the bone.

Sapie^ce Thus should every man that will be called Just,
Bridle and subdue his beastly inclination,
That he in the end may obtain perfect trust,
The messenger of God to give sight to salvation.

Just. That trust to obtain with him I have struggled,

Sapie^ce Then let us depart and leave this beast bridled.


Go out both, Inclina. Mary the devil go with you and his dun dame,
Such horse masters will make a colte quickly tame,
I would he were hanged that this snaffell did make,
It makes my chappes so shamefully to ache*
ye have no pity on me you I se by your laughing,
I care not greatly if I fall to gambolling,
We he, he, he, he, he, come alofte I say,
Beware the horse heles I auise you, stand away,
The rain of my bridle is tied so short,
That I can not make you any more sport,
But though I be bridled now of the Just,
I doubt not but I shall be unbridled by Lust,
And let not Just think but I will rebel,
Although he bridle me ten times all well,
Though nature says one dome with a croche,
It will not lie long but incontinent aproche,
Eeuen so, though that I be bridled a while,
The Colte will at length the Curser beguyle,

Enter Gredy gutte running and catch a fall, Gredy. Chill run I as fast as I
can,
zures did none of you zee a man,
Cham zent in haste from my master Lust,
So that Inclination needs come to him must.

Incli. Where is he now I pray thee tell me.


Gredy. Why what have we here Jesus benedicite,
I hold twenty pound it is Baalams Ass,
Nay it is a Colte, I see his tail by the mass.

Incli. Am I a Colte, nay thou lie like a knave,
Somewhat for thy labor now shall thou have.

Gredy. Ho ball ho, lousy Jade must ye kick.


Inclina* Who ever saw such a desperate Dicke,
Why Gredy gutte, do thou not know Inclination?

Gredy* Body O me, who has dressed thee of that fashion,
Thou art brydled for biting now in deed,
Syra, master Lust would have thee make speed.

Incli. I am bridled I* even as thou do see,
Therefore desire him to come and help me,
But what is the matter that he for me sent.

Gredy. Mary to gather with Gredines, now he is bent,
He has had long talk with Carnal cogitation,
And is set on fire by the means of Elation,
So that he is so lusty he can not abide.
Therefore one or other for him must be spied.

Inclina* Well Gredy gutte, I pray thee go and make haste.


Gredy. Tushe fear not, chill spend no time in waste.


Incli. I had rather then.xl. pence that he ware come,
If I be bridled long I shall be undone,
So sharp is this snaffell called restrainte,
That it makes me sweat I am so faint:
Hark, I hear the voice of my master Lust,
Now I shall be unbridled shortly I trust.

Enter Lust, Lust. Cocks precious wounds, here has been vilanie*

Inclina. Ye, ye they have used me with to much vilanie,
That old knave Sapience so counseled Just,
Bu let me be unbridled good master Lust.

Unbridle him, Lust. Lo now thou art unbridled, be of good chere*
By lady I am glad I have gotten thus clear,
But harke^ you master Lust, if I may do you pleasure
Whisper, She is called Treasure.

Lust. O my heart is on fire till she come in place.


Inclina. O master Lust, she has an amiable face,
A tricker* a trimmer, in faith that she is,
The gods of wealth, prosperity and bliss.

Lust. But think you that this minion long endure shall.


Inclina. For ever and ever man, she is immortal:
There be many other, but she exceadeth them all.

Lust. What be they, have you their names in store,

Inclina. Yea hark in your ear. whisper, and many other more

Lust. Sith that the apple of Paris before me is cast,
And that I may deliver the same where I will,
I would Prometheus were here to help me hold fast
That I might have a fore wit with me ever still,
Pallas I consider in science has skill,
But Juno and Venus, good will do I bear,
Therefore to give the Appull I know not where.

Incli. Be conciled by me and give it lady Treasure,
It shall be for your commodity in ye end without measur
For having the company of this minion less,
you shall never want the society of Pallas,
Juno, nor yet the armipotent Mars,
Can not resist your strength be they never so fearce
And as for Venus, you shall have at pleasure,
For she is bought and sold always with Treasure,
She of her power has whole countries conquered
The most noble cha^pions by her has been murdered
Acon for her sake was stoned to death,
Tushe, innumerable at this day spend their breath,
Sum hang or be hanged, they love her so well,
She is the great goddess, it is true that I tell.

Lust. Which way should I work of her to have a sight.


Incli. I Inclination will lead you thither right,
But we must have Gredy gutte and also Elation.

Lust. They are at the house of carnal Cogitation.


Inclina Whether I would wyshe that we might depart.
I will lead you thither with all my heart.
Go out. Enter Just, Trust, a woman plainly, and Contentation, knele down and
sing, she have a crown, So happy is the state of those*
That walk upright and just,
That thou Lord do thy face disclose
By perfect hope and trust.
Their Inclination thou do stay,
And sendest them Sapience,
That they should serve and eke obey,
Thy high magnificence.
Thou sendest contentation,
That we in thee may rest,
Therefore all adoration,
To thee pertains best.

Just. God cares for his as the Prophet does say,
And preserves them under his merciful wings,
Namely the Just that his will do obey,
Observing his holy commandment in all things,
Not for our sake, or for our deseruinges,
But for his own sake openly to declare,
That all men on earth ought to live in his fear.

Trust. How God has blissed you all men may see,
For first at your entrance you conquered Lust,
Not by your power, but by might of the deity,
As all persons ought to do that be Just,
Then through Sapience which God did you send,
You bridled that brutishe beast Inclination,
And also ordered you with Contentation.

Conten. Those that are contented with their vocation,
Be thankful to God, this is a true consequent,
And those that be thankful in their conversation,
Can not but please the Lord God omnipotent,
But those that be sturdie, proud, and disobediente,
The Ruler of all Rulers will them confound,
And rote their remembrance of from the ground.

Just. When Solon was asked of Cressus the king,
What man was most happy in this vale terestriall,
To the end he seems to attriqute that thing,
When men be asociate with treasures celestial,
Before the end can no man judge he does say,
That any man is happy that here bears breath,
But then by his end pretely judge we may,
Thus true happiness coesisteth says he after death.
If this be a truth as undoubtedly it is,
What men are more foolish, wretched and miserable,
The^ those ye in these treasures account their whole blys
Being infect with amdition that sickness incurable,
A wicked Adrastia, thou gods deceiuable,
Thus to pluck from men the sense of their mind,
So that no contentation, therein they can find.

Trust* The treasure of this world we may well compare
To Circes the witch, with her crafty cautilitie,
Where with many men's minds so poisoned are,
That quite they are carried into all fidelity,
They are coniured in deed, and bewitched so sore,
That treasure is their trust, joy and delight,
True trust is expelled they pass not therefore*
And against contentation, they continually fight*
But though wicked men follow their lust,
Criyng, on earth is our felicity and pleasure,
yet God does so guide the hearts of the just,
That they respect chiefly the celestial treasure.

Conten. Alas should we not have that estimation,
Which God has prepared for his dear elect,
Should not our minds rest in full contentation,
Having trust in this treasure, most high in respect:
S* Paul, when the Lord so high did erecte,
Says: it passes the sense of our memory and mind,
Much less can our outward eyes the same find.
And as for treasures which men possess here
Through fickelnes of fortune, sone fades away*
The greatest of renown and most worthy pere,
Sometime falls, in the end to mysery and decaie,
Record of Dionisius, a king of much fame,
Of the valiant Alexander, and Caesar the strong,
Record of Tarquinius, which Superbus had to name,
And of Heliogabolos that ministered with wrong,
If I should recite all, I should stand very long.
But these be sufficient plainly to approve,
How sone by uncertainty, this treasure does remove.

Just. It is true, therefore a mind well content,
Is great riches as the wise king Solomon does say:
We have seen of late days this cancar pestilent
Corrupting our realm, to our great decaie,
Ambition I mean, which chiefly did reign
Among those that should be examples to other,
We saw how their brethren they did disdain,
And burned with fire the child with the mother,
It is often seen that such monsters ambitious,
As spare not to spill the blood of the innocente,
Will not greatly stick to become seditious,
The determination of God thereby to preuente:
God grant every one of us earnestly to repent,
And not to set our minds on this fading treasure,
But rather wyshe and will, to do the Lords pleasure.

Trust. O ye Emperors, Pote^tates, and Princes of renown,
Learn of Just with trust your selves to associate,
That like as your vocation, by right does ask ye crown
And also due obedience, being ye appointed magistrate,
So rule that at the last you may be resuscitate,
And reign with ye almighty with perfect co^tinua^ce,
Receiving double crowns for your godly governance
ye noble men, whom God has furnished with fame,
Be myndefull to walk in the ways of the Just,
Add virtue evermore to your honorable name,
And be not overcome of concupicence or lust,
Fle from love of Treasure, catch hold of me Trust.
And then double felicity, at the last you shall possess,
And in all earthly doings, God shall give good succes.
ye poor men and commons, walk well in your vocation
Banishe lust and desire, which is not convenient,
Let trust work in you a full contentation,
Considering that it leads to treasures more excellent
For these are uncertain, but they are most permane^t:
your necessity supply with virtue and trust,
And then shall you enjoy your crown among ye Just.

Just. As I being properly nominate Just,
Am here associate with contentation,
So have I my whole felicity in Trust,
Who ilumineth mine eyes to see my salvation.

Trust. Fear ye not, shortly you shall have consolation,
If I were once grown in you to perfection,
Even thus goes it always with ye children of election

Just. I will depart now, will ye go with me trust.


Trust. yea I must always associate the Just.


Conten. A psalm of thankesgeuing first let us sing,
To the laud and praise of the immortal king.
Here if you will: sing the man is blessed
that fears God. etc.

Go out, Enter Inclination laughing, Incli. Lust (quod he) now in faith he is
lusty,
Lady Treasure and he has made a match,
He thinks that I wax marvelous trusty,
Because I teach him to clawe and to catch,
And now a days amity does therein consiste,
He that can flatter shall be well beloved,
But he that says, thus and thus says Christ,
Shall as an enemy be openly reproved.
Friendship, yea, friendship consists now in adulatio^,
Speak fair and please the lust of thy Lord,
I warrante thee be had in great estimation,
When those that tell truth, shall be abhorde,
A unhappy lingua, whether will thou ren,
Take heed I advise thee, least thou be shent,
If ye chance to tell any tales of these gentlewomen,
With flesh hokes and nails, you are like to be rent,
Nay for the passion of me, be not so moved,
And I will please you incontinent again,
Above all treasures you are worthy to be loved,
Because you do no men deride nor disdain,
You do not contempt the simple and poor,
you be not his minded, proud and presumptuous,
Neither wanton nor wyly you be never more,
But gentle, loving, modesty, and virtuous,
Behold how a lie can please some folks diet,
O pacify their minds marvelous well,
All whyste I warrant ye, so they in quiet,
How to please you hereafter now I can tell,
Hark, I hear Lust and my lady Treasure.
They are given to solace singing and pleasure.

Enter Lust and Treasure a woman, finely appareled. Lust. Ah Amorous Lady of
bewtifull face,
Thou art heartily welcome into this place,
My heart is inclined to thee lady Treasure,
My love is insatiate, it keeps no measure.

Treasur It is I master Lust that will you advance,
Treasure, it is that things does enhaunce
Upon me set your whole affection and lust,
And pass not a point for the ways of the Just,
Treasure is a pleasure, bear that in mind,
Both trusty and true ye shall me always find.

Inclina. As trusty as is a quick ele by the tail,
What Lady Treasure welcome without fail,
To be better acquainted with you once I trust,
But I dare not in the presence of my master Lust,
ye are welcome sir heartily, what be of good courage:
Drawer, let us have a pynte of white wine and borage.

Lust. Wherefore I pray thee tell,

Inclina* Mary me think you are not well.


Lust. Not well, who can a better life crave,
Then to possess such a lady as I have:
Is there any wealth not contained in treasure,
Ah lady, I love thee in faith out of measure,

Incli. It is out of measure in deed as you say,
And even so most men love her at this day:
Oh she is a mynion of amorous hew,
Her pere in my days yet I never knew,
(Old quod you) I am an old knave I tell ye,
Nay, never laughe at ye matter, for doubtless I smell ye
She passes Juno, Ceres, and Pallas,
More beautiful then ever dame Venus was*
Othea in sapience she does excede,
And Diana in dignity, of whom we do read.
What should fair Helene once named be,
She excels all these master Lust believe me.

Lust. How say you, is not this an eloquent lad?

Treasur That you have such a servant, truly I am glad.


Inclina. Ha, ha, now in deed I can you not blame,
For women of all degrees are glad of the same,
They that flatter and speak them fair,
Shall Be their sons, and peradventure their air.

Lust. You told me of a brother you had lady Treasure.


Treasur Yea sir that I have, his name is called Pleasure,
And seeing you enyoye me now at your will,
Right sone I am sure he will come you until*

Lust. Truly of him I would feign have a sight,
For because yt in pleasure. I have marvelous delight.

Inclina. Then honesty and profit you may bid good night

Lust. What say thou?


Incli. I say he will shortly appear in sight,
I know by his singing, the same is he,
The misbegotten orpheus, I think that he be.
Enter pleasure singing this song. O happy eaies, and pleasant plays,
Wherein I do delight a
I do pretend, till my lives end
To live still in such plighte a*

Inclina. Master pleasure I perceive you be of good chere.


Pleasur What Inclination old lad, art thou here.


Inclina. Yea sir, and lady Treasure your sister also.


Pleasur Body of me, then unto her I will go,
What sister, I am glad to mete with you here.

Treasur Welcome unto me mine own brother dear.
Master Lust, this is my brother of whom I told,
He is pleasant and lusty, as you may behold.

Lust. Gentleman (I pray you) is your name master Pleasure

Pleasur yea sir, and I am brother to lady Treasure.


Lust. And are you concented to accompany me.


Pleasur Where as she is resident I must needs be,
Treasure does Pleasure commonly proceade,
But the one is with ye other, they have both so decreed

Inclina. Mary now you are well in deed master Lust,
This is better I trow then the life of the Just,
They be compelled to possess contentation,
Having no treasure but trust of salvation,
But my lady your mistress, my mistress I would say,
She works you may see to keep you from decaie.

Lust. O madame, in you is all my delight,
And in your brother Pleasure, both day and night,
The trial of treasure this is in deed,
I perceive that she is a true friend at need.
For I have proved her according as Thales does say
And I perceive that her beauty can not decay.

Treasur Always with you I will be resident,
So that your life shall be most excellent.

Pleasur yea sir and me Pleasure also you shall have,
So that none other thing there needs to crave,
I will replenishe your heart with delight,
And I will be always with treasure in sight,
But if you desire to enjoy me at your will,
My sister you must have in reputation still,
And then as her treasure is certain and excellent,
My pleasure shall be both perfect and permanent,
Credit not those sir that talk that and this,
Saying, that in us two consists no bliss,
But let experience your mind ever move,
And see if all men us two do not love.

Inclina. Love, yes they love you in deed without doubt,
Which shuts some of the^ Gods kingdom without:
They love you so well that their God they do hate,
As time has declared to us even of late,
But he that on such things his study does cast,
Shall Be sure to be deceived at the last.

Lust. What do thou say,

In^lina. Of treasure forsooth ye must ever hold fast,
For if you should chance to lose lady Treasure,
Then fare well in post this gentleman Pleasure.

Lust. My love to them both can not be expressed,
And especially my Lady you I love best.

Treasur If ye love me as you do profess,
Be ye sure you shall want no kind of welthines.

Pleasur And if you have welthines at your own will,
Then will I pleasure remain with you still.

Incli. You are both as constant as snow in the sun.
Which from snow to water through melting does run
But worldly wise men can not conceive that*
To honte for such myse they learn of the cat.

Lust. My Lady is amorous and full of favor.


Inclina. I may say to you she has an ill-favored savor.


Lust. What say thou?


Inclina. I say she is loving and of gentle behavior.


Treasur And so I will continue still be you sure.


Pleasur And I in like case while your life does endure,

Lust. Ah trust treasure, ah pleasant pleasure,
All wealth I possess now without measure,
And seeing that the same shall firmly remain,
To help me singe a song, will you take the pain.

Treasur Even with all my heart begin when ye will.


Incli. To it, and I will either help or stand still.
Singe this song. Am not I in blissed case
Treasure and pleasure to possess,
I would not wish no better place,
If I may still have welthines,
And to enjoy in perfect peace,
My lady lady.
My pleasant pleasure shall increase
My dear lady.
Helene may not compared be,
Nor Creseda that was so bright,
These can not stain the shine of thee
Nor yet Minerua of great might,
Thou passest Venus far away,
Lady lady,
Love thee I will both night and day
My dear lady.
My mouse my nobs and cony sweet
My hope and joy my whole delight,
Dame nature may fall at thy feet,
And may yield to thee her crown of right
I will thy body now embrace,
Lady, lady
And kiss thy sweet and pleasant face,
My dear lady.

Enter Gods visitation. Visita. I am Gods minister called Visitation,
Which diverse and many ways you may understand
Sometime I bring sickness, sometime perturbation,
Sometime trouble and misery throughout the land,
Sometime I signify gods wrath to be at hand,
Sometime a foreronner of destruction imminent,
But an exectuter of pain I am at this present,
Thou insipient fool that have followed thy lust,
Disdaining the doctrine declared by Sapience,
In treasure and pleasure has been thy trust,
Which you thoughtest should remain ever in thy presence
Thou never remembrest Thales his sentence,
Who wills men in all things to keep a measure,
Especially in love to incertaintie of treasure,
Even now I am come from visiting the Just,
Because God begins first with his elect,
But he is so associate and comforted with trust,
That no kind of impacience his soul can infecte,
Contentation in such sort his race does direct,
That he is contented with Gods operation,
Comfortably embracing me his visitation.
But now I am come to vex thee with pain,
Which make treasure thy castle and rock,
Thou shall know that both she and pleasure is vain,
And that the almighty thou can not mock,
Anguishe and grief into thee I do cast,
With pain in thy members continually,
Now thou have pain thy pleasure can not last,
But I will expelle him incontinently.

Lust. O cocks heart, what a pestilence is this,
Depart from me I say, hence gods Visitation,
Help, help, lady treasure thou gods of blis,
At thy hands let me have some consolation.

Treasur I will remain with you be out of doubt.


Incli. Will ye be packing you ill-favored lowte.


Visita. Presently in deed from him thou shall not go,
And why? because Gods will has not determined so.
But in time thou treasure shall be turned to ruste,
And as for pleasure he shall now attend on the Just.

Lust. Gogs wounds these panges increase ever more.


Inclina. And my littell finger is spitefully sore,
you will not believe how my hele does ache,

Treasur Nay let me alone your part I will take, to Visitatio^

Visita. Be of good comfort while I here remain. to Lust.
For pleasure and he shall be parted in twain,
It is not mete that he should be participate with lust
But rather with the virtuous godly and Just.

Lust. Remain with me still master pleasure I say.


Pleasur Nay there is no remedy I must away,
For where God does send punition and pain,
I pleasure in no case can not remain.

Visita. I could in like case separate thy treasure.
But God does admonish thee by losing thy pleasure.

Go out Visitation and Pleasure, Inclina* Fare well in the devils name old
lousy loute,
That my master will die I stand in great doubt,
Ho, ho, ho, how is it with you master Lust,

Lust. By the flesh of Goliath, yet Treasure is my trust,
Though pleasure be gone, and I live in pain,
I doubt not but Treasure will fetch him again.

Treasur Yea, that I will fear not and with you remain.


Inclina. The property of rich men undoubtedly he has,
Which think with money to pacify Gods wrath,
And health at their pleasure to bye and to sell,
How is it master Lust, are you any thing well.

Lust. Against this Visitation my heart does rebel,
Gogs wounds, shall I still in these panges remain.

Treasur Fear you not master Lust, I will help you again
Treasure in physic exceadeth Gallenus,
Tushe there is no physician but we shall have with us.
To the ease of your body they will you bring,
And therefore I pray you despair in nothing,
Put your trust always in me lady treasure,
And I will restore you again unto pleasure,
For I am the Gods that therein has power,
Which shall remain perfect unto the last hour.

Inclina. Yea, yea, master Lust, be as merry as you may,
Let Treasure be your trust who so ever say nay.

Enter time. Time. The ancient Greeks have called me Chronos*
Which in our vulgar tongue signifies time.
I am entered in presently for a certainly purpose,
Even to turn treasure to ruste and to slime,
And Lust which has long disdained the Just,
Ensuing his filthy and vile inclination,
Shall immediately be turned to duste,
To the example of all the whole congregation,
For time brings both these matters to pass,
As experience has taught in every age,
And you shall behold the same in this glass,
As a document both profitable and sage,
Both Lust and treasure come forth with speed
Into the shop of the most mighty God,
There shall you be beaten to powder in deed,
And for your abusion, feel his scourge and rod.

Incli. By saint Mary, then they have made a wise match,
I pretend therefore to leap over the hatche,
Nay let me depart, syrs stop me not I say,
For I must remain though both these decay.

Go out, Lust. Lust from the beginning frequented has been
And shall I now turn to nothing for thee.

Treasur Treasure in all ages has been beloved,
And shall she from the earth by thee be removed.

Time. You know that all such things are subject to time
Therefore me to withstand is no reason nor ryme,
For like as all things in time their beginning had,
So must all things in time vanishe and fade.

Lust. Gogs wounds, let Treasure remain still with me,

Treasur Yea let me continue still in my dignity.


Time. Nay, I must carry you into Vulcans fire,
Where you shall be tried unto the vttermoste,
Seeing Lust against Just did daily conspier,
To dust he shall turn for all his great boaste,
Both of you shall have one rigorous hoaste,
Come therefore with speed time can not tarry,
To the end of your felicity I will you carry.

Treasur If there be no remedy then there is no shifte,

Lust. He must needs go that is driven by the Devils drifte,
A cocks precious sides, what fortune is this,
Whether go I now, to misery or blis.

Go out. Enter Just, leading Inclination in his bridle shakled. Inclina We,
he, he, he, he, ware the horse heles I say,
I would the rain ware lose that I might run away.

Just. Nay fithe thou will not spare against me to rebel,
I will not spare by Gods grace thee to brydell,
All men may see how vile Inclination,
Spares not to put the Just to vexation,
Even so may all men learn of me again,
Thy beastly desiers to bridle and restrain*

Inclin. Mary sir I am bridled in deed as you say,
And shakled I think for running away,
This snafle is sharp indeed for the nones,
And these shakkels do chafe my legs to the bones,
And yet will I provoke spurn and prick,
Rebel repugne lashe out and kick,
We he, in the Iades name are ye so fresh,
This gere I suppose will pluck down your flesh.

Just. Nay soft, thou shall have a little more pain,
For somewhat shorter now I will tie thy rain.

Enter Trust and Consolation. Trust. Most blissed and happy I say are the
Just,
Even because they restrain their own Inclination,
Thou therefore that have made thy treasure of trust,
Behold, I have brought thee here consolation.

Just. Now blyssed be God of his mercy and grace,
With all my heart and soul I do you embrace.

Conso. Consolation is my name even as Trust has said,
Which is joy or comfort in this life transitory,
He that possesses me, is of nothing afraid,
But has a most quiet and peaciable memory,
For I through trust does show thee the glory,
That God has prepared for them before hand,
Wherein at the last they shall perfectly stand.

Trust. Receive this croune of felicity now at this space,
Which shall be made richer in the celestial place.

Incli. Byr lady, I would I had such a gaye croune.


Just. Now praised be God for this riches of renoune
Felicity in this world the Just do enjoy,
Namely when the Devil can them not anoye,
The Lords work this is, who be praised for ever,
who grant us in his laws still to persevere.

Conso. Amen, amen, God give us delighte,
In his holy covenant both day and night.

Trust. Our matter is almost brought to an end,
Saving that Inclination in prison must be shut,
Just carry him forth that uses to contend,
And see that surely enough he be put.

Just. That shall be done shortly by gods grace.


Inclina. What soft I say, me think ye go a shameful pace,
Was there ever poor colte thus handled before,
Fie upon it, my legs be onreasonablye sore,
Well yet I will rebel, yea, and rebel again,
And though a thousand times, you should me restrain.

Lead him out. Enter time with a similitude of dust, and rust, Time* Behold
here how Lust is converted to duste,
This is his Image, his wealth and prosperity,
And Treasure in like case is turned to ruste,
Whereof this example shows the verity.
The trial of Treasure this is no doubt,
Let all men take heed that trust in the same,
Considering what things I time bring about,
And quench out the ungodly their memory and fame.

Enter Just. Just. Why, and is Lust and treasure converted to this.


Time. yea forsothe.


Just. What foolish man in them would put trust,
If this be the final end of their bliss,
Much better I commend the life of the Just.

Conso. So it is no doubt, for they have consolation,
Possessing felicity even in this place,
I mean through Cruste and hope of salvation,
Which sets out unto us gods mercy and grace.

Trust. Let all men consider this good erudition,
And not to put confidence in Lust nor Treasure,
By these two examples receive admonition,
And also of the sudden vanishement of pleasure.

Time, Remember that time turns all things about*
Time is the touchestone the Just for to try,
But where as lust and treasur in time is come to naught
Just possessing Trust, remains constantly,
So that as I Time has revealed their infamy,
So have I showed the Consolation and gain,
That the Just shall receive that justly do reign.

Conso. We will now no longer trouble this audience,
Sithe some what tedious to you we have been,
Beseching you to bear all things with patience,
And remember the examples that you have seen,
God grant them to florishe lively and grene,
That some of us the better therefore may be.
Amen, Amen, I beseech the blyssed trinity.

Finis.

