A CHRISTIAN Memorandum, OR Advertisement wherein is handled the Doctrine of
Reproof. WHAT IT IS, HOW WE MVST Reprove, How necessary it is: With
Exhortations and Arguments moving us to the right performance of that duty, and
Reproof for neglecting Reproof. By RICHARD TRVMAN Mr of Arts and Minister of
Gods word at Dallington near Northampton.

EPHESIANS. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness but
rather reprove them.

OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield, Printer to the University, and are to be
sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Tygres Head by Henry Seal. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable William Lord Spencer Knight of the Bath, and Baron of
Wormeleighton, all outward happiness, with peace of conscience in this life,
and everlasting salvation in the World to come.
RIght Honorable It is a true and Ingenui pudotis est fateri per quo^
profece^^^us, and haec quasimere as authoris. Plin
ancient saying, It is the property of an honest and ingenuous mind, to
acknowledge by whom we have received profit, and this is as it were a reward
to the author. Now seeing books and writings are the greatest riches we have,
being the issue and offspring of our best studies and dearest endeauours; I
could not but present to you the first fruits of that tree whose plantation was
caused by your own hand; and the rather that I may give some poor pledge and
obuious testimony of my thankful commemoration and acknowledgement of such
favors as have bin on my part received from that noble personage who is now
gathered to his Fathers, as also for that favor and countenance which still I
receive from your self. I will not speak much of him whose own works have
given testimony enough to the world, and added as to your Honor, so to your
comfort: yet to free my self from the aspertion of Dixeris maledicta cuncta,
cum ingratum hominem d^^cris.
unthankfulness which is a sin of sins, and all the evils a man can
speak of, I must needs say something of him, for the constancy and fidelity of
whose love, I receive still daily comfort: least justly the world might say of
me according to that inscription which Scipio Africanus caused to be set upon
his Tomb when he had done many favors for Rome and afterward was banished by
them. Ingrata Patria, ne offa quidem mea habes. Val. Max.
Unthankful country that have not so much as my bones. Yea the world can
testify how profitable he has been to Church and Common wealth, who from a
loving and noble ambition took always pleasure and delight to be beneficial
to such as stood in need of him; and that not after the manner of our ignoble
benefactors in these days, who profess charity, in mean time the object
dies, and this is to set a dish of meat upon a dead man's grave; or else they
do good when they themselves are departed, which howsoever it may comfort the
living yet adds no joy to him that gave it being dead; good works being done
after death we carry the Lantern behind us, it may guide and comfort the
followers, but we see not what we do our selves: but good works done in our
life time, is to carry the Lantern before us, whereby we administer help to
others, and to our own comfort behold it our selves. It shall suffice to
speak but in general; for should I proceed to the commendation of his
particular virtues, I presume I should be answered as he that spent a long
Oration in praise of Hercules, Quis vituperauit? Who dispraiseth Hercules? Yet
I could not but break his box of spikenard wherein his good name was
enbalmed, that the perfume and swee^nesse thereof might somewhat impart itself
to the world, concluding my speech of him as Philip of Hipparchus, he died
seasonably Sibi mature ^^ mihi (...).
for himself but to me too soon: Let me therefore return unto you most
Noble Lord bearing the character and impresse of all his worthy parts, as
though they came by succession and inheritance, beseeching you to accept these
my poor labors, though they be nothing equivalent to that maine debt I owe
unto you. Your acceptance I crave especially because I know in this world and
Babel of distraction and confusion of divided minds no man can please all, but
some will presume to tax the whole world: but this shall be my comfort, that I
have ever found the best learned and ingenuous, the most modest and gentle
censurers of others: for which cause, I was moved and emboldened to shelter my
self under your religious and iuditious protection, which may be to me like
the buckler of Ajax, to shield me from the detraction of many. And as
Antimachus being forsaken of all his auditors, proceeded in reading his book,
because Plato was left, esteeming him to over value them all: so if many shall
disdain, and reject my labors, yet if it please you to approve and like them,
it shall administer comfort and encouragement to me: as for such as want both
learning and charity to judge aright, or to judge in love, I pass not, if they
use the freedom of their own native judgments, and I will resolve as in the
Tragedy, as I have little hope to obtain their favor so care I little for
their frown, envy may disdain, draw blood it cannot. Thus being as confident
of your favor, as I am certain of the inconstancy of the most, I leave you
and all yours to the blessed and prosperous protection of the Allmighty, and
remain

Your Lordshipps ever to command in the Lord Richard Truman.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, It was the saying of Solomon, the wisest Prince that ever
reigned. Withhold not good from them to Prove. 3. 23.
whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it; and them I
take to be the owners of any good, that stand in need of the same; few or none
there be, to whom direction may not be profitable in their demeanure, but to
some more then to others; therefore as the Almanacks of Prognosticators are
written especially for the climate wherein they dwell, so my publishing this
discourse is, chiefly for my own countries sake: for amongst the manifold
causes of the augmentation and increase of sin though it he not so seriously
advised and thought upon, yet doubtless the want of discountenancing and
rebuking sin, is one reason, why it flourishes so much in the most: and in
regard there is one kind of people, who offend by connivency and silence when
they see sin committed. I have endeavored to put some life and zeal into them,
by stirring them up to this duty: also beholding on the other side a strange
extreme, namely a generation of people too industrious and ingenuous in
reproving others, who are rough and tetricall spirits, that whosoever is not in
every point as precise as themselves, they account them as dogs and swine, men
of unclean and profane dispositions, unworthy any account or countenance; yet
these men for want of wisdom and discretion in their behavior, do more
mischief through a rash vnadvisednesse and want of government then they can
benefit by reprehensions; therefore I have performed the best I can, that Judge.
14. 14.
like Sampsons riddle, out of these devourers and Lions, I might bring forth
that which may be for meat and sweetness in the discovery of this point.
Wherein I have laid down 1. What it is to reprove sin. 2ly, How or after what
manner we must do it. 3ly, I have urged the duty it self by way of instruction
and reproof. 4ly, Is set down Arguments or Motives thereunto. Many there are
that have briefly discoursed upon this subject, and I must needs confess, my
poverty has constrained me to glean some bundles ofeares, which I have found
seattered here and there, in the fields of some of them. For which I hope no
wise and indicious reader will think the worse of my pains: for as the
spiders web is not to be esteemed the more because it is wouen out of her own
bowels; so neither is the honey of the Be the less set by, because it is sucked
from diverse flowers. But howsoever it find acceptance, I have adventured to
offer this poor mite of my penury, amongst the Talents, which others out of
their plenty have cast into the offerings of God; yea whilst many worthy and
learned men lay up their Talents in obscurity. I have rather chosen to put my
little to employment, for the benefit of others, then in a sullen disdain to
hord up much for myself. I confess my first studies upon this point, and this
impotent work, like the Cripple at the poole of Bethesda, had kept its own
couch till death, had not some Ioh. 5. 5.
Angel troubled the water, and put it in, to make it go abroad; and the
rather, because I knew my self unfit and unworthy to handle this point being
not so apt to give, or receive instruction as I should. Take this therefore, as
a token of what I desire, and shall strine to he, not what I am: if thou can
get any good by me, bless God, and I will follow thee so fast as I can. But
least I should make my writing like the City of Mindus, with a fair and large
gate, and the edifice but poor and little, I leave both it and thee to the
blessing of him, who alone gives increase of grace to all our good endeavors.

Thine in the Lord Richard Truman.

A CHRISTIAN Memorandum.
CHAP. 1.
THE Apostle St Paul writing to the Philippians, exhorts them so to carry
Phil. 2. 15.
themselves, that they should be blameless and harmless, the sons of God,
without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, amongst whom
says he, ye shine as lights in the world. Now as in that place the Apostle
would have the Philippians imitate those heavenly bodies in their light and
influence, so he stirs up the Ephesians to imitate their motion: and
therefore as the Planets carried about by the sway of the Heavens do
notwithstanding keep a proper course to themselves: so he admonishes all
christians, that though in common and natural courses, they cannot but be
carried by the sway of the world; yet he urges them to have a peculiar and
proper motion of grace and goodness, contrary to the course of worldlings, and
not to participate with the wicked in evil doing, but rather reprove their
evil manners. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful Ephesians. 5. 11,
works of darkness but reprove What it i^ to reprove.
them rather: Now from this place also we may briefly see the nature of
Dogeneres animos times arguit, Virg. Apparet virtus arguiturque malis O^id.
Ipsum peccan^^ verbis, opera vera luce vitae arguimus, ^^use in loc.
reproof, or what it is to reprove. The word (...), which commonly is
translated by the word arguite, Reprove, signifies properly to bring to light
or make manifest, as Calvin and other Expositors on that place observe. Now
that is done two ways, either by our words, or by our works, by an holy
contradiction in words, and by an heavenly contrariety of practice. So that to
reprove, is nothing else but to discover and lay open to our brethren their
faults, together with our own dislike of the same, that they may amend them.

CHAP. 2. How we must reprove.
Three things required in Reproof

THat this Christian duty may Three requisites in reproof.
be performed to the honor of God, and the good both of the reprouer and
reproved, there are three things very requisite and necessary, in all our
reprehensions. It is a common saying, every good Physician must have three
properties. An Eagles eye, a Ladies hand, and a Lions heart. Now these three
may serve as a fit Emblem, of three virtues, and sister graces, herein
required. Wisdom, Gentleness, and Courage.

First requisite is wisdom.

The first thing required in our reproof, First requisite wisdom. In wisdom
a precedent and present disposition.
is wisdom, and that requires a double qualification one precedent, before our
reproof, the other present in the action of our reproof it self: the
precedent condition stands likewise in two things, first in the knowledge of
the fault. Secondly, in Authority to reprove, before we take it upon us.

First precedent property of wisdom is knowledge.

If we will reprove in wisdom, First precedent property of wisdom is
knowledge of the fault.
then first we must be sure, we have knowledge of the fault committed, and
drive the nail in a sure place. It must be made manifest by the light, and
then we must reprove it, the fault must not be controuerted, Ephesians. 5. 13. Omnia
quae argu^ntur manifest antur ^ luce.
or litigious, upon suspicious surmises, and flying reports of others, for so
we may loose our labor and friend at once, but if we do mention a fault upon
presumptions and probabilities, from the reports of others then let our
reproof be Hypotheticall, that if the offense reported of be not true, then
they that told us may bear our shame; but the safest course will be to stop
our ears, and deny every odious report the entrance, and of a certainty to
know before we believe or reprehend. Thus the Lord himself advises us Thou
shall enquire and make search, and ask diligently, and behold if it Deuteronomy. ^3.
14.
be truth and the thing certain that such abominatio^ is wrought amongst you;
and then according to equity we may proceed to correction and reproof. Yea
when God was to deal with as spurious a people, as the earth did bear, the
sons and daughters of whoredom and uncleanness it self, namely the
Sodomites, the cry of whose sins pierced the heavens for vengeance, yet he
would not destroy them until he came down (as it were from heaven) and
perceived that the clamor Genesis 18. 20. 21
of their sins was just against them. Almighty God that knows all Omni
potens Dominus, omnia scient, cur ante probationem quasi dubitat, nisi vt
gravitatis nobis exemplum proponat, ne ^^la hominum ante praesumamus quam
propere. G^eg. ^^or. lib. 29 c. 23 Aequa iniquitas est and punire innocents
and non punire nocentes, Ber.
things, seems to doubt of some thing before proof be made, for what cause?
but to give us an example of gravity, not to be light of belief, or reproof,
in conceiving evil of others, before we see things plainly proved: and indeed
it is as great a sin, in this kind, to punish any man that is not guilty, as
not to reprove when we behold a fault worthy reprehension. But herein many men
do much mischief to themselves and others, who will take occasion upon any
suspicions and rumors, even from men of hostile and traiterous dispositions to
control^ and condemn others; or if they want an author for their aspertion,
then they broach adulterate and pestilent glosses, hammered only from the
forge of their own falsehood, yea many will reprove and speak ill of others
having no more, in truth, to speak against them, then the chief Priests and
Officers had to say against our Savior Christ unto Pilate, Ioh. 18. 30.
if he were not an evil doer, we would not have delivered him up unto thee.
Their bare acclamation and clamor must be ground enough, even to the
destruction and ruin of others, these are like unto the Lion, that sleeps
with his eyes open, they will seem to the world, as if they knew all things,
whereas indeed they see nothing at all, and this quality in many breeds nothing
else, but dissension and controversies, wars and rumors of war, in good
societies, and a well governed Commonweal, yea amongst many, it breaks the
very neck-bone of love and amity, which can never be set again. It is good
therefore for us not to let fly our bullet of reproof, in the face of any, but
against sin, which is perspicuous and evident; least mischief and dishonor
cause that headstrong and furious bullet, which we shot into the adverse
camp, to retort to the destruction of our selves; yea it is far better to
cover a fault when it is committed, then upon uncertainties to reprove it, or
to extend it when it is made known.

Second Antecedent required in wisdom, is Authority.

Secondly, wisdom requires that Second precedent property of wisdom is to
have authority. Public authority. This is (...) potestas authoritatis.
before we reprove, we should have authority thereunto, after the knowledge of
the fault. Now authority is either public or private, public authority is
from the word, and from the sword, and belong either to the Minister or
Magistrate, these as St Paul advises Titus, may speak exhort, Tit. 2 15.
and rebuke with all authority. Yea as the Lord says to Joshua, and Absolon to
his servants, they must Josh. 1. 9. 2. Sam. 13. 28.
be courageous and do it because God commandes them to strike sin. Private
authority pertains to every 2 Private authority.
christian in his several place to use this duty of love, governing himself
with cautious, and due considerations: but here we must know, that every man is
not bound to reprove, being but a private man, but when conueniencie does offer
it self; for we are bound to reprove, as to give alms, now we are not bound
in giving alms, always to seek out persons to whom we may give, because we
shall commonly find enough objects of pity without seeking for them, and then
if we administer comfort and help to those we meet, we have done our duties:
thus must we do in our reproof, it is a public debt we owe to all men, and
therefore if we be but private men, it is not required of us to enquire after,
and search out the faults of others, to reprehend them, but if we seasonably
reprove them as often as we meet with them, we have performed as much as God
requires at our hands. Indeed every man in his own family is a public man,
and may exercise his power, but a man has no peculiar charge over others,
without he sees a mild and friendly reproof may take place: as for him that
will take upon him to reprove he knows not whom, in an abrupt and unseemly
manner, performs he knows not what, and his action is strained, as if a
Justice of peace should look for as much authority in another country, as he
can challenge at home. The best reproof in this kind, is our dislike, and
resolution on the contrary, with Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord; or
with the Prophet David, I will not sit or Psalm. 26. 5. (...) impii^ non sedebo.
remain with the wicked; that at least, if we cannot better them, we may
keep our selves from infection. But here may be repoued many reprouets, and
men of dogged natures, yea not only so in themselves, but such as bring up
cu^res to their own hands, and send them fawning about, to smell out the
faults of others, that they themselves may follow sent the better. Foolish and
distempered brains they are, taking upon them, to reprove and correct their
betters, having neither authority nor calling to reprove, nor blessing and
benefit in conclusion, but rather disadvantage and damage themselves, by their
unadvised carriage. These may rightly be compared to the Pelican, that finding
a fire near her nest, and fearing least her young ones should be burnt, she
strives so much to blow it out, and to extinguish it with her wings, that at
length she burns her self and her young ones by her foolish pity: thus many
unadvisedly meddling with the sins of others prove so far from helping them,
that they rather fire their own wings, then quench the flame and heat of
sin in others. Therefore it is requisite, that he that will reprove, have a
commission and authority to countenance his action, for defect in this kind,
makes men contemned and resisted. The sons of Sceua seemed to take upon them
a matter of great charity and consequence, in casting out devils, in the name
of Jesus, but the devils knowing they had no authority, for any such action,
resisted them, leapt upon them Act. 19. 16.
and prevailed against them, so that they fled away naked and wounded. Thus
Vzza having no warrant for staying the tottering Arc lost his 1. Chr. 13. 9. 10
life for it. And thus men often times suffer as busibodies in other men's 1.
Pet. 4. 15.
matters. Better it is therefore to be silent till we have a calling to
reprove, and to take S. Paul's counsel, To study to be quiet, and to meddle 1.
These. 4. 11.
with our own business.

Present qualification of wisdom in reproof.

After we have searched into the Present Quallification of wisdom wherein it
consists.
knowledge of the fault of another, and our own authority to reprove him;
which are the two maine pillars, upon whom the foundation stands, it is very
necessary we look into the present qualification of wisdom: and that
consists in consideration of three circumstances. 1. the Person whom we
reprove. in 3 things.
2ly the Place where we reprove. 3ly the Time when we reprove. In the Person
we must consider, 1 his disposition by nature. 2ly Three things considerable in
the person we reprove.
what his offenses are, and thereafter temper our reproves. 3ly we must know,
what he is in place, and outward condition amongst men.

Frst we must consider of what In the person ^ consider his ^aturall temper.
temper and constitution he is of, whom we have to deal with, and so demean
our selves in our reproof; for all men are not to be handled alike, because
all are not qualified alike. Some are like Thorns (says a modern divine)
which being easily touched hurt not; but if hard and unwarily, they fetch blood
of the hands; others as Nettles, which if they be nicely handled sting and
prick, but if hardly and roughly they are pulled up without harm, therefore,
before we take any man in hand, we must know whether he be a Thorn or a
Nettle, whether he be of an harsh or mild disposition, for many we shall
find, that the more they are borne withal, the more outrageous they grow;
which being strictly handled, may be reformed and reclaimed whereas all the
fair means, and good words a man can use will no whit better them; others
there are of another mind, more stout hearted and manly, who in no hand will
be reclaimed by harsh courses and ill languages, but are like the Indian Lama,
a beast that will perform more for entreaty, then a multitude of stripes, and
a nod, or gentle admonition to the^, (as Solomon says of a wise man) will do
more good, then an hundred stripes upon the back of a fool. Prove. 17. 10.
With such kind of men we must deal, as a skillful Cook, in rosting his
meat, who that it may not burn, at first lays it a good way from the fite,
for a little fire and a small heat sooner opens the pores, and heats to the
bone, by reason of the little resistance; then if it were at first put near to
the fire, which by reason of that opposition and contrariety of qualities,
would shut the pores and so quickly burn the meat. Thus when we are to
reprove men of this quality, it is better to do it by little and little, least
an over violent reproof causes rather an opposition, then a capatious and
pliable yielding. It is not amiss to use both kinds, as wise soldiers
striving to win a City, who some times go forward with open and violent
batteries, and some times by prudent policy; according as they see the
condition of the state they oppose. Yea let us consider with S. Paul and know
whether we should come to them with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of
meekness, which must 1. Cor. 4. 21.
be done upon consideration of the nature and quality of the reproved.

Secondly, we must consider amongst 2ly his course of life.
men that have committed faults, worthy reproof, the general course of their
lives, whether they be less or greater offenders, and so temper our rebukes.
Thus Moses gives us an example, in reproving men of both conditions; when he
saw the Hebrew and the Egyptian fight, he presently drew his sword and slew
the Egyptian; but when he saw the two Hebrews contend, he said to him that
did the wrong, wherefore smitest thou thy fellow? Thus we must give every Exodus
2. 12. 13.
man his proper portion, not casting pearls to swine, nor yet giving the Mat.
7. 6.
true child a Serpent for a fish. First 1 How to handle weak christians. 1
Pet. 2. ^. 1 Cor. 3. 2.
some are newborn babes in Christ's Church, and must be fed with milk; yea
with the honey and the hony-combe of the Gospel of peace and mercy, least they
swallowing down ^he great morsells of misery from the Lamb of God, being not
able to digest them, together with them they cast up their good and wholesome
nourishment; and here we may quickly break the bruised Isa. 42 3.
reed, and quench the sma^ing flax: Jude 2^.
of these therefore we must have compassion 2. How to deal with men partly
reclaimed.
making a difference. Others there are in the second place, who are in part
reclaimed and have repented of their fault, or there are in them manifest
signs of speedy amendment, now here there is no place left for reproof, but
love must cover a multitude of sins: and indeed 1 Pet. 4. 8.
he that cannot wisely according to time and place digest and wink at small
faults, when there are true and strong probabilities of amendment, Qui nestit
dissimulare nescit impera^et
from the party offending, is unfit to be a reprouer; sufficient it is to such
men to have borne the shame and correction of their former iniquities, as S.
Paul speaks of the incestious person, whom he would have the Corinthians to
reprove 2 Cor. 2. 7. Condonate illi and consolamini illum: id est, ita nunc
est^te promp^^ ad ignoscendu^^, and consolandum sicut tunc suistis a^
obiurgandum and ^^^i^^dum. Anselm. in loc.
no more for his sin, least he should be swallowed up with overmuch
heaviness; but contrariwise he exhorts them to forgive him and comfort him,
and that with as much willingness and freedom, as first they were forward to
correct him and cast him out of the Church for his offense. But herein many are
exceedingly ouerseene who though they perceive some good alteration and change,
in the life or manners of a friend or brother, yet they do so ply him with
continual reprofes, that they rather hurt then help; and through too much
curiosity and strictness, spoil where they might seasonably better: these are
like to Apelles Prentice, who coveting to mend the nose marred the cheek: or
like the foolish Diar, who never Multi ^ratrum peccata antiqua and iam emendata
^^rigunt. Stella in Luc. cap. 17. v. 3. Nocentes punire supra meritum manifesta
iniquitas est, in quantum enim punitio excedit delictum, i^ tantum innocentia
punitur. 3ly How to reprove greater malefactors.
thinks his cloth black, till it be burnt, yea sometimes they rub upon an
old sore, which has been healed long ago, and so most unmercifully exceeding
in punishment the nature of the offense, with much injustice punish even
innocence itself, and for want of judgment in handling men of a good and
tractable nature, they never leave till they have brought a good beginning to
an evil end. Thirdly if they that sin be greater offenders, and such as
continue in sin daily and are more hardly reclaimed, then as S. Paul advises
Timothy. 2 Timothy 4. 2. reprove 2 Timothy 4. 2. (...).
rebuke; noting that if a bare reproof will not serve, then we may deal more
roughly with him: for good words and forbearance to such is like a too hasty
salucing and skinning over a sore, the fester whereof breaks out again with
more rage and danger: and as Thunder and lightening do more purify the air,
then the calmest Sunshine, so the terrors of the law, and a sharp censure do
more better men of this condition, then mild and pleasant speeches: here if
we deal with too much clemency, we do but only shake the sheaues of sin,
and lap the branches of iniquity, and leave the tree like that which Daniel
speaks of, with the stumpe Daniel 4. 15.
and roots in the ground, which in time will bring forth fruit again, it is
better to lay the Axe to the root of the tree, and to cut away all which God
has not planted, and if they will not be reclaimed by fair means to rebuke
them sharply that they may be sound in the faith, God has Tit. 1. 13.
made every man in this kind his brothers keeper, and a fisher of men,
therefore it behoues us to do like skillful fishers, who fish not for all
kind of fish after one manner; when they angle they are private and still,
least they fright away the fish: but when they set their nets to catch, then
they plunge and beat the rivers, and with a great clamor and noise they drive
fish by force into their nets: so when we come to catch some souls with the
hook of reproof, we must fish privately secretly and concealedly; also when
we fish to catch others we must do it magno strepitu, with many great
outcries and noises, that we may compel Luke 14 23.
them to come in, as Peter at one time fishing drove three thousand souls Act.
2. 41.
into his net: otherwise the want of a little labor may dash all our former
hope and future success; they therefore, they that go not through-stitch in
their reproves, and handle not greater malefactors with greater severity, may
do them some good for the present, but not to the saueing of their souls:
these deal like a faint hearted and faithless Physician, who by sparing of an
ounce or two of corrupt blood, which was better out then in, they leave that
behind that taints and infects the whole body again: It is better therefore
not to spare the offense of a man's person, then to suffer soul and body to be
destroyed by sin, at the day of judgment. Fourthly and lastly, if we see
that 4ly What persons are not to be reproved Prove. 17. 22.
those we reprove are incorrigible, and will not be bettered by reproof, but
harden their hearts against instruction: if they be the sons of Ely, 2. Sam.
2. 12.
the sons of Belial, past hope of amendment, if they be open and manifest
contemners of religion, scorning and hating to be reproved, as some there be,
whom a man can no sooner reduce from sin by reproof, then they may take a
Leuiathan in the maine Ocean with a net, then we may give them over as Christ
gave over the Scribes, Let the^ fulfill Mat. 23. 32.
the measure of their own wretched Revel. 22. 11. Pereat, perdat, prosundat.
choice: and he that is unjust let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy
let him be filthy still: for to instruct and admonish this perverse generation
of men, is but to cast pearls Mat. 7. 6.
before swine, who will trample them under their feet, and like dogs turn
again, and all to rent you, these men are like unto the milk of the Tygresse,
the more salt is thrown into it, the fresher it is, such whelps are they of
that monster, that the more reproof they have to season them, the fresher
their sins are in them: and we shall ever find that those that are bent
upon villainy, with a full intent and resolution, are made more violent by
dissuasion; as a strong stream being resisted by floodgates, will swell over
the banks and as he that casts a stone against a marble pillar, does not
break the marble, but in regard of the vehement repe^cussion brings danger
upon himself; thus he that reproves an Adamantine and hardened heart shall for
the seed that he has sown of wholesome reproof, in this unprofitable and
cursed ground, reap nothing for his pains, but the weeds and thorns of
mockes and reproaches. For a scorner loves not Prove. 15. 12.
one that reproves him. And he that reproves a scorner gets Prove. 9. 7.
himself shame, and he that rebukes a wicked man gets himself a blot:
better therefore is it to be silent, then to stir up Hornets about our ears,
and to thrust our hands into a waspes nest.

Thirdly and lastly, wisdom requires 3. Wisdom is to consider the outward
quality of him we reprove. 1. How to reprove infeririours.
that our reproof be ordered with an advised consideration of the outward
quality and condition of them we reprove, with a respect to their place and
age, as if they be our inferiors, especially such as any way have relation to
us, or dependency upon us, then we may do it with more freedom and
authority. If they be our equals, then not by 2. Equals. Par^^ p^rem non habet
imperium. Vt amica commonefactione facilius illi in v^am offic^^ reducantur.
Calv. in 1. Tim. c. 5. 3. Superiors.
an imperious command but by a loving and friendly commonition, and
advertisement, that we may bring them into the right way. But if they be our
superiors in place and age, or either ways, then we must carry our selves
with reverent and submisse exhortations, according to that of St Paul to
Timothy, Rebuke 1. Tim. 5. 1.
not an elder, but entreat him as a father, especially if he be a
Presbyteriall Elder and a Father in Gods Church, that reveals the mysteries
of God to his people, here must a singular care be taken in governing our
tongues in reproof and reprehension. But as it was the sin of Israel, so is
it of our times. This people are as they that rebuke the Priest: yea we shall
find Mechanickes Hos. 4 4.
and Rural Swine, that will make no more to reprove the life and doctrine of
the ministry, then they will do to correct a misshapen vesture, or to give
their horse the lash, when they are offended with him. But let them know that
if Cham was cursed for sporting at Noah's nakedness, and yet spoke the truth;
thrice cursed shall they be, that Genesis 9. 22.
without a cause, make ashamed their spiritual Fathers in the Lord. Therefore
if we desire to do good in this lovely office of reproof, let us consider the
person whom we reprove, and therein his natural temperature his course of
life, the quality of his offense, as also his outward condition, and
accordingly let us do as an expert Musician, who in setting an instrument in
tune, does sometimes wind up his strings, and sometimes let them down again:
so, as occasion serves, let us learn to be earnest and gentle in our
reproves, according to the rule of wisdom, and then may we expect a good
success to attend our endeauours.

The second general circumstance in wise reproof is the Place.

The second general circumstance 2 Place where we must reprove. Private
reproof for a private offense
to be considered in wise and discreet reproof, is the Place where we must
reprove. Now if it be a private offense, it must be privately handled,
according to our Saviors Mat. 18. 15. 16 etc.
direction. If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone: but if secret ^duertisements will not
prevail, then we may go to him more openly. But if he will not hear thee,
the^ take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of one or two witnesses
every word may be established; and if he shall neglect to hear them, then
we may relate it more publicly, and tell it to the Church. For as the Damsel
was raised Man 5 41. Luk 7. 14. Ioh. 11. 43.
up within the doors: the widows son without the gates: and Lazarus before a
great multitude of people: so we must handle some privately and in secret,
others more openly, and the third kind in public, as the incestuous person
was used. If we can do good with them by private 2. Cor. 2. 6.
instructions and corrections, then we need go no farther: if that will not
serve, we may* relate the matter before some others; if neither of these will
work with the patient we have in hand, then we may tell it to the Church, that
if the offenders will not be amended yet others Public reproof for public
offenders
may be preserved from contagion: This made St Paul name Alexander the
Copper-smith to Timothy, to the intent he might beware 2. Tim. 4. 15.
of him. John also nominateth Diotrephes for Christians to take heed 3. Ioh 9.
of him; but this was in a weighty and public matter, even for the
Qualification for a public reproof. Genesis 2. 23. Quia proximus duo bona
habes, famam sciticet and conscientiam quae duo serua^d^ sunt in qua^tum sieri
potest. Sed si po^eri^ curare conscientiam seruan^o famam teneris facere. Ideo
occulte corripiendus est. Sed si occulte monitus noluerit emendari, tunc quiae
conscientia est maius bonum quam ^ama, necesse est, fama periclitetur, vt
conscientia non pereas. Stella in Luc. cap. v. 3.
good of the whole Church, and this kind of reproof must not be used, but in
like cases; as for small and private offenses, or for men which fall of
infirmity, they must be used with all honest priuacie that may be: behauing our
selves like Noah's good soones, who when their Father had discovered his secrets
in time of his drunkenness, they turned their backs upon his shame, and
uttered not a word; which gives us to note, that the sins of other men we
must modestly hide, and silently conceal, with the best preservation we can of
the credit of the delinquent. But if we cannot preserve the soul and
conscience of a man without blemishing his credit, it is better to ^ndanger the
one, then that we suffer the other to perish; as one largely expresses that
caution. But in this case many are to be taxed of indiscretion, who deal with
their brethren as the Jews did with Christ who when they came to speak of his
miracles and great works, concealed his name, Hic homo, this fellow does many
miracles, but when Ioh. 11. 47.
they wrote the title of his fained crime on the tree, then they maliciously
published his name, not with hic homo, but Jesus of Nazaret King Ioh. 19. 19.
of the Jews, and in three famous tongues, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, written
in capital letters that all men might run and read it. There is a
generation of men who in praising the virtues of others are very sparing and
remiss, but in reproving a vice (though but supposed) they write infamy upon
their foreheads, with the pen of a Diamond, which cannot be blotted out. Thus
they cruelly rend the good name of their neighbors, and that sometimes in any
place or company, and oftentimes it falls out, that in places of mirth and
feasting, their greatest music is, to talk of the disorders and infirmities
of others, yea sometimes maliciously, before the company of such as with whom
the party offending desires to retain love and a good opinion; and this is a
most cruel and wicked hostility, for nature and grace do teach us, to
maintain the good names of one another, and though we should publicly
condemn a disorder, yet to spare the private person of any Parcere person is
dicere de vitiis. Pa^ cum hominibus, bellum cum vitiis, Aug.
man. Which rule if we rightly observe, we may confidently trust, that as our
passage in reproving is good and honest, so our end will prove effectual and
prosperous, to the comfort and reformation of him we reprove.

Third general circumstance i^ wise reproof is the Time.

The third general circumstance 3. The Time when we must reprove, and that
threefold 1. Timely. Nullum medicamentum sanat, nisi qu^d opportune a^bibetur.
in wise reproving is to take a due, and fit proportion of Time. As first, that
we reprove betimes. 2 That our reproof be seasonable. 3 That we continue in
reproving. First our reproof must be Timely, before the patient be past cure,
for no salve is saving being administered after a fit time, and as if there be a
fraction or dislocation in our bones or ioints, the sooner the Chirurgian takes
it in hand, the easier it is to be restored, so sin, which is the distortion
of the soul, the sooner it is reproved, the more easily it is amended; Saint
Jude compares sin to a fire, and Jude. 23.
therefore he would have sinners pulled out of the fire, or snatched out with
all have, before they be consumed; which must be done by a seasonable and
timely rebuke. But herein many fail, who never administer physic till the
patient be past cures nor cast on water till the house be burnt to the ground,
they suffer their friend or brother to live so long in sin, till he be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; Heb. 3. 13.
and herein many parents with Eli, 1. Sam. 2. 29.
put off reproof so long, that their children grow impudent in sin,
incorrigible, past amendment. This kind of reproof is like the warning which
the Porter gave to Cato who after he had stricken him on the ear wished him to
beware. Better is the timely stroke of reproof upon sin, then that sin
should unseasonably strike the soul to death.

Secondly the time must be seasonable.

Secondly, our Time must be seasonable, 2. Our time must be seasonable.
when the delinquent is most capable of reproof. First, not when a man is in
distress and perplexity, 1. Not to reprove in distress.
a troubled spirit is unwilling to hear rebuke, and we shall find reproof
like Honey, which though it be sweet and pleasant, yet if it be applied to
Vicers and ill affected members, it is very painful and troublesome.
Secondly, we must not reprove in time of excess and riot; and Not in time of
excess. Non cum morbus excess^ est, ^e sae^i^, (...) cum se re^^^tit. Sen^ 3.
de ^ra.
as Physicians forbid to apply medicines when the hot fit and paroxisme rages,
and to give it when the extremity slacketh; so must this physic of the soul
be applied at such times as the patient is aptest to receive it, and not in a
burning distemper. Here we must give place to wrath. Sin Romans 12. 19. Dam
furor in cursu est cur^^ti caede furori. Ov. ludg. 8. 5.
in these men must be overcome like the City of Ai by retiring from it for a
season, and not by too furious an onset. This course took wise and virtuous
Abigail, she would not tell Nabal of his drunkenness till he 1. Sam. 25. 36.
was awake from this wine, she knew that a distemper was no season for a man
to be bettered by reproof: she dealt with her husband, as one that has the
oversight of Bees, who dares not at all times touch his own Hiues, if the Bees
be angry and troubled. She saw how far he was wide of reason, and how she might
incur danger herself, therefore for that time she leaves him: least he should
like a mad man not only have rejected her Physic, but also strove to More
Pl^enetici non solum repellat, sed and mordere te^te^ medici manum. Ber.
bite the hand of the Physician, as a Father in another case much like this,
speaks. And therefore we read that Alexander killed Clitus his intimate and
familiar, because he reproved him of drunkenness, in the midst of his cups.
He that in these cases will follow truth too near the heels, it may happily
strike out his Ad penetendum properat, cito qui iudicat.
teeth. He that throws a stone thus rashly and unadvisedly into the air it
may fall down upon his own head. A man that will reprove men in such heats
and furies, is like unto a foolish shepherd, who seeing two furious R^m^^es
run together in full strength, thrusts himself between them, and so abides
the stroke of both. Or like unto the Be which in a testie peevishness,
stings another Plin. hist. not.
and loses at once her own strength and life. Thus he that in this case will
take upon him to reprove and correct the faults of others, had need take heed,
that he run not upon his own mischief and ruin; and whilst he thus bites
and devoures another, Gal 5. 15.
he be consumed of another himself. Therefore for our own safety, and for the
benefit of the reproved, let us be careful to make choice of such a time, when
his heart is most pliable to correction and discipline, and this will add
grace and comeliness to our reproof; For a word fitly spoken is like apples
of gold in pictures Prove. 25. 11. 12
of silver, as an earing of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise
reprouer to an obedient ear. And what can commend a man, or make him shine so
bright, as that which M Cleaver upon that place.
helps to remove away the rags of his corruption, and further him to
repentance that he may be cladde with righteousness.

Thirdly, Reproof must be continued.

Thirdly, the last circumstance of 3. Reproof must be continued. Gal. 6. 9.
time is, that our reproof be continued: In this case we must not be weary
of well doing. But as S. Paul advises us, we must reprove, rebuke, 2. Tim. 4.
2.
exhort with all long suffering. But herein is to be admired the strange
carriage and impatience of many, who having told men of their faults and often
reproved them for the same, they quickly grow weary of this Christian duty, and
in spleen and choler forsake those which God has not forsaken: whereas every
man should be grauid and in childbirth, for the new birth of his brother, and
herein a man must imitate a woman with child, whose time is at hand; and then
is possessed with fear and hope, and these two strive as the two twins in
Rebecca's womb her sorrow makes her careful, how Genesis 25. 22. 23
she should be delivered, but her hope stays her heart, first knowing that
her misery is common and incident to all women in her case. Secondly that she
is not likely to suffer her misery long. Thirdly because she hopes the end of
her pain will be the beginning of her joy. Thus must we be affected for the
new birth of our brethren, we must labor in sorrow, and (as S. Paul says) My
little children of whom I travel Gal. 4. 19.
in child birth: our patience must be much for those that are yet without, and
withal our sorrow must be mixed with hope, that though the new birth of grace
in our brethren, be like that of nature, lachriniosa, painful, yet let us
with patience expect their amendment, hoping that the conclusion may sweeten
all, and that the end of our ear may be the beginning of their cure. But if
any shall object and say, and yet perceive no alteration and change, which
makes me so weary, I can hold out no longer. I answer, take these motives, to
make thee patient Motives to make us continue in reproof. ^ Motive.
that it is not the ^enting the ears of any man, with sharp and bitter words,
that will do much good, but it is the continuance of wise reprehension that
gets the mastery: reproves are like the dropping Gutta ca^^tia^idem non v^,
sed sape ca^endo. Sic homo sit iustus, non v^, sed sape mo^^^do.
of water upon a stone, which makes not impression by force and violence, but
by continual dropping. A man commonly is not overwaighed with words of pounds
and Talents, mighty and dreadful speeches, these seildome make any penetration
in the heart of a sinner: but when in a mild and softly manner, we continue in
our reprehensions; when our words shall drop as rain, and our speeches distill
sweetly as dew, we shall make a hard and stony heart even to bend, break and
yield, and then a broken heart the Psalm. 51. 17. a Motive.
Lord will not despise. Secondly consider how hard a thing it is for a man to
be reclaimed from his natural corruptions; and that is intimated by the two
words which the holy tongue gives for man. The first shows his weakness by
creation, as (...)
made of the earth, the weakest and basest of the Elements: the second
expresses his weakness by the (...)
mortiferous and deadly sickness, his prevarication, and first fall brought
him unto. So that if we rightly consider it, we have more reason to wonder at
the infinite patience Qui miseram instabilem fragilem ac depravatam bominis
naturam considerant, illis magis mirum est, quod memor illius est Deus, quam
quod ille subinde peccat. Musc. in Gal.
of God, in suffering the sins of man: then to admire at his often
tra^sgressing the law of god. Every man before the time of his effectual
calling is like unto a chained prisoner, who is not able to go whether he
would, or to perform what he desires; yea, when the chains are taken from off
his legs, he will halt and complain a long time after, of his want of
agilitie and nimblenesse, to use his ioints. Thus, before our calling is it
with every man, no man can move hand or foot to the performance of any good
action: and when a man has shaken off the irons of sin, wherewith he was
holden and restrained, yet a long time after he will feel, and complain of
much want of strength, and be sensible of a great measure of lamenesse, and
stiffenesse in the ioints of his soul, occasioned by the bonds and chains of
sin. It is Romans 7. 15. 18. 24. 25.
storied of one of our own countrymen an Archbishop of Canterbury De Anselmo
in vita eius.
that being in his Peripateticall and walking studies in the fields, upon a
certain time cast his eye upon a shepherds boy, who having caught a bird,
tied a stone to the leg thereof, by which means the bird could no sooner mount
and soar aloft, but the stone drew her down again: whereupon the reverent
and learned man fell a weeping, and condoled the miserable estate of man by
nature; who could no sooner by Godly thoughts and contemplations endeavor to
asscend up into heaven, but his corruptions and concupiscences forthwith
enforced him to the earth again, the due consideration of which should move us
to patience and continuance in this duty, and withal know and resolve, that if
at length, by our wise and seasonable rebukes, we can win a soul to God,
that then our labor is well bestowed. Therefore in the third place, to
continue our reproof, 3. motive.
let us consider that man by nature is wonderful forgetful of good
instruction and reproof: now, we can never teach that thing too Nunquam nimis
dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur. Sen.
much, which a man can never sufficiently learn; no man can live so strictly
but he has continual need to be put in mind of his ill courses, for a man's
memory with Pharoas Genesis 40. 23.
Butler, will soon be turned into forgetfulness; especially in good
instructions, for therein it is like a sieue, which holds fast the course
brans, but lets the fine flower fall away. Therefore St Paul advises Timothy,
1 Timothy 4. 6.
Take heed unto thy doctrine, and continue in it, for in so doing thou shall
save thy self, and them that hear thee, and thus may I say to every reprouer,
take heed unto thy reproof, and continue in it; for in so doing, thou shall
get a good reward to thy soul, and save the soul of him thou reprouest.
Fourthly 4 motive.
and lastly, let ou^ apprehension be continued, because it is the command of
God that so we should do, and therefore when S. Peter asked our Savior, How
often shall my brother Mat. 18. 21. 22 Luke 17. 4.
sin against me and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus faith unto him, I
say not unto thee until seven times, but until seventy seven times, whereby
we are taught that if we cannot reform sinners, so soon as we would, yet we
must not give them over, but reprove quoties toties, as often as they shall
offend; and thus we ought to bear one another burden, that if it be
possible we may convert the sinners Gal. 6. 2.
to God: and every man that will wisely reprove must in conclusion open his
mouth with wisdom as Solomon Pro. 31. 26. (...) in sapientia vel sapienter.
Esa. 50. 4.
speaks of a good huswife, and speak a word in season, to him that is weary
and that word of reproof must needs be always seasonable, which with wisdom
is directed to the offender, so often as he does transgress, and therefore as
needful it is to continue (yea and far more necessary) then to begin a
reproof at first, seeing the conclusion of Pers^^trantia virtutum sola
cor^^atur.
every good act is that which crowns it.

CHAP. 3. The Second property of our reproof, is Gentleness.
THe second property wherewith every reproof must 2 Property in a reprouer.
be adorned is Gentleness and clemency, a sober, mild, loving and courteous
carriage. We must deal with malefactors as Lot behaved himself toward the
wicked Sodomites, who when they would have pulled down his house upon his
head, he reproved them with meekness, and by way of petition, I pray you
brethren do not so wickedly. Thus Joshua behaved himself Genesis 19. 7.
toward Achan, My son give I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and
make confession unto him, Josh. 7. 19.
and tell me now what thou have done, hide it not from me. Where we see his
speech was neither filled with tedious Battologies, nor with inuectiue
bitterness, but he reproved him August^. open tune, importune.
with as few and friendly words as clemency could invent, with a sparing and
friendly increpation, and yet his reprehension was fitly and powerfully spoken,
a pregnant and imitable example of a good temperature we have in Nathan with
his dealling with David, one prophet with another, he comes not Hem adulter,
homicida, latro, Aug. in e^ar. in Psalm. 51. 2 Samuel 16. 13. Psalm. 141 5. (...)
Perc^^ia^ me influs misericordia.
with railings and reuilings, out upon thee thou adulterer, thou murderer,
thou thief: not like a cursed and railing Shemei, but in a cool and gentle
temper he struck at his impostume, and let out the corrupt blood. And
therefore the prophet David prays unto the Lord, Let the righteous smite me
with leniti^ Nomen (...) commode resolui potest in aduerbium clement^^. Calvin.
in loc.
and gentleness, as the Hebrew text plainly declares, or gently and
modestly, as one observes upon that place. Now if David himself, a man
according to Gods own heart, does thus desire to be dealt withal, then
surely it is fit we should deal no worse one with another, for the better
persuasion to this kind of dealing, (let the malefactor be what he will,) we
must not reprove him with gall and bitterness, for Michaell the Archangell
contending Jude. 9.
with the devil himself, durst not bring against him a railing accusation,
but said, The Lord rebuke thee, yea so far should we be from the
intemperature of a cursed and bitter reprehension, that we should turn our
cholor into a Godly and christian compassion when we reprove a fault, and as a
merciful Surgeon being to cut his only son, handles him tenderly and
softly, and cutteth and weepeth, and weepeth and cutteth again; so our bowels
should be filled with compassion, at the correction and bettering of a
distempered soul.

In gentleness two requisites

Now in a beneuolous and courteous In gentle reproof two things tequisite.
reprehension two things are requisite. First a gentle instruction or
admonition to make way for reproof, 1 A mild admonition.
according to that of S. Paul. In meekensse instruct them that oppose; and
therefore he exhorteth-Timothie to conioyne reproof, rebuke 2 Timothy 4. ^.
and exhortation, and indeed if these be separated, we cannot have such
prosperous success as we expect; because instruction serves to encourage in
goodness, and reproof to restrain from sin, and those that reprove and
correct, and do it not with admonitions and instructions, are like to those
that are often snuffing the light, but forget to put oil into the Lamp, for
want of which it quickly goes out of it self. Therefore we must be profitable
(as S. Paul speaks of Scripture) to ^ Tim. 3. 16.
teach, to improve, to correct and instruct in righteousness, and undoubtedly
we shall find instruction make way for reproof, and win that audience which
an intemperate and preposterous anger cannot attain. They that reprove with
fury, are like to foolish Threshers, who ^euer tappe the corn in the sheafe
gently, but laying on with mighty and powerful strokes, they make the good
grain fly into every corner, and scatter that abroad which gentle and
leasurely labor might have preserved. Therefore let us begin gently with
friendly instructions, and when a man will endure this tapping, then strike
harder, or else we shall but loose our labor, for necessary is it that every
reprouer have the reproves of instruction; Prove. 6. 23. (...) increpationes
eruditionis.
which being possessed with an attractiue virtue, cannot but win audience and
respect, that correction or reprove may have the seasonable working.

Second requisite.

Secondly it is very necessary that in our reproves we mingle some 2 A wise
approbation of any good parts.
kind commendations of those good parts and virtues we see in the party
offending. Thus it is in the Poet, O Achilles, etc. As much as if he should
have said, what is become now of thy courage and valor, which filled the whole
world with thy honor and renown? How comes it to pass that thou art thus
retired, and have shamefully brought to infamy all those excellent parts and
valiant acts by thee peformed? Thus having awaked him out of his idleness and
security, he stirs him up to farther employment, and so (...) Per^^^a.
informs him how he may recover and get again his former honor, and thus
must we deal with men of worthy and noble parts, putting them in mind of
such virtues and graces they possess, and this will Usher reproof to come
before the face of the party offending; for man naturally is like unto wax,
which being cold is so hard; that it admits of no impression: but being once
hot, it becomes soft, and pliable to any impression at all. The mind of man
though it be naturally hard and vntractible, yet being made hot by courteous and
wise approbations, it becomes fit to receive the engrauement of correction and
reproof, and as when a shower has moistened the earth, then it is fittest to
pluck up weeds, and cast in good grain. So when loving and kind speeches
have mollified a man's heart, then he is fittest to have sin pulled out of his
soul, and to receive the good seed of wholesome reproof; for the memory of
former virtues cannot but touch the mind with a noble and feeling shame of
present faults. Therefore as those that give wormeseede for the worms, to
children, do sweeten it with somewhat that they may take the medicine more
willingly, or as those that give bitter pills to queasie stomacked patients,
do wrappe them up in some conserve to the intent they may take them without
offense. Thus let us make a prepatatiue to reprehension, with some loving
preamble of their deserved commendations which may make way for their
spiritual purgation; and be (as it were a bait) to hide the hook of
reprehension, to catch the souls of them we fish for. But alas too too many
there are, who deal harshly and barbarously in their carriages, and rather
hurt then do good to the reprouer, and all because the salve proves worse
then the fore. These kind of people are like unto those mentioned in the old
law, who striking with the axe to cut down the tree, the head slips from the
helue, and hits his neighbor and kills Deuteronomy. 19. 5.
him. Thus such as reprehend others too curstly, do make the head of the Axe
fly from the helue, and kill their brethren unadvisedly, and whereas with the
good husbandman they should but lap with the pruining knife, they hew down
Ioh. 15. 2.
with the axe of judgment, and such as these go about to amend the faults of
others (according to the old proverb) as the Devil did to set his dames
leg, for whereas he should have set it aright, he burst it quite asunder.
But may not a man King in thy own house and teritories, but take heed thou
prove not a Tyrant: least thou discourage those that are in subjection unto
thee; the bitterness of an enemy sticks close to any man; but the fury of
him to whom we have relation, wounds a good nature most of all: as when Casar
saw the hand of his son Brutus against him, then his heart was done, and
cry: out (...), what thou also my son Brutus? Thus the outrageous cruelty of
a friend, in bitter reproves, strikes with as strange amazement the heart of
him that is reproved. O but the faults of such a heart to feed a cursed curre a
spotted Beast, a wanton Ape, and a cruel Lion, but the simplicity, blemishes
and sins of thy dependents thou can not endure, nor them for their sins
sake. Be as wise as thou can to beat down sin, but take heed thou pronest
not unnatural. Be not thou like a Dragon in the Wilderness cruel to her
young; nor like the Ostrich, which forbearing sustenance ^am 43.
exposes her young ones to the wide world, as Moses Parents their Exodus 2. 3.
son to the waves of the river. Let not parents prove without natural 2 Timothy
3. 3. Genesis 49. 5.
affection, neither Let instruments of cruelty be in their habitation, as it is
said of Si^eon and Leui, and as they Sce^us est. Jason and magis Scelus Med^^.
ought not to be extreme to mark what is done amiss, so neither to reprove
what is amiss: but with all gentleness and compassion reprove such sins in
their children, as they have derived to them from themselves.

Three causes of bitter reproof. Three causes of hit ter reproof.


Now if any man shall demand a reason of me why many men deal thus curstly
with such as offend: I will give him three maine causes of such inhumanitie,
the first is vain glory, the second Loquacitie, and the third Envy.

In the first place we shall find 1 Cause vain glory.
that vain glory is a great cause of this unkind dealing, and stirs up men
to control the faults of others, out of a secret selfeloue to themselves. The
Pharisee looks upon the public faults of others, and with an indigne
condemning and undervaluing of others, strives for applause to his own person.
I am not Luke 18. 11. 12. No^ sum sicut cateri, non sicut ^^^e.
as other men are, etc. nor even as this Publican. Thus there are many men, who
from a triumphing and imperious insultation over the falls of others, yea from
peremptory and malignant forgeries and fancies of their own, proclaim the
faults of other men, who are seven times more just then themselves, thinking
that by the eclypsing the light of others, they shall make themselves shine
more bright in the eyes of the world. This is as if the Moon should rejoice at
the night and absence of the Son, and thereby go about to make the world
believe, that all light and influence proceeded from her self. But let the^
know that they that strive to build such a Babel of pride and vain glory upon
the ruins of other men's reputation, shall soon be brought to confusion for
their pains. And like Flies, whilst they strive to extinguish and put out the
light of others they shall torment and burn themselves in the flame. I could
wish this fault were not too common even amongst the sons of Levi themselves,
who strive like Absolon to 2. Sam. 15. 6.
steal away the hearts of the people, and that by discovering and aggravating
the faults of their fellow laborers, whereby they may win more renown to
themselves, amongst the common and vulgar people, and as the Apostle S. Paul
speaks They are puffed up rather then 1. Cor. 5. 2.
mourn for them that have done evil. And as a Cipher set after a figure,
makes it of more account and valuation, then if it stood by it self. So they
think they shall never be raised to the height of their ambitious minds, but
by the weakness of the like comparisons: thus the silly (...). Farn^by in Ep.
ante Trag. Sen.
Grasse-hopper and the Pismire in their generations prove most degenerate in
their own kinds. And they that are most unable of all to resist, become most
cruel enemies one to another, Discovering a great measure of hypocrisy to the
world and to God. For how can they believe, Ioh 5. 44.
when they seek glory one from another? And this is the first reason or cause,
why many men reprove others with such strictness and austerity, because by the
looking into their blemishes, and imperfections, they think more clearly to set
forth their own beauty and comeliness.

Cause the second. The second cause is loquacity.


The second cause proceeds from Loquacity and a looseness of speech, as when
men have small or no employment, they fall into discourse of the lives and
manners of others: these are like unto S. Paul's widows, they learn to be
idle, wandering about 1. Tim. 5. 13. (...), Non solum verbosae, sed and
curiosae, id est, invest^ga^te^ aliorum facta and negligentes sua, and
students aliquid semper audi^e. Anselm. in loc.
from house to house; and not only idle but tatlers also, and busybodies,
speaking things which they ought not. They are such as cast not an eye upon
their own faults, but are always discovering the sins of others, with
itching and Athenian ears. I may rightly compare these people in a
commonweal, to a loose tooth in a man's head, which is both troublesome and
vselesse. Or if you will, they are like Ants upon a molehill, which busy
themselves in a needless and unprofitable action: and indeed these are the
very confusion and incendiaries of a Christian world: all their labor is to
handle the sores of others; and they take as much delight in reproof, as the
Carter does in his whip, who is never well, but when he hears, the lash.
Their words burn in their minds, as an unthrifts money in his purse: and like
an arrow in a dogs side, they are never well till they are out. These may fitly
be resembled unto a cloud, which being possessed with hot exhalations, is so
weak that it cannot contain them: and so they break forth to the terror of
the world. Thus, this kind of people, through the weakness of their minds,
and imbecility of government can keep nothing that is in their heart, but like
Solomon's fool, they Prove. 29. 11.
utter all that is in their mind; though it be to the mischief and
destruction of them that live by the^, according to that of Solomon. An Prove.
11 9. (...) In o^e hypocrota corrump^^ sodalem suum. ^er. 12. 6.
Hypocrite with his mouth destroys his neighbor: yea oftentimes we shall
find that men of affinity, and near acquaintance, will much degenerate in
this kind. Ieremic complains of this treachery in his time; and so does the
Prophet David. It was not (says he) mine enemy that reproached me, then I
could have Ps. 55. v 12 13.
borne it* neither was it he that hated me that did magnify himself against
me, then I would have hid my face from him. But it was thou O man, mine equal,
my guide and mine acquaintance. And David in another place, compares such kind
of people to Bees, now a Be we know has honey in her mouth, and a sting in her
tail: we shall see them come to us with a supersiciall and outward show of
unfeigned love, with as great a complement, as if they would at once prostrate
their souls and bodies to our good and welfare. And the words of Ioab to Amasa
shall be at their tongues end, Quomodo vales? 2. Sam. 20. 9.
Art thou in health my brother? And yet mischief is in the heart; and they can
no more hold their tongues, the^ he his hands, though it be to the Psalm. 28. 3.
wounding and destruction of a man. Now the best way to deal with such
impostors is, to answer them as the sick Hen in the Fable answered the Cat,
who asking how she did, replied again, better if you were farther off from me:
better it is to want such friends, then to be betrayed by their pretended
friendship. Or at least it is good to put no trust in a friend, nor confidence
in a counselor: we live in the worst times, in the last part of
Nebuchadnezars Image, the feet whereof are constituted of iron and clay, the
last times of the world, wherein men are possessed with unnatural, iron and
stony hearts. So that they shall betray one another and hate one another. The
Mat. 24. 10,
father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father:
Luke 12 53.
the mother against the daughter, the daughter against the mother: the mother
in law against the daughter in law, and the daughter in law against the mother
in law. Now where there is this want of a good nature, there we shall find
the unfriendly looseness of treacherous tongues, which is abominated of God and
man: and though we find some, and the most, to have as long ears, as they
have wide Auriculas Mid^ quis non habet? Per. Sa^.
mouths; yet withal we may perceive, that such men are generally hated, and
as some love treason, yet all hate the traitor, so many will desire to hear
of the faults of others yet withal they will hate the condition of the
relator. Therefore we are advised not to declare other men's faults, neither to
friend nor foe, end if the sin appertain not unto thee, reveal it not, for
he will harken unto thee, and mark thee, and when he finds opportunity he
will hate thee: if thou have heard a word Eecl. 19. 8. 9. Eccl. 25. 10.
against thy neighbor let it die with thee: for as Solomon speaks, He that
covers a transgression keeps love but he that repeateth a matter seperateth
Prove. 17. 9.
very friends, and it is better with S. Paul, to study to be quiet, and to do
our own business. And when 1. These. 4. 11.
relations of others shall be told unto us, not to be like Malchus without
Ioh. 18. 10.
the right care, and only hear with a sinister and left ear, with a cruicall
and hypocritical ear. But let us ear as little to hear such aspertions, as
we will to hear the clock, when we care not for the hour: then shall we
obtain favor of God and man, and retain quietness and tranquillity in our
own souls.

Cause the third.

Now the last cause of this unkind The third cause is Envy.
and discourteous reproof, is Envy and Malice, which makes men like fiery
Salamanders, and raging Seas toward their neighbors: they reprove to bring
men into disgrace and ignominy: their end is not to heal the sore, but to
uncover the wound, and to leave an vnsighty scarre of discredit behind them:
and sometimes they draw at nothing but sound and solid flesh: and instead of
pulling out the more from their brothers eye, they pull out the eye it self;
or if by chance they do any good, with Beelzebub they cast out Devils through
the Prince of Devils. They behave themselves as if they had drank of Marah,
Massah and Meribah bitter waters, or as Exodus 15 23. Exodus 17. 7.
though they had filled themselves with the waters of strife, as Behemoth with
Jordan: yea they carry themselves with such a Cythian and barbarous austerity,
as if they were hewn out of Caucasus, and were nourished with the milk of
Tygres: that a man may as soon get water out of a flint, or oil out of a
stony rock, as mild and courteous words from their mouths. These are borne of
the cursed seed of Cham, delighting in nothing so much as to uncover the
nakedness of others: or rather Gen 9. 22.
indeed borne of the Devil him self, whose name is Diabolus, a defamer, as
the word in the Syriacke tongue, in S. Mathewes Gospel does import, expressed
by the word divulgator, a publisher of infamous reports; so that he which
lightly conceiues a reproach against his neighbor, either for giving it
himself, by misconstru^tion, or credulously receiving it upon the report of
others, is nothing else but a Devil in Syrtacke. And therefore S. 2. Tim 3 3.
(...) crim^natores.
Paul affirms, that in the last times there shall be men Devils false
accusers, evil and reproachful speakers. ^. Tim. 3. 11. (...), detra^entes.
And in another place he speaks of women devils in regard of their slanders
and detractions. Whereby he shows the near union betwixt a calumnious
reprouer and the Devil, for as the Devil by his accusations of man to God
strives to overthrowe all his happiness; so these men by slanderous aspertions
and accusations (being as powerful in them, as the blasts of Rams horns
before the walls of Ierico) Josh 6* ^^.
do strive to lay all the power and strength of other men's virtues level and
even with the ground at one utterance, and by their bitter reviling putrify
the sweet ointment of a man's good name. Yea the good Eccl. 10. 1. Eccl 7 1.
(...)
name of a man, which is better then precious ointment. Thus they prove most
malignant and vnluckey Planets to their neighbors where they live; so that a
man may with more safety play at the hole of an Aspe, and handle a Cockatrice,
then fall in to the hands of these men: whom I take to be the vncleanest
Leapers that ever sore ran upon, most worthily deserving the usage of
Paricides at Rome, who were sewd up in to a male of leather, and cast into the
Sea, so that neither water nor air, nor element of any other kind could once
approach unto them. Yea I say, they are most unworthy to live, move, or have
their beings. These are the sons of Cain and Abadon, yea a brutish spurious
and adulterate offspring, who^ the Prophet David reports to have no
faithfulness in their mouth, their inward part is very wickedness: their
throat Psalm. 5. 9.
is an open sepulcher, from whence comes this (...), rotten speech, ascending
from an internal putrefaction. The best way for us to reprove such reprouers,
is to say to them as Cato said to Lentulus when he had uttered his stomach in
his face. Lentulus they are deceived that think thou have no mouth. And Sen de
ira l 3. cap. 38.
with fair and gentle words to silence them if we can. For in this case
sometimes (as the old proverb is) it is good to please a knave: and to do to
him as Aeneas to Cerberus, who is reported to cast a sweet mor fell to that
Hell-hound, because he should not bark at him. Here it is good not to give
Quid pro quo, railing for railing, and rebuke for rebuke, to these cursing
Shimei's, and dead dogs, least the storm of reproach in an enemy, and the
waves of discontent in our own selves, do Aug. Sermon. 3. in fest. Epiph.
so toss the ship of our souls, that it dash upon a rock, and so be cast
away. Also when we our selves are to reprove any, let us do it with the At
pater vt gna^i, sic nos debemus amici, si quod sit vttium non fastidire, Hor.
greatest clemency we can invent, with a friendly, brotherly, and a fatherly
affection, free from a peevish and envious disdain; handling the sores of
others, as if they were our own, with as Christian and Apostolic compassion
as S. Paul did, who is weak, and I am not weak? Who 2. Cor. 11. 29.
is offended, and I burn not? bringing pity in our eyes and hearts, when we
chance to see the falls and infirmities of others. As our Savior Christ who in
compassion to Jerusalem is said to weep over it. Let us be like Vespasian who
would Luke 19. 41. Qui justice suppliciis illa chrim^^it etiam and jugemuit.
weep and groan at necessary executions of law. Yea let us imitate a wise and
merciful Chirurgian, who sets and restores a limme dislocated, to his
proper place, with as little pain as may be to the party. Let Tigers in the
forest be cruel toward their companions, let them bite and be bitten,
devour and be devoured of one another, let dogs grinne, and Unicorns push
with their horns; let Scythians and Canibals be cruel and eat the flesh of
men. Let Midianites and Philistines sheath their swords in the bowels Judge 7.
22.
of each other. Let them forget the love of the Lord, that the God of heaven
may forget his mercy toward them; let such reprobate minds carry to their
graves, and to that bottomless Abyss of hell and confusion, that mark and
character of everlasting reprobation, that the spirit of God has engraven upon
their brows and foreheads, that they are false accusing devils, and men of a
fierce and savage disposition: 2. Tim. 3. 3. (...).
but let every one of us that bears any part of G^ds heavenly image, who is
Father of mercy, and Isa. 9. 6. 2. Cor. 1. 3. Ephesians. 2. 4.
Prince of peace, and rich in mercy unto us, be like minded to others, and give
mercy for mercy, grace for grace patience and long suffering, with abundance of
brotherly kindness, doing all things in charity, and let us put on as the
elect of God, holy and 1. Cor. 16. 14. Ephesians. 4. 31. Col. 3. 12. 13.
beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long
suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another.

Three arguments to move us to clemency.
Now for the better stirring us up Three arguments to move us to gentleness.
to mercy and gentleness in our reproof, let us consider three things, First
let us search into the good

First Argument.

First let us consider with our 1 Argument is the virtue of the reproved.
selves, what good parts and virtues we can find in him that has offended,
and let those move us to cleme^cy, considering that there is no gold but has
some dross, and the best men have their faults. For as a modern divine says,
every one is once a fool, and does that perhaps in one fit of his folly, which
he shall have leisure to repent of, as Noah in one Genesis 9 21.
hours drunkenesse uncovered those secrets, which were hid six hundred years
before, the world is hereupon ready to call in question all his former
integrity, and to exclude him out of the hope of any further amendment. But
seeing God has given us two eyes, the one should be busied about the present
fault that we see, with a detesting commiseration, the other about the
commendable qualities of the offender: since the heart has no window made to
look into it by the Creator thereof, but is reserved under lock and key for
his own view: I had rather wrong my self by credulity, then others by unjust
censures and suspicions.

Second argument.

Secondly consider man's propensitie 2ly Man's propensitie to good words, and
contra.
to good words, and his indisposition to rough speeches; the mind of man is
naturally stubborn, and rather follows with willingness then will be led
by Natura contumax est, huminus anim^^ sequitur po^^us, quam ducitur. Sen. de
cle. lib. 1. cap. 24. Nullum animal est morotius homine, quodque art ma^^re
tractari debet. Sen. de clem. Tritum est illud: Generosu^ est hominus animus,
magis ducitur quam tra^itur.
harsh means, and a mind ouerweighed with the violence of passions, will
scarce admit the freedom of reproof which reason might warrant. For there is
no creature more waiward then man, nor which ought to be handled with more art,
and we shall find reproof like unto the Sun and the storm in the Fable;
if it be mild and comfortable, like the Sun Beams, it makes a man cast off
his cloak; but if it be turbulent and stormic, it causes him to wrap it more
close about him, a gentle and loving reproof makes a man cast away his
transgression, but Plus itaque proficit amica correptio, quam turbulenta
accusatio. Amb.
violent and tempestuous words cause him more to cleave to sin: for when a
sweet and lovely nature is wildly handled, it makes a man not only to hate and
detest the Satyr; but by accident, it possesses the mind, with a more fiery
and furious disposition, then that which comes by nature, and this kind of
usage, was a Remora or let to the Galathians, whereby they were rather provoked
and stirred up to hatred and envy, to snarling and biting Gal. 6. 1. Hinc antem
non emendabantur peccatoves. sed magis ad odia and inuidiam, and ad ^emo^dendum
prouocabantur. Musc. in loc.
at the reprouer, then to be bettered by reprehensions and reproof, and we
shall find it far better to use courteous and gentle persuasions, then to
enforce by bad language and ill terms; for a servile and violent constraint
exasperates free spirits, and like Sampsons foxes sets all on Judge 15 4. 5.
fire, and makes such as would be reclaimed with the violence of sweet and
seasonable words, even to cast away shame, and persevere in faults. Therefore
if ever we make account to benefit any by reprehensions, let us root out
these fibras, and roots of bitterness, and plant the herb Philantropos, or
Plin. h^st. not. lib. 24 cap. 19.
brotherly love in our hearts, then may we stay our minds with a good
persuasion to better the reproved.

Third argument.

Thirdly if the two former will 3 Argument is to consider our selves.
not persuade to mild and gentle reprehensions, then let us consider our own
weakness, calling to mind what we have been, what we are and what we may be.

First let us consider what we 1 What we have been.
were and have been. This St Paul would have Titus to put his auditors in mind
of, that they should speak evil of no man, that they should be no brawlers;
but gentle, Tit. 3. 2. 3.
showing all meekness unto all men, For (says he) we our selves were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceiving, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
we were once without Christ, and aliants from the commonwealth Ephesians. 2. 12.
of Israel, and were strangers from the covenant of promise, and had no hope,
and were without God in the world. Once likewise we were babes and weak in
grace, and in the heat of youth; and had much trouble and difficulty, in
encountering and passing the vanity of that age; and there was less
probability in us of that good we have, then in them we reprove, for which
cause we have no more reason, in a bitter reproof, to vaunt our selves over
our brethren, then the wall whereon the sun shines, (though it self base)
should contemn the marble wall, because it is in some obscure place where the
Sun is not so powerful: though in process of time it may receive more light
and influence from the sun then that does. Take we heed then, in our
reproof, we have respect to what we were at first ourselves, and what the
reproved may come to, for otherwise, if we have not a care, he shall be our
judge in conclusion, who at first was guilty Nobis erit index, qui ^^it ante
nobis reu^, ^d what we are.
to us, and to our reprehension.

Secondly let us weigh with our selves what we are for time present, namely so
weak as not able to stand one hour by our own strength and ability; but as
S. Paul says, By the grace of God I am that I am, and herein we shall find
more cause of bewailing 1 Cor. 15. 18. Qui seme^^^. sum a ^^cit, non quarit,
quid in al^^ frequenter reprehendat: sed in semetipso quid l^gea^^ter:
wailing our own sins, then ordinarily to control the faults of others, we
have more need to break open the steel gates of our own breasts, wherein our
sins lie hidden, then violently to rush into the coffers of other men's
infirmities: and to consider with our selves what sins we have of late
mortified, Quod malum ^odie sa^afli. Sen, de ira lib. 3.
before we strike our neighbor violently on the face, leas^ i^ be said to us
as Eliphaz to Ioh, Behold thou have Job. 4. 3.
taught many, and strengthened the weary hands: thy words have informed him
that was falling, and thou have vpheld the weak knees: but now it is come upon
thee, and thou art grieved, it touches thee and thou art troubled, and let us
say with St Paul and Barnabas, Sirs, Why do ye these things? We also are men
of Act. 14. 15.
like passions with you, for there is no man living that can say of himself as
our Savior Christ, Which of you Ioh. 8. 46.
conuinceth me of sin? But if there be any man, that in his own eyes seems
thus holy, let him cast the Ioh. 8. 7.
first stone at him that sins. How unnatural then do those deal, which
beholding so much the faults of others, forgette their own frailty and humane
nature. What? are Et quid sunt se^uer^ illi iudices? an non homines and ipsi.
Musc.
they not men as well as others? If they will be men and not beasts, how
unhuman are they, who thinking they can never sufficiently aggrauate the
sins of others, forget their own transgressions? or if they Puluere si
ledant scribunt, sed marmore lasi.
do remember them, write their own in the dust, and others in marble.

Thirdly and lastly, let us consider 3 What we may be.
what we our selves may fall into. Consider thy self least thou also be
tempted, this good use did a Father Gal. 6. 1.
make of another man's fall. He has fallen this day, and I not unlike to fall
to morrow. And in another place he advises us not in any case to judge Ille
hodie and ego eras. Ber. Ser. 2. de resu^ Dom. Non iudicos fratrem magis autem
excusa: excusa intentionem si opus non potes, puta ignoran^iam, puta
subr^ptionem, puta casum; Deoasi omnem omnino dissimulation ^^ rel certitude
recusat, suade nibilominus ipse tibi, and dicito apud teipsum, vehemeni fuit
nimis tentatio. Quid de me illa fecisset, si accepisset in me similiter
potestatem. Ber. ^^ Cant.
our brother, but rather, if we canue to excuse him any way; but if we can no
way excuse him, (as he largely advises) then he would have us consider what
such a temptation as our neighbors was, would have wrought upon us, if it had
had the like power against us. Thus let us when we chance to see other men's
infirmities, behold our own faults, as when we look into the apple of
another man's eye, we may discern our own eyes. But herein many may be taxed,
who never grow into consideration with themselves how they may be tempted; so
that sometimes it falls out, that for their unmercifulness to others, God
gives them over to the shame of the same sin themselves. Others there are
(and sometimes good men) who will strictly condemn that which themselves fall
into. Thus it was with David, who when Nathan the Prophet made relation unto
him of one that had taken away a poor man's lamb, David's anger was greatly
kindled against 2 Samuel 12. 5.
the man, and he said to Nathan, As the Lord lives the man that has done this
thing shall surely dye. But when Nathan said to him thou art the man, then he
was both ashamed and silent. Thus Judah hearing that Thamar had played the
harlot, presently cries out, bring her forth and let her be burnt, but when she
showed unto him, the Signets Genesis 28. 25. 2^
and Bracelets and the staff, as testimonies of his own abomination and
filthiness, then h^e could not but confess, that she whom he so rashly had
condemned, was more righteous then himself. Thus when men have heard relation
of the faults of others, and the odiousness of the same, they are ready on a
sudden, to condemn them to the greatest judgment they can think of; but when
the same impersections are laid to their own charge, then they grow more
remiss and merciful, yea good men I say, oftentimes spare themselves in great
offenses, whereas trifles in others shall have Summumius. Extreme right,
extreme wrong, and though some times like the moon they are full of blots and
imperfections, yet (according to the proverb) they will look beyond the
moon, and complain against the least moat they behold in the Sun, yea we
shall find the most wicked men that live, like barren rocks and mountains,
complain of a fruitful and fertile soil, because here and there springes up
a thistle and a weed, and the cause is, men are given more to see into the
faults of others, then their own. For every man (says Aesop) has a wallet
hanging upon his shoulders; the one half hanges upon our breast, and the other
half upon our back: the former is full of other men's faults, which we
continually behold: that part which is behind, and laden with our own
offenses, we never regard, nor cast an eye toward it, and by this means we
become unmerciful toward others, and too sparing to our selves. Therefore to
move us to pity and commiseration in our reproves to our brethren, let us
consider that either Aut sumus (...) vel poss^^^^ esse quod hic est.
we have been, are, or may be as bad as they that sin.

The third circumstance in the manner of reproving.

Now the third and last circumstance 3 Circumstance in the manner of reproving
is Courage.
to be considered in the manner of reproof is Courage and magnanimity; as
well as wisdom, and gentleness, we must have the Oar of love and the Oar of
fear to work in the delinquent, by the impartial Remum am^ris and remum
^imoris. Plut.
courage, of a wise reprouer* Herein we must be like the Be, which is not all
honey, it has a sting also, and our reproof must be tempered according to the
riddle of Fortiter s^a^is s^a^iter fortis. Judge. 14 14.
Sampson; both strong in sweetness, and seet in strength, otherwise we shall
find but little profit redownd to our labors, for although love and fair
means win and recall some: yet there are others that we must Jude. 23.
save with fear pulling them out of the fire, these must be handled roughly
(as Hagar was) for as all men sleep not alike, so neither are Prod^cero ^^^ra.
Pr^ducere verbera.
they to be wakened alike, to some we must give the breast, to others the
rod; otherwise by sparing we spill.

Our Courage must consist in two Two things to be considered in courage
things, Frst that we spare to reprove the person of no man, when we have
authority to reprove. Secondly that we let pass no sin in the party reproved.

First we must show our true zeal 1 Property of courage.
and courage in reproving whomsoever we see sin. Herein we are bound to say
as Nathan to David. Thou art the man, as Elias to Ahab, 2 Samuel 12 7. 1 Kings
18. 18. 2 Chr. 26. 18.
It is thou and thy fathers house that trouble Israel. Azaria rebuked vzziah.
It partaineth not to thee to burn incense. Asa reproved his mother. 1 King.
15. 13.
Yea we must reprove Father Luke 14 26.
and Mother, and wife, and children and brethren and sisters, be they never so
dear, or near unto us by the bonds of love or relation. Let us not do as
many pusillanimous and effeminate spirits, who dare adventure to check an
inferior, but to a man in power they dare not say as John Baptist to Herod, it
is not lawful for Mat. 14. 4.
thee, they will adventure perhaps to throw a stone at a Dog, but to look
but a Lion in the face they dare not. Some again will not stick to be
courageous in their reprehensions, but their rebuke shall fall rather upon
virtue then upon vice; Dat veniam cor^is ^^ra^ censura columbas lunen. s^t. 1
and so reprove where they should cherish and maintain, this is as mettell in
a blind horse, and does endanger both his own life, and the life of him who
should be his guide. It is necessary that our reproof should be settled upon a
right object, and then let it be in us as powder to the bullet, to offer
violence upon the face of any sinner, and like the flaming sword in the
Cherubims hand to keep him from forbidden fruit. Though a sinner swell with
pride and contempt, as Behemoth with Jordan; Job. 40. 23.
if he be Agag let him suffer as well as the poorest Amalakite. Let us not
stick to touch the hole of the Aspe; and to lay our hands upon the den of the
Cockatrice; then shall we show our true valor indeed, every coward dares set
his foot upon a poor silly worm, because it has no power to resist, but he
is the best man that dares encounter where greatest opposition is.

Secondly as we must know our 2 Property of true courage.
courage in sparing the person of no man, so likewise in sparing the sin of
no person, we must deal as Saint Paul with the Corinthians, who nominates
their sin to them. It is reported 1 Cor. 5. 1.
commonly that there is fornication amongst you: we must deal with our
friends as the Painter dealt with Alexander, who painted him out curiously, yet
with his scarre in his face, and Clitus that loved him best, condemned and
reproved his quaffing, (though for the manner he did it so unadvisedly as it
cost him his life). Thus must we spare no sin we see in others, but discover
and make it manifest: Imitating the skillful painter, who shadoweth a man in
all his parts, and gives every piece his just proportion: thus in our
reproof we must decipher out, and show every humor in the kind: and as the
Surgeon that makes the Anatomy, shows as well the muscles in the heel,
as the veins in the heart. So in our reproving, we must faithfully and fully
set down the faults of the party offending, that he may both see them and
shun them. Let us not be fearful to offend Mat. 10. 28.
men, whose breath is in his nostrills, but let us fear God, who is able to
cast both soul and body into hell fire, least (according to the old proverb)
whilst we fear the frost, we be overwhelmed with the snow for Qui time^^
p^^i^am, irruet super eos ^ix. Prove. 29. 25.
as Solomon says. The fear of man brings a snare, but who so puteth his
trust in the Lord, shall be safe. Here then are all such to be reproved who
want courage in this christian duty Especially Ministers and Magistrates who
have most authority to reprove. It is a shame to see a Minister stand like
Harpocrates the Egyptian God, with his fingers in his mouth when Babel is
building, and sin reaches up to the heavens. Shame it is that the Magistrate
should not be such a man, as Iethro Exodus 18. 21.
counseled Moses to make choice of; a man of courage, fearing God, and Romans
13. 4.
whereas he is styled Goas sword bearer, not to wear it for a show and for
naught, he does not execute wrath upon him that does evil, but lets all run
at Randum, which way it will. Or if he does any thing, there is no more life in
his actions then in a child that is still borne. Yea the Minister that should
fight with the sword of their spirit, and the Magistrate with the sword of
justice, both of the^ let the sword lie, as the sword of Goliath rusting behind
the Ephod: and like the Sword-fish, they 1. Sam. 21. 9.
have a sword but no heart; or like a cowardly Gallant, they carry a sword
about them, but dare not draw it, though their cause be never so good and
honest. Let me advise therefore both Minister and Magistrate to put on courage
as a garment upon them, and though they should be much opposed by sin and
sinful men, yet let them with the Horse neigh at the Trumpet, and with the
Leviathan laugh at the spear, and make difficulties whetstones to fortitude,
let them conioyne and unite their forces together, and say to one another as
Ioab to Abishai. If the Assyrians be too strong for me, then thou shall 1.
Chro. 19. 12.
help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will
help thee. Even so if an army of sinners shall affront either Magistrate or
Minister, let them conioine their power and courage, to the cutting down all
monstrous and prodigious outrages: then shall we see that sin will not so
abound amongst many, and the judgment of God shall be prevented from falling
down upon us all.

CHAP. 4. Instruction the first.
NOw in the third place, if the doctrine of reproof be so 1 Instruction is to
keep our selves from reproof.
necessary and profitable. This should teach us that lesson of S. Paul to keep
our selves blameless Phil. 2. 15.
and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked
and perverse nation, amongst whom we shine as lights in the world. And though
we cannot but converse with sinners, and be beholders of the sins of others,
yet let us have a care, that we be not infected with their evil manners. Let
us be like the bird Trochilus, that lives in the mouth of the Crocodile and is
not spoiled: like the Salamander that lies in the fire, and is not burnt, or
like fish that live and swim in the salt sea, and yet taste not of the Pisce^ in
sal^ ^^^i and alii, salem tamem non reserunt. Lips. constant: lib. 2. cap. 16 1
Ioh. 2. 20. 27.
salt. And the rather because as Saint John says, we have received the
unction of the spirit, now oil though it be powered into other liquors, yet it
swimmes on the top, and keeps it self unmixed. So though we cannot but mix
our selves with the world in natural actions, yet in spiritual affairs let us
strive always to swim aloft, least the wicked ones of this world (like
cursed Cham) behold our nakedness, and sport themselves at our shame: for Genesis
9. 22.
we shall find them to make a small fault in a professor to exceed in
wickedness the greatest of their own. And so that sin which was not taken
notice of before a man's conversion, will prove a great disgrace and ignominy
to him, in time of his good conversation. For as when a comely and delectable
picture and portraiture be cut or drawn out, it mattereth not much how uneven
and knotty the board be, whereupon it is to be drawn; but when once the picture
is finished and brought to perfection, then the least knot or blemish will
seem a great deformity and disgrace to the picture. In like manner, though it
be not of so great importance and observation, our follies and errors
committed in the old man: yet seeing God has wrought the sacred impression of
his holy spirit in out hearts, if we walk inordinately now, and not according
to the law of God, the lesser blemishes and imperfections of our souls will
prove more disgraceful and odious in the eyes of the world, in regard we have
the confused Chaos of nature in us, transformed according to the image of God.
But to keep me to my matter in hand; the best and safest way to keep us both
from the sins of others, and from the aspertion of the world, will be to
have nothing to do with the men nor their manners: but rather to take the
counsel of Solomon, Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the
way Prove. 4. 14.
of evil men. I might lay down many reasons why we should neither walk, nor
stand, not sit with wicked Psalm. 1. 1.
men. But these few arguments may move us.

First such as we commonly and frequently have society with, such 1 Argument
to dissuade us from ill company.
commonly we are our selves: therefore ordinarily to associate with wicked men,
is a sign of a wicked disposition. And therefore the Lacedaemonians that they
might the better understand the quality and condition of their children, were
wont to enquire what companions they linked themselves withal. And this use of
company and acquaintance did Augustus make, who being at Suetonius.
a Combat, where there was a great company of people, amongst the rest, his
two daughters Iulia and Livia were present; who thereupon took occasion to
mark what company resorted to them, to court and salute them: and seeing that
grave Senators talked with Livia, and loose Dulce quidem dulci se adiunxit,
ama^^que amaris.
striplings, and riotous persons with Iulia: he thereupon knew the conditions
and inclinations of his daughters. Thus may we take it for granted, that so
long as a man does commonly and frequently with a full consent Qui aequo animo
malis immiscetur, malus est.
of mind haunt the company of wicked men, that he is such a one himself.
Therefore let us resolve with David, not to sit with vain Psalm. 26.^.
persons, nor to abide with dissemblers. Neither let us be partakers with
them; for though we were some times darkness, yet now we are light Ephesians. 5. 7.
8.
in the Lord: let us therefore walk as children of the light.

Secondly keeping company with 2 Argument to dissuade us from ill company.
wicked men, does not only give a man his denomination: but likewise it does
by a secret infusion of sin, wonderfully infect the soul of man. And he
that associateth with evil men must needs learn their ways. Prove. 22. 25.
Sin amongst men is like the rot amongst sheep, its catching and infectious.
If we sleep with dogs we shall be sure to swarm with fleas, if we fly
with Ostridges and Pelicans we cannot but have a tincture of their wild
nature, and like Jacobs sheep, we shall conceive Genesis 30. 38. 39
and bring forth according to the objects set before us, yea though before we
go into wicked company, we may resolve not to partake of their sins; yet the
best men shall find it as impossible to frequent ordinarily evil company, and
to return from them as good as when they went in, as for sheep to live
amongst briars and thorns, and not to leave some of their woll behind them,
for the best men are like wax, as apt to receive the impression of sin, as
that of grace, and as those that go into the Sun become Sun burnt, though
they go not for that intent. So they that go into wicked society, become
Prove. 13. 20. (...), ^edantu^ (...) mult^^^ corpori^^s ^^ natione (...)* O^^d.
worse then they were, even whilst they think not of it, even as sore eyes
do infect the sound, whilst we expect no mischief at all. But some man may
say, I may do good David thou Psalm 39 1^.
must refrain thy tongue from good speech whilst the wicked are in presence,
for ungodly men will keep others from godliness, as the dead Genesis 8 7.
carkases did the Raven from Noah's Arc, and as the Loadstone cannot draw iron,
if the Diamond ly by it: so neither can the soul of a christian be
tractable to goodness when ill company are present. Let us not think to
imitate the Grafter who ioynes good fruit to a Crab-tree. Nor to be like the
Be the sweetness of whose nature, makes things of another nature sweet. Let
us not think the life of grace in us, will make them alive to goodness, but
rather they being dead in sin, may kill our virtues. It is written of
Mezentius the Tyrant, that he joined Corpora corporibus i^^gebat mortua viuis.
dead bodies with the living, but the dead did not revive by the living, but
the living putrified by the dead. Therefore seeing evil company is so
dangerous and infectious, let us do like the Swallows who durst not come
within Thebes because the walls were so often beseiged: Let us not put on
wings to fly into such company, whose manners prove continual enemies to our
souls, but when we have to do any thing with them, or by them, let us do as
the Egyptian dogs at the river Nilus for fear of the Crocodile who lap and
run, not making any stay by them least they should be devoured. In like
manner let us be chary how we come into the company of wicked men, least
whilst we intend to reprove and better them, we our selves are reproved and
made worse.

And we are bound in duty not only to keep our selves out of the company of
evil men, and from their infection; but likewise as occasion serves, to
condemn and reprove their wicked behauiours; and as every Be has a sting to
rouse up the Drone, and if any be nastie and unwholesome, to make them mundifie
and cleanse themselves: So every Christian must have a tongue to raise up the
sluggard, from his sin, for as Solomon says The words of Eccl. 1^, 11.
the wise are as goades and pricks in the side of the sluggard, therefore let
the father deal with his children, the master with his servants, and one
friend faithfully with another. But some man may object and say, I Solomon. He
that rebukes a man, afterward shall find Prove. 28. 23.
more favor, then he that flattereth with the tongue, besides if we should
loose a friend by our wise and holy rebukes, we shall be sure to find a
friend of God, and howsoever it shall fall out that the reproved shall not take
it in as good part, as it is given, yet it is better for us and him, that we
should suffer his anger and displeasure, then his sin and destruction. Or if
we can do him no good by our rebukes, yet we must reprove him: and indeed
God requires not at our hands the cure of the party we deal with, that must
be wrought by his own hand and mercy; only we are commanded to have a care
over one another: Christ like the good Samarit Luke 10. 33. 34.
an, requires the seeing to the man, he himself will pay for his cost, and
heal his person. Therefore let every man resolve with that Heathen Divine. I
dare make so bold, as to Audeo pec^anti mala^u^ oftendere, vitia eius si non
^xcidere, inhibebo Sen.
tell a transgressour of his faults, if I cut not away his vices, I will
notwithstanding inhibite them. And that our reproves may the better take
impression in the hearts of the reproved it is very requisite that we keep
our selves vnsported of such sins as we gainsay in others, by which means
we shall be sure to convince the conscience of the sinner, of the error of
his actions, which we by an holy and heavenly contrariety do contrary, and
indeed this is the best reproof of all, when by a contrariety of carriage we
make manifest the sins of others, reforming our selves first, and then
endeavoring the good of others, Charitas enim ordinata esse debet, vt homo
prius curam sui ^phus habeat, ^einde proximi. Stella.
and this is it which God requires of every reproouer. But alas this course
is contrary to the carriage of many, who practice themselves in the reformation
of others, but seldom look home to their own ways: these are like unto some
of the Galathians, who would needs Qui cateris praestantiores videri velehant
cum ^ssent and ipsi carnales, magna seueritate mordebant ac damnabant eos qui
per infirmitatem delinquebans Musc. in G^s. 6. 1.
seem better then others, who being themselves carnal would with much
severity condemn those which fell merely of infirmity, these men have eyes
with double balls to see with, and stand out of the head, nearer to other men
then to themselves, staring at faults committed abroad, but blind as beetles
to behold their own corruptions: O mayor tandem parcas insane minori Horat.
lib. 2. Sat. 3.
and so they reprove the smaller offenses of others with greater of their own,
and thus according to the Proverb vice corrects sin. Iratos irati ipst
^biurgamu^. Plut.
These men are like unto the Ibis, a great bird in the city of Alexandria in
Egypt, which was kept only to devour the garbage and offall, and to cleanse
the streets, but she left of her own filth and beastliness, more noisome
behind her, Mala men's malu^ animus.
thus many will control the faylings of others, with greater impurity and
impiety of their own, these men seldom do good, but rather hurt to them
they reprove, they do as it were put their durtie fingers to wipe out the moat
they behold in the eye of their brother, which rather causes the eye to
perish, then helps the sight. Therefore I will strive first to cast out the
beam out of mine own eye, that thereby I may more clearly see to cast the
mo^te out of my brothers eye: I will first learn to have and forsake mine own
sin; before I sharply reprove it in another; least that speech of our
Savior, be applied to me as to the Pharisee, Thou hypocrite first Mat. 7. 5.
Luke 6. 41.
cast out, etc.

Instruction the second.

This also in the second place may advise us to bear the word of exhortation 2
Instruction to suffer reproof. Heb. 13. 22.
and reproof, and to endure a memorandum for our miscarriages, and if a friend
shall strike us on the one cheek with reprehension let us be so far from
resisting, that we rather turn to him the other cheek Mat 9 39.
also. It was the wisdom of the Prophet to submit himself to the check of
Nathan, and to yield his neck (as it were) to the block for his iniquity: he
served not Nathan as Ahab 2 Samuel 12. 13.
served Eliah, who held him for the Da^^s of the land and troubler of Israel,
because he told him of his 1 King. 18. 17.
sins: neither used him as Jeroboam did the Prophet of Judah, cause his
servant to lay hold on him: neither tells him he is a Prophet as well as
himself, and therefore Medice cura teipsum. Physician heal thy self; Luke 4.
23.
but he quietly submits himself under the censure of the Prophet, and the rod
of God, to do what he would with him. Thus ought we to behave our selves when
we are reproved: not with wicked and gainsaying Spirits, be more outrageous
when we are told of our faults; but rather take occasion thereby to further our
selves in goodness: and though in part we be in the right way, yet let
instruction and reproof be unto us, as the wind to a ship, rather make us go
faster though we have already the tide. Let us think our selves more bound to
a faithful friend, that wisely reproues our faults, then to all the adulterous
flatteries, and Sirens songs, of such as shall sooth us up in our iniquities;
knowing that the corrosiue which heals with pain, is better the^ the sting
of the Serpent that kills with pleasure. And as Solomon says. It is better
to hear the rebuke of the wise, then for a man to hear the song Eccl. 7. 5.
of fools. Yea open rebuke is better Prove. 27. 5. 6.
then secret love, and faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of
an enemy are deceitful. And indeed there is more hope of good, in that man
that will take well the corrections of a faithful friend, then of him who will
swallow down the sugered words of a perfidious Parasite; who only lays
healing plasters to the sore, to skin it aloft, when there is more need of
corrasiues to eat out the dead flesh that is within; thus whilst their speeches
are fair like Iezabel under painting, and their 2. King. 9. 30.
mouths seem to be full of Nectar, yet the gall of bitterness is in their
hearts, and they are deceitful in all their ways. Therefore when our friend
shall tell us of our faults, yea though he do it with the more sharpness,
yet let us freely and willingly bear the same, though hec burn our sore, or
lance our wound, Medicum and vrentem and secantem diligam^^, Amor.
yet let us undergo it with patience in our selves, and love to the Physician
of our souls. Let us strive to compose our minds to a good docility and
morigerous tolleration, that no wise obiurgation and chiding prove bitter to
us, but those corrections which breath humanity and clemency, and arise from a
placid and beneuolous mind, let us receive them lovingly and bear them
patiently, resolving with the Prophet David. Let the righteom smite me Ps.
141. 5.
it shall be kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil,
which shall not break my head. But he harken to his reprehensions? I answer,
though he should fail in Jason to the heart, by accident opened his impostume
and saved his life. Or as Achilles, who when he wounded Vna eademque manus
vulnus opemque tulit.
Telephus, with the rust of that spear which should have killed him, he was
cured. Thus let us strive to co^vert the mischievous end and intent of an
envious reprouer, to the good and conversion of our own souls. And make the
malicious aspertions of our enemies to be as thorns and briers in our way to
keep us from the forbidden pastures of iniquity and transgression. But some
man may further object and say, he that that cannot govern himself? I
answer this is a foolish and simple pretense Physician is sick of the same
disease; how simple is that man that will refuse the physic of him that cannot
cure himself? Would not the Lord have been angry with Noah, if he had
wilfully Genesis 6. 14.
rejected his own safety in the Arc, because the men that built it were
drowned themselves? And shall we reject the good aduices and reproofs of a
friend, or the minister of Gods word, because his life is not so good as he
desires it and thine? But know thou this whosoever thou art, that though his
life be never so bad, if his reprehensions be not followed, they will be of
sufficient power, to condemn thee at the day of Christ, though he that
reptoues thee stancheth not the issue of his own corruption.

Reproof the first.

Here then are to be reproved all 1 Reproof to such as will not suffer rebuke.
such as will not bear a reprehension upon faults committed, but delight
altogether in fair words and flatteries, they make reproof the only
choake-peare they can take, though it be never so seasonable and just, they are
rather exasperated against the reprouer, then amended by reproof, these are
like a Canon that is over charged, when the match is put to it; which will
either recoile or burst, so that it proves dangerous to the Gunner, if it cost
him not his life: so that a man may say to them as St Paul said to the
Galathians. Am I therefore become your enemy, Gal. 4. 16.
because I tell you the truth? and when we shall come to cast out Legions of
foul spirits out of their hearts, they will reply, what have we to do with
thee, Jesus th^^ son of the most high Mat. 5. 7.
God? yea let the reprouer be Magistrate or Minister, they will object malice
as Ahab; or pride and ambition, as Corah and his company, ye take too much
upon you. Or as Number. 16. 3. Exodus 2. 14. Act. 7. 27.
one of the Hebrews to Moses, who made thee a Judge? Some go farther with
Ahab to imprison. And some with Herod, could find in their hearts to cut off
John Baptists head, Mar. 6. 27.
and take away their lives. Yea most men we shall find like Marcus Antonius
wife, who would have worn Tullies tongue in her hat, because he reproved the
faults of her husband. These are like the Horse and Mule, Psalm. 32 9.
without understanding, let a man feed them all his life time, and no
resistance is made, but when their keeper comes to let them blood, to drench
them, or meddle with their sores (having no reason to apprehend their own
good) they strive to mischief him, that only aims at their health; and some
horses there are again, which being traveling, if they be spurred, they fling
about them rather then mend their p^ce. Thus we shall find many behave
themselves, when they are reproved, tell them of their faults, and strive to
restore them from the distemper of their souls, and they will inhumanely
resist, and brutishly oppose those good motions and exhortations, which tend to
the good of their souls. For as Solomon says. He that hates reproof is
brutish. And correction is grievous to him that forsakes Prove. 12. 1. Prove.
15. 10.
thy way. These men deal with them that correct their faults, and show them
their imperfections, as the Ape with the looking-glass, who beholding therein
his ill-favored face and feature, strives by all means to break the glass
wherein he sees himself. A faithful and wise reprouer is like a looking
glass wherein a man may see his spiritual faults and blemishes, a disobedient
and stubborn heart is like unto the ^^pe, who strives not to mend his faults,
but labors to break the glass, that is, to mischief him that lays his
faults open before his face, and this perverseness of mind sends many souls
to hell, For he that hates reproof shall dye. How many Prove. 29. 1.
then shall shake hands with death and destruction, who being great in place,
and estate, are like unto Mount Sinai, which may not be touched; Psalm. 125. 1.
but he that tells them plainly of their faults, is counted presumptuous; he
that calls a waterish swelling the dropsy, or an angry humor the Gout, is
thought now a days unmannerly, as though men were born to feed the humors of
great ones: in reproving men of inferior rank we shall find reprehension
like the flaying of a beast, the skin goes from the body with much ease, and
little labor; but when we handle great men, we shall find reproof stick
at the head, and from thence the skin of sin, as of a beast will hardly be
drawn. And this is the reason why great men are Venison in heaven, a rare dish
seldom seen.

The second Reproof.

Here I may also che^^e another generation of people, who if they look to
their own carriages, they respect not how others demean themselves. But are
ready to say with Cain, Am I my brothers keeper? Genesis 4* 9.
And what have I to do with him? Let him look to himself if he will. Whereas
S. Paul wishes us to consider or observe one another. And Heb. 10. 24. Phil 2.
4. Id est, ea quae pertinent ad vtilitatem a^^r^. A^^elm. in loc.
to look not every man to his own things, but every man also on the things of
others; so far forth as they concern the good and benefit of our brother.
And so it falls out often times, that we are more beholding to our foes and
enemies, then to our friends and kindred, who pretend much love to our persons,
but are too sparing to our sins; with them they will have nothing to do, or
if they have, it shall be rather to make and maintain a vice to be a virtue;
like the Fox in Aesops Fables, who said the Crow was a fair bird, and had a
pleasant note. Yea this want of reproof may be condemned much in Magistrates
and Ministers themselves, especially if they should exercise this good office
upon such as have relation to them, or they that are any way a gain and profit
to them; they can peradventure handle zealously the faults of inferiors, or it
may be the inferior faults of great ones; but if they should light upon that
sin which chiefly lives and reigns in them, then they grow remiss and
flacke handed, and rather sooth up the same with fair words and sugered
speeches. These are like the fierce Mastiue, that will bark and bay till his
chain crack at a stranger, and if he chance to come within his reach, he will
fly in the face of him: but if it be his master that he sees come, then his
barking is turned into fawning, because he knows his master uses to give him
crusts and bones to feed on. Thus many will offend for a hit of bread; P^ov.
28. ^1.
and for fear of a check or inconvenience from him that is reproved. And we
shall also find that covetousness is a great cause of this defect, as well as
fear, because sometimes it falls out that men are made rich by the sins of
others, and this makes them like the Fox hunting after his prey, which wakes
with his eyes shut; they see not, and yet see, they are wilfully blind, having
closed their eyes least they Act. 28 27. Genesis 38. 14.
should see; with Thamar, they muffle their eyes and will not see, and all
because the sins of others bring advantage to them; I would this fault were
not too common amongst the Courts of this Nation, and Magistrates of the Land,
who like unmerciful Chirurgians keep the wound raw, which they might
seasonably heal: and all for their own gain and advantage. Yea I could wish
that every man in his place would deal faithfully and plainly with the faults
of others, no^ searing the person or face of any man. I would men would
condemn the sins of others as plainly, as the Franciscan Friar did Pope
Sixtus the fourth, who came to be Pope from the same order. Who seeing the
Friar, showed him a great treasure of money, and said unto him. Friar, I cannot
say as Peter did. Silver and gold have I none. No more can you say (says the
Friar) as Peter said to the man that was sick of the palsy, Arise and walk.
If we durst thus behave our selves, and that to the Act. 3. 6.
greatest, surely we could not but bring forth some reformation from our good
endeauours. And for our better encouragement, not to dissemble with any, but to
deal faithfully with all, let us consider the words of Solomon. He that says
to the wicked thou art righteous, him Prove. 24. 24. 25
shall the people curse, nations shall abhor him. But to them that rebuke him
shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them.

CHAP. 5. Arguments to persuade us to reprove the sins of others.
First Argument the guilt of Sin.
IF we reprove not sin in others, 1 Argument to move us to reprove sin in
others.
we make our selves guilty of the same sin, for the neglecting any duty which
is commanded, displeases God as well as the committing of sins prohibited,
Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the Indg. 5. 23.
Lord, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; not because they fought
against the children of the Lord, but because they did not assist the Lord
against the mighty, and we are as well liable to the curse of God, for not
helping the lord against sin, as they that really transgress the law; vice and
virtue are contraries which have no medium, and therefore in subiecto capaci,
the absence of the one must of necessity argue the presence of the other, so
the^ he that has authority to reprove sin, is guilty of it, if he strike it
not upon the face with a seasonable rebuke, and if a man neither lie nor swear
himself, yet if he suffer it in others; ^^e sin is Qui ferendi potestatem
^abet, solus in culpa est. si culpa non feritur B^r. Amici vitia q^i ser^,
facit sua.
his own, as in the Common wealth, and our laws, the accessory is as well
guilty and liable to punishment as the principal: So in Gods Consistory, the
not corrector as well as the law-breaker is both guilty of the sin and
subject to the same reward. For if a soul sin and hear Leuit. 5. 1.
the voice of swearing and is a witness, whether he has seen or known of
it, if he did not utter it, then he shall bear his iniquity, and therefore the
Lord admonishes the watchman to blow the trumpet, and Ezeck. 33. 7. 8.
warn the people from the Lord, otherwise if he warned not the wicked man
from his way, the wicked man should dye in his iniquity; but God would require
his blood at his hands. Now every one in this case must be a watchman over his
brother, to prohibit and rebuke sin in him; otherwise his brothers blood
shall be required at his hands. And thus it was in ancient times amongst the
Heathens themselves; for the Lacedaemonians used to punish him that did not
reprove the fault of another, with the same punishment that was due to the
offender himself, and thus we see the sin of another man, by our silence
may become our own: and therefore the word mum in English I take to be derived
from the Hebrew word (...) macula, a fault or blemish, so that in this kind to
be mute or mum (as we say) or to hold a man's tongue, is a sin and
transgression in the sight of God; and certainly shall not go unpunished.
Therefore if any man have an eye to see sin, let him discover it, if he have
an hand, let him pluck it up; otherwise other men's sins shall be enrolled
amongst ours, and so with Ely we shall not only break the neck of the body,
but that of the 1. Sam. 4. 18.
soul also, and make the curse of another man's sins light heavy upon our
selves.

Second argument is charity toward the sinner.
Secondly the duty of love and 2 Argument to move vsto reprove sin.
charity we owe one to another, binds us to this good office. In the old law
we are commanded not to see Deuteronomy. 22. 1.
our neighbors ox, nor his sheep to go astray, and to hide our selves; but
in any case to bring them again unto our brother, much more then are we to
reduce a straying soul into the ways of God, and good reason, for we are all
of us fellow members of that body whereof Jesus Christ is the head, now we know
members of a body are helpefull to one another; if the foot have a thorn in
it, the head stoopes, and the hands help to pluck it out again. We are
brethren as St Paul says, Brethren if any one be overtaken in Gal. 6. 1.
a fault, etc. fraternall and brotherly affection must be a spur to prick us
on to show our love in this action which indeed is a sure trial and
manifestation of the best love, and on Probatio dilectionis est exhibitio
operis Greg. Ins^li^^^ici^ia q^^ illum quam (...), ^^^endo ^radit Diabolo.
the contrary it is a cursed friendship and association which by a wicked
taciturnitie and conniuence at finne gives up the soul of the sinner into the
hands of the Devil. Therefore in this kind it is good we should deal as
one loving friend to another, who beholding him dangerously and deeply
affected with some disease or sickness, he will carefully provide the
Surgeon or Physician for his cure and restoration to his former health:
thus let us strive to have as much spiritual love as most men have natural
affection, that when we see our brother evil affected with sin, which is
the sickness of the soul, we may by wise and seasonable rebukes make up and
heal the sores and spiritual (...).
batteries of sin and Satan, in the hearts of our brethren. The good
Samaritan that found the maimed man in misery, that was fallen amongst
thieves, had compassion Luke 10. 33. 34.
on him, and bound up his wounds: shall not we then much more have compassion
upon a Brother, when we see him lie under the hands of his spiritual enemies,
and bind up the wounds of his soul, by holy and Godly rebukes? Having reason
from the law of equity and cons^ience more to commiserate the diseases of the
soul, then of the body. Therefore as Solomon says, withhold not Prove. 23. 13.
14
correction from the child, for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not
dye; thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell.
Thus if we withhold not a seasonable rebuke when we see our brother sin, we
may happily deliver his soul from death and Satan, therefore reproof is
called the correction of life, because it tends and leads to life. The ear
that hears the Prove. 15. 31. (...)
reproof of life abides among the wise: let us try therefore, if by this
means we can convert a man that is erring from the truth, and we shall save a
soul from death, and shall Au^is audie^^ increpationem vitarum. I^m. 5. 19.
20. Mat. 18. 15.
hide a multitude of sins. I might fairly launch forth, and with a
prosperous gale, set up sail, and away into an Ocean of reasons, or arguments
to move us to this duty: as the honor of God, or the ensnaring the sinner and
the standers by, who by our silence, may half persuade themselves, a sin to
be no sin; or else so small as not worthy a reprehension, or that we are
such as they are, and love the sin if we reprove it not, also by our
reproof See M. Bolton^ direction^ for walking with, God. page 122. sine.
we may keep out the infection and contagion of sin whereby our souls may
be poisoned, but for breuities sake, I will leave them to the judgment and
amplification of the reader, and him and them to the blessing of that holy
spirit, who gives grace to the reprouer and reproved, both how to speak, and
how to take a word of reproof in due season.

FINIS.

