A BRIEF INSTITVTION OF THE COMMON PLAces of Sacred DIVINITY. WHEREIN, THE
Truth of every Place is proved, and the Sophismes of BELLARMINE are reprooved.
Written in Latin, by Lucas Trelcatius, and Englished by John Gawen, Minister
of Gods Word.

LONDON Imprinted by T. P. for FRANCIS BVRTON, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard,
at the Sign of the Green Dragon. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, SIR RICHARD LEVVKNOR Knight, Chief Justice both of
Chester, and of his Majesty's Council in the Principality, and Marches of
Wales, Grace and Glory in Christ JESUS.
HAVING finished (Right Worshipful,) the Translation of this Logical, and
Theological Treatise; I thought good, both for the patronizing of the Book,
and the Testimony of my duty, to offer the Dedication of the same unto your
Worship: for the former cause, that as the Author himself, dedicated this
Book at first to such persons, as were for authority able, and for Religion
zealous to protect the same; so I the unworthy Translator of so worthy an
Author, made bold to make choice of your Worship, being for authority in your
place, no less eminent, and for zeal to Religion no worse affected, To the
end it may be shielded by your Patronage, from the mouths of the malignant;
not in regard of my labor herein, (which as it is but small, if either the
quantity of the Book, or the Authors own Industry be considered; so it is not
without imperfectio^s, which notwithstanding, I hope the discreet, with
favorable Connivency will pass over, considering the difficulty of
Translation in this succinct and Logical kind of writing, and the penury of
our English Language in the Terms of Art;) but in respect of the matter it
self, which being so worthy, for Gods cause deserves, and so profitable for
the Churches sake, desires your favorable countenance. For the latter Cause,
that as your Worship, is my best, and chiefest favourer, and that for the
best and chiefest cause, the profession of godliness; so meet it were I should
declare, whom first, and best I should remember in this the first fruit of my
labor, and best token of my love: best I say, in regard of the matter, which
is here contained, though least to be esteemed in respect of the manner, how it
is by me delivered; which (though being offered in a homely style, as a golden
Treasure in an earthen vessel, or a rich Pearl in a poluted hand) I trust
your worship will not reject. And so I commend the same, such as it is, to
your Worship, in your Christian favor to be regarded, your self to the Lord
in his continual mercy to be protected, and all that I am, and have to your
self, at your godly pleasure to be commanded,

JOHN GAVVEN

TO THE COVRTEous, and Christian READER.
NOt long since (Courteous Reader,) a friend of mine commending this Book unto
me, upon the general good liking conceyved thereof in the Original by the
learned, entreated me for the further good of the Church, to take upon me the
Translation thereof: Which, though at first, I was unwilling to do, especially
for that in the perusal thereof, I found it so Scholasticall, as that it
required much Art, Reading, and Leisure of him that should perform that
business. Yet forasmuch as the Book for matter is necessary, for Art
exquisite, and for Method more compendious then any other I have read in this
kind, I have adventured the employment of that Art, Reading, and Leisure which
I have, in the Translation of the same. Wherein, as my labor has been the
more difficult, partly, because the Treatise is Logical, and therefore in many
places are required proper and fit terms of Art, wherein our English tongue
is penurious; partly, because of many Greek words very significa^t, and
therefore not easily expressed word for word in our language; partly also by
reason of some few faults committed in the Original Printing, (from which no
Book can be free,) and therefore had but my conjecture at the correction
thereof; so I trust it shall be the more favorably censured, if ought therein
be found Defective. Concerning my dealing herein, I have followed the Author as
nearly in sense, as my Judgment apprehended, as faithfully in Words as
Discretion guided me, and as fitly in Phrase, as the Idiome of our Tongue could
suffer. Only I have inserted here and there a Word of mine own, either for
the explayning of Words more obscure, or for the supplying of such, as in
Latin are more tollerably understood: All which, I have for difference sake
noted with a Parenthesis. And withal, for the better satisfaction to the
Intelligent, have placed all the obscure Latin Words in the Margent, as
leaving them to their choice, either to accept of mine Interpretation, as it
is, or allow of their own, if it be better. As for the places of scripture
quoted in the Margent, I leave them as I found them. It remains therefore
(Christian Reader) that thou take in good part, what I offer in good will. And
so I end, wishing my labor to be for thy profit, and both for Gods glory.
Ludlow this 9. of October. 1610.

JOHN GAWEN.

TO THE WORTHY, most Prudent, and Right Honorable Lords, Surveyors of the
University, and Consuls of the Commonwealth of LEYDEN in Holland.
I Offer unto you (Right Honorable) the first fruits of your bounty, and my
duty: for it was your bounty, that through your favorable, and benevolent
voices, you placed me as the Heir of my Fathers profession, and your
courtesy, and rather out of your affection hoped and wished, then thought or
judged, that I (who had strength neither sufficient, nor worthy for so great a
height of business) should be able to do somewhat for the public good of
your School. Nevertheless, I acknowledged and embraced your Honorable
Judgment, in regard of your authority and prudence, and your favor, in regard
of you singular love, as faithfully as I could, wi^^ such modesty as I should:
and have (you^ selves electing and promoting me) ascend^ unto the chair of
Theological professi^ with the hazard of my reputation, fearing to hazard not
only my Profectum.
proceeding, b^ also your Affectu^.
affection. It was my duty, (...) not to answer the worthiness of my
profession, and your expectation, yet at least wise, by all means to testify
my own affection, how I would gladly answer the sam^ according to my small
ability, and undertake any thing, to the end I might endeavor my best for the
public profit, and your desires. For which end, I have taken in hand, as it
were the Anatomy ((...) ripping up) of the whole body of Divinity, and within a
year and a half space, have composed and briefly abridged a Scholasticall,
and Methodicall Treatise of the common places of sacred Theology; first,
Didactice.
by way of Doctrine, and confirmation in teaching the truth, then Elenctice
by way of reproof and confutation, in cutting of the Sprigges of errors, with
the Sickle of Truth: for there is a twofold way of teaching Divinity, the one
De Verilate.
of the Truth, the other Pro veritate.
for the Truth: both are coupled together, as it were, by a sacred Wedlock,
and necessary for the through handling of Divinity. We have laid down, and
confirmed the Doctrine of the Truth, or the nature of every common Place by
Definition, (where either it might, or should be done,) and an Analyticall
Explication of the same by Causes; but have concluded the confutation of
falsehood, with an Appendix, or (Addition) of general Solutions, and
Distinctions: every one of which, we have opposed against each Argument of
Bellarmine, (where the place has been in Controversy with the Papists,) in
the same order, as they are by him laid down in the places noted. And so
having passed through the whole course of our fore-determined Journey, we are
come at length to the wished Goal, and have finished both the parts, of
Theology as it were in a Platform. One thing remained, that I being privy to my
self, of mine own Infancy should entreat pardon of my Auditors, for mine
ignorance, and excuse those things, which were spoken, and delivered by me with
honest silence, and so commit and commend them to their private courtesy,
censure, and consideration. And I had so done, had not both the public
respect of my Theological study, and the private conscience of my Duty,
besides the importunate entreaties of friends, (as it were) wringed from me
the Edition, or publication hereof. In so great a plenty of so many
Theological Books, and common Places, the Students of Divinity have of long
time complained of scarsity, and that not without cause; for the Writers and
Authors of common Places, (who are in use amongst young Students,) do either
with their prolixitie delay the speedy, longer then is meet, or with their
overmuch brevity, either compel them to run back the same way of doctrine
too often with loathing, or bar them from the other, (which is by way of
reprooving) with danger. Hence it is, that the fervor of Study waxes faint,
and before it be lively, oftentimes waxes old. It was therefore long ago both
my desire, and the desire of all that are studious in sacred Theology, that
both parts of Divinity might be contracted, and brought into a compendious
Breviary by a Scholasticall, and Methodicall discourse: which, wile I wished,
and waited for from others, who abound both in leisure and Learning, it seemed
good unto i me to publish this our Book, as a witness of our common desire,
that as a forerunner it might invite, and provoke those great wits, whereof
this age is most fruitful, to accomplish the same. Which if I shall obtain,
I verily profess, that I have receyved a plentiful fruit of this my labor:
the mean while I trust, if as I would request, that those things, whereof I am
ignorant, might be imparted unto me, without concealing of arrrogancy; so it
shall be likewise acceptable, that I impart those few things which I know, unto
them that are desirous thereof. Moreover, whereas the profession of the
handling of common places was committed unto me, and the explication of them,
was now at length to be taken in hand again: I thought good, not only to ease
my Auditors from a trouble of writing, but also to lay forth, as in a Table, to
their memory, and eyes, what hereafter they ought to expect from me, and have
withal, as a guide in the way, with the finger pointed at the matter, to show
unto the studious, the way, (and that the readiest way) to the Doctrinall, and
reprooving Knowledge of Theology. Now, unto you (Right Honorable) I offer,
and consecrate of due right, and desert, these first fruits of my profession,
such as they are, as the young tender seeds of my Theological Harvest, which
first sprung up in your field, and afterward, through your courteous favor,
attained unto some maturity; both, that I may testify and show some proof of
my thankful heart, by this task of duty, and especially, that ye may the
more stir up your loving favors and my studies, and so yield your selves to
be my forwarders, and stout protectors against the barking mouths of the
malevolent. And so I hope, and trust in the Lord you will: unto whom I pray
(Right Honorable,) that he will prosper the course of all your Councels, and
very long preserve you in a safe and flourishing Estate for the good of this
University and Commonwealth. Lugd. Bat. the 7, of August. 1604.

To your Honors most devoted, LVCAS TRELCATIVS. L. F.

THE TABLE OF the Contents of the First BOOK.
OF the Principles of Sacred Divinity. Cap. 1 Of the Word of God. Cap. 2 Of God
and his Attributes. Cap. 3
The Contents of the second Book.
OF the works of God, or causes of Man's Salvation. Cap. 1 Of Predestination.
Cap. 2 Of Creation. Cap. 3 Of Providence. Cap. 4 Of the Works of Grace, or of
Redemption. Cap. 5 Of the Person of Christ. Cap. 6 Of the Office of Christ.
Cap. 7 Of the Calling of Man unto Salvation. Cap. 8 Of Man's Justification
before God. Cap. 9 Of the Covenant of God. Cap. 10 Of Sacraments in General.
Cap. 11 Of Baptism. Cap. 12 Of the Lords Supper. Cap. 13 Of the Church. Cap.
14
The Contents of the Third BOOK.
OF Man and his Diverse Estates. Cap. 1 Of the State of Man in his Integrity.
Cap. 2 Of the Corrupted State of Man. Cap. 3 Of Sin. Cap. 4 Of Free Will.
Cap. 5 Of Faith. Cap. 6 Of Good Works. Cap. 7 Of the State of Man after this
Life. Cap. 8
REader, for a Book of this quantity and quality to be without faults, is
almost impossible, yet better is it by much that they be noted, whereby they may
be amen^d, then that they should cause an error for want of corre^^ion. Were
the Subject of the Book light, Faults were ^sse material; but because it
concerns Gods special ^ory, and man's salvation, They are of greater
consequence. (...) point only, or a letter may either obscure the meaning,
(...) quite invert it: Wherefore as I have taken pains to col^ct the chief so
I pray thee in thine own book before thou ^eade it, amend them thus.

Page Line. Errata. Correction. 9 10 or Principles; principles; 24 19 perfect
and more Perfect, and no ^bid 24 mediate immediate 33 5 Principle prescriptions
Principles 68 3 actual, and actual. And 74 4 are only one only 80 2
Beginning of Principles of 88 3 combine continue 102 15 motions notions 212 8
receyved perceyved 231 8 righteousness, unrighteousness, 237 16 thereof therefore
of 241 6 from the for the 351 16 in that That 448 25 follows flows Fol. 23
in former inferior 543 7 and excelent excelent 554 1 do understand do not
understand

A Scholasticall and Methodicall Institution of the common Places of Divinity.
INtending to lay open in a brief and School Method a Theological
institution, we will premise two things, in stead of a Preface or introduction
thereunto.

The one of Divinity it self, and of the Nature and verity thereof.

The other concerning the order and Method of our institution.

Divinity we mean not that first pattern, which in God is of God himself,
nay, is God himself (for both God and that which is in God is the self same
in a simple Essence) wherein by an indivisible and unchangeable act, he knows
both himself in himself, and out of himself all and singular things by
himself, but the stamp out of that former expressed and shapened by a
revelation and gracious communication thereof, either according to the
universal nature in all men, or according to special grace and measure of the
scripture in the Church.

He that would enquire the verity hereof, ought to consider two things,
first, that it is, secondly, what it is.

That there is such a stamp of Divinity, the Nature of God, the light both of
our own Natural conscience, and supernatural knowledge revealed, as also the
common experience of Nations and ages do declare.

The Nature of God, for since he is by all means infinitely good, we must no
way think that God wants a good mean to communicate good, whose property it
is to be a communicator of himself, or to communicate himself with other his
creatures, according to their condition Mat. 5.45.
.

The light both of our Natural conscience, by which clearly shining, all men
have this settled in their hearts, that there is is a Divination, and other
kinds of divine communications Romans 1.1^.19 and 2.24.25.
as also of supernatural Knowledge revealed whereby we know that whole truth
to be fully and plainly registered in the holy scriptures, which was
behoofefull for us to know to our salvation.

Common Experience, for even the Gentiles themselves being strangers from God,
had the Oracles of the Devil in stead of these from God rather then that they
would deny that stamped Divininity, or be said to want the same Romans
1.21.22.23.
, for hence it came to pass, that whereas among the Heathen, some of their
Gods were thought to be very Gods, some others to be such spirits, as they
called Daemones, the heathens Divinity was held to be of two parts, for the
one treated of the Gods themselves, the other of Daemones.
those spirits, which they called Daemones, that which treated of their Gods,
August. lib. 5. de Civit. Dei, cap. 6.
was held of them to be three-sold, as Augustine out of Varro teaches, to
wit, Poetical, Natural, and Civil, that which did set forth the power of
those spirits, was twofold: for whereas of those spirits, called Doemones,
some were good, some evil: that which discoursed of the evil spirits who
were to be pacified and appeased, was called Magic and Enchantment: but the
other which delighted the good with sacrifices, was called Divine ministration
and Expiation: therefore there is a Divinity.

Now if you respect the true interpretation of the word, it is defined thus, to
be a knowledge of the Oracles or speeches of God: but if the thing or matter
it self; it is a true wisdom of divine things from God communicated, either
by mean Natural, according to inbred principles, or else by a mean more
excellent, according to grace supernatural.

And of this Divinity we speak in this place, we call it Wisdom by example
of Scripture: 1. Cor. 26.
first, for the excellency of the thing, as being the most certain declarer of
principles, and most noble Princess of all sciences: secondly, for the
singular mean or manner of knowing, for this wisdom is distinguished from
that which in the Scripture is called earthly, sensual, and devilish.

The subject of this Theological wisdom are matters divine, both for their
Nature, and the manner of considering: for whereas a Subject has two parts,
the one which contains the place of the matter, and is called the thing
considered: the other of the form, and is the manner of considering it: we
observe them both in the explication of this subject: The thing considered is
God himself, and all things disposed unto God, that is all things divine,
either of their own nature, or by relation unto God: The manner of considering
is proportionable to Gods truth, even to the whole truth, and every part
thereof alike (or equally) infused, fitted to the dignity of the deliverer to
the nature of the argument, as also to the condition of those, to whom it is
delivered.

And this is the nature and verity of Divinity: now we will briefly show the
Method of our Institution concerning the same.

There is a twofold Method of teaching, the one from Principles, the other
unto Principles, the one a Priori proceeding from the Cause to the Effect, and
from the first and highest to the lowest and last: the other a Posteriori,
proceeding from the Effect to the Cause, or from the last and lowest to the
highest and first: The use of the former is chiefest in sciences contemplative,
of the latter, in the practicke (or active.)

Now whereas Divinity in both these holds the first and principal place, (by
reason whereof, some have distinguished it into Contemplative and Active) and
for that it affords a faculty both of knowing and doing well, which is the
right way of wisdom: it has fallen out that D^vinity has been handled in a
diverse M^thod by diverse men, yet by all of them profitably and faithfully.

For whereas all order is taken either from the nature of things to be
considered. or from our better and easier knowledge thereof, Calvin, Melanthon,
Vrsinus, have done well, who observed an order of their better knowledge in a
method, unfolding by way of Analysis Analyti^a.
in like manner, Hiperius, Musculus, Hemingius, Zanchius, have done well,
observing the order of Nature Syntheti^a Synthesis, also is contrary to
Analysis, beginning from things granted to that which is in question.
in a Method of composing and couching things handsomely together. We in this
our Institution will join both these together, borrowing a Synthesi,
from the Method of composing the disposition, and Ab Analysi.
from the Method of vnsoulding the invention of the same, that from both, the
Systema.
full constitution of this body of Divinity which we have in hand may arise.

Therefore by an order Syntheticall (as we term it) we will begin from the
first Principles, that by the Means we may come to the last: but we will set
down a declaration, such as we call Analyticall, of the first, middle and
last things; first in teaching the truth by way of confirmation, then in
reproving the falsehood by way of confutatio^: that, by the help and benefit
of the Definition of every point of Divinity, and by the Analysis of the same,
through the causes thereof: but this, by the Appendix (or addition) of the
general solutions, which we will lay under every place (or point) and set
against the principal arguments of our adversaries, especially Bellarmines:
this is our Method.

THE FIRST Book of the Principles of sacred Divinity.
CHAP. I.
ALL Sciences have their proper principles, above which, as being those that
cannot be demonstrated, and are immediately the first, we may not ascend: but
among many sciences, that is the more perfect, which is, or comes of the
superior (...) Principles; and that the most perfect, which resolves a matter
into the first Principles, which depend not upon any former, of which sort,
Divinity alone is. For the principles of other sciences are not simply the
first, bu^ only in their own kind: because indeed, in their own science
they have no other Former: but there ought not to be any other Former
Principles of Divinity, neither in it self, nor out of it self, to wit,
neither any Principle of being, nor any principle of knowing.

For there are two Principles, the one of the thing, the other of knowledge,
those out of which other things are produced, these on which the knowledge of
other things do depend, both these Analogi^e.
proportionably are of us to be considered in Divinity: for the true
exposition of the word intimates unto us, those two beginnings to wit, God,
and the Word: God is the Principle of being, and the first cause of Divinity,
from which both the end of Divinity and the means unto his end do spring: the
Word is the principle of knowing, by which the end of Divinity, and the means
unto it may be known.

Both the principles are immediately (...) the first: God is a Principle
immediately first, because nothing was be^^h^^: the word is a principle
im^ediately, first, because nothing was ^poken before it: which two, though
^hey go together in dignity and office of beginning, yet in the course of
order, in the manner of doing, and in ^he producing of the effect, they are
distinguished, and are mutually each to other subordinate, for God first
mediately speaks unto us in the word, then the Word mediately brings us
unto the knowledge of God, which knowledge, since it is intended to be the
principal and proper subject of whole Divinity, the mean thereunto
subordinate, which we called the Word, ought first to be known.

Of the Word of GOD.
The part confirming. CHAP. II.
THe Primary Principle of Divinity, for dignity is God, but for the order of
better knowledge, the word^ is the first.

The word we understand 1. En^^tiatiue (or which is uttered) whereby God has
communicated with man, either specially through Revelation by Oracles, visions,
or dreams; or generally through a lively tradition o^ doctrine from hand to
hand, or through a more excellent manner by the Scripture.

The same we thus define: It is at holy Instrument concerning the truth,
necessary Romans 15 4. 1 Timothy 4.^ Ioh. 5.35
to salvation, faithfully and perfectly written in the Canonical Romans 1. 2
Pet. 1.19 2 Pet. 3.15 16.
books by the Prophets and Apostles. 2. Tim. 3 16.
as the Secretaries of God for the healthful instruction of the Church. 2.
Pet. 1 22. Psalm. 1 19.1 1. Tim. 4 13 16.
.

We call it an Instrument both in respect of the Covenant, whereof God would
have an Instrument to be made, and by a renewed contract publicly to be
registered, as also in relation to another thing, as in the proper use and
office thereof, because the holy Scripture is not for it self, but as the
manner of ^struments is for another thing, the ^hority, perfection,
perspicuousnes, ^d use of this Instrument shall be made ^dent by a Methodicall
Analyst.
resolution the causes.

The Cause Efficient of the Scripture God 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21
the Father in the son by the ^rit, for the same has the Father laid ^en to
the Church by the word Enun^tiue, and by the works of grace and ^wer generally
and specially, ordina^y and extraordinarily, Heb. 11.
the Son ^th both ways confirmed it in the ^ew Testament, Heb. 1.2
the holy Ghost sea^th the same in the hearts of the faith^ll by the word
inwardly testifying, or (...) an inward Testimony, Esa 59.21. Ioh. 14.26
the Scrip^re then is divine by original, and by ^e things thereof, both
Essential and ^aturall, as also assumed,

By Original, because every know^dge of truth is from the first truth, ^hereof
the Scripture is an instrumen^ll badge, and as it were a shapened ^mage: hence
it is, that God both ^mmediately with his own finger wrote the Decalogue in
Tables, and Exodus 34 27.
mediately by servants as his Actua^ios Ta^ula^ios
Notaries and public pennemen commanded that whole Systema.
compacted body of holy scripture with every part thereof to be written 2.
Tim. 3.16. Insitis. Adsitis.
.

The scripture also is divine for the matters both put therein and put thereto,
for both the Essential parts thereof are divine in matter and form, and the
end divine also, as hereafter shall be declared, yea and the apparent
signification and demonstration of the Spirit and presence of God, very
antiquity, the invincible force of the truth, and many other points do
witness the same to be divine: now it must needs be, that the Scripture,
which has God to be the author, has also divine authority.

Further, this authority is two ways considered, first in it self, secondly,
in respect of us: the authority of the Scripture in it self is divine, if we
consider the cause, subject and certainty of doctrine.

The Cause, because the authority of the Scripture is as great as that of the
holy Ghost 1 Ioh. 1 9.
who endited both the matter and words thereof, and whose Prophets and Apostles
were only the Amanuenses, pennemen Ioh. 14.16.
.

The Subject, for whereas there is wont to be a double respect of testimonies
concerning the authority of a thing one from the power or efficacy of him that
witnesses, the other from the Nature and property of the Instrument, the
Scripture, in respect of the things whereof it is the Instrument, has an
exceeding great and infallible authority Heb. 4 12.
.

The certainty of doctrine which the Scripture has from God by Virtue, Verity,
and Complement: by Virtue, because he has confirmed the same both at all times
with his spirit, and at convenient time with his works of grace, and power: 1.
These. 1.5.
by Verity, because it contains the whole truth communicable in it self both
alone and perfectly 2 Pet. 1.19.
By Complement, because as in substance, so also in event all things are most
certain, and most true in the Scripture Mat. 24 35.
.

Now in respect of us or unto us, the authority of the Scripture is divine by
the testimony of God both particular and general.

Particular, because God has both publicly testified that sovereign
Authority by ordinary and extraordinary means, and privately sealed it by his
everlasting spirit in the conscience of the godly Ioh. 1.37 and 5.6.
.

General, because first God used the undoubted Ministry of his servants as
fi^te Notaries, which went between God speaking, and the Church which he
speaks unto for the perpetual verity of the thing: Ephesians. 2.20.
Secondly, comes the consent of the Cannon of the Law with the truth.
Thirdly, the assent of the Church which has allowed, the Scripture delivered
of God, receyved, kept and delivered the same by the use and exercise of Gods
Ministry, and of Ecclesiastical Discipline which depends thereon.

Which authority of the Church is secondary, not to establish, but to testify
the authority of the Scripture, for both are to be acknowledged, yet in their
degree and order, for that of the Scripture is Primary, sound and essential:
but that of the Church is subordinate, accidental, and altogether ministerial.

The Material Cause of the holy Scripture ar^ divine matters revealed to our
salvation, according to our capacity, and registered in the Canon.

We call the Canon the doctrine, that is contained in the Books of both
Testaments, the form whereof internal, is the unchangeable truth of God:
but the external is the holy Scripture, the most absolute Symbol of the same,
for God has used and sanctified the Instrument of the Scripture, as it were
the Index or declarer of that Essential Canon, and the truth of the word for
the approving of the truth, as it were in a certain state or habit of an
external form, that by divine ordinance it might be the Canon of our faith
and life, as a right even measure both whole and perfect.

The nature and office of this Canon come now to be declared.

The Nature, for whereas even unto this day, there has been a threefold Canon
in the Church, the one divine, the other Ecclesiastical, and the third false;
how the Canon properly called divine may be distinguished from the
Ecclesiastical, and both from the false, it is very needful for us to
discern, first by the parts thereof, secondly, by the manner of delivering:
thirdly, by their proper conditions.

We devide the pattes of this Canon into the books of the old and new
Testament, according to those two several times of the old and new Church.

The old Canon is that which being receyved from God, the ancient Church of
the Jews kept, and next after delivered from hand to hand to their posterity
by Gods appointment: the books whereof are reckoned to be 22. by the Jews,
but more distinctly by us 39. and are divided into three ranks: the first
contains the five Books of Moses, the second contains the books of the
Prophets, both hystoricall and prophetical, whereof some were published before
the Captivity, to wit, the book of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, two of Samuel, two of
Kings being hystoricall, Esaias, a good part of Jeremy, and the nine lesser
Prophets being Prophetical: Others were in the time of Captivity, and after as
Esdras. Nehemias, Ester, which are hystoricall: some part of Jeremy, Ezekiel,
Daniel, and the three last of the smaller Prophets, which are Prophetical: the
third contains holy writings before the Captivity, Job, the greatest part of
the Psalms, the Proverbes, Ecclesiastes, the songs of Solomon, in and after
the Captivity, the two books of Chronicles.

The New Canon is that which the christian church had more largely since the
time of Christ and the Apostles: the substance of which Canon is the word by
Christ uttered, and the things which he did: the most faithful hystory
whereof is contained in the four Evangelists: the examples in the Acts, the
Exegesis.
exposition in one and twenty Epistles, the Prophecy in the book of
Revelation.

The manner of the delivery of both the Canons varyed according to the times of
the church and persons: the internal form that is the unchangeable word of
God remaining still the same: for as, for the time being, the law or the books
of Moses were the Canon in the church, so also after Moses, that which was
added thereunto, was the Exegetica
fuller exposition of that Instrument or canon.

The conditions of this Canon properly called divine are two, the one that it
contain in it self the truth, or have the express form of the word of
truth: the second, that it be delivered, ruled and sanctified by divine
authority, to the end it might be a Canon for us in the church, the latter of
which conditions can never be plucked away from the former.

Now God has sanctified these forsayde books, to the end they might be a
Canon in the church, partly, after a general, partly after a particular
manner, after a General manner, because God has approved and confirmed the
Books of both Canons, not only by the testimony of his spirit, but also by
the consent of the Canon, and testification of the church, after a particular
manner, because God has specially sanctified the Books of the old Canon, to
wit Moses his five Books, with his speech, miracles, signs and events: the
books of the Prophets, and holy writings before the captivity, with the
extraordinary signs of a cloud and smoke in the Temple, 1. Kin. 8.10. Leu.
16.2.
as also of Gods answer by the Ephod, Vrim, and Thumim, Exodus 28 30.
after the captivity with singular testimonies of eventes, the books also of
the new Canon, God has sanctified singularly, both by his son made manifest
in the flesh, as also by his words and deeds, Heb. 1.2.
and by the Ministry of his Apostles which was most effectual in signs,
powers and miracles, Mat 3.5 page 13.
And these are the parts, manner and conditions of the divine Canon.

The other Canon is Ecclesiastical, which neither contains the truth
perfectly in it self, nor was sanctified by God in the Church, that it might
be a Canon of doctrine and faith, and therefore is called of the Greek
fathers a second or inferior Canon. To this Canon belong the Books
Apocryphal, either wholly so, as the third and fourth of Esdras, Tobit,
Judith, the two books of the Machabees, the book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,
or being Appendices.
additions to the canonical, as Baruch, the prayer of Manasses, and those
which are added to Daniel and Esther: these, although they be taken into the
Canon Ecclesiastical, yet by evident means that is by faith, order, and use,
they were of the Fathers less esteemed then the books of that divine Canon,
whereby, though abusiuely they were called Canonical, to wit, by custom,
yet properly they were distinguished in the church from the canonical, by the
name of Apocrypha.

The False Canon is that which after the Authority of the Apocrypha books,
grew greater, was constituted by human opinion.

The office of the Canon is twofold, the one is to teach the truth, the other,
by this rule of truth to decide al controversies concerning Religion: for it is
the pr^per and Judiciary voice and sentence of the holy Ghost, that sovereign
and inward Judge, from which we may not appeal.

The Formal Cause of the holy Scripture is twofold, inward and outward; the
one is whereby the Scripture is proportionable to the divine truth, and with
every part of it self, the other is the exquisite Phrase of the holy
scripture, whereby all things are written with a style fitly tempered both
according to the dignity of the speaker, and the nature of the word spoken, and
lastly, according to the condition of them, to whom it is spoken.

From both as also from the consideration of the other causes, the perfection
of the holy Scripture aryseth, both as touching it self, and oppositely
against unwritten traditions.

As touching it self, because the scripture does most perfectly contain the
whole truth which is communicable, the perfection springs from principle,
subject, and effect.

From principle, for whereas every principle whether of the thing or of
knowledge, ought to be perfect and (...) Apod^cticae.
demonstratiue or true conclusions, are drawn from that which is imperfect, it
must needs be, that the Scripture is altogether most perfect, as being the
first, only and mediat principle of all doctrine concerning the truth Deuteronomy.
4.2. and 12. ver. vlt.
.

From subject, because it has parts both Essential, of which we have
spoken, to wit, matter and form, and also Integrall, which are the law, and
the gospel, and is all or wholly perfect both absolutely, and by relation.
Absolutely, because for substance it contains either expressly or Anologically
all that doctrine concerning faith and manners, which is communicable: for
whereas of divine matters some are communicable, and some incommunicable, and
of those which are communicable, it is not expedient that some be communicated
unto us in this life, and yet expedient that some be: we affirm that divine
matters are perfectly contained in the Scripture, because they are both to be
known 2. Tim. 3.16.
and profitable to be known; by relation, because as it has the perfection
of the whole, so has it also the perfection of the parts in the whole, that
is called a perfection according to Essence, this according to quantity, yet
so, that considering the several bounds of times, every part was sufficient for
the proper times thereof, and all the parts in the whole are for us.

From the Effect, for it makes a man wise unto Salvation, instructs him to
every good work, and makes him blessed by beginning in this life, and by
perfection in the other Ioh. 2. v vlt. Rom 15.4. Ioh. 3.59.
.

Neither is it only perfect of it self, but also as being opposed to
unwritten traditions: all which by the perfection thereof, it excludes Gal.
1.8.
.

By the Name of Traditions we understand not in a general signification the
doctrine delivered both ways, to wit, by speech and writing, as very often
they are taken in the Scripture, and with the Fathers, but in a more special
sense, for every doctrine not written by the Prophets and Apostles, whether it
be termed Dogmaticall or Hystoricall, or Ceremonial: for the perfect matter
of Dogmaticall Traditions, which pertayne to Faith and Manners, is delivered
unto us by God in the Scriptures, and those tie not us which are delivered
without the Scriptures, but the general matter of those which are Hystoricall
concerning the things either spoken or done by Christ or his Apostles, is
perfectly contained in the Scriptures, which it behooveth us to know for our
salvation: those which are delivered without the Scripture are to be reckoned
for human writings: Of those which are Ceremonial, the Essential part is
written down in the word of God, according to their own kind: but the
Accidental part of them which is concerning the circumstances is free and
changeable.

The Final Cause, according to the consideration of the double Object, is
twofold, the highest and furthest off is the glory of God in the maintenance of
his truth: The second and the nearest, whereof our speech is in this place, is
the instruction of his Church unto salvation.

The necessary means of this instruction are three, the plainness of the
Scripture, Reading and interpretation, whereof the one has respect unto the
Scripture, the other unto us, and the last, both unto it and us.

The first mean is the Plainness for the doctrine of a dark and doubtfu^
matter, neither ought to be delivered nor can be learned, forasmuch as ever^
Instruction, whether it be by the o^der of Nature, or Doctrine, is begu^ from
things more known: but whereas there is one thing better known in respect of
it own Nature, and another in respect of us: we consider the plai^nesse of
the Scripture both ways, bo^^ in respect of it own Nature, as far forth as it
is inspired of God, and also in respect of our selves, as far forth as we are
inspired of God for the understanding of the same.

Of the playnenesse thereof in it self, there are two arguments, first, the
matters delivered in the Scriptures; secondly, the manner of delivering them;
for, albeit they seem obscure in respect of their dignity and majesty; yet, if
you respect the truth of them, agreeable with their first pattern, 2. Pet. 1
19.
if the ^^w and the Gospel, wherein, as in ^e parts they are contained, Deu.
30 11. 2. Cor. 4.3
if the ^ceeding great consent of all matters, ^d words: if, lastly you
respect the ^ory of God the Principal Prou. 6.21.
Effect of ^em from the understanding of Doc^ne and Salvation which is offered
unto us in the holy Scriptures, it must ^edes be, that it is in it self most
per^ect Ioh. 20 31.
.

The Manner or Style of delivering ^he matters, is most applyable, both (...)
the things themselves, of which ^here is speech made, and to those persons,
for the instructing of whom the ^cripture was delivered, yielding an ^xceeding
great playnenesse both in words, as also in sense and signification: In Words,
for the Phrases which are proper, do shine in the pro^riety of Words; and
those which are Figurative, are perspicuous lights of a holy speech: In Sense,
which of it self ^s one only, as being that which the ^ntention of the
Speaker, and the Nature of the thing signified do import: for the Schoolmen
say well, the Theologiam Symbolicam non esse Argumentativa^.
Figurative Divinity is not fit for reasoning (or disputation); yet it may
diue^sly be applied to the use of the Hearers Per Anagogas, Allegorias, and
Tropologias.
by Mystical, Allegorical and M^ralyzing Interpretations, that one only
literal and Grammatical sense (...) the holy Scripture nevertheless
remaining whole and entire.

Of the Playnenesse of the Scripture, in respect of our selves, there a^^ also
two reasons, the one of absolu^ necessity, because indeed the Scripture is the
only means and Instrument o^ Faith: for, whereas knowledge, Asse^^ and full
assurance, are the first beginnings and degrees of Faith: these thre^ can by no
means stand without the evident playnenes of the Scripture: the other is
Exothesi.
from a supposition of God Promises concerning the writing of h^ Law in our
hearts, and the spreading abroad, or clearenesse of the Doctrine o^ the
Gospel, Esai. 59.21. Ier. 31.31
of which promise there would be no accomplishment, unless the holy
Scriptures, which exhibit ^^to us the sum of the Law, and that ^^ctrine were
evidently plain in all ^^nges, which are necessary unto sal^^tion: but as
there are degrees and ^^pediments from the flesh of the fee^^^g of this faith
and promise, so are ^ere of this playnenesse in the regene^te: whence it is,
that neither all ^ings are clear and perspicuous to each ^^rson alike, nor
each thing to all per^^ns equally; yet to all and singular per^^ns sufficiently
unto salvation, accor^ing to the measure of Faith and di^^ne illumination.

The second mean of Instruction is ^^e Reading of the holy Scripture, which is
necessary to all and singular ^odly men: First, for the precept, se^ondly, for
our salvation; thirdly, for ^e edification of others: the conside^ation of the
precept is declared in the ^criptures two ways, expressiuely Ioh. 1.39
A^alogically, and by consequence, because in the Scripture, God speaks unto
all, therefore by the same ^ight, the doctrine of the Scripture is common unto
all: also the end of the Scripture is to be the power unto salvation to every
one that believes, with many other arguments, which from the force of
Consequence may be drawn but whreas the point of our Salvation i^ perfectly
expressed in the scripture, the common Edification of others commends unto us
the reading of the scripture as the study, diligence and duty of attayning the
same: for since we are bound to instruct others as in life: so also in doctrine,
we needs must learn those things, in which we have a rule both in life and
doctrine written down most perfectly.

The third mean is Interpretation, whether it be of public or private
authority: the first beginning whereof is the holy Spirit: the manner is the
truth, the rule is the Scripture: the use is Charity: now the means which are
Principal, are a continual collation of the holy Scripture with Scripture:
the consideration of the Essential points of a place, that is both of the
intention of the Speaker, and of the nature of the Word spoken. The Analogy of
Faith, that all things be expounded according to the truth of the Principles
(...) in Divinity: but those which are secondary, are these; the practice of
the Church, the decrees of the founder Councels, and the expositions of the
Fathers; to all which so far place is to be given, as they consent with the
Scripture and Analogy of Faith.

OF THE WORD OF GOD, The Part Confuting.
COncerning the truth of the Scripture, we have already spoken in an
explication of the Definition, by causes, Analytica
by way of resolution: now for the truth thereof, we will briefly speak
against the objections by an Appendix (or Addition) of general solutions and
distinctions, following the order and method of the Causes already declared.

DISTINCTIONS FOR THE Authority of the Scripture against COSTERVS. Ench. Lib.
2. Cap. 2.
I.
There is a double consideration of the Church and the Scripture; the one
common in respect of the Author; the other singular, in respect of the
Authority, which the Author has put into them: God is the Author of both,
whether mediately or immediately, but the Authority from God is diverse, that
of the Scripture is principal and formal, but the other of the Church is
secondary and ministerial.

II.
THe Scripture is two ways considered, either according to the substance of
the Word principally, or according to the manner of Writing: Secondarily, in
that the Scripture is more ancient then the Church, as by which the Church was
begotten or generated,

III.
SOme things are required for the confirmation of a thing absolutely, and of
it self, and some by accident, and for another thing: if the Scripture need
any confirmation of the Church, it needs the same by accident, and not of it
self: and therefore the confirmation of the Church belongs not to the Cause
Efficient, but Ministerial.

IIII.
IN causes coordinate, those which are inferior and latter cannot obtain the
force and faculty of others, which are the former: Now every Authority of the
Church is subordinate, yet the use of both is very great: of the Scripture, as
the mean principal to believe, of the Church, as the mean outward and
ministerial.

V
THere is one corruption of words, and certain particular places, through the
blemish where of the principal parts cannot be corrupted, and there is an
other corruption of the essential parts of the Scripture: the former, if any
has happened unto the Scripture, (for the latter, we utterly deny) is not the
corruption of the Scripture; but was caused either by the naughtiness of some
other, or through the infirmity of the church, or through the particular
ignorance of them, that were of the household.

The places of Scripture, which COSTERVS wresteth, are these.
John 14.16. I answer, that is badly transferred to the church generally,
which is spoken of the Apostles particularly; for the testimony of these is
immediate, blameless, and extraordinary, but of it mediate, weak, and
ordinary.

Luke. 10.16. I answer; that which was spoken concerning the office of the
Church, in respect of Ecclesiastical censure and discipline, is not to be
restrained unto the office of the same in respect of doctrine.

1 Timoth. 3.15. I Answer, the praises, which in the Scripture are given to
the Church, declare the Ministry and not the authority of the same, as being
that church which should keep the Depositu^.
pledge of the truth committed unto it, as the house of God, should set it
forth as a pillar whereon it hangs, and in that pillar should keep it
immovable as the ground thereof. Basis.


Distinctions for the Canon against Bellarmine, 1. Tom. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. unto
the 16.
THe Objections which are wont to be brought against the Canon, are either
those which are alleged against all the books of the Canon generally, or
against every one particularly: of all these, the solutions are general.

I.
The Councels which have their Canons concerning the canonical and Apocryphal
Books are either ancient or latter: the ancient are either Oeconomica.
general, the credit of which is the worthier; such is that of Laodicea
celebrated in the three hundred year after Christ's birth, which with us
acknowledges the self same Canon or Provincial, as that third of Carthage
celebrated in the year four hundredth, having no authority, not only because
it is particular, but also because it is convinced of error by the former
general of Laodicea. Again, the latter are that of Florence, and of Trent: of
which there is no authority: but because they are too late, as also because
they are papish and tyrannical.

II.
T(Hese terms or Epithetes) holy, Divine, and Canonical, are so called,
either properly in very deed, and according to the truth; or by a certain
similitude, that is from the opinion and ordinance of men, according to a
certain resemblance: and in both significations, they are taken with the
Fathers in general: in the former when they treat of the books truly
canonical; in the latter, when of the Apocryphal.

III.
IT belongs unto him only to prescribe, give, and maintain a Canon in the
church, who is the Author, Lord and Preserver of his Church.

IIII.
Neither does the Apocryphal confirm the authority of the Apocryphal, nor the
Councels of Florence and Trent, nor the Ecclesiastical reading, nor lastly the
Fathers, either by citing of places out of the Apocryphal, or intitling the
Apocryphal with the name of holy Scriptures; for the Canon of ecclesiastical
reading is one, and the Canon of says is another.

Distinctions for the perfection of the Scripture.
Whereas our Adversaries are wont to bring two kind of Arguments against the
perfection of the Scripture: the one against the necessity, the other against
the sufficiency thereof; we will treat of both together.

Against Bellarmine, 1. Tom. Lib. 4. Cap. 4.
I.
THere is a twofold necessity, the one absolute; the other by an Or
supposition.
Hypothesis: or something is said to be necessary two ways, either as the
Cause, or the Concausa.
Fellow-cause: the word of God revealed, is simply necessary to all men, as the
cause: but the Scripture as the Fellow cause. Now it follows not thus to
conclude; the Fathers until Moses used the necessary cause without this the
Fellow-cause; therefore we may: for a conclusion drawn from the change of time
is deceitful.

II.
A Tradition only is said to have been either After a sort or in part.
Simply or Absolutely.
secundum quid, that (...), without the Scripture, and so we confess a
tradition to have been until Moses, or simpliciter, and that we deny: for
they had in stead of Scripture, other innumerable Principles and Ru^diments.

III,
THe whole is said to be two ways; either according to quantity, or according
to the perfection of the Essence thereof: All the Books severally are
sufficient in their own Essential ^erfection, though according to their
^ntirenesse, and quantity they have not the sufficiency of the whole, but their
own.

IIII.
THese Books which perished either were not Canonical, or their substance is
found in those which are Canonical.

V
SOme precepts of God are expressed and manifest: some other inward and
hidden: God commanded his Word to be written down, both by the inward
inspiration of the spirit generally: and therefore is said to be inspired
Divinitus.
of God, as also expressly to certain persons in particular, Reu. 1.11.
Apoc. 1.11.

VI.
ALL things are contained in the Scripture, either expressly or Analogically:
so what we are to think^ of Women not circumcized: of Infants dead before the
eight day: of the Gentiles saved, we may know out of the Scripture Analogically.

VII.
A Principle of a Principle cannot be had, nor ought to be sought: Now the
Scripture is known to be divine, not from Tradition, but first from the inward
testimony of the spirit of Christ: secondly, from the testimony of the
Apostles, as the public Notaries in the Church: Thirdly, from the testimony
of the Scripture, as a divine Instrument: and lastly, from the ^^stimony of the
Church of God open^, and as it were, in a pillar, setting ^rth the testimony of
the Apostles, and ^f the Scripture.

VIII.
THe Scripture is not doubtful in it self, but unto us by accident, and ^ther
seems so to be through the cor^uption of our understanding: but God (...) an
infallible Interpreter of the same ^y his Spirit, and word written; and ^f this
divine tradition we have need ^r the understanding of the Scripture: or those
things which it behooveth us ^o know, concerning the equality of ^^e persons,
the proceeding of the Spi^ite, original sin, the descension of Christ into
Hell; are sufficiently decla^ed in the Scripture for our Salvation.

IX.
THose things which are spoken concerning the Virginity of Marie, after the
birth of Christ, the Passover to be celebrated on the Lords day, the
Paedabaptismo.
Baptism of Infantes and Purgatory either are not necessary, as the first and
the second, or are found Analogically in the Scriptures, as the third or are
false as the fourth.

The Places which are cited by Bellarmine against the perfection of the
Scripture, 1. Tom. Lib. 4. Cap. 5. are these.
Ioh. 16.12. Ans. The Place treate^ of special things; the knowledge o^ which
is infinite, which therefore als^ are expressed in the Scriptures, not i^
particular, and one by one; but b^ Word, and in general: or else o^ those
things, the Revelation whereof, according to the dispensation o^ time, Christ
would defer until the time of that extraordinary and visibl^ communicating of
the holy Ghost.

1. Cor. 11.2. Ans. In the holy Supper of the Lord, two things concurre^ the
very substantial things of the Supper, to wit, the matter and form:
se^^ndly, the mere Ceremonial things, the Rites: Those are of themselves
^^cessary, and were most faithfully de^ered by the Apostles: but these (...)
after a sort, Secundu^ qu id.
for that which is moral (...) them is necessary, and therefore ^ly written
down of the Apostles: ^t that which is Ceremonial, only is (...)
Indifferent, Adiapho^um.
and left free to the ^hurches.

2. These. 2.15. Ans. The Word of ^^adition is Equivocall: for either in
^enerall it signifies every doctrine, ^owsoever delivered by Word or Wri^g, or
it signifies in Particular, or ^ppositely, that doctrine which is not ^itten:
in the first signification, the ^postle takes it, and not in the se^nd.

1. Tim. 6.2. and 2. Tim. 1.13. Ans. that the pledge and pattern of whole^me
words cannot be otherwise ex^ounded then of the Scripture it self, and the
substance of christian doctrine: ^ll the circumstances of the place do teach.

2 Ioh. 1.2. Ans. That kind of reasoning has no consequence, which is drawn
from particulars, either deeds or rytes, which it was not needful to
express in writing: but the case is altered concerning the very substance of
the doctrine of Faith.

Distinctions for the playnenesse of the Scripture against Bellarmine, 1. Tom.
Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
I.
THe clearenesse or obscurity of the Scripture is twofold; the one to us,
partly through the Nature of the things, partly through our own infirmity:
the other in manner and mean of the Scriptures: every obscurity whereof
mention is made among the Fathers, is not of the Scriptures; but either of the
things in the Scripture, for the majesty thereof, or else ours, who, without
the inward light of the spirit cannot know them, and those things which we
know, we know only in part, and after an imperfect manner.

II.
THe matters of the Scripture, though for their majesty they are unto us
obscure, yet as they are proposed unto us in the Scripture they are not
obscure; for the manner of speaking is every way perspicuous: neither is there
in the Scriptures either any contrariety or ambiguity or falsehood; nor do the
speeches which go Hyperbaticae.
out of Grammatical order, Phrases, Tropes and Figures, note any obscurity of
them.

III.
THe use of commentaries do not simply argue the obscurity of the Scriptures:
but our Infirmity; for we do not conceive the doctrine of the Scripture in it
self perfect after a perfect manner, but according to our size or (measure) by
means imperfect, and (as they speak) proportionated.

IIII.
THe doctrines which are propounde^ in the Scriptures, are three waye^
considered; first, in themselves; ^^condly, so far as they are propo^^ded in
the Scriptures; thirdly, so far (...) they are of us understood: the first an^
third way, the Scriptures in some measure are obscure, but the second way they
are most plain.

The Places which Bellarmine there does cite, are these.
Psalm. 119.18. Ans, It is one thing to treat of our Internal and Natural
blindness, which must be helped with the Internal Illumination of the eyes of
the mind: but another thing of the obscurity of the Scripture in it self, and
therefore the consequence from the persons to the doctrine is (a consequence) of
no force.

Luke 24.32.17. Act. 8.31. (24) An. The means which serve for the
understanding and exposition of the Scripture appertain not to the Scripture,
but to our infirmity, which is wont and ought to be helped by the
interpretation of the same.

2. Pet. 3.16. Ans. Obscurity of things in themselves, by reason of that
Majesty they have, ought to be distinguished from the manner of delivering
them, for obscure matters may be plainly delivered: Neither is that
consequence of force which is from the integral part to the whole, because it
is one thing that the Scripture is hard, and another thing that certain points
in the scriptures are hard.

OF GOD AND THE Attributes of GOD,
the Part Confirmatiue. CHAP. III.
THe second Principle of holy Divinity is GOD: The second we call it, not in
the order of Nature; for nothing is before God; but of our better knowledge or
understanding, because as the Scripture is the first Instrument of every
healthful knowledge, concerning God: so God is the first, and supreme
Principle of the being of those things which serve to this knowledge, on whom
all things immediately depend.

Now concerning God (whom to be, both nature and reason has sufficiently
taught the natural man to make him inexcusable, as also the Scripture and
Faith has sufficiently taught the Christian man to his salvation: Romans
1.19.20.21. Ioh. 17.3.
) we must know two things; first, what he is, to wit, his Nature: secondly,
who he is, that is his Attributes.

The Nature of God according to the manner of divine Revelation, and measure of
our knowledge, may and should be known two ways: the one is of the Name, the
other of the thing or definition, by which two, every knowledge touching any
thing is wont to be made plain or perfect.

Whatsoever is spoken of God, certain it is that that thing is not God which
is spoken of him, because he is Ineffable (or unable to be spoken of) yet since
a Name is the signification of that thing which might be comprehended as far
as might be: diverse Names are attributed unto God in the Scriptures, whereby
the Nature of God is not so much expressed, as that thing which may be known
of us concerning the same.

And all those are wont to be expressed and declared in a double manner, the
one Negative, the other Affirmative or Positive.

The Negative names which are given unto God, as Incomprehensible, Infinite:
remove far from him the imperfections of the Creatures.

Those which are Affirmative, are either uttered Essentially, or Relatiuely, or
by a Metaphor.

Essentially, whether it be properly such as that proper and Essential name
of God IEHOVA, and others equivalent unto the same, which cannot be
attributed, (no not Analogically) to any Creature: or commonly, which may
indeed be applied to men, yet are meet for God, both for the manner of
excellency, as God, King, good, wise, etc. as also by mean of the cause not
depending, as Creator, Redeemer, etc. all which are distinguished in God, not
in respect of the Essence, but of the Effects.

Those which are said to be Relative, are the names of the persons, of which
there is no commeation, or confusion, but are severally proper to the several
persons, to wit, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

These are vtered Metaphorically, which are given to God, either after humane
affection (or passion) as man, angry, sleeping,, or else by a congruency and
similitude, as a Lion, a Stone, a River, etc.

From the consideration of the names of God, we proceed to the explication of
the thing, or the description of God himself.

Now God is (as the Hebrews most briefly define), JEHOVAH ELOHIM, Exodus 6.2.
and 3.13.
the Lord God, that is, one Essence of three persons.

Of this description there are two members, the one of the Essence, and the
Unity of the Essence: the other of the Persons and the Trinity of the persons,
which two can neither be separated from the declaration of the divine Nature,
nor ought to be confounded in the same: for as there is an exceeding great and
indivisible unity of the divine Essence in the plurality of the persons: (for
the Essence of the Father is the Essence of the Son and the holy Ghost:) so
is there a real and different Distinction of the persons in the unity of
Essence, (for to be the Father is not to be the Son or the holy Ghost.)

We discern the unity of the Essence two ways: first by the verity of the
Essence: secondly, by the manner of Unity.

The Essence is that whereby God both is and existeth by himself and of
himself absolutely: for he alone is that thing which is, and who is, that is,
a being not leaning upon any other.

The manner of unity, is not of knitting together, nor of the general, nor of
the special, nor of consent, but of number, because there cannot be many Gods.

This manner of the unity is proved by three arguments, by the testimonies of
Scripture, both very many and evident, even of the old and new Testament,
Deuteronomy. 6.4 Esa. 44.6. 1. Tim. 2.5. 1. Cor. 8.4
by beginning, which as it is the first, so of necessity it ought to be but
one: for two or more infinite beginnings are not granted by Essential
perfection which the persons have in common, whole in them all, and whole in
each one: for the whole Godhead is equal in it own perfection Ioh. 5.26. Mat.
1.27.
.

Through this Identitie of Essence in the persons, or most single, and very one
unity, Christ is said to be in the Father, and the Father in Christ, John. 14
10.
which thing of the Fathers is called an union of the persons.

This Essence which is one in number and individual, is improperly said to
be communicated from one person to another, whereas that of the Essence is an
Essence of it self: and in respect of it, the three persons in the Godhead,
are of themselves God: but most properly it is said to be common to the three
persons, not as the universal to the things singular, not as the accident to
the Subjects, not as the cause to the Effects, not as the whole to the parts:
Lastly, not as one thing to others, but as the thing to his proper manners,
which are in the thing, for the persons are the manners of subsisting or divine
Essence; from which they are distinguished, not by the respect alone, nor by
the real distinction, but by the degree and manner of the thing.

The name therefore of persons which was used of the Fathers against Sabellius,
as also the name both of Essence against Samosatenus and of both against the
Arians, signifies three things first the (Individuum) it self or singular
thing subsisting, intelligible, incommunicable, and not sustained of another:
secondly, the very propertyes of every Individuum, by which they are
distinguished from others, and which also the Schoolmen have called Principia
Individuantia: lastly, these both together, they are called subsisting
Individua, together with their properties and the manners of being, because
they signify nothing else then the Essence subsist^ng in some one Individuum,
and by the property thereof severed and limited.

These persons are three, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, Esa.
63.7.8. Mat. 3.16.17. Ioh. 15.26.
distinct, not by degree, state or dignity, but by order, number, and the
manner of doing.

By Order, for the Father is the first person of himself, not of another, not
in regard of Essence, but in regard of person existing, Ioh. 5.7. 1. Ioh. 6.
the Son is the second in respect of person, in deed, of the Father existing
by eternal generation: of which as the truth is, Hyperphisica.
supernatural, so likewise is the manner unspeakable) but as touching his
absolute Essence, he ^s of himself, and God of himself, the holy Ghost is the
third coeternally proceeding and coming forth from the Father and the Son,
in regard of person, but God of himself with the Father and the Son, in
regard of Essence.

By Number, for they are among themselves truly distinct, and every one by
themselves, subsisting for the relations of the persons, are incommutable, and
incommunicable, the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, which are not names
of Essence, but of relations, and persons: and the properties which from thence
flow, and come forth, distinguish the persons among themselus, to wit,
paternity, or a not being begotten: a being begotten, and a proceeding, which
are works, Ad intra, ad extra.
from within, and divided, that is proper to every person incommunicably.

By the Manner of doing: for even in the works, from without, which are
Indivisible, the persons indeed work the same things, but not after the same
manner: the Father creates, the Son redeemeth, the holy Ghost inlighteneth:
in respect of the cause and the effect, or absolute finishing equally and
inseparably; but in respect of the bound distinctly or severally.

These three persons are God, three in unity vnconfusedly, and one in Trinity
Indivisibly, that the Father is God all men confess.

That the Son is God, three things do prove the equality of divine essence,
with the Father, divine names, and the essential proper things of God.

The Equality, both Christ proves Analogically by his works, Ioh 5.18
and Paul lays it down expressly, Phil. 2.6 Col 2.9.
as also very many places of the old and new Testament Parallelorum.
mutually compared together, do confirm the same.

The Divine Names which are attributed unto Christ, are all those which are
said to be of God essentially, whether properly he be called IEHOVA, Esa. 43.
or commonly he be called GOD.

The Essential proper things of God which are attributed unto Christ, are
either divine Esa. 9.6
properties, as Eternity, Idiomata
universal presence, omniscience, Apoc. 1.17.
omnipotency, Mat. 28.20.
or divine works, as of Creation, Apoc. 2 23.
Redemption, Phil. 3.21.
Miracles, Io. 5.46.
or divine worship, as Invocation, Faith Ep. 1.1.2
.

That the holy Spirit is God, the self same course of Arguments does prove:
the equality Christ prooveth, Mat. 8.2
the Divine Names, which are attributed unto him, are both that proper name of
JEHOVAH, Phi. 2.10
and the common of God and others, Ioh. 15 6
the same proper things are attributed unto him in the Scripture, whether they
be the very properties, as eternity, Act. 1.16
universal presence, 1. Cor. 3.16. Act. 4 24.
Inscience, Heb. 9.14.
omnipotency, Romans 8.9
or divine works, as of creation, Ioh. ^4.26.
of redemption, Heb. 3.7.
of miracles Job. ^6 15.
or divine worship. 1. Cor. 2.10. Romans 1.5. Mat. 28.9
.

And these three persons are one God, for although personally the Father be
one; the Son be another, and the holy Ghost another person: yet Essencially
the Father is not one thing, the Son another thing, and the holy Ghost
another thing.

The truth and perfection of this both Unity and distinction, is seen in the
knowledge of the Attributes or proprieties both of the Essence and the persons.

We call the Proprieties of the persons, those Characteristica Idiomata.
marking Idiomes, or limiting Attributes, which coming from the persons, are
not only limited in the persons, but also do limite the persons, both in
themselves and among themselves: for we consider, as it were a double respect
of those unto the persons, the one personal, the other Notionall, both in
relation, but in a diverse manner and degree.

The Personal respect is in those properties, which together note indeed a
Relation, yet especially according to the use which they have obtained in the
holy Scriptures, and among the Doctors of the Church, they note and point ^ut
the very subjects Hipostases.
or subsistings, as ^re the names of the persons: the No^ionall respect is in
those properties which are called Notions or Relations: ^he use of which is in
relation alone, as ^re the names of Generation, Nativity, procession.

The Properties of Essence we call Attributes in God, Essential to God,
whereby both the verity of the Essence clearly appears in it self, and is
distinguished from others; yet so, that they really differ neither from the
Essence, nor among themselves: not from the Essence, because they are so in one
Essence, as that they are the very Essence: for God is a simple working power,
not among themselves: for that which is in God is one, and from the first
unity, every difference and every number ought utterly to be far away.

But because they differ neither from the Essence, nor among themselves, they
are no mean qualities between power and act; but they are in God most inward,
actual, perpetual, (...) from his form and act essential: whence it is,
that God is a substance without composition of matter and form, with out
quality good, true, just, etc. without quality or bound, exceeding great and
incomprehensible, without motion or action, without passion pitiful, without
situation of place most present, without time the first and the last, without
habit or addition; the Lord of all things: for all the properties are
affirmed of God Essentially, and that both formally, and in the abstract,
because of the individual perfection of the Essence, as also subiectiuely, and
in the concreate, because of the verity of God existing.

Of these properties some do note out unto us the Essence, as it were a
Priori, partly Negatiuely as Infinitiues, and partly Affirmatively, as
simplicity: some other as it were a Posteriori, and that partly Properly, as
those things which are in GOD principally, and by themselves, as Power,
Knowledge, Will: partly improperly, as those things which are spoken of God
Metaphorically, or by way of translation, or according to the similitude of a
humane passion, (or affection) as Love, Anger, etc.

Those which are in God a Priori, are given to God one and only according to
his Essence, Action, and Use: and they are said to be incommunicable, as
Simplicity, Infinitiues.

Simplicity is in God altogether Indivisible and Absolute, admitting no either
diversity or composition of parts, or accidents, neither in himself, nor in
the persons, nor in his works: not in himself, because God is the same, that
his Essence is, and his Essence is the same that the being of God is: Ephesians.
5.26. 1 Ioh. 1.7.
for God is the principal, first, and pure act, of whom all things are
wrought, and by whom all things do work.

Not in the Persons, because the Essence is whole and the self same in them,
as whole, and the self same abiding in every one, whence we say, that the
Father is in the Son, the Son in the Father, the holy Ghost in both, and each
one in every one: not in works, because the Essence, Will, and Action, are
altogether the same thing: for as the Essence of God is naturally disposed, so
it wills, and does: and again, as it wills and does, so his Essence is
disposed. Neither do the Act, and the thing done differ in God, but they are
the selfsame thing, so as while one thing seems to be done by the Godhead,
all things are together effected in one thing, and while many things, one thing
is effected in many things.

By this simplicity the exceeding great perfection of God is concluded: for
that which is one, and most simple, is of all most sufficient and most content
with himself: and therefore is both self sufficient for himself, from
himself, and in himself, to all things, and in all things: as also to others
a pattern and cause of all perfection, Nature and grace.

Infinitnes in God, is not a magnitude or multitude, which we may not pass
through, but an incomprehensible power, or an incomprehensiblenes of an act,
whereby he is neither from without, nor from within finite, in himself every
where whole, or most inwardly in all things by his Essence and power.

For, by his Essence God is every where, Psa. 145.3. 1. Rin. 8.27. Ier. 23.23
or by speaking more properly, he is every where it self: that is, that self
same thing, which we call every where, being in every place without definition,
dimention, or circumscription, in every time without changeablenes, whole in
all things, whole in each thing, whole in himself: the manner of this
Infinitnes is, that it be neither multiplied, norrarified, and that the Essence
of God be not made diverse, but the same whole and one, that it be said to be
present with all things, and with each thing, yet of none contained: according
to which manner we say, that God is every where and no where: to wit, in
that he is contained of none, he is no where, but in that he contains all
things, he is every where.

By his power, God is every where, because by him this Vniversum.
whole frame was both perfected, and is affected: yet so, that neither by
perfecting that power of God is weakened, for it is unmeasurable and infinite,
no time, no where failing, nor by affecting does suffer; for he is God of
power super-essentiall, not only Superficies.
comprehending the outmost parts of all things, but also with it whole self,
pearcing and passing thorough the depth of all things.

That which necessarily, and as it were by an Issuing forth Co^sectarium.
follows upon this Infinitenes, is immutability, and that which likewise
follows Immutability, is Eternity, for he which is Infinite, can neither be
moved nor changed, according to utter and inner qualities, and whereas he has
in himself, and from himself the fullness of perfection, I ac. 1.17 Mal. 3.6.
Essence and Power, he cannot be extended, neither concerning Essence, nor
concerning work: he which is immutable, is not changed into another nature,
but possesses the same whole, neither receyving, nor ever hereafter about to
receive, but without time he is, that he is, and that he is not, he never
may be, and that is it which we call Psalm. 90.2 Apoc. 1.8.
eternal.

Those properties which being from that which is the latter, are in God, be
spoken indeed of God principally, and by themselves, but yet according to the
proportion both of his Act, and use in the Creatures, they are communicated
unto them, and are Ex concreto.
jointly uttered of them: these therefore are in God most inwardly according to
beginning and immovably, but in the Creatures Accidentally, by participation,
and after a mooueable manner, as are these amongst the chiefest; Power,
Knowledge, and Will.

Power in God is that, whereby he perfectly does all things which he wills
and all things which he can will, he can perfectly do, this is called
absolute; that actual, And both of them, are active.

Now God wills by act, partly Internal and Eternal, which act is in God,
either according to beginning, and limite, as the understanding of God: or else
it is indeed according to beginning in God, but according to limitation in
another, as Providence, Predestination, and in respect of this Act, the actual
power in God is called Immane^t (or abiding in) partly also by act external
and temporal, as Creation, Redemption, and in respect of this act, the actual
power in God is called Tra^sient (or going forth.)

He can Will infinite things Mat. 3.9.
as his being is Infinite, and so likewise he can do infinite things which
are absolutely possible, and yet never shall be determined to a certain order
of things; he can then do more things then he does, if he will, yet he
never will do them.

But as he cannot will either things contrary, as evil, good, or things
contradictory, as to be, and not to be; so can he not do, either contrary
things which in a nature most simple and incommutable cannot subsist, or
things contradictory, which in the Essence of God, void of all falsehood, and
in truth most absolute and perfect, have no place; yet not to be able to do
these things is a token of power: for he is exceeding able, who enjoys a
constant and unchangeable power, and by no means departs from that very
thing which is one: for it is a point of infirmity to be able to do things
opposite, and the property of one that is altogether powerful, is to abide
and persist in the best thing.

Knowledge in God is that, whereby he knows both himself, in himself, and
out of himself, all and singular things by himself, by an indivisible and
immutable act: for God alone knows and understands himself, Mat. 11.27.
by a most inward and perfect Act, he being infinite comprehends himse^fe
being infinite, infinitely, and yet while by understanding himself, he
comprehends himself, the understanding of God whereby he comprehends, is
not one, and that which he comprehends another: for to be, to understand, to
comprehend, are reciprocated (or made to have recourse each one to the other.)

He knows also out of himself, all things, and each thing, in a common and
distinct knowledge, Heb. 4.13.
of the matter, of the form, and of both their Accidents, even of good and
badde things: but he knows indeed the good things by himself, the evil
by the good opposite thereunto.

Yet he knows both himself and other things by an indivisible act, in that
by one act of understanding and a whole looking on at once, he comprehends
the universal distance of things, both local and temporal, possessing all
things at once, and always which with us by times are unfolded: and this
indivisible and present knowledge of God is unchangeable, as well of things
contingent, as of things neecessary, laying the condition of co^tingency on
things contingent, as also the law of necessity on things necessary.

Will in God, is that whereby God freely and unchangeably wills his own
glory, as the end, and all other things as the means unto this end, this
will, for that it is of the end, and of the means is the first and supreme
cause of things, comprehending with all other causes in it self, and
subordaining them to that first cause.

And albeit there is but one will in one Essence, yet by reason of the Obiectes
and Effects of good and evil things, we distinguish the same into
Beneplacitum and placitum.
good Pleasure and Pleasure, for in respect of the good Effects whereof God
chiefly and by himself, entendeth the end and means, we term that Will
his good pleasure, Ephesians. 1.5.
but in respect of the evil effects in which GOD indeed chiefly and by
himself intends the end, yet not the means themselves but for the end, we
call it his pleasure. 1 Cor. 10.5.
.

This will of pleasure, and good pleasure in God is unchangeable, that it can
neither be deceyved nor deceive: not be deceyved, in respect of that secret
will, according to which God foreknew, determined, and willed all things from
eternal Romans 9.19. Esa. 46.10.
.

Not deceive, in respect of that revealed will: according to which God has
communicated the knowledge and revelation of that eternal will, as much as is
necessary for our salvation.

OF GOD AND THE ATtributes of GOD, the Part CONFVTING.
Distinctions for the UNITY of ESSENCE.
I.
THe name of God is taken either properly, and that both essentially and
personally, or improperly, and that both by way of Concession. and Imitation,
when the Scripture teaches of false and feigned gods, as also Appellatiuely,
and by a congruency when it treats of gods, not by nature, but in respect of
divine gifts and office.

II.
ONe and three are not opposed privatiuely, because both are truly uttered of
God in a diverse respect, one in respect of Essence, three in respect of the
persons.

Distinctions for the TRINITY of the Persons, and first for the distinction of
them.
I.
THere is one respect of those who are both finite and divisible, who in this
self same point are distinguished as in persons, so also in Essence: but there
is another respect of God whose Essence as it is Infinite, so is it indivisible
also, and therefore (...) only.

II.
THose Actions which are common in cause and effect are distinguished by the
bound of the Action or Effect: for the cause of working in things belonging
unto God is the same, and the work the same, but the manner of working is
diverse.

III.
THose names which are given to the persons in the Scripture, some do point
out the persons themselves, some the properties of the persons, and some the
operations extra personas, out of the persons.

The Places.
Ioh, 14.9. Ans. It is one thing to treat of the order of the persons among
them selves, and another thing of the order of our knowledge unto them.

Ibidem 10. Ans. We badly pro^ede from the Phrase and manner of ^peaking
concerning the Essence, to that which is concerning the person, or some things
are spoken absolutely ^f the persons in respect of the Essence, and some
things relatiuely in that they ^re persons.

Col. 1.15. Answer. There is one ^mage Accidental, and another Substantial.

Secondly for the Coessence of the persons.
I.
IT is one thing to treat of the Original beginning of the Essence, which ^n
things pertaining to God is none, and another thing of the original of the
persons: the Son and the holy Ghost, have only the original of person, the
one by generation, the other by procession eternal, but neither of Essence

II.
HE that has al things, and has them by nature, and not by grace is not lower
then he of whom he has the^ for but one of both respects can be granted to be
of Inequality.

III.
A Sending and obedience take no^ away equality of power, neythe^ is he that
sends, and he that is se^ distinguished by properties Essential but
Personal.

Places of Scripture.
1. Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.6. God alone is called Father in Scripture in a double
respect: first oppositely, to the Creatures and counterfeyted gods, not
exclusiuely to the Son and holy Ghost: secondly, by an excellency, God alone
is so called, to wit, because he is not from another, no not in respect of
person.

Luc. 11. the Name of Father is taken sometimes Hypostatically, when the
Godhead within it self is described; and the persons of the Godhead are among
themselves distinguished, some^es Essentially, when the outward ^rkes and
benefits of God toward Creatures, and the Church are de^bed,

Distinctions for the Attributes, for the simplicity of GOD.
WHatsoever is simple, it is so, either absolutely or by it self,
comparatively, and in respect of bo^s; after the first manner, God is ^ple,
after the second manner, the ^gels and the Souls are: but if any ^mposition
seems to be given to ^OD, it is altogether Acciden^l, either in respect of
the acti^s or the Subjects on which he wor^th: or lastly in respect of the
Propo^ion which concerning God is vtte^d.

For the INFINITNES.
GOD by speaking properly is not in a place, because he is no where ^ontayned:
yet every where, because he contains and reaches unto al thing not in
quantity but in power.

For the IMMVTABILITIE.
WHatsoever change seems to b^ ascribed unto God in the scriptures, it is not
in God, but in the thing and therefore when Repentance is uttered concerning
God, it signifies n^ the affect in God, but the effect of Go^ in men.

For the ETERNITY.
SOmewhat is said to be Eternal^ either properly or Analogically Properly,
which by Nature has neither beginning nor ending: Analog^cally, which having a
beginning b^ the grace and power of God, has no^ an end, after the former
manner God is eternal, after the second, the Angels and the Souls.

For the KNOWLEDGE.
THe Act of Knowledge in God, is indivisible, wherefore neither foreknowledge,
nor remembrance are not ^ncident unto God, but in respect of us.

For the POWER.
POwer in God takes away all that, which is either of finite power or want of
power.

For the WILL.
THe Will of God is either absolute, or Conditional, neither are there
contradictory Wills in God, since the things and persons are both alike, or
after the same manner.

The end of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE first Part of Holy DIVINITY, that is of the Works of
GOD, or the Causes of our Salvation.
CHAP. I.
AFter that we have treated of the (...) of holy Divinity, we must consider
concerning the parts thereof.

Now the parts of Divinity, according to the consideration of the end and of
the means to the end, are two, the one of the causes of our salvation, and so
of the works and Effects of God: the other of his Subject, to wit, of man,
and of the diverse state of man: for, salvation which is the nearest end of
Divinity, is considered two ways, both in it self, and the causes thereof
simply, as also by relation unto the Subject, unto which it was ordained: for
which respect it is diversely modified (or measured) according to the manifold
condition of the subject wherein it is.

The works of God, of which we must treat in the first part of Divinity; are
of two sorts, Inward and Immanent, Outward or Going out; those are in the very
Essence of God by an Internal and Eternal Act: these pass from (or go out
of) God into the Creatures, by an external and temporal act: of the first
kind, is Predestination: of the second, if you respect the works of Nature, is
Creation and Providence, if of Grace, Redemption, and restoring again.

OF PREDESTINATION The Part Confirmatiue. CHAP. II.
PVrposing to speak of Predestination, we must declare first what Name it is,
secondly, what thing it is.

Whereas to Predestinate, is to appoint and ordain things to their ends, Romans
8.29. Ephesians. 1.5.
according to the manifold respect, and consideration of those ends; it is wont
to be taken diversely among the Doctors of the Church.

Now the ends generally, to which things created are ordained, are two: the
one, is that to which things are carried by the order of nature, or according
to nature, by the ordinance of God: the other is that which exceeds the
proportion (or measure) of the created nature, and respects the state of man
out of this temporal and natural life: the one, of the Schoolmen is called
Proportionate, the other Superexcedent.

In respect of the former end, Predestination is a decree of God, or a
judgment of Gods understanding, as well in general of all things created,
Act. 4.28.
as in special of all Creatures reasonable, which were to be put over to their
certain end. And in this signification it is also of others called Providence,
and by us was said to be a kind of those inward and immanent actions of God,
in respect of the latter end. Predestination is taken two ways Synecdochice.
Synecdochically, even as the state of man out of this natural life is
twofold, either commonly or Improperly, for the eternal decree of God
concerning men to be saved or punished, or singularly and properly, for the
Act of decreeing unto eternal salvation; which was in the mind (or
understanding) of God: and in this signification we take Predestination in
this place.

This Predestination is to be discerned two ways or by two degrees, first in
it self, and the causes thereof simply: secondly, oppositely unto the
contraries of the same.

Predestination therefore is an Act of Gods good pleasure, whereby God from
everlasting purposed in himself, out of the universality of Creatures to make
some and certain of them partakers of his grace and glory in Christ to his
praise and their salvation.

The Primary Efficient Cause of this Predestination is God, in whom, and from
whom the very Act of Predestination is, as it were from his divine
understanding, and in it fore-shapened altogether (or always) going before all
things and causes: 2. Ephesians. 1.5. Romans 8.29 2. Tim. 1.23.
secondly, Impulsive, which is the benevolent (or well-willing) affection of
the Will of God in Christ, which in Scripture is called the good pleasure of
the Will of God Ephesians. 1.5.
.

And this act of Gods good pleasure, which in God is simple and uniform,
according to our humane manner of understanding has two, as it were distinct
Predestinations: the former is of the end, the latter of the means unto the
end: that distinctly we use to call election or foreknowledge: 1. Pet. 1.2.
Romans 9.11 8.29.
but this by a common name, purpose Prothesis.
and Predestination, but both of them is a fore-ordinance from everlasting,
before all things and the causes that were in the things Romans 9 19. Act. 13.48
Romans 9.11 and 11.6.
.

The matter of Predestination, or to speak more properly, the Object is man,
who out of the common nature of his kind, was to be lifted up or advanced: Of
this object according to that double respect of the act of Gods purpose, there
ought to be a double consideration; for if you respect the fore-ordinance of
the end, man commonly and absolutely Romans 9.20. and 21.35.
is the matter of Predestination: but if of the means unto the end, man is, who
was to perish of himself, and in himself and guilty in Adam Esa. 54.16. Romans
9.22 1. The. 5.9
. The form speciciall indeed and proper is an adoption into Sons by Christ,
Ephesians. 1.5.
but commonly that whole manner of order in respect both of decree and
execution.

In respect of Decree, the order of degrees Romans 8.30.
is this Foreknowledge, by which God fore-knew them that were to be
Predestined: before appointment, or a determining purpose, by which God has
fore-determined the Predestination of them, that were fore-knowne, both by
electing them from everlasting, and by preparing for them elected grace in the
present world, and glory in that to come.

In respect of Execution, the order of degrees is this, an effectual vocation,
Romans 8.30.
Justification, and Glorification, that is, a gracious beginning ^roceeding
together with a glorious pe^^ection of divine blessings, by the perfect
conjunction of Christ (or by the perfect joining of them together with Christ.)

The End Remote is Gods glory, the Subalterna.
mean (or indefinite, indifferent) End is that we should be holy; the last end
is life and glorification Ephesians. 1.6
.

And this is the manner of Predestination in it self, and the causes thereof
simply: we must now consider of the opposites and contraries of the same.

Of these although there be a diverse respect, yet Sinecdochically, it is wont
to be signified and showed by the common name of reprobation: in which
signification it is distinguished both from eternal Predestination, which
abusiuely is called Reprobation, as also from that part of Gods decree, which
either Logically is called Non Election, or Theologically a Preteritio.
passing by, and which properly is called Reprobation.

But forasmuch as being opposite to Predestination whereof we have treated, it
signifies that whole fore-ordinance and manner of order unto the end, whereunto
the Reprobates are appointed, of it we must speak in the first signification.

Now Reprobation is an Act of Gods pleasure (or decree) whereby God from
everlasting has purposed in himself, to pass by the greater part of the
Universality of Creatures, as touching the communion of his healthful and
supernatural grace and glory, and the same also before hand to condemn, that
were not like to abide or (...) in the integrity of their first original
estate, according to his justice, for their sins to the setting forth of his
glory.

The Cause Efficient of this reprobation: first principal is God; second,
impulsive is his own pleasure and will. Pro. 6.3 Ephesians. 1.11. Prou. 16.4
.

But this act which in God is simple and uniform as touching us, in respect of
the order unto the end, ought two ways to be considered and distinguished: for
there is in God first an act of Preteritionis.
passing by, called of the Schoolmen, a Reprobation, Passive and Negative,
before all things and causes that were like to be in the things, or from the
things, whereof no other reason, either can be given, or ought to be sought,
besides the pleasure and will of God Romans 9.11.12.13. Mat. 1.23.
. Then there is an Act of the preparation of punishment, or fore-condemnation
from everlasting, 2. These. 2.9. Romans 6.23.
called of the Schoolmen Affirmative and Active Reprobation before all things
indeed, but not before the causes fore-known, and considered to be like to be
in the things or from the things: but it is a respective Act of sin, as the
necessary Antecedent, because as God in time justly punishes, and condemns
man for sin: so God also from everlasting has justly decreede to punish man,
and fore-condemned him, by (or from) the Ex Hypothesi.
supposition of sin.

The matter of Reprobation, or rather the right object, are all and singular
Reprobates, and the condition of this matter or object, according to that
double respect of the Act, ought two ways to be considered: for as touching
that former Act of God and passing by, the matter of Reprobation is considered
to be Man in general, without any respect of any quality, Romans 9.11.
but as touching the latter, which is of Predamnation, or appointment unto
punishment, the matter of Reprobation is man, in that he is a sinner, or for
his sins to be punished, by the necessity of Gods justice Ephesians. 2.3.5.
.

The form special is indeed, the not appointment of the^ into the adoption of
Children, but in common, it is that whole manner of order unto the end, in
respect of both the Acts, to wit, both of Preterition and Predamnation.

Of Preterition, whereof this is the manner of order, Prescience or
foreknowledge, not that which is of special affection and good will, but that
of understanding and knowledge in God, which otherwise is also called in the
Scriptures, the Purpose of God, and whereby God foreknew them that were to be
rejected, both who, and how many they should be: fore-appointment, by which he
has determined the Reprobation of them, that were forknown, in not choosing
them by a special love in Christ, but in leaving them to themselves in their
own nature, which fore-appointment is wont to be signified sometime by the
name of Preordaining, sometimes of coagmention, and sometimes of hatred Romans
9.22.
.

Of Predamnation and the execution ^ereof, this is the order, a just forsa^ng,
which is either of trial, God ^ot giving his grace, Romans 9.21.
or of punish^ent, God taking away all his saving ^tes, and delivering them
into the po^er of Satan Ioh. 13.2 1. These. 2.9 10.
.

Hardening, and those things, which ^se to accompany Romans 9.18.
the same, even unto the guilty condemnation of man, which of some are called
the Effects of Reprobation, but more fitly and truly ^he Consequents or
degrees of order unto the end.

The end of Reprobation first remote, is the setting forth of Gods glory: Romans
9.
second the mean (or Indifferent) end, the declaration of the liberty of God:
2. Romans 9.21.
the last and nearest, Romans 9 28.
the execution of his justice, in the punishment of the Reprobates.

OF PREDESTINATION, The Part Confuting.
I.
SOlutions or distinctions for the cause efficient: Predestination signifies
two things; the determination of the end, and the ordinance of the mean^ unto
the end: of both the first cause i^pulsiue, is the will of God.

II.
PRedestination is either taken mo^ specially, for the Predestination o^ the
Saints, and differs not only i^ the thing, but also in the manner, from
Election: or more generally, for every fore-appointment of order unto the
certain end: in which signification, the three parts thereof may be put, to
wit the appointment of the beginning, the means, and end.

III.
REprobation is taken either Negatiuely, for not Election or affirmatively, for
the preparation of punishment.

IIII.
IT is one thing to treat of the first act of Predestination and Reprobation,
which is Gods decree of choosing and (...) choosing, or passing by, which is
^solute; and another thing to treat (...) the second, which is respective, of
^posing indeed, unto the means, where the cause is in God only, but of ^t
choosing unto sin, whereof the ^use is in man, but the ordination from ^od.

V.
THe second Act of Reprobation, or the ordination unto punishment is
^^stinguished into that which is simple, ^^d compound, or comparatiue; the one
that whereby one is ordained unto ^unishment; but the other, whereby in (...)
unequal condition, the one is more ^en the other: the cause of that without
God supposes the merit of man: ^ut of this without God, no reason can ^e
given.

The Places for faith foreseen.
2. These. 2.13. Ans, The conclusion is ^f no force from the cause of salvation
^nstrumentall, to the cause of salvation Efficient.

Act. 23.48, Ans. There is (...) Consequence from the state, mark and
condition of the persons which we^ elected to the causes of Election, eyth^
impulsive or meritorious.

Romans 8.29. Answer. The Pres^ence or foreknowledge of God, is n^ the
Consequent, or the Effect of thing but the Antecedent: neither dooth^ signify
in the place cited, a foreseeing of the beginning; but the special lo^ of God:
but the foreknowledge of approbation is one, and that of naked science and
knowledge is another.

Heb. 11.6. It is one thing to tre^ of the first cause of Election, and another
thing of the means and subordinate causes: for faith is the proper and only
Instrument of our Justification, and reconciliation with God, of which mention
is made in this place.

Romans 11.20. It is one thing to treat of the perseverance of the Saints, but
another thing of the election: neither ought those which are the means to be
mingled with the Causes and beginnings.

Places for good Works.
Romans 8.29. The Conformity of ^^e Image of the Son of God is the ^onsequent
of Predestination, but not ^e Efficient and meritorious cause there^f, and
those words which are to be ^^pounded according to the sense of the ^postle,
by the understanding of the ^erbe Substantive (Were) ought not to ^e taken in a
contrary meaning.

1. Tim. 2.20. to treat of the seals of ^aith, which of the Apostle are
reckoned ^o be two, the one Inward, the note (or ^nowledg) of divine
approbation: the other outward, the avoiding of iniquity; of which the Apostle
speaks in this ^lace, as also to treat of the cause and beginning of our
salvation and election are things diverse.

Apoc. 3.11.4. It is one thing to treat of the crown of Ministry, and
another thing of the crown of eternal life, and the worthiness which in
scripture is attributed to the elect, is not (...) natural excellency, but of
meerenes o^ fitness by God given freely: also the^ is one by inherence in the
faithful; and another by imputation: of which mention is in this place.

Distinctions for the matter.
I.
THe matter of Election is called so Equivocally, either Ex qua, out (...)
which, and it is the counsel of God: (...) Circaquam, about which: and it is
man or in which, and it is Christ, as the Mediator.

II.
MAn is considered either Commonly, without any considerati^^ of the qualities,
or Singularly, as he i^ a Sinner; after that manner in the f^ Act of Election
and Reprobation: b^ after this in the second.

III.
THe number of the Elect, and Reprobates, the person numbering, and numbered is
certain, though both be not certainly known unto us.

For the FORM.
I.
THe Form of Predestination consists in two things, in the Action, and
manner thereof: the Action is Adoption: the manner is in Christ, in whom as in a
bond lying between, the union of us with him was made.

II.
PVrpose, Prescience, Predestination, are distinguished in God, not by time,
but by order: Purpose signifies the whole counsel of God: Prescience the
first degree thereof; Predestination not only them, but also those which depend
on them,

III.
DEcree together with the execution thereof, as they ought neither to be
confounded or mingled together, nor plucked asunder: so it is needful they
should be joined together, and distinguished: all which distinction is from
that, which is the latter, and from the manner of the things effected.

OF CREATION.
The Part Confirming. CHAP. III.
THat sort of Divine Actions immanent, we have already declared in the
doctrine concerning Predestination: now by order we pass to Gods actions
external.

Of these, according to the double object, there ought distinctly to be had a
double respect, and notice: for those divine actions, which pass over unto the
Creatures, do either belong to this common nature, the common beginning of
things natural: or to special grace, the special beginning of things
supernatural, unto the communion whereof, Man is to be advanced.

Those which concern Nature, men distinctly consider to be either that first
beginning (or springing up) as it is In fieri.
in the doing (or making:) or the conservation of the same, as In sacto.
it was already done (or made): that we are wont to express by the name of
Creation, but this, by the name of Providence.

The Work of Creation is known of us two ways; the one common according to
the common consideration of all things which were created, even as the
general, and every special of them have their proper conditions in nature,
which were effected, since that first universal beginning in the very time of
Creation: the other particular, according as there is a singular respect, and
express mark of the same: the first manner properly belongs to Divinity, the
second, to the science of things Natural.

Creation therefore Theologically, is the first bringing forth of Nature, and
of things in nature done (or made) by God in the beginning of time, and
finished in the space of six days, unto his own glory, and the salvation of
the Elect.

The Cause Efficient of Creation is God: for the things created were not by
one understanding conceyved, and by another procreated, as the Valentinians
thought; not by another Nature, which Cerinthus calls one while, the Womb;
another while, the General Work, not by the Angels, as the Symonians deemed:
not by their peculiar spirits, called Daemones, as the Philosophers: Lastly,
not by Fortune, as Epicures; but by God they were produced and disposed: Psalm.
33.9. Esa. 40.28.
which beside the Scripture, either the distinct workings of the three persons,
or the nature or manner of the Creation, or lastly, the manner of beginning does
convince.

The persons working in the Creation are, as the Causes: first, the Primordiall
Cause is the Father, Act. 17.24.
the working cause is the Son, Col. 1.16 Ioh. 1.3.
and the perfecting (or finishing) cause is the holy Ghost Genesis 1.2. Psalm. 33.6.
.

The manner of Creation is two-folde; the one by the bringing forth of things,
the other; by the most wise setting of them in order, Job. 9.8. Esa. 40.22
both of them is from God, either immediately or mediately. The consideration
of beginning is, that it should love singularity; and there can be no
universal first thing, unless it be one, neither one unless it be God.

The matter of Creation ought to be distinguished two ways, according as
there is one creation primary and immediate, and another secondary, and mediate.

There was no primary matter of creation, neither with God coeternal, nor of
God existent, or as a material cause put or spread under the work of this
creation: for God gave not immediately the beginning of nature by nature, but
by himself: and for that he is of infinite power: he necessarily excludes all
matter; wherefore out of nothing, as it were the bound, God brought forth Psalm.
33 9. Romans 4.17 Heb. 11.3.
nature by his own power.

Of the second and mediate Creation, the matter is twofold: the first, and
that which springs from the first.

Of the first matter there is a double knowledge: the first in the pureness of
it own nature absolutely, and by it self: the other with a respect unto other
things, as the beginning and first subject, of which things are made and
consist. In both notions it is described of Moses; first, as touching the
substance, in that it is partly earthly, and partly watery; for hereunto tend
the names of earth and water: Secondly, as touching the quantity, in that it is
a Jngens moles.
huge heap, and yet not only a Plasma rationis.
work of manner (or fashion) but in very deed, a Being laid (or spread)
under all things: Thirdly, as touching the quality, in that it was dark, and
obscure, which the Spirit of God lay upon Genesis 1.1.2. etc.
.

The matter of the Secondary creation, to wit, being that, which of the first
sprung, is wont to be showed by the Name of Nature by the Philosophers, as by
the names of heaven and earth in the scriptures. Psa. 124 8. and 134.3. Esa.
37.16.
.

For of the things drawn forth of that first matter, there are two sorts
plainly differing between themselves, although Analogically, they are referred
to the common respect of one kind: for some are Compound, Elementall, and
Material in this world, which are manifested by the name of Earth: other some
are Simple and Immateriall, above this world, in the heavenly places, by God
set in order, which are made known by the Name of Heaven.

By the manner of them a two-folde Nature is made: to wit, an Inferior, and
Superior: the one is considered in this vniversalnesse of things natural, in
which man also is: the other in the universality of things, put above the
nature of this world, in which also are the Angels: the truth and manner of
both may more conveniently be concluded by the form of Creation.

The Form of Creation, to wit, of that which is Primary, is both that hidden
force of divine Power, put into that first matter, according to the being and
conditions of the same: as also the External, Immediate, and instant bringing
forth of the matter, and the state thereof, without shape and order: But, of
that which is Secondary, the Form Internal, is that common and hidden nature
of the whole frame, which God has imprinted into all things after a common
mean and manner: but the external, whereof speech is here, is that powerful
bringing forth of all things, out of the first matter in the beginning of
time, by the space of six days; as also the most godly disposing of the same,
both in themselves, and among themselves Genesis 1. per totum caput.
.

Now the truth of this bringing forth, and disposing is two ways discerned,
according as the Nature of the things brought forth and disposed, is twofold:
the one is Inferior, or elementall and material: the other, superior, simple
and Immateriall Heb. 1.10.
.

Of this Inferior Nature, there are two parts; Elementall, and Ethereall.

The Elementall part, is of bodies, by their Nature, subject to change, below
the Region of the sky, whether they be simple or compound.

The Simple Bodies are the Elements, the beginnings of things compound, which
in a most godly and most convenient order were at first created Ge. 1. to v. 10.
. The compound bodies were co^pounded either of two elements, or of three only,
or of all the four: those are called imperfectly, these, perfectly, mingled.
Of these, some are without life, some having life; those which have life, are
either only growing as Plants, 1 Gen 1.11.12.13.
or growing and feeling, as the brute beasts: Genesis ^.20 21.
or lastly, growing, sensible and reasonable, as man Genesis 1 28
of whom we shall speak, in the third book of this Institution.

Of the part of this Inferior and Etheriall Nature, there are two sorts of
Orbs (or Spheres) with stars, and without stars.

Those with stars, are both the moveable Firmament every way shining, with
the thicker parts of the Spheeres, as also the sky of the Planets, containing
in compass thereof seven Orbs Genesis 14.15.16.
.

Those without stars, are both the Superior Orb, or the Primum mobile, which
turns about in compass all the Inferior parts, as also the inferior Orb
which is in the ayrie sky.

Of the superior or super-celestial nature, there are two parts, the one
containing, which Empireum, the first and immovable, in Scripture called the
Act. 1.11 Ephesians. 4.10. 2 Chr. 16.14.
Heaven of Heavens: the other contained, which besides the blessed Souls, of
whom we will speak about the end of this Institution, are the Angels: of
whom in the Scriptures, a description is expressed, both in a general and
particular manner.

In a general manner, as touching their Essence: for they are things truly
subsisting, or Psa. 104.4.
spiritual substances incorporal and indivisible; as touching the properties
of their Essence, Internal, they are endued with understanding and will, and
according to their own natural perfection, being opposite to things
corporate, they are simple substances: but external, in propriety of nature
finite, in place definite, the Administers of God their Creator Heb. 1. v, vlt.
1. Ring 22 20.
.

By a particular manner, they are discerned, either as they are good, or else
as they are evil.

Good, who continued, and were confirmed Mat. 18.10. and 2^.30.
unchangeably in their natural dignity, wherein they were created by the
special grace of the Creator, whose work and office is to serve God, and men
after God, either immediately in respect of their own nature, Mar. 6.10 Psalm.
103.20.21.
or mediately by dispensation of the assumption of bodies, either Genesis 13.2.4.
Heb. 13.2. Mat. 28.3.
humane, or fiery Es^ 6.2. Ezec 1.^. 2 Kin. ^.
.

But evil, who from that their natural dignity, freely and maliciously fell:
whose work is, being proper and voluntary, both to work evil of themselves,
in themselves, and by themselves, as also to tempt, and induce other to the
working of the same: Io. 8.4 Iud. ver 6. Job. 1.11 1. Pet. 6.8
but being improper and not voluntary, it is to serve God, and to restrain and
yield all their power, whether illuding, or lying, or active, and effectual,
unto his own will, so, as they can use the same, neither otherwise, nor to any
other end, then God most wisely has decreed 1. Kin 22 20. Job. 16. and 2.1.
.

The End of Creation is twofold, the furthest and highest, is the glory of God
the worker, in his goodness, wisdom, and power: for the faculty (or virtue) put
n^o the things commends: Ge 1.31. Psalm. 0^.24. Prou. 16.4
his goodness, the order of them his wisdom, and the manner of both his power:
the nearest end is of the work, Genesis 1.28. Psalm. 8.7. Heb. 2.7.8.
that all things by their uses should serve for the Salvation of the Elect.

Of CREATION, the Part Confuting.
Distinctions for the Cause Efficient.
I.
CReation is said to be either properly, concerning the work of the first
bringing forth of things, or Metaphorically, of those things or works, which
are of no less virtue and power: both ways it is attributed to God alone.

II.
THose things are created, which are made of no substantial and material
beginning: but those things are generated, which are made of a fore-being
matter: the Creation of God is by himself, but the generation of nature next
after God.

III.
NO things being apt to generation or corruption, which are brought forth of
God, by second causes coming between are properly said to be created; because
to be created, is immediately to be brought forth of God.

IIII.
CReation is two-folde, Active and Passive: the one says, that there is a
divine Essence, and that the Creature cannot exist, unless he put the case,
that there is a divine Essence: the other says that the Creature was really
brought forth by God, and notes withal a creating Essence,

V.
TO Create, and to make, differ, because that more strictly taken, signifies,
of nothing to make somewhat: but this more generally imports not that only,
but also to bring forth somewhat out of a matter, lying and being before.

VI.
THe things themselves, and the nature, and substance of them ought to be
distinguished from the evil, that comes unto them, and from the Accidents of
the things and substances.

For the MATTER.
I.
THere is one respect or manner of the Primary Creation, another of the
secondary: wherefore that general Classicum.
Alarm of the Philosophers, of nothing, nothing is made, may be fitted (or
applied) to the estate of bodily things, but cannot be opposed to the Creation.

II.
NOthing is said to be either privatiuely, or Negatiuely: Negatiuely, of the
Primary Creation, Privatiuely of the second.

For the FORM.
I.
THe signification of beginning is threefold: for it pertayneth either to the
time or to the things and causes: or lastly to the order: but it is taken in
the first signification, when we treat of the beginning of Creation.

II.
THose things which of Moses are written down of the form, and order of
things created, are not to be taken Allegorically, but Physically, (or
Natural^y.

OF PROVIDENCE,
The Part Confirming. CHAP. IIII.
ANd this is the beginning, both Primary and Secondary, of things created
acording to their nature: now follows the powerful co^servation of the same,
and the most wise ordering of them unto their end, which by the use of the
Scripture, and the Doctors of the Church, we call Providence.

Now, whereas a double part of this Providence is wont to be discerned, and
distinguished: the one of decree, according to the eternal foreknowledge, and
fore-appointment of all things in God: the other of Execution, according to
the external Administration of the same in time: and whereas also the
consideration of the former properly pertayneth to Predestination; which is a
kind of Gods operations Immanent: we in respect of this latter, do here
consider, and treat of Providence, properly so called.

This Providence then is an outward and temporal action of God, whereby he
keeps all and several things, which are; and disposes ^ll, and several
things which are done, to that end, which he has determined according to the
liberty of his will, and that to the end, he might in all, and several things
be glorified.

The Efficient Cause of this Providence or government is the same, which is of
Creation, since the one, and the self fame beginning is of both: from and by
which all things proceed and are conserved, to wit, God the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost Psalm. 32.13.15. and 139.78. Ioh. 12.34.
.

The Father, or the love, and goodness of the Father, is the first beginning
cause. The Son, in that he is the wisdom, and word is the working causes.

The holy Ghost, in that he is the virtue and power of the Father, and the
Son, is the finishing cause.

The nature of God teaches this, whose presence, power, and operation, the
scripture commends in both works: Psalm. 9 4.8. Mat. 10.29. Ier. 10.23. Prou.
6.19 Esa. 45.7.
common Nature testifyeth it, which as the common Instrument of God being
stirred by that universal beginning, stirs, and being moved, moves it
self, and al things according to it self. Our nature together witnesses and
feels it, because as in himself we have our being, so in himself also, we
live and are moved. Act. 17.28.


And the operatio^s of this efficient cause are according to degrees
distinguished; now they are distinguished by a threefolde order and manner. The
first is of Conservation: the second of Governing: The third of Ordayning to
the end: of which more at large in the formal cause of providence. The Matter,
about which Providence is employed, according to the twofold consideration of
the things which are subject unto it may be distinguished two ways: one way in
respect of those things which are, another way in respect of those things which
are don, for after both ways and respects, all and several things are ruled
by Gods providence. The things which are, ought three ways to be
distinguished, first, according to their nature: secondly, according to their
Accidents: thirdly, according to their use. Of the nature of things, whether it
be that superior, or inferior, whereof we treated in the place of creation,
there is a double knowledge: the one common, and according to their natural
form or kind: the other singular, and acording to the Individua.
things themselves, as they are indivisible. The Accidents, whatsoever they
are, are either of common nature in its beginning and perfection, or of
singular nature in the defect and condition thereof, Agnata.
besides the course of nature.

Of things according to their use, there is a twofold distinction: for either
they are the ends, or the means unto the end: but the ends are, some furthest
off, and some intermediate unto the same: the means are severally known two
ways: first, after the manner of doing: for some are ordinary, some
extraordinary, and both ordained to their proper ends: Secondly, by the
quality, and essential condition of them: for some are necessary, and some
contingent.

Of those which are necessary, there are two kinds: for some are by themselves
absolutely necessary, by a necessity of the Consequent, as they call it; and
some by the cause from a Ex Hypothesi.
Supposition by necessity of the Consequence.

Those which are absolutely necessary, when we treat of things created, we
distinguish by two degrees. The first is in the first and common beginning of
nature; first by themselves, and by all things necessary, as when we say, that
twice two is four, which unchangeably, and by an infallible necessity are
true. The other degree of necessity is from nature, out of it own inward
beginning, whether material, as when we say, that every thing compounded of
contraries, must necessarily perish; or Formal, as when we say, that the fire
necessarily burns.

Those, which are necessary by supposition, or by necessity of condition, or
consequence, do put one a necessity, either from the inward beginning, or from
the outward, or from both together. Things contingent are those, which may be,
or not be; such as properly happen to every Individuum (or singular thing): for
the power is the matter, which is capable of things possible (or contingent,)
and the matter is of every singular thing, and of every Individuum, which are
limited in their own matter.

And this is the manner of those things which are: now those things, which are
don or the actions, are distinguished two ways, by their beginnings and
qualities; By their beginnings, because some actions are from a common
beginning, and ar^ called Natural, which either nature by it self effects,
neither is the action of will required for the same, as to live, to quicken,
etc. or effects them wit^ the action of natural will, as to eat, drink,
etc. other some are from a singular beginning, and are called Voluntary, which
our will Intellectiue effects, not led by the instinct of nature, but by the
rule of reason, whether by advise or deliberation, from which is the will
elective, or by an unadvised motion, Voluntas per causam.
from which is the Will by a cause.

By the qualities, because some are good some evil: that which is the goodness,
or evilnes of actions is discerned both by their own common condition,
according to the beginnings in actions natural, and by a singular manner,
according to their special kind, and circumstances in actions voluntary: and
all, and every one of these, as well those which are, as those which are done,
be subject to Gods Providence, by ways both common and singular, as in the
explication of the cause ensuing shall be declared.

The Form of Gods Providence, is that perpetual Act of directing all and
singular things unto their proper ends: which act ought two ways to be
considered and discerned, to wit, common and singular; by the one, according
to the diverse degrees of that act of Gods providence, by the other, according
to the singular nature and condition of the subjects upon which it works.

The Act of Gods providence is generaly discerned by three degrees, the
declaration whereof is very necessary, for the understanding of this doctrine.

The first degree is of Conservation, whereby all and several things are
ordinarily sustained in the same state of Nature, and natural properties, in
which they were created.

This conservation according to the distinction of things, which either are, or
are done, is both of Existence, and of power.

The conservation of Existence, is the continuance of the substance of things,
which had their being by creation, whether they be of a whole special kind, or
of any Individuum Psa.. 19.12. and 104 19.20. etc.
.

The conservation of Power is, whereby God sustayneth and moves the proper
powers of every Creature, which pertayne to the operations and perfections
thereof, by a singular Job. 14.4 Heb. 9.27. Psalm. 134.2.3.
beginning which in things involuntary, is a singular nature; in things
voluntary is will.

Both of them is from God, as from the universal beginning, on whom the
beginnings, both common and singular, of things and actions do depend. In
which dependency two things are to be noted; the one is that the same first
beginning of the conservation of things do so work in the inferior
beginnings, that it detracteth nothing from them, but ordinarily leaves their
Actions perfect: for God so orders all things, which he has created, that
he suffers them also to exercise and do their own proper motions: The
other is, that, that first beginning works by those which are inferior, after
the manner of those Inferior: for as often as many causes Coordinate (or
together ordained) do befall; the last effect follows not the first cause, by
necessity or contingence, but the nearest cause: Hence is that term, Fate (or
Destiny) natural, so termed by Christians, which is a course and order of
natural causes, depending upon the first cause; which unless they be hindered
by the same, of their own power, and nature bring forth the same effect.

The second degree is of Governing, whereby God, in whose power is supreme
authority, disposes of al things, consisting in his own power, ruling the same
according to the liberty of his own will.

Of this Governing, there is a threefold consideration; the one consisting in
Commanding, the other in Doing: the third in not Doing, which they call
Permitting: the first verily is of Doctrine and Right, and therefore not proper
to this place, the other two, properly respect the action of Gods providence
the Action therefore of God governing is twofold; the one performing, the
other permitting.

The Action performing is that, which of the Grecians is called
(Foreknowledge, according to good pleasure) whereby God effectually performs
in all and several things, that which belongs to his own work: Now he
performs whatsoever is good in Nature, both common and particular, as the
universal beginning of Nature.

The Action permitting is that which of the Grecians is termed (Foreknowledge
according to permission,) whereby God forbids not the Actions of others; but
permits to the will of the doer, the manner of them: Of this Permission,
there are in the Scripture two kinds: the one is of (a permission,) Simple,
and Abso^ute, when GOD permits simply that, which he might simply, and
immediately hinder; as when he permitted Adam to fall: the other Ex Hypothesi.
by Supposition; when God after a humane manner tempereth his permissions,
according to the condition of men: such permissions as these, are very many in
the Old Testament: both are in God from his own will, and are moved to the
end, which the will of God has fore-appointed.

The third Degree of GODS Providence, is of ordayning, whereby God by his
admirable Wisdom brings all things, though most out of order, unto their
due order, and proper End.

In this ordayning, three things concur, the appointment of the End, the
disposing of the means unto the end, and the directing of the means disposed.

The appointment of the End: because God limitteth as all Subiect^ with their
forms; so the motions of the forms with their ends, whether proper or nerest,
which are of things according to their own nature: or that last, or furthest
end, which is above nature, to wit, Gods glory, to which all things tend by
Gods ordayning.

This supreme end of things, though according to perfection signified, it be
one only: yet according to the manner of signifying; which manner is from the
objects, it is twofold: his most powerful Justice, and Grace, which in God
have the respect of chiefest good.

Unto this double End, there is a double disposing of the means, according as
there is fitly laid down by the schoolmen, a double intent of God the
disposer: the one by it self, chiefly, or first intended; because as well it
self, as all things unto it self are intended: the other by it self
intended, but not chiefly or first: because it self indeed is intended, but
not all things thereunto: the intent, after the first way, is Gods ^race;
after the second, Gods justice.

The directing of the means disposed, ^s an effectual bringing of them along
unto the end, by the known means of Gods wisdom, whether revealed or
^idden: now this directing of the means (...) either by it self, or by
accident.

And this is the manner of general providence; which being laid down, ^here
is a more easy way and method, unto the particular means thereof, according
to the particular nature of the Subjects.

For first of all the nature of things, whether general or particular, is
subject ^o Gods providence, according to all the means both of appointment,
governing and ordayning: Mat. 10.29.30. Luc. 12.6.7. Pro. 16, 33
for the appointment, governing and ordayning of things natural, so faree
extend themselves, as the Causalitas.
causing of the first agent extends it self: now it extends it self as
far, as unto all Entia.
beings, not only as touching the beings of special kinds, but also as
touching the Individua.
particular things themselves: neither only as touching the beginnings of
things incorruptible, but also of things corruptible.

Secondly, the Accidents of Nature, whatsoever they are, which are of common
Nature in their own perfection, are subject to Gods Providence, after the
manners already remembered; but those which are of particular Nature in their
defect, are subject to Gods Providence, after the manner of Governing, and
Ordayning Genesis 37.28. Job. 1.21. Esa. 10.5.6. etc. Act. 2.23. Romans 8.28
.

Thirdly, all ends of things whatsoever, whether mean or supreme, are
appointed, governed, and ordained of God.

Fourthly, those which are means, whether they be ordinary, or extraordinary,
the first cause uses even them, according to their own Nature, by appointing,
governing, and ordayning them.

Fifthly, concerning things necessary, and contingent, (that we may see
thereinto, and in few words expound the more difficult points thereof) three
things are to be noted.

First, that the Nature and natural properties of things, as they be, are from
God, and that therefore according to the manner which God has put into things,
they are subject to Gods providence. Job. 10 10.11. Exodus 15 26. Ps. 105.17
And thus stands the manner and nature of things, that some be necessary, some
contingent; those, (the order whereof between the Cause and the Effect, is
unchangeable) either absolutely by themselves, and of their own Nature, or by
Supposition and relation to the Causes proposed; which nevertheless, may
either not be, or be changed: these, the order whereof, is mutable into both
parts, of it own nature indefinite, such as are the things of nature, or
things particular, which have the conditions of mutability, and contingency
infolded among themselves, and in themselves.

Secondly, that it is an effect of Gods providence, that any thing happens by
what manner soever, whether contingently, or necessarily: and therefore that
falls out necessarily, which Gods providence has disposed to fall out
necessarily; and that comes to pass contingently, because such is the reason
(or manner) of Gods providence: hence God being the universal beginning,
either mediately or immediately causes that the things stand both ways, and
that out of causes necessary, or contingent, Effects and Events necessary, and
contingent are produced.

Thirdly, of what soever things, there is a contingency; of these there is also
a necessity by supposition: and therefore nothing is so contingent, which may
not two ways be necessary by supposition: one way in it own existence: for
what was to be contingent, the same from whence it proceeded, must needs
presently have, or formerly had a being. The other way by the determined
decree, and foreknowledge of God: in respect whereof, all things come to pass
infallibly* but to speak properly, it is one thing that somewhat falls out
contingently; another thing necessarily, and another thing infallibly: the
first, and the second infer the order of the Effect unto the Cause: but the
third is more common then both; because things both contingent and necessary
come to pass infallibly; yet those, contingently, these necessarily.

These things laid down, it is manifest, that all things both necessary, and
contingent, are every way subject to Gods Providence. 1. of Conservation,
because both have being and power from God. 2. of Governing; for of both, God
disposes according to the liberty of his will, whether effecting, or
permitting. 3. of Ordayning, because God also has prescribed an end unto them,
according to their Nature, and d^sposeth them, as means wisely, and brings
them unto the same powerfully.

Sixthly, as concerning Actions Natural, and Voluntary: it is to be noted, that
three beginnings of actions must be considered, and proportionally
distinguished: the one Universal, is God, the other General, is Nature: the
third Particular: and is either a Natural Inclination, or Instinct, or Will
Elective.

Of these beginnings, there are particular properties: the universal beginning
is finite; the General is desining; the particular is defined in his Subjects:
the first is from it self, and to it self: the second has a relation unto
God, the third unto both.

Whence it comes to pass, that those actions, which are from the particular
beginning mediately; are from God, by the general beginning: but those which
are from the general beginning, are from God immediately.

Here it is evident, that all actions, whether natural or voluntary, are
subject to Gods Providence: first, by way of Conservation: for God conserveth
the Natures of things, and the liberty of will which he has given man:
Secondly, by way of governing: because God, as he is an universal beginning,
effectually moves all other beginnings, to do (or work:) thirdly, by way of
ordayning: because he brings and directs all actions unto the end, which
he has fore-appointed to them, whether Natural, or Voluntary. Psalm. 139.3.


The last thing remains concerning good and bad actions: and that the manner
and efficacy of Gods providen^e in evil actions (for of the good there is no
difficulty) might according to the degrees thereof, the better be known, two
things are to be premised.

One is, that according to the difference of the beginnings, whereof we have
above spoken, the one, and the self same action is both good and evil; good
as touching the general, as it is from God and common Nature: for both God and
Nature of themselves, do always bring forth good actions: evil, according to
the particular respect in man, as he is corrupt: for every vicious act takes
the necessity of the vice, from the nearest cause, which is the will of the
offender: whence is that of the Schoolmen, Principalitatem Causalitatis omnis
in peccato, consistere, penes voluntatem, quae imperat actum
that the chiefty of every procurement in sin consists in the power of the
Will, which commands the Act.

The other is, that in every Action, three things are to be discerned, and
distinguished; the Nature, the Subject, and the Accidental quality of them
both.

The Nature is from the Creator, which gave it, and moves the beginnings of
natural properties and actions.

The Subject is the moving of the Action, which is according to nature, in
respect whereof, every sin is said to be in God, subjectiuely.

The Quality is the Accident of Nature, and of the Subject being good indeed,
according to grace, but evil, according to the corruption that grows in
nature, and in the Subject, which infecteth man; and those things, which are of
man, with a bodily and effectual taynt (or strain:) whence the will, which is
the inward beginning of actions, infuseth the force of that corruption into the
actions immediately.

These things laid down, it is to be marked, that Providence also in evil
actions works by all the ways and and degrees. Esa. 45.7 Lam. 3.37 Am. 3.6.


In the way and degree of Conservation: for it has put into man both the
beginning of Nature, which by it self by a natural necessity is limited; as
also the beginning of actions, which is the will, that by it own power
limitteth her motions, and freely inclines them unto whatsoever actions
undetermined: again, it sustayneth the will, as it moves the things of
nature, by a common beginning, and the actions natural and voluntary, by a
particular beginning.

By way and degree of Governing: for first, God brings to pass effectually
the work, that is evil, as far forth, as it has a respect of good; and
chiefly, it has that, both because it is in good, subiectiuely, and because it
is unto good reduciuely: Secondly, God remitteth the sin, and prescribes a
bound unto it, according to the liberty of his will. Pro. 16.9.
Thirdly, he permits evil things, not that he allows them, but that it
is no evil, to permit evils: for, since he which permits, has power to
forbid without any obligation, as also he, to whom it is permitted, has power
to do without any compulsion: the Will in both parties is voluntary; in the
former, without fault, in the latter without excuse.

In the way and degree of ordayning: for God ordayneth the events of sins
unto good, Romans 8.28.
either moral (that is of punishment, and chastisement:) or Supernatural,
(that is, of his glory in Justice, and mercy:) Romans 5.20. and 11.33.
whereby it is clear, that for a thing to have being, to do, and to be
ordained; it is good: but for the same to be evil, to do evil, and to be
carried unto evil, it is evil; that God effecth, but this God suffers to be
effected by the creature: and this is the formal cause of providence.

The end of Providence, which may easily be gathered from the things
afore-going, is the glory of God conjoined with the salvation of the Elect.
Mat. 6.26.


OF PROVIDENCE, The Part Confutatiue.
Distinctions for the Cause Efficient.
I.
FAte (or Destiny) is either true or feigned; that, without violence; this
violent: The true Fate, either is Divine, or Natural: the Divine is nothing
else, then the governing and providence of things: the Natural, is none
other, then the course and order of natural things. The fained Fate, either
is of the Chaldeans, or the Stoickes: the one superstitiously binds and tyeth
the actions and eventes of things unto the power, and position of the stars:
the other is flowing from everlasting, being such a rank and knitting together
of causes, that on it should depend both God himself, and Gods Providence: the
Consequent of both is a necessity of constraint.

II.
Unto Providence pertayne two things: the manner of order, and the execution
thereof: the first is Eternal, the second Temporal.

III.
GOD governs the Inferior things by the things superior; not for the defect
of his power, but for the abundance of his goodness, according to the liberty
of his will.

IIII.
THe Nature of the following cause is not only like to the superior Cause, in
that it has somewhat thence: but also unlike it, in that it proceeds from
without, (or outwardly.)

For the Material Cause.
I.
ALL things subject to the causing of the first agent, are also subject to the
ordinance of the same, unto their end: wherefore all things in that they have
being, are subject to Providence.

II.
IT is one thing to treat of the cause universal, and another thing of the
Causes particular: Of the Particular Causes, there are chances; but the
Universal Cause, nothing can escape.

III.
COrruptions and defects in natural things, are indeed against the particular
nature: yet they are from the Intention of the universal nature, in that they
fall out for the good of the whole universal.

IIII.
THe manner of the Doer is one, and of the Instrument is another: that, which
is of the Instrument, and the Creature, is disorder: but that, which is of the
doer, and the Creator, even in things most out of order, is order.

V.
SOme things are done by Providence, efficiently, and causally: some other
things according to Providence, permissiuely, and determinatiuely.

For the Formal Cause.
I.
THe Soul always works freely, which although it depend on the causes, yet
it self is the nearest cause of her own actions: for natural effects have
more likeness with the nearest causes, then with the furthest off.

II.
THere is one necessity from the former, or Constituens.
that which appoints, another from the latter; Consequens.
or that which ^nsueth: one inward, another outward; one of constraint, another
of ^mmutability: one absolute, another by supposition: the distinction of all
which, in this point of Providence, is very necessary.

III
IT is one thing to speak of deeds, is they are in act; and another thing as
they are subject to the Cause contingent: for, after the first manner they are
necessarily, after the second, contingently.

IIII.
Sin is two ways considered, either properly and principally, as it is
sin: or as far forth, as it has the respect of good, and that two ways:
first, because it is in natural motion, action, and Inclination, that is in
good subiectiuely: Secondly, because it is unto good: God from evil drawing
forth good.

V.
THat thing which being once decreede, another infallibly follows without any
other Intermediate Cause; is the Cause of the Consequent but God will have sin
to come to pass, not immediately, but by the will of man, as the mean
intermediate.

VI.
OF things being, God is the effectual beginning: but sin, to speak
properly, has not the manner of an Act, or being, but of defect: for there is
a double being; of the thing, and of the manner; under the being of the manner,
not only notions and relations are contained, but also Privations; and sin is
a being of the manner, not having a being Positiuely, but Privatiuely.

VII.
IN every sin there are two things: the Material, or the Subject: and the
Formal; that is to say, the naughtiness: The Subject is a thing of nature
from God: the naughtines came unto the Subject, by the corruption of man.

The Places of Scripture, which are wont to be wrested against the truth of
this Doctrine of Providence, are for the most part these.
Against the Material Cause.
1 Of the Corinth. 9.9. Ans. Providence is either general or special: A
conclusion from the denial of the one, unto the denial of the other, is of no
force.

2 Samuel 1.6. 1. King 21.34 Ans. Providence, and chance are not repugnant, the
one to the other, if the respect of diverse causes be distinguished.

Esaias 31. 1. and Act. 5.38. Ans. according to the diverse considerations of the
beginninges, we judge both of the Causes, whether nearest or remote, and of
the qualities of Actions, whether good or bad: but whatsoever quality is
vicious, it is from the particular beginning, and not from that, which is
Universal or Common.

Against the Formal Cause.
Ezec. 18.33. Ose 13.9. Answ. a double consideration of the punishment of
sin, is wont, and ought to be distinctly noted: one is of Justice in God,
and has a respect of moral good: another, of merit and fault in man, and
has a respect of evil: and in this latter signification, these places are to
be understood.

Prou. 16.4. Answer. The working of God, in respect of the wicked, presupposes
three things: first, the limitation of sin; secondly, the withdrawing of
Grace; thirdly, the ordayning of punishment.

Ierem. 10.7. Answ. The Prophet speaks from the feeling of his own infirmity,
not of an untruth in doctrine, nor of any wickedness in life; but of his
vocation, unto which he was drawn against his will.

Exodus 4.21. Esa. 69.19. Ezekiel. 14.9. Romans 1.28. 2. These. 2.11. Answer. A
Working is one thing, and a working permission is another thing: That is in
good things only; this both in good and evil: for, by permitting, God works
four ways; first, as touching the material of sin: secondly, as touching
the withholding of grace, which God owes to no man, because it is grace.
Thirdly, as touching the ends, unto which God disposes sins. Fourthly, as
touching the just punishment of the sinner; whereof, this is the highest
degree, by sin to punish sin.

OF THE WORKS OF Grace, or of Redemption. CHAP. V.
THe Work of God External, and Temporal, which he brings to pass in
things, is twofold; of Nature, and of Grace.

The Work of Nature, whereof hitherunto we have spoken, is, whereby God has
either created things, not as yet being, or conserveth, governs, and
orders them, being created, by his Providence.

The Work of Grace, is that which God effects in the Elect, who shall be
heirs of Salvation, according to the good pleasure of his will.

And this Work commonly is called Redemption: for the explication of which
work, three things concur: the beginning, the manner, and the Effect, or
the Application thereof.

The beginning is Christ, as he is God and man; from whom there is no power,
nor healthful Action, which is needful for Redemption, but does proceed.

The manner, according to which Christ executed this work, is that holy
disposing, and dispensation of his offices.

Now the Effect, or Application is discerned; first, by the degrees hereof, in
this life; that is, by Calling, and by Justification: Secondly, by outward
means; that is, by Gods Covenant, and by his Sacraments: Thirdly, by the
Subject, that is the Church, which Christ has redeemed with his blood.

Wherefore, we must treat first of Christ's person: secondly, of the offices
of his person: Lastly, of the other places pertaining to the application.

OF THE PERSON OF CHRIST.
The Part Confirmatiue. CHAP. VI.
THe nearest singular and determinate beginning of our Redemption is Christ; as
he is God and man; because, by him, Man was to be redeemed, in whom our
redemption was from everlasting Predestined: by him again to be restored, by
whom at first he was created: in him he ought to be made partaker of the love
of God, who was the Son of love, (or the beloved Son:) and at last in him,
to obtain the right of Sons or adoption; who, by Nature was the Son and
heir of God from everlasting.

Christ therefore, being God and man, is (as the scripture most briefly
defines) the Word made flesh, or God made manifest in the flesh: that is a
person, in whose singularity two Natures, (the properties thereof remaining
whole,) are united for the Redemption of mankind.

For the explication of this Definition; we must consider of three things in
order.

First, of the Natures, and the necessity, verity and actions thereof.

Secondly, of the Subject of the Natures, or of the person, and of both the
Unity, and the operation thereof.

Thirdly, of the Hypostaticall union of the Natures, and of the manner,
foundation, power, and efficacy thereof.

As concerning the Natures, whereas Nature is an outward beginning, making the
thing it self, and distinguishing it from other things; we acknowledge two
such natures in Christ, according to the Scripture, Divine, and Humane: both in
themselves, and in their properties distinct: Romans 9 1 1. Ioh. 5.20. Phil. 2.6.
the one from everlasting, immutable, immortal, impassible: the other in time
conceyved, and borne, mutable, mortal, passible.

Both are Indivisibly necessary for the redemption of mankind, or the
dispensation of the office of a Mediator: the divine (Nature) that he might
satisfy God; that the satisfaction might be proportionable to our debt; that
an Infinite good might help an Infinite evil, by overcomming death, and by
undergoing both the heavines of sin, and the infiniteness of Gods judgment:
Add further, that whereas the arbitrament between God and man, is above the
humanity; because no man can be a chief and supreme messenger of divine
things; but God by his Godhead; because no working above nature; such as is a
sufficient Intercession with God, is of (or from nature,) because no beginning,
but of the Godhead it self, can be the beginning of that satisfaction, which
may stand before God; it must needs be, that according to the divine nature
in his person, he took on him, all the parts of Mediation, (or Mediatorship.)

But the humane, that being man, he might according to the Law, satisfy Gods
justice, that he might sufficiently suffer for the accomplishment of the work
of satisfaction, both by obeying, made under the law, and by dying, made a
curse according to the Law; that in all things being like unto his brethren,
sin excepted, he might be a faithful, and universal high Priest in those
things, which are to be performed before God, to purge the sins of the
people. He. 2.17


Now, the divine Nature of Christ (that we may in few words speak touching
the verity of those Natures,) is that, whereby he obtayneth the same Essence
with the Father, and the holy Ghost: albeit, both according to his person,
whereby he is distinguished to be the Son of God, and according to the
dispensation of his office, whereby he is discerned to be a Mediator, he is
distinguished from the essence of God: of which nature we have more largely
treated in the place concerning God,

The humane Nature of Christ is that, whereby he holds the same Essence with
us, both the manner of subsisting or being a person, and the vicious accidents,
and sins of the substance being excepted.

For neither is the humane nature of Christ any thing by it self subsisting,
without dependence: but being without subsisting, was assumed in the
singularnesse of person, without any either confusion of natures, or division
of person Phil. 2.6. Ioh. 1.1.
.

Neither could any contagion of sin infect that humane nature of Christ, the
substance whereof being otherwise in it self, corrupt originally, the
unspeakable operation of the holy Spirit sanctified, and most fully purged
from every spot: nor yet ought (to infect,) as being that wherein the purging
of our sins, was to be performed Luc. 1.35. Heb. 4.15.
.

These things excepted, Christ took our true and Real Nature, and the same
both whole and perfect, according to the substance, properties, and infirmities
thereof.

The Substance; for Christ had both our whole Nature, and the Essential parts
of it whole.

Our whole Nature: for hence is he called in the Scriptures, The seed of the
Woman, Genesis 3. and 22.16.
the seed of Abraham, the seed of David, according to the flesh, or the
fruit of his loins, Act. 2.30
and very where the Son of man.

The Parts: for he had both a reasonable Soul, and an Isntrumental body.

A reasonable Soul: this the Scripture, and Ioh. 10.17. Mat. 26.38
the end of his Incarnation prooveth: for, that which is not assumed, is
incurable. The Verity of Nature, because the other parts of man have their
beauty by the Soul.

An Isntrumental Body: this proved the verity of his humane Nature, which
requires a limited matter: that is a fleshly and an earthly body: Luc. 22.42.
the verity of satisfaction, which ought to be made in a body truly passible,
and mortal: Lastly, the verity of demonstration: for Christ showed even by
signs that he had a body, not fantastical, or heavenly, but fleshly, and
earthly. Luc. 2.40 Mat. 4.2. Ioh. 11.35 Ioh. 4.6. Mat 8.24. Mat. 27.50. Job.
19.27


The properties which Christ coassumed, are either of the whole nature: to
wit, to be created, and to be finite, or of the parts, as of the Soul:
for he had understanding, Mat. 26.28.
and will, Luc. 22.42.
and the operations of both, and of the body, for he had a shape, quantity and
circumscription, and all the properties and natural actions of a body. Luc.
2.40. Mat. 4.2. Ioh. 11.35 Ioh. 4.6. Mat. 8.24. Mat. 27.50. Job. 19.27.


Infirmities: for it was behouefull; for the end of his Incarnation, that he
should wholly take unto him all natural defects, sin excepted; for of
defects, some are simply miserable, as Augustine terms them, and some
damnable; or as Damascene calls them, Detestable: those Christ wholly took,
because they were no let to his perfection, knowledge, and grace: Ioh. 1.14 1.
Tim. 3.16. Heb. 5.7.
but these he did not so, because they had hindered our Redemption.

Of these natures, the necessity, and verity whereof has been declared, there
are diverse operations; 1. Pet. 3.18.
for there are two natures in Christ, as it were two inward, and effectual
beginninges; out of which formally, Actions, and their manners, are deduced:
wherefore, as all things in Christ, (his subsisting only excepted,) are
twofold, (or of two sorts) to wit, his Nature, Properties, Will, Knowledge:
Mat. 11.27. and 23.37. Ioh. 2.19. 1. Cor. 15.27. Luc. 2.47.
so are there two-folde operations; some divine, some humane, distinguished by
their beginninges, manners of doing, and the particular Actions of each of them.

By their beginninges: because, look how many Natures there are; so many
formal beginnings of actions there are.

By the manners of doing: for every beginning works according to it own
manner, and condition: the Godhead, after a supernatural, and divine manner:
the man-hoode after a Natural and Humane manner.

By particular Actions; for the Word works that, which is of the Word, and
the Flesh, that, which is of the Flesh, without any confusion of Natures, in
the unity of Person.

Thus much concerning the Natures: the other thing follows concerning their
Subject; that is, the person, and both the unity and operations thereof.

Of the Person of Christ, there is usually held, and declared a double respect
in the Scriptures: the one in regard of the Essence of the Word; the other in
regard of the office and dispensation.

In respect of Essence; Christ, being considered, or severally, (or without
commixture,) as Nazianzene speaks; is in the divine Essence; another person
from the others, but not another thing.

In respect of the dispensation, which we consider of in this place; he is
that second person of the Godhead, Incarnate; that is, that person, who took
man's Nature, by creating it in the singularity of his subsistence immediately,
and by his person united the same with the divine nature mediately; so as
Christ is one of both Natures, not two into both: one, and the same without
time begotten of the Father; the Son of God without mother; and in time
begotten of the Virgin; the Son of man without Father, the natural and
consubstantiall Son of both.

This Unity of Person, three things, do prove: first, the authorities of the
Scripture, for Christ is, as the Prophet teaches, Emanuel: Esa. 7.
as the Angel teaches the same Son of God, which should be borne of Mary:
Luc. 1.35
as the Evangelist teaches; the Word made flesh: Ioh. 1.1.
as the Apostle teaches, the same, who came of the Father according to the
flesh who is God above all things to be praised for ever. Romans 9.5


Secondly, the end of his Incarnation; because, that God, and man might be
made one in the Covenant; It was behoofefull, that one should be made God and
man in person, not by participation of grace, but by verity of nature; not by
confusion of substance; but by unity of Person:

Thirdly, the denominations of both natures, attributed to the same Subject:
for as those things are not incident to the divine nature, which are proper to
the humane; nor those unto the humane, which are peculiar to the divine, so all
in common, and according to truth, are uttered of the person, according to both
Natures: Act. 20.28. 1. Cor. 2.8
therefore the one and the same person is Eternal, and not Eternal; Infinite,
and Finite; holding all the divine and humane properties; those from
everlasting, as he is God: these in time assumed, as he is man: both really,
yet Intransitiuely, as he is man-God.

This Person is the common beginning of those actions, which the Greek Fathers
have called divinely Humane: for the actions of Christ are not only, some
humane, some divine: but also some of common operation, which Christ effects;
both as he is Man-God by Nature, and as he is Mediator by dispensation: his
Natures are the beginninges of Natural Actions; but his person is the
beginning, both of common and particular actions, according to both natures:
wherefore every working of Christ, in respect of his person, is in number one;
in respect of his Natures, is in kind, two-folde: One in number, because he
is one effectual Worker: and one absolute Perfection. In kind two-folde,
because there is one Divine, of the Godhead, and another humane, of the
manhood.

The last remains, concerning the Hipostaticall Union of the two Natures in
Christ: the Nature, Foundation, Power, and Efficacy whereof, are now briefly to
be expounded.

The Nature of this Union we shall discern by the definition and division
thereof: for it is a Personal Conjunction of two Natures in Christ; a
conjunction, I say Personal, not of persons; and of two Natures, yet not
Natural: not such as is of things Superior with the Inferior; of the
Accidents with the Substances; or the part with the whole; but, in that both
mediately, the two Natures are united in the person; and immediately the humane
Nature is united to the person, after a secret and most strait manner. 1. Tim.
3.18. Gal. 4.4. Col. 2.9.


Hence this union, which in very deed is one in the manner of considering, is
usually termed, and distinguished to be twofold: the one immediate, of the
person assuming, and the humane nature assumed; for the humane nature, it own
Personalitate.
Person-head, (that I may so say,) being forsaken, (or left,) came unto the
person already perfect, not to be perfected, (by that) of which it was assumed,
that it whole might subsist in the whole person; Ioh. 1.1.2.3. etc. Ioh. 1.14.
Heb. 2.14.
the other mediate, of two natures, between themselves, wrought by means of
the person, without any, either confusion of Natures, or division of person.

Not by the confusion of Natures: for it is made Immutably, and inconfusedly;
the Essential Natures, and their properties, which neither should be
confounded, nor can be transfused, being distinct and entire, so, that they be
neither confounded between themselves, nor changed each one in themselves.

Not by Division of Person: for it is made Indivisibly, and Inseparably; so
that neither the humane Nature from the person, nor the natures in the person
from themselves, are any while, or any where separated.

The Foundation or ground of this union, is the Incarnation: the Efficient
Cause of this Inchoatiuely, (as the Schoolmen speak) is the whole Trinity;
but Terminatiuely, Christ himself is, being made that, which he was not; and
yet remaining in the mean while, that, which he was.

Of this Incarnation there are two parts, Conception, and Nativity: both are
ordinary, as touching the Verity of the matter: for Christ took unto him a
Nature like to ours, of the Substance of Mary: yet extraordinary, as touching
the manner; that is, both of forming in the womb of Mary, and of Assumption,
and of Sanctification, as also lastly, in respect of fulfilling, or
accomplishment; for the forming was immediate in the Virgin, without the
means of a man,

The Sanctifying was from all spotte of sin, whether Habitual or Actual:
the Assumption was made into the unity of Person, without any alteration:
Lastly, the fulfilling was according to the Prophesies.

From this union, (that in few words we may express the power thereof,) two
things follow; the Communion of natures, and the communication of properties.

The Communion is in very deed the same with the union of Natures, according
to Subsistence: yet in manner of consideration, it differs, because that is,
as it were, the Effect, and Consequent of this; for this communion of natures
does properly signify a Concomitance of properties, and operations, of both
natures in the work of mediation, concurring together unto one absolute
perfection: by reason whereof it comes to pass, that the proper things of
each nature be, and are said to be common in the person: and this is the
ground of the communication of the properties.

For it is a Phrase of speaking, whereby the property of one nature is really
uttered, concerning the whole person of Christ: yet so, that it properly
pertayne unto one nature in respect of the thing itself; and unto the other,
in respect of another thing: for we say, that God purchased his Church by his
blood, Act. 20.8.
that Christ being man is every where: Ioh. 3.13
and this is (as the Schoolmen call it,) That grace of the union, by reason of
which we may say of Christ, that God is man, and man is God; Christ is God and
man.

Now this communication is after a diverse manner, both Real, and Verbal:
Real, because of the union of the Natures, and the unity of the person: for
Christ is one, who being God, has that which is humane in the verity of humane
nature: and being man, has that which is divine in the verity of divine
nature: the same in the Son, God and man: wherefore as the word, because of
the flesh, is man; so the flesh, because of the word, is God: and yet, neither
is either the humane nature coextended with the divine; nor the divine
concluded in the humane: because that, look what Idiomata
properties in the concretiue name are communicated in the person, according to
both natures: these in the Abstract, in each natures are not communicated,
because they are properties.

Therefore the universal presence, omnipotence, and omniscience, no less then
Eternity it self, and incomprehensiblenes are the self Essential things of
God, or his Essential properties, which cannot be communicated: now to be
every where, to be omnipotent, omniscient, as to be Eternal, and
Incomprehensible; are truly uttered of Christ, being man; not according to
another person, but according to another thing by the communication of
properties, which is true, so far forth as the thing it self is true.

From this Real communication of properties, we must distinguish that real
communication of gifts natural and supernatural made by the divine nature;
the gifts of the humane, as well according to it self, as in the person:
whereof some pertayne to the perfection of the flesh assumed, and some to the
power of office.

The gifts of Perfection, are all those, wherewith the assumed nature,
according to it self, and in it self, was enriched; whether they be those,
which by force of the Union, the humane nature of Christ enjoys after a most
blessed manner; or those, which were put in, and infused, and that in the
highest degree, that ever a humane nature can attayn: or lastly, whether they
were gotten by habit, as those, which Christ successively took, according to
the order of nature, until his nature was brought up unto the perfection
thereof.

The gifts of power or office, are those, which in respect of the
dispensation, he receyved in time, not according to either Nature apart, but
according to the whole person, which therefore was incarnate; that in both
Natures, and according to them both, he might perform the healthful office
of a Mediator.

The Verbal Communication is said to be that, which pertayneth to the
exposition of words and Phrases which offer themselves in the holy Scriptures,
and by which, that which is proper to one nature, is uttered of the other by
name only, by reason of the Identity of the person, and the uniting together
of the properties in the person.

Now, as there are three sorts of Names, whereby the Subject is uttered
concerning Christ: so there are three kinds of Attributes, which of him are
pronounced: for some agree with the divine nature only, some with the humane
only, and some with both natures in his person: those which are of the first
and second sort, are Incommunicable: those which are of the third, are spoken
of Christ in his person, in respect of both Natures.

From this difference both of Subjects, and Predicates, a double manner of
Predication or Declaration arises; proper and simple: improper and figurative.

Proper, is when either those things which are true in the Subject; that is, in
the person, according to either nature; are likewise pronounced of the same;
and therefore that which is pronounced divine, concerning the person, is
understood to be true, according to the divine nature; and that which is
pronounced humane, according to the humane: as the Son of God is every where,
Almighty, Eternal; the Son of man is borne, Dead, in Heaven: or when the
Predicate, common to both natures is uttered, (or pronounced,) also by a common
name of the Subject, as Christ redeemed us with his blood.

Improper, either when those things which are of the whole person, are uttered
of either Nature, named in the concrete: as God redeemed his church; the flesh
quickneth: or secondly, when that which is proper to one nature, is uttered of
the person named by the other nature; as God suffered; man is every where:
which manner of speaking has been called E^all age.
the changing or communication.

Of the Person of CHRIST: The confuting Part.
For the necessity of the Divine Nature in the work of Mediator-shippe,
against Bellarmime: Lib. 5. 2. Contro. 1. Tom. Chap. 3.
I.
THe beginning of Mediatorshippe is considered, either absolutely, or
oppositely: the person of Christ, Godman is the beginning absolutely; but
oppositely and distinctly, there is one beginning in the same person, which is
first or Principiant, which is the Word, according to the divine Nature
thereof: the other second, or principiate, that is, the humane Nature
subsisting in the Person.

II.
CHrist performed some works according to the form of a servant: some,
according to the form of God simply: but other some, according to both
commonly.

III
CHrist, when he is compared to God, is distinguished from the Creature two
ways, in nature and dispensation; in nature, when according to his person he
is distinguished from the Father: In dispensation, when according to his
office, he is distinguished from the Essence of God, as he is a Mediator:
according to nature, he is equal with the father, but according to
dispensation, he is inferior to the Father.

IIII.
THe Fathers, when they make mention of the humane Nature, exclude not the
divine: but suppose the union of both co^curring together in the unity of the
person, for (or to) the unity of working.

V.
CHrist in nature co^municateth with both parts, which are to be conjoined,
as it were, with bounds, that must be united together: yet in the manner of
dispensation, he differs, as he is God-man, or God and man.

VI.
CHrist, acording to the nature, whereby he is God, has agreeablenes with God;
but, whereby he is man, with us, as on the contrary whereby he is God, he
differs from us, but whereby he is man, or by his voluntary dispensation, he
differs from God.

VII.
CHrist is considered either, as he is God-man, or according to the manner of
his absolute nature, either this or that: after the first manner, he is said
to be the mediator of himself, not after the second.

VIII.
MEdiatorshippe agrees not with the Person, according to the common nature of
the Godhead; but according to the special nature, or the form subsisting,
which they call Personalitas.
Personhood, or Personality.

IX.
IT is one thing to speak of the Godhead of Christ in himself, according to
his own nature a part; and another thing as he is in the Supposi^o.
Subject. Now Christ is a Priest, not as he is God by nature, but as he is
God-man, by the dispensation of (his) will.

The Places.
1. Tim. 2.5. Answ. Christ is pronounced man three ways; for, either the
person of Christ is noted, which person is man: or the person of Christ,
whereby he is man: or lastly, his manhood simply. Now it follows not, he is
Mediator being man: therefore he is Mediator as he is man, or according to his
manhood.

For the Verity of the Humane NATVRE.
I.
IT is one thing to treat of the Material cause of Christ's flesh; and another
thing of the forming cause: for the holy Ghost brought not the substance, but
disposed and sanctified it.

II.
Look, concerning what the Accident of a thing is denied, concerning the same,
it is not needful to deny the matter and Subject of that Accident, and so on
the contrary.

III.
OF Defects, which indeed, are Privatiuely so called, some are repugnant to
perfection, in themselves to be shunned and condemned: some are common to all,
in themselves, indeed to be shunned, by the will of nature, yet not
condemned. Lastly, some are Personal, according to the manner of every
Individuum: of the first, Christ had no experience: the second, because they
are Essential, and natural defects of man corrupt, Christ took them all on
himself: of the third, the matter is doubtful.

The Places.
2. Cor. 13.4. Ans. It is one thing to treat of Christ oppositely, and
distinctly, according to both natures: but another thing of the person, with
which because of unity, that is communicated, which is proper to both natures.

Ioh. 6 51. There is one descent local, another Metaphorical, another of
Nature, another of dispensation, another according to substance, another
according to evacuation; Exinamitionem.
Christ descended according to the manner of dispensation and evacuation, and
not locally. Now the flesh of of Christ is two ways considered, either
according to it self simply: or, as it was united with the divine nature, by
the means of his person; and after this manner, not after that; the flesh of
Christ is called the bread of life, to wit, not causally, but Instrumentally.

For the unity of Person.
I.
OF Christ, there is a twofold consideration: one according to the person,
commonly: the other according to the natures oppositely. Now those things are
uttered of the natures in the person, which agree with the person, in respect
of both.

II.
THe coessence is of the natures, not of the person: for Christ is not another
of (or from) the Father, and another, of, (or from) the Virgin, according to
the person: but another of the Father, and another of the Virgin, according to
the natures, because according to the divine Nature, he is coessentiall with
the Father, but according to the humane, coessentiall with the Virgin.

Ioh. 2.19. Ans. The conclusion from the Natures to the person is of no force:
for the person of Christ is not called the Temple, but his Manhood; in which
the Godhead dwelt bodily.

Heb. 7.3. The Nativity of Christ is twofold: the one without Mother,
according to the divine nature: the other without Father, according to the
humane: and both were united in the one and the self same Subject.

For the quality of Natures.
I.
COncrete (or conjoined) names are not multiplied, unless the Subjects be
multiplied: but whereas, there is but one Subject alone in Christ, of necessity
there is but one Christ alone.

II.
THe Actions and Passions are of the person, and not of the natures now a
conclusion from the persons unto the natures, is in consequent.

For the Hypostaticall union, and the communications of Properties against the
Vbiquitaries.
I.
A Thing is united three ways Essentially, when of many, there is made one
Essence: Accidentally, when the Accidents are joined to the Subjects:
Substantially, when the substance which otherwise of it self might exist: is
drawn to the being of another Subject, and depends on it, as a part of (...)
it.

II.
We must make a difference between the Godhead sending, and the person sent:
and there is one consideration of the Word, by reason of the Essence; and
another, by reason of the office.

III.
Whatsoever things are pronounced of Christ; either they are divine simply,
pertaining to his divine nature, or humane, pertaining the humane, or common
mediately, pertaining to the whole person: therefore glory, Power, and other
things, when they are pronounced of Christ. are these three ways to be
considered; as divine, and then they are Essential, and Incommunicable; as
humane, and then they are proper to Christ in the form of a servant; as
mediatory, which are proper to the person of Christ, in both natures, together
and in common.

IIII.
SVch as is the substance of every thing, such also is the manner of being: but
there is but one substance of Christ's body: therefore but one manner of being,
which is proper to bodies; that is, circumscriptiue: not definitive, which is
proper to the spirits, nor repletiue, which is proper unto God.

V.
FRom Christ being man, to Christ's manhood: the conclusion is impertinent for
neither the nature ought to be confounded with the nature, the person with the
nature, or the abstract with the concrete.

VI.
THe imitation, Exoequatio.
equalness, or communication of Essence, or properties, makes not an union;
but the copulation of nature in one subsistence.

VII.
WE must distinguish between whole Christ, and the whole of Christ: the first
whereof respects his person; the second, his natures: for that, which is true
of whole Christ, cannot conveniently or truly be pronounced of the whole of
Christ.

The Places of Scripture.
Mat. 26. Act. 2. Ephesians. 1. The right hand is one thing, and to sit at the
right hand is another: Christ is one thing, and the manhood of Christ is
another thing; the figured signification of right hand is one thing, and the
proper is another: for in the Scriptures, the right hand of God imports two
things, besides the proper signification, to wit Power, and Glory: both
Christ has communicated unto him, as he is a person, God-man: whence it is,
that the Schoolmen affirm, Christ to be ascended unto his sitting at the
Fathers right hand Aequaliter. Aliqualiter.
equally, according to the divine Nature: in some sort according to the humane:
as a double descent is given him in the Scriptures: one according to his
Exi^anitionem.
debasement, as being God: the other, according to the local places, as being
man.

Mat. 28. Phil. 2. Col. 3. Ephesians. 4. The properties of the one nature are
attributed to the whole person, because of the unity of the Subject: for all
that power, dignity, exaltation is proper, to the office, and person of the
Mediator, and not to the natures: now they are attributed to Christ being man;
partly, by grace of the union, and partly, because of that exaltation of
Christ's person, which was made above every Name.

OF THE OFFICE OF CHRIST.
The Confirming Part. CHAP. VII.
FRom the person redeeming, we pass to the manner of Redemption, which the
office of Christ does circumscribe: for, whereas the manner of Redemption
comprehends all that action, course, and manner of Christ which he has
performed according to the ordering, disposing, and dispensation of both his
Fathers will, and his own; we must thoroughly discern them by their degrees,
and the degrees of the office of Christ.

Now we discern them partly; Generally, according to a common manner: partly
singularly, according to their special kinds and parts.

Generally, the office of Christ is defined to be an office of mediation
committed to the Son Heb. 5 5. Ioh. 3.17
by the Father, and of the Son, both voluntarily received, Ioh. 10.18. Heb.
10.7.
and in both natures perfectly fulfilled; Phil. 2.8. Romans 5.19
that he might unite, and reconcile us to God, and God to us for ever. Ioh.
11.51.52. Romans 4.25
.

The Cause efficient of this office essentially is God, the Father, Son and
holy Ghost, Heb. 1.9 Esa. 61.1.
but yet, the order of proceeding being kept; to wit, both that which is
inward of the persons among themselves, and that, which is outward, as touching
the things created: for in respect of both; it comes to pass, that the
Father, from whom is both the Essence, and virtue of working, according to the
beginning, is said to be the Efficient cause of this office: of whom the Son
is anointed, both as touching the calling, and as touching the bestowing of
Gifts: the latter whereof, properly pertayneth to the humane nature, the former
to both: Now the form is said to be the mean (or mediating) cause, by order
of person, from the Father, but by dispensation of office, subordinate Ioh.
14.28.
to the Father.

The matter of this office is considered two ways: Subjectiuely, and it is
both the natures of Christ, Ioh. 6.33
not severally, but jointly together: for there are two parts (or offices) of
Mediatorshippe: the first in the things, that concern God; the second in the
things that concern us: and therefore Christ must be as a Mediator in office;
so the middle-one in person between God and us, that communicating with both
by nature, he might be a Mediator between both, by office: Secondly,
effectually, and they are all actions, which he performed: Divine, as God;
humane, as man; one and indivisible, as Mediator; whence it is that they are
called, Divine-humane, because as there is but one Worker of the Works of both
Natures: so is there but one absolute ending: for the working is of the person;
but the beginnings of the workings, are of the Natures.

The form is the manner of administering, or the mediation it self, which of
the Schoolmen is usually considered, either in a more large, or in a more
strict manner: in that (it is the mediation) which is of Christ, as the head of
all Angels, and men generally: but in this, it is that, which is of Christ, as
the Redeemer of men particularly; after which manner, he is of us here taken.

But in this Mediation of Christ, the Redeemer, two proportionable things are
considered; the person, and the working: whence it is, that there is one
mediation termed Substantial; another by working.

The Substantial Mediation, is the conjunct^on of the two natures in one
person, for the work of mediation.

But that, which is by operation, is performed by certain degrees: the first
is of an Arbitrator; the second of a Messenger; the third of an Intercessor;
the fourth of satisfaction; the last, of governing: and all these parts of
mediation, the Person of Christ has, and yet does execute the properties of
both natures wholly kept. For he is an arbitrator between God and Men: a
messenger from the Father with us: an Intercessor from us with the father, who
for us prays and makes supplication; a Priest, who for us offered himself:
Lastly a Governor, who rules us by the virtue and efficacy of his spirit.
And of these degrees, the first and second is of the Prophetical office; the
third and fourth, of the Priest-hoode; but the last, of the kingdom of Christ,
by his Mediatorship.

The end of Christ's office Supreme, is the glory of God; Subordinate,
Redemption, Justification, and our Salvation.

And this is the common way and manner of Christ's office.

The particular manner they distinguish, and define to be the special kinds
and parts thereof.

The special kinds of Christ's office are three; according as both the
necessity of man's condition without Christ, and of the deliverance of him from
out of the same by Christ, as also the verity of that anointing, whereof he
is named Christ, most clearly convinces. Psalm. 45.7 Heb. 2.9.


Of man's condition without Christ, there are three, as it were degrees: the
first of Ignorance; the second of Inordination, or disorder; the third of guilt
from both Man's deliverance from the same is performed, according to three
contrary degrees, which the office of Christ seals unto us: for Prophet^^ is
set against Ignorance; the kingdom of Christ, and the building of his kingdom
in us, against Inordination; the priesthood against guilt.

The same does the verity of Christ's anointing convince: for look what was
the manner of the three-folde calling, prophetical, priestly, and kingly,
which were wont to be confirmed with the outward oil; Exodus 30 23.24. and
28.41.. 1. Sam. 16.14. 1. Kin 19.19.
the same is also the manner of Christ's office, anointed of the Father; both
as touching those callings, and as touching the conferring of gifts in them.

There is therefore a threefold office of Christ the Mediator; of prophecy,
whereby he teaches us our own ill, and the good of divine grace; Mat. 3.17.
of Priest, whereby he redeemeth us from our evils, and prepares for us
divine grace: Psalm. 110 4. Heb. 7.21.
of King, whereby he defends us from all evil, and conserveth us in that
conferring of Psalm. 2.6. Luc. 1.32.
grace.

And these three offices Christ has in order performed, and does as yet this
day perform in Heaven, executing the parts of a Mediator in their order,
toward us, and toward God the Father: toward us, teaching, sanctifying,
and ruling by the power of his Spirit: toward the Father, exhibiting his
message, and the offering up of himself; yea and moreover, most powerfully
exercising his kingly authority, given him of the Father.

The Prophetical Office of Christ, is a function of the person, whereby he
teaches, and instructs his church.

The verity of this office, is to be discerned by the parts, and manners
thereof: the parts are two; the outward publishing, and the inward
illumination, or efficacy of doctrine.

The outward publishing of doctrine is both the preaching of the Gospel,
concerning the Grace of God, and Redemption of mankind: as also the
Interpretation of the Law, according to the mind of the Lawgiver himself; and
lastly, the foretelling, and prophecy of things to come. Ioh. 1.13 Mat 5.17.
Mat. 4 17. Esa ^1.^. Ioh. 3.18.


The efficacy of doctrine, is that special accomplishment of the Prophetical
office, whereby the faithful are moved by the Spirit of God, that both in
mind they might conceive, and in heart desire those things, which are taught
by publishing. Ioh. 5.25. and 6.83 Mat. 16.16


The manner of this office is twofold; the one immediate, the other mediate.

The Immediate is, whereby Christ according to his divine Nature of himself,
instructed the Patriarchs and Prophets in the old Testament, by visions,
oracles, and dreams: but according to both natures; he witting and willing
taught mankind in the New Testament, by outward voice: Heb. 11 2. Pet. 1.21.
Hence it is, that every where he is called in the Scriptures, the Word of
the Eternal Father; the Messenger of the Lord; the Angel of the covenant,
Mal. 3.2.
counceller, Esa 9.6.
and the Apostle of our profession. Heb 3.1


The Mediate is, whereby Christ by the Patriarchs, and Prophets in the old
Testament; and by his Apostles, and their Successors, in the New, does instruct
the church by the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments. Luc. 24.45. Act. 16.14
Luc. 21.15


The Priestly office of Christ, is a Personal work of Christ, God-man, whereby
he was ordained to satisfy God, for men.

Of this office, there is usually delivered in the Scriptures a twofold manner;
the one according to type, the other according to truth.

The Type was both of calling, or person, and of execution, or actions,
according to calling.

The Typical person, in the old Testament was the Priest, either having an
ordinary calling generally, according to the order of Levi; or extraordinary
particularly, as Melchisedecke; according to whose order Christ, both for the
dignity of person, as also for the manner of calling, is called a Priest. Psalm.
110 ^. Heb. 7.21.


Actions according to calling, are three fold: to keep the Law, to offer
Sacrifices, and to make Intercession.

The keeping of Gods Law, among other things, was severally commended to the
high Priest; the Tables whereof, he was to keep, being given of God, and laid
up in the Arc of the covenant.

Of Sacrifices H^lasti^orum.
pacifying, which were offered by the Priest, and of the types of the
sacrifice, truly propitiatory, there was a twofold sort; the one reconciling,
and Holocaustum.
whole burnt; the other, absolving or redeeming.

The whole burnt, was a sacrifice, in which the beast, whether greater or
less, being orderly slain, according to the ability of every offerer, was
wholly burnt, and consumed to ashes, Leu. 1.23.
and was both Ordinary, and Extraordinary.

The Ordinary one was Perpetual, (or continual,) which was daily performed by
two Lambs: Exodus 29 39.
the other set; because upon set or appointed days, it was offered; either
Sabathicall, which was every Sabath offered; or monthly, which was every new
Moon; or anual, which was every year offered. Leu 23.2 3. etc. Numb. 28.23.


The Extraordinary was that, which was performed for an Incident necessity,
either public, of all the people; or private, of every man. 1. Sam. 7 8. 2.
Sam. 24.25.


The Redeeming was that, whereby some certain sins were purged: and there
was one for sin by error; or ignorance committed; Leu 4.2.3. etc.
another, for an offense, or sin committed by one, witting and willing: Leu.
7.24
both were ordinary, either in the new Moons, as at the Feast of Passover and
Pentecost, Leu. 23 19. Numb. 28.15.
or extraordinary, at any other time.

Now comes the third action of Priesthood; to wit, Intercession: whereof
there were, as it were, three parts; Presentation, whereby the Priest
presented himself, as a Mediator to God for the people. Covenant, whereby, for
himself and the people, he solemnly promised thankfulness, and obedience.
Prayer, whereby he prayed for the remission both of his, and their sins.

And this is the manner of the type, to which the verity of Christ's Priestly
office every way answers most agreeably and perfectly; whether you respect
the calling of the person, or the execution of his office.

The calling of Christ's person to this priestly office, three arguments do
prove: First, divine testification, whereof the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, cites a two-folde testimony: Heb. 5.5 6.
Secondly, the voluntary debasement of Christ's person, and the dispensation of
his office; whereof there was one only end, even the execution of this office:
Thirdly, the Analogy, and comparison of Christ's person and Melchisedech, which
the author to the Hebrews does at large prosecute.

The execution of Christ's priestly office is, as it were, by three parts
finished: by the fulfilling of the Law; by the full payment of punishment, and
by intercession, or by the gracious and effectual application of both.

The fulfilling of the Law is that, whereby he has freely and perfectly
performed the whole righteousness, unto which we were bound, both by a
perfect conformity of understanding, and will with that Law; and by works
agreeing with this Law, as being perfect, both inward and outward. Romans 8.4
Ioh. 17.19 Mat 3.15.


For two things were required, that the Law might be fulfilled, the
righteousness of the person, or that which is habitual; and the
righteousness of operation, or that which is actual: that, from which is the
power; this, from which is the Act of fulfilling: Christ had both, not for
himself only, but for us: yet for himself, because man; but for us, because
he was man for us: for, as he was made God-man for our sake; so those things
which he, being man, had and did; he had and did them for us. Hence it is
also, that many are called just by his obedience, and that he is said to be
the end of the Law unto righteousness, to every one that believes. Romans 5.19.
.

The full payment of punishment is the voluntary oblation of Christ, whereby
he offered himself to God, and the Father in the eternal Spirit, the price
of Redemption for our sins, being himself, both the Sacrifice, and the
Sacrifice.

There were of that oblation, as it were, two parts: the appointing of the
Sacrifice; and as it were, the preparing of the same for the sacrificing; then
the very consummation of the Oblation on the Altar of the cross.

The appointing and preparing of the Sacrifice, all those sufferings do
limite, wherewith Christ disposed himself voluntarily unto the oblation of the
sacrifice of his body; especially, about the end of his life, and the next day
before his death. Mat. 26.38. Ioh. 12 27 Mar. 4.35


Of these sufferings, some were Inward, in respect of the soul, and affection;
Heb. 5.7. Apoc. 9.15. Esa. 53.5.
some outward, in respect of the body: Heb. 10.5 Mat. 20.28.
for the whole Substance of his Manhood must needs have been possessed in
suffering of punishments, that he might save whole man.

The consummation of the oblation was made on the cross by death: but, because
the Scripture makes mention of a twofold death; to wit; natural, which is of
this world; and supernatural, which is of the other; both which were laid
upon Adam the offender, and his posterity, when the Lord said, By dying, thou
shall die: both these Christ for us suffered, and subdued; that when the soul
was separated from his body: Ioh. 19.30.
this, when, having felt by dispensation, the dashing and violent force
thereof, he said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 29.46.
.

Now unto both deaths was conjoined a curse corporal, and spiritual, by the
sign of the cross, that Christ by the curse of his punishment, might purge
the curse of our guilt: Gal. 3.13 1 Pet. 2.24
for, albeit neither of both were Infinite, as touching the time: yet both are
considered as Infinite, touching the absolute quantity: and therefore, Christ
suffered death infinite in deed, and not in time: because the Infiniteness of
his Merit, Satisfaction, Sacrifice, and Redemption, by all means went beyond
that Infiniteness of time, which the damned feel.

There remains the last part of the Execution of Christ's Priest. hood, which
is Intercession: whereby Christ applies effectually that unto us, which he
has deserved by the fulfilling of the Law, and the full payment of
punishments. First, by presenting himself unto to God the Father, as the only
Mediator and Satisfier, that he might procure unto us the presentation of his
merit, and of his performed satisfaction, Heb. 9.24. Romans 8.34
the remission of sins, and the restoring of righteousness: Secondly, by
promising and undertaking to God the Father for us, obedience, and
thankfulness: the seal and earnest of which undertaking, he gives us, even
his Spirit, by whom he might stir up in us a desire, both to avoyde sin,
and perform righteousness. 1. Pet. 2.5 Romans 8.26 Mat. 20.38
Lastly, by making intercession, and praying for us. Romans 8.34.


And this intercession of Christ, as it leans upon his satisfaction and
sacrifice: so it obtayneth that dignity and value which it has from his whole
person, whose work it is.

The kingly office of Christ, is that whereby Christ does order, and desend his
kingdom purchased by Redemption.

But whereas, the kingdom of Christ is twofold, the one Essential, according
to nature, which he has common with the Father, and the holy Ghost: the other
Personal, according to dispensation of will, which he executes, as being
Mediator: Ioh. 18 36. Romans 14.17. Psalm. 2.6. Ephesians. 1.22.
in respect of this properly; this Kingly office of Christ, must needs be
considered.

Now it is considered by the manner of administration, and the term, or end
thereof.

Of Administration, there are two times: the present, as of this world, and the
future, as of the other.

In this world Christ administreth, or ordayneth his church two ways: by
Prescription, and by Execution of Laws.

The Prescription of Laws is twofold: outward, whereby Christ by the
Ministry of the Word, prescribes unto his Subjects, Laws of Iac. 4.12 Ephesians.
4.11. 1. Cor. 12.18.
believing, and living. Inward, whereby, he moves by his holy spirit, the
hearts of the Elect unto the obedience of his commandments, with a feeling of
his present grace, and a sure hope of his future glory. Ioh. 1.16. Act. 26.18 1
Ioh. 1.3.


The Execution is finished in two parts: In the gracious distribution of
Rewards and Benefits, whereby all corporal, and spiritual things necessary
for salvation, are ministered to the church, under a certain condition of the
cross: Ioh. 14 18. Heb. 13.5. Iac. 1.5.
and in the just inflicting of punishments, whereby he deals with the enemies
of his church, whether they be corporal, or spiritual, by repressing, and
restrayning some; Psalm. 110 Romans 16.20.
but by punishing, and utterly destroying other some. Romans 7.24.^5. 1. Cor.
5.36.


In the other world, Christ administreth his church with a perfect consummation
both of Rewards, Romans 14 7. Apoc. 21.4 1 Cor. 2.9
and punishments: poc. ^ and 2.8 2 These. 1.6.
the Antecedent whereof shall be the universal judgment; the consequent,
Eternity.

The term and end of this kingdom, in respect of Oeconomiae.
the ordering thereof, shall be, when the Son, being about to deliver up this
kingdom of Mediatorshippe, to God, and the Father; shall be subject unto him,
who has made all things subject to himself, that GOD may be all in all: 1.
Cor 15 28.
for he shall solemnly profess his voluntary subjection toward God the
Father, by a singular and glorious yielding up of this Oeconomicall Kingdom
receyved of him, as touching his Person from the Fathers hand.

And this is the manner of Christ's Office, according to the special kinds
thereof. Now concerning the parts, we must in few words consider: Of Christ's
Office, there are two parts: or (as they are commonly called,) two Estates of
Christ, God-man: Humiliation, and Exaltation: for in these, that whole
dispensation of Salvation, and the execution of Christ's threefold Office
consists: wherefore, look what is the manner of Christ's Office from the
Natures in the person, or from the person, according to both Natures, the same
also, is the manner of his Humiliation, and Exaltation.

Humiliation is that base, and voluntary condition of Christ, God-man upon
earth; whereby he debased himself, as touching both Natures, that he might
both die, and by dying satisfy: as touching his Divine Nature, he debased
himself, both by a voluntary subjection of his Person, and by a hiding of his
glory, and majesty before men, for the time: Phi. 2.7.8
as touching his Humane Nature, both by taking unto him the Infirmity of our
Nature; and secondly, by his most humble Obedience of Life, and Death. Esa.
53.5 Ioh. 19.34
.

Exaltation is the condition of Christ, God-man, whereby he was advanced into
the glory and dignity, which was meet, or convenient for the person of a
Mediator, and that according to both natures; according to the divine nature by
relation, or by a divine manifestation of that majesty which he hid, during the
time of his abasement; Romans 1.4 Act. 2.38.
according to the humane; partly, by the deposition of his servile condition,
and partly by the receiving gifts, in body and in soul, concurring together
unto the perfection and blessedness of his humane nature, above all nature.
Phil. 3.21 Ephe. 1.20 2. Heb* 2.9.


Of both states, there are proper degrees, opposite one to the other. Of
Humiliation; and first of that which is outward, or of his Submission unto
death, there are three degrees: death, with the curse conjoined: Gal 3.13.
Burial, that the truth of his death might be ratified: Luc. 23 53.
Descent into Hell, or that voluntary debasement of Christ to suffer, and as it
were, with wrestling, to overcome the pains of Hell, which Christ chiefly felt
in his soul, when he was assaulted; first with heaviness, afterward with
the sorrows of both deaths. Act. 2.24. Ephesians. 4.4


To these are opposed three degrees of Exaltation: Resurrection, in which by
divine power, having subdued death, he raised up himself unto life
everlasting: Mat. 28.6. 1 Cor 13.4.
n Ascension, whereby, through the same power, he verily and visibly
translated his body into the Heaven of the blessed Act. 1.9 Ephesians. ^.11.
sitting at the right hand of the Father, whereby Christ was actually endued
with all fullness, both of glory, and power. Heb. 1.3. Psalm. 110.1 1 Cor. 15.25.
.

OF THE OFFICE OF CHRIST. The Confuting Part.
Distinctions in defense of Christ's Office, in General.
I.
THere is wont to be a three-folde signification of the Word Office: for
either it imports an endeavor, or deed whereunto for some man we are
dutifully employed; or an action of virtue, as Cicero defines: or lastly, an
action, (or work,) unto which, when a man is appointed, he (accordingly)
executes the same: and in this last signification, it ought to be taken when
we treat of Christ's Office.

II.
IN the Office of Christ, three things are to be distinguished: Vocation,
which in person he had immediately from God. Gifts, by Vocation, which
immediately he receyved in the Humane Nature. Administration which was in
person, according to both Natures; which three, the outward unction in the old
Testament signified.

III
CHrist is said to be Mediator; partly, as he is middle; partly, as he is
mediant; middle in Person, mediant in Office.

IIII.
OFfice ought to be distinguished either by the Substance thereof, or by the
manner of execution: by substance, according to the parts, and special kinds
of it: by manner, which has respect both unto the person, and to the natures
in the person: for the agent is one, and the action one, in respect of the
Person: yet there are two powers of the Agent, and two beginnings of actions,
in respect of the Natures.

In Defense of Christ's Prophetical Office.
CHrist is called a Prophet for three respects: first, in respect of person;
for he is the wisdom of the Father, not subiectiuely residing in the Father,
but impressiuely expressing the same in the Person. 2. in respect of Office;
because he has taught his Church immediately, either according to either
nature in the old, or according to both, in the new Testament. 3. In respect of
Ministry; mediately teaching men by me^, which were called either ordinarily,
or extraordinarily, unto the office of teaching.

In Defense of his Priestly Office.
I.
THe Word Sacrifice is taken in Scripture, either Analogically, or properly:
Analogically, or by a certain resemblance, it signifies the duties of Piety,
and Charity: but properly, either the action it self, conjoined with the holy
ceremonies, or the things which are offered.

II.
SAcrifices, some are Typical, or Signifying: other some not Typical, or
signified; and both either Pacifying, or Propitiatory: or else Eucharisticall,
or of Thanksgiving.

III.
THe word (Leholam,) with the Hebrews, imports not the Infiniteness of
time, but the continuance of the same, sometimes longer, sometimes shorter,
according to the subject matter.

IIII.
THe Sacrifice of Christ is considered, either properly, or Symbolice.
comparatively: Properly, It is one only in verity, and efficacy, even that
Sacrifice of Christ's body on the cross: comparatively, with the old Doctors
of the church, the Eucharist was sometimes called a Sacrifice.

V.
THe Oblation of Christ, is one only, not only in special kind; but also in
number: for there can be no oblation of Christ, but by his coming between,
and therefore that distinction of Sacrifice, into a bloody and unbloody, is
false.

In Defense of his Kingly OFFICE.
THe Kingdom of Christ is taken, either Figuratively, or Properly:
Figuratively, and then both Instrumentally, for the Gospel, and subjectiuely
for the church properly, for that Oeconomicall dominion of Christ, which is
called the Kingdom of Grace for the beginning thereof in this world, and the
kingdom of glory, for the consummation thereof in the other.

In Defense of the State of Christ's Humiliation.
I.
THere is one Subjection natural, another Oeconomicall: and by this (latter,)
Equality is not destroyed: because the thing equal (as Cyril says) is said
to be subject to the equal, by way of dispensation.

II.
OBedience is not an Act natural of nature; but voluntary of the person,
according to both natures. Now the consequence is of no force from one special
kind, unto the other; from the Act of Nature, to the Act of Will.

In Defense of his Exaltation.
I.
THe majesty of the Essence of the Word is one, and of the dispensation another.

II.
DIspensation comprehends two things: one, the mystery of the union; the
other, the end of the mystery: In respect of the union, Majesty has properly
respect unto the nature assumed; in respect of the end, it fitly agreeeth with
Christ, according to both natures.

III.
EXaltation is not the abolishing of nature, but the perfection; and all other
power given to Christ, is of Office, and not of divine Essence.

OF THE CALLING OF MAN unto Salvation.
The Part Confirming. CHAP. VIII.
FOr as much as we have treated of the Beginning and Dispensation of our
Redemption: that is, of the Person and Office of Christ: We now are to treat,
according to our appointed order, of the Application thereof.

Now the verity of this Application, ought three ways severally to be marked:
by the degrees thereof; by the outward means, and by the Subject: the degrees,
according to which, God in time applies unto us the benefit of Redemption,
are chiefly two: Vocation, and Justification.

Vocation, is the first degree of Application, on Gods behalf; called therefore
by Augustine, The entry unto salvation, and the first passage toward the end.

Of this Vocation, there is usually had a diverse knowledge, according as it is
distinguished; either, as touching the manner of calling, into an Inward, and
outward: or as touching the diverse condition of the cause Efficient, into a
General, and Particular: or Lastly, as touching the effect of calling, unto an
Effectual, and not Effectual Vocation.

Now of this Vocation, whether Inward, Particular, and Effectual; or outward,
general, and ineffectuall, there is a double respect: the one Absolute in it
self; the other Joint, (or conjoined) in an ordinary vocation. For God calls
outwardly in general; inwardly, in particular; and jointly, both ways
ordinarily.

Of both, we are orderly to treat, according to the course of the causes.

The outward and general Vocation, (that we may speak of it in the first
place) is a gracious action of God, whereby he calls men forth, by word,
sign, and work, from unbelief unto faith; that both the faithful might be
disposed to the communion of salvation, and that others being co^vinced of the
grace offered unto them by God, might become inexcusable.

The cause Efficient of this Vocation is God, because it is from him properly,
if you mark the true beginning thereof; and is from him, first, (or chiefly,)
by himself, and principally, if you have a respect unto the means, which God
would have to be used, either extraordinarily, or ordinarily, for the calling
of men.

The beginning is that love of God toward man, whereby as a lover of souls,
and the Savior of Men, Sap. 11.27. 1 Timothy 4.10.
he bears his good will toward all men, and generally offers his Grace
unto them.

Now, he offers the same (that we may in few words speak of the means) by
word, by signs, and by works; all which in respect of God, that ordayneth
them, are general: by word, either extraordinary, such as was in the first
times of the Church; Numb. 12.8. Heb. 1.2.
or Ordinary, by the universal Canon of faith and life, which we call the
Scripture; Ephesians. 2.17. Romans 10.14.
by signs, by which added unto the word, (the Lord being author,) his grace is
visibly sealed up; Romans 4.11. Genesis 17.11
by works, either Ordinary, or Extraordinary, either within the Church, or
without the Church.

The matter, or Subject of this vocation, are all men, without difference of
nations, sexes, or states; unto whom by name, the means, whereof we have
spoken, do extend: For God will have all men to be saved; both generally,
because he calls forth out of all whomsoever he will; or Ex singulis
generum genera singulorum.
out of every one, of the general sorts, the general sorts of every one,
unto salvation: as also, because the grace of God is offered unto all; not by
the universal efficacy of Christ; but by a general sign, and power. Mat.
22.14 1. Tim. 2.4.


The Form, is that outward Vocation, which God mediately effects by the
ministry of his word, by the use of the Sacraments; and lastly, by the
communion of the Church, and the members thereof, in themselves, and among
themselves: all which are ^ceyved by the outward senses. Heb. 4.12.


The End is twofold: Proper, both the inexcusablenes of the Reprobates, and
the salvation of the Elect: Remote, the manifestation of the Grace of God. 1.
Cor. 15.28.


And this is the outward, and general calling.

The Internal, and particular calling is a gracious action of God, whereby the
elect, from everlasting, in their due time, according to the good pleasure of
God, for the merit of Christ, by the holy Ghost, are inwardly informed, unto
the receyving, and communion of Gods grace for their own salvation, and the
glory of Gods mercy.

The Efficient cause of this Vocation ^s God, according to the particular
beginning, and the ordinary means thereof.

The beginning, is the saving grace of God, for Christ; for two things do
distinguish this particular beginning of inward calling, from the general of
outward calling: Gods good pleasure, as the foregoing cause thereof; and Christ's
Ransom, as the meritorious cause thereof. Out of both jointly arises that
singular and benevolent affection of Gods will, whereby he embraces us,
adopted in his beloved Son, with his Infinite love, by applying unto us his
saving grace. Ephesians. 2.17 19. Ioh. 15.19 Act. 6.14 Ephesians. 1.5.


Of this Inward calling, or application, there are two inward means: the
Spirit and Faith.

The Spirit, which calls by the efficacy of the cause: 1. Ioh. 2 17. Ezec.
11.1^.
Faith answers the calling, by the office of the instrument Romans 8.30. ^ Pro.
1.22.
Now, as the giving of the Spirit; so also the bestowing of faith, is the
singular gift of God. Pass
To be possible to have both, is of Nature; but to have both, is of Grace.

The Matter of this Inward calling, are those, whom God fore-knew, and
predestined unto life; for whom he has predestined, them has he called.
Romans 8.30.
Neither can this Inward and effectual calling, be of any others, then of them
whose also is the Spirit of Christ, and saving faith, according to the purpose
of Gods Predestination in Christ; all others are excluded: for, albeit it be
sometimes given unto the wicked; not only with their senses to perceive those
things, which are of the outward Ministry, but by them, after a sort, inwardly
to be affected in the heart; that is, in the understanding, and will: yet this
inward saving calling, whereof we here treat, does affect them only to
salvation, who live, and are moved by the Spirit of Christ, and are ingraffed
by faith into Christ, to life eternal. Ioh 17 ^0. Ephesians. 2.20.21.22.


The form of this calling, is that inward Information of the faithful, by the
spirit and faith, for the communicating of Gods grace and glory.

Of this Information, there are two parts; the one is, that effectual action
of Gods Spirit in us, and according to that the whole renewing of man, which in
the Scripture is commonly called Regeneration: 1 Ioh. 3.9. Romans 8.1
The other is the action of Faith, whereby both the mind is enlightened, that
it may know, and the Will sanctified, that it may apprehend God in Christ. Col.
1.^. Romans 14.14.


The End, Remote, is the glory of God graciously calling; Nearest, the
salvation of Man effectually called.

And this is the manner of the outward and inward absolute calling: whereof the
one is of good pleasure, and election: the other of the sign: the one of
Efficacy, the other of Signification, tending to Efficacy: the one proper to
the Elect, the other common to all.

But, because the one cannot, nor ought to be separated from the other in the
Elect, in the ordinary way unto Salvation; out of both arises a calling, which
we term Coniunct, both ordinary, and effectual in the matter of our
salvation.

Now, is it an effectual, and gracious action of the holy spirit, sealing up
in the Elect, by the instrument of true faith, the preaching of the word, the
use of the Sacraments, the communion o^ Christ, and his Church, for their
salvation, and Gods eternal glory.

The Efficient cause of this calling, is God: for the calling is of gift, not
of merit: of grace, not of nature: God calling whom he will; and again,
whom he will; either not calling at all, or not effectually calling; but both
freely without respect of person, or without blame.

The matter are men elect, in whom alone, only this calling is effectual,
perticularly, and savingly; though generally the not elected, and Hypocrites
may both receive the use of the outward calling, and seem openly to declare
the sense (and feeling) of the Inward: whence it is, that the Effect of the
calling, of these is called in the scripture, a Heb. 6.5
taste only, but of those a commixture of the Word with faith. Heb. 4.2.


The Form is that divine manner of divine Information, Inward, and Outward;
whereof this is fully performed with the preaching of the Word, the use of the
Sacraments, and other both private and public exercises of faith, and
charity; but that, with the saving communion of the Spirit and Faith.

The End is both the glory of God, being merciful, as also the advancing and
translating of man from his misery, to spiritual grace and glory.

OF THE CALLING OF MAN unto Salvation. The Confuting Part.
Distinctions in defense of the Efficient Cause.
I.
THe Universal Calling, which is commonly called Natural, is one; and the
Political or Ecclesiastical, which is called Personal, is another; Lastly,
the saving is another: of which we treat in this place: yet of all these, the
Principal, and only Efficient, is God.

II.
THere is one calling Immediate; another Mediate: Extraordinary, and Ordinary:
That, God effects by himself: This, by the Ministry of men.

III.
OF the Efficient cause of all callings, there is commonly had a twofold
notice: the one according to the beginning, the other according to the
Instrument: that, is properly of the cause; this of the Concausa.
fellow cause.

In Defense of the Matter, against the Universality of Effectual Grace.
I.
THe grace, and good will of God is, either noted generally, whereby God does
benefit all men; or particularly, whereby he does good to the Elect in
Christ: but this universal, and general grace ought to be discerned from the
singular, and particular: as also the universal, and common benefits toward
all, as they are men, from the Particular toward men, as they are Christians.

II.
THe Affirmation is Inconsequent, from the General to all Particular things:
for all ought not to be taken universally of every man, but generally of all
sorts of men.

III.
THe Argumentation holds not from the communion of Nature, to the communion
of Grace.

IIII.
THe quantity of Active virtue, ought to be known by the Effect of the
quantity.

V.
THere is one Efficacy of calling outward, another inward; the outward is, when
the senses, and corporal things are touched, and moved by the outward
Ministry: the inward, when the understanding, and will are touched, and moved:
Both these Efficacies again are twofold: the one saving, proper to the Elect;
the other not saving, but, leading the way according to the general order, and
generally belongs unto all that are called.

The Places.
1. Tim 4 10. Ans. The benefits of Christ, in the saving of men, are distinct
by two degrees: the one is common to all: the other is peculiar to the Church,
and saving to the faithful. Add further, that the word of (saving) imports
sometimes the benefits of God in this life, and sometimes that eternal
benefit of salvation aequivocally.

Ezekiel. 28.26. God two ways is called the God of men, either universally, and
commonly, according to nature; or particularly, according to Grace, whereby he
chose them from everlasting in Christ.

In Defense of the Formal CAUSE.
I.
THere is one Calling by grace natural; and another by Grace supernatural.

II.
THe Calling, which is common to all, by natural Grace, is wrought by God
according to the Esse naturae.
being of Nature, (as the Schoolmen speak) generally: but that, which
happens to those that are called Supernaturally, is concluded in two parts:
for it proceeds generally from the caller, and belongs particularly to the
called.

III.
THe Formal of the calling, ought to be distinguished from the Material
thereof: because the Subject of that, is particular; but the Subject of this,
belongs to all men alike.

OF MAN'S Justification before GOD.
The Part Confirming. CHAP. IX.
THe Second degree of Application which is here made on the behalf of God, is
Justification.

It is needful that the verity of this Justification be declared two ways:
by Anotation of Words, whereof there is use in the explication of this doctrine:
as also by definition of the thing it self, according to all the causes.

The Words, whose doubtful signification is to be taken away, lest they
should in the doctrine it self breed any difficulty, are chiefly two; Justice,
and Justification.

Justice, (which indeed is of the Person) is two ways usually considered: one
way, in the manner of quality, or Inherence; and it is the obedience of the
Law, which we perform to it: the other, in manner of Relation, or Imputation;
and it is a gracious giving of another man's obedience for us performed: that,
is called the righteousness of the law, or Works: this, of the Gospel, or
Faith: that, is in the person subjectiuely; this, of the Person by Grace of
Imputation. It is needful, that both be distinguished, because there is a
diverse use of both; of this, in the Private, and inward court of the
conscience before God: of that, in the public, and outward Court of christian
profession before men.

Justification generally considered, is the very application of righteousness:
but specially, if we treat of righteousness inherent, it is the effecting of
a certain habitual holiness in man, which signification is most unusual, and
improper: if we treat of the righteousness of Imputation; it is a gracious
Imputation of another man's righteousness by faith; and so an absolving of a man
before God.

And this signification, as most proper, and usual, both the common custom of
tongues, Idiotismus.
and the proper phrase of the holy Scriptures do confirm.

The common custom of tongues; for as with the Grecians, to justify has two
significations, besides (or without) the doctrine of Justification; the one, to
judge and pronounce one just, by public judgment: the other, after the cause
is judged, judiciously to punish one: so, that there is the same use of the
word with the Hebrews; two things do most evidently prove: first, the direct
and most frequent use of that word in court, or pubilcke judgments, causes,
and actions 2. Kin. 15.4. Deuteronomy. 25.1 Esa 43.9.
: secondly, the manifest Pro. 17 15. Esa. 50.8 Romans 8.33 ^4.
opposition of condemnation, and justification, as being contraries Antithesis.
.

And in this signification the word to Justify, commonly imports three
things. To absolve a person accused; Esa 5.23 Exodus 23. Luc. 7.29.
to judge one for righteous: to give a testimony to one already Justified; as
also rewards, which are due to the just and innocent.

If you respect the proper phrase of the Scripture by judicial proceeding, it
proposes the whole doctrine of Justification: this the Phrases of speaking,
which the Scripture uses; as also that whole manner and course of our
Salvation, which it describes, do prove.

The Phrases, which in this point the Scripture uses, do prove; some by way of
denial, that, he which is justified, is not condemned, not judged: and that
sins are not imputed unto him: f some by way of affirmation do prove, that
he is made just, is freede from the accusation, and condemnation of the law,
that righteousness is imputed unto him. etc. Romans 5.18. and 8.33


The whole course and manner of our Salvation is fully performed, as it were,
by two degrees: by the knowledge of our misery, and the trust of Gods mercy. Of
our misery, there are three parts: the Offense, the Guilt, and the Punishment.
Of Gods mercy, there are three opposite parts; the foregiuenesse of the fault,
the absolving from the guilt, and the freeing from the punishment. That whole
course or proceeding, from our misery to Gods mercy, is caled Justification, by
a signification taken from common pleadings: Forensi.
or from the Lawyers.

Justification therefore is properly a free judicial action of God, whereby
he judges the elect in themselves subject to the accusation and malediction
of the Law, to be just by faith, through Christ by imputation of his
righteousness, unto the praise of the glory of his Grace, and their own
salvation. Romans 3.24.25.


That this definition might be rightly understood, it is needful that the
Causes, which are orderly noted in the same, be two ways considered,
according as Justification is taken, either Actiuely, in respect of God, who
iustifyeth; or Passiuely, in respect of man, who is justified.

The Efficient cause of Justification, taken actiuely, is God the Father, in
the Son, by the holy Ghost: 2. Cor. 5.19. 2. Cor. 6.21.
for it is in him to absolve (or acquit) the guilty person, by whose Justice
he is made guilty: in him to pronounce one just, whose will is a rule of
Justice: Lastly, in him to give judgment of life or death, who by nature,
right, and office, is supreme judge. Esa. 59 1 Psalm. 5^.4. Esa. 43.21. Mar 27.


Of this Efficient, there is a double Impulsive cause; Outward, and Inward: the
Inward, is the only mercy of the father, Romans 3.23.
both in regard of his good pleasure, which predestined us Ephe. 1.5
into the adoption of sons, Romans 3.23.
as also in regard of the Oeconomiae.
disposing, and dispensation, which both ordained the Son for this end, and
applied the benefit obtayne^ by the Son unto us Coloss. 1.12.
. And this is the grace, which in Scripture if called the Grace of r Free
gifts; in Schools, the Grace that makes one acceptable; and among the common
sort, the Grace that freely gives, and is always opposed unto works, which
are called the gifts by grace, or of grace freely give^; because God took not
the first cause of Justification from us, or our works: but in himself, and
from himself, for the unsearchable riches of the glory of his grace.

Wherefore, there can be from us no disposition, and preparation, which of the
Popelings is surmised to be necessary for the bringing in of the form of
Justification Ephesians. 2.8.9. Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.4
: for albeit there be two special degrees of preparation, if not in time, at
leastwise in nature, going before Justification; to wit, the feeling of our
misery, and a confused knowledge of Gods mercy: yet none of these makes for
the manner of the Efficient Cause, not only concerning the condign, but not
so much as concerning the congruent.

The outward impulsive cause is Christ, God-man, both in respect of his merit,
as also of his efficacy and operation.

Of his merit, because both by obeying and suffering in his life and death, he
purchased for us the benefit of Justification. Esa. 83.3. 1. Tim. 2.6. 1. Ioh
1.7 Romans 8.30 31.


Of this Efficacy, because he effectually applies this purchased benefit both
by offering the same by the preaching of the word, and conferring it by the
inward and effectual operation of his spirit. Romans 1.16. 2. Cor. 5.19.


On man's behalf, that, which is, and is called reductiuely the Efficient cause
of the Passive Justification, is wholly Isntrumental; and it is says, by
which, not, for which, we are said to be justified, both in respect of her
Correlatiue, as also in respect of her contrary, the law and good works.

Of her Correlatiue, because the whole form of says, as it is justifying,
consists in relation: neither is it said, to justify us, as it is a
quality, but as it is occupied relatiuely, in the applying of her Correlatiue.
Gal. 3.8. Heb. 2.4. Romans 1.17


Of her contrary: because the good works, which are required in the person of
him that is justified, are excluded from the merit of Justification; as in the
place concerning Earth and Works shall be spoken more at large Romans 5.15. and
11.6 Ephesians. 2.8.9.
.

The matter of Justification, which on Gods behalf is considered actiuely, is
two fold, according as there are two parts of Iustificatjon; the Remission of
sins, and the obedjence of Christ.

For, because we Asiequuti sumus.
procured unto our selves both the bond of death, and the deprjuation of
righteousness, and life, both were needful for our Iustificatjon, that both
our sin might be abolished by Remission, that we might be freed from death,
which is the wages of sin, and that righteousness might be communicated
unto us, to the end we might attain unto life Dan. 9.24. Gal. 3.13.
.

By the name of Remission of sins, we understand that gracious act of God,
whereby he perfectly forgiueth and remitteth the fault, and the punishment,
for the merit and satisfaction of Christ: 2. Cor. 5.19. Romans 8.1. and 4.7.
The foundation hereof is the righteousness of Christ, not his Essential and
Divine, Esa. 42.8
nor yet his habitual, which was his original righteousness opposite unto
our original righteousness, or spot of nature; but his actual
righteousness, which is the effect of both: namely a most perfect obedience,
performed to the Father, both by satisfaction for sin, and by fulfilling of the
Law. For the obedience of Christ is two fold; opposite to the double bond of
man after his fall; active, for the fault; passive, for the punishment: or
both, for both.

The Active obedience is a perfect performance of Gods law, which Christ fully
and perfectly executed even to the utmost title 1. Cor. 1.30. Rom 5.19 2. Cor.
5.21.
of the law: the necessity hereof, in the work of our Redemption, and
Justification, three things do prove: the Justice of God, the office of a
Mediator, and our Salvation.

The justice of God: for if you either respect his nature, whereby he is
infinitely just, he ought not to save man, but by the same manner of justice
Prou 17 Exodus 20.5
; either proper to us, or freely imputed; or (if we respect) his will revealed
in the law, which is an immovable (...) of Justice, he has prescribed none
other way unto life, than obedience.

The office of Christ the Mediator: for, whereas he, as our surety was bound,
by a voluntary dispensation, to undergo, and perform those things, which we
our selves were necessarily bound to undergo and perform; it was needful
that he should not only suffer death for us, but also perform the law,
because we were bound unto both Romans 8.3 Gal. 4 45.
.

Our Salvation: for, whereas two things are necessary for the same, a freeing
from death, and a giving of life; it was needful, we should obtain the one by
the purging of sin, and the other by the gift of righteousness Romans 10 4
Romans 5 19 20.


Hence it is, that Christ is said to be the end, and presection of the law unto
Salvation, to every one that believes; and the actual obedience of Christ,
whereby we are made just, is in the Scripture, opposed to the actual
disobedience of Adam, whereby we are made sinners Heb. 10.14. Romans 4.25 1.
Pet. 1.19 1. Ioh. 1.7. Gal. 3.13.
.

Add further, that in the very passive obedience, the active nevertheless
does of right challenge unto it self the chiefty; for the suffering does not
simply justify, but as it is the suffering of Christ voluntarily presenting
himself to God the Father, by his Eternal Spirit: whereupon the same Christ,
by offering himself, as a sacrifice suffered; as a Sacrificer performed it.

The Passive obedience of Christ, is the sacrificing, or suffering of Christ;
very necessary in respect of God, of Christ the Mediator, and of us. Of God,
because his justice must have been satisfied by punishment. Of Christ, because
he, being our surety, ought to have paid our debt. Of us, because it was
needful, that we should be freed from death by death Number. 8.33.
.

The Subject of this righteousness, is Christ alone, in whom subiectiuely that
habitual Justice is inherent, and from whom, that both active, and passive
obedience proceeded, which we called actual righteousness.

The matter of Justification, which is considered Passiuely, are men elect;
Romans 5.8 10. Tit. 3.3. Ephesians. 2.12.13.
Of this matter, there is commonly had a double notion; the one according to
Nature; the other, according to Grace supernatural; according to nature, they
are sinners, and therefore subject to the accusation and malediction of the
law: Romans 8.30. Ephesians. 5.30. Ioh. 17 20.
according to grace supernatural, they are believers, or ingraffed by faith
into Christ.

The form of Justification, taken actiuely, is a feee imputation of Christ's
actual righteousness, whereby the merits and obedience of Christ are applied
unto us by virtue of that most strait communion, whereby he is in us, and we
in him.

The form therefore consists in Relation; in which the unity that arises
thereout, has between both bounds, the manner of a form: and consists
rather in the issuing forth, and the habit, then in the inherence. Hence it is
also, that Relation is said Non esse eius, sed esse ad aliad.
not to be his, but to be in respect of another. Now, it is receyved by right
of the giving, and acceptance of the merits of Christ's obedience: for this
imputed righteousness is grace, and not nature; the communicating of a
benefit, not a Real, or habitual possession of the righteousness, or
substance of Christ: Lastly, an Imputation, not a passible quality inherent in
us.

In this Imputation we consider two things: the truth thereof in it self, and
the manner of the truth thereof in us.

Of the truth in it self there are two bounds, Righteousness, and the
Imputation thereof: between these there is a relation, because Christ has
perfect righteousness, for no other end, then that he might impute it; nor
imputes any other thing then righteousness; nor is our righteousness any
otherwise then by Imputation.

The manner of the truth thereof in us, is in the Scripture two ways limited:
whereof, the former teaches us, that we are just, not in our selves, not in
our own righteousness; but by the righteousness of Christ, which being out
of us, is made ours, by right of giving. Hence we are said to be made the
righteousness of God in him Cot. 5.21.
: the second teaches us, that we have righteousness, as Christ has our
sin: now he has it, not subiectiuely, or inherent, but by imputation. Hence
is that Autithesis.
oppositio^ made by the Apostle in the place already cited, to wit, of Christ,
whom God made sin for us; and of us, who were made the righteousness of God
in him.

And according to this form of Justification; there is one and alike
Justification in all men, though in diverse according to the measure of him
that apprehends, it be after a diverse manner modified.

The former before of Justification is not an ha^^ ^al sa^ctity inherent in us;
for, albeit Justification and Sanctification agree in the Efficient causes, (as
well Gods grace, as Christ's merit:) in the Isntrumental (cause) to wit, faith,
by receyving that of the one, and by effecting that of the other. Lastly, in
the scope and end, (for they tend to one end, save that the one is as the
cause, the other, as the way,) yet they much differ, both as touching the
substance, and as touching the Adjuncts.

As touching the substance; that is, as touching all the causes: for the matter
of Justification, is the obedience of Christ; of Sanctification, our own
obedience; the one perfect, the other imperfect; the form thereof that, is the
Imputation of Christ's obedience; but of this, the drawing back of our minds
from vnpure, to pure qualities. Of Justification, there is no nearest, and
inward efficient cause; but of this (Sanctification) the will of man is, being
the beginning of human actions: the end of that is the peace of conscience; but
of this, an open testifying of the reconciling of our selves with God.

As touching the Adjuncts; because they differ, first in the manner of
effecting; for that is effected by right of donation; this by manner of
alteration: secondly by the Effects: that absolveth us in the judgment of God,
This does not. Thirdly, and lastly, in continuance; for, That shall have an end
with this life; This shall endure for ever.

The Form of Justification, taken passiuely, is the application of Faith.
Hence it is, that we are said to be saved Per fide^, fide, ex fide.
by faith, through faith, of faith; of which we have spoken in the cause
Isntrumental Mar. 5.39. Romans 3.7. Gal. 1.16. Ephesians. 2.8.9 Tit 3.5.
.

The End of Justification, taken actiuely, is the glory of God, in the
wonderful tempering of his Justice, and mercy Ephesians. 1.5.6.7. Romans 3.^6.
. Of his justice, that he would have his Son to satisfy it: of his mercy,
that he would impute his sons satisfaction unto us. Romans 5.1 Tit. 3.7.


The End of Justification taken passiuely, is peace of Conscience, and eternal
salvation.

OF MAN'S Justification before GOD. The Confuting Part.
Distinctions in defense of the Definition of the Name, or Word.
I.
IN the searching out of the interpretation of a Word; the derivation and
composition of the Word, is not simply to be looked unto, but the use, and the
propriety of the same.

II.
THe use of the Word Justification, is usually twofold: for either
Justification is taken properly; or in a signification translated from the
special to the general, by an abuse of speech; it imports all those
things, which follow Justification.

III.
THere are two orders of Testimonies concerning Justification: the one Legal,
the other Evangelicall: the testimonies of the Legal Justice, do teach what
manner of justice stands before the Tribunal of God: the testimonies of the
justice of faith, or those, which are Evangelicall, do, some pertain to the
causes of Justification; some to the outward signs, and testimonies of the
person justified: Lastly, some to the comprobation of the work done by faith.

The Places, by which Bellarmine prooveth, that to justify, signifies to make
just. cap. 3. lib. 2. de Iustitia.
Romans 5.16.18.19. Ans. First, there is a manifest opposition of condemnation,
and justification. Now, whereas things opposite are under the same kind;
Genere.
it must needs be, that justification, as well as condemnation, is a judicial
Act. Secondly, as condemnation is never taken out of that signification, which
belongs to places of judgment, and pleading: so justification which is made
before God, is never taken from the effect of infused grace. Thirdly, the
judgment of God, is according to truth as well, when he pronounces us just,
for the imputed righteousness of Christ, as, when he makes us just by the
power and virtue of his Spirit: both truly, though diversely: the one
perfectly, the other imperfectly.

Dan. 12.3. Ans. Justification in the signification, belonging to courts of
pleading, is twofold: the one immediate, the other mediate: of this speaks
the Prophet, whereby God by his Ministers absolveth sinners, as by the same he
binds, and holds sinners: and it is a Figure familiar in the Scripture, to
attribute that to the Instrument, which is proper to the cause.

Esa. 53.11. Answ. First, the Hebrew word, in the third conjugation, signifies
to pronounce one just, as in the first, it signifies to be just positiuely.
Secondly, the Text has not (in his Knowledge,) but, (in the knowledge of
himself,) whereby is declared not the manner of Justification, but the
Instrument, or faith expressed by a circumlocution. Per Periphrasm.
Thirdly, it is one thing to treat of Christ's righteousness, which in him is
inherent subjectiuely; and another thing of that, which by Grace is imputed
unto us. Fourthly, Christ's satisfaction, is the meritorious cause of
Justification, which is become only ours by benefit of Imputation.

Apoc. 22.11. Ans. Justification in the judicial signification, notes out two
things, according as there is a twofold Court; the one of Conscience before
God, the other of holiness before men: for it imports to be absolved either
before God, by the righteousness of faith; or before men, by the
righteousness of works. In the first signification, the sense is thus; He
that is just, let him be justified still: to wit, by applying unto himself,
the continual remission of his sins, and the imputation of Christ's
righteousness. In the second, the sense is thus; He that is just, let him be
justified still; that is, he that desires to be just, let him be informed
more and more, unto Justice and holiness; either of both ways, the judicial
(or law) signification remains.

1. Cor. 6.11. Answ. First, there is a fallacy of conioyning: for these three
are not joined together, as if they were Synonyma.
of one signification; but as subordinate, and opposite to the three-folde
accusation going before: for to those corruptions, whereof he treated; he
opposes washing: to defiling, or unrighteousness, fornication, covetousness;
he opposes Sanctification: but to Guilt, which he expresses in these
words; They shall not inherit the kingdom of God: he opposes
Justification. Secondly, he treats of Justification, which is made in the
name of Christ, and not of that, which is by a certain infusion, or inherent
righteousness.

In defense of the Efficient Cause of Passive Justification, or the
Isntrumental Cause of the Active, against, Bellarmine, from the 13. Chap. lib.
1. De Iustificatione, to the 19.
THat Faith alone does not justify, Bellarmine proves by five Arguments.

First is, That the Fathers and Scriptures do attribute the power of
Justifying, not only to Faith, but also to other virtues. Chap. 13.

Distinctions according to the rank of his Arguments.
I.
FAITH, in the Scriptures, and with the Fathers, is wont two ways to be
considered; one way, properly, according to the Nature of Faith simply; the
other may figuratively, that is, by a Metaleptice.
transumption, and correlatiuely, whereby faith apprehends her object: after
the first manner, Faith is said not to be alone, after the latter, it is said
alone to justify.

II.
Justification, which is the actio^ of faith is considered two ways; either
generally, for that whole missery of our reconciliation, with God; or
particularly, for the principal, and special part thereof, which consists
in the application and imputation of Christ's righteousness. The ground of the
one, is General; the Instrument of the other, is particular.

III
FAith is considered one way in the person of him that is justified; another
way in justification it self; and another way in the effect of Justification.
In the person of him that is justified; it is the root, and beginning of all
virtues: In the act of Justification, it is the instrument; in the effect, it
is the door of life, the gate, and way into life.

IIII.
THe fear of the Lord, in the Scriptures, and with the Fathers, is taken
aequivocally: for it signifies either the fore-goer, (or antecedent) of Faith,
or faith it self, or the consequent of Faith: the Antecedent of Faith, because
fear is the first degree of faith unto Justification; First, not in time, but
in order of nature: Faith it self, because the fear of God in Scriptures very
often signifies the whole worship of God, knowledge, and trust, that is Faith
it self. The consequent of Faith, because the fear of God, or that desire to
avoyde sins, and to perform righteousness follows faith, as the fruit,
the good tree. Now, whatsoever things are attributed to the fear of God by the
Fathers, or in the Scripture, they are attributed either in the second
signification, by a Synecdoche; or in the third by a Metonymy.

V.
THe Word (Hope) is sometimes taken for trust it self, according as the same
Verb signifies, sometime to trust, sometime to hope. In which signification
it is taken of the Fathers, and in the Scripture, in the places cited by
Bellarmine: sometimes it is taken oppositely, so that faith is of things past,
and present; hope, only of things to come.

VI.
TRue love, which in this world can never be perfect, is neither in time, not
nature, before Justification: seeing that it, being, as it were, the effect by
issuing forth follows faith, as the nearest cause; neither do the places of
Scripture, which are alleged, point out the cause of the remission of sins,
or of Justification, but the Adiunct, and the necessary consequent thereof.

VII.
THere is a twofold repentance propounded in the Scriptures, a true and an
hypocritical. Faith defines and limitteth the true; but the want of faith the
hypocritical: and therefore those things which are attributed in the
scriptures, and by the Fathers, to the true repentance, they are attributed,
not in respect of it self simply, but in respect of faith Secundu^ quid.
after a sort. Add further, that by a frequent and usual Metonymy in the
Scripture, that is attributed to the Effect, which is proper to the cause.

VIII.
THe Purpose, and desire truly to receive the Sacrament, as also a purpose and
desire of a new life, and obedience, are excluded from Justification, but not
from the person justified for the cause of Justification is one thing, and the
quality of the person justified, is an other thing: neither are the effects to
be confounded with the causes, or the causes with their effects.

The second Argument. If Faith cannot be separated from love, and other
virtues, then it alone cannot Justify. Cap. 14.15.
DISTINCTIONS.
I.
IT is one thing to treat of Faith, as it is considered absolutely, as a
quality; but another thing, as it is considered relatiuely, as an Organ, and
Instrument; being absolutely considered, it cannot be separated from good
works; but considered relatiuely, it justifies without works: because it
alone is the Instrument of Justification, and not works: and so it is never
alone, yet it alone works in the work of Justification.

II.
ANd yet it follows not, that faith justifies with vices as it justifies
without works: because Faith only is considered exclusiuely without works, as
it justifies, Quae, iustificans est.
and not what it is justifying.

III.
WHerefore that third point also, is in co^sequent, that faith if it be alone,
shall also alone justify us, because as Justification is never separated from
faith, so neither is faith from works. As also, that is an Inconsequent, if
the eye alone sees, therefore it shall see although it be alone.

IIII.
But that, which the Adversary proves, that true faith may in very deed, be
separated from love and other virtues, leans upon no ground: and first, as
touching the places in John. 15. there is speech of faith historical, in 1.
Cor. 13. Of faith, of miracles. In James, 2. Of faith temporal, or
hypocritical. Secondly, as touching the argument taken from the state of the
Church, he plays with the doubtful signification in the word (Faithful,)
who in the places now cited, are so called, for the outward profession of
faith, and the communion of the Churches, and not according to the inward
truth, and formal manner of faith, and the Church. Thirdly, as touching the
argument, taken from the proper manner of faith, and love, it leans both upon
a false consequent, and a false supposition: for this is a false consequent, in
that albeit there be two virtues, yet they may mutually be separated the one
from the other. This also is a false supposition, in that love springs not
necessarily from faith: for God has given Faith, as the mother, and begetter
of love. Fourthly, as touching the absurdity, there is none: for Justification
shall not therefore depend upon works, because it is not without works:
whereas these are two diverse propositions, to be without works, and to
justify without works.

The third Argument is taken from the removal of the Causes, whereas Faith
alone Justifies: which causes are of Bellarmine referred to three heads, cap.
16.
The first is the authority of the word, whereunto the Adversary answers; That
it is no where taught in the scripture, That we are justified by faith only.
Answ. Though the Particle (alone) be not expressed in the Scripture, yet the
signification of that word is expressed by Synonimall forms of speaking, which
are these: 1. Without Works. 2. Of Grace, freely by Grace. 3. The exclusive
Particles, which are two particulars, Galat, 2.16. but by Faith. Luc. 8.30. By
believing only: by which forms of speaking, as all works as well Ceremonial,
as Moral, are excluded; so faith alone is included, as the only Instrument of
Justification.

The second head is the will of God, who will have us justified with the alone
condition of faith. The Adversary answers; that it contradicts the
Scripture, which lays down also the condition of Repentance.
Answer, 1. Repentance is the condition of faith, and of the person justified,
but not properly of Justification. 2. It is one thing to treat of the
condition of Justification, but another thing of the cause, and Instrument
thereof: for a condition notes a consequent, or effect: but a cause, the
Antecedent, or Efficient. 3. Neither is our Justification, with the condition
of Faith, as Faith is a habit in us, but as it apprehends Christ out of us.

The third is the nature of faith, which alone has that property, that it
apprehends Justification. The Adversary answers, that Faith does not
properly apprehend.
Answ. There is a double apprehensio^, the one of knowledge in the
understanding, the other of trust in the Will: both these Faith includes,
which in respect of the understanding, and the will apprehends Christ: but
the nature of the Sacraments is otherwise, which were instituted, not that
they might justify, but that they might confirm the party justified in the
feeling of his Justification.

The fourth Argument, is from the manner of Justifying: for we affirm that
faith Justifies not by the manner of cause, worthiness, or merit, but by
relation only: which Bellarmine denies, and proves by three arguments, that
faith justifies by the manner of merit, and cause, cap. 13.
The first is taken from testimonies, which teach that faith is the cause of
justification.

Romans 3. Romans 5. Ephesians. 1. Answer. First, for Faith is one thing, and by Faith
is another thing. The one is of the cause, the other of the Instrument.
Secondly, neither is the manner of works the same, with that of faith in
opposition: because works have the nature of righteousness inherent in us,
but faith the nature of righteousness imputed unto us. Thirdly, nor do the
places, which are alleged, note the cause of Justification, but either the
Instrument thereof, or the quality, and state of a man justified.

The second, is taken from those testimonies, which testify, that faith is the
beginning of righteousness, and hereby the formal cause of Justification.

Romans 4. First, there is a twofold imputation, as in that very place the
Apostle notes: the one of debt, the other of grace: and the Apostle trea^eth
of this, and not of that. Secondly, ^^th Faith is the instrument, it is no
strange thing, if (as it is usually the manner of ^nstruments,) the name and
the office of the thing, whereof it is but the Instrument, be attributed unto
it.

1. Cor. 3. First, A foundation is usually considered two ways; properly, or
by a Metalepsis: properly, Christ is so; but by a Metalepsis Faith, which has
respect to Christ. For distinctions sake, the one may be called Primum, ad
primu^.
the first; the other to the first. Secondly, a foundation is either
understood to be, as a part of a building, or a ground of a building. Christ
and Faith are said to be the foundation of the Church, not properly, as they
are a part thereof; but as they are the Ground, and Base of the same.

Act. 15. First, the hearts are justified by faith, not as the cause, but as
the Instrument; not by effecting, but by affecting or applying. Secondly, the
place it self does manifestly distinguish Faith, which is only the inner
instrume^tal cause, from the cause properly Efficient, to wit, the Father, in
the Son, by the holy Ghost.

The third, is taken from those Testimonies, which teach that Remission of
sins is obtained by Faith.

Luke. 7. Ans. First, men are said to be saved both properly of God, our
only Savior; and figuratively, by the means, which it has pleased God to
use, either inward as faith; or outward, as the voice of the Gospel, and the
signs thereof. Secondly, the efficacy of faith, wholly depends upon the
object, which it apprehends: and it is said to save, for that it is the
effectual, and necessary Instrument of Salvation, like as the Gospel is
called the power to every one that believes unto salvation.

Romans 4. Ans. First, The Particle, (wherefore) notes not the cause of the
Consequent, but of the Consequence. Secondly, it is there showed, not what the
habit of faith deserves, (since faith and merits are opposites) but what is
the use, and effect of true and natural faith.

Romans 10. Answ. First, the Apostle does neither make preaching the cause of
faith, nor faith the cause of invocation, and salvation: but teaches, that, as
that is the Instrument of the one; so this is of the other. Secondly, the
degrees of Salvation are reckoned up by the Apostle, which are badly
confounded with the causes thereof. Thirdly, those things, which Faith
obtayneth by Invocation; it obtayneth as an Instrument, and not as a Cause,
because all the power of Faith, consists in Relation.

Heb. 11. Ans. First, men please God by faith, not for faith. Secondly,
whatsoever examples are cited; they note not the merit of Faith, but the use,
and effect thereof.

The Fifth Argument, is fee from two principles; the first whereof, is the
Formal Cause of Justification, which the Adversary affirms to be
righteousness inherent in us: The second is the merit, and necessity of good
works. Of the former, we shall treat in the explication of the Formal
Cause, of the latter, in the place concerning good works.

DISTINCTIONS IN Defense of the Material Cause.
I.
THere is one Justice Create, and another Increate; the one is of God, and of
Christ, as he is God: the other of the Creature, and of Christ, as he is a
creature.

II.
THe Create righteousness, is either of the Person, or of the cause: by that,
some person is judged just; by this, a righteousness of the Cause of some
controversy is understood: the righteousness of the Person, to speak
properly, is in Christ.

III.
OF the person, there is one inherent; another Imputative: that was in Christ;
this is in us, by the work of the Spirit, for Christ.

IIII.
INherent righteousness, is either original, or habitual; or else actual:
both of these were in Christ, yet properly, he imputes this only.

V.
Actual righteousness, is either perfect or imperfect; this is in us; that in
Christ.

VI.
PErfect actual righteousness of Christ consists in a double obedience;
whereof the one is called the obedience of the Law, the other obedience unto
death.

VII.
THe obedience of the law, which is truly and properly the effect of the
person, being the mediator; neither ought, nor can be called, either a part
making the person; or a quality pertaining to the making of that person.

VIII.
THe places of Scripture which treat of Christ's death, are not to be taken
exclusiuely, or oppositely, but figuratively, or Synecdochically, for the last
accomplishment of the whole obedience.

DISTINCTIONS in defense of the Formal Cause.
The Arguments, which Bellarmine brings against the truth of this cause, are
of two sorts: for first, he endeavors to prove by certain reasons, that
our inherent righteousness, is the formal cause of our righteousness.
Secondly, he impugneth the imputation of Christ's righteousness.

The first he endeavors to perform by 8. Testimonies. Cap. 3. Lib. 2. De
Iustificatione.

The first is in Romans 5. Of which we have treated in the explication of those
places, which were alleged against the true nature of the name, or word.

The second, is in Romans 3. Answ. First, the Grace of God is taken in Scripture
aequivocally: First, for the free and eternal favor of God, whereby he made
us acceptable to him self, in his beloved Son: and this is the Grace that
makes acceptable. Secondly, for the gifts, by Grace, whether outward, or
inward, whether general, or particula; and that, in the place cited, it is
taken in that signification, and not in this, three things do prove. First,
because the Apostle excludes the righteousness of the law, which is of works;
to the end he might establish the righteousness of faith, the causes whereof,
he reckons up. Secondly, because, what he called freely, he expounded by
grace, that not only the works that go before; but also those that follow,
after faith might be excluded. Thirdly, because the Apostle opposes the very
same Grace, cap. 4.2.4. against Abraham's works, howsoever proceeding from the
renewing of the Spirit. Secondly, neither in deed, does the conjoyning of those
two words, Freely, and by Grace; (since the one expounds the other according
to the Scripturall Phrase of speaking:) nor does the force of the Preposition
(by,) which is not found in the original Text, and very often in the
Scripture, notes the efficient; nor does the Efficacy of Gods grace, the
effect whereof ought necessarily to be distinguished from the Cause: nor lastly
does it, because love in Scripture is called any Grace (whereas both the love
of God toward us, is a grace making acceptable, and ours toward God is a
grace freely given,) any way infringe that interpretation.

The third, 1. Cor. 6. To this we have above answered.

The fourth. Titus 3. Answ. First, the Effect is badly confounded with the
cause, to wit; Justification, with Regeneration, and Renovation; for the
matter of that, is the righteousness of Christ; but of this, our Inherent
righteousness. Secondly, neither does the Apostle call Renovation,
Justification; since he expressly distinguishes the one from the other.
Thirdly, the Apostle shows not the cause, but the use of Renovation, or good
works, when he says; that being justified by the grace of God, we might be
heirs, according to the hope of everlasting life.

The fifth, Heb. 11: Ans. First, there is a two-folde righteousness, Imputed,
and Inherent: by both they are called Just, (or righteous) but after a diverse
manner: by that, by way of Relation, and perfectly before God: by this,
Inchoatiuely, Subjectiuely and imperfectly. Secondly, the perfection, which is
ascribed unto the faithful, in the Scripture, has a threefold respect; the
first, of Gods council from everlasting: Secondly, of the foundation in
Christ; lastly, either of comparison, and opposition unto other men's
unrighteousness, or of the end, or term of perfection, unto which it tends:
besides these respects, there is no perfection of the faithful in this world.
Thirdly, the nearest cause, in deed of a righteous work, is inherent
righteousness; but the chief, and principal cause, is the Spirit of Christ;
imputing his righteousness to us, and by the power of that imputed
righteousness, working this inherent righteousness in us.

The Sixth, Romans 8. 1. Cor. 15. Ans. first, our Conformity with the Image of
Christ, whereof mention is made in the Scripture, is threefold: the one, unto
the image of glory, being opposite to that, which is unto the image of Christ's
afflictions: And of this the Apostle treats in the cited places. The second,
unto the image of Christ's obedience, which, in deed, in this world, we
perform imperfectly: but Christ applies the same to us, as perfectly
performed for us. The third, is of the death, burial, and resurrection of
Christ. Secondly, of Christ's righteousness, there is a double use: the one
principal of satisfaction, and merit: the other, exemplary, and of document:
as touching satisfaction, Christ's righteousness is imputed to us; as touching
example, it is the rule of our inherent righteousness. Thirdly, the
opposition, which is made between the image of the first Adam, and the second,
according to the sense of the Apostle, in both places, has respect unto the
mortality, and immortality, the earthly, and heavenly qualities of the body;
and not properly unto sin, and Christ's imputed righteousness.

The seventh, Romans 6. Ans. The word Justification is taken two ways;
properly, and improperly: Properly, when we are said to be justified by the
cause; Improperly, when we are said to be justified by the effects.
Secondly, the Apostle treats of our Sanctification, and the two parts thereof;
the mortifying of the old man, and the quickening of the new of both which
parts, he gives us an example in the death and resurrection of Christ.
Thirdl^, to be justified, signifies to be freede, according to the proper
phrase of the Hebrews, who comprehend the Consequent with the Antecedent.

The eight, Rom 8. Answer: First, the degrees of our Salvation, Adoption, and
Justification, are badly confounded together. Secondly, of Adoption, there are
two considerations; the one, according to the truth, and foundation thereof, in
the eternal counsel of our Election: the other, according to the fruition,
and accomplishment thereof in the other life. In that signification, Adoption
goes before Justification: but in thy, Adoption is the bound, and end of
Justification. Thirdly, it is one thing to call Justification Putatiue, and
another Imputative: that, as being false, is falsely also feigned unto us:
this, is no less true, then if we our selves had it subiectiuely, because of
the truths sake, both of Gods promise, and our conjunction with Christ.

That the FORMAL CAUSE of our Justification, is not the Imputation of Christ's
righteousness; Bellarmine proves by ten Arguments. Cap. 7. Lib. 2. de
Iustificatione.
To the FIRST.
IT is false; for whereas there are two sorts of testimonies, some expressed,
and some by consequent: the things that follow, prove, that both are found in
the Scripture, and with the fathers, concerning the imputation of Christ's
righteousness. there are two express testimonies, (among the rest) in
Scriptures. Romans 4.6. 1. Cor. 1.30. And by Consequent, these are special:
first, That the remission of sins, which is the second Part of Justification,
is expressed in Scriptures, by the name of not Imputing. Romans 4.7. and 8.
Secondly, that the Apostle denies any proper, or inherent righteousness, to
the end, he might establish that, which is of Imputation by faith. Phil. 3.8.
Thirdly, because look what the manner of our sin is in Christ; the same is
also the manner of Christ's righteousness in us; to wit, in both by imputation. 2
Cor. 5.21. The testimonies of the fathers, are also frequent.

To the SECOND.
FIrst, whether you respect Gods truth, Imputation of righteousness is
conjoined with the Remission of sins. Dan. 9.24. Romans 4.6. and 7. Or whether
you respect our Salvation, it was behouefull also, that the two parts of
Justification should be opposed to a double evil, whereunto we were subject:
to punishment, remission of sins, to offense, imputation of righteousness.
Or lastly, whether you respect the satisfaction of the Law, two things were
necessary; the first, that we might be freed from the punishment, which the
law threatens: secondly, that we might fulfill the law, and so might be made
like unto Christ. Secondly, neither do the places, which are cited, concerning
the Remission of sins, take away the Imputation of Christ's righteousness,
since the things, which put themselves one with another, cannot duly be put
one against another. Thirdly, the opposition, which is made in Romans 5 has not
respect to the manner of inherence, or imputation, but to the Causes, Effects,
and Subjects of salvation, and conde^narion: The Causes of salvation being the
obedience of the second Adam; but of Condemnation. the disobedience of the
first: The Effects, that by the one, we are made just; by the other, Sinners.
The Subjects, on both sides, there are many men found, to wit, in the cause
of condemnation universally, but in the cause of Salvation generally.

To the THIRD.
FIrst, there is a double use of the Imputation of Christ's righteousness: the
one is, to absolve us before God; the other, to cover the imperfection of our
righteousness: that is Primary, this Secondary. Secondly, the perfection,
which is attributed to Faith, Hope, and Charity, is termed so aequivocally,
and is to be expounded, according to that threefold respect thereof; of
which, we have before spoken.

To the FOVRTH.
FIrst, we are said to be Formally just, either subiectiuely, or by relation:
subiectiuely, by righteousness inherent in us, which is imperfect: relatiuely,
by Christ's righteousness, which is perfectly imputed unto us. Secondly, it is
false, that a thing should always have a name outwardly from the qualities,
which may be inwardly since, even in natural things, the bodies of the
stars shine not with their own, but with a Ascititio
borrowed light, that is, by the benefit of the Sun. Things subordinate, do
not disagree, neither are they two contrary forms; to wit, the outward, and
the inherent, since that is both the foregoing, and forming cause of this.

To the FIFTH.
IF you respect the truth of righteousness imputed unto us, we are accounted
truly righteous before God, no less then Christ; but, if you respect the
quantity and subject, Christ is more righteous then we: because he is so
actually, we imputatiuely, he subiectiuely, we relatiuely in him, unto him:
and therefore we cannot, nor ought to be accounted Redeemers, and Saviors;
for that, of Christ's actions there are two sorts, the one is of them, which
being named in the Abstract, (or divided) do not so much signify the office of
Christ, as his benefit obtained for us: the other of them, which in the
Concrete (or conjunction,) do not so much note out to us, the benefit, as his
personal office. The names of those are wont to be changed; but the names of
these, are bounded in the person of Christ.

To the SIXTH.
OF the restoring of Gods image in us by Christ, there are two parts: the
abolishing of the depraved Image, and the renuance of the same; That is
performed by the Imputation of Christ's righteousness, This is by the benefit
of sanctification, or inherent righteousness; and both we have of Christ.

To the SEVENTH.
FIRst, there is a double consideration of Christ; the one as touching
himself, the other as touching us; whose person he took upon him: in respect
of the former, Christ is said to be just, holy, etc. In respect of the latter,
he is said to be made sin, the curse etc. Secondly, albeit it sin be
called a sacrifice, according to the Hebrews proper form of speech, yet the
manner of opposition, in the cited place requires, that he be rather said
to be made sin, that is, a sinner, not in himself but by the guilt of all our
sins imputed unto him: a figure of which thing, the two he Goats were,
whereof mention is made. Leu. 16.

To the EIGHT.
FIrst, there is a twofold fairness of the Bride: the one, which she has
of her Spouse, by perfect imputation; the other, which she bath in her self,
by a beginning in this life Secondly, the beauty of Christ, and of his church
differ not in Form, but in the Subj ct, and manner of propriety: for, in
Christ is fayrenesse, by manner of inherence; in the church, by manner of
imputation. Thirdly, she is said to be fair among women, not opposed to
Christ, but to other women.

To the NINTH.
FIrst, the Pureness, wherewith we are prepared for the seeing of God, is, as
well that, which we have by Imputation, as that, which is in us subiectiuely in
this life. Secondly, neither is imputation a vain thing only, which may
seem, or only be thought to be; for it is in very deed applied unto us: and
whereas Relation is not an idle thing, but an application unto the bound
thereof; it must needs be, that this Imputation is some what, which wholly
consists in Relation.

To the TENTH.
HEb. 9. Ephesians. 5. Tit. 2. Ioh. 16. Ans. First, the word Sanctification, is
Homonyma.
of diverse significations: for it signifies Justification it self, or the
effect of Justification: and in the first signification it is taken in the
cited places, but not in the second. Secondly, these words Truly, and
Imputatiuely, are badly opposed the one to the other: since those things also,
which are imputed unto us, are as truly ours, as if they were in us
subiectiuely.

OF THE COVENANT of GOD.
The Part Confirming. CHAP. X.
ANd these are the degrees, according to which God, in this life, by calling
effectually, and justifying freely, disposes the benefit of redemption. Now by
order, we are to see, concerning the outward means, by which God ordinarily
executes that dispensation.

The outward means ordinary of the execution thereof on Gods behalf, are
two: the covenant, and the seals, and sacraments of the covenant.

By the name of covenant, we understand, not that general earthly, and
temporary covenant, which God made, and keeps with all created things,
according to their nature, by the free law of his providence; neither that
special covenant, which he entered into, with our first Parents in that state
of integrity, a special examination or trial of obedience being added, as
also both the promise of a life supernatural, and the threat of a double death
being put thereto Genesis 3 22.
; the one is of nature, universal, the other of humane nature limited by a
certain bound of time and state; neither of both are properly pertaining to
us, who are to be advanced from the universal nature, and the corruption of
particular nature to the communion of supernatural glory: but we understand
that covenant, which God entered into with man after his fall, by his special
grace: which covenant is one only; for as much as there is but one only way of
salvation, though a variable, and diverse manner of adminishing the same, be
pointed out: Wherefore, first we must speak concerning the very substance of
the covenant: Secondly, of the Forms thereof which diversely it had from the
outward manner, and circumstances.

The Covenant then which God entered into with man corrupt, is the free
disposition of God, whereby he promises eternal salvation, by the death of
his Son, to the glory of his Grace.

The Efficient cause of this Covenant is God Ier. 3^.31 etc. Gal. 4.24
: for here is not the disposition of two parties, which is wont to presuppose
the equality of persons, and right, between parties: for such a one can never
befall between God and the creature: but it is of God alone, who of his mere
will, stroke that covenant with man, whereby he might be advanced from his
own nature, unto the communion of Gods grace, and glory.

And the manner of this Efficient cause in the Scriptures, is usually two ways
circumscribed, both Generally, and Immediately, as also Particularly, and
Mediately.

Generally, and Immediately, it is the benefit of the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost.

But Particularly and mediately, it is the benefit of Christ, God and man;
who, as, he is the foundation of Election, so is he also of Gods grace in
time communicated, upon which this covenant is built Ephesians. 13.4 Act. 3.15.
.

The Matter of the covenant is two-folde; whereof the one is of the Object, the
other of the Subject, wherein also the parties are to be considered.

The Object, or the matter (as they term it) about, or concerning which, is
twofold: First, it is God promising life, under condition of faith, and his
worship: secondly, it is man, St^pula^s.
covenanting for grace, and promising faith and obedience.

The Subject, or parties of the Covenant, do circumscribe the conditions
thereof, which are of two sorts: the first is of them, which are promised of
God in the Law, and the Gospel: the latter of those, to the performing whereof,
man binds himself, promising faith and good works.

The Form of the Covenant, is a mutual binding of the parties, according to
certain conditions: of God, promising by the death of his Son, a free
Remission of sins, and everlasting life; Genesis 12.1.^. Ier. 32.40.
Of Man, promising faith and obedience. Genesis 17.1. Mar. 16.16
And in respect of this obligation, the manner of the parties is diverse; for
in respect of God, it is his own free Grace, and mercy, who binds himself to
man, by his love, and promise; in respect of man, it is an obligation, wholly of
right, and due.

The End General, is a declaration of Gods sovereign goodness, mercy, and
Justice in our Salvation: Particular, is man's salvation, as far forth, as
faith by it self, has respect to man's good, though through his own fault,
the same be not always saving unto him.

And this is the Substance of the covenant, which God made with man after his
fall: the truth whereof is expressly, and perfectly contained in the old, and
new Testament, the Law and the Gospel.

The Manner of administering this covenant was diverse, according to the
difference of the times Heb. 1.1
; wherein a diverse face, and form was put upon that self same substance of
the thing.

The General distinction of the times has two Periods: the one of Christ, to
be exhibited; the other of him already exhibited.

And that we may speak of the first, even before Christ's coming; he
administered this covenant diverse ways, according to the manner of the three
Ages.

The first Age was from the time of Adams fall unto Abraham; at which time God
expounded no less evidently then briefly, the whole manner of the covenant in
that promise, which is extant in the third of Genesis Genesis 3 15.
.

And this was the Manner of the Promise.

The second was from Abraham unto Moses, when the promise which hitherunto was
proposed unto all, being restrained to Abraham, and his posterity, was sealed
with Sacraments, and, after that a solemn covenant was added to the promise;
conditions were laid down on both sides, as well on Gods behalf, as on man's
behalf.

And this is properly called the Manner of the Covenant, because of the
express mention of the mutual obligation Genesis 7 4 5. etc.
.

The third, was from Moses unto Christ's coming, when God, in a more special
manner disposed, declared, and confirmed that covenant, into the form of a
Testament Heb. 9 15 16.
.

Of this Testament, there are two parts subordinate, the one to the other: The
one Legal and conditional, requiting of man a perfect obedience of the law,
and under condition thereof, promising life eternal Leu. 18.5. Luc. 10.27.
; which part was, as it were, a preparation unto the other, according as the
Law is the Schoolmasters unto Christ: but the other part of that Testament,
was the Doctrine Evangelicall, concerning man's reconciliation with God, and his
deliverance from his misery, by the death of Christ; which part was shadowed
forth with diverse Types, and Ceremonies Exodus 14 20. Heb. 8.8.
.

And this was the Manner of Administering the covenant before Christ's coming.

After Christ's birth; first, at the coming of Christ into the flesh;
afterward in his administration in the flesh; and lastly at his death, the old
being abrogated, he brought in the new Testament Heb. 7.17. Heb 9.16.


We say abrogated after a sort, in respect of both parts of the Testament; of
the former, because God neither urges, nor requires the manner of perfect
obedience, of the Law: of the latter, because the body succeeded the shadows;
the truth, the figures; the thing signified, the signs, and sacrifices: And
hence it may be easily concluded, what might be the difference, and agreement
of the Law, and the Gospel, of the old and the new Testament.

The Agreement is made in the Substance of both; for there are no Essential,
but Accidental differences, according to the diverse manner of dispensation:
wherefore they agree in all the causes.

In the Efficient Cause: for there is the same Author, even God by his free
mercy; and the same meritorious cause, even the death of Christ Ier. 31.31 Romans
9.7. Mar. 1.15.


In the Matter: for the things promised, and sealed up, are the same; to
wit, the Grace, and Glory of God Romans 4.^3. Gal. 3.^6.
.

In the Form: for in general, the manner of administering is the same that is,
the internal communication of the spirit, and the external communication of
the word Genesis 22.18. Psalm. 2.22. Mat. 28.19.
.

In the End, because the end, on both sides is life eternal; for the
scriptures, examples, and manner do prove, that the Fathers in the old
Testament, who, were partakers of the same promise with us, had no other end.

Scripture, because the very form of the covenant; and the Prophets, the
Interpreters thereof, make mention of life eternal Genesis 15 8. Psalm. 116.15.
Esa. 51.6. Heb. 11.9.
.

Examples, for the Author to the Hebrews does testify, that Noah, Abraham,
and the rest, that were in the same covenant, atained unto that end.

Manner, for they abounded both with the same spirit of faith, and with the
signs of the same signified thing 2 Co. 4 13. Ier. 15.6 1 Cor. 10.3.
.

The difference is in the manner of administering, and in the circumstances of
the disposing.

In the manner of Administration* as well on Gods behalf, as on man's behalf:
on Gods behalf; for both the internal communication of the Spirit, and the
external communication of the Doctrine, and Signs, was far more evident,
and effectual in the New Testament, then in the Old Act. 15.8 2. Cor. 4.13.
Ier 3^.31.
: On man's behalf; for they, who were in the Old Testament, had but the Image,
for the truth absent; the shadow, for the body: but they who were under the
New, have both the present truth, and the perfect body. Heb. 10.1.
Add further, that they had M^ses for the Mediator of that covenant, but we
Christ Heb. 8.6. and 12.24.
.

In circumstances both of time and place: Of Time; the Old Testament endured
unto the first coming of Christ, the New shall endure from the first, unto the
second. Of Place; for the Old Testament, from the time of Abraham, was
enclosed only in a corner of the world, but the New passed over all the world
Mat. 10.5.6. Ephesians. 2.2. Romans 3.24
.

OF GODS COVEnant. The Confuting Part.
Distinctions, in Defense of the Efficient Cause.
I.
THe words ( Covenant and Testament) are Homonyma.
Equivocall: Covenant signifies three things. First, that bargain made by
God, with man, whether it be the whole; or the parts thereof. Secondly,
as well all the laws, and holy promises taken universally, as any special
commandment whatsoever, or promise added to the covenant. Thirdly, by a
Metonymy, the books wherein the covenants are written down. Likewise also the
word Testament, does signify three things: First, the meaning of our will,
concerning that thing, which we would have to be performed after our death, as
touching our goods: the Grecians call it, a disposing, 2. according to the use
of Scripture, a compact between God, and man: the Grecians term it a
composition: 3. By a Metonymy, the books or distinct parts of the Bible.

II.
THe word Covenant is taken, either absolutely, or oppositely. Absolutely, for
the free Covenant both old, and new: Oppositely, for the Legal covenant, or
the Law it self: and in the first sense, we here take it: but taken in the
second: as the old Testament is called in the Scripture, the Killing Letter,
and the Ministry of death: so the new Testament is also called the ministry
of the Spirit, and life.

III.
THe Foundation, Condition, and Cause of the Covenant, when they are pronounced
of Christ, are in matter the same, but do differ in manner: for he is called
the foundation by way of application: the Condition, as he is to be applied;
and the cause as he is, (or was) applied.

IN DEFENSE OF THE MATTER.
I.
THe Conditions of the covenants on man's behalf are not Essential: because,
both Faith and Works have, but the nature, the one of an instrument, the other
of a Testimony.

II.
THree distinct kinds of promises, do offer themselves unto us in the
Scriptures: the first is the promise of the covenant of Works, wherein is
promised eternal life, under condition of works, proceeding from the powers
of nature: the second, is of the free covenant, under condition of Faith: the
third is of particular promises and agreeable to the free covenant, under
condition of the works of Grace.

IN DEFENSE OF THE FORM.
I.
THe Form of the Covenant consists in Relation: for the Relate is God, the
Correlate is Gods people: the foundation is the solemn obligation of the
things referred each to other.

II.
THere are three principal times; before the law, under the law, after the
law: and there are three notable persons, as the captains of those times:
Abraham, Moses, Christ; they make not three covenants, but only a threefold
manner of administering one Covenant.

III.
WE must make a difference between the things substantial of the Covenant,
and the things accessory: those were eternal, these temporary.

IIII.
THe dividing of the Covenant into the old and new, is not of the general into
the special, but of the Subject into the accidents, and diverse adjunctes make
not the substance of the thing diverse.

V.
THe new Testament is so called, because of a double succession; the one of
persons, for Christ succeeded Moses: the other of the dispensation; for the
Evangelicall Dispensation, succeeded the Legal.

OF THE SACRAments in General.
The part confirming. CHAP. XI.
THe Second ordinary mean of the execution, on Gods behalf, are the seals of
the Covenant, or the Sacraments.

Of these we usually, and duly hold and expound a twofold manner; the one
General, concerning all; the other, Special, concerning each one of the
Sacraments. Now by the Name of Sacrament (which is translated from military
affairs, to Christian uses) we do not in the largest signification, by a
Metalepsis, understand every mystery, or hidden secret of a holy and divine
thing, in which sense the Gospel, the Incarnation of Christ, the calling of
the Gentiles, are wont to be expounded in Scriptures: Neither in a less
general signification, by a Catechresis, do we understand a divine mystery,
and unknown Symbolicall secret, or every such thing, as signifies somewhat
else, beside the show, which is offered unto the senses; such as are
Ceremonies, Types, Parables, Signs, and Figures: all which, because they
pertain to divine matters, were called of the old Fathers, Sacraments: but in
a more restrained, and most proper signification, by the name of Sacrament, we
understand a Sign of Grace, ordained of God, that he might both seal up his
benefits in us, and consecrate us to himself for ever; for in the
signification of Sacrament, there is a mutual respect: the one on Gods behalf
offering grace; the other on man's behalf, promising thankfulness.

And in this sense, is the word Sacrament wont to be used two manner of ways:
either for the sign only, and the thing signified Synecdochically: or
properly, for both; or for that whole holy action, which comes together, for
the full participation of a Sacrament.

Now Sacraments are called Mysteries, not for that they be the working of
miracles, but the ceremonies of a secret and spiritual thing: or (as Augustine
speaks) because they are the Signs of things, being one thing, signifying
another thing; whence it is, that they were also called Symbola. Gen 17.10 11.
Mat. 28.19
badges and stampes.

Now a Sacrament is a holy action, ordained of God; whereby God, as touching
his promise; seals up his grace in Christ, with a fit agreement of the
signs, and the things signified Romans 4.11. 1. Cor. 10.17.
and we testify our mutual faith, and godliness toward him.

The Efficient Cause is God, and Christ the only Mediator of God, and men; 1
Cor. 11.23.
because the Institution of the Sacraments belongs to the excellent, and
divine majesty, which only has right to promise the thing signified, and
power to apply the same: whence sprung that immovable, and golden rule; that
nothing has the Nature of a Sacrament, Nihil habere ratione^ Sacramenti extra
vsum a Deo institutum
without the use ordained of God.

Now God effects a Sacrament by the word of Institution, which added unto the
Element, it becomes, a sacrament not by infusion of a new quality, but by
changing of the use.

Of this Word called Sacramental, there are two parts, a commandment and a
promise: whereof the one shows the authority of the sacrament; the other, the
use and efficacy of the same.

The Commandment, is that whereby God commands, both that the Sacraments
should be administered, by prescribing the form of them; as also, that they be
receyved, by giving charge for the use thereof: so in the Supper, the form of
Institution is prescribed, and the use of the Supper is given in charge: the
same in Baptism also. Mat. 28 19. Mar. 16.15


The Promise annexed to the commandment is, as it were, the power, and life of
the Sacrament, which the Effect necessarily follows Mat. 26.26 1. Cor. 11.24.
Romans 6. 2. Pet. 3.
: so in the Supper, there is promise made of the eternal and spiritual
nourishment of the soul; in Baptism, of the salvation of the souls, and the
washing away of sins.

And the consideration of this Efficient cause, does circumscribe the whole
dignity of a Sacrament: wherefore it cannot be, that the same is either Tit.
1.25 Ephesians. 3 17
abated through the faults of the Ministers; or Romans 3.3.4
that any thing is detracted from it, because of their unbelief, which receive
but the signs only.

The Matter of the Sacraments, is twofold: the one sensible, and outward, the
other intelligible, and inward: of these, the one is commonly called the Sign;
the other, the thing signified, or the thing of the sign.

Now, by the name of Sign in general, we understand every thing, the use
whereof is put in signifying: in which signification, there are two sorts of
signs; some by Augustine, called Natural, and some Given: Natural are those,
which without will, or desire to signify, do cause somewhat else, beside
themselves, by themselves to be known, as the dawning, is a sign of the Sun
to be near at hand, and the smoke of the fire. Given are those, which depend
on the Will of the Institutor, whether God or Man: for the signs, which are of
force, by the appointment of the Will, are either of humane, or divine
Institution.

Those, which are of divine Institution, (of which only our speech is in this
place,) are some miraculous; some without miracle: those have respect unto the
extraordinary, and unusual works of God, at which, the minds of men are
greatly astonished; of which sort, very many signs, either of divine Doctrine,
or wrath, or grace, do occur in Scriptures: these are familiar, and
favorable signs of Gods grace, whether they be monuments of things past, or
whether pointing out or signing a thing present, or to come: or witnessing the
certainty of a thing, as it were, with a sealed stamp thereon; or lastly,
yielding that thing, which is signified, and that by the verity of Gods
institution, and the hidden virtue of the Spirit.

And such are these Sacramental Signs, not natural, but given; that is of
God instituted, that they might signify, seal, and exhibit. Of these signs,
two parts ought to be considered, and declared: the one Elemental, the other,
Ceremonial: whereof the one respects the Substantial matter, the other, the
action, and the Rite.

The Substantial matter, is all that in the Sacrament, which is set a part
from common use, by Gods ordinance, and appointed for the signifying, sealing,
and exhibiting of inward and spiritual things; such as in Baptism, i^ the
Water; in the Supper, the wine and bread. And these Signs remain in
themselves, and their own Essence both as touching the substance, and a^
touching the Essential, and adherent qualities Ioh. 1.26. 1. Cor. 10.16. and
11 26. etc. Luc. 22.19
.

The Action is a Ceremony, both of the Minister, supplying Gods room, and of
the faithful receyving, as in body, ^he outward thing, so also, in faith, the
^nward, or signified thing 1. Cor. 11.3.
.

For, of the actions by God in every Sacrament prescribed, some agree with
them, of whom they are admini^^red, doing what they do, in the ^ame of
Christ; and some with the rest that receive the Sacrament; such as are (...)
Baptism, the sprinkling, and dip^ing of the Water; in the Supper, the
^reaking, the distributing, and recey^ing of the bread, and wine: both signs,
^omming unto our outward senses, pro^ose to our minds, other things altoge^her
spiritual, and heavenly, that they ^ight be understood, and by faith sea^d up.

Those other Things (that we may ex^ound that other part of the matter of ^^e
Sacrament,) are generally all, that ^^ing, which Faith applies to it self,
unto salvation. Now it does properly, and most nearly apply Christ himself,
who wholly is and ought to be called the matter of the Sacrament Romans 6.3 1.
Cor. 10.16. Gal. 3.27.
, in respect both of his person, merit, and benefits.

Of his Person, because whole Christ is given in every Sacrament, both by
reason of his Divinity, and Humanity, although especially mention be made, and
respect had of his Humanity, in the Institution of the Sacrament: both because,
according to it, he is of the same Essence with us, and our brother; as also,
for that in it, Christ merited that, for us, which the Sacrament seals: and
lastly in that, an entrance is given mediately by it, unto this Divinity and
Gods Grace.

Of his Merit, because both the truth and profit of Christ's death, whereby he
purchased life for us, is chiefly offered, and confirmed: whereupon the signs
both of his blood shed, are give^ in Baptism, and of his body crucified in the
Supper. For the passion of Christ, is, as it were, the material, and
meritorious cause of our salvation 1. Pet. 1.7 2. Pet. 1.19. Mat. 20.28.
.

Of his Benefits: because, look what things Christ has, and did, he
testifies Ioh. 6.53. Ioh. 15.4. Romans 8.32
by visible signs, in every Sacrament, that he had them to our good, and did
them for us. Now the Scripture proposes four things, which in very deed, are
the benefits of Christ's person, and the fruits of his merit 1. Cor. 1.30.
: Righteousness, which is the remission of sins, and the absolution of the
sinner before God: Wisdom, which is the perfect and true knowledge of Gods
will, which no man has without Christ. Sanctification, which is the denying of
our selves, joined together, with repentance, and new life. Redemption, which
is both a full deliverance from all evils, yea, even from our last enemy Death;
as also a small glorification.

And these are those things, which are sealed in all Sacraments, which of the
Divines, are otherwise wont to be expressed by the name of an invisible
Grace, as the sign it self, by the name of a visible Form.

From this consideration of the sign, and the thing signified, the agreement,
and difference of both may be concluded: The Difference, because they are
diverse, both in nature, (for the Sign is visible; the thing signified is
invisible) and in the Object: for the sign goes but into the body, the thing
signified into the soul: and in the Manner of communication: for in respect of
the sign, the manner is corporal, but of the thing signified, it is
spiritual: the Agreement, because those things, which were otherwise really,
and very far separated, are joined together by a Sacramental union.

The inward and proper form of a Sacrament, is that excellent agreement of the
Sign, with the thing signified, and the mutual relation of the one unto the
other; whereof that, properly consists in the comparison and similitude of
the Effects, and this in the ordayning of the sign to the thing signified.

Now this conjunction of the Signs, and the thing signified in the Sacraments
is not natural, by a substantial contraction, or knitting together, or by the
uniting of the accidents, and substances: Indistantia^ Inexistentiam.
nor local, by the neerenesse, and being of the one in the other: nor yet
spiritual, as immediately quickening the very signs themselves: but it is
wholly Relative, and Sacramental, consisting specially in three things: in the
signifying, in the sealing, Praebitione.
and in the exhibiting of the thing signified.

In the signifying, because the signs by a most agreeable similitude, and
proportion, as it were by a certain introduction, do represent the Genesis 17
10.11. 1. Cor. 11.15.16. Ioh. 6.33.
spiritual mysteries; that is, the things invisible, by things visible.

In Sealing; because the Signs are, and are called the Seals, or stampes of
the things signified, both for that they confirm the truth of the similitude,
between the sign, and the thing signified, and that also they necessarily,
and most surely seal the efficacy of both conjunctions, in the lawful use
thereof. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
And this is called a coupling of the Sealing.

In Exhibiting: because that, in very deed is exhibited, which is figured by
the signs: for God mocketh not by instituting Signs, whereof there should be
no truth: but as in the audible word; so also in the sign, that is, in the
visible word, he in very deed performs what he promises and shows 1 Pet.
3.2. Romans 4.11 Ephesians. 3.7.
.

And yet the exhibiting, or receyving of the the thing signified, are not
referred to the Instruments of the body, but to the heart of the believer:
because it is spiritual, according as the exhibiting and receyving of the
Signs is corporal: we say spiritual, for a double respect, both by reason
of the Efficient, that is, the hidden operation of the holy Ghost, which is
done in very marvailous manner, that by the means of Christ's flesh mystically
communicated to us, the blood and virtue of Christ-merite, pearceth even unto
our souls: Col. 6.7. Ioh. 1.26.
and by reason of the Instru^ent; be, cause faith, by which we rece ue them, is
a spiritual instrument, by the bond whereof, the spirit most straightly
conjoyneth those things together, Col. 26.7. Ioh. 1.26.
which otherwise are very fair distant each from the other Ephesians. 3.17
.

From this inward form of a Sacrament, and the mutual disposition of the
sign, and the thing signified, do arise two special kinds of Sacramental
Predications, used in the Scriptures; the first, when the sign is pronounced
of the thing signified; that is, when the sign is said to be the very thing
signified, as when Christ is called our Circumcision, our Covenant, our
Paschall Lamb 1. Cor. 5.7. Genesis 17.10. Act. 7.8.
: the other, when the thing signified, is pronounced of the sign; that is,
when the very thing signified, is said to be the sign; as when the bread is
called the body of Christ, and the wine the blood of Christ 1. Cor. 11.24. Mat.
26.28
.

And these Predications are wont to be called Relative, Analogicall, and
Metonymycall: Relative, because, when the one separated thing, is pronounced of
the other; a mutual relation, and respect of things like the one to the other,
is necessarily presupposed. Analogical, because the changing of the names is
made, in regard of the Analogy, and exceeding great agreement between
themselves. Metonymycall, because the sign is put for the thing signified, and
so contrariwise. The reason of these Predications in the matter of a Sacrament,
is the union, which as it consists in three, in the signifying, sealing, and
spiritual exhibiting; so it makes these Sacramental Predications true,
because of the signifying, sealing, and exhibiting.

The End of a Sacrament is twofold; Proper and Accidental: The Proper, is
either Primary, or Secondary: That, is the visible sealing of Gods invisible
grace, and our conjunction with Christ: Romans 6.4. 1. Cor. 10.16. Gal. 3.27.
This, is a testifying of godliness toward God, of love toward our
neighbor, and of open profession, whereby, as by a mark, we are severed from
other Synagogues of Satan 1 Cor. 10.17. Ephesians. 4.5 1. Cor. 11.29.
. The Accidental, is the condemation of them, that unworthily communicate: for
albeit the unfaithful receive the Sacraments, yet, for the abuse of the
signs, and reproachful contempt against the thing signified, they are made
guilty of the contempt of Christ, and therefore also of everlasting death and
condemnation.

By this An alysi.
opening of the definition through all the causes, it may easily be concluded,
what those things are, which most properly may hold the name, and nature of a
Sacrament; to wit, those wherein there may be a concurrence of all these
causes and of the conditions, that issue out of these.

Such Sacraments as these, are some of the Old, and some of the New Testament.

Those, which are of the old Testament, are of two sorts: for some were
Temporary, Accidental, and Extraordinary, which God used but once or for a
certain time: and of these, some resemble our Baptism, as the passage through
the red sea, the deluge, the abiding under the Cloud; some the Lords supper,
as the Manna given from heaven, the water out of the rock: some were firm, and
ordinary, the use whereof, was unto the time of the New Covenant, which
specially were two, Circumcision Genesis 17 10. Leu. 12.
, and the Passover Exodus 12 3. 2. Chr. 3 5
: the one, a token, and Sacrament of entrance, and receyving into the Covenant:
the other, of continuance in the Covenant: which are called special; partly,
because they were the Presidents of the New Testament; and partly, because they
sealed up the promise o^ Grace, and the application thereof, made to every
one: for which two respects, they are distinguished from all other Sacraments,
which were many in the old Testament.

The Sacraments of the New Testament are two; the one of entrance, to wit
Baptism, which succeeded Circumcision Col. 2.11.12. Act. 22.16 1 Pet. 13 21.
: the other of Nourishment, or food; namely, the Lords supper, which the
Paschall Lamb shadowed forth Luc 21.15. 1. Cor. 5.8 1. Cor. 11.24.


And as all the causes do most evidently declare the verity of these two
sacraments: so they manifestly convince the vanity of the rest, which commonly
are wont to be counterfeyted.

For of these two Sacraments, God is the Cause Efficient, by the word of
Institution, that is, of commandment, and promise: which Efficient Cause the
other five ambiguously called Sacraments, have not Mat. 28 19.
.

The Matter, that is, the sign and the thing signified, is exhibited in these
two Sacraments: the former whereof notwithstanding, Penance has not simply;
but Matrimony, Order, Confirmation, and Extreme Unction, have it not by Divine
Institution: the latter of these, none of them has most nearly, whether you
respect Christ himself, or his merit, or his benefits.

The Form of a Sacrament, is only found in Baptism, and the Supper: but the
others have indeed some signification, but no sealing, or presenting at all.

The Principal, and Secondary end, these two Sacraments have jointly together:
the other five either have not, or have it severally, (or dividedly.)

To these are added two conditions annexed to the institution of sacraments;
whereof the first requires, that a sacrament be ordinary, and perpetual: the
second, that the use of a Sacrament, be common to all, which profess the same
Covenant, and the same faith: which two conditions do concur in Baptism, and
the Supper: but in the others, either the first of them is wanting, as in the
Extreme Unction, which only in the time of the Apostles, was as a Sign used
not in sickness, past hope of recovery, but likely to be recovered: or the
second is wanting; as in Matrimony, and Order; or both, as in Confirmation.

These Sacraments of the old, and new Testament, in diverse respects, do both
agree and differ.

They agree first in the Efficient, that is God, or the word of Institution:
Secondly, in the Genericis
Natural parts, the Sign, and the thing signified. Thirdly, in the Relation,
to the thing signified; which, in both places, is the same 1. Cor. 10.3. 2.
Cor. 5.
. Fourthly, in the End, to wit, that they be visible signs of Gods invisibe
grace.

But they differ, first in the outward Adiunctes, and the circumstance of time
Gal. 23 and 5.6.
: Secondly, in the Manner of Signifiing. Thirdly, in the Quality of the Signs.
Fourthly, in the Number, Measure, Poer, and Easiness: For ours are for number
fewer, for profit better, for the understanding of heavenly things playner,
for virtue greater, and for action easier.

OF SACRAMENTS in General. The Part Confuting.
Distinctions, in Defense of the Name, and the signification of a Sacrament,
against Bellar. Lib. 1. of Sacraments, cap 7.
I.
THe name of Sacrament is taken either Generally, or Specially; generally, for
every divine mystery Symbolical; specially, for a divine mystery Symbolical,
which is ordained of God, for the sealing of faith, by the word of
commandment, and promise; that is commonly, this properly called a Sacrament.

II.
EVery Mystery is not a Sacrament, but every Sacrament is a Mystery: for, of
the word Mystery, there are three general significations; the first, for a
secret thing. The second, for a secret divine thing. The third, for a secret
divine thing proposed (or set forth) by certain outward Symbols, Signs, and
Types. And in this signification, a Sacrament is called a Mystery, and not
contrary wise.

The Places which he cites, are these.
Dan. 2 Apoc. 17. 2. These. 2. Ephesians. 5. Ans. All circumstances do show, that
these places, when they make mention of the word Mystery, do signify not so
much the sign of a secret thing, as a secret thing it self. For, in the first
place, not the Image, but the dream of the King is called a mystery, that is, a
secret thing, and not to be revealed, but of God. In the second, the woman is
not called a Sacrament, but a secret thing of the woman, that is, concerning
the woman, is pronounced. In the third, Antichristianisme it self is called
the Mystery of iniquity, that is, a secret iniquity, or a secret impiety. In
the fourth, the Apostles very restraint, and limitation does prove, that not
the joining together of the man and woman, but of Christ, and the Church, is
called a Sacrament.

Distinctions, in Defense of the Efficient Cause. against Bellarmine, Lib. 2.
De Sacram. cap. 19.
I.
THe Commandment of God is considered two ways: either as it is given, or as
it is written: as it was given, it simply bound (men) at that time when it was
given: as it is written, it simply binds, since that time, when it was
written.

II.
THere is a twofold manner of the Institution of a Sacrament: the one, in
respect of the Author, the other, in respect of them to whom it was written,
given, or made: in respect of the Author, the Institution is always of force,
whether written, or not written: but in respect of them, to whom it is
written, it is of force, as it is written: whereupon, also there is usually a
double testimony of the Institution of a Sacrament; the one Immediate, of the
Author; the other Mediat of the Instrument, or scripture. Now unto us it is not
manifest concerning the will of the Author; but by the Instrument, or Scripture.

III.
THe Promise is considered, either as the effect, or as the Efficient of the
sacrament: as the Effect, it is sealed with the Sacrament, as the Efficient, it
adds an assurance of the sealing to the Sacrament. For, in a diverse respect
the Sacrament does both seal the promise, and has the promise concerning the
sealing.

IIII.
THe word of Promise in Baptism, and the Supper is expressed, and contained in
the words of the very Institution: Neither must we refer the words of the
Promise in the Supper, to Christ's Sacrifice, but to the Sacrament which he
instituted: neither also in Baptism, is the efficacy of the Sacrament simply
expressed, but the promise given, concerning the efficacy.

V.
THe Concionale.
word pertaining to the congregation, and the word of Institution are not
opposite; but both in Baptism, and the Supper, there is the same word: for
that, which is Or of Preaching
for the congregation in Baptism, the same is of the Institution; and that,
which is of the Institution in the Supper, the same is for the congregation.

VI.
IN every Sacrament, two things must needs be distinguished; the
Substantial, and the Accidental thereof: the one whereof, is properly
required for the being; the other, for the well being of the same. Now the
Preaching of the same, is no part of the Essence of the Sacrament, but
pertayneth to the manner of Administration.

VII.
THe Consecration of Sacraments, consists in two things; in the Institution,
or ordinance, blessing, sealing of the word, and in the promise of God
himself; then in the holy use thereof, which is done by prayers, and
thanksgiving.

VIII.
THe change of the Sacramental word, is twofold: Substantial, and
Accidental: the one properly pertayneth to the sense; the other, to the
words, and order of the words; and yet a conclusion, from the change of
words, to the change of the Element, is of no force; because, this cannot be
changed without corruption, but those may easily be changed, the sense
nevertheless remaining.

Distinctions in Defense of the Cause Material.
I.
Signs are either of things past, or things present, or things to come; and
they all either pointing out, or sealing up, or presenting: of all which the
Sacramental signs are mixed.

II.
THe sign, signifies either the Element, or the Action, or both: wherefore in
a Sacramental thing, all that is called the sign, which is perceyved by the
fences, whether it be seen, or heard; for the Element is perceyved by the
sight, but the action by the sight, and hearing.

III.
THe thing signified in the sacrament, is both a substance, and action: the
substance is either properly whole Christ; or Synecdochically, the body of
Christ delivered unto death, and his blood shed: the Action is Gods alone, and
is either Justification, or Regeneration.

IIII.
THe thing and the signs are both offered, either jointly, and truly, in
respect of God, who promises; or distinctly, in respect of the faithful, to
whom, without the sacramental communion, the thing signified, is truly, and
spiritually given: or of the unfaithful, to whom, even in the Sacramental
Communion, the Signs indeed are offered, but the thing signified is not given.

Distinctions, in Defense of the Form, and Effect of a Sacrament.
Bellarmine proves by ten reasons, that the Sacraments of the New Law, are the
causes of Justification, by the work done. Cap. 8. Lib. 2. de Sacram. Ex opere
operato.


I.
THe Sacramental Signs are said to be practicke, not for that they work by
the deed done, but because they are effectual Instruments, whereby the truth
of Gods Grace in Christ is sealed up unto us; and because Infantes are
baptized, the Sacraments do not therefore immediately effect Sanctity: for,
in respect of the Infants, Baptism is properly a Sacrament of entrance, as in
respect of them, that are grown to full age, it is a Sacrament of
Sanctification, not by effecting, but by binding.

II.
GOds institution, or authority, has ^ot put a power of effecting in the
Sacraments, which is proper to the Principal Agent; but of signifying,
sealing, and presenting: neither has humane instirution any place in divine
matters, since the nature of those things, which concern faith, and religion,
lerneth upon the alone word of God.

III.
THe Institution, and use of a Sacrament, consists in two things: first, in
the Relation of the Sign unto the thing signified; Secondly, in the lawful
administration, and receyving the verity, and virtue of the Relation does wholly
depend upon the Institutor: of the lawful administration, God is the Author,
according to his will; but man is the Minster of the same, according to the
rule of Gods will, and his own calling.

IIII.
THe Sacraments depend upon God, and Christ's Passion, after a diverse respect:
upon God, as the cause; upon Christ's death, and Passion, as the object; for the
Passion of Christ cannot properly be called the cause of the Sacrament; but the
object, and the thing signified, whereunto it is carried.

V.
WE are made assured of the remission of sins by the Sacraments, through an
assurance not absolute, but relative; not from the former, but from the latter;
not by the Principal, but by the Isntrumental; not properly by effecting, but
by scaling.

VI.
THe Sacraments, and the word have reference unto faith, not after a contrary,
but after a subalternall manner: because, as faith is begotten by the word, so
it is nourished by the Sacraments: both are Instruments; yet distinct, by
manner of working.

VII
SAcraments profit not, except they be well applied: now there are two means
of Application; the one outward, the other inward: the outward, are the Signs,
and the Word: the use of the Signs is perceyved by the touching: but the use
of the Word by hearing: the understanding of both is required, because the
Signs, and the word not being understood, do not profit: the inward is
faith, which brings the use of the Signs, and the word to the Soul.

VIII.
THe subordinate Instruments of the stirring up of faith, is the word of
preaching, or the Scripture, and the visible word of the Sacrament: neither
does the one disanull the other, but rather settle and establish each other.
Add further, that the use of the picture, and outward Signs of Baptism, is
one, and of the Sign is another, whereas that has neither the word, nor
promise, this both.

IX.
THe profit of the Sacraments, is both General, and Particular, in a diverse
respect. General, in respect of the entrance, and the whole outward action.
Particular, in respect of the Application: the one Generally is performed by
the Signs, and the word; the other particularly by faith.

X.
THe Difference of the Sacraments of the old, and new Testament, consists
not in the thing signified, but in the manner of signifying, and other outward
Adjuncts, and circumstances, whereof we have above spoken.

The same Point does Bellarmine prove by eight Testimonies of Scripture. Cap. 4.
The First Place is of Matthew the 3. Answ. There is no difference made between
the Efficacy of John's Baptism, and Christ's, but between the Persons: whereof
the one, by the outward Ministry only gives the water, as the Sign of the
Remission of sins; the other, by the Inward Efficacy, gives the Spirit, as
the earnest of the things signified. And he uses the future Tense, speaking
of Christ's Baptism, because he has respect to the very Ministry of Christ's
Preaching, which he was about to take in hand: neither does the Place cited out
of Acts 19. prove the same power of both Baptismes: because they are the words
of Paul, speaking of them, who were baptized by John, in the name of the Lord.

The Second Place, is of Mark the last, ver. 16. Answ. It is there declared,
not why, but who should be saved: and withal, it is taught, what is the
Consequent of Baptism, and Faith.

The Third, is of John 3.5. Ans. The name of Water is Equivocall. For in the
Scripture, it is usually taken in a threefold signification: for, either
specially, it signifies Baptism: or the the outward Legal washing; or
lastly, the very Effect of the holy Ghost in us. If it be taken in the first
signification, the sense is, that Baptism is the ordinary Sign of
Regeneration in the Church: If in the second, the sense is, that the outward
clensings of the Law do not profit, unless the inward purging of the
Spirit be added thereto: If in the third, the Name of the Spirit is added
Exegetice
, by way of exposition: for that the Efficacy of the outward Sacramental
Baptism, depends upon the Spirit.

The Fourth, is Act. 2. Answer. To be baptized for the Remission of sins
properly notes, not the Effect of Baptism, but the end, and scope thereof:
neither was the Action ordained to signify the sign, but the sign to
signify the action signified.

The Fifth, Act. 8. Answer. The Particle (By) signifies sometimes Efficiency;
sometimes the Instrument, and sometime the Sign. And in this place, it is
taken Symbolically, because the gift of the holy Ghost, by the laying on of
hands, is both signified, and sealed.

The Sixth, is the 1. Cor. 10. Answ. To partake of one Bread, is not a cause,
but a public Testimony, that we are of one Body, whereupon it is called one
Bread, not in number, but by the common notion of a Sacrament; to wit,
representing unto us, that one mystical body of Christ.

The Seventh, is Ephesians. 1. Answ. by a Metonymy, that, which is proper to the
thing signified, is attributed to the sign: because Baptism is the sign of
our Consecration; and indeed effectual, not by it own power, but of him, who
being one, became all things to us, the faithful.

The Eight, is the 1. of Pet. Answ. Salvation is attributed to Baptism,
because it is the visible Instrument of Salvation, both by the signifying and
sealing. Add further, that Baptism, as a Counter-paterne, is opposed against
the deliverance, from the deluge, not in respect of Efficacy, but of the
Consequent, or the thing signified: Neither is there a difference properly put
between the Baptism of the Jews, and ours; but between the outward, and
inward Baptism; for as much as the Effect of this is Salvation, and Peace of
conscience.

Distinctions, in Defense of the END. Bellarmine proves by five Arguments,
that the sealing of Grace, and Gods promises, is not the End of a Sacrament. 2.
Cap. 14. Lib. 1. De Sacramento.
I.
THe end of the Sealing of the Sacrament, is not either, that we may be
taught, what are Gods promises, which the word teaches: or that we should
more believe the Sacraments, then the promises: for the Sacraments are for the
promises, and not the Promises for the Sacraments: but that the truth of Gods
promises might be confirmed, and sealed.

II.
THe Essence and nature of Sacraments, ought to be gathered, partly from the
words of the Institutor, and partly from the properties of a Sacrament: that
the words of the Institutor do include a promise, it has been above said,
that the property of a Sacrament is to signify, and seal the thing promised;
the Nature of every Relation, and the use of all signs do evidently prove.

III.
THe use of divine Testimonies depends upon the will of the Institutor,
whether they be Signs, or works, which being Subordinate, neither ought, nor
may be opposed: both are effectual, and have their use; neither does the
abuse of the Signs in Hypocrites, take away the use of them; but (such is the
nature of things opposite,) does more establish the same in the godly.

IIII.
THe sealing of Gods promises, has respect, either unto the Faith of the
covenant, or unto the Faith of them that are in the Covenant: In Infants, the
sealing of Gods promise is made properly, in respect of the Faith of the
Covenant; but in them that are of ripe years, in respect of their faith in the
Covenant.

V.
THe end of Sacraments has respect either unto the Institutor, or unto him
that uses the same; the end of the Institutor is, that Sacraments should
seal; but of the users, either that they use that sealing according to the
will of the Institutor, to their own Salvation; or that they abuse them to
their own condemnation. Which last end, being accidental, takes not away the
proper end, whether Principal, or Secondary.

OF BAPTISM.
The Part Confirming. CHAP. XII.
THe Doctrine in special concerning the two Sacraments of the New Testament,
to wit, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, is next after added unto the Doctrine,
touching the Sacraments already expounded in General.

The word (Baptism) according to the manner of the true interpretation
thereof, does Generally signify any washing whatsoever, especially, the Legal
and Jewish clensings, and purgings, or purifying, which is done by water; but
Particularly it is taken, either Metaphorically, for the Cross, and Martyrdom
Mat. 10.38.
, which they call, The Baptism of blood; or Synecdochically, for the pouring
out of Gods visible Gifts, wherewith the Apostles were furnished Act. 15.
, which they call The Baptism of Flaminis
Inspiration: or most properly, for the first Sacrament of the New Testament,
which they term the Baptism of Fluminis
Water; in which last signification, it is of us here taken, and defined.

To wit, that it is, the first Sacrament of the New Covenant, instituted by
Christ, consisting of things Analogicall; to wit, the Sign, and the thing
signified; as also of the Analogicall relation of themselves, between
themselves, together with their action (or working) by which, they which are in
the Covenant, are washed with water by the Minister of the Church; that being
ingraffed into Christ, they might be made partakers of the inward washing of
the soul, by his blood and spirit.

The Efficient Cause of Baptism may be considered two ways: either as the
Cause Instituting, or as the cause using Baptism instituted, or the baptizing.
After the first manner, Christ only, by his holy spirit, ought to be called,
and accounted the Author of Baptism, in as much, as who first instituted
Baptism in the person of John the Baptist; whose Baptism Christ himself
witnessed, not to be of men, but of God, and from heaven Ioh. 1.23 31.
: and afterward confirmed the Baptism of John instituted with the word of
commandment and promise Mat. 28.19.
. For albeit, as touching the Circumstance, and manner of Christ's
manifestation, there was some difference between the Baptism of John, and of
the Apostles, yet in kind it was one, and the same Baptism, seeing that the
definition, as of his Baptism, so also of theirs, is the same, and both agree
in all the causes.

After the latter manner, the Minister is said to be the Baptizer, or the
cause using Baptism Instituted Mat. 28.19. Heb 5.4.
: because he administering Baptism in the name of Christ, does Sacramentally,
and ministerially, seal, and confer the matter of Baptism: Now by the name
of Minister we understand him, to whom the Ministry of the word is committed
in his lawful calling: for these are Conjuncts. To wit, the office of teaching
the Gospel, and administting the Sacraments: neither is it lawful, for a
Private man, even in the cause of necessity, to baptize, since there is no
necessity, which may compel us to violat the orders by God prescribed 1. Cor.
14.34. 1. Tim. 2.12.
. Now the power, and dignity of this Ecclesiastical Ministry, depends not
upon the quality of the Minister, but upon the power, and truth of God, who
instituteth the same. For the Sacraments are true, because of the true God,
whose they they are, says Augustine.

The Matter of Baptism is two ways wont to be considered, either as it makes
Baptism, or as it receyveth: the one has properly the consideration of the
parts, the other of the subject or object.

The Matter, that makes Baptism, is twofold, according as there are two
parts thereof: the one Outward, and Visible, the other Inward, and Spiritual,
that is properly called the Sign, this the thing signified,

By the name of Sign, all that is understood, which is perceyved by the
outward senses, in the pure, and lawful administration of Baptism, whether it
be the Element, or the Action, or Rite, answerable to Gods Institution.

The Elementall Sign in Baptism, is the water Act 10.47. Ephesians. 5.26
, not the oil, not the salt, not the spettle: because, neither the
commandment of Christ, nor the examples of the Apostles, nor the judgeme^t of
the ancient Church admit any other substantial matter in Baptism, besides the
Element of water.

The Sign Ceremonlall, which consists in the action, is a dipping, or
sprinckling: for both is noted by the word Baptism Ioh. 3.29. Mat. 3.16. Lue.
11.38. Mar 7.4.
: bur albeit, the Sacramental Rite, in particular circumstances, be dispensed,
and may suffer a moderation according to charity, and necessity: yet we
worthily reject Exorcismes, and consecration of Water, both for that they are
conjoined with superstition, and especially, because they defile, and stain
the action of Baptism.

The Thing signified, is twofold: the one General, the other Particular: the
one is already expounded in the doctrine concerning the Sacraments: but the
other, if you respect the Essential signified things of baptism, may fitly
be referred to three heads. The first, of the blood of Christ, for the
Remission of sins: whereby it comes to pass, that neither that Gemina.
Natural Impurity, nor the fruit thereof, that is actual sins, be imputed
unto us Mar. 1.4 Luc. 3.3. Act. 5.8. Act z2.16 Ephesians. 5.25.26.
. The other, is the Spiritual, and divine power of the same, whereby we are
regenerated by the mortifying of the flesh, and quickening of the Spirit: for
these things God requires, according to the form of the Covenant, of all
those, who are entered by the sign of Covenant Rom 6 3.4. Tit. 3.5.6.
. The third, is the most strait Union, and Conjunction we have with Christ,
whereby is wrought that we are made partakers of his person, merits and
benefits 1. Cor. 12.13. Gal. 3.27
.

The Matter receyving Baptism, are they all, and alone, who probably are
reckoned in the Covenant: now, there are reckoned both the ripe of age, who
having made an entrance in the Principles of faith, and coming to the church,
profess their faith and repentance before men, as also Infants, who, as they
are partakers of the communion of the Covenant, by the form and promise added
thereunto Genesis 17.1.
, so are they likewise of the Communion of the sign, and seal of the Covenant
Genesis 27.12. Leu. 12.3.
.

Add further, First, that as they are partakers of Gods promises in Christ,
and his Church, so are they also of the Sacramental signs, which were
ordained, for the sealing of the promises Act. 2.38 39.
. Secondly, that as by the power of the Spirit, they have that wholly, which is
signified, so it were wickedness, that they should be excluded from the
partaking of the signs Genesis 17. 1. Cor. 7.14.
.

Thirdly, that as the children of the faithful ought to be ingraffed into the
Church, and to be discerned from the unfaithful; so it were needful, they
should be partakers of the singe of entrance, and the note of differenee Act.
2.39.
.

Lastly, both the Type of Circumcision Anagoge.
, (in the stead whereof, this reduction of the one to the other, does plainly
show, that Baptism succeeded Col. 2.11.12
and the Actions of Christ, consecrating children by his blessing, and prayers
to God his Father Mat. 13.14.15.
, as also the examples of the Apostles, baptizing whole Families, do
abundantly confirm the baptism of these.

The Form, which fashioneth baptism, according to the Essence, and Inward
nature thereof, is an Analogicall, and Sacramental Relation of the Signs, and
the thing signified in baptism, which Relation chiefly consists in
signifying, sealing and presenting.

In Signifying; for, by a most agreeable proportion, both the water of
baptism, signifies the blood of Christ; and the dipping, or sprinckling, the
death of the old man: but the conveying out of the water, the life of the new
man; and lastly, the Communion of the baptism of the faithful with Christ,
notes their most straight union with him: Act. 22.16. Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5 6 1.
Ioh. 1 7
In Sealing; because both the verity of the Similitude, between the Sign, and
the thing signified is confirmed, and the Efficacy of the joining of both
together in the lawful use, is sealed up.

In Presenting Praebitione.
, (or offering) because God by baptism, in very deed, presents those things
to faith, which are signified in baptism, not by the work done, but
Sacramentally: partly, for that he exhibiteth those things as visible to the
minds of the believers, and partly, for that he does assure us, that, That is
in very deed performed in the soul, which is showed, and promised by the
visible Sign Act. 2 38. Romans 6.4. Gal. 3.27.
.

But, because of this Sacramental agreement, and relation of the Sign, and
the thing it self, as also of the certainety of the receyving of the thing
signified, the names and properties of the sign, and the thing signified are
changed, by a familiar Metony my of the holy Scripture. Hence it is, that
baptism is sometime said to be in the Scripture, the Lavar of Regeneration,
or the washing of the New birth; and Tit. 3.56 1. Pet. 3.21.
to save us.

The Ends of Baptism are of two sorts; for some are Principal, and
Antecedent; some Secondary, and Consequent: whereof, those properly respect our
Faith before God, but these our confession before Men.

After the first manner, the end of baptism is to signify, seal, and
exhibit Sacramentally, the Remission of sins, the benefit of Regeneration,
and our union with Christ.

The Remission of sins; for, albeit sin by reason of the state of Nature
abide, as touching the disease or root of sin, and the very matter; yet it
is taken away, by reason of the state of the person; as touching the guilt or
form, which is not imputed to the faithful. Hence it is, that Baptism is
said to be given for the remission of sins Act. 2.38 and 22.26.
.

The benefit of Regeneration; because we, being ingraffed into Christ by
baptism, are changed into his nature, and are made partakers of his divine
Nature: for which cause, it is called the Laver of Regeneration Tit. 3.5.6.
.

Our Union with Christ; for, hence it is, that we are said to be Baptized
into Christ Ga. 3.27
, and into the Name of Christ Mat. 28.19. 1. Cor. 12 13.
, by baptism, to be buried with Christ, and to be baptized into his death, and
resurrection Romans 6.3.4.
.

After the Latter manner: the end of baptism is first, that it may be a
Testimony of our godliness, and obedience unto God with Thanksgiving Ioh. 4.1.
Act. 2.41.
. Secondly, that it may be a badge discerning the Church, together with her
members, from profane Nations. Thirdly, that it may be the bond of the
communion of the Church, and their mutual love, who are dipped in the same
Lavar.

From this consideration of the causes, two Consequents are drawn: the one, of
the Necessity; the other, of the Effect, and Efficacy of Baptism.

The Necessity, two things do circumscribe, or limite, The Institution of
God, and the Condition of him that is to be baptized.

The Scope of Gods Institution is, not to tie, either the things signified to
the Signs, or the men to the Sacraments, by an absolute necessity; forasmuch
as God by an immediate, and extraordinary action when he will, and on whom he
will, conferreth the thing signified: neither can the simple want, but the
contempt of the Sacrament be hurtful, (which does befall, neither unto all
Infants, nor all them that are of ripe years:) but according to the liberty of
his will, it may seal the things signified in them who both can, and should
receive the use of the signs.

They, that are to be baptized, are persons of years, and Infants: to a person
of years, Baptism is necessary unto Salvation two ways; either by Desire,
and Will, if liberty be not granted him to take the Layer of water: or really,
and in very deed, if liberty be granted. For faith has always joined with
it, the desire of obedience. To an Infant, Baptism is necessary, not simply
for the Invisible, but after a sort, for the visible ingraffing of him into
Christ, and the body of the Church; which if the point of necessity do bar him
from, that invisibly is fulfilled with out baptism, which otherwise is showed
in the visible baptism.

The Effects of baptism are not, either the doing away of all guilt, and
punishmen; or the conferring of grace by the work done; or lastly, an
impression of a mark, that cannot be raced out; but they are the same with
those, which are the ends thereof above expounded. The Efficacy of all which
Effects, is not ascribed to the outward baptism, or the Elements of water,
but to the blood of Christ, and the inward baptism of the Spirit, which by a
hidden operation conferreth that invisible Grace, which is signified in the
outward Baptism.

OF BAPTISM. The Part Confuting.
I.
THe Word (Baptism) is taken two ways in the Scriptures, Properly, and
Figuratively; Properly, it signifies two things; first, a dipping into the
water; secondly, any simple washing, or cleansing; and in this signification,
by an excellency, the first Sacrament of the New Testament, is called Baptism.
Figuratively, it imports four things, either by an Allegory, the deluge of
the waters, the passing through the Sea, and the abiding under the cloud: or by
a Metaphor, the cross or every extreme affliction: or by a Metalepsis, the
pouring out of the gifts of the Spirit: or lastly, by a Synechdoche, the
whole doctrine of John, and his whole Ministry.

II.
Baptism in kind is but one, but in the manner of considering, it is
twofold; Outward, and Inward: that is, of the Water; this of the Spirit, and
blood: which three, because indeed they are the parts of the whole Baptism;
from each one, every of the three kinds of Baptism do spring, (to wit the
Baptism,) of Water, Inspiration and blood.

In Defense of the Efficient Cause, or the Minister baptizing; and first, that
the baptism of John Baptist, and the rest of the Ministers was one, and the
self same, against Bellarmine, Lib. 1. de Sacra. Bapt. Cap. 20.21.22.

THe DISTINCTIONS.
I.
THat baptism cannot be said to have been instituted of John himself,
which the Scripture teaches to have been a baptism administered by Gods
commandment, Luc. 3.2.3. To be from Heaven, Mat. 21.25: and which the
Pharisees refusing, are said to have despised the counsel of God: Luc. 7
30.15. but in that it is called the baptism of John, it distinguishes between
the Ministry of John himself, and the mastership (of authority) of Christ.

II.
THe Invocation of the Trinity, is expressed in the Scriptures, either
according to the very formal words, or according to the sense and truth:
albeit those words be not expressed in the administration of John's baptism;
yet the consequence of diverse Arguments, do abundantly prove, the sense and
truth of the Invocation: for, therefore is John said to have baptized into
Christ, Act. 19.4. and to have preached the baptism of Repentance for the
Remission of sins, Mar. 1.3.

III.
THe time of the Institution of baptism, ought not to be reckoned since
Christ's resurrection from the dead; or since his baptism in Jordan, but since
the time of his manifestation in the flesh, from which, the time of the New
Testament ordinarily takes his beginning.

IIII.
THe difference of baptism is, one Essential; the other, Accidental: That,
according to the substance, and effect; This, acording to the circumstance and
manner of Christ's manifestation: but there are two causes, why he would
distinguish between his baptism, and Christ's: the first, that he might note
the difference between the outward Baptism of Water, and the Inward
Baptism of the Spirit; the other, that he might distinguish between his own
person, and office, and between the person and office of Christ. Add further,
that the Baptism of the spirit is taken for the visible gift of miracles
powered out on the Apostles, according as the conferring of places Parallelorum.
, the one with the other, teaches Act. 1.5. and 11.16. but, in that it is
spoken in the future tense, it is an Enallage (or change) of the tense, very
frequent in Scriptures.

V.
THe Fathers, who treated of the difference of both Baptismes, either treated
of the circumstances, and the manner of Christ his manifestation only, and not
of the substance, or efficacy as Origin, Justin, Nazianzene, Chrysostom,
Cyrill; or of the outward Baptism of John, or the inward of Christ severally;
as Basil, Tertullian, Cyprian, Hierom: or as they are men, have erred from the
truth, as Augustine.

VI.
THe office of John Baptist, ought two ways to be distinguished: one way,
whereby he receyved from God the office of teaching, and baptizing: the other,
whereby particularly, he is called the forerunner of the Messiah in the
Scriptures: by the former, he sealed, and conferred salvation ministerially by
preaching, and baptizing: by the later, he fore-shewed Christ, the true and
only Author of the true Baptism: by both ways, the power and efficacy of
John's Baptism, and of the rest, is evidently proved to be the same.

VII
A Comparison is made of both Baptismes, in respect both of the person, and of
the office of John, and Christ, and not (in respect) of the essence and effect:
neither is the outward baptism diverse (or different;) but in the
administration or both, the difference is declared between John's outward, and
Christ's inward Baptism.

VIII.
THe Consequence is of no validity, from a conjecture, though ever so likely,
whereof notwithstanding, there is no testimony extant in Scripture: again,
according to the use of Scripture by a Synecdoche, a part is taken for the
whole. Add further, that Luc. 7.8. The Scribes, and Pharisees not being
baptized, are excepted of John.

IX.
ACt. 19. ver. 3.4.5. the words of Paul speaking, are to be distinguished from
the words of the Evangelist, declaring that history, as it is confirmed by the
propriety of the two words in the Greek tongue. Moreover, in that they deny,
that they ever heard, whether that there were a Holy Ghost, it is to be
understood, not of the Existence, and Substance of the ho^y Ghost, but
Metonymycally, of the manner of the visible pouring out of the gifts of the
holy Ghost. Add further, that from the doubtful significa^ion of the word
Baptizme, nothing ^olloweth: for baptism does not sig^ifie Water only, but
either the matter of Baptism, or the very doctrine of ^ohn.

DISTINCTIONS. Of the Baptism of Lay-persons; against Bellarmine, Lib. 1. cap.
6. De Sacra. Baptis.
I.
THe example of Zipporah, who circumcised her son, in as much as it was,
either a rash, and unlawful ex^mple of a foolish angry woman, or (...)
particular action, or deed, ought not to be drawn into a consequence: for the
Angel was pacified, because the Child was circumcised, and not because she
had circumcised him.

II.
THe office of teaching is, one Ecclesiastical, an other Domestical; that is
public, this private; the Ecclesiastical, and public office pertayneth to
them alone, who have a calling in the Church: the Domestical and private to
all those, who being as members of the Church, are by the law of Charity bound
to respect the good of the whole Church, and every member thereof. Now the
conclusion is not of any force, from a public office of teaching, to a
private, whereas, that is of a particular calling; but this of a calling common
to all Christians.

III.
FRom public persons, and those, upon whom sometimes the office of
administering the word was imposed, to those that are of the Laity, the
conclusion is of no force. Add further, that the administration of Baptism
was two-folde in the Primitive Church; the one Immediate, by the Apostles
themselves; the other Mediate by the Deacons, who, not of themselves, but by
the commandment of the Apostles, did baptize.

IIII.
THe Testimonies of the Fathers, and Councels, which are cited, are either
unfitly alleged, as that of Tertullian, who gives the authority of
baptizing, not absolutely, but by the way of supposition of the order altered
in the Church: Of Ambrose, who treats of the extraordinary function of the
Deacons in the Primitive church; and the ordinary function of the Ministers in
the Church, which followed after: Of Augustine, who determines nothing, but
doubtingly proposes a question, or, are false, and are confuted by the
testimonies of the fourth Council of Carthage, which, in the 100, Canon,
ezpresly lays down, and determines the contrary: Of the Nicene Council,
which treats of the Baptism of Heretics, whose manner is diverse to this,
and not of the baptism of the lay-persons? or lastly, by the testimonies of
other Fathers, and councels, as of Chrysostom, and Epiphanius. etc.

For the Matter receyving Baptism, or the baptizing of Children.
I.
FRom those things, which are particularly spoken, or done, with certain
conditions, and circumstances of the persons, and the times; simply, and
generally to conclude, is an Inconsequent.

II.
TO believe, as touching the present controversy, is taken two ways:
Actiuely, when they, which are of years, have faith in Christ, by the hearing
of the word* Passiuely, and by imputation, when, for the covenant, and Gods
promise, the righteousness of faith is imputed unto Infants.

III.
THere is a twofold Act of Faith: the first, and the second: that, whereby
faith is: this, whereby faith works: Infants have faith in the first Act, not
in the second; in the seednesse, and not in the harvest: by Imputation of
justice, not by operation: by a hidden verrue of the Spirit, and not by
outward demonstration.

IIII.
THe diverse circumstances of ages, break not the unity of Faith, and the
nature of the promise: for the one, and self same righteousness of faith is
sealed in the Parents, and in the Infants.

V.
AN Universal commandment includes a particular: neither must we restrain
that to one part only of the promise, and to the half seed of the riper age,
which pertains alike unto all.

VI.
FRom the denial of a special precept, to an universal forbidding, it
follows not by consequence.

VII.
THe truth of doctrine ought not only to be drawn forth, and confirmed from
the outward syllables, but from the consequence, and force of the whole
scripture referred to the proportion of Faith.

VIII.
THe consequence is of no weight, from the unlikeness of time, and persons,
and the diverse order of God toward persons, of years, and Infants.

IX.
COnfession of Doctrine, and faith, are not the proper, and true causes of
Baptism, but only the consequent Effects.

For the necessity of Baptism, against Bellarmine. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
I.
FRom the ambiguous signification of the word (Water,) nothing follows: for
it is taken, not only for the outward Element, but also for the operation of
the holy Ghost, which Exegetice
by way of exposition, is wont so to be expressed in scriptures: then the
necessity, which Christ infers, is to be ascribed, not so much to the
sign, as to the thing signified. Add further, that the Baptism of water is,
after a sort, said to be necessary to those, who both can, and ought to use it.

II.
THe Testimonies of the Fathers, and Counsels, some are badly cited, as that of
the Council of Carthage, and of Milevitum out of Augustine: For those Councels
do treat against the Pelagians, who, at that time, denied the baptism of
children, and some are suspected, as that of the Tridentine Council, and the
Testimonies of the Popes.

III.
INfants ought two ways to be considered: either, according to common nature,
or the singular manner of the covenant, and grace; that way they are conceived
in sin; but this way they have obtained remission of sins by the promise.

In Defense of the Effects of baptism, against the same. Cap. 4 and the rest
that follow.
I.
Sin dwelling in us, is by baptism taken away by three means, and degrees:
First, because it is not imputed. Secondly, because, by little and little, the
body thereof is destroyed. Thirdly, because, in death, it shall utterly be
taken away, by the power of the same blood of Christ, wherewith we are washed
in Baptism.

II.
IT is one thing to speak of the cause of Justification; and another thing of
the Instrument thereof; lastly, an other thing of the sealing: the cause is the
merit of Christ; the Instrument is Faith, and the sealing is Baptism.

III.
THe new, and uncertain devise of the Schoolmen, concerning the Character (or
Mark,) which cannot be defaced, is with the same facility denied, as it is
affirmed: chiefly, whereas, neither Scripture teaches, nor necessary reason
shows, nor authority of Fathers proves any such Character. Add further,
that the chief reason, why Baptism is not iterated; is not the impression of
the character, but Gods only Institution.

OF THE LORDS Supper.
The Part Confirming. CHAP. XIII.
THe other Sacrament of the christian church immediately instituted of Christ,
for the perpetual use thereof is, The Lords Supper: whereof, though there be
diverse appellations both in Scriptures, and with the Fathers, (for in the
Scriptures it is called, The body and blood of the Lord, The New Testament, The
Communion, The breaking of bread, The Lords Table, The bread, and the cup, The
Communicating of the body and blood of Christ Mat. 26.28. Luc. 22.20. Act. 20.7
1. Cor. 11.25 1. Cor. 10.21. 1. Cor. 10.16.
: which by the Fathers, First, it is called a gathering together: The
Eucharist, or Thankesgiving, Publ^^g Administration. Secondly, the Lat^^^,
Offering, because of collections, and sacrifice, for the remembrance of Christ's
Sacrifie, yet most properly, by this appellation, Of the Lords Supper, the
thing it self has most fitly been expressed, and indeed, it is called, The
Supper, with respect had, both of the thing, and of the time: because it is a
holy banquet of the soul, and not of the belly, instituted of the Lord, and
that in the Evening; but the Lords, in respect, both of the Author, who is the
Lord, and of the End, which is the remembrance of the Lord. Now it is defined
to be;

A Sacrament of the New Testament, instituted of Christ, consisting of the
Sign, and the thing signified, proportionable, by an Analogicall Relation, and
action of themselves, between themselves; whereby the full grown members of
Christ and his church, are trained up, and taught in the lawful use of the
visible signs, concerning the true, and spiritual communication of the body
and blood of Christ, unto life eternal.

The Efficient Cause of the Lords Supper, ought to be considered, either, as
instituting; or as using, and administering the same; that is, the principal
cause: but this, is the serving, (or administering) cause.

The Principal, or Instituting cause, is the Lord, from whom, it has been
customably called the Lords Supper; to wit, Christ, God, and man, our only
Redeemer, instituting the mystery of his body, and blood, by the oblarion
whereof, he redeemed us Romans 15 18. 1 Cor. 11.23.
.

Of this mystical, and divine Institution, there are two parts. Christ's Deeds,
and his Words: by the one whereof, he limited, and left an example of
Administration; by the other, a doctrine of Institution.

Of Christ's Deeds, whereby the manner of the lawful public office, or
administration is declared, there are three parts, according as, concerning
both signs, which Christ receyved, he orderly used, holy and ceremonial
actions Mat. 26.26. Mat. 14.22. Luc. 22.19 1. Cor. 11 24.
.

The first is: (Blessing, and Thankesgiving:) for the Scripture uses those two
words, the one Matthew, and Mark uses; the other, Luke, and Paul, both
signifying the one, and self same thing: to wit, how Christ, by prayers to
God, by thanksgiving, and all that holy action, prepared, appointed, and
sanctified the Bread, and Wine, to a holy use, that they might be a Sacrament
of his Body, and Blood; not by their own nature, but by divine Institution:
and this is that true Consecration, or Sanctification of the Sacrament, whereof
mention is made among the Fathers,

The Second, is The breaking of the Bread, and the pouring of the wine into the
Cup, which Christ used, not only for the cause of dividing, and distributing
thereof, but for the representing of his death; for it is an Essential, and
Sacramental Ceremony of the Lords Supper, pertaining to the end, and form
thereof Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22. Luc. 22.19 1. Cor. 11.24.
.

The third, is the offering, and distributing of the Bread broken, and the Wine
powered in. For, Christ gave not the same to his Disciples, that they should
distribute, but that they should receive that, which was distributed Mat.
26.26.27. Mar. 14.22. Luc. 22.56
: because, they were in that Supper, not the dispensers of Gods Mysteries, but
the Guestes. But Christ, as being the Feast-maker, with one labor instituted,
and with his own hands dispensed the Sacrament of his Grace, and withal
sanctified the Ministerial dispensation thereof.

And all these Actions are Sacramental, and ought diligently to be considered,
as far forth, as they are used, for the signifying, and sealing of Spiritual
things, by divine Institution.

To these Actions, (that we may come to the second part of the Institution,)
Christ added Words; whereof some include a Commandment, some a Promise; and
lastly, some an Explication: These in Schools have usually been termed
Preceptiue, the other Definitive, and Sacramental: Lastly, these Expositiue.

The Words Preceptiue, are those, by which he has enjoined, both upon the
dispensers, a necessity of their administration, and upon the communicants, a
necessity of taking; and has prescribed unto, both a form of both:
Administration, by his deed, whereof we have above spoken, and by his
commandment of Imitation, joined thereunto Mat. 2, 6 26. 1. Cor. 11.24.
. Of Communicating, by a double Precept; by the one, To take; by the other, To
eat, and to drink.

The Taking, is a Sacramental Rite, prescribed to him, that comes to the
Lords Table, whereby we receive with our hand the Bread, and Cup of
Thanksgiving: (for it cannot be gathered, either from the Story of the
Institution of the Lords Supper, o^ from the fashion of Christ's sitting down,
and his Apostles, that Christ in the first Supper, did put those signs into
the mouth of every of the Apostles) by which taking, the spiritual sealing
within us, both of Christ himself, and of his benefits, by the Instrument of
faith, is declared.

The Eating, and Drinking, is an outward, and sacramental use, and taking of
the signs, according to Christ's Prescription, whereby the inward, and
spiritual eating, and drinking of his body, and blood is sealed by divine
ordinance: for as first, there are two persons administering the Supper; the one
of the Pastor doing that, which is done outwardly, and openly; the other of
Christ, effecting by his Spirit, that which is done inwardly; Secondly, as the
whole Action of the Lords Supper consists in two things, the one an earthly,
bodily, and perceyuable for the senses; the other, heavenly, spiritual, and
intelligible, for the understanding of the faithful. Thirdly, as there are two
parts of man; the one, the body, the other, the soul; so there are two
givings, and eatings; the one outward, which is called Sacramental; the other
inward, which is termed Spiritual: yet, that was instituted of Christ, that
it might be a certain express shape, (or Image) of this.

The words Definitive, and Sacramental, are those which declare the inward
matter, or thing signified, and utter the same, whether it be of the bread, or
of the cup, sacramentally, of the bread, as This is my body, which for you is
delivered, and broken Luc. 22.19.
: but of the cup: This is my blood, which is shed for many Mat. 26.28.
.

Both expositions are wont two ways to be considered, either in each words
apart, and by themselves considered, or in the whole exposition together.

Being considered apart, they note either the Subject, or the Attributes, or
the Copula.

The Subject, is the Pronoune demonstratiue, (this) not adjectiuely, but
substantiuely taken: for it does not signify Individuum vagum.
any singular thing: but the very bread, which Christ Took, Brake, and Gave
to his Disciples, and the Wine, which he held in his hands, according as the
order of the Text Mat. 26 26.27.
, the interpretation of Paul 1 Cor. 11.24.25.
, and the Analogy of Faith do demonstrate.

The Attribute in the first proposition, is the Body of Christ, not the
mystical, which is the church, but the proper, and the true, which for us is
given, and broken, and that as it was such a body; In the second, is the blood
of Christ, which for us is shed, and even that, as it was such a blood,
according as the other member of these Attributes, which is pronounced by an
Enallage of the present tense, for the future Tense, does most evidently prove.

The Copula, whereby the Attribute is knit with the Subject, is the Verb
Substantive (IS,) which ought not, nor may be taken Substantially; whereas, by
no means at all, the unlike cannot properly, and Essentially be affirmed of
his unlike: but figuratively for a mystical and Sacramental Being, whereby
the thing, which signifies, takes the name of that thing, which it
signifies, because of the Analogy of the one with the other: for by that little
word, Christ taught not what the bread and wine, were by nature, or substance;
but what they were by signification, office, and use: for, by nature they are
bread, and wine; by signification, they are the body, and blood of Christ.

The whole Attribution, or Predication is not proper, or regular, whereas
neither the proposition is Identicall; nor the body of Christ can properly be
affirmed of the bread: to wit, whereas the Body of Christ is, neither the
General, nor the Special, nor the difference, nor the property, nor the
accident of bread, but it is Figurative, and Sacramental.

Figurative, not simply Metaphorical, and Allegorical, but Metonymycall; to
wit, such, whereby the name of the thing signified, is given to the Sign,
which Metonymycall speaking is very familiar in the Scriptures.

Sacramental, because the exhibiting of the thing signified, is withal
promised: and yet, there is no swerving from the word spoken or pronounced,
whereas we retain the word spoken, being Sacramental, which is altogether
different from regular Predications, and to be expounded with an
interpretation, aunswerable to the nature of Sacraments.

The Expositiue words are these, by which Christ expounded, (or laid open)
the end of this holy action; to wit 1. Cor. 11 16.
, the remembrance of his death, which is not a naked, or idle remembrance of a
thing past, but an effectual and healthful apprehension of Christ's merits,
and an explication of the same privately with our selves, (or properly unto our
selves,) and withal a solemn Eucharisticall Thanksgiving, in the use of this
Sacrament, for so great a benefit: and this is the manner of the Efficient
Cause being principal, or that, which instituteth the Supper, and of the
Institution it self.

The Cause Efficient Administering, or Isntrumental, are the Ministers of the
Church, called by lawful ordination; by whom God, as by active instruments,
offers, and represents us, those things outwardly by the signs of bread
and wine, which by the inward operation of the holy Ghost, he effects in us.

Of these Instruments, if you respect the Office; it is to administer the Lords
Supper, with those rites of dispensing them, in the very which, Christ went
before by his own example; If the Quality, so they lawfully execute their
office in the preaching of the Word, and the administration of the Sacraments,
it nothing adds to, or detracteth from the efficacy of a Sacrament: since the
authority of Sacraments, if they be considered in themselves, depends not
upon the quality of the Minister, but upon the Institution, verity, and power
of Christ.

The Matter of the Lords Supper is two ways usually considered, either as
that, which partaketh the Supper, or as that, which constituteth the Supper,
whereof, the one has the manner of the Subject, the other of the parts.

The Matter, or Subject, partaking the Supper, are all they, who, being by
Baptism made the members of the Church, and now, being of years, profess
sound doctrine, and have the testimony of a holy life 1. Cor. 11.20. and 12.13.
.

From the circumscription of this Subject, are excluded first, the dead, or
they that are departed this life; from whom, both the power of using the
Sacrament is taken away, and unto whom all the use thereof is in vain, and
ineffectuall; as also the use of the preaching of the Gospel, whereof the
Sacraments are appendents. Secondly, the Sick like to die: for Christ would
have this communion not to be private, and domestical, but ecclesiastical,
and public: neither does the want, but the contempt of the same hurt the
party that does not communicate, though peradventure there be another respect
to be had concerning them that have slipped, and that are Excommunicated out
of the church, and concerning prisoners, who are to be punished, and are now
penitent.

Thirdly, Children and Infants; for, to speak properly, the Supper is meat,
for the stronger, and the further grown in years, and not for Infants: neither
can they yield a reason of their Faith, nor examine themselves; which, not
withstanding, how needful it is, the Form, and End of the Lords
institution, as also Tradition do prove with great likely hood. Fourthly they,
who for heresy, or for their dissolute life, are lawfully excommunicated: for
this Supper requires worthy guests, which live to Christ in Spirit, and Faith.
Whence it was, that the persons, who were excommunicated, or did Penance, after
the Sermon ended, were in former time, commanded to go forth.

The Matter constituting the holy Supper, is twofold; the one Earthly,
Outward, Elementall, Visible; the other Heavenly, Inward, and Spiritual;
whereof, that is commonly called the Sign; this the thing signified.

By the name of Sign, all that is understood, whatsoever is perceyved by the
outward senses, in the pure and lawful administration of the Lords Supper:
whether it be the Element, or the bodily substance, or the action, or rite,
agreeable to Gods institution.

The Elementall Signs, (for of the Rites we have spoken in the explication of
the Efficient Cause) are two, the Bread, and Wine: which two, albeit materially
they are distinguished, yet formally, and perfectly, (as the Schoolmen speak)
they make but one Sacrament: now they so make it, that neither more, nor fewer
be required, for the entirenesse, and perfection of this Sacrament. Not more,
because all refreshing, (or feeding) is by them performed, and ours in Christ,
is perfectly noted forth. Not Fewer, because, if the one fail (or be wanting)
the Sacrament of perfect refection is taken away.

And in this defect, Offense is committed in the maiming of the Elements, or in
the communion under one kind only; against the Lords Institution, the
Apostles Tradition, The End and Dignity of the Sacrament: and lastly, against
the Orthodoxall consent of the elder Church.

Christ's Institution: because, if you respect either the action of Christ, and
of the Apostles in the first Supper, both were given, and both were receyved:
or the words: First, Preceptiue, of both they include a commandment: Take,
and Drink. Secondly, Definitive, they are pronounced of both, the Bread, and
the Wine: This is my body, and this is my blood. Thirdly; Expositiue, In both
they propose a promise Mat. 26.28. Mar. 14 24. Luc. 22.20
.

Apostolical Tradition: because the Apostle by the authority of the Lord,
injoyneth upon the whole Church of Corinth, a necessity both of eating the
bread, and drinking the wine. Which 1 Cor. ^ 11.25.26.
Tradition, that it was proposed not to one age, but to all ages to be
observed; The consequence of the Text does easily prove q.

The End and Dignity of the Sacrament: because the end is to seal the perfect
refreshing of us in Christ, which by the cutting off of the other Sign, is
made imperfect: but the dignity is to set forth the grace of that covenant,
after a more evident manner, then in the old Testament, it was set forth unto
those, who did all alike partake of the Paschall Lamb, and of the water out of
the rock, as the Story, and Paul's eplication teaches 1. Cor. 10.1, 2
.

The Orthodoxall consent of the elder Church: because all that ancient and
purer Church judged, that the communication of both kinds, did not pertain to
the Clergy only, but to the Laiety as well. It knew nothing of Concomitancy,
which, from the bad costome of the Eucharist dipped in the Wine, spru^g forth
above a thousand, two hundred, and twenty years after: and afterward was
confirmed in the Councels of Constance, Basil, and Trent.

Now by the name of Bread and Wine we specially, and properly understand those
Elements, which by those words are wont amongst us to be noted and pointed
out. To wit, being Pure, and Common; Pure, that they be not mingled, or
confounded together, either by dipping of the bread in the wine, or by adding
the same together with the Wine. Common or Vulgar, that they be such, as are
in common use; to wit, lest by the matter, color, and taste of those signs,
any superstition should be bredde in the heart, or mind.

The Thing signified, or the matter inward, and spiritual in the Supper of the
Lord, the nearest and principal, is the body and blood of the Lord: That, as
it was crucified, or broken: This, as being powered out. Then, the Secondary is
the most strait copling of Christ with us by faith, by the mean whereof, we
are made partakers of Christ's own person, and all his benefits.

The First, or Principal (in the Supper) is the Body and Blood of the Lord
both as touching the Substance, and as touching the singular Attributes of the
Substance.

As touching the Substance: because we a^e made partakers of the true, and
Essential body and blood of Christ, though, after a spiritual manner of
receyving 1. Cor. 10 26.
for albeit the Supper be an eating of the body, yet it is not bodily, but
spiritual: not in respect of Essence, but in the manner of communicating, and
the spiritual efficacy of nourishing: for the Spirit of man, by faith alone,
receyveth the body and blood of Christ, and with them really, (for even
spiritual actions have also their reallity,) is nourished to a spiritual
life, by the effectual working of the holy Ghost.

Neither do we exclude whole Christ from the Supper Gal. 3.27 Romans 6.3
, since by the denomination of his body and blood, the whole humanity of Christ,
nay, his whole person is synechdochicaly understood; because neither the
humanity without the Divivity, not the Divinity without the humanity, nor both
without their common Subject, can be a mediatrix. The reason of which
Synecdoche is, that albeit he be the one, and the same, who suffered for us,
even Christ, God, and man; yet suffered he not in the very Divinity, but in the
Flesh: for therefore, as said Augustine, was Christ borne, that being man, he
might deliver men, and being mortal, he might deliver mortal, and dead men
from death.

The Particular Attributes of this Substance, are the crucifying of his body,
and the pouring out of his blood 1 Cor. 11.14. Luc 22.19.20
, and the fruit of the merit of Christ's Sacrifice conjoined with these; to
wit, Remission of sins, Sanctification, and Redemption: whence it is, that in
the Scripture, the whole obedience of Christ, and all the benefits thence
proceeding, have usually been signified by one word, Death 1. Ioh. 1.7. 1. Pet.
1 19. Mat. ^0 28.
.

The Secondary thing signified in the Supper, is the most strait uniting, and
conjoyning of us all into one mystical body; both with Christ, and among our
selves 1. Cor. 10.16.17.12.13.
: for as we are tied among our selves by the holy band of the same faith, and
brotherly love, as the members of the same body: so, by the true eating of
Christ's body, we are most straitely conjoined with him; and from him, as from
the head, life issues unto us, as unto his members Ioh. 6.5.7.
.

By the mean of this union, it comes to pass, that we be made partakers
both of the benefits of Christ, and of his Substance. Of his Benefits, as well
those, which are conferred upon us by Imputation alone, as by real efficacy:
of his Substance, because, all the benefits, and that quickening power, which
sustaineth our souls unto life eternal, cannot be plucked asunder from the
body and blood of Christ, to which it inhereth, and so from Christ himself; no
more then the Effect can from his cause, which contains it, or the quality
from the Subject, from which it issues.

The Form of the Lords Supper, which is inward, and proper, is the joining
together of the Signs, and the thing signified; not natural, either by a
substantial touching, and knittting together, or by the union of the Accident,
and Subjects: not local, by a neerenes or being in, of one thing in the
other; but Relative and Sacramental: wholly consisting in this, that the same
being declared according to Gods ordinance, by the Sacramental word, the
Signs, and the thing signified, be one certain thing, not in number, not in
special, not in general, but by an Analogy, and a reciprocal relation
between themselves,

This conjoyning of the Relation does chiefly consist in three things: in the
signification, the sealing, and presenting of the thing signified, and sealed.

In Signification, because of the Analogy, or similitude of the properties, and
effects of the sign, and the thing signified both in the very Substances, and
in the singular attributes of the Substance.

In the Substances: because they have ^ great affinity between themselves: for
that, as the bread, and wine are the most fit, and chiefest Instrument of
carnal nourishment; so are also the body and blood of Christ, the only and
alone food of the hungry souls: whereupon it is largely declared by S. ^ohn,
that the Flesh of Christ is meat ^ndeed, and that the blood of Christ is
^tinke indeed, which, whosoever shall ^ate, and drink, he should never ^unger,
nor thirst Ioh. 6.31.32
: and it is most usual in the Scriptures, that the names ^f the Signs, and of
the thing signified ^re diversely changed, by a kind of Sa^ramentall speaking
Exodus 12 11. 1. Cor. 5.7
.

In the singular Attributes of the ^ubstance; because both the breaking ^f the
bread, and the pouring of the ^ine into the cup, do mystically lay, and
represent unto us, before our eyes, ^he truth, power, and efficacy of the
^illing of Christ's body, and the shedding of his blood, by which, to wit, he
faithful behold, with the eyes of their mind, Christ himself, as it were
beaten, and broken upon the Cross, with exceeding great torments, and as
though dropping clutters of blood 1. Cor. 11 14. Esa 53.3
,

In Sealing: because the Bread, and Wine both are, and are to be cal^d the
seals, or stampes of his body and blood; both, for that they confirm the
truth of the Similitude between the sign, and the thing signified; and also,
because they do most certainly seal the efficacy of the union, and
conjunction of both together in the lawful use, for, we do not simply, and
properly consider the Sign, and the thing signified, as they are things
material, and substantial, but as mystical things Entia rat. onis.
, and things that have their being of the manner, not natural, but of divine
ordination: seeing that Faith considering the Signs, not in their own nature,
but in the sacramental word of Institution, uses them, for the sealing of the
partaking, and fruition of the thing signified.

In the Presenting, or offering: because, that in very deed is offered, which
by the Sign is figured: for the Sacramental signs are exhibitiue, for that
by them Christ yields, Ioh. 6.35.
and exhibiteth himself, the heavenly bread, unto our souls. Wherefore in the
Supper of the Lord, things very different, earthly, and heavenly, are proposed,
and delivered, together in time, though not together in place. There is then no
essential changing of the signs in this conjunction, as if they should either
by a dissolution be resolved into their first matter, or even into nothing; or
if, by a simple, or absolute change, or according to substance, they should be
converted into the substance of the true body, and true blood of Christ; (for
the substance and nature of the signs being removed, or taken away, the
affinity, relation, and Analogy of them, to the thing signified, should
perish:) but it is wholly Sacramental, that is, a change of the quality, or
condition, of the use, and end of the Elements.

The end of the Lords Supper, is two-folde: Primary, and Secondary.

The Primary is, that we in the lawful use of the Signs, celebrating the
memory of Christ's death, may be confirmed, both concerning our communion with
him, and our nourishment in him Ioh. 6.57 1. Cor. 5.8 1. Cor. 10.17.
, unto life eternal.

The Secondary, that it might be a toke^ of our resurrection, and testimony of
our thankfulness; a pledge of our mutual love; lastly, a public note, (or
mark) of difference, and profession.

This resolution of the Definition, by causes, three additions, or Corollaryes,
do follow: one of the Presence, the other of the Communication, the third of
Adoration of the Lords body, and blood.

For the Presence of Christ in the Supper, it is needful that it be
distinguished, and considered two ways; First, according to the verity
thereof, Then, according to the manner of the verity thereof.

The Verity of Christ's presence in the Supper, in that the Supper of the Lord
is considered not as an earthly actio^ only, but as a heavenly, is that,
whereby in his Body, and blood, he is believed to be truly, and really
present in the Supper, and that both in respect of the signs, and in respect
of the Communicants.

Of the Signs: because the body, and blood of Christ are truly present
together with the bread and wine, the sacramental signs; not in respect of
co-existence, and place, but in a Sacramental manner, in respect whereof, this
presence in the Schools, is commonly termed Relative.

Of the Communicants: because Christ is in very deed present, in the hearts of
them that believe, even altogether with the same, and such a presence, as the
communion of his body, is exhibited unto them in the Supper Mat. 18.20.
: and this presence is Real: yet neither presence is corporal: for by faith
(as Ambrose says,) Christ is touched, not by body.

Of this Verity there are two grounds; The Divine Promise, and the Sacramental
Union.

The Promise; for since Christ, in the instituting of his Supper, has promised
the eating of his body, and blood; and therefore also his Presence, we must
verily believe, that Christ accomplisheth, and performs what he has
promised Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22. 1. Cor. 19.23.
.

The Sacramental Union: for the Essential Form of the Sacraments, and i
that, which makes Consistence, requires, that in the Supper, the thing
signified be no less certainly conferred, then the very present signs are
offered.

The manner of this Verity is not corporal, natural, or Local, either by a
conversion of the whole Substance of the bread and Wine into the Lords body,
and blood, or by Impanationem.
a passing into the bread, or by local inclusion; or lastly ^nex stent^am.
Indistantia^
, by a being in, or closeness; but it is Sacramental, and Spiritual, which
Gods will, and authority declared by the word of Institution, effects:
Sacramental, because, according to the nature of Sacraments, it consists in
a disposition, and relation, by which Christ, together with the sign,
exhibiteth the thing signified to the Communicants, and sanctifyeth the bread
and wine, that they may be the signs of the thing signified, being conjoined
together by a Sacramental union.

Spiritual; because the body, and blood of Christ, being not simply, and as
they are in themselves, things subsisting, but Intellectually, and
understandingly to be considered, are proposed in these mysteries, and are
offered to the mind, not to the body, to Faith, not to the senses; being also
with the mind, and with faith alone to be taken and receyved.

Of this manner, there are three grounds; The Institution, the Verity, and
Manner of Christ's body, and the Nature of the Sacraments.

The Institution: for Christ instituted the Sacrament of our communion with his
body and blood, whereof we are spiritually partakers by Faith: for after no
other manner can it be believed, that the present body of Christ is exhibited
in the Supper; but as it is truly receyved, as the spiritual meat of the
soul unto life.

The manner and verity of his body: for seeing the body of Christ being
coessentiall with ours, is circumscriptiuely in Heaven, wheresoever he will,
and cannot be in earth by a manner invisible, incircumscribed, infinite
indefinite; al and every of which manners, overthrow the verity of a body; we
must altogether confess, that Christ, being bodily in heaven, is
nevertheless, after a Sacramental manner in body present in the Supper Heb.
2.17. Luc. 24.29.
.

The Nature of the Sacraments: for Faith should cease in the Sacraments, if the
very thing, which is believed, were otherwise present, then after a
sacramental manner 1 Cor. 11.17.
; neither, indeed does the omnipotency of God, or a miracle invert, or evert
this sacramental manner of presence. Not Gods Omnipotency: because, when there
is speech made of that effectual, and actual power of God, the will of God
revealed in the word, must needs go before. To which (will), if any thing be
contrary, it is from it necessarily excluded, as that also, which is by nature
contradictory: not a Miracle; because neither miracles which are indeed above
nature, should be said to be against nature, taking away, and withal leaving
a substance, or natural quality: nor is it probable, that a thing which is
extraordinary, is done in an ordinary Sacrament of the Church.

And these things have we spoken concerning the Presence of Christ's body and
blood in the Supper: Now are we to see, concerning the Communicating, and the
eating.

It is needful, that both the ground and the manner of the Communicating of
Christ's body, be considered and discerned.

The Ground is the union in the Supper, and the same twofold: the one, of the
body and blood of Christ, with the bread and wine, which is called
Sacramental, and pertains to the Form of the Sacrament: the other, of the
same body and blood of Christ, with the believers, pertaining to the end of the
Sacrament.

The Former consists in 2. things in the conjoyning of the Sign, and the
thing signified, whereof we have spoken, and in the joint receyving of both,
in the lawful use, because in the use instituted, they are receyved Simul,
licet non similiter.
together, though not alike: both conjunctions are not natural, nor corporal,
nor yet simply obligatory (or binding) but Sacramental, whereby the thing
signified is conjoined to the Sign, and the matter of the Sacrament, to the
Sacrament: and are jointly perceyved in the true and lawful use thereof.

The Latter is our Essential, Real, and spiritual communion with Christ Ephesians.
3.16.17. and 5.29.30. 1. Cor. 6.15.17. 1. Ioh. 3.24.
. Essential, if the things, which are united be respected: Real, if the truth
of the Union: Spiritual, if the manner, whereby the union is made, be
considered. The things, which are united, are Christ, and his Church; the
Verity thereof, the name of Union confirms, and diverse similitudes in
Scriptures do shadow forth: the Manner is not simply Intellectual, or
vulgarly, Supernatural; but plainly Spiritual, Divine and Heavenly, whereof
the (question) that it is, is manifested unto us by the word of God, both
simple, and Sacramental: but the question, how it is, is so mystical and
secret, that even an Angel cannot comprehend the mystery thereof Ep. 5.30.32.
.

From this twofold union, a twofold manner of Communicating also arises.

The one is Sacramental, or External, of the Signs, which is made by the
taking of the bread and wine, as according to the Institution and ordinance of
Christ, they are the holy signs of his body and blood 1. Cor. 11 26.
: For as the bread and the cup of the Lord is corporally eaten and drunk; so
is the same eaten and drunk Sacramentally, whereof the bread and the cup are
a Sacrament, even after that manner, as the Sacrament of his body is called his
Body, and the Sacrament of his blood, is called his Blood, by a Sacramental
manner of speaking. And this manner of eating is Temporal, and may be iterated.

The other is Spiritual, and mystical; to wit, the very receyving of
Christ's body, and blood in verity, by the Spirit, by which Christ is
spiritually applied unto us, that we being made one with him, might by his
spirit be quickened to life eternal Ioh. 6.46 48.
, and so this spiritual communicating, does not only signify Faith, but also
application, which is made by faith, and our communion with Christ, whereupon,
sometimes it is called faith in Christ, sometime the communion of Christ's
benefits, and sometimes our ingraffing, and incorporating into Christ. Now it
is called Spiritual, partly, because it is effected by the work of the holy
Spirit 1. Cor. 12.13.
: Partly, because it is by faith only received, and partly also, because it
pertayneth to the Spiritual life. And this manner of communicating is daily,
continual, incessant. From both we exclude the corporal, and or all
communicating of Christ's body and blood in the Supper. From the First, because
the sign is receyved with the mouth, and not the thing signified: From the
Second, because a spiritual thing cannot be receyved, bur Spiritually.

The Adoration, or Bread-worshipping remains, which by a false supposition
both of the presence, and of the communicating of Christ's body and blood,
superstition has devised. For, albeit all the godly do worthily confess,
that this Sacrament is to be handled with great Religion, and Reverence; which
Reverence the Fathers sometimes called by the name of Adoration, and Christ
himself is to be worshipped in the mysteries, both as he is God, and as he
is God and man; yet we must not stay in the very signs, neither are the eyes
of faith to be lifted up to the place of the bread, but unto heaven Col. 3.1.
.

That this popish Adoration is Idolatrous both in it self, and in the Adiunct
Ceremonies, we prove diverse ways.

In it self: by three Arguments drawn from the cause, from the manner, and
from the kinds of Adoration: for seeing the cause of the Adoration of Christ,
is proper in his Godhead: for nothing is properly to be adored, but that
which is God: the worshipping either of (...), or (...); cannot be translated
to the outward signs themselves without manifest sacrilege: then, seeing the
manner of Christ's adoration requires, that neither the person be divided, nor
the natures equalled, or the difference of them taken away; the bread cannot at
all be worshipped, or the body in the bread; but either the nature, and the
properties thereof should be confounded, while the presence of Christ's body is
judged to be in the bread; or that which is not fit for a humane nature, but
in regard of the person, should Idolatrously, be attributed not only unto him
simply, and as touching himself, but also unto his Sacrament, Lastly, seeing
there are two kinds of Adoration, Praying, and Thanksgiving; neither of them
can be applied to the bread, neither properly, nor Sacramentally, whereas both
belong to Christ, as being God and man.

In the Ceremonies, it is idolatrous, whether you respect the reserving of
Relics, the enclosing, or carrying about, or the Elevation of the Eucharist:
for, albeit there were certain beginnings of these ceremonies in the ancient
church; yet seeing they were prescribed neither by Christ, nor his Apostles, or
observed in the most ancient and purest church; they were for the good cause
taken away in the churches of the Gospel.

OF THE LORDS Supper. The Part Confuting.
Distinctions in Defense of the Interpretation, and signification of the NAME.
I.
THe Supper of the Lord signifies, either the sign, or the action: that is,
either it is taken Relatiuely, or Absolutely. Being Relatiuely, it signifies
the Symboles or Signs of Gods grace: Absolutely taken, (...) signifies the
whole Action com^^sed of the visible and corporal (...) ^ing of the Signs,
and of the invisible, and Spiritual receiving of Christ, and his benefits.

II.
THe Lords Supper is considered, either abstractly, as touching it self, or
applyedly in the lawful use: this way, it is properly called a Sacrament, that
way, it is not, but abusiuely, and improperly.

III.
THere are four forms of speaking, concerning the Supper of the Lord; the
sense whereof, and manner of understanding (them) is the same: the First is,
wherein the Name of the thing signified is laid on the Sign; as the Supper is
the New Testament. The 2. wherein the thing signified of the Supper, in respect
of the effect, and efficacy thereof, is given to the Sign, as the Supper
makes us partakers of the new Testament. Thirdly, wherein the offices of the
signs are expounded in their proper signification, as the Supper is the sign
of the Covenant. The fourth, when, in the lawful use of the Supper, the
Sacrament is conjoined with the promise of grace, as he, which receives the
bread and wine worthily, shall eat the body, and drink the blood of Christ.

Distinctions in Defense of the Efficient Cause principal; and First for the
Subject of Predication, against Bellar. Lib. 1. De Sacra. Euchar. Cap. 10.
I.
THe Pronounes demonstratiue, and Relative, as well with the Greeks, as
Latins, do not always according to rule, agree with the substantive
following, but sometimes also, with that, which goes before; and contrariwise
not always with that which goes before, but with that also which follows.
Moreover, the thing, which is only a note in the universal, and not in the
particular, according as bread was in the Supper, is most usually uttered by a
Nowne universal of the Neuter gender.

II.
THose things which are to be understood Tropically, according to the nature
of a sacrament, ought not, or may not be properly, and simply taken. Now there
is a double Trope in the proposition touching the cup: for by a Synechdoche,
the cup is put for the wine in the cup; and by a Sacramental Metonymy, the
Effect of the thing signified, is given to the Sign.

In Defense of the whole Predication, to Cap. 9.
I.
THe Style of Scripture, does most manifestly prove, that the Sacraments of the
old, and new Testament, as also Testaments, compacts, and covenants, are found
to have been instituted in Figurative words, and the precepts to have been
uttered Figuratively.

II.
AN Argument drawn from a Figurative speaking, to the obscurenesse of the
same, is inconsequent: for it follows not, that if it be Figurative,
therefore it is not perspicuous; or on the contrary, if it be perspicuous,
that, therefore, it is not Figurative.

III.
THe Testimonies of the Fathers are Sacramentally to be taken, that is, to be
expounded according to the manner, and Trope, which is agreeable to Sacraments:
Whence it is, that they all have judged, that Christ's words are to be
expounded, not according to the Word spoken, but according to his meaning.

IIII.
THe appellation of the Word spoken, or the sense of the words is taken,
sometimes in a larger, and sometimes in a straiter signification: in a
strayter, in regular Predications; in a larger in those, which are Figurative:
Wherefore, in the very words, of the Supper, we retain the very word spoken,
but sacramental; wherein, not so much the letter, and the sound of the words,
as the sure (and certain) meaning thereof is to be followed, to wit, that,
which may agree with the nature of a Sacrament.

Of the Words of Consecration against Bellarmine: Lib. 4. Cap. 13.
I.
THe words of the Institution of the Lords Supper, are of two parts: some are
the words of the Evangelists, and some of Christ himself: those are not only
recited as a history, but do admonish, as well the Ministers, as the
Communicants, what Christ did, and what he commanded likewise to be done of
both: These serve for consecration; yet so, that neither the rest, ought to be
omitted, nor consecration be circumscribed with four, or five words only;
or lastly, Prayers, and Thanksgivings be excluded; seeing, as well the former,
as the latter words of the Institution do finish the consecration, and the
Substance of Bread and Wine is not changed by a certain hidden virtue of those
few words; but on the contrary, the consecration, which is made in the
Eucharist, is called in the Scriptures, a hallowing with thankesgiving.

II.
THere was a double respect of the Apostles in that first Supper, one of
Pastors, and dispensers of Gods mysteries; but the other of the church, or the
universal company of the faithful, which they represented: in the first
respect, the commandment to Do, ought to be referred to all that, which
Christ did, concerning the bread and wine: in the second, to all that, which
the Communicants ought to do in the lawful use of the Lords Supper: but by
neither of both ways is that Popish consecration proved.

III.
Our Consecration, and Christ's, differ not in Substance, but in degree: for
that which is Christ's, is nothing else but an appointing, or dedicating of the
bread and wine, to the holy, and divine uses made by the word of Institution,
according to his Free will; but that which is ours, does all and wholly depend
upon the verity, power, and ordinance of God, not upon the secret recital, and
muttering of words.

IIII.
THe will of Christ consecrating, is not to be separated from the Sacramental
manner, and Rite of consecration: because as the one is the cause Efficient of
the consecration; so the other also, is the material, and formal cause
thereof. If you respect the Efficient; Christ consecrated it with his will
alone; if the material, and formal; he consecrated it with the solemn word
of Institution, and with those Rites of dispensing, which he himself used and
commanded us to use.

V.
TO do this, in the Institution of the Supper, is not to consecrate the
outward signs or symboles, but to do all that which Christ commanded his
Disciples to do: Neither did Christ utter these words (This is my Body,) to
the end he might consecrate the signs, for he uttered them after the
blessing, and breaking of bread, but that he might declare unto his Disciples,
the manner (or nature) of the Sacrament.

VI.
THere is no change made in a Sacrament by virtue of the words, but of the
divine Institution, and ordinance. And that which is made, is not made in
Substance, in quantity, or in natural qualities, but in relation only, that
is, in use, and office. Neither does either the custom of the church prove any
other thing, which used a showing and holding forth of the Eucharist, not for
adoration, but, either that they might prepare the people to the communion, or
that thereby, out of the offering of private men, a certain part being set
aside, for the peculiar use of the Sacrament, might be showed: or the costom of
the Greek Fathers, who never used this Rite of Elevating, since the beginning
unto this day.

VII.
IT is manifest, that those words, which were not spoken over the bread, or to
the bread, but to the Disciples communicating, were spoken to instruct the
people, and not to change the bread: neither do the most ancient Lyturgies
gainsay this, which join together the words of consecration with the whole
action of the Lords Supper; or do the Fathers; who (when they affirmed, that
the Eucharist is made by a mystical Prayer, by calling on the name of God, by
solemn blessing, by thanksgiving, or some certain consecration;) had no
respect to those five words alone; and that they, with them, would not have
consecrated the bread of the Sacrament by any Substantial change, their own
most evident expositions do plainly show.

In Defense of the Matter constituting the Lords Supper, and first against
Concomitancy. Bellar. Lib. 4. Cap. 21.
I.
AN Argument drawn from the hypostatical union of God, and man, and that which
is natural of the Flesh, and the Soul, to concomitancy, is of no force:
because it is one thing to treat of flesh, and blood, which are things
substantial, and entire parts of humane nature; but another thing, as they
are given unto us, for meat and drink, according to the voluntary, and
Testamentall disposition of Christ: neither is therefore the Hypostaticall
union of God and man broken, which was not broken in death, howsoever the soul
and blood were separated from the body.

II.
THe spiritual eating, (whereof only the order of the Text in the Chapter
cited shows, that mention is made) ought to be distinguished from the
Sacramental eating, whereof here the question is: neither ought that which is
spoken Synecdochically of eating in some places, be taken exclusiuely; seeing
also in other places, there is very often mention made of drinking.

III.
FRom false, ambiguous, and impertinent Principles, a false, ambiguous, and
impertinent consequence is drawn. Now the first Principle is false: for we do
not acknowledge any real, or visible presence of Christ's body and blood in the
Supper. In respect of the signs, it is wholly Sacramental; in respect of the
thing signified, merely spiritual.

IIII.
THe second Principle is ambiguous, because the body and blood of Christ are
two ways considered: one way, as they are the parts of Christ's humane
nature; all which being unable to be sundered, lives glorious: the other, as
they are represented unto us Sacramentally in this action of the Supper; to
wit, as both the body was offered unto death for us on the cross, and his
blood out of the body powered forth: for the words added to the Institution,
do plainly testify, that the body and blood of Christ, as things separated
in the sacrifice of the Cross, are offered, and exhibited unto us in the
Supper.

V.
THe third Principle is impertinent, and different from the question now in
hand: because we treat not here either of the universal presence of Christ's
Divinity, which pertayneth nothing to the special kinds: for if the adversary
understand the presence of nature, Christ shall be as well any where else, as
in the Supper, because he fills all things: if the presence of grace, he
affirms nothing that is proper to the bread, but what pertains to all the
faithful; or of the Hypostaticall union of the two natures, in respect whereof
notwithstanding, we will never affirm that the Divinity of Christ is with his
humanity by a Concomitancy, because that were a Nestorian (heresy.)

VI.
THe Fathers which are cited, either spoke Synecdochically, by the body,
understanding the whole humane nature of Christ, as Cyprian, Hillarie, Ambrose:
or of the whole person, whereof in the Supper we are made partakers, as Basil,
Hierome, Chrysostom, Origin, the Nicene Synod: or Sacramentally they uttered
that of the sign, which is proper to the thing signified, as Augustine, Cyril,
both he of Jerusalem, and that other of Alexandria.

VII
The body of Christ, under the show of bread, is Sacramentally offered unto us
in the Supper, as it was crucified, and broken, and his blood as it was shed,
(for Christ instituted the Supper for a remembrance of his death,) and yet is
not his carcass eaten, because Christ by his death purchased merit of life,
for himself and his.

VIII.
It is one thing to speak of the body, and blood of Christ, as touching
themselves, and another thing according to the manner of a Sacrament: as
touching themselves, the blood of Christ cannot be plucked from the body: that
was done once on the Cross: but as touching the nature of a Sacrament, they
ought distinctly to be considered, partly, because in the Supper, they
represent that unto us, which was once done, and partly also, because the
perfection of our refreshing in Christ, is exhibited in the eating of Christ's
flesh, and in the drinking of his blood.

IX.
MIracles are not to be drawn into use and rule, because every miracle is
unwonted, and unusual: but those which are cited, were either devised of
superstitious men; or false, and put forth to deceive the simple; or lastly,
brought forth by the help and furtherance of the Devil, according as Christ,
and Paul foretold of Antichrist,

Against the Communion under one kind only* Bellar. Lib. 4. Cap. 24.
I.
TO reason from the Signs, and Sacraments of the old Testament, which differ
in the outward adjunctes, in the circumstance of time, in the manner of
signifying, and in the quality, and number of the Signs, to the Sacraments of
the New Testament is inconsequent: neither is it needful to require both
kinds in those, which either were not capable of both, or in the lawful use
whereof, there is not extant a commaudement for both.

II.
FRom a particular, and indefinite proposition, we badly conclud exclusiuely:
for albeit in some places, there be mention made of eating; the other kind
therefore is not necessarily excluded: for there is else where mention made of
flesh and blood together, of eating and drinking the same, yea four times in
the self same chapter.

III.
THe consideration of meat, and ordinary bread, and of the mystical and
Sacramental bread, is altogether different, not as touching the natural
substance, quantity or quality, but as touching the use and office. Now there
was both in that miracle of the feeding of the people, and in the Supper at
Emaus, not a Sacrament of Grace, but a feast of nature; Neither have the
Fathers interpreted the bread, concerning the true and natural body of Christ,
but concerning the mystical, that is the church.

IIII.
SYnecdoche is that, which, by name of the part, comprehe^deth the whole, very
familiar in the Hebrew tongue, wherein, by the breaking of bread, they are wont
to signify a dinner, supper, and any feasts whatsoever; from which feasts
notwithstanding, as drink neither ought, nor can be excluded: so neither may
it from this Sacramental feast, whereof mention is made in the cited places,
whence it is also, that the same Paul, to whom this breaking is attributed,
expounding the Lords institution, teaches, that this Supper consists of
bread, and of the cup.

V.
IT is true that the Manichees communicated under the one kind of bread only:
for they thought, that the wine was the gall of a Dragon: but that the ancient
Church did not therefore reprehend them, it is most false: even those very men
do prove the contrary, whom the adversary would have to stand on his side, to
wit, Leo the Bishop, and Gelasius the Pope: the former whereof, called this
mangling, a sacrilegious counterfeiting, and the latter, a great Sacrilege.

VI.
THe Consequence is of no force, which is from examples, whereof the former is
of doubtful credit, as of which Chrysostom himself makes no mention; and
because of the cunning and craft of a womanish wit, ridiculous: but the latter
of a false and contrary credit, as being that, which by most certain proof,
evidently shows that the communion was usually, and necessary under both
kinds.

VII.
FRom extraordinary cases of necessity, and those particular, there is no
conclusion to that, which in lawful, ordinary, and public celebrations of
the Eucharist ought to be observed Add further, that in all those rites, and
ceremonies, though not always, yet for the most part, there was use of both
kinds, according as the constitution, and custom of the Primitive church,
does most manifestly prove.

VIII.
TO reason from the authority of the Councels, and Fathers, for the
establishing of some error, is inconsequent. Add further, that in the
Primitive Church, the Communion, for a long time, was retained under both
kinds; even in the monasteries, until the thousand, three hundred year, and
the mangling (or maiming) thereof was first by a public decree brought in by
the Council of Constance, in the year 1484.

IX.
FRom discommodities (or inconveniences,) an argument concludes nothing: both
because they lean upon superstition, and because the collection is faulty,
drawn from particulars; and lastly, because they being foreseen by Christ, and
the Apostles, hindered not the Institution of the communion under both kinds.

In Defense of the Form against Transsubstantiation: Bellar. Lib. 3. Cap. 19.
FRom a bad, and insufficient Enumeration of the parts, a false conclusion is
drawn: for every change is either Essential of the very Substance, that is, of
the natural matter, and form; or Sacramental, of the office, condition, and
use of the Elements: both are true, but after their manner: that, true
Essentially, by the manner of nature: but this, Sacramentally, by the manner of
Grace. Now, whatsoever change is in the Supper, it is not essential, or
natural, but Sacramental; that is, a Consecration, appointment, and setting
apa^t of the Signs, from a common, to a holy, and mystical use.

To the Testimonies of the Fathers which by Bellarmine are cited in the 20. and
21. cap. of the third book, and the whole second Book.
I.
THose Fathers, who called the Eucharist, the body, and blood of Christ, used a
Sacramental manner of speaking: whereby it comes to pass, that the names
being changed, the sign or Symbol is called by the term of the thing it
self. Now, they used this for three causes. First, that they might declare
whereto Christ had ordained the Eucharisticall bread. Secondly, that they might
express the Analogy between the Signs, and the things signified. Thirdly,
That by the change of the names, they might teach, that there is a most true,
and indivisible conjunction of the things signified, with the signs
themselves, in the lawful use.

II.
THe Fathers, who have called the Eucharist, the precious body, the reverend
mysteries, the pledge of Salvation, our ransom, spoke Hyperbolically of the
very bread sanctified, and not of any other body present, by
transubstantiation. Now they used those Hyperbolicall Phrases for three causes.
First, that they might extol the dignity of the mystery. Secondly, least
eating, they should stick in the outward signs. Thirdly, that with a great
affection of godliness, and reverence, they might approach to that holy
Communion.

III.
THe Fathers which affirmed, that the Body of Christ is touched, seen and
chewed with the teeth, spoke Figuratively. For there is a double signification
of the Sacrament, and body of Christ to be held; for, as a Sacrament is
sometime taken Figuratively, for one part, and sometime properly for both
parties: so also is the body of Christ, sometime properly, and sometime
Figuratively for the outward sign only: and ^n this sense, by a figured, and
Metonymycall use of speech, the Fathers have affirmed, that the body of Christ
is touched, and seen, that is the sign of his body.

IIII.
THe Fathers, who spoke of the changing of the bread and wine in the Eucharist,
treated of the Sacramental change, whereof we have spoken in the first
distinction: and therefore willed and taught, that their words should be
taken Figuratively and effectiuely.

V.
THe Fathers who taught, that our bodies are cherished, nourished, and fed with
the body and blood of Christ, used a Sacramental Trope. For as Christ said.
This is my Body, when he gave but the sign of his body; so our bodies are
said to be cherished, nourished, and fed with the body and blood of Christ,
when in very deed they are nourished with those things, which are the Signs
of the body and blood of Christ.

VI.
THe Fathers, who spoke of the Adoration of Christ's flesh, treated not of that,
which was done in the mystery, but in the celebration of the mystery; for that
flesh hypostatically united to the eternal Son of God, is rightly adored of
us, as often as the Supper of the Lord is celebrated.

VII.
THe Fathers, who required of Communicants a fear, trembling, and faith, did
not put any essential change of the thing signified into the signs; but they
required a certain fear, least the signs for their vileness should be
conte^ned: but faith they required that that thing, which is not seen, might
yet be believed, and by faith receyved.

VIII.
THe Fathers, who affirmed that a miracle was wrought in the Eucharist,
understood no miraculous Tra^substantiation of the bread into the body of
Christ; but the majesty of this mystery, which they compared with the greatest
miracles, and by a Catachresis, called it a miracle; because by a wonderful,
and incomprehensible manner, God works in the hearts of the godly, as often, as
by a true faith, they celebrate this mystery.

Of the Presence of Christ in the Supper, against Bellarmine: Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
I.
FIgures are either so called oppositely, as they are opposed to the body, as
also shadows to the Image: or Relatiuely, as in general they figure, and
signify some thing else, besides that which is seen. In the first
signification, the Figures of the old Testament, are not opposed to the
sacraments of the New, but to the fulfilling of those things, which were
prefigured: in the second signification, the Figures, or Sacraments of the old
Testament, are badly opposed to the Sacraments of the New Testament, whether,
as touching their quality, or as touching their excellency. Because, albeit by
the word of Institution, they agree in the general parts, the Relation, and
the end; yet they differ in the measure, virtue, and easiness of
signification; In which respect, the Sacraments of the New Testament, are said
to be more excellent, then the Sacraments of the Old Testament.

II.
AGainst Bellarmine: cap. 5. and 6. The Sermon which treats only of the
matter of the Sacrament, and the communion thereof, and not of the Sign, as
the very sense of the place, the Interpretation of Christ, and the Analogy of
Faith, do most evidently prove, cannot prove the real presence of Christ's
body under the forms (or kinds) of the Signs: for the Spiritual eating is
to be distinguished from the Sacramental, because, that is internal, and
invisible, this external, and visible: and though it be granted, that in that
place, there is speech made of the Sacramental eating; yet the four
arguments, which are from thence drawn, cannot prove that presence. Not the
First, because the bread Synecdochically, is taken for meat, and the meat
Figuratively, for the flesh of Christ. Wherefore in the place cited, the bread
is not the Subject, but the predicate of the flesh. Not the Second, because
Christ by correcting, reproved, and by reproving, corrected the Capernaits, and
his Disciples, as verse 61.62.63. do evidently show. Not the third, because
the words of eating, and drinking, are taken Figuratively, and as the Text
declares, they are of the same force, with these manners of speaking, to
believe in Christ, and to abide in Christ. Not the Fourth, because Christ
confirms his censure before going, showing, that then they shall consider
their error, when they shall see the son of man ascending.

III.
THe Arguments which in cap. 9.10. are taken from the words of the Institution,
are above confuted in the distinctions of the Efficient cause.

IIII.
THe three arguments, which are drawn out of the 10, chapter, of the former to
the Corinthians, have no consequence; not the first, because it is a fallacy of
that which is not the cause, as the cause. For the blessing or consecration is
not the cause of the Sacramental conjunction of the thing signified with the
Sign, but the Institution only, and the divine ordinance declared, and
confirmed by the blessing. Not the Second; for the breaking, which is properly
said to be of the bread, is improperly, and Figuratively spoken of the Body.
Not the Third; because the word Communion signifies an Union, and joining
together in fellowshippe, properly of our persons with the person of Christ,
being indeed that same which is spiritual, and supernatural, if you respect
the manner; yet real, and true, if you respect the bound and object thereof.

V.
LIb. 1. cap. 13. The argument, which is taken out of the 11. chapter of the
former Epistle to the Corinthians, concludes nothing: because the apostle
treats not of the eating of his body, but of the outward receyving of the
bread and wine, which indeed with the former is conjoined in the lawful use
thereof; but in the unlawful use of them, that communicate unworthily, is
alone; and yet makes the communicant guilty of the body and blood of Christ:
because the unworthy taking, and handling of the signs redoundeth unto the
reproach of the thing signified.

VI.
THe Testimonies of the Fathers, which are alleged throughout the whole
Second Book, we have above answered.

VII.
LIb. 3. cap. 3. The profes which are alleged from the omnipotency of God,
do infer no corporal presence of Christ in the Supper. Not the First;
because the omnipotency of God excludes, both things contrary to his nature,
and things contradictory; and not to be able to do those things, is not a
point of weakness, but of infinite power, and constancy. Not the Second;
because his first apparition was heave^ly, which nothing furthereth the
presence of Christ on earth: The second, was in the night, which appeared not
to the eyes, but to the mind. Not the Third; because the Fathers treated,
either of the presence of Christ, as touching his person, as Chrysostom; or of
the Sacramental presence of his body in the Supper, as Ambrose; or of the
effect of the eating of his body, as Cyrill, and Theophilact: or lastly, they
spoke Hyperbolically, as Augustine. Not the Fourth; because, to reason from the
divine nature, to the humane, and from the one part of man, which is
spiritual, to the other, which is corporal, is even proportionally
inconsequent. Not the Fifth; because it is one thing to treat of the mysteries,
which go beyond Nature; but another thing of the miracles which overthrow
nature. Not the Sixth; because of those things, which are equally united, the
one cannot be any where else, where the other is not, or may not be; and to
attribute to Christ two bodies equally united, were a monstrous thing.

VIII.
CAp. 6. Lib. 3. The proofs which are taken from the illocality of the body,
are false. The First, because the consequence is of no validity, from a thing
possible to be, to reason that there is absolutely a being; and partly because
he which takes from bodies the spaces of places, destroys the verity of a
body. The Second; because the conclusion is of no strength, from an
Allegorical form of speaking, to the proper. The Third; 4a 5a, 6a, 7a,
because there is no consequence, from a miraculous pearcing through of
dimensions, from a singular prerogative of Christ's Nativity, which pertayneth
not to the Essence of the body, from the rolling back of the stone, done
immediately by an Angel at the time of Christ's resurrection, from the
Ascension of Christ into heaven, which w^^ done, as the Scripture speaks by
the opening and dividing of the Heaven* from the punishment of the damned, all
which destroy not the verity of a body from like miracles, which are above
nature, but not against nature, and detract not any thing from the substance of
the thing, (from these I say,) to the ^llocality of the body, (there is no
consequence.)

IX.
CAp. 8. Lib. 3 The profes, which are taken from the truth of God, do fail
many ways. The First Petit Principium
iterateth the same matter in question, for proof (or proves one doubt with
another.) The Second lays down a false position: for the truth and ancientnes
of the consent of the church, ought not to be taken from the testimony of some
certain persons, and from the times of Lanfrancus, but from the testimonies of
Scripture, and the times of the Apostles. The Third in their own cause is
suspicious: For the Authority of Popish councels, neither can, nor ought to
prejudice the truth. The Fourth, reasons in consequently from humane
authority in divine matters. The Fifth, insisteth upon the actions, and
narrations of persons, which were either fabulous, or far set digressions.
The Sixth concludes from Miracles, the truth whereof is in controversy, or the
superstition noted, or the falsehood manifest.

X.
CAp. 21. From the authority of the Romish church, and of the counsels, by the
same celebrated, nothing is concluded: because the truth is to be preferred
before all humane judgementes.

XI.
THose things which are spoken concerning congruency according to reason, (or
the manner) are worthily rejected as incongruent, and contrary to reason. The
First, indeed, concerning the absence of the Substance of Bread, because
neither the Lords body is substantially under the accidents of Bread; nor is
the flesh of Christ simply adored, as if it were under the bread; but, because
it is hypostatically united to Christ's Divinity: neither are the food of the
mind, and the food of the belly receyved with the same Instrument; but the one
is of the body and the mouth, the other of the soul, and faith: nor does
abstinence from the use of the mystical bread cause fasting, as neither does
the receyving, and use, break off fasting. But the Second, concerning the
accidents remaining: because the accidents of Bread, make not the Sacramental
Sign, but the Substance of bread: because no real, and substantial change is
made in the Supper, but only that, which is Sacramental, both bounds of
Relation nevertheles remaining; because this is alone the merit of faith to
trust to the merit of Christ: because he, which eats not flesh in the proper
form thereof, eats not flesh really.

OF THE CHVRCH.
The Part Confirming. CHAP. XIIII.
AFter that we have discerned the application of our redemption by Christ, by
the Degrees thereof, and the outward Means, which God is wont to use for the
accomplishment of the same. Now let us see, according to order, concerning the
Subject of that application, that is, concerning the Church, which Christ
redeemed with his own blood, and unto which alone, by the gracious election of
God, the use, and profession of the great, and singular benefit of Redemption
pertains.

For the Knowledge of this Subject, or Church, a two fold explication is very
necessary: the one Nominall, the other Essential: the former whereof,
Generally expounds the Equivocatio^ (or diverse signification) of the word;
the latter, the very manner (or nature) of the church in particular.

The Nature of the very word ought to be considered and expounded two ways,
Etymologically, and Logically.

Etymologically, the Church is a company called forth by public authority.

Logically, the Church is of the number of those things, which the Logicians
call, Collectiue, and gathered together, that is, such, which are not some one
thing absolutely, but contain in themselves two things, whereof the one is
like to a multitude and a matter dispersed, but the other, to an unity, order,
and gathering together.

Being both ways considered, the Church has a threefold signification: the
first most General, under which, not only the Angels are comprehended, but
also Politically every civil assembly, and Catachtestically, the false church
which is called Ecclesia malignantium, the Congregation of the wicked Psalm.
26.5. Apoc. 3.9.
, is understood: The second, is more Special, and signifies th t whole
multitude of all persons, which generally is esteemed by the outward
^allingling, and profession. The Third, is most Special, most properly
signifying, that part of men, which is knit together unto everlasting life;
which signification is usually distinguished from the ^. former, as it were, by
four properties, and attributes: that it is One, Holy, Catholic and
Apostolic.

One, in the Author* of Salvation, in ^he consent of Doctrine, in the
Subministration of the Spirit, and in the holy communion of the members Can
6.8 Ephesians. 4.4. 1. Cor. 3.11.
.

Holy, in use, office, affection, and proceeding; lastly, in effect, and
perfection in Christ: for it is sanctified for Gods use; it desires after
holiness, and is perfectly cleansed by the blood of Christ Mat. 26 28. 1. Cor.
1.2 Ephesians. 2.20.
.

Apostolical, in the Ministry, and truth of doctrine.

Lastly, Catholic, in resepct of the Places, Persons, Time, and Parts 1.
Cor. 12 13 and 4.27
.

In this place we are to treat of the Church in the second and third
signification: whereof, according to that double signification there issues a
double notio^; the one visible, in which, acording to the outward form of the
church; others also are mingled with the good (who properly are the Church,)
that pertain not to the same, but only because of the outward profession of the
christian faith and calling Mat. 18.17. Mat. 13.24 Luc. 3.14.
. The other Invisible, which according to the Essential form thereof,
comprehends the predestined, and Elect only, whose Faith cannot be
discerned with the outward eyes 2. Tim. 2 19. Romans 11.3.4.
: The Former is esteemed by the outward calling generally; the latter by the
inward calling properly, and particularly Ephesians. 3 15.
.

According to both Notions, the Church is of us to be defined both Generally,
and Distinctly.

Generally, the Church is defined to be the company of them, whom God by his
free calling does call forth to the communion of his grace and glory Mat. 11,
29.
.

Distinctly, the Church visible is defined to be a society of men called forth
by an outward calling, or communicating of the preaching of the word, and
Sacraments, to the worship of Gods Glory Mat. 18.17.
.

And the Invisible Church, the Society of men predestined, which are called
forth by an effectual, and saving calling, out of the state of corruption,
unto the dignity of being adopted the children of God, and are united unto
Christ, as to their head, not only to the service and worship, but also to
the fruition of the glory of God Luc. 1.33 Romans 11.4.
.

The Efficient Cause of both Churches is the one Primary, the other
Isntrumental, or Serviceable.

The Primary, and Principal, ought 2. ways to be expounded, according to the
constitution of the church, and according to the administration and ordering
thereof.

The Cause Efficient of the Constitution of the church, is God the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, as the beginning of all good in nature, and above
nature Rom 2.29.
.

Of this Efficient cause, or beginning, in respect of the unity of the Essence,
there is one, and a common Operation but in respect of the distinction of the
Persons, there is a distinct Manner of working.

A Common Operation, because in divine matters, the cause of working is common,
and the work it self the same.

The Cause of Working, in the constituting of the Church, is the good pleasure
of Gods will, whereby, from everlasting, thee has appointed to call forth some
of Mankind, to the communion of his Grace Ephesians. 1.5 Tit. 2.14.
. But the Work it self, is the Ephesians. 1.13.
fulfilling, (or complement) of the church, which is to be consummated with
those degrees of means, and periods of times, wherewith it pleased God. Of
which decree and work, God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, is the common
beginning; but the manner of Working is distinct. For the Father is the
Efficient cause of the Church, of the Invisible, by election, but of the
Visible by Creation. The Son is the Efficient cause of the Invisible, by
effectual Redemption; but of the visible, by the common offering of the same
Redemption, by the preaching of the Gospel: the Holy Ghost is the Efficient
cause, of the Invisible, by saving sanctification, and new creation in Christ;
but of the visible by outward calling, whereby he works more or less.

And this is the manner of the Efficient cause, in the constituting of the
Church.

Now the cause efficient, nearest, of the Administration, and ordinance thereof
is Christ, God, and man, by a voluntary disposition, and dispensation of Grace,
whereby God the Father, made and appointed Christ, the head over all, to his
Church, which is his Body Rom 12 5. 1. Cor. 3.11.12. Col. 1.18.
.

And it is so, not by order of nature, but by the divine ordinance of saving
Grace: for the Church is not said to be a Physical, and Mathematical, but a
mystical body of Christ.

Wherefore also, by the same benefit of divine Ordination, Christ ought to be
held, and esteemed the head of his body, not many heads, but one, for the
church is neither without head, nor yet having many heads.

But, as the condition of the head over the body, does chiefly consist in three
things in Order, Perfection, and Power; in Order toward the members, in
Perfection in it self, in Power toward the whole Body: so Christ also in
order, perfection, and power, performs all duties, after a most excellent
manner, which can or ought to be performed of the best head.

In Order, because he, being true man, and true God, holds the chiefty in all
things, having the supreminence, not only of dignity, but also of Regiment,
and power; whence it is, that the Scripture does very often affirm him to have
Being before all things, and to be placed above all things.

In Perfection; because Christ alone is the King, Prophet, and High Priest,
having all things in himself, from the Father, which any way may be required
for the perfection of the head.

In Power, and Efficacy; because he alone inspireth vigor, sense, motion, and
spiritual life into his members, and is alone knit fast unto the body, by the
bond of the Spirit, yielding that whole joining, and fastening together of the
members among themselves, and with God, to the whole Church.

The Cause of the Church Isntrumental, and serviceable is, Generally, the word
of God, what way soever revealed, and communicated, whether inwardly, or
outwardly, or jointly both ways Heb. 4.12. Act. 2.4^. 2. Pet. 2.23. 1. Tim.
3.15.
. Whence it is also, that the Word is in Scripture, called the seed of the
Church, and the rule, measure, and foundation of the truth, which the Church
has as it were, hanged upon a pillar, and as a sure prop vpholdeth the same.
But Specially, the Isntrumental cause of the church Invisible, is faith it
self, which since it is inward, is not, indeed, known by the judgment of
men; but yet, it marketh, (or notes out) the true and essential manner, and
form of a member of the church, as being the only Instrument of that inward,
and effectual calling of God. But of the Church visible, chiefly, and Primary,
are the Ministers of the Gospel, who, for that cause are called in the
Scripture, Builders, and Master Builders 1. Co. 3 10. Ephesians. 4.12. 1. Pet. 3.5.
; to wit, instruments used of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, for the
knitting together of the Saints, for the work of his Ministry, and for the
common edification of the Body of Christ Ephesians. 4.7 2. Cor. 4.1
.

Now both the calling of these Instruments, and their Office, according to the
Calling, must be expounded.

Their Calling I mean, whereby they are holily, and lawfully called to a holy
public function in the communion of Christ, and of his Church.

Now, they are called either of God inwardly, by the Spirit, or outwardly of
the Church (next after God) in a holy, and lawful order. The first manner, if
it be alone, makes the calling immediate, and extraordinary, which God alone
causes for the singular begetting and raising of his church; such as was that
of the Prophets, and Apostles, whom the Lord extraordinarily called, and
informed, by a singular revelation, that their authority in teaching, and
writing, might be plainly divine Luc. 21.14. Act. 13.1. Act. 21 4.
. The latter with the former makes a calling mediat, and ordinate, which God,
together with the church, causes by Order Ecclesiastical 1. Tim. 5 17.
.

Of this Order, there are two Essential parts, The Choice, and Confirmation:
the First is, whereby a holy and lawful examination is made, both of life, and
doctrine Tit. 2.7. 2 Timothy 2.24 1 Timothy 3.10.
: The other is, whereby a consecration and ordination to the Ministry, is
first made with Imposition of hands by the Clergy, the body of the Church
thereunto consenting by Sign, speech, or free si^ence Act. 6.6. ^. Tim. 4.14.
2. Tim. 1.6
. And this calling, for that it is Ordinary, is also Successiue, not by nature,
as once the posterity of Aaron, and the Levites, but by Ordinance and
Institution.

But the Office of these Instruments ^s, to administer the affairs of the
Church, according to Gods prescripti^n.

Now the affairs of the church do ^oncerne either the Doctrine, or the
^ignes, and Sacraments: or lastly, the ^cclesiasticall Jurisdiction, and
Disci^line of the Church. Wherefore the ^ffice of all Ministers is contained
(or ^ounded) in the administration of Do^trine, Sacraments, and Ecclesiastical
^overnement.

The Administration of Doctrine ^onsisteth in two parts: in the asserti^n of
the truth, and in the contrary re^^tation of falsehood; the right object of
^oth, is the word of God 2. Tim. 2 15 Tit. 1.9.
.

The Administration of Sacraments, has two considerations; one of the Persons,
to whom the Sacraments either ought, or ought not to be administered. The
other of the Manner, that they be wholly, conveniently, and intelligently
administered. Wholly, as touching the Substantial; and Conveniently, as touching
the outward quality, and form; Intelligently, as touching the common
Edification of the Church 1. Cor. 1.23. Luc. 22 19
.

The administration of Ecclesiastical Discipline, is chiefly exercised in two
things; in the punishing of faults, and in the execution of Ecclesiastical
judgments, as afterward we shall show more at large 1. Cor. 5.4. 2. Cor. 2 8
.

The Matter of the Church has respect either of the parts, or of the Subject.

The Parts of the Church, generally, and materially, are two: The one
Superior, the other Inferior; That, (...) the head of the Church, to which the
church is subject, and from which al^ virtue (...) into the Church: This, is
the body unto which, the members among themselves, and with the head are
united: for the mutual relation of these parts, the one to the other, makes
an essential manner (or nature) of the church.

But particularly, the entire parts of the church Invisible, are two, according
as there is usually had a double respect of this church: the one in the
Beginning, and progress; the other, in the Perfection thereof: that is
commonly called the Militant, this, the Triumphant: both which, as touching the
Essential nature of the church it self, are but one, albeit, for the
difference of the qualities, which are in these parts, they are, as touching
the place, very diversely distinguished; so that the one is in heaven, which
triumphs, and the other on earth, which is in warfare Heb. 12 22. Apoc. 21.2
Ephesians. 6.11.12.
: but of the church Visible, as it is so considered: there are two maine
parts, the Guides and the Flocks: the Instructers, and the Learners, though
extraordinarily it often happens, that the one part is separated from the
other; the essential form of the church it self, still remaining.

The Subject of the church Generally is Mankind Mat. 28.19. Ioh. 10.16 Romans
1.16.
: of which, partly some are called daily by the grace of God, whosoever are
ordained to life eternal; and partly others are also called, who being
convicted of the grace offered, might become for ever inexcusable. But
Particularly, the Subject of the church visible, are all those, in general,
which are called, and outwardly profess the same faith, in which common
assembly of the church, not only the godly, and elect are, but also the
ungodly and reprobate: Those, as touching the verity of the inward, and outward
form; these according to the show, and resembla^ce or counterfeiting of
godliness: Those, Elect and called; these, called only, and not elect: Those
the lively, these the dead members of the church Luc. 8.13. Mat. 22.14
: but of the church Invisible are they only, that are predestined to life,
who indeed, are inwardly affected with the calling of God, and perceive the
same by faith, according to the election, and operation of Grace Romans 8.9 Ephesians.
1.23. Ioh. 14.23
.

Neither are either the newly catechized Novices, though yet not baptized, nor
those, which are excommunicated, if they repent, excepted out of the visible
church: not those; because albeit they have not as yet receyved the outward
sign, yet, being endued with faith, and baptized with the inward Baptism,
they ought to be taken for the members of the church, according to the
perfection thereof. Neither is it lawful to exclude those from the communion
of the church, whom the Scripture does not exclude from the communion of
Salvation. Not these; because, as they were conditionally excluded, till there
be hope of repentance, so they must conditionally be of the Church. Now all
Reprobates, and those, that live wickedly without any prick of conscience, are
excluded, because, whether they seem to be inwardly of the church, or whether
they are outwardly of the church, yet they have been always separated, and
continued so from the unity of this church. For this church is the communion of
Saints, the Spouse, and body of Christ without blemish, the Temple of God, the
holy city, etc.

The Form of the church, both generally, according to it self wholly, and
specially, according to the double notion thereof, ought to be expounded, as
has been done in the causes precedent.

Generally, the Form of the church, is two ways considered: Severally, in it
self, and the Efficient cause thereof, or jointly in her Subject.

After the former manner, the Form of the church, is that divine, and precious
calling wrought in heaven, according to the purpose of Gods will, whereby he
decreede from everlasting, the communion of himself with the church, and of the
church, with himself, in his beloved Son Ephesians. 1.4.5. Ioh 10.27.48. Romans 8.30
. After the latter manner, the form of the church, is a divine and gracious
calling, whereby the church of God is in this world fashioned, and waiting,
until, after the course of her calling here consummated, it be advanced in
Christ Jesus, to the fruition of the heavenly calling.

And of this calling, as the nature, as touching it self, is most perfect; so
the manner of the same is also twofold: the one immediate, the other mediate;
that which God by himself makes through the virtue of his Spirit; this,
which he makes outwardly by speech, sign, or working ordinarily, or
extraordinarily, as it pleases him to make it known unto men.

Specially, the form of the church Invisible, is an effectual, and inward
calling, and (by virtue of that effectual calling) that communion of Saints,
both with their head, and of themselves, each with other 1. Ioh. 1.12.
. And of this calling, as the nature in respect of God is perfect; so the
inward and effectual mean thereof is twofold; the Spirit, and Faith: the
one, in respect of him, that calls; the other, in respect of him that is
called: by the one, God offers, and conferreth the effectual calling; by the
other, we take hold of that, which is offered, and make answer to Gods
calling: for it is needful, that these two concur together, that the
calling be effectual; to wit, the calling of God by the virtue, and
efficacy of his Spirit, and our correspondent affection, or relation to that
calling.

And according as one part of this Invisible church does warfare on earth; and
the other triumphantly in heaven; so the manner of the form hereof, is
diverse: for in the triumphant church, it is perfect in it own kind; but in
the Militant, it is only inchoatiuely, (or by way of beginning) tending to
perfection by more or less efficacy, acording to the measure of the spirit,
and faith. And hence it is, that in respect of this form, the state of the
Invisible church is diverse. For as it is united to Christ her head, it cannot
err, because there is but one truth of the head, the spirit, and the body;
but as it is considered according to it self, and the diverse members thereof,
it erreth in diverse ways and degrees 1. Cor. 13.9. 1. Cor. 3.12. Apoc. 3.1.
: for albeit the Spirit be always in it, yet the same works not perfectly
by it; but only according to that measure, which it has 1. Cor. 12 7.11.
: but this invisible church cannot revolt from her God, because it has God
that promises, a Mediator that redeemeth, and saves; and lastly, gifts that
cannot be repented of Mat. 16 18. Ep. 4.1.29.
.

The Form of the Church visible: the one is (Constitutiue,) which ordayneth
the Church: the other (Distinctiue,) that distinguishes the true church from
the false.

The Form which makes the visible Church, is that outward calling, which God
mediately effects, according to that holy kind of government, which he
would have to be kept in his house.

To this calling three things are as handmaids; the word of the Gospel, the
use of the Sacramenrs, and the lawful communion of Saints: for God calls
outwardly by Word, Sign, and Work, whereof we have more at large spoken in
the place concerning the calling of men unto Salvation.

The Form, that distinguishes, and makes difference of the true Visible
Church, from the false, is that, which certain marks do limit, and point out.

Now we call them Marks, by which the things, which come into question, are
certainly known, whether they be to be perceyved by sense, or by
understanding, or both ways.

And as there is wont to be of every thing a double knowledge, the one which
notes out the Essence of the same, by the true and immediate causes; the other
fette from the Accidents and affections, declaring the inseperable dispositions
of the same, or the other outward accidents, which only overcover the thing:
so also, two sorts of marks are agreeable to this double knowledge: for some
are effectual and necessary marks, which they call Signs infallible, and
other some accidental, which they term Probable: These former, are the
proper tokens of the church, which certainly show the Essence, and nature of
the same, the latter are but common, and probable signs thereof.

The proper and essential note of the visible church belonging to the Essence
thereof, immediately and properly, and next of all flowing from the form of
the same, is only one, to wit, the truth of Gods word revealed, and
communicated, whereunto the truth of the Sacraments, as a thing inseparably
tied or knit with it, is conjoined Heb. 4.12. Ioh. 10.27 Mat 28 10 Romans 4.11
; for the truth of both is so proper, and so essential a token of the church,
that this truth, and the church, are alike changed.

The accidental marks are two-folde; for some are fet from those natural
dispositions of the Church, which are inseparable, which are also the natural
dispositions of that first mark, to wit, The pure preaching of the Word, and
the lawful administration of the Sacraments Ioh. 5 39. Act. 17 11 Mat. 26.26.
1. Cor. 10 17.
, which are the two necessary, and proper Adjuncts, and Attributes of the
church: other some do properly pertain to the order in the Church; either
public, or private, Such as are Ecclesiastical power, and public, and
private exercises of godliness, and charity Mat. 3.3. and 28.20 1 Timothy 2.1.
.

The Power Ecclesiastical, is threefold; of Ministry, of Order, and of
Ecclesiastical Discipline.

The Power of the Ministry is an authority, and right in the church, to teach
not every thing, but that only, which the Lord has prescribed by his
Prophets, and Apostles Gal. 1.8. 1. Tim. 6.3.
, and is the first part of the keys.

The Power of Order, is an authority of the Church, which is employed partly
about doctrine, and partly about constitutions, and laws, for the outward
policy of the Church: the one is commonly termed Doctrinall, or Prescriptiue;
the other Constitutiue, or Ordinate.

The Ecclesiastical Discipline, is a judicial power of the Church, whereby
men receyved into the family of Christ, are directed to godliness, and are
restrained, least they should commit any thing unbeseeming their christian
profession, but the offenders are reproved, rebuked, and corrected: And this is
the latter part of the keys, distinct from the former; because that, properly
belongs to the office of teaching; but this, is most of all practiced in the
correcting of men's offenses, and in the exercising of Ecclesiastical
Judgments Mat. 16.19. Ioh. 19.23 Mat. 18.18. 1 Cor. 8.11.
.

And according as there are two sorts of slippes to be corrected, some
concerning doctrine, and some others concerning manners; so, about both these
Ecclesiastical judgment is occupied, for the private good of the offender,
and the public good of the Church.

Now there are three degrees of of that judgment: rebuking, conjoined with
admonishment: Secondly, an Excluding, suspending, or with holding from the
Lords Supper, whereby for a time the offender is forbidden, or barred from the
participation of the Supper. Thirdly, Excommunication, whereby after a lawful
knowledge had before hand, some person for his malicious contumacy, is excluded
from the communion of Saints, or as the Apostle speaks, is delivered up to
Satan, to the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit might be saved Mat.
18 18. 1. Cor 5.4 etc.
.

The public exercises of godliness, and charity, which notify the true Church
Act. 2.42 1 Timothy 2.1 1. Cor. 1.2.
; are a gathering for the poor, the Ministry, the receyving of the word, and
sacrament, Prayer Ioh. 13.35.
, singing of Psalms; etc. but the private, which indeed make for the ordering
of our life, are the exercises of repentance: and those, which respect our
neighbor, are the exercises of charity, as Alms, etc.

And of all those marks, there is a common use, and outward show of them, for
the most part in all Churches: but the right of possession, and the lawful use
of them is proper, and particular to the true Church only.

Whence, judgment ought to be given concerning the purity, or impurity, the
cleanenesse, or obscurity of the visible Church. For that church, which has
that Essential mark, and all those, which are accidental, is the purest;
that, which has that only, and not all these, is the true Church, but
imperfect: that, which has some of these, and not that, is the Church,
ambiguously so called, or that, which is Hypocritical; that, which has
neither these, nor that, is not a Church at all.

But, because the particular Church, which has these marks, either has them
perfectly, or according to parts, and again both ways, according to the
quantity, and quality diversely, either more or less, either more purely, or
more vnpurely: Hence it comes to pass, that particular Churches both
diversely err, and oftentimes fail: they err more or less, according as they
either cleave to the truth, or swerue from the same 1. Cor. 13.9. Romans 7.23
Mat. 6.12.
; they fail partly, because they are not always conspicuous in order,
regiment, and continual succession; and partly, because sometimes they utterly
perish by Apostasy, and corruption Apoc. 13 4.8.
.

The End of the Church in general, is the glory of God himself, or the praise
of the glory of his grace: but in Particular, (the end) of the Invisible
Church, is the salvation of the Predestinate; and of the visible, the
consummation, and fulfilling of the body of Christ, out of them that were
generally called.

OF THE CHVRCH. The Part Confuting.
In Defense of the Invisiblenesse of the Catholic Church, against Bellarmine:
cap. 12. Lib. 3. THE DISTINCTIONS.
I.
THe Church is two ways usually considered: either according to the outward
matter, and form thereof, or according to that which concerns the whole (or
universal) and inward form thereof. In the former sense, it is called
visible, but in the latter invisible, even the Scripture it self granting (or
condiscending hereunto) which for this end calls the Catholic church, the
church of the first borne, who are written in heaven; the body of Christ, not
natural, but mystical; the Spouse, all whose glory is inward.

II.
THe reasoning is of no validity, which is drawn from the particular church to
the catholic, or Universal; because those things pertain not to every
singular part, which yet are most truly spoken of the whole in general, and
indivisibly. Now these are particular churches, whereof there is mention made,
Numb. 20.3. King. 8. Act. 20 Act 15. ver. 3. and 4. Act. 18. 1. Cor. 15. Gal.
1. Phil. 3.

III.
THe conclusion is inconsequent from the catholic church to a Particular: for
neither do all the conditions, or properties of the whole church, fit to
every part thereof, either always, or altogether: and those two propositions,
Mat. 16. and 1. Tim. 3. are to be understood of the catholic, and invisible
church, as all the circumstances thereof do evidently prove. For the
foundation of the church cannot be said to be visible, or sensible; whether
you understand Peter, according to the confession of the Adversary, for it
cannot be seen) or Christ (for he is the mystical head of a mystical body)
or the confession of faith, (for faith is only to be perceyved by the
understanding,) Neither treats he of the Church, over which Timothy was
chief in respect of the visiblenesse thereof, but so far forth, as it was a
part of the catholic invisible Church, and did only comprehend those which
were in very deed of the household.

IIII.
THe name of Church is termed properly, or Figuratively, by the exposition, or
opposition of the two entire parts of the Church, which are the Pastors, and
the Flock. For properly, and absolutely it signifies the universal body, but
oppositely this, or that part of the Church; but in the place cited, Mat 18.
it is taken oppositely for the Rulers of the Church themselves, who commonly
are called the Church representative.

V.
THe Argument, which is not grounded upon the authority of Scripture, but upon
the bad exposition of Augustine, concludes nothing. Now the proper
translation, and natural sense of these words, In them he laid a tabernacle
for the Sun, is, that God placed. Tent in the Heavens, or a certain glorious
seat for the Sun.

VI.
Esaias. 2. Dan. 2. Mich. 4 Mat. 5. Ans. There is no good proceeding from the
Figurative forms of speaking, by which the dignity, and majesty of Christ's
kingdom, or of the Catholic church is set forth; to the visiblenesse of the
same. For, either all that Majesty of the church, as it is catholic, is
inward; or if it be outward, it belongs not to the church, as it is
catholic, but in regard of the diverse, and particular circumstances of
place, time, and persons. Of Place, because that may be true Secundu^ quid.
after a sort (or in part) concerning particular churches, which absolutely,
and simply cannot be spoken of the Catholic. Of the Time, because the manner,
and fashion, (or outward appearance) of the same, is diverse. For the church is
at one time more conspicuous then at another: but it was most conspicuous at
the time of the first preaching of the Gospel. Lastly, of the Persons, because
of the outward concourse of men, either good, or bad, which Augustine against
the Donatists, proves to have been in his time most populous.

VII.
Two times only do not make the universality of the church, but all times
from the beginning of the world to the end of the same. Neither could the
church of the ancient people either be known by circumcision, or were the
gifts of the holy Spirit visible in the new Testament. Not the one, for all they
which were of the circumcision, did not pertain to the catholic church. Not
the other, because the grace of the goly Spirit, is not to be perceyved by the
outward sense.

VIII.
THe church is called so aequivocally, either simply, and absolutely, or (after
a sort) as touching some particular limitation of the same: the church
absolutely so called, comprehends the Angels, but after a sort so called,
either comprehends the whole universality of men in heaven, and in earth, and
so the Souls of the dead, or only that universality of men, which is on the
earth. The Society of these, as they are elect, is mystical, and spiritual,
and therefore not well compared to politic or civil societies: neither does
the outward society of the sacraments, whereof Augustine speaks, cause any
man to be a member of the catholic Church, but of a particular Church only.

IX.
THere is no consequence, either from an aequivocation, or from the unlike
manner of the church: the aequivocation is in the word (Church,) which
signifies, either the catholic church Invisible, or Visible: Now the manner
of the Jewish, and Popish Church, is unlike, because God commanded the form of
the one, but of the Popish church not at all; and they that were partakers with
that Church, did partake in holy things and such as pertayned to the condition
of that church, and not in all things promiscuously, (or confusedly.)

X.
THere is one necessity absolute, another conditional: the necessity absolute
is, that, if we will be saved, we adjoyne our selves to the catholic
church, out of which there is no salvation: but the necessity conditional is,
that we adjoyne our selves to this, or that particular church: for there is a
twofold condition, the one if we know which is the true church, the other, if
by means of the times, we can adjoyne our selves to the same.

XI.
FRom a false definition laid down, a false proof is drawn: and therefore
both the Antecedent, and Consequent of the Argument, is denied.

XII.
THe Testimonies of the Fathers, which are cited, do either treat of the
inward form of the Church, as that of Origin, and Cyprian; or of the Eternity
of the Church, and not of the Visibility thereof, as that of Chrysostom: or
lastly, of the Particular Churches of some certain time, as that of Augustine.

In Defense of the matter of the Church; and first, that they which are not
baptized, and the Catechized, (or novices, belong to the Catholic church:
Against Bellarmine; Lib. 3. Cap. 5.
I.
COr. 5. It is one thing to treat of the not baptized, by reason of their
unbelief; and another of the not baptized, because of their vncapablenes,
either of age, or profession of faith: and to be without, and not to be
baptized, are things different: for as they are sometimes without, which are
baptized; so on the contrary, they are sometimes within, which are not baptized.

II.
ACT. 2. there is a twofold adding (to the church;) the one, according to the
judgment of the truth, and the inward nature of Christianity; the other,
according to the judgment of charity, which is believed to be, because of the
outward communion of the Signs: that, is proper to the Church invisible: but
this, to the church visible; and of this, but not of that, does the place treat.

III.
THe Body of the Church, and Baptism are so called ambiguously; for the body
is either outward, or mystical and spiritual. Baptism likewise is either
outward, or inward, either of water, or of blood: all which are baptized with
water, are of the outward body of the Church: but all those which are baptized
with the blood of Christ, are of the mystical, and spiritual body of the
Church.

IIII
THe Catechized (or Novices) with the Fathers are two ways distinguished: the
one according to the opinion of the common people: for they were not numbered
among the Christians, who might not seem to believe, albeit they believed. The
other, according to the form of the Church, To which, because they pertain not
properly, they are thought not to be of the Church, though they be the
members of the Church invisible.

V.
THe respect of right is one, and of the fact is another: he has right to the
Sacraments which has faith. Now by Fact, none are admitted to the outward
communion of the sacraments, but those which profess faith.

Secondly, that those, which are excommunicated belong to the Church Invisible,
against Bellarmin; Lib. 3. Cap. 6.
OF Persons Excommunicate, there are two sorts: for some are justly
excommunicated, and some unjustly: those which are justly excommunicated are
cast forth out of the particular churches, but not simply out of the
catholic Church. For Excommunication is a censure, not of the catholic
church, but of the particular: they which are unjustly, are neither cast out of
the visible church by right, nor out of the invisible by right, or fact. Now
the Testimonies of the Scriptures, or of the Fathers, which are alleged, do
either treat of those, which are justly excommunicated, or of the
Excommunication of particular Churches, whereof there is no question.

Thirdly, that the predestinate alone pertain to the Invisible Church, against
Bellarmine: Lib. 3. Cap. 7.
I.
TO be in the Particular church, and to be of the catholic church, are
things different: the one, is for a man to adjoyne himself to that outward
society of the faithful; but the other, to be as a member ingraffed, and
conjoined unto Christ. Wherefore also, these are two things different, namely
to be cast out of the particular church, and to be cast out of the catholic
church. That, is done by Excommunication, but this, by no means can ever ^e
done. Now the places which are cited, Mat. 3. Mat. 15. Mat. 25. 1. Cor. 5. 2.
Tim. 2. are true concerning the particalar outward churches, and not concerning
the Catholic. Add further, that the Arguments drawn from Parables, are of
small weight, beyond the meaning of the Holy Ghost.

II.
A Man is said to be of the church two ways: either according to Gods
Election, or Predestination, or according to the outward Temporal calling: the
one way, every faithful man is a member of the catholic church, even from
everlasting: the other way, no man is indeed, to be a member of the visible
church, unless he be called in time. Paul then, was of the catholic church,
even when he was not of the visible church, before his calling: but Judas was
not of the catholic church, though he was of the visible church, as touching
his outward calling.

III.
PRedestination is two ways to be considered, either abstractly, or
absolutely, as it comprehends that decree of God from eternity; or
compositiuely, and Relatiuely, as it comprehends all the means, which are
necessary, for the execution of that decree; as Vocation, Justification, etc.
After the first manner, every Person Predestinate, is called a member of the
catholic church; after the latter manner, no man is called a member of the
visible church, but as he is called, Justified, etc.

IIII.
THe Respect of brethren, and of the church is not the same. For they are
called brethren, which are either joined together in an outward society, and
profession of faith, or who have the same Right of adoption with us. Those are
known, these are not. In like manner, the Church is considered, either, as
Catholic, or Particular: the Predestinate are called the members of the
Catholic church, and not of the Particular generally.

Of the FORM of the Church, and first of the Marks thereof, against
Bellarmine: Lib. 4. Cap. 4. to the End of the book.
I.
THe manner of reasoning from Names is inconsequent. For, according as the
things are certain; so Names, which are of Imposition, are accidental,
voluntary, and therefore uncertain. Neither can that be a mark of the
Church, whereby the true may be discerned from the false, which either cannot
be seen, because of the universality it self, which is only to be perceyved
by the understanding, or is commonly used according to that, which is spoken of
others, who live without the Churches.

II.
ANtiquity, as being a thing accidental, separable, common, by sense not
perceiuable, cannot be a Mark of the Church: It is a thing accidental,
because it makes not the Essence of the Church, but happens thereunto,
because of the process of time: It is a thing separable, because without this,
the Church was sometimes known, both the old church in the time of Adam, and
the churches of the New Testament in the time of Christ, and of the Apostles:
It is a thing common, because a lie or hearsay have also their antiquity: It
is a thing by sense not perceiuable, because antiquity it self can be
discerned by the understanding, and reason only.

III.
THe same consideration altogether is of Durance, as is of Antiquity, since both
is referred to the time, and the one comprehends the other in it self. Now
those things which are spoken of the church are true, as touching the common
body of the church; but false, as touching the church particularly, or of the
Romish church.

IIII.
THe multitude pertaines not to the Church always, nor to it alone, nor
altogether: Not always, because in a little Flock, Christ has his Church.
Not to it alone, because it is a common State, even to the Synagogues of
Satan, which in multitude far exceedes the true Church. Not altogether,
because, though many be called, yet few are chosen.

V.
THere is one Succession of doctrine, another of person: that is principal,
this is secondarie. The former is Coincident with the true and essential
marks of the Church. The latter cannot be known; partly, because it is
particular: for, by the Confession of the adversaries, it belongs to the
Church of Rome only; partly, because it is accidental, according to the
condition of the Persons, Things, and Places.

VI.
THe Agreement in Doctrine with the ancient Church is spoken ambiguously; for
there is one with the Church Apostolical, and another with the Church of some
former ages, or with the Church of Rome: the former we acknowledge, the latter
we deny; because the purer Church knew not of it, it disagreeth with the
Scriptures, and is common with Heretics.

VII.
THere is one Union mystical, and spiritual by the bond of faith; another
outward by the bond of profession: that is coincident with the true Mark of
the Church, this cannot be a Mark: partly, because it pertains not to the
Church alone; for there is also a certain union, and fellowshippe of the
wicked: partly, because it pertaines not always, for oftentimes dissentions
arise in particular Churches.

VIII.
THe Holiness of doctrine, is either of the Apostolic doctrine properly, or
of the Traditions, and Constitutions of Popes ambiguously. The first way it is
coincident with the true and essential mark of the Church; the latter way, it
can by no means be known, because it is uncertain and mutable.

IX.
THe Efficacy of doctrine is twofold; the one saving, and proper to the Elect:
the other belongs generally to al them that are called, and is in many
degrees different. Yet neither of the^ is a mark of the Church: not the one,
because it is inward, not the other, because it is diverse.

X.
THe holiness of the life of the Authors, or first Fathers, is referred either
to the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, or to other Doctors, the Institutors
of Religious Orders: as concerning the first Order, such true Holiness is
only of the Elect, and therefore cannot be a Mark of this, or that particular
Church; as concerning the other, in those Doctors and Institutors of Religious
orders, superstition indeed is acknowledged, but Holiness is not known.

XI.
THe glory of Miracles, since it has reference to the Doctrine, and not to the
Church, is properly to be termed the marks of that, and not of this. Now, it
is a mark Accidental: for it is not always convenient. Particular, for it is
not convenie^t for every church. Lastly, not Proper, because it is alike common
to truth, and falsehood.

XII.
THe Word Prophecy is ambiguous. For, either it generally signifies the gift
of Interpretation, and understanding of the Scriptures, or specially, the gift
of foretelling. In the first signification, (whereof also the place of Joel is
to be understood) Prophesying is coincident with the true and essential note
of the Church. For it has the nature of a miracle, and cannot be a Mark,
because it is an extraordinary gift in the Church.

XIII.
THe confession of the Adversaries, is also an obscure Mark, and uncertain,
neither always true. Again, that which is from the light of nature, only has
rather the shadow, and the Image of the truth, then the truth it self.

XIIII. and XV.
A Conjecture, which is taken from either prosperity, or adversity, is
uncertain: neither do particular examples make a general rule, because as
temporal felicity does not always accompany the church, but the cross of
Christ; so an unhappy end, does not always follow the enemies of the Church.

That the Visible Church may fail, against Bellarmine. Lib. 3. Cap. 13.
I.
IT is one thing to treat of the Church, as touching the Essence, but another
thing of the Church, as touching the outward and visible manner, and form
thereof only. The Church, according to the Essence thereof, cannot fail at
all; but, as touching the outward, and visible manner of the same, it may
fail, not, that it is in it self invisible, but that it cannot be seen, and
perceyv^ of men. Now, the places, Mat 18. 1. Tim. 3. treat of the church in
the first sense, and not in the second. Further, the church is called the
Pillar of the truth, not by a ratione architectonica, sed forensi.
a manner of speech, borrowed from the Art of Master Builders, but from the
Lawyers and Pleaders; namely, because the church has the Truth, as it were
hanged unto it.

II.
THe Places, Mat. vltimo. Ephesians. 4. Psalm. 47. Esa. 61. which contain an open
promise, without the name of the church, do either treat of all the faithful,
and elect only, or of the perpetual use of the Ministry, necessary in the
Church, or of the perpetual glory, and felicity of the catholic church: or
lastly, of the propagation, increase, and blessing of the Angelical church,
for the covenants sake.

III.
THe Parables, which are cited, do show, that the church indeed, as touching
it self, is visible, which we do not deny: but they prove not the necessity
of that glorious conspicuity, whereof we are in controversy.

IIII.
THe Eternity of Christ's kingdom, whereof mention is, Psalm. 88. Dan. 2 Luc. 1.
pertayneth not to the outward glory, and form of the church; neither is the
manner of Christ's Kingdom the same, as are the kingdoms of the world.

V.
THe Testimonies of the Fathers, have either different and unlike examples, as
that of Augustine, and Lyrinensis: or prove not the cause: because they do but
after a sort testify, that the church cannot at all perish, as that of Bernard.

VI.
TO treat of the visible Church, so generally called, and of this or that
particular church; are two things most different. Again, the church is called
Invisible two ways, either in it self, or in the eyes of the world, and of
the enemies of the Church it self.

The End of the Second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK CONCERning the Second Part of DIVINITY, and first of MAN, and
his diverse Estate in this Life, and after this Life.
CHAP. I.
HAving ended the first and Principal part of Divinity, which is concerning
the Causes of our Salvation, and so concerning the Works of God; Now by order
we are to come to the second which is concerning the subject of the same, that
is of Man, and of his diverse estate.

The whole Knowledge of Man, as far forth as the same pertains to a Divine,
and to the Principal end of Divinity, which is Salvation, is generally
limited, as it were, within 2. bounds of places, and times: for we must
necessatily know, and discern a double estate of man: the one, in this life,
while he is in the way; the other, after this life, when he shall attain to
the last Jail, either of felicity, or eternal death.

In this life, we are wont, and ought to consider a double estate of man,
according to the distinction of the works, which indeed pass from God to the
creatures, by an outward, and temporal action: the one of nature, the other of
grace: that, belonging to man, as he is natural, as touching himself; this,
as he is to be advanced by the grace of God, above his nature, and natural
condition.

The Former State of man in this life, which is according to nature, ought to
be discerned, and distinguished, according to the diverse condition, and
consideration of Nature.

Now the Nature of man is two ways considered; one way, according to his
Beginning, and first Original condition, and creation: the other way,
according to the Change, and Corruption, which followed after, as man fell from
his Natural goodness, by his own mutability, and fault, into the evil of
Nature, and guilte (or sin:) whereupon there arises a double Estate of Man
in Nature: the one of Integrity, the other of Corruption.

OF THE STATE OF Integrity, or first Creation of MAN, according to the Image of
GOD.
The Part Confirming. CHAP. II.
THe State of Integrity, or the first creation of man before his Fall, is a
singular work of God in Nature, whereby he made man a Reasonable creature,
being of a compound (or double) nature, according to his Image, for his own
glory, and the good of Man himself,

The Efficient Cause, is Jehovah Elohim, The Lord God, or God in the Plurality
of Persons, and Unity of Essence: for there is but one finishing, (or
perfecting) of the work of one Essence; though according to the distinction of
the persons, the order of working is distinct: For the Father created by the
Son, through means of the power of the Spirit himself.

Now God effected it both by a common consultation, will, and consent going
before Genesis 1.27.
, and by a manner of of effecting or creating, partly immediate, if you respect
the soul, which God of nothing created, by infusing, and infused by creating
Genesis 1.7
; partly mediate, if you respect the body, which was brought forth from a
matter preexistent.

The Matter or Subject of this first estate is humane nature endued with all
perfections, which in themselves might befitte, for a thing created, according
to the condition thereof.

Now, whereas we call it a matter, we understand not only that, which is
incorporeall, or the corporeal only, but that which is composed, and as it
were tempered of both: for there are two essential parts of this Subject, or
humane nature, whereof we treat, the Body, and the Soul: the truth whereof
ought to be discerned, and distinguished by their first Beginning, Substance,
and Qualities.

By their first beginning: because the bodies of our first Parents were created
of a matter preexistent, or having a fore-being; either near, as the body of
Eve, of Adams ribbe, and the body of Adam of the dust Genesis 2.7 22. 1. Cor.
15.45.
: or remote, of the 4. Elements, and which Synecdochically, are understood by
the name of earth, as being an Element for substance and quantity predominant:
but the souls were created of nothing, by the virtue of Gods infinite power,
as after the same manner, God creates new souls in every body; for they are
not brought forth from the body Per traducem.
by derivation, but are brought into the body by creation Psalm. 33.14. Zach.
12.1 Heb. 12.9.
; nor are they forced out by the power of the matter, as other living
creatures, as well perfect, as imperfect: for they are simple spirits, which
are neither divided, nor changed, nor corrupted.

By Substance, because the bodies are compound substances, furnished with
diverse Organes (or Instruments) by which the souls exercise their powers and
faculties: but the souls are substances, both simple and immateriall; for
being compared to other material things, they consist of no matter; and that
they have not any material matter, their beginning and original has taught:
as also immortal, not absolutely by themselves by the Law of nature, or
composition: for God alone, being life it self, is by himself immortal: but
by the grace of God the creator, and his divine will, which created the same to
be such, that though it had a beginning, yet it should not have an end 1. Tim
6.16. Luc. 16.22 and 23.43.
.

By Qualities; because even their bodies had also an incorruptibility, not in
their own nature absolutely; for everything composed of contraries, is
corruptible, but by Gods grace, whereby man was able, as touching his body, not
to die, unless through his Genesis 3.19. Romans 5.12 Iac. 1.15.
own fault, he had voluntarily brought on himself the first and second
death, and also a Bewty: so that there was not any Infirmity, or deformity, but
a convenient proportion, and a most godly well ordered constitution: but the
Souls, which are humane, (and as they are so) had two principal faculties,
the understanding, and the will, according as the object of them is twofold;
to wit, Being, and Goodness: to which faculties, as being Subalternall; all
the other are referred. For the understanding apprehends Being, and Truth:
the universal, indeed by it self; but the particular by sense. The Will
inclines forward to good, which, because it is in the things them selves, it
does not properly draw, and take unto it the very things, but is drawn of them.

The Form of this first Estate of man is limited in the condition, and
consideration of the Image of God, according to which man was created.

Now we call the Image of God, that likeness, whereby man resembles the
nature of his Creator after a convenient manner of his nature, partly in the
soul properly, partly in the body, because of the Soul; Last of all, partly
in the whole, and entire person, by reason of the union of both.

In the Soul: whether you respect the Nature thereof, and the faculty of
substance, or the Faculties; or lastly, the qualities of the habites, whereby
they are perfected.

The Substance of the Soul, resembles the Nature of God, according to her
condition, and the measure of the condition for three causes; first, because as
that, so this also is one, though it consist of many faculties, as her
essential parts. For of one singular thing, there is but one substantial
form. Secondly, because as that is, so also is this simple, spiritual, and
immateriall. Simple, in respect of the material; Act. 17.26.
Spiritual, in respect of the bodies Genesis 2 9
; Immateriall, in respect of Original. Genesis 2.7.
Thirdly, as that is, so is this also incorporeal, and immortal. For it has
neither the dimentions, (or limitations) of a body, nor shall have end of life
Ezec. 37 4.5. Mat. 10.28. 1. Cor. 15.19.
.

The Faculties of the Soul, which resemble the nature of God, are chiefly two;
Understanding, and Will; the one expressing the Image of God in the faculty of
understanding al things Col 3.10. Eccl. 17.6.
; the other, in the liberty of willing and choosing every object 1. Cor. 7 37.
.

Both as well the faculty of understanding, as the liberty of will, is
twofold: the Faculty of understanding, the one is Passible, (or suffering,)
as man's mind is of it own nature capable of all things: the other Active, (or
doing,) which effects that those things, which in power may be understood,
by Act be understood. Liberty (or freedom) the one is from compulsion;
because man is not compelled to that, which is strange from a Free Will; the
other, from Impediment, because he is not violently let (or hindered) from
that, which he seeks after with a free will 1. Co. 7.37. Romans 8.7 Romans 8.2 1
. Wherefore the first man could will the good, and refuse the evil; and again
refuse the good, and choose the evil.

The Habites, which perform those faculties, are two. For wisdom perfecteth
the understanding; but righteousness, the will.

Wisdom is an excellent and perfect knowledge, both of the supernatural
good, whereby he knows God, and his felicity in God; and of the Natural,
whereby he knows the things created, and their natures Col 3 10. Romans 12.2
.

Righteousness is that uprightness of the mind, whereby perfectly, that is,
inwardly, and outwardly, it obeyed Gods will, according to the whole law; which
righteousness was not only of person, but of nature, because the first man
was created in it, and unto it, as the original and root of mankind,
^herevpon also, it is called Original Ephesians. 4.24. 1. These. 5 23. Eccl. 9.29
.

And this is the manner of Gods Image in the Soul. Now in Body man resembles
the Image of God, not according to the parts, or according to it self, in
respect either of Substance, or Figure, but partly in respect of the soul,
whose Instrument it is; partly of the Person, a part whereof it makes. For it
does most readily execute things both well understood, and holily defined in
the soul, and in person, as it were in a most clear glass; it also
represents the whole world, being the verity, and dignity of the very
Creator, and Original, (or first) pattern thereof.

Lastly, in the whole and entire person, the Image of God shines forth,
because of the union of the soul and body, both in respect of the constitution
of that whole man,, which even the faithful themselves have so admired, that
by it they acknowledged Gods Image, as also in respect of his rule over all in
former things; whereof the first man receyved from God, not only the right
and power, but also the use and execution Gen ^ 19. Psalm. 8.6.
.

The End of that first state of Man, principal, and chief, is the glory of
the Creator Architectonicus. Prou. 16.4. Psalm. 113.5. 1 Cor, 10.31.
, but subordinate, the blessedness and felicity of the Creature Psalm. 144 15.
Ioh. 17.3
.

OF THE FIRST Estate of Man. The Part Confuting.
DISTINCTIONS. In Defense of the Verity of Gods Image, according to which, man
was created: against Bellar. Cap. 3.
I.
THe Grace, that makes grateful, takes not away the natural condition of
man, and his original righteousness, but proves it. For Man had from that
Grace, both the verity of Nature, and the quality thereof.

II.
THe Habit of Grace, which makes grateful, differs from original
righteousness in the manner only, and not in very deed, or nature; because
that very righteousness, wherewith the first man was endued of God, was that
habit of Grace, for which man became grateful, and acceptable to God.

Against Bellarmine. Cap. 4.
THe Grace of God is twofold; the one, whereby we could, if we would, not
sin: the other, whereby not only we could but also would not sin. The
first was given to Adam, but not the second: and so wanted the one, and
receyved the other in his creation: and the necessity of this special Grace,
and assistance in Adam, does Augustine plainly show in his Treatise of
Corruption, and Grace. Neither do the Testimonies which are alleged, prove
the contrary.

Against Bellarmine: Cap. 5.6.
I.
A Thing is termed Natural ambiguously, either Causally, which is from
nature, or Subiectiuely, which is in Nature, or lastly by propagation, which is
communicated with nature: so also a thing is called Supernatural, which either
our nature, as touching it self, cannot comprehend, or is not capable of, and
so is beyond (or above,) the condition of nature: or in which nature no way
works, but grace alone: or lastly, which is not propagated by natural mean,
but by divine manner is communicated above the order of Nature. Original
Righteousness is said to be natural; partly, because God has communicated the
same in Nature, and with nature; partly, because by a natural spreading, it
was to be communicated to the posterity of Adam, if he had stood, or
continued; but supernatural, it can no way be called.

II.
THe condition of man, in respect of one part, whereof the place of Genesis 3.
treats, takes not away his condition, in respect of the other, or the whole;
for whole man, both in body and in soul, was made wholly, according to the
Image of God: neither does the place of Ecclesiasticus infer the contrary,
who treats, either of the outward ornaments of men only, or of their virtue,
not supernatural, but natural, as the very words do manifestly declare:
neither does the Parable out of Luke, 10. which sets out, not the state of
man after his fall, but the duty of charity toward them that are fallen, and
are in misery.

III.
THe Testimonies of the Fathers, which are alleged, deny not that, that
Integrity in Adam was natural: but testify, that grace was added to nature,
which indeed we confess and teach very gladly.

IIII.
THe reasons which are alleged, are vain (or Idle:) The First, because God
conjoined the matter and Form, though things most different, to the natural
bond of peace, and love. The Second, because the corruption followed not from
that Integrity, wherein Man was created, but from his mutable condition, which
with it was conjoined. The Third, because there is a diverse respect of Adams
sin, by which he revolted from that first Original integrity, and of our
actual sins. The Fourth and Fifth, because the manner of reparation, and
recreation is not the same, as that of the first creation. For that was done in
nature, but this is done above Nature. Neither is it absurd, that the name of
the Son of God was granted to Adam, in that state of Integrity, as being
he, who in that natural condition, resembled the Image of God, according to
which he was created.

OF THE SECOND Estate of MAN, which is OF CORRVPTION. CAP. III.
AFter this first state of Integrity, the second which is of Corruption by and
by succeeded, and followed: It is,

The Condition of Man, whereby in turning away goodness from himself, and
himself from goodness, and in estranging the same into the contrary, he by
himself, as touching himself wholly perished.

And this condition ought two ways to be known, according to the quantity
and quality thereof. For first, we are to see, concerning the corruption which
man procured to himself, through his own fault and naughtiness: then
concerning the power of man, which after that corruption, remained in Man. The
place concerning Sin, contains and expounds the Doctrine of Corruption: but
the place concerning Free Will, contains and lays open the doctrine of Man's
Power.

OF SIN.
The Part Confirming. CAP. IIII.
SIN, by which name the quality of humane Corruption is wont to be expressed,
is in General, defined to be Ioh. 3.4.
a breaking of the law, (or iniquity) that is a Defect, or want of that
lawful good, which was given to our Nature by God, whereby man declining from
good, and inclining to nothing, but to evil, is made guilty of Gods wrath, and
damnation, and everlasting punishment: but in Special, it ought three ways to
be distinguished, defined, and through the causes to be expounded. For there
are three degrees of Sin: the Beginning of it was in Adam; the Propagatton
from Adam in us, and the Effect of the same from us: Wherefore, we must by
order consider together of the Sin of Adam, Original Sin, and of Actual
Sin.

The Sin of Adam is an act of disobedience in Adam, as in a singular,
individual person, and general beginning of all men, whereby, by violating
the Law of God, he destroyed both himself, and his posterity for ever Genesis 3.
Romans 5. 2 Cor. 11.3
.

Original Sin, is an hereditary vitiousnesse, whereby for the disobedience
of Adam, all men from him, either propagated, or to be propagated, are made
guilty of both evils, both of sin and punishment Psalm. 51.7 Ephesians. 2.3. Romans
5.12
.

Actual Sin, is an iniquity, and Lawlessenes, whereby we swarving (or going
awry in our actions) from the straitenesse of the Law, daily increase the guilt
of sin, and punishment Mat. 12.34. Iac 1.13.14.15. Romans 7.8.
.

The Efficient Cause of Adams sin, or the beginning thereof, may be noted to
be twofold, according to the former, and the latter. Active, (as we
distinctly speak) and Actual. The Active beginning, is a natural power to
both opposites, the moral good, and evil 1^ Tim. 2 13. Romans 5.12
. The Actual, whereby through the act of disobedience, the will of man abused
that his power, to evil: and lost his power to good, and alienated the same
into the contrary Genesis 3.6. Romans 5.19. Ecle. 10.15
.

The Efficient Cause of Original sin, ought to be considered and discerned
by three ways, and degrees: for there is a double outward cause, and one
inward.

The outward nearest cause, is the actual sin of Adam, who was as the
mediate and common beginning of whole humane nature Romans 5 12.19.
: but the Remote was the justice of God, which God had shadowed in nature, and
expressed in speech plainly uttered, (or in the word Enunciatiue Genesis 3.
.) The inward Cause, is the very Law of Nature, originally passing; of which
law, God laid down a double ordinance. By the one he commanded a
propagation absolutely; by the other he threatened a punishment conditionally,
with the former, he furnished both man, and in man Nature; with the latter, man
only. Hence it came to pass, that, by that ordinance of propagation, man is
begotten; but by the ordinance of punishment, he is begotten vicious Romans
5.12.16. Heb. 7 9.10. 1. Cor. 15.22.
. Both alike necessarily.

The Efficient Cause of Actual sin, properly, and immediately is the will,
which commands the Act, in which the whole Action of evil resideth, as in
the Agent (or working) Instrument Genesis 6.5 Iac. 1.14.15.
.

The Matter of Adams first sin, which is as the Subject, is the whole, and
entire person of Adam, and in him, as in the active beginning, the whole matter
of mankind 1. Cor. 15 22
. But that, which is of the Object, is the taking of the forbidden fruit, and
the use or eating thereof Genesis 3.4.5.
; both whereof includes a contempt of Gods commandment, an impious consent
of licentious will, Briefly, a most miserable backesliding from God, and a
disobedience of the whole man Psalm. 51.5. Tit 33. 1. Cor. 2 14. Romans 7.23 Ephesians.
2. etc.
.

The Matter of Original Sin, which is as the Subject, is whole man, and
every man according to himself wholly, and the whole of himself: for the whole
Subject is subjacent to whole sin, both in respect of receyving: for whole
man receyveth whole sin, and of power, and manner: for the whole man does,
and works whole sin; and therefore whole sin affects, and infecteth
whole man with a corporal and effectual taint (or contagion) Romans 5.6 7. Romans
6.6. Gal. 5.16. Col. 2.11. Romans 8.3. and 6. Ephesians. 4.17.18.
: but that which is as the object, is first a defect (or want) of original
righteousness, then an inclination or quality contrary to that righteousness,
or uprightness, which is commonly called natural corruption, or original
concupiscence: the former, those testimonies of Scripture do prove, which
speak of Sin negatiuely, or privatiuely: but the latter, those which speak
of sin affirmatively, or positiuely Mat. 12.34. Mar. 7.31.
.

The Matter of Actual sin, which is as the Subject, is man, according to his
body and Soul, and all the faculties of both, to wit, both of body, and
Soul Gal. 5.19 20. etc. Mat. 15.19. Romans 14.1. Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 15.18. Col 3.17.
Gal. 6.1. Iac. 4.17.
: but that which is of the Object, are the things spoken, done, and lusted
after against the Law, whether they be of omission, or commission, either by
infirmity, or by malice, or whether they be outwardly, or inwardly committed:
whereupon many kinds of sins arise, and those which are neither mutually
matched each with other, nor linked together: but some more grievous then
other, yea, and oftentimes some contrary each to other Ioh. 9.11 2. Pet.
2.20.21.
.

Hence also is the difference between sin pardonable, and unpardonable;
whereof the one is said to be a sin, which is committed against the father,
and the Son; that is every transgression of Gods law, whereunto Repentance
belongs, and therefore that, which is pardonable, not by the properties of it
own nature, but by the grace and mercy of him, against whom it is committed
Mat. 12.31.
: the other is said to be a sin which is committed against the holy Ghost,
and therefore is called by an excellency in Scriptures, the blasphemy of the
Spirit, and a sin unto death Mat. 12 31. 1. Ioh. 5.16.
. Now, for the making of this Sin, three things concur. First, the Denial
of the Truth against knowledge, and conscience: Secondly, an universal
Backe-sliding from Christ, and not a particular sin against the first or
second Table of the Law. Thirdly, a Rebellion sprung from a hatred of the
truth, conjoined with a tyrannical, sophistical, and hypocritical oppugning
(or withstanding:) and of these conditions, there is a mutual knitting and
sequel of the one with, and after the other. Further, it is called a Sin
against the Holy Ghost, not in respect of the divine Essence, and person of the
Spirit, but in respect of his office, that is of Grace, and illumination,
whereof the holy Ghost is properly the Worker (or effecter:) but it is said to
be unpardonable for three causes: First, because of the just judgment of God,
who suffers not his Spirit, which is the Spirit of truth, to be reproved
of a lie. Secondly, because of impenitency, or the hardness to repent. Thirdly,
because of the truth and the dignity of redemption, purchased by Christ. For
there remains no other sacrifice after men have forsaken the sacrifice of
Christ Heb. 6.4. Heb. 10.20
.

The Formal of Adams first sin, is twofold, according as that sin in a
diverse respect, is either a Quality, or Relation: as it is equality, the
formal thereof is disobedience Romans 5.19. Romans 5.14.15. 1. Tim. 2.13.
: as it is a Relation. The Formal of the same is guilt, or obliging to
everlasting punishment. Disobedience passed by Act, but guilt was spread on all
the posterity by imputation Rom 5 12. 1. Cor. 15.22.
.

The Formal of Original Sin, is likewise usually taken two ways, either
for guilt, which nevertheless, is rather the necessary consequent of that
sin, or the proper accident thereof; or for that whole deformity of whole
nature, which was not infused, nor yet gotten by imitation, but natural, or
(as we speak) connaturall, (or begotten together) with us, not by the vice of
common Nature, but by the vice of the first original Instrument; from which
all descended naturally Psalm. 52.7 Romans 5.12 1. Cor. 5.22. Ephesians. 2.3.
.

The Formal of actual sin, is an inordinatene adjoined to that, which is
spoken, done, and lusted after against the Law; which ought to be discerned
from the actions and motives, as the defect, from the effect. For sin is not
formally the very action, but the corruption or defect of the action, and as
the Actions of men are twofold, Immanentes, trauseuntes.
to wit, abiding in, and passing from; Whereof those come from the mind, and
will immediately, but these by the members, or Instruments of the body
mediately; so there is a twofold inordinatenesse, the one Inward, the other
outward Romans 24 1. Ephesians. 2 3 Gal. 5.16. Romans 15 15. Col. 3.17. Romans 6.19
.

The End of the first Original, and Actual Sin, ought to be discerned
after one, and the self same manner, and consideration. Now it is discerned
two ways; First by the Accident, in respect of God disposing sin to the just
end, and most wisely showing forth his glory, both by works of justice against
them, who endeavor to sin, and by works of mercy toward them, whom he
freeth from sin for Christ: Secondly, according to it self, in respect of
man, in whom sin is: in which respect, an end of Sin cannot properly be
granted: but in stead thereof are granted two Consequents, or effects, guilt
and punishment Genesis 2 17. Romans 6.23. Ephesians. 2.3 2. The. 1.9
. By the name of guilt, we understand that bond between sin and punishment,
as a mean put between, whereby the sinner is most strongly bound to the
subjection of punishment, and in the very subjection, to the continuance
thereof. The punishment is both deaths, both of the body temporal, and of the
soul together with the body eternal. Whereunto are conjoined afflictions, as
the fore-goers of both, and these, through the goodness of God, are in those,
which are truly faithful, either trials, or martyredomes, or fatherly
chastisements, but in the wicked, they are in their own nature, torments and
punishments: and these two Effects do altogether hold all men bound, being
considered in the state of nature, without any difference of age; yea, the very
Infants, who both have a guilt, and feel a most bitter punishment, both of
loss, and sense, unless God graciously avert it. Now he averteth it for the
covenant sake in the Infants of the faithful, in whom sin is taken away by
Baptism, both in the lessening of it self, and the releasing of guilt: yet
not that it gives over, either to be in all equally, or to work in them, that
are already of full years, unequally: for that native or natural corruption
remains in Act, even after Baptism Romans 7.18. Exodus 34.7 Pro. 20.9. Job.
9.20.
.

OF SIN. The Part Confuting.
In Defense of the Efficient Cause of the First Sin. DISTINCTIONS.
I.
IN the Fall of Adam, three beginnings concur, which must be distinguished
and discerned: one Outward, two Inward, to wit, General, and Particular: the
Outward beginning universal is God, in respect of the action: The Inward
General is nature, which moves man to the action natural. The Inward
Particular, is the will of man in the power whereof the principalnesse of
causing consists, Principalitas cousalitatis.
as it is such an action.

II.
ADam is two ways to be considered, either as a particular person, or as the
root of all mankind: if after the former manner, the disobedience of Adam was
his own proper sin; if after the second, it was with him and us common,

In Defense of the Efficient Cause of Original Sin.
I.
THe Efficient of this Sin is either Total (as they speak) or Partial:
that which is partial, is improperly, and accidentally said to be a cause,
in respect of the occasion it self: and it is the tree of life, and the
instigation of that old Serpent: that which is total, is Man himself, through
the manner of propagation.

II.
THe Propagation of Sin is two ways made; partly by the manner of
Generation, and partly by the manner of Fault: Of Generation, because Sin is
transfused through the body of the Begetter, into the body of the begotten
materially: but into his soul causally, and that partly by Gods forsaking, and
partly by the contagion of the body, into which the Soul is infused: of Fault,
because Adam, according to the condition, wherein he was created, conveyed
through his offense, as through a certain gate, whatsoever evil was in
himself, into all his posterity.

III.
THe Soul of Man is two ways considered, either according to her Essence, or
according to her Subsistence: according to her Essence, she is from the Man
that begets, who communicates unto him that is begotten, that singular
manner of subsisting in the body.

IIII.
THe whole of Nature should be distinguished from the whole Nature: because we
have that from common nature absolutely by Gods ordinance: but this mediately
from our Parents, as the Isntrumental beginning thereof.

In Defense of the Efficient Cause of Actual Sin.
I.
IN Actual Sin, there are two things; Being, and Iniquity. Of Being, God
is the Author, and Principal Efficient: of Iniquity, the Will of Man.

II.
A Thing is said to be done by Gods permission two ways, either by it self,
or by Accident: That, which is done, God permitting it, by it self, has the
respect of good: but that, which is done by Accident, God permitting the self
same, in respect of God permitting it, by accident is evil: because God
permits not evil, as it is evil, but as it is a mean of his glory.

In Defense of the Matter of the first SIN. That the first Sin was not
Pride, but unbelief, against Bellarmine. Lib. 3. de Amiss. Gratiae. Cap. 5.
and 6.
I.
EEccles. 10.14. There is a fallacy of the sense (or understanding) of the
word. For Pride is not the beginning or cause of backe-sliding, or departing
from God; but on the contrary, the very backe-sliding and departing from God,
which is comprehended in unbelief, is made the beginning and cause of pride.

II.
TO b. 4. Ans. The place treats not of the order of diverse acts in the
first sin, but of the Effect of Pride, to wit, Perdition; the beginning
whereof is truly and properly attributed to Pride, yet not exclusiuely.

III.
Romans 5. Ans. Disobedience comprehends the whole Sin of Adam, to wit, the
violating (or breaking) of Gods commandment, which if it should be resolved
into it own parts, the first shall be, not Pride, but unbelief.

IIII.
THe Testimonies of the Fathers, which are alleged, either do not ^reate of
the order of the first sin, ^ut of the next Adjunct thereof, or
Synecdochically, they understand by pride unbelief it self, as the immediate
^ause thereof.

V.
THe inner actions are two ways discerned, either in respect of the In^ention,
or in respect of the execution: whereof the one properly respects the end,
the other the means: but when there is speech made of the first sin, it is
not inquired what was the first thing in the intention of Adam, and Eve; but
what was the first act of committing the Sin.

In Defense of the matter of Original Sin. That Original Sin is a quality, or
Concupiscence, against Bellar. Lib. 5. cap: 15.
I.
THe Positive cause of original Sin is held to be threefold, the First, the
actual sin of Adam: Secondly, the Law of Nature originally passing: the
third, the Justice of God.

II.
THe positive quality is tra^sferred to the posterity after the same manner, as
the Sin it self is; not as a certain accident of nature concreated (or
together with it created) which should follow (or accompany) the substance by
it self, but as a whole corruption of the whole, man which has a foundation in
Adam, as in the first instrument of nature it self: neither are the habits
gotten, convayed into the offspring as they are personal, but as in the name of
the whole Nature, one for all got them.

III.
IN Concupiscence, two things concur: the very Act of lusting, (or coveting)
which by it self is not evil, and the deformity of that act: of that, God is
the Author; of this, he must by no means be the Author.

IIII.
THe first sin was not only the sin of the Body, but also of the Soul.
Wherefore it was not only the eating of the fruit forbidden, but also
unbelief, and pride in the soul, and so whole Sin is transmitted into body
and soul, not only by the law of generation, by which man forms, (or
yields forth) man; but also according to the corruption of him, that
generateth, whereby man as he is corrupt, begeteth corrupt man.

V.
THe Quality was not diminished, both because then it passed, as it were, into
another nature, as also, because it cannot either be diminished, or abolished,
but by the singular grace of God.

VI.
THe Concupiscence of the Flesh against the Spirit, does not only signify
those first motions void of consent, but also the very root of evil, and the
whole corruption, which is not only of the coveting, but also of the other
faculties of the Soul.

VII.
Original Sin is taken away in this life by the regeneration of Baptism,
not that it might not be, but that it might not be imputed for sin.

In Defense of the matter of Actual sin, against the distinction of Sin
Venial, and Mortal. Bellar. Lib. 1. Cap. 9.10.
I.
THe Testimonies of Scripture, do not prove, or confirm the Verity of the
distinction, according to the mind of the adversary. Not the First, Mat. 5. for
he treats of the inequality, not only of sins, but also of punishments,
by an allusion to civil, or politic punishments. Not the Second, Mat. 23.
for he treats of the nature of Hypocrites, who being careful in small
matters, do openly neglect the chiefest things, and make not a difference
between those things, which by themselves, and always are necessary; and
those, whereof not the want, but the contempt does make us guilty (or
culpable.) Not the Third, Luc. 6. for he treats of them, who hunt after
praise, by the reprehending of others, but do neither know, nor reprove
themselves: being in others very quick sighted, but in themselves blind. Not
the Fourth, Luc. 12. for he speaks of the duty of love toward our
neighbor, whereby we are bound after the example of Gods goodness to forgive
even the least sins. Not the Fifth, 1. Cor. 3. for he speaks of doctrine,
and the manner of teaching, and that by a supposition applied to the Doctors of
the Corinthians. Not the Sixth, Iac. 1. for he speaks of the degrees of
sins, which are three, Vitiousnesse, a vicious motion, and vicious action.
And of all these, Death is made the reward (or wages). Not the two Last, Math.
12. for he speaks of the nature of Sins, even the least or lightest: for
which notwithstanding, we are presented guilty before God. Ephesians. 5. because both
the heaviness of sins, and the effect of the same, are expounded
Synecdochically.

II.
THe Testimonies of Councels, and Fathers, are either suspected, or in
controversy: as of the Tridentine Council, and of the Popes, both Pius, and
Gregory: or do treat of the inequality, and diverse degrees of sins, as the
Council of Milevitum, and of the Fathers, Augustine, Origin, Chrysostom, and
Hierome.

III.
THe reasons which are alleged, prove nothing. Not the first; because it is
grounded upon a double false, presupposall. Upon the one, that sins in the
faithful are not mortal; For the Wages of Sin, of whatsoever manner it be,
unless it be forgiven, is Death. Upon the other, that the sins of the
faithful are lighter then the sins of the unfaithful, and so in their
Nature Venial. For in that sins are Venial in the faithful, it is not from
the nature of the sins, but from the Grace of God, and in that they are not
so in the unfaithful, it is not from God, but from the nature both of the
sins, and sinners. Not the Second, because Sin is not said to be Venial,
or pardonable, for that it is worthy of pardon, but for that God vouchsafes
pardon to the Sin, and the Sinner. Not the Third, because it is false, both
that Sin is Venial of it own nature, and that any the least Sin should not
be against Charity. For it is the transgression of the Law, the end whereof
is Love. Not the Fourth, because the Nature (or consideration) of man offended
is one, and of God is another, for according to the party offended, the
greatenesse of the offense is esteemed. Not the Fifth; for no sin is
imperfect, because every sin is a perfect iniquity, though there be degrees
of this perfection. Not the Sixth, because though all sins do not exclude
charity, yet they offend. Now in that they exclude not, or are venial to the
faithful; we must impute it not to sin it self, but to Gods mercy in Christ.

OF FREE WILL.
The Part Confirming. CAP. V.
NOw, after the Condition of man under Sin, follows the consideration of
humane strength, which after Sin remained in man, and is commonly, and
usually expounded, and noted by the Name of Free Will. But it is needful, we
discern the nature of this Doctrine three manner of ways. First, commonly,
and absolutely, according to the causes thereof. Secondly, in Particular,
according to the state and condition of man being a Sinner. Thirdly,
respectively, and comparatively, according to the diverse estate of Man out of
the State of Sin, whether of his Integrity, or redemption, or glory.

Commonly, and Absolutely, Free Will is defined to be a natural power, or
faculty of the Soul, by it own, and proper motion without coaction (or
forcing) to choose, or refuse the good, or the evil, which is proposed (or
offered) to the will, by the mind (or understanding) to be chosen or refused.

The Efficient Cause of this Free Will, is usually two ways distinguished. For
one is Primary, and another Nearest: The Primary (or Principal) is God, the
beginning, not only of every good in nature, but also of Nature it self, and
of the faculties, and functions thereof Genesis 45.8. Pro. 16.1. Ier. 10.23 Phil.
2.13.
. The Nearest is Free Will it self, that is the will of man, which by
judgment of reason going before, of it own accord, choosing imbraceth; or
refusing, shunneth, that which was objected by the mind Esa. 1.19.20 Mat. 23.37
1. Kin. 3.5
.

Of this will, there is usually had a double consideration: the one, as
touching the Special, the other as touching the Operation. As touching the
special, it is said to be a faculty of willing, or nilling: as touching the
Operation, it is said to be a function, or action of that faculty, either
improperly occupied about the ends, or properly about the means, that tend to
the ends.

The Matter has the nature either of a Subject, or Object.

That which has the nature of a Subject, (as in this place, we consider it,)
is a substance created, intelligent, endued with reason, wherein namely the
understanding and will are the essential parts proportionally: but freedom is
said to consist, or be in these parts, as the separable accident in the
Subject.

That, which is of the Object, is generally all that, which is put (or
consists) in election (or choice.) But specially it is the moral good or
evil, whereunto the will of the Creature is freely carried, or which it freely
escheweth. And as touching Free Will in the cause of Natural good, the
question is more Philosophical then Divine.

The Form of Free Will, is the very freedom of the mind, or of the Elective
will, which (for learning sake) must three ways be distinguished, and known.
For there is one freedom in the Subject, another to the Object, and lastly
another from the let that crosses the same: which three it is needful that
we know, for the making of this Form, and for the condition of man's Free Will.

First, there is required freedom in the Subject, that is, in the will it
self, which from her inward beginning, works always freely, and that by
reason of it own nature, according to which a free necessity of willing is
laid upon it. So that it is not to be called a Will which is bereft of this
Freedom. For the will has such a reciprocacy with Freedom, as with it own
Essential property.

Then there is required freedom to the Object, either to both, opposite by way
of disjunction, to wit, either moral good, or moral evil, whereof the one
is chosen, or refused before (or rather then) the other, or to either of the^,
when only one is offered to be taken, or refused.

Lastly, there is required freedom from the let that crosses. For the will of
man is freede from compulsion and from necessity. From Compulsion; for what it
does, it does the same of it own accord. From Necessity; for, albeit, in
respect of the Special, it be necessarily limited to do either good only, or
evil only, or both; yet by it own inward power, it freely limiteth it self
to the bringing forth of it own act; yet it is needful, that both manners of
Freedom be distinguished. First, from the Freedom of right, and secondly from
the Freedom of slavery: That nature has denied to man: This, the corruption
of nature. He has not freedom of right, who of due is Subject to another, and
according to the will of the same, lives, is moved, and works Pro. 21.1 Act.
2.23.
: Wherefore all self power, or liberty ought to be given and assigned to God
alone: he has not freedom from slavery, who through his own fault, has made
himself a slave to sin, and the tyranny thereof Ioh. 8.34.
.

The End is the glory of God in his Justice, and mercy, and the Salvation, or
inexcusablenesse of man.

Particularly, in the state of Corruption, Free will is defined to be, a
natural faculty, and power, freely, and without coaction, to choose, and
perform the evil, which by the mind is offered to the will, to be chosen and
performed.

The Efficient Primarie Cause is God, both in respect of the Will, and the
freedom it self, as being the Author, and beginning of both, as touching the
natural state thereof. The nearest cause are the mind, and will of man so
far forth, as both by corruption of nature are averted from good, and
converted to evil; and the understanding verily proposes and judges falsehood
for truth; and the will chooses, and follows the evil in stead of the good
Tit 1.15 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 8.7. Romans 5.6. 2. Tim. 2.26.
.

The Matter as it is considered in the Subject, is the natural, or carnal man,
but as in the object, it is the evil, unto which the actions of both faculties
are carried.

Now, the Evil, whether you refer it to the inward, or to the outward
actions, we two ways consider: absolutely, and in it self; or Relatiuely, as
having reference to another thing. The Evil absolutely is that, which is
strictly forbidden of God. Relatiuely, is that, which is evil in the object,
circumstances, and end; that is, which either is not truly good, or is
inclined unto those things, which are not truly good.

But because when there is mention made of good; either the natural, and
moral good, as touching man; or moral, divine good, according to grace, is
understood: We must here observe a very great difference, when there is
speech of Free Will. For the power of a natural man, if it be referred to the
thing, which this natural light respects, has indeed her inclinations to
natural good, and moral good, as touching man Romans 1 19.20. Romans 2.15 Romans
2.14
; but because the communicating of every good, proceeds from judgment, and
judgment from the choice, and choice from knowledge, the power of man is
limited to the good, according to the measure of the knowledge of that good in
man. Now that knowledge is not true, because it erreth in the manner of the
truth, and strayeth from the true end and scope thereof 1. Cor. 2 14. Ier.
13.23 Mat. 12.35. To. 14.23.
.

Now the moral good, according to grace, which is supernatural, is not
apprehended, but by a supernatural knowledge, which is not in the natural man:
and therefore man being under sin, has neither inclinations, nor motions to
that good: for he wants all power to supernatural things, even that power,
which the Philosophers have called the receptiue, or passive power, because
every power is from a beginning, but there is no beginning in a natural man,
when there is speech of divine things) ^eyther to do them himself, nor to
^ffer them to be done by an other 2. Co. 3.5. Ioh. 3.19 Phil 2.13. 1. Co. 1.18
: ^oth being considered in man, are from ^at beginning, of all aptnes to good,
and ^so of the working thereof, which is in christ. Whence it is clear, that
power (...) the supernatural good is not in the ^turall man, and that there is
indeed ^me power in him, to the natural good, ^ut such, as straieth in the
end, and manner, ^d that therefore to speak properly, it (...) only a power to
the evil, whether it ^e such Absolutely, or Relatiue^ 1. Cor. 10.31. Romans
14.20. Tit. 1.15. Ier. 13.23. Mat. 7.18. Romans 3.10. Ioh. 3.6.
.

The Form is the Freedom in the ^biect to the Object, and from the co^^ry
impediment. For the will of man, (...) touching it self, is most free, and
freely ^itteth it self for the bringing forth (...) the action of evil,
without either ^y coaction, or necessity of the ^ct.

The End is the glory of God in his iu^^ce, and the inexcusablenes, or just
condemnation of man.

Comparatively, Free Will is two waye^ considered, according to the twofolde
condition of man, out of his State o^ Corruption, to wit; of his integrity
before his fall, and of his restoring, c^^ regeneration after his fall.

In the State of Integrity, Man had a Free will, or freedom of an Electu^^
will to both Objects, without any coaction or necessity. For he had a power,
that he might sin, and not sin But when he came to the act of disobedience,
by the act, he lost the power to good; because this was the nature o^ man, that
he abusing that his power to good, should turn away the good from himself,
and himself from the good into the contrary 1. Cor. 3 12. 1. Ioh 3.12. 2. Pet.
1.4. 1. Cor. 15.28.
.

In the State of Restoring, or Regeneration after the fall, free will ough^
diverse ways to be considered, an^ expounded. For, whereas man in the state, is
the common Subject of grace and sin; Hence it comes to pass that he has
free will, both to good according to Grace, and to evil, according to Nature,
which two contraries since they cannot be in one and the same subject, in the
highest degree, thence ^t follows, that man Regenerate is to be considered
according as his regeneration is more or less, (...) excellent.

As for him that is Regenerate, according to the highest degree, there can be
in such a one, no contrary matter, as it shall be with man in the life to
come; where free will (if we may so speak) shall be unto good only, and that
unchangeably; so that a man can will nothing but good, and that also after 1.
Cor. 13 12. Romans 7.18
, a good manner; but he, which is regenerate in the inferior degree, the
contraries may be together in him, and in very deed, are together in him, the
powers therefore of Free Will in man regenerate, while he is in this life,
ought diversely to be discerned both in the Subject, Object, and manner. The
Subject is two ways considered, partly, according to the old man, in whom he
is borne: partly according to the New, in whom he is regenerate. Of this
Subject, there is also a double object, the natural evil, in respect of the
old man, the supernatural good, in respect of the New 2. Cor. 3 17. 1. Ioh.
3.9. Romans 8.2 Ephesians. 2.5.
. But the manner of all these is free, because as the old man freely inclines
to natural things, so does the New man also to things which are
supernatural: in respect therefore of the matter, the Subject is common, but
in respect of the Efficient Cause, and of the beginning, repugnant the one to
the other; on both sides there comes a let to the freedom. Whence that
strife of the flesh, and the Spirit comes, whereof there is mention in the
seventh to the Romans.

OF FREE WILL. The Part Confuting.
DISTINCTIONS.
I.
THe Will or Desire is three ways distinguished; for one is Natural, an other
sensual, another intellectual. The Natural is a pure inclination of the
Essential form, whereby man naturally labors toward the perfection of
himself, The Sensual is the power of the inferior part of the Soul, led or
moved by sense, and not by reason, to these, or those particular things: the
Intellectual, is in the creature endued with reason, in respect of the Subject,
inclining the will to diverse objects, which is called Reasonable.

II.
THe reasonable will ought to be discerned three ways. For one is called
natural, whereby nature is simply carried to desire after that thing which it
apprehends: an other Elective, whereby the will chooses, between two
things opposite, by a separating of them. Lastly, there is a will by the
cause, whereby man straieth from his end, voluntas per causa
through an accidental error.

III.
THat which we call (Arbitrium) (Free Will) is sometime referred to the
understanding, and sometime to the Will; to the Understanding, either
Contemplative, or Active, in respect of the things, which belong to
deliberation: but to the Will, in respect of the things which pertain to
Election. After the former manner it comprehends the mind alone; after the
latter, as of us it is here taken, it comprehends, both mind and will.

IIII.
THere is one Freedom from Bondage, an other from Coaction, an other from
Unchangeableness, or necessity. Freedom from Bondage, is said to be that,
whereby one is not addicted (o^ subject) to the slavery of sin, or misery.
From Coaction, is said to be that, whereby one cannot be compelled to do, or
suffer any thing against his natural inclination: from Unchangeableness, is
said to be that, which can frame it self indifferently, or contingently to
both opposites, and so can do, and not do, suffer, and not suffer: The first
freedom is not in man corrupt; the Second is in every man, of whatsoever state
and condition: The third was in man before the fall.

V.
ONe freedom is said to be from necessity, an other from sin, an other from
misery. The first is of Nature. The second of Grace. The third of glory.

VI.
Freedom is either properly taken for the freedom which is in the Subject to
the Object, and from the contrary impediment: or improperly, or
Synecdochically, for one of these Liberties.

That Man cannot without faith, or the special help of God, perform any
moral good, against Bell. Li, 5. de Great. and Lib. Ar. Cap. 9.
I.
GOod Works are two ways usually considered; either according to their
outward manner, or according to their inward: In respect of both, God is said
to reward good works: of the one, because they carry a shadow of civil
goodness, which also is acceptable to God, as touching it self; but of the
other, because they are done in faith, according to Gods Rule and Prescript, to
Gods glory. Now God rewards, not according to the proportion of merit, but
according to the grace of promise; notwithstanding those places of Exodus the
1. because there is noted an antecedent, but not a cause of Gods blessing
toward the Mid-wiues. Of Ezekiel. 2.29. and Daniel, 4. because the Consequence
is of no force from the outward rewarding to the quality of the Work. For God
is wont liberally to recompense an outward obedience, with an outward rewarding.

II.
A Thing is said to be good Equivocally, and that two ways; either that it is
such indeed; or that it appears such; or else, that it is either good in it
self, as touching the substance of the work; or that it is said to be
perfectly good in the Object, Subject, End, and other circumstances. The Works
of the Heathen, are called good works, either according to the appearance
only, or because the substance of the work is good, though it be evil in the
Subject, object, end, and other circumstances.

III.
THe Fathers, which seemed to attribute any thing to Nature, either treated
only of those outward, Civil, and politic actions, as Basil, and Augustine;
or of the natural good, as Chrisostom^: or of Works according to the common
opinion, as Hierome.

IIII.
IN the Works of Heathens, all and every of those things are wanting, which
are required of the Adversary for the making of a good work: the circumstance
of the end is wanting, because that is not don for God, which is not done for
his commandment, and according to his rule, or for Gods glory. The Action is
defiled by the naughtiness of the cause, because whole man is whole sin
wholly, not only as touching himself, but also as touching his actions.
Neither has a good work any proportion with the strength of nature, because
to will, and to do good, is of grace, and not of nature: and so good works are
not only hard, but also impossible to Nature: Neither do the absurdities prove
the contrary, because we are bound of duty to do good works; nor are they
therefore called evil, because they are done simply, but because they are not
well done.

That there is no Free Will in godly, and saving actions, against Bellarmine.
Lib. 6. cap. 10.11.12.
THe Freedom of Will is usually considered two ways in man regenerate,
according as there are in him two diverse and contrary beginninges: the
beginning of good, which is the Spirit, or the part Regenerate: the beginning
of evil, which is the flesh, or the part unregenerate. Hence the freedom of
will, in respect of the first beginning freely wills good: in respect of the
other, it freely wills evil: and in this sense is Free Will in man
Regenerate diversely pronounced, either to be, or not to be.

AND

THis is the State of man, according to Nature, and his natural condition,
both in his first original condition, and Creation, and in his change and
corruption, which after followed by sin: Now the other state of man in this
life, according to the Grace of Vocation, which is above Nature, is to be known
and discerned.

Now, it ought to be discerned two ways, according as the Ch^istian calling,
and estate, or the condition of a Natural Christian man is in this life
comprehended in two principal heads, to wit Faith, and good Works. For these
are the two parts of a Christian calling, and the two most conjunct duties of
a Christian man, namely, to Believe and to Do; for faith imbraceth the Grace
of God in Christ, good works do testify, and perform Thankfulness for that
Grace.

OF FAITH.
The Part Confirming. CAP. VI.
BY the Name of Faith, we do understand an outward and hypocritical
profession of Religion, and Faith Mat 13 20.21. Heb. 6.4.5 6.
, not a temporal knowledge, and assent concerning Gods Grace Act. 8.13 Iac.
2.29.
. Lastly, not a certain persuasion concerning some miraculous effect conceyved
by a singular revelation or promise Mat. 17.20. 1. Cor. 13.2.
: but we mean that which properly, and simply is so called and is pronounced
by it self, concerning the only Elect, and them all. Whereupon it is wont
commonly to be called the saving and justifying faith Romans 3.28.
; and is a gift of God, or a holy habit Inditus.
given inwardly by the Spirit of God, whereby the godly in their
understanding, believing Gods truth, receive with a sure and firm assent of
Will, the promises of the saving good will, and grace of God in Christ, to his
glory, and their salvation.

The Efficient Cause of faith is two ways usually expounded, Primary, or
Instrumentally.

The Primarie Cause of Faith, is God, who had his foregoing good pleasure, and
the only free affection of his will, no preparation of our righteousness going
before, or merit of our works accompanying the same Ioh. 6.29 Ephesians. 2.8 Luc.
24.32
.

The Isntrumental Cause of Faith, is two-folde; the one inward and chief, the
other outward and furthering.

The inward chief Cause is the holy Ghost, who begets the same in the
Elect, by a special action, next, and immediately, beyond the order of nature,
partly, by disposing the understanding to the saving knowledge, and receyving
of Christ; partly, by induing the will with new qualities, and by inclining the
same, that it might particularly, and firmly assent, and cleave to that
knowledge, and receyving 1 Cor. 12.9. 2. Cor. 4.6 Gal. 5.22.
. The outward and furthering Cause is the preaching of the Gospel, by which
the holy Ghost ordinarily forms, and confirms this very work of Faith in
us, albeit God, according to the Liberty of his power, and will, may beget, and
work faith without the use of this ordinary means, when it pleases him, and
is expedient Romans 1 7.16.17. Romans 10.8 Ioh. 3.8.
.

The Matter of Faith ought only three, ways distinctly to be considered,
acording as it has respect unto the Subject, Object, or parts.

The Subject proper, and nearest, is the understanding, and will of man, as
both these faculties are regenerate by the supernatural grace and virtue of the
Spirit, and as the understanding knows the supernatural benefits of faith,
which are offered in Christ as true, and the will applies the same to it self,
with a sure persuasion of the heart, as good and healthful Luc. 24.25. Ephesians.
4.23. Act. 16.14 To. 10.20.
.

The Object in respect of the understanding, is Gods truth, in respect of the
will, is Gods singular Grace, laid open by his promises in Christ Jesus. Now
both are contained and limited in the word of God, which wholly and soly faith
imbraceth, as her level object, and in the same Christ crucified, together
with all his benefits, as her principal, first, nearest, and proper Object 1.
Cor. 2.2. Heb 10.22 2. Cor. 3.4 Romans 4.8. and 8.38.
.

The Parts, according to the manner of the Subject, or Object, are wont diversely
to be considered. In respect of the divine understanding, and will, they are
both a Knowledge, and an Assent: the Knowledge is, whereby we understand the
whole word of God, as touching the principal heads thereof, according to the
measure of grace revealed Esa. 53.11. Ioh. 10.38 1 Ioh. 4.16
. The assent is, whereby we most firmly resolve with our selves, that all
things, which are known out of the law, and the Gospel, are most true, and
rest our selves persuaded in them Romans 7.16. Ephesians. 3.12. Ephesians. 1.22
.

In respect of the will, the chief and principal part of faith, is, Trust
which is a firm persuasion of the heart; whereby every one of them, that are
truly faithful, do particularly appropriate to themselves, the general
promise of Grace. Which trust manifests it self by a double effect, to wit,
by constant Indurance, whereby faith opposes it self to all dangers, inward
and outward; and full Persuasion whereby we surely trust in God concerning our
salvation Romans 8 15.16. Ephesians. 1.13. Heb. 10 22. Heb. 11.1.
.

The Form of faith consists in Relation, whereby every Elect after a
particular manner applies to himself both the word of Truth, and the
particular promises of GODS Grace, by appropriating unto himself, through a
firm persuasion, those things which are taught, and promised, particularly,
and In Hypothesi.
by a Supposition; though conceyved in a position, and generally In Thesi Ioh.
17.15 Mat. 9.2 Gal. 2.20 Ioh. 1.12
.

The Supreme and chief End, is the glory of God, the Author of our Faith, and
Redeemer Romans 11.35. Ephesians. 1.12.
, the nearest end is our Salvation, which the holy Scripture calls the end
and reward of faith 1. Pet. 1.9 Ioh. 3.15 16. Ioh. 20.31
.

By this opening of the Definition through the causes, 2. things consequently
follow: First, that Faith is both one, and diverse: One, both in Special kind:
for faith Species specialissima.
is a Special kind most special: and in Object, because the thing believed is
one Ephesians. 4.5. 2. Pet. 1.1
. Diverse, both in number, and in degree: In Number, because every one has his
own faith, distinct from another: In Degree, because he has it acording to
the measure of Gods grace, as it is more or less Heb. 2.4. Mat. 9.22. Romans 14.1
.

Secondly, that faith is so far firm in all (the elect,) that it can neither
totally, nor finally ever at any time be lost: to wit, because of the
certainety, and unchangeableness of the Election, and promise of God, of the
satisfaction, and merit of Christ, and of the sealing of the Spirit.
Wherefore faith after some degree is oftentimes diminished; but, as touching
the form, it cannot perish Ioh. 3.16 Phil. 1.6 Ioh 6.56. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
.

OF FAITH. The Part Confuting.
DISTINCTIONS. In Defense of the Object of faith, against Bellar. cap. 8. Lib.
1. De IVSTIFICATIONE.
I.
THe Testimonies, which are alleged out of the histories of the Gospel, do
either treat of faith in Christ expressly, Mat. 16. Luc. 7. Ioh. 1 Ioh. 6. Ioh.
11. Ioh. 14. and Ioh. 20. and so of the special mercy of God, which God laid
open in Christ singularly, and effectually: or of Gods special mercy, which
Christ exhibited by will, and work in the example of the Leaper, Mat. 1. or
they treat only of an hypocritical boasting of that special mercy of God,
as in the example of the Pharisie, Luc. 18. Or lastly, of the outward means,
and extraordinary miracles, that further faith, which make not a justifying
faith, but do either generally testify, or particularly confirm the same,
Mar. vlt.

II.
THose which are alleged out of the Acts, and Epistles, are either Sermons
touching Christ, and so Metonymically concerning Gods special mercy, Act,
2.4.10.13.17. and 18. or do treat of Abraham's faith, not in respect of the
temporal, or earthly, but of the spiritual and eternal promises (for he saw
the day of the Messiah by faith, and therefore rejoiced) Romans 4. Or lastly,
they treat of the mean of special mercy, procured unto us, and confirmed by
the resurrection of Christ Rom, 10. and 1. Cor. 15.

Against Bellarmine, cap. 10.
I.
THe Word of God is two ways usually considered, either as the Word of truth
generally, or as the Word of promise and grace specially. The one Faith
respects, as it is a Knowledge, or assent; but the other, as it is a
trusting, or believing: for albeit the promises are generally proposed in the
Scriptures, yet there is a special application of them by faith, as the
examples of the sick of the palsy. Mat. 9. Of the sinful Woman, Luc 7. Of
the Adulteress, Ioh, 8. of Zacheus, Luc. 19 and of the Thief Lu, 23. do
teach.

II.
FAith is the Instrument of Justification, and not the Cause, which neither by
time, nor place can be discerned, or separated from the things which it
apprehends: Neither does the faith of a special mercy follow Justification,
because without it there is no Justification.

III.
IVstifying Faith takes not away, but proposes the subordinate means of
confidence, such as are Prayer, Sacraments, good works, Baptism; and uses
them for the augmenting and confirming of the same.

IIII.
THe confidence (or assurance) of faith depends not upon the quality of the
person believing, or the quantity of his Faith, but upon the truth of God
promising, the will of Christ redeeming, and the faithfulness of the spirit
sealing.

Of the Form of Faith, against Bellarmine: Lib. 1. De Iustificat. Cap. 5.
THe Testimonies which are cited out of the 11. to the Hebrews, do not
overthrow the form of Faith; but establish the same. First, the Apostles
definition of Faith, and the sense, and interpretation of the two properties of
faith, whereof mention is made in that Definition. For faith is said to be a
Ground (or substance,) not that it is a naked representation made in the
understanding, but for that it is a certain and undoubted assurance of the
will, as it may easily be collected by the places compared, the one with the
other, Psalm. 39.8. Heb. 3.14. Again, Faith is called an Evidence, because it
affords that certainety of demonstration, whereby not only the mind, but
also the will is convinced, that it might, particularly apply unto it self
Gods promises, understood by the mind.

Secondly, that, which is alleged concerning the understanding of the
Creation, by faith; for besides that, there is an other respect of Faith
justifying, which properly has an eye unto to the benefit of Redemption, and
not unto the work of Creation; we must also note, that some things are
pronounced of faith in Scriptures, rather in respect of knowledge, or assent,
and some things rather in regard of confidence (or assurance,) neither does the
understanding exclude assurance, but goes before it. Thirdly, the example of
Noah; for the Act of his faith does not only respect the deluge, and the truth
of Gods judgment; but also the saving of himself from the deluge; which he
could not believe, and embrace, but by the Assurance of the will. Fourthly,
that, which is alleged, concerning the things, belonging to God; because that
same faith, whereof the Apostle treats, does withal suppose both knowledge
in respect of the Essence and Nature of God, and confidence of his gracious
rewarding.

Against Bellarmine, Cap. 6.
I.
Romans 4. Answ. The nature and force of faith is not principally and chiefly
placed in knowledge, which is of the understanding, but in assurance, which is
of the will. For hence first mention of the promise is made, which the will
properly respects, that it might be embraced. Secondly, Abraham is said to
have been strengthened by Faith, not to have doubted through unbelief, or
distrust, and to have been very fully persuaded, that God was both merciful,
which would, and mighty, which could do him good: all which do testify his
confidence, and not his knowledge only.

II
COr. 1.13. Hope and Faith are sometimes of the same signification, and import
the same thing, sometimes they are distinguished, as in the place cited. Now,
they are thus distinguished, that Faith is a knowledge, assent, and assurance,
but hope an expectation, which follows Faith, and is begotten by Faith.

III.
COr. 2.10. The Apostle does not treat of Justifying faith properly, but of the
Effects there of, or of that spiritual virtue, whereby we renouncing our
selves, do bring into captivity all our thoughts to the obedience of Christ.

IIII.
Ephesians. 3. Assurance is diversely wont to be considered, either as the Form, or
as the Effect of faith: as the form, as it embraces Christ with a sure
persuasion of the heart; as the Effect, as out of this persuasion it begets
in us tranquillity of conscience, and boldness (or assurance) of Liberty.

V.
THere is one Object of faith, level, another chief or special: that which is
level, is the whole word of God, in respect of knowledge, and assent: that,
which is special, is the word of Grace, in respect of assurance.

VI.
TO believe, is wont sometimes to be taken largely, sometimes strictly; being
largely taken, it signifies generally every voluntary assent, with a
certainety, to that thing, which is not seen: being strictly taken, it
signifies a Justifying faith, which does indeed, presuppose a knowledge, but
formally, it is an affection toward the promise of Grace.

OF GOOD WORKS.
The Part Confirming. CAP. VII.
ANd this is the first and principal part of Christian Calling, being Inward
and Invisible, which the other, which is outward and visible does succeed, that
is, good Works, which prove and testify the truth, and life of faith, by the
outward exercises of Piety and charity.

Now it is needful that the doctrine of good works be expounded two ways:
first, according to their own common nature, and respect; secondly, according
to the chief kind of a Christian life, and the principal exercises of a
Christian man in this life.

Good Works, according to their own common nature, and respect, which of us in
this place, are indeed considered Theologically, and not either
Philosophically, or Politically, are defined to be, Actions, which are done
(the holy Ghost working the same,) of the Regenerate, by faith, according to
Gods law, to the glory of God, the confirmation of faith, and our election, and
the aedification of our neighbor.

The Efficient Cause of good works is usually considered, either as principal,
or Secondary. The Principal is God the Father in his Son, by the holy Ghost,
from whom, in whom, and by whom, is the beginning, and finishing, as in
nature, so above nature Phi. 2.13 1. Cor. 4.7 Ioh. 3.27. and 15.5. Ephesians. 2.4
. Now, God effects good works, partly in respect of the age^t, or
Instrument, which is man regenerate, whom he prepares, informs, and
instructs after a saving and singular manner of the Grace of sanctification,
that he might both be willing, and able to work well: partly in respect of
the action, which he sanct fieth, that it might be good both in the general,
and in the special, and in all circumstances.

The second Efficient Cause is either External, or Internal, both
Isntrumental, in respect of that former, (or superior) Cause. The External
is man regenerate, Immediately producing good actions, according to the
measure, and degree of his Regeneration. For, because the Spirit and the flesh
are mixed one with an other in a man regenerate, it comes to pass, that in
one, and the same work, the action springs mixed of both, by a mutual
conflict, which by the more intentive quality is usually named the work of the
Spirit, or of the 1. Ioh. 1.8. Romans 7 23 Ephesians. 2.3
flesh, Whence is the infection, and imperfection even of the best works. The
internal is Faith, not by the virtue, efficacy, or efficiency of it self; but
as it apprehends that her object instrume^tally, unto which it is carried, to
wit, Christ, in respect of whom only the holy Ghost works in us both to
will, and to do good, and our actions, though most imperfect, do
nevertheless, please God, and are approved of him.

The Matter of good works, is whatsoever is prescribed by the Law of God: for
both God alone has the authority of commanding, and the Law of God alone,
has the rule and manner of every commandment, which has respect unto that,
which is right and good 1. Sam. 15.22. Ezekiel. 20.19. Mat. 15.9. Esa. 29.23.
.

Of this Matter, according to the distinction of Gods Law into two Tables,
there are two chief and principal parts: the former whereof prescribes, and
commands the duty of man toward; God or godliness: the latter, the duty of
man toward man; or humanity.

The good works, which belong to godliness, are absolutely, and necessarily
good, and cannot be otherwise: the consideration whereof is most perfectly set
down in the four precepts of the first Table. For the works of godliness do
properly belong, either to the inward disposition of the mind, namely, that we
should hold both the truth of Gods worship which is expressed in the first
precept, and the manner of that truth which is expressed in the second: or they
do belong to the outward testifying of the body, to wit, that both in words,
which is in the Third, and in works, which is in the Fourth, we should give our
selves to all exercises of godliness.

The good works, which belong to humanity, are most perfectly expressed in the
six precepts of the second Table: for first the foundation of them all is laid
in the first precept, to wit, that mutual relation of obedience, and duty of
the inferiors toward the superiors, and the superiors toward the inferiors:
then the chief, and special kinds of humanity are reckoned up, unto which,
all the rest must proportionally be referred. The sum of these is, not to
hurt our neighbor, neither in deed, nor word, nor thought: not in Deed,
either in respect of his person, that he must not kill, or in respect of his
goods, that he must not steal, or in respect of the Person, which does most
nearly belong unto him, that he must not commit adultery.

Not in Word, for he must bear no false witness against him. Lastly, not in
mind, and thought: for very lust and concupiscence is forbidden.

The Form of good works is a full perfect conformity in all the parts
thereof, with the Law of God, both according to the outward show, and the
inward truth; 1 Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal 3.10. Romans 7.14
for two things concur for the making of this Form, the outward goodness of
the works, which the precepts of the Law do outwardly show and require, and
the inward holiness of the same, which the nature of the Law, which is
spiritual, and of the Lawgiver, who being a spirit, and a knower of the
heart, according to their manner, do declare, necessarily presuppose and
require.

And in respect of this double form, the manner of good works, as touching
themselves is most perfect, but as touching us, most imperfect: partly,
because, of the relics of sin; partly, because of the continual fight and
wrestling of the old and new man in us, and partly also because of the state,
degrees, and increasings of regeneration. Wherefore if there be said to be any
perfection of works, while we are here, That is spoken abusiuely, either for
the merit of Christ, and the gracious acceptance of God, or by relation unto
those, who have not as yet so proceeded in the Study, or exercise of
godliness, and works; Or lastly, after a humane manner according to outward
discipline. There is therefore no merit of good works, since there is no
proportion of equality between the reward, and the works, since also
whatsoever works are granted for good, are from another, are due, and are
imperfect Romans 7 23. 2 Cor. 3.5 Phil. 2.23. Luc 17.10
.

The End of good works is threefold, according to the diversity of the Object,
to wit, of God, our selves, and our Neighbor. On Gods behalf, the supreme
end is his own glory, whereunto both the commandment, and al benefits
corporal, and spiritual, are subordinate Mat. 5.16 1. Cor 10.31. Phil. 1.11.
. On the behalf of our selus, the End is the confirmation of our election, the
outward testifying of our Faith, and the due execution of our duty Mat. 7.16
17. Phil. 1.11. Iac. 2.17. 2. Pet. 1.10 Tit. 3 8.
. In our Neighbors behalf, the end is partly, that the unfaithful by our
good example might be provoked to faith and godliness, partly, that the
faithful might be confirmed in godliness and faith. Luc. 22.^2. Romans 14.19.
.

And this is the consideration of good works generally; but particularly, the
truth of good works must be discerned and declared, chiefly, and principally in
two things; namely in prayer, and repentance: whereof the one is properly
exercised Circa beneficia impetranda, Circa malefi^ia perpetrata.
, for good things which we would obtain; the other, for evil things, which we
have committed.

Prayer, is a special worship of God, whereby through Faith, we crave for
the Mediators sake, necessary good things of God, as being the fountain of all
good things Ioh. 4.24 Luc. 18.1. He. 10.22.
.

Now we crave, either for others, and that is Intercession, or against others,
and that is Expostulation; or for our selves, and that is, either Deprecation,
if we crave a deliverance from perils, or Supplication, if we desire the
partaking of a new benefit Psalm. 9 30.
.

A Form of asking, or prayer, we have in the Lords Prayer, whereof there are
three parts: an Entrance, a Narration, and an Epilogue (or Conclusion.)

The Entrance contains the places both of will, (Our Father) and of power,
(which art in Heaven.)

The Narration consists of 7. Petitions, whereof the four first require
Positive Graces; the three following, graces Privatiue, (as they call them.) The
Graces Positive respect, either the Soul; or the Body: those, which respect
the soul, do, either require the advancement of Gods glory, both universally,
among all, (Hallowed be thy Name,) and particularly in the Church; (Thy
Kingdom come) or do expound (or lay open) the manner of both, (Thy Will be
done.) Those, which belong to the Body, are Synechdochically included in that
only Petition of d^yly Bread. The Graces Privatiue are three; The Remission of
sins, Defense against the Devils Temptations, deliverance from all evils
Private and public.

The Epilogue contains causes Impulsive, and Final: the Causes Impulsive are
two, The Kingdom, and the power. The Cause Final is only one, the Glory of
God.

Repentance is a serious, and healthful changing of our wicked mind, and will,
effected by the holy Ghost, by the preaching of the Law, and the Gospel Ezekiel.
18.31. Ier. 4.1.3. Ephesians. 4 23 2. Cor. 7.10.
.

Of this there are two entire parts, according to the two bounds, namely, from
which, this change is made, and whereunto the same tends: which are the
mortifying of the old man, or the Flesh, and the quickening of the new man, or
of the Spirit: for by these, true repentance is performed.

Mortification, which is the first part of Repentance, has three properties,
or degrees: the Acknowledgement of Sin; sorrow for sin, and God offended;
Lastly, a Detestation and an utter avoiding of Sin. The Acknowledgement is in
the mind; Sorrow in the Passion; Avoiding, or shunning, in the action of the
Will. The quickening (or vivification) which is the latter, comprehends three
things contrary to Mortification: an Acknowledgement, and trust of Gods mercy
in Christ; Joy springing from the same; Lastly, an earnest Desire or endeavor
of holiness, righteousness, and new obedience through our whole life.

OF GOOD WORKS The Part Confuting.
DISTINCTIONS. That Good Works are not simply, and absolutely necessary to
Salvation, against Bellarmine. Lib. 4. De Iusti. Cap. 7.
I.
THe Promise of life is said to be conditional, not that the performance of
the condition is proposed to be the Cause of Life, but the Instrument and mean
to attain unto life. Neither do the places which are cited, prove any thing
else, which do either note the quality of them that are to be saved, and not
the cause of Salvation: Heb. 10.1. Tim. 2. Romans 10. or do intimate the way of
righteousness, by which men come unto Salvation, Phil. 2. and 2, Cor. 4. Or
lastly, do treat of the Effects; from which, as from that which is the A
Posteriori, That is from the Effect; to the Cause.
latter, judgment both may, and should be had of them, that are truly
justified, and hereafter shall be glorified, Mat. 25. Iac. 1. 2. Cor. 7.

II.
Neither does the reason alleged from an absurdity, and expressed in the
ninth Chapter, prove the contrary: for Faith alone is said to save us
aequivocally; either in respect of faith, because it is alone, or of salvation,
because it alone saves. Faith is not alone without works, but it alone saves,
and justifyeth without works; as the eye only sees, yet not alone, but
joined together with the Body.

That the Law of God is not possible to be fulfilled by us, against Bellarmine,
Lib. 4. Cap. 11.
I.
THe Testimonies of Scriptures, which are alleged, First, Man. 11. and 1.
Ioh. 5. treat not of the nature of the Law, compared with the power of the
Regenerate, or not Regenerate, for the fulfilling of the same; but either of
the burden of the Cross, which the inward virtue, and efficacy of Christ's
Spirit, and the hope of eternal immortality, do ease; or of Gods
commandments in General, as well in respect of Faith, as of good works, which
are not so far grievous, that by them the faithful should be oppressed, for
both the Spirit becomes conqueror, and whosoever believes i^ freed from
the curse of the Law. Secondly, those in Ioh. 14. To. 13, Gal. 5. Ioh. 15. do
not treat of our power, for the fulfilling of the Law; but either of our
duty, or of the effect of our love toward God; Or lastly, of the love of our
neighbor, as a most evident Testimony of the whole obedience of the Law.
Thirdly, in Psalm 118. 1. King. 14. Act. 18. 1. Kin. 15. 2. King. 23. 2. Chron.
15. and 11. There is no speech concerning any perfection of the righteousness
of those, who are named righteous absolutely; but, either respectively, or by
relation unto others; or Inchoatiuely, as touching themselves; or by
Imputation, in respect of Gods acceptance; Or lastly, after a sort, in respect
of their own sincerity opposed, or set against Hypocrisy.

II.
THe reasons, which are alleged, Chap. 13. prove not the question in hand.
Not the First, for it is grounded upon a false presupposall, and upon that,
which by the Schoolmen is termed (Petitio Principij:) Not the Second, because
it plays upon a false consequent; for our bond remains, albeit our
weakness, (or want of power) be admitted: like as the debt is wont to
remain, though the debtor be not able to pay. Not the Third, because God has
his reasons: First, he does not require a debt in vain, and we are put in mind
of our debt: Secondly, the Principles of nature, are not in vain stirred up,
for the convincing of the wicked, and the saving of the godly. Not the Fourth,
because the Apostle discourses, Romans 8. of the right of the Law, not of
Justification; and that right is not said to be fulfilled of us, but in us.
Not the Fifth, because the operations of the Spirit are produced in us,
according to the manner of the Instrument, and the measure of our Infirmity.
Not the Sixth, because, as being Justified they are born of God, they perform
the Law; but as they are regenerate imperfectly, they perform and fulfill the
same imperfectly.

OF MAN'S ESTATE after this Life.
The Part Confirming. CAP. VIII.
ANd this is the State of Man in this life, both according to the condition of
his first Original, or Natural corruption, as also according to his
regeneration by Grace, or the truth of Christian calling. Now the other State
of Man, which shall be after this life, next ensues the same; and it ought two
ways of us to be considered, and declared, either Generally in respect both
of the godly, and ungodly, or Particularly in respect of these, or those.

Generally, the estate of man, after this life, is known by two degrees: by
the resurrection of the flesh, and the last judgment.

The Resurrection of the flesh is an iterated, and indivisible coupling of the
soul with the body, wrought by the mighty power of God, that when death shall
be conquered, men made immortal, might live for ever, either in glory, or in
torment.

The efficient cause principal, of the Resurrection is the whole Godhead. For
the father raises the dead, the son quickneth whom he will, and the holy
Ghost, with the father, and the son, gives a fulness of life, as well to the
body as to the 1. Cor. 15.12. 1. These. 4 14. 1. Cor. 15.25.
soul: but the isntrumental, or ministerial, are the Angels, the effectual
working of whom, the scripture signifies by a Metaphor of a sounding Trumpet.

The matter is man's body, the same in number, as touching the substance, which
we bear in this life, whether it be of them, which are dead, or of those
which shall be found alive, at the last day Dan 12.2. Ioh. 5.26.29. 1. These.
4.16.17.
.

The form, according to the consideration of the matter, shall be either a
Restoring of the dead unto life, or that proportionable, and conformable
transformatio^ of those, which shall be found alive. This form the changing of
the qualities of the body does accompany, being, indeed, a general
incorruption, and immortallity; but, besides these, in respect of the faithful,
there shall be a particular glory, power, and spiritualnes of the bodies.

The end principal, is the glory of the righteousness and grace of God;
Subordinate, according to the considerations of the persons, that rise again,
either the salvation, and glory of the Elect, or the punishment, and casting
away of the Reprobate.

The last (or extreme) judgment is a judicial act, whereby Christ, in the
last day, with great majesty, and glory, shall give sentence upon all men,
universally.

The efficient cause principal, as touching indeed the judicial power, and
authority, is God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: but, as touching
the manner of judgment, or exercise thereof Christ is; not only, as he is God,
but also as he is man: both because of the estate of glory which follows
together with the personal union of the divine and humane nature, as also,
because of the agreeableness, and affinity of himself with men Mat. 24.30.
Luc. 21.27 2. Tim. 2.8.
: The Administering Cause shall be the Angels, whose Service God will use,
both in the gathering together, and in the separating and singling out of them
that shall be judged Mat. 24.31. 1. These. 4.16.
.

The Matter, as it respects the subject, is the faith or infidellty of every
one, declared by the effects of both: but as concerning the Object, are both
universally, all Creatures, even the unreasonable, which shall be freed from
the servitude of corruption, and generally, all, both Angels and Men, and
particularly, that man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, Antechrist Mat. 29.32.
1. These. 4.17. Apoc. 20.12.
.

The Form is that whole order, and proceeding of the most majesticall
judgment, comprehended in the very preparation, both of the Judge, and of the
Persons to be judged, in the sentence of the judgment, and in the execution of
the sentence Mat. 25.32 1. These. 4.16.17.
.

The End Supreme, is the glory of God himself, and the accomplishme^t or
Christ's office; Subordinate, the just condemnation of the wicked, and the
glorious felicity of the faithful; both which, the infiniteness, and eternity
either of joy, or sorrow follows 2. Tim. 4 8.
.

Particularly, the State of man after this life, after the time of that
universal life resurrection, and last judgment, is either of life, or death
eternal.

Life Eternal, is the life of glory, wherein the Soul, joined to our body,
enjoys God for ever, being advanced to the highest top, and height of her
felicity,

The cause of this life is God, to wit, the Father the Efficient, the Son the
Meritorious, and the holy Ghost the sealing and applying Cause Ioh. 14.2^. Apo.
21.3. 1. Cor. 15.45. Romans 8.11
.

The Matter, which has the respect of the Subject, are those good things,
which neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor can the mind of man
comprehend 1. Cor. 15 28.
. That which is of the Object, are all the blessed and elect Apo. 21.3. Mat.
25.24
.

The Form is the most perfect knowledge, vision, and fruition of God himself,
and the exceeding felicity and blessedness of man, which accompanies the
same, which also consists both in the separation, and absence of all evil
things, and in the participation, and presence of all good things; both, are
both perfect, and eternal Apo. 22.4 Psa. 7 15 1. Ioh. 3.2. Psa. 16.11
.

The End is the glory of Gods grace, and the glorifying of the elect Apo.
21.3.5.12.11.17. 1. Cor. 15.28.
.

Death Eternal is the unspeakable and most miserable condition of the
reprobates, appointed (or decreed) of God; whereby both their Soul, and body
are most justly adjudged to eternal punishments.

The Efficient Cause remote is God, the most just judge; the Isntrumental is
Satan; the nearest is Sin Mat. 25.41.
.

The Matter, which has the respect of the Subject, are Eternal punishments:
that which is of the Object, are the Cursed, and the Workers of iniquity Ioh.
5.29 1. These. 1 9.
.

The Form is the perpetuity, and the infiniteness of the punishments in Hell
Apo. 20.15.21.8. Esa. 66.24 Mat. 4.42
.

The End Supreme, is the glory of Gods Justice: The Nearest, is the just
condemnation, and punishment of the wicked.

OF MAN'S ESTATE after this Life. The Part Confuting.
Touching the Resurrection.
I.
THe Resurrection, in the holy Scripture, is two ways taken: Figuratively, or
Properly: Figuratively, either by a Metonymy, it signifies immortal life, or
by a Metaphor, either a deliverance from danger, or the regeneration of the
Souls, which is a spiritual resurrection, and is called the First: Properly,
Resurrection signifies the quickening of the Body, which shall be done at the
last day, which also is called the Second.

II.
THere is one Resurrection Universal, and Final, which no man shall escape:
an other Particular, or foregoing, whereof there are particular examples extant
in the Scriptures.

Of the last Judgment.
I.
IVdgement in the Scriptures, signifies three things: either the cause of
damnation, or an universal government, or the very Act, either of
comdemnation or Justification.

II.
THere is a twofold Judgment of the Lord: Particular, or Antecedent; When God
in this life either defends his people, or represseth the wicked: Universal,
being the last, which shall be done in the last day of the Resurrection.

III.
THe Son is said to be the judge of the world, not exclusiuely, or
oppositely, but by an appropriation: for that by the Son in a visible form,
the last judgment shall be executed.

IIII.
THe Son is said to be ignorant of the day of judgment; either because he
would have us to be ignorant thereof, or as touching his humane nature, which
by ordinary and natural knowledge, knows nothing of this matter; or as
touching his state of humility, which as touching his voluntary dispensation,
he has taken upon him.

Of Life Eternal.
I.
THere are 3. kinds or differences of life: there is a life of nature, which
the Apostle calls Natural. There is a Life of Grace, which the Sons of God
alone do enjoy in this world: there is a life of Glory, which consists in
the vision of God.

II.
LIfe Eternal is two ways taken: Metonymically, both for the way to life, and
for Christ himself: Properly, for the State of the blessed after this life.

III.
THere is one Vision of God Natural, in the things created; an other
Specular, or Symbolicall, by resemblances and Signs; an other of Faith, by the
doctrine and doings of Christ; an other of Present sight, or of glory to come,
when we shall see God face to face.

Of Death Eternal.
DEath is fowre-fold: First, Corporal, which in the Scriptures is also called
Temporal, and the first death in respect of the wicked. Secondly, Spiritual,
and that either of the faithful or unfaithful: that of the faithful is
threefold; of Sin, which is called Mortification of the Law, as it is the
power of Sin; of the world, as the world is dead unto them. The death of the
unfaithful is that, which may be called the death of faith, or of the soul.
Thirdly Eternal, which is called the second. Fourthly, Civil (death) which of
the Lawyers is said to be of them, which are condemned to death.

FINIS.

