A MUCH PROFITABLE TREATISE AGAINST THE pestilence, translated into e^glyshe
by Thomas Paynel Chanon of Martin Abbey. 1534.

REMEDY AGAINST THE PESTILENCE.
FOr the conseruatyon of these that are in health, and reformation and
amendmente of these that are sick. I intend under ye correction of my
auncyente masters and doctors, to write and declare certain profitable
things for the common weal, and against pestilence, the which does very
often invade, trouble, and vex men's bodies. And against these things after my
poor learning, I will ordinatly write, as here after does follow.

Of the pronosticate signs of pestilence. cap.i.
THe signs, by the which a man may pronosticate, speak, and know the
pestilence, are after this work but.vii.

The first is, when that in the self same su^mers and come of the south wind.











The seventh is, when there blows much

The causes of pestilence. cap.ii.
THe causes of pestylence are diuyded in three. For at somtymes they proceed fro
beneth, and sometime fro above, and other while from both. Pestilence may be
caused and come from beneth, when there is nyghe unto our chamber some priuey,
or stynkynge sink, by the which the air may be corrupt and infectyd: and
this pestilence is called a particular pestilence: the which may chance and
happen daily. And of this procedethe a pestilent fever, by the which many a
physician is deceyuyd, not knowing the said fever to be pestiferous. And
sumtymes such pestilence chancethe by the corruption of deed carreyne, the
which does fortune oftentimes in corrupt places. This pestilence comes very
often fro above, and that through the virtue and operation of the celestial
bodies, by the which the lively spirit of man is corruptyd. Of this speaks
Auicenna in his fourth book saying, By the air and influence of the celestial
bodies above, the bodies benethe ar oftentimes and very sone corrupted and
infectyd. For the celestial impression does corrupt the air, and by such
corruption the lively spirit of man is corrupted as well by the inferior rote
as by the superior: that is to say, that the pestilence is caused as well by
the inferior bodies, as by the superior impression, when the air is through
deed careyn so corrupted that it infecteth man, and ingendrethe siknes, as
fevers and impostumes. For why, the air is then open, whose attraction is
often venemons and corrupt, the which is right grievous for the heart, and
nature is there with diverse manners of ways feblysshed and sore grieved.

Upon these things before declared, two questions may be asked. First why that
some do die and peryshe of the foresaid sycknesse, and some not: and being in
the said same city or house, why one does dye, and a another dies not?

Unto this first question I answer and say, that hit may so fortune and
chance by two diverse reasones. And first because that the action and
operation of the bodis above, have more respect to one place then to a another.

The second reason and cause comes of the patient. For saying it is so, that
every man is not of like complexion, one may be disposed to that infirmity
and sickness, whereunto an other is nothing inclined or dysposed. And ye shall
note, that all such as be disposed to the pestilences, are of a whotte
complexion, and their conduites are wide and large, their poores open, and
replenisshed with diverse humors.

Item all such bodies as be much resoluyd, as these that do often times
company with women, and these that use much baynynge, and these which by
great labor and vehement anger are chased and hot: al such are much more
disposed to have the pestylence than any other.

The second question is, whether such pestilente sickness be contagious or no.

To this question I answer and say, that such pestylente sickness is
contagious. For from such infected bodies commethe infectious and venomous
fumes and vapors, the which do infecte and corrupt the air. And therefore it
is very necessary to avoid and eschew all such as be infected with any
such infirmite: and also in time of pestilence to avoid great multitude and
congregation of people. For in a greatte multitude may be some one infectyd,
the which may infecte many other. And therefore the wise and expert physicians,
when they vyset any such infecte persons, stand far from them, turnynge and
holdyng their facys toward the door, or some other wyndowe: and so should their
servants do, and also they that keep them.

Ye shall also note, that yt is very good and profitable to recover health, al
sumtymes to change chambers, and to open the north and este wyndowes of the
sickema^s chamber, and to keep the southe wyndowes thereof close and shytte. For
the southe wind has two causes of infection and putrefaction.

The first is, that it feblyssheth as well the hole and sound bodies, as the
sick.

Secondely it is written in the third book of the Aphorismie, that it
inflatethe and can sethe a man to swell, and noyeth the hering, and does hurt
the heart. For it does open the pipes and conduites of man, and persethe unto
the heart. And therefore it is very conueniente and mete for a hole man, in time
of pestilence, and when the southe wind does blow, to keep him self within:
or else (if a man must needs go forth) that he depart not from his house,
till the son be hot, and of a good heyghte.

The remedies against the foresaid pestilence. Cap.iii.
FOr asmoche as we have seen the causes of the pestilence, it is now
convenient to declare certain remedies to withsta^de it. Wherefore ye shall note
after the mind of the supernatural physician, spekyng by the mouth of
Iheremie, that if a man will be surely cured, and have a sure medecin, he
must leave his sins, and confess him self with humility and great
repentance. For in time of sykenes confession and penance should be preferred
above al other medecines. But to keep and conserve the body, the most
soueraynste thing is to avoid and fle such places and persons as be
infected. But yet for as much as there be many that can not conuenientely, nor
with their ease or profit change their habitation, I would counseyll them as
much as shall be possible, to eschew and fle al such things as may ingendre
or cause putrefaction, and to absteyne from much bodily frequentation and
company of women.

Also in such dangerous season and time of sickness, we should avoid the
southe winds, for naturally they cause much infection and dangerous
putrefaction. And therefore we have told you before, that the south windows of
your house should be shut, til it were prime, and that they should be open
northward. Also we have said, that all manner of infection and stynch should be
anoyded and fled, as the infection of stables, pryueys, and above all other the
infection of deed carein, and of long standing waters, the infection of old
sinkes, that cause such corruptions, that the inhabitours of such houses do
die, their neighbors continuyng in health and prosperity. In like wise we
should flee those places, where that putrified ware is sold: for such
putrified things do engender infection and sauers much contrary unto health.
For as aromatike sweet odours and savors do comfort the heart, so does ill
and infectious savors grieve the heart, and cause it to be weke and feeble,
wherefore it is right necessary to withstand such infections, and to beware,
that they do not perce and enter in to our chambers, and that we have good
and clear fires, and that these herbs here following be not to seek,
Bayberies, Ieneper, Vbery, Organy, wormwod, Isope, Rue, Muggeworte, and
specially this wodde Aloes, the which is very dear, whose fumygations must be
receyuyd by the mouth and nose, for they do strength, fortify, and comfort
the heart, and the interyour parties of man.

Also ye must eschew and fle the excess of meats and drynkes: for such
repletion does cause and engender ylle humors, the which are easily and sone
corrupted and infectid. And therefore Aui. says in his.iiii. canon, that all
such as use great repletion, do abrige and shorten their days and the end of
their life. In like wise a man should not bayne nor wasshe him among much
company, for the breath of one infectid person may infect a hole. Farthermore
all manner of multitude and congregation of people is to be sled and auoidyd.
But for asmoche as it is very hard for many a man to avoid and absteyne fro
company, let all such receive and use these medicines that here after follow.

In the morning at your vprysyng, ye shall eat a little Rue well wette and
depte in clear water, with a little salt, and one or two walnuttes well pylde.
If so be yt ye can not have these forsaid things, take a tofte wette in
vinegar, and specially wha^ the wether is clowdy. Also ye must se and take heed, that your house be over sprincled with vinegar of losis, and that in
somer it be strewde with vine leaves. Item it is very good for a man to wash
his hands in water and vinegre, and than to smell to his hands.

Also it is helthsome to smell to such things, as be sharp and tarte, whereof
I had experience and prouyd it my self at Mou^tpeller. For through poverty I
was enforced and constraynyd to be among them, and to goo from house to
house to help the sick and dysesyd, and so took a sponge in my hand deped
and well wet in vinegre, or else a toste, the which I held unto my mouth. For
all that is sharp and sower, does replenyshe the pypes and conduites of the
body, and lettethe the ylle air to enter into the body, and so it is
excluded.

The confortation of the heart and other principal members of man. Capi.iiii.
THe things which do comfort the heart, are Saffron, Cherfile, and plantayne,
the which do solid and confirm the interior spirits.

Also ye shall understand, that the eyes through the infection of the air
do wax obscure and dim, except a man carry about him these foresaid
things. It is a right wholesome thing for a man to wash his hands, eyes, and
his mouth with rose water and wine. But if all these forsayde things can not
be had, take aysel: for so ye may both dwell and hau^te the more surely
among much company: the which medicine is laxatyue, and much profitable for
the bellye. Or else ye may take pylles named pestile^tions, the which ye
shall find at the potycaris. And as considering metes, I say that Triacle is
very good: and therefore it is not ill to use thereof twyse a day the quantity
of.ii. sponfulles well mynglyd with clear wine, or rose water, or ale. And after
it is well myngled and beten together, and that ye have received it, ye must
absteyne from all other meats til it be none. Also it shall be very good ons in
the day to eat good meats, and moderately to drink good wine, or else it
should putrify and corrupt the humors. Men must beware of hot meats, as
pepper, and garlyke, notwithstanding that the pepper does purge the brain of
fleme, and other principal members of al superfluous and vicious humors, nor
that is not through his heat, the which hete ingendrethe putrefaction, whose
bytternes plesythe me much more than his savor.

And garlyke in like manner, does purge and avoid fleme, prouokyng man's
appetite, and chaceth away ill ayers. Yet for as much as it troublythe the
eyes, and does hete their heads that do much use it, I think it therefore
another wholesome, nor the use thereof very pleasant. For the pestilence through
natural heat, is often times incresyd and augmentyd. All meats of light
digestion are most wholesome. And it is good to use boylde meat in the
morning, and roste at night. Suppynges and cawdelles, if they be tarte and
sharp, aare profitable. For in time of pestylence such egre and sower meats
are better for man's body, then any other medicine.

Item all fruits at hurtful, except they be sour and sharp, as cheris,
poumgarnades, or instead and place of a medicine, a littel piece of a naple, or
of a pere. For all manner of fruit engender putrification. The most
profitablest spice in time of pestilence are these, Cmamum, Gynger, Common,
Nutmegges, and Saffron: of the which men do make sawses for rich men: But if
so be poverty will not suffer you to bye these foresaid spyces, make your sauce
of rue, sage, walnuttes, and parcely, depte in vinegar. If so be they be of
mean estate, let them take for their sauce saffron and cummyne, the which
must be put in vinegre.

This sauce is a very good sauce auoydyng all corruption, and with all this a
man must be merye and nothing melaneolyous: For that is cause of good health.
And therefore in time of pestilence a man should not fear to dye, but rather
trust and hope to live long.

Of lettynge of bludde.
FLeubothomye, that is lettynge of blud, may be done and used ones in a
monthe, if it so be that iorneinge or no another thing do let it: as in
pylgrymmes, and other feeble persons, or they that are laxatiue. And whether
that this fleubothomia be in the right Basilyke, or in the list it must be
done fasting. And after the incisyon, he that is let bloudde must be merye,
and use moderatelye good wine, or else good ale, and keep him self from
sleep that day that his basilyke is cut.

And if a man feel him self to be greuyd with any impostume, he must avoid
sleep, And seek for good merye company, or else walk: for by sleep the
interyour and inward heat drawethe the poison so unto the heart and the other
pryncypalle members of the body, that hardly a man shall either by herbs, or
any other medycine restore the body to his first condytyon and estate again,
the which thing should not chance, if he would eschew sleep. And therefore
sleep must be differred for a while by walking in to some plesaunte feldes or
gardeynes.

After such walking a man may sleep the space of a good hour. And to this
purpose Auicen says, that when we purpose to sleep, we should before drink
some good wine, or else some other good drynkes for by sleep a man gethereth
ill humors, the which good drink do expel.

Here it may be inquired, how one should know, when he is smitten with the
pestilence, where to I aunsere and say, that who so ever be infected, that day
he shall eat very lyttel meat: for he is fulle of ylle humors, and a none
after he has eaten, he shall desire to sleep, and under a spyce of cold, he
shall feel a vehemente heat, in the fore part of his hedde. The which thing
may be avoided and helped by mean mouinge of him self, or walking. For the
pondorosite of the body, will not suffer him to walk, or to ride much at that
time: for he shall couette to sleep at every hour. For the poison that is in
his body does so trouble the lively spirits, yt he shall require nothing else
but sleep. And by these foresaid signs a man shall well perceive when he is
infectyd with the sycknes. And he that will not believe it, may tarry the space
of half a day, and know it to be so by experience. For he shall feel the
sores under his arms, or about his eres, his neck. and shulders, or else
above his reins.

Therefore the most souereynste remedy is in time of pestilence, to fle and
refrain sleep.

For when the spirits of man be at rest, the venym and poison does extend
and sprede it self throughout all the body: of the which thing I have had
experience and prouyd it by my self. And therefore when any man does feel him
self smytten and infectid with the pestilence, he should be let blood in
great quantite. For the euacuation of a little blud does only move and
stir the venym. And who so will not let him self bludde by many veins,
must be let bloudde by one, and that abundauntly. But whether he that is let
bloudde be sick or hole, he must needs (for the reasones before rehersyd)
eschew and avoid sleep. And if he have a sore, he must be let bloudde upon
he self same side that he has his sore, and not upon the contrary side, for
such causes as here after shall follow. And therefore it the sore be upon the
right arm, he must be let blud upon the vein in the mids of the self
same arm: and like wise it must be done, if it be upon the left arm. And
if the postume be benethe toward the priuey members, he must be let bludde
on the left side, toward his great too: But if the sore be in the neck, he
must be let blud in the hand upon the self same side, nyghe unto the thumme,
and nyghe unto the little finger. But if the sore do appear nyghe unto the
ears of Cephalica, then he must be let blud upon that side where he does
feel his grefe in the vain yt is betwyxt the thu^me and the next finger,
which is called Basilica. If ye sore do appear upon the shulders, he must be
let blud with ve^tosities, and first in the veyn called mediane. If it appear
on the back, he must be let blud in the vein called perdica magna. And let al
these things be done, if the pacient slepte not before he knew of the sore,
for if he feel hit after that he has slepte, then he must be let bloudde
clean contrary: that is to say, if the sore do appear upon the right arm,
he must be let bloudde upon the left arm, in the vein of the liver, or in
the veyn named Basilica mediana. And if hit appear upon the left arm, ye
must do as ye did when it appeared upon the right arm, and so consequently
where so ever it does appear.

If the patient after such diminution of bloudde be weyke and seble, then he
may sleep and take his rest at after none: for until it be none he must needs
be in continual and moderate motion. And if the sore do increce, yet a man
should not fear it, for the soore is the cause of health. And to ripe and to
break the sore, make this medicyne that here after folowethe.

Bruise the leaves of Ellerne with a little mustarde, and make a plaster thereof,
to lay upon the sore. Some Surgiens will put triacle unto it, the which
thing in no manner of wise I would ye should do: for the nature of triacle, is
to repel poison, and therefore it were better that the paciente should drink
it to avoid out the poison.

Another medicine to ripe a pestilence sore. Take an herb called herbaiouis,
pellytory, plantayne, and a lyttellrye, and stamp them together, until there
come water from it: after that wete it in woman's milk, and drink thereof
fasting, and before ye go to your rest: for so it shall have the better
operation.

Also he that has a soore, may take hasell nuttes, fygges, and rue, and make a
plaster to lay to his sore.

To know vrines.
IF ye will know vrines, ye must first of all mark, whether the urine be
scummye, ye shall see a cercle about it, and thereby ye shall know, that there
are greatte ventosyties in the guts and reygnes.

When ye se that the urine is as though it were full of bloudde, it
betokenethe grefe and pain through out all the body, and if it be in the
botum of the water, yt sygnyfiethe pain in the reygnes.

When ye se that there is much vryne, and that it is as clear as water, it
signifies the virginity of a maid.

When ye se in any vryne little bryghte and flamynge sparcles, as appear in the
son beams, in a man it signifies ill humors: in a woman it betokens that
she is with child, and if those sparcles be read, it is a shrewde token.

When ye se the vryne read, and in color like unto wine, and as there were
small bubles in the botome, it signifies yt the patient does suffer great
pain through out all his body. When ye se the vryne discolored, and dark in
the mids, it signifies that the pacient is full of fleme, but yet without
any fever: and that he has a swellyng in the belie, and that he is peyned in
the raynes, in the side, and in the heed. And if it be a woman's water, she is
peyned in the nauyll, in the raynes, and in her knees, and that the suffers
cold in her hands, and in her feet.

To all such persons, ye may give good strong wine, well mengled with hoote
water: in the which water ye must put sodden sage, whereof ye must give them
every morning half a nou^ce. Also ye must make them a bathe of Penny real,
Camamyll, and baye leaves: and whether it be men or women, they must be therein a
long season, and anoynte their raynes and their bellyes with the same, and
with oil of bays.

A remedy for the french pockes.
I Find that this sickness began in the year of the creation of the
world.MM.ccccxxxvi. And now I say, that the unfortunate co^iu^ction of
Saturn and Mars (in the which this disease had his beginning and course) the
conjunction and ill respect of those planets was the beginning thereof. In the
year a.M.cccc.xcvi. re.vi. of Ianuer, in the third face called Piscis: the
which infortune and ill respect of the forsayde planettes impressyd in man's
body, disposed to corruption, this forsayde disease. For Saturn is the cause
of the passion and peynefulnes of the legs and other members: and Mars is the
cause of the ingendryng thereof, as it is noted in the book entitled Initium
sapientie. cap.4. of the nature and sygnification of planets. And therefore I
say, that the deed of the forsayde conjunction, is the cause of this sikenes:
the which conjunction is paste, and shall come no more. For in the
year.M.cccc. xc.vii. the forsayde planettes did holly conioyne them self all
in their contrary sign. And therefore if any man chance to be infected again
with this syckenes, it is not by the influence of any constellation, nor by the
influence of any ill respect of the forsayde coniu^ction: but because it is of
his propre nature very contagious. And therefore yet such as keep good diet,
may be sone eased.

This malady is cronique, long sense, and extendyd through the nature of
Saturn, whose scabbes, pusshes, and inward and outward goutes, which ar of
ye nature of Mars shall be shortly in Aries. But as touching this matter, there
are four things to be co^siderid. First that they, which be infected with
this sycknes, must use no great abstine^ce in meats nor drynkes. For
abstinence causethe great debilitie of nature, and feebleness of body. They must
ete such meats as be light of digestion, and drink sweet wynes with rain
water.

Secondarily they must be purged ones or twyse in the weke with pylles
convenient and mete to purge the heed: because that this malady, which is of
Saturnus, proceeds from the heed. Thyrdly to remove this sycknes and the
peynes thereof, ye must anoynte him with oil made of sweet almandes, and with
terpentine: the which two must be mengled well together. Fourthly he must
drink every morning woman's milk, and suck it from the dugge, for that is
most convenient: or else he must take asses or gotes milk, and that the foresaid
bestes be norished after the use and form of physic. The manner of receyuynge
of this milk, is by the dugge: and the cause is this. In this sickness there
are three things, sores, bledyng, and consumtion. Vlceration must be healed,
bledynge must be mundified, and consu^ption recovered and restored. There is a
medicine, i^ the which are these three, that is milk, the which naturally
does cleanse, the chese does fasten, and the butter does nouryshe, and restore
the forsayde consolidation. And therefore I say, that who so will use this
thing every morning fasting, shall by the grace of god recover his health, and
so I pray god he may.

To the reder.
It may be, that this remedy for the french pockes before written, was at the
beginning the best that men had by experience proved: but I think it is
nothing now comparable to that that Hutten writes de ligno guaiaco, yet not
withstanding we have put it to, that men may se what things are good, if the
other could not be had.

Finis.
LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELET REGII IMPRESSORIS.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


