THREE SMALL AND plain Treatises.

1. Of Prayers or Active Divinity. 2. Of Principles, or Positive Divinity. 3.
Resolutions, or Oppositiue Divinity.
Translated and collected out of the Ancient Writers for the private use of a
most Noble Lady.

By an old PRAEBENDARY of the Church of Lincoln.

CERTAIN PRAYERS, AND short MEDITATIONS translated out of the Writings of S.
Augustine, S. Gregory, S. Bernard, Ioannes Picus Mirandula, Ludouicus Viues,
Georgius Cassander, Charolus Paschalius, and others, for the private Use of the
L. M. B.
Morning Prayer.
MY Soul flees unto the Lord before the morning Watch, Psalm. 130.6.
I say, before the morning Watch.

O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, Psalm. 143.8.
for in thee is my trust: show thou me the way, that I should walk in, for I
lift up my soul unto thee.

O Lord assist me with thy holy Spirit in my prayers, And let my cry come unto
thee.

Our Father which art, etc.

A Prayer for Confession of sins.
S. Greg. Homil. 33. in Job.
Receive (O Lord) in the arms of thy mercy, thy distressed handmaiden, who in
remorse and contrition, returns unto thee from her sins. Because the life of
that sinner is not abhorred of thee, which is accompanied with sighs, and
repentance. Pardon then (O Lord) all my offenses for thy dear Sons sake. Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning.
ALmighty God, Georg. Cassander Pres. Eccles.
our heavenly Father, which have brought me thy handmaiden to this present
morning, protect me still with thy mighty power, that this ensuing day, I may
fall into no sin, nor run into any kind of danger, but that my thoughts,
words, and deeds may tend to the honor, and glory of thy name, and the
eternal comfort, and salvation of mine own soul, through Jesus Christ my
Lord, and only Savior. Amen.

Another.
Viues.
O Most sincere, and pure Light, from whence this light of the day, and of the
Sun fetches his beginning; Thou which enlightenest every man, that comes
into the world. Thou Light, whom no night, or evening can obscure, but
continuest ever in thy Highnoone brightness. Thou Word, and Wisdom of so
great a Father, enlighten this morning my soul, and understanding, that thy
weak handmaiden may be this day as blinded to the Vanities of the world; and
quick-sighted only to those things, which are pleasing unto thee, and leading
to the ways of thy Commandments. Amen.

For the Mediation of Christ.
LOrd Jesus, Greg. Hom. 7. in Ezech.
that art not only righteous, but righteousness it self, and art my Advocate
with God the Father, justify thou me thy hand-maiden in the day of judgment,
because I acknowledge, and accuse my self, as full of injustice, and pollution.
For it is not upon any action, or contrition of mine own, that my soul
relies, but only upon a faith, assurance, and bold confidence in thee, mine
Advocate, who live, and raignest with the Father, and the holy Ghost, one
God, world without end. Amen.

Against Temptations.
Give me thy grace (O Almighty God) so to vanquish, Aug. Sermon. 86. de verbis
Domini.
and overcome the lusts, and temptations of this world, that I may triumph with
thee over the Devil, and his wicked angels in the world to come. Amen.

For Piety.
I Humbly beseech thee (O Almighty God) that this desire of reading, Aug. Sermon.
82.
and hearing thy sacred Word, which by thy holy Spirit thou have planted in my
heart, may by thy grace, and mercy be daily renewed, and augmented unto a
perfect fire of zeal, and devotion to the honor of thy Name, and salvation of
mine own soul in Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer for a Noble-woman.
Carolus Paschalius.
O Lord Jesus Christ, that art so far from contemning Nobility of birth, that
thy Evangelists have diligently searched out, and recorded thine own
genealogy, give me thy unworthy handmayden the grace, that I abuse not by
ingratitude this thy favor, and mercy. But rather, as it was first acquired
in my Ancestors, let it still be preserved in my person, by my continual
serving of thee, and doing (as it shall lie in my power) all works of Charity
to my neighbors. Give me grace, that as thou have placed me in Birth, and
rank, so I may be found in devotion, piety, lowliness of mind, meekness,
and a religious care of thy worship, conspicuous above others. And if it be
^hy gracious will to make me a mother of children, and a mistress of a family,
let me appear a pattern and ensample of devotion, and piety to all that are
about me. And make me and them so to live in thy fear, that we may die in
thy favor, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and only Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for a Wife.
Charolus Paschal.
ALmighty God, which haste given me to be a comforter, and an helper unto my
husband, endue my soul with those heavenly Graces, wherewith I may be most
enabled to serve thee, and please him. Knit our minds, as well as our bodies
in an indissoluble band of sincere affection. Give either of us sanctified
hearts, zealous toward thee, thankful toward our Sovereign, sincere, and
loving one toward another. Crown withal, if it be thy will, these chaste
intentions with thy fructifying Grace, that we may become the happy Parents of
such Olive branches, as may one day advance thy glory in this Church, and
Commonwealth. In a word, so incorporate us both by faith in Christ unto thy
kingdom of Grace, that we may at the last attain unto thy kingdom of glory.
Amen.

A prayer for one attendant near the person of a Prince.
Carolus Paschal.
ALmighty God, by whose gracious providence it comes, that my Lord, and
Husband is thus employed in that neernesse of attendance upon his Royal
Majesty, give him grace so to serve thee, that he may the better serve him,
and by making him thy Saint, continue him his servant. Fill his mind with all
wisdom, knowledge, and other virtues befitting his rank and calling, that he
may seem no more elected by the King, then selected by thee for these
employments. Make him vigilant, careful, and industrious in his Masters
afaires. Make him to account it his only happiness to serve thee, his only
virtue to observe him, and all the rest as glittering vanity. That after a
troublesome, but long life in a Kings Court, his soul may be carried by the
Angels unto thy Court, where one day is better then a thousand. Grant this for
thy dear Sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Meditation. Count MIRANDVLA, his twelve Thoughts, or weapons against all the
temptations of Sin.
Think
Io. Pici Mirandulae Doctr. Salutif.
1 THe pleasure thou art tempted unto, but short, and momentarie. 2 And even
this is attended with loathing and anxietie. 3 And yet that for this, thou must
loose Heaven. 4 That thy life is but as a dream and shadow. 5 Thy death is
sudden, and at thy door. 6 Thy time of repentance casual, and uncertain. 7
Thy reward, or punishment endless and eternal. 8 That thou art a creature of
an excellent worth, and made to serve God. 9 That thou have no happiness to
the peace of Conscience. 10 Think how good thy God has bin unto thee. 11
Think of the Cross, and of Christ, who there died for thee. 12 Of examples of
holy men and Saints, who lived before thee.
Walk about your chamber a turn or two after your prayers, and meditate upon
these points seriously, and you shall find, that temptations to sin will
vanish away, and leave to assault you.

The 4. last things to be first thought upon by all good Christians.
Bern. Bonauent. Dionys. Carthus.
1 The day of thy death, thou know not how suddenly. 2 The day of judgment,
that will come certainly. 3 The joys of heaven, if thou live religiously. 4
The pains of hell, if thou continuest to do wickedly.
The end of Morning prayer.
Evening Prayer to bed-ward.
O Lord hear my prayer.

And let my cry come unto thee.

Our Father which art, etc.

A Prayer for Evening.
O LORD, Carol^^ Paschal.
I do confess to my shame, and confusion, that this day has been spent by
me with less purity, and piety, then it should have bin. I have augmented
sithence this morning the score of my sins. My thoughts have been polluted,
my wit profane, and unsanctified, my tongue more rash, and unbridled, then
became any one of that rank, and calling, wherein thou have set me. I have
sinned through idleness, ignorance, slothfulness, and malice. And this
darkness of the night puts me in mind of that eternal darkness my sins
have deserved. Pardon, and forgive me all my transgressions. Let this
darkness be a fit time unto me of rest, and sleep, and no opportunity of
snares, and temptations. Send thy holy Ghost into my heart, to free, and
purify the same from all rolling motions, and suggestions of Satan, and from
the usual terrors, and affrightments of the night. Preserve this house in
safety (O Lord) and all the people that are therein. Let my prayer ascend up
unto thy presence as the incense, and let this lifting up of mine hands be as
an Evening sacrifice, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and only Savior. Amen.

Another.
Having spent the day, Viues.
we betake our* selves to our repose in the night. So after the troubles of
this present life, we shall rest our selves in death. Nothing does more
resemble our life then the day, our death then sleep, our grave then the bed,
and our resurrection then our awaking in the morning. Do thou then, O God my
protector, and defender, preserve me in my sleep, from the incursions, and
temptations of the devil, and in my death from the guilt and punishments of my
sins. I have no strength to resist in the one, nor merits of mine own to
display in the other. Look only upon the merits of my Lord, and Savior, and
give me a strong, and steadfast faith, to apply his righteousness to mine own
soul. In confidence, and full assurance of whose satisfactions for all my
sins, I do for this night lie me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is
that Lord only, that makes me to continue in safety. Amen.

Another.
ALmighty, G. Cass.
and everlasting God, who make the light to succeed the darkness, give me
the grace to spend this night freed from the snares of sin and Satan, and to
be here again upon my knees in the morning, to give thee thanks for the
same, through Jesus Christ my Lord, and only Savior. Amen.

MEDITATIONS. When your maid is getting you to bed.
Viues.
He that willingly goes to bed, should as willingly go to his grave. We
willingly put off our clothes, being to put them on again in the morning: and
should as willingly put off our bodies, being to put them on again in the
Resurrection.

2 After the troubles of the day comes the quietness of the night, Viues.
in the which the King, and the swain differ nothing: so after this life comes
death; where poor, and rich are alike, and equal.

3 Here is a fit time (especially laid in your bed) to fall to your Audite for
the day past. The practice of the Kings Majesty, as I have heard


What evil you have committed by 1. Swearing. 2. Lying. 3. Taunting. 4. Being
too angry. 5. Vain talking, especially of Religion. 6. Exceeding in fare or
apparel. 7. Iniuring of another.
Repent of it. Detest it. Resolve to do it no more.

What good you have omitted, as Saying grace when you eat. Praying. Releeuing
of a poor body. Respecting your husband parents.
Spending some time upon Meditations. Works of charity.
Desire Gods grace to be more wary.

What good you have performed If you have learned any thing that day. If you
have done any man good that day. If you have kept your private and public
prayers, that day. If you have given any alms that day. If you have heard the
Word, or received the Sacrament that day. If you have spent any time upon your
Meditatio^s that day.
Rejoice in it, and give God thanks for it.

When you have run over these accounts, and find sleep coming, say,

Into thy hands I commit my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me (O Lord) thou God
of truth. Amen.

The end of Evening prayer.
Some other Collects.
For Faith.
MAn is blinded by sin, Viues.
but thou (O Christ) by the goodness and mercy of God the Father, art become
our guide in the way of salvation. And yet such is our wretchedness, and
misery, that we stagger for all this, sometimes not understanding, sometimes
not believing, many times not applying to our souls with a sure confidence thy
promises of salvation set down in the Gospel. O miserably blind that we are,
that can neither see our selves, nor believe our guider, and instructor. O thou
eternal, and pure verity, vouchsafe so to slide into our hearts, that we may
be more certainly persuaded of thee, and thy Truth, then of those things we
see with our eyes, hear with our ears, and handle with our hands, the weak
apprehensions of our bodily senses, upon which this flesh and blood does so
much depend. Appease and assuage those rolling thoughts, and wandering motions
of the flesh, that make us to doubt, and stagger in those high mysteries, of
the which we ought most firmly to be fixed, and resolved. Faith is thy gift,
and therefore work it by the holy Ghost in my heart, that all my senses, and
imaginations may become slaves, and captives to the same. Lord, I believe,
help thou mine unbelief. O Lord increase my faith. Amen.

MEDITATION.
Viues.
1 How easily we believe a lewd, and lying man, and yet how scrupulous we are
to believe God himself.

2 We believe a man in things, which nothing concern us; we believe not God in
matters of our salvation. Man is impotent, God omnipotent.

3 We believe our senses, which often delude us, as in all tricks of
Legeyr-demaine: we distrust Christ, who can neither be deceived, nor deceive us.

For the King, and the Royal Issue.
I Humbly beseech thee, G. Cass.
Almighty God, to prevent with all blessings of goodness, our King, and his
Royal issue. Increase upon them day by day all thy favors, vanquish with thy
mighty hand, all open enemies, and privy Conspirators, who oppugn their
religion, life, diadem, or dignity. Crown each of them with all virtues,
these virtues with long lives, and their lives at the last with eternal glory.
Amen.

For Charity, or the works of Mercy.
August. Meditat.
O Lord of mercy, and compassion, I beseech thee by the tender bowels of thy
Son Christ Jesus, to move my stony heart to the works of mercy, that I
may keep my hours of prayers, mourn with them that mourn, counsel them
that are amiss, help them that are in misery, relieve the poor, comfort the
sorrowful, help the oppressed, forgive them that trespass against me, pray
for them that hate me, requite good for evil, despise no man or woman,
reverence my betters, respect my equals, be humble, and courteous to my
inferiors: imitate those that are good: shun those that are bad: embrace
virtue, eschew vice. Be patient in adversity, modest in prosperity, thankful
in either. Keep a watch over my tongue. Scorn this world, and thirst after
heaven. Amen.

For the receiving of the B. Sacrament.
O Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, G. Cass.
thorough whom only is granted forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting,
who did justify the Publican, when he confessed, the woman of Chanaan,
when she prayed, Peter when he repented, and the thief upon the Cross, when
he called upon thee, grant unto me, a most miserable, and wretched sinner,
pardon and forgiveness of all my transgressions, which I most humbly confess
I have committed against thee: that I may receive this Communion of thy body
and blood, not to my judgment, and condemnation, but to my everlasting comfort
and salvation, who live and raignest with the Father, and the holy Ghost, one
God world without end. Amen.

Meditation When you have newly received.
O Lord increase my faith, O Lord, G. Cass.
let the body and blood of Christ be fixed in my soul to my comfort in this
life, and eternal salvation in the life to come. Amen.

For that day you expect to hear a Sermon, or when you read upon your Bible.
G. Cass.
ALlmighty, and everlasting God, whose Word is a lantern to our feet, and a
light unto our paths, open and enlighten my understanding, that I may learn
the mysteries of thy Word, so far forth, as is necessary to my salvation,
purely and syncerely: and be so transfigured in my life and conversation, unto
that which I shall learn, as to please thee in will, and deed, through Jesus
Christ my Lord, and only Savior. Amen.

For sickness, and all other uses, you have excellent Prayers in the Book of
Common prayers.

PRINCIPLES. Few Notes for the private use of my L. M. B.
A Prayer to be said upon your knees, before the reading over of these Notes.
Almighty God, the Fountain of true Wisdom and knowledge, send thy holy
Spirit into my heart, that I may sufficiently understand, and steadfastly
believe all the doctrines necessary to my Salvation, and add such practice and
obedience to this Faith, thorough the whole course of my life and conversation,
as I may so serve thee in thy kingdom of Grace, that hereafter I may be made
partaker of thy kingdom of Glory, through the only merit and mediation of thy
dear Son, and my dear Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

I.
MAn, sithence his fall in Adam, has no hope of salvation, but by the Covenant
of Grace betwixt God and Man; Whereby God promises unto man, Mercy and
Forgiveness of Sins, and man unto God, true Faith in Christ and holiness of
life and conversation.

II.
ALl men have not interest in this Covenant of Grace, but they only that are
of Gods Church: Now the Church of God is;

Any Company or Congregation of men wheresoever living, called by God through
the sound of the Gospel, unto the Faith of Christ, and distinguished from other
Societies by these five Marks especially, 1. hearing and reading the Word, 2.
Faith thereunto, 3. the use of the Sacraments, 4. Prayer, and 5. Sanctity of
life.

Where these five things are, there is ever a Church of God and sufficient
means of salvation.

III.
THe Word must be read often upon your Bible, with modesty and short desires of
the heart unto God, to give you grace to understand it, to believe it, and to
practice it, It must be heard upon all convenient occasions, especially in
those two hours of the Sabbath day, appointed by the Church and the State for
that Divine worship, and then you must observe four Rules.

1 Observe the Preacher with attention and modesty.

2. Secondly, apply unto your self in particular, the Doctrines and Uses which
are delivered in general.

3. Examine your conscience if you be guilty of the sins there reproved, and
presently call to God for grace to amend them.

4. Think upon these things again when you come to your Chamber.

IIII.
THis outward hearing and reading of the Word, together with the inward working
of the holy Ghost in your heart, does beget a true, lively and saving faith,
which is,

A certain knowledge and assurance of the heart that all is true which God
has spoken or promised in the Scripture, and that you rest wholly and
confidently upon God, that he has granted unto your self in particular,
forgiveness of sins, and true righteousness in Christ Jesus.

This is the maine point you are seriously to meditate upon, and therefore
observe these precepts,

1. If you do not believe, or if you do doubt of any thing in Scripture,
presently pray unto God to strengthen and enlighten you.

2. If you doubt whether you may have any particular interest in those general
promises of grace in Christ, propounded in the Gospel, fall again to your
prayers for an increase of Faith.

3. If you doubt, and yet can find in your heart to pray for more faith, Let
your conscience never be troubled with such a doubting.

4. Mark well when the Creed is in reading, and give an assent with your heart
to every Article. And (as I doubt not you have learned it) so keep it still in
memory.

V.
NOw as this faith of remission of sins, and righteousness in Christ is
wrought in us by the reading and hearing of the Word joined with Prayer, so is
it signed and sealed in our hearts by the two Blessed Sacraments.

Baptism. The Lords Supper.
Observe in either Sacrament two parts. A visible sign Water in Baptism.
Bread and Wine in the Supper.
An invisible grace. Remission of sins in Baptism. The benefit of Christ's
passion in the Supper.



VI.
Baptism is the first Sacrament of the new Testament, to wit,

An outward washing of Water appointed by Christ in his Church, with this
promise, that upon your being Baptized, you were as certainly washed from your
sins Original being an infant, and actual, if you had been of years, by
the holy Ghost, and the Blood of Christ, as you were rinsed outwardly in body
by this Element of Water.

Mark then these uses of Baptism.
1. It assures us we are washed from our sins by the Holy Ghost, and the
Blood of Christ.

2. It keeps us from despair, because it assures us our sins are washed away.

3. It keeps us from sin: for it is a shame for one washed to soil himself
again.

4. It gives an entrance into the Church.

5. It has a visible sign. Water.
Grace invisible. Forgiveness of sins by the blood of Christ.



VII.
THe Lords Supper is a distribution of Bread and Wine, which seals, signs and
exhibits, or gives unto you Christ's true Body offered, and his true Blood
poured out upon the Cross, for your sins, as certainly, as the Priests
exhibit unto your hands the Bread and the Wine. And withal, the Supper
assures your heart, that Christ's Body and Blood nourish your soul to perpetual
life, as surely, as Bread and Wine does nourish your body to the offices of
this temporal life.

Mark then the uses of this Sacrament of the Supper.
1. It assures you of all the benefit that is to be expected from the Body and
blood of Christ.

2. It puts you continually in mind that Christ dyed for you.

3. It strengthens and ascertaines your faith, if it be received worthily. And
therefore you must not neglect (twice in the year at the least) to approach
with all reverence this heavenly Table.

VIII.
THat this Sacrament may be received worthily, you must examine your self
before the receiving, Pray unto God for Faith in the receiving, and take heed
of gross and premeditated sins after the receiving of this Sacrament.

IX.
BEfore the receiving, you must examine four things:

1. You must examine your knowledge, 1. Whether you know how you ought to live.
To this end read over the 10. Commandments. 2. Whether you know how to
believe. Read over attentively your Creed. 3. Whether you know how to Pray. Say
over advisedly the Lords Prayer.


Without this little knowledge (at the least) you are not fit to Receive.

2. You must examine your faith Whether you are assured in your heart, that
Christ has fully satisfied for your sins, and perfectly reconciled you unto
God, not others only, but your self also.


Without this assurance (in some measure) you may not receive.

3. You must examine your Repentance. 1. Whether you are sorry for your sins.
2. Whether you hate sin. 3. Whether you resolve to endeavor to sin no more.


Without this Repentance you cannot receive worthily.

4. You must examine your Charity. 1. Whether you forgive all the world. 2.
Whether you are free from malice and hatred.


When you have examined these four points you may receive worthily.

X.
NOw your faith in Christ which you have gotten in Gods Church, being thus
hatched by the holy Ghost in your heart, brought forth by your hearing,
cherished by your reading of the word, sealed by your Baptism, and strongly
confirmed and strengthened by your partaking of the blessed Sacrament of the
Supper, must be continually maintained and preserved by these two means,

Prayer unto God and him only.

And

Good works, or holiness of life.

And this is the sum of all your notes which I recommend unto you for this
time.

1. Salvation is only by faith in Christ.

2. Faith only in Gods Church.

3. Where, by the Word read or heard, Faith is nourished.

4. By the Sacrament of Baptism assured.

5. By the Sacrament of the Supper ratified and confirmed.

6. By Prayer and Good works for ever established.

A Prayer after the reading of these few Notes.
O Lord God, that I may be partaker of thy covenant of Grace, make me a
believing member of thy Church, send thy holy Spirit into my heart to beget
there a confidence and full assurance of the remission of all my sins in
Christ Jesus, let this assurance be still nourished with my hearing and
reading of the Word, let it be sealed unto me by my Baptism, confirmed by the
Sacrament of the Supper, and fully established by my serving of thee in Prayer
and Good works, to the glory of thy Name, and the endless comfort and
salvation of mine own soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

A SHORT CATECHISM concerning Faith and good Works, to be read and meditated
upon once every week at the least: which may be well called, The Catechism of
the Conscience.
Question.

WHy has GOD made me a reasonable Creature, and not (as well he might) of a
meaner kind?

Answ. That with your whole heart, that is, with your will, and understanding,
you might serve him, and love him: which creatures only endued with reason can
do.

Q. How is God principally served, and loved of me?

A. By your faith and good works, which God commands you in his Word. And
these good works of yours are twofold, Prayers to God. Charity to men.


Q. What is Faith?

A. A full belief, assurance, and persuasion of your heart, whereby you are
immovably resolved of these three points:

1. That there is one only God, one Essence, and three Persons. The Father,
who created you. Son, who redeemed you. Holy Ghost who sanctified you.


2. That God the Son came into the world, to do all that was to be
performed, and to suffer all that was to be endured by you, for your sins
actual, and original. And hereby obtained for you perfect forgiveness of all
your sins, and has bestowed upon you his own perfect righteousness, by the
means whereof you stand just, and guiltless before the throne of God.

3. That God has prompted with his holy Spirit the Penmen of the Scriptures,
to teach you all this faith, and belief, as also all the course of his
worship. And that every thing contained in these Scriptures is true.

Q. Why does God so much require of me Faith, and belief?

A. Because without believing in him, you cannot love him, nor reverence him.
As if you did not believe your father to be your father, you would not love
him, or reverence him, as your father.

Q. How is this Faith first wrought?

A. By your hearing of Gods word, and using those two Sacraments appointed by
Christ in his Church, Baptism, and the Lords Supper: And withal, by praying
continually unto God, and doing of good works.

Q. How shall I know that I begin to have Faith?

A. If you find in your self these alterations:

1. If you find, that you have gotten more knowledge of God, and of Religion,
and are glad thereof.

2. If you do desire more then you did, to have the Son of God to become
your Savior, and to stand betwixt you and Gods wrath for the sins you have
committed against God.

3. If you take more delight then you did in Reading and hearing the Word of
God. Receiving the Sacrament.


4. If you find doubtings in your mind, and can pray unto God, to strengthen
your Faith.

5. If you endeavor to abstain from sin, for fear of offending so good a
God.

6. If you begin to endeavor to live godly, and righteously, because it is
the will, and commandment of God.

7. If you take more delight then you did in praying to God.

8. If you thank God privately for these his good motions.

By these eight points you may soon know, whether you have true faith or not.

Q. What is the infallible mark of true, and justifying Faith?

A. The effectual applying of Christ, and all his benefits to your own soul,
in particular.

This application does make a difference betwixt justifying Faith, and all
other kinds of faith, which cannot save us: As Historical Faith, which is a
bare knowledge. Faith of Miracles, which is a bare assent. Temporary Faith,
which is but a bare profession of the Faith for a time, embraced only for the
desire of Knowledge. Credit. Profit.



Q. What is the meaning of this assertion of S. Paul's, that we are justified
by Faith alone?

A. The meaning is this. Even as when you give your alms to a beggar, it is
received by his hand alone, and yet his hand is not alone when it receives
these alms, but accompanied with an arm, sinews, and arteries: Even so, when
God offers unto you Christ, and his righteousness, you do receive him by
Faith alone, and yet this Faith, which receives Christ is never alone, but
still accompanied with Charity, and good works.

In a word.

1. To hold alms is proper to the hand, and not the arm: and to hold
Christ, proper to Faith, and not good works.

2. You are justified by Faith alone, and yet if your faith be alone, it cannot
justify you.

Q. What is the meaning of S. James, when he says, That we are justified by
works, and not by Faith?

A. The meaning is this?

1. Faith justifies us before God, good works before men.

2. Faith makes us, good works declare us to be justified.

3. Faith gives us our first justification; good works our second, which is our
Sanctification, or holiness.

Q. What is the least, and weakest degree of Faith, that I may build upon, to
keep me from despair, in case I find not all those alterations in my self,
which you spoke of before?

A. 1. If you desire Faith, or pray unto God, that you may desire Faith.

2. If you can pray, or desire of God, to enable you to pray.

3. If you find fault with your want of faith, and desire sometimes of God to
help this want.

You are for all that the child of God.

RESOLVTIONS. OPPOSITIVE DIVINITY: OR The ordinary Objections of Papists,
against them of the reformed. Churches. DIALOGVE. Papist. Protestant.
CHAP. I. Of the Church.
Pap. THe Church of England is no Church, (...) strange, considering your own
Writers conclude a Church to be there, where there is found 1 doctrine of
salvation, Georg. Cassan. consult, titul. de Ecclesia.
according to Scripture, 2 the use of the Sacraments, and 3 outward discipline,
or Ecclesiastical government, although the Churchmen should fall short of
those Apostolical, and primitive perfectio^s, which flourished in their
predecessors.


Pap. Yea, but it is not the Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed, I believe
in the Catholic Church.


Prot. 1. No more is the Church of Rome: for there was no Church at all in
Rome, when the Creed was made by the Apostles at Jerusalem; Ruffin in Symb.
Augustine. Ser. 115.
every Apostle making his Article, when they were to depart to plant particular
Churches in Rome, Id. Sermon. 181. de Tempore.
England, and other places.

2. But our Church is a branch, and portion of that Catholic Church, as is
also the Theoriani collo. Damianus a Gots. Onuphrius in vita Iulij.
Greek, Armenian, Ethiopian, and Syrian as well, if not rather then the
Roman Church.


Pap. Peradventure these other Churches may be members of that Catholic
Church, as joined and united with us, but the union betwixt your Church, and
ours has been cut asunder above an hundred years agone, and therefore you
are quite cut off from the Catholic Church.


Prot. This is more then you know, or then I am bound to believe. For

Cassand. consult. page 930. merely spiritual consisting in Faith, Hope,
Charity, true Doctrine, etc. Institut. of a Christian fol. 19.
This union of the members of the Catholic Church is inward, not outward, and
therefore discerned only by God himself: We never sundred our selves from the
people, or Church of Rome, but from the Faction, or Court of Rome, not from the
sincere doctrine of that Church, but from the corruptions and innouations
foisted into that Church.

And therefore although we be never so hated, Cassand. ibid.
and excommunicated by your Priests, yet, we may be still united in internal
society with your Church, if you retain those principles of Religion sound,
and unaltered, in the which our forefathers died, and (as we well hope) were
saved.


Pap. How are you then gone from us, if you be still united with us.


Prot. As the Prophets went from the corrupt Churches of the Jews, and as
Christ, and his Apostles from the Scribes, and Pharisees, clamando, and
dissentiendo, by crying out against your corruptions, and dissenting from your
innouations, and this Cas. consult. page 929. Gerson. de p^^^tate Ecclesiae.
your own men allowed us to do.


Pap. I, but some of your men say, that we had no true Church of God in the
West of many years before Luthers time.


Prot. Their meaning is to be limited in respect of the Predominant, and
prevailing Faction. Your Church held (I confess) a saving profession of the
Truth of God, but your Churchmen mingled therewith many damnable impieties.
And these innouators only carrying the greatest show of the Church, are denied
by our Writers to be the true Church of God.


Pap. This it is we Catholics observe. You dare not for all your malice deny
the Church of Rome to have in some sort a saving profession of the truth of
God, but our Priests conclude directly that your Church has no truth at all,
and that Barclaius paraenes. li. 1. page 7.
none can be saved in that Church.


Prot. As in every kingdom the general estate is nothing so forward, active,
quick, and peremptory, as the private Factions, and yet is found at the last
more wise, and stayed in final resolution: So in the Catholic Church, the
Can. loc. theol. l. 4. c. 1. Lindan. panopl. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Factions are ever more headie, and precipitate in their denunciations of
Heaven, and Hell, then the maine body thereof. Hence it comes to pass, that
although the Greek, Armenian, Ethiopian, and Syrian, and (for the most part)
the Protestant does censure charitably of those Laickes, who living rather In
then Of the Church of Rome, hold the grounds of the doctrine of Salvation,
without any notorious mixtures, with the late superstitions, and impieties
crept into the same; yet does the Quodlibet page 342.
Papist, Russic. conun. c. 23. p. 103.
Russeist, Sle. Hist. l. 5.
Anabaptist, Allens confess.
Familist, and Protest. p. 16.
Puritan hold no Church a Church of God, but his own conuenticle, and all to
be damned, that are not of his society, and combination. Now what belief you
shall afford these Bouteseux of the Catholic Church, that dispose of Heaven,
and Hell, as if it were their own Fee-simple, I leave to your wisdom and
common understanding.


Pap. Me thinks you now put me in mind of another objection, which usually we
make against the Protestants of England that they bring in too much good
fellowship in religion, and make Salvation a flower, which grows in every man's
garden. Seeing that according to their Tenets, Papist, Protestant, Anabaptist,
and Familist, may every one of them by means offered in his own Church, as a
portion, or fragment of the Catholic Church attain unto Salvation.


Prot. If you were learned I could answer you in a word, that none of these
three Sectories considered in his own Formality, Qua talie, as he is a Papist,
Anabaptist, or Familist can ever attain unto Salvation, but only as he is a
Christian man, admitted by Baptism unto the visible Church, and there made
partaker of Gods word, and Sacraments. For then (although these blessed means
are very much weakened, and obscured in their Synagogues by the malice of
Satan, and inventions of men) yet may that holy Spirit, that John 3.8.
blows where he lists, work in such a man's heart by these weak
instruments, (and the rather, the more the Word is faithfully preached, and the
Sacraments be in those places sincerely administered) a true faith in Christ
Jesus, to bring him to salvation. So then we do not hold, that Papists,
Anabaptists, and Familists, but only that some Christians living in their
congregations may (though with great difficulty in comparison of this
flourishing Church of ours, and these admirable means of Salvation tendered in
the same) by the special mercy of God be saved, and preserved. If we be in an
error, it is safer to err in Charity, then in Malice, and praecipitancie,
considering the event hereof is unknown to either of us.


Pap. I but where was your Church before this reformation began?


Prot. 1. When our Savior Christ withdrew the people from the Matt. 16.12.
leaven of the Scribes, and Pharisees, to the bread, John 6.35.
which came down from heaven, and to salvation by faith in his Name, was it
fitting to demand of him, where his Church was before that Reformation?

2. When these Churches of 1. Corin. 5.1.
Corinth, Galat. 3.1.
Galatia, Revel. 2.12.
Pergamus, and Revel. 2.18.
Thiatyra, were full of abuses, if some part only upon the preaching of the
Apostles had reformed themselves, and so a division had grown: would you
straight ways have tax't them of Nouelty, or ask't them where their Church had
been before this reformation?

3 When the Apostles cast off ^he Law of Moses, excepting only those Acts
15.29.
three or four Ceremonies: and when the Primitive church some hundred years
after, cast off those Ceremonies also (for I find them breathing of their last
as it were about the times of Anno (...). 140. Dialog. qu^ ins^^^^tur Tryphon.
Justin Martyr) had it not been a poor challenge of the Jews, or Traskists
of those times, to demand, where this vnceremoniall Church lay hid before the
reformation?

I answer then, that our Church, before this reformation began, lived together
in one communion with yours, with toleration of all those abuses, which you
have still retained, and we most justly rejected.


Pap. I, but I hope you dare not compare in the gifts of the Spirit with
Christ, his Apostles, or those worthies of the primitive Church. And therefore
how presumed you to reform your selves? Reformation, being a work fitter for
a general Council to have gone about, then for a small handful of Northern
people.


Prot. Luther. in epist. ad Galat. in praefat. distinctio admissa in Comitijs
Augustanis ab ipsis Germanis Principibus. Scultet. annal. decad. 1. pa. 43.
The Court of Rome had so gained upon the Church of Rome, that is, the Pope, and
his conclaue of Cardinals had wriggled in themselves to that transcendencie of
power over the rest of the Clergy, and well minded laity, that it appeared
both at In the year 1415.
Constance In the year 1546.
and Trent, there was small hope of Reformation from such a Council, where the
Pope the party to be reformed, became the party reforming, and supreme
Judge, and president of the Reformation it self. Although poor seduced
ignorant women are much carried away with the name of the Council of Trent; yet
you will quickly find out this ridiculous absurdity. In a general Council (as
now it is held sithence the decay of the Empire) the Pope is the party to be
accused, yet puts up his own endictment, passes a jury of his own vassals,
and find they what they will, being to give final judgment, he will be sure
to do, as his supposed predecessor taught our Savior to do, to wit, favor
himself. Matthew. 16.22.
So as there was no hope of doing good by a General Council, See the history
of the Council of Trent.
unless it were a generous and free Council, and such a one the Pope (you may
be sure) would never abide. Gerson. de council. vnius obed.
And therefore one of your own writers concludes, that in such a case, several
kingdoms are to reform themselves by National Councels, which England and
Denmark did put in practice.


Pap. Yea, but it is too well known, It was no zeal of Reformation, but
carnal respects, that moved King Henry to touch upon religion.


Prot. To you (it seems) it is given to know these secrets, but I see no
reason we should think so. The King could not be induced to this reformation,
as a means to possess himself of the Abbeies for they were already swallowed
up. 31. Henr. 8.
Nor as a preparatiue for his woing (as Saunders thinks) because Fisher the
Bishop of Rochester, who opposed his marriage, made up the one and twentieth
prelate in banishing the Pope out of this Kingdom. Instruction of a Christian
in the Preface.
But without doubt, the finger of God was the cause, whatsoever was the hint,
or occasion. Act. 23.1.
Festus his popularitie, and humor of pleasing gave S. Paul occasion to
appeal to Caesar, and to visit Rome, where, and when he laid the first stone
of the Roman church. Would you like it well a Protestant should say, that your
Church was founded upon courtship and popularity? If any carnal respect,
whetted on the king, that was but the opportunity, God only was the first
mouer, and prime Agent in this reformation.


Pap. Nay surely, God is the God of unity, but your Church being once severed
from the Roman, was presently cantl'd out, into as many factions almost, as
there are Countries; witness the Lutherans soft and rigid, the Caluinists,
Puritans, Conformitans, Brownists, Anabaptists, etc. So as one may easily
guess, from what Lerma, and fenny ground this Hydra of so many heads had her
first Original.


Prot. This argument sounds very big in a ladies closet, and weighs much with
the ignorant, and unlearned people, but with a man, but of a reasonable
understanding, this seeming division is no scandal at all to our reformed
Churches. What man of any reading in the Histories of the time, but knows
well, that after the trumpet for this reformation had blown, the first warning
by In the year 1375
Wicklef, In the year 1410.
Hus, and Hierome of Prage, and then the second by de signis ruin. eccl.
Gerson, 1411.
Peter de Aliaco, Bucholcer Anno 1517.
Cardinal Cusanus, in Theor.
Picus Mirandula Phil. Comin. l. 3.
Sauanorola, and many others, (of whom we read in Guic. hist. l. 4.
Guicchiardyn) when In the year 1512.
Luther in Germany blew the last, and that there appeared no hope of a free and
indifferent Council, so as several kingdoms were thus necessitated to
provide, and take care for themselves, this worthy Act of Reformation,
beginning in sundry estates, by reason, partly of their diverse shapes, and
forms of gouernements, and partly, of a great disadvantage that one part of
Christendom, knew not, what another did, nor consulted with their fellows,
that so they might with unanimity proceed in the same, did necessarily produce
a seeming difference in the outward forms of particular Churches.

But lo, the goodness, and providence of Almighty God. Although these
Churches have several faces, yet have they all but one heart, there being no
essential, fundamental, or material difference amongst any of us of the
reformed Religion, as you may easily find by reading the confessions of our
several churches. And therefore for these odious Nicknames of Lutheran,
Caluinist, Huguenot, Zuinglian, and the like, be more sparing of them, until
you have reconciled your own churchmen, as your Minorits, and Dominicans about
the conception of the blessed Virgin, your Jesuits, and Dominicans about
predestination, and those dependant questions, your Sorbonists, and Jesuits
about the bounding, and mereing out the Regal, and Papal Authority: and you
shall find more doctrinall oppositions in your own, then you can imagine in
our Churches. But keep you at home in your native country, and look (without
envy or partiality) upon this flourishing Church of England, and name me one
Kingdom in all Europe that has continued very near this hundred years in that
constancy, and immutabilitie of doctrine or discipline. We are ordered with
that consecration, that Sand. de schis. Angl. lib. 3.
Archbishop 32. of Henry 8.
Cranmer was, we renounce the Pope by that abiuration, that Archbishop Cranmer
did, we subscribe to those Articles of religion, which In the year 1552.
Archbishop Cranmer in the Reformation pitched upon, before we can be admitted
to any Ecclesiastical function. Some wild coults we have, that start, and
boggle at the first, if they see but their own shadows, but by the discipline
of the Church they are curbed, and fetched about again, and taught in a little
while to come on gently to this uniformity and subscription. So that malice it
self cannot challenge the Church of England, this most glorious portion of
that Catholic Church, of any fractions, or divisions in points of Doctrine.


Pap. Nay, but I have often heard, that you have no Bishops or Priests at all
in your Church. But that in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign, laymen in
the Parliament did appoint you Bishops, who consecrated one another in a
Tavern at the Sander. de Schism. lib. 3. Harding against Jewel.
Nags-head in Cheapside, and that your Priests were ordered only by these
Parliamentary Prelates.


Prot. This tale of the Nags-head, Harding, Sanders, and Stapleton have forged
out of their own Nagges-heads without any ground, or likelihood at all. And
yet as easily as they came by it, it put a M. Mason Archdeacon of Suff.
Minister of our Church to an infinite deal of learned pains. Who by his
Majesty's special commandment, did search out the ancient Records of the
Archbishop of Canterbury (agnized sithence by many Priests and Jesuits, in the
Clincke, and other prisons) and out of them has composed a learned book,
showing the successiue Consecrations of all the Bishops of England, from that
first convocation that Institut. of a Christian. fol. 19.
banished the Pope about the year 1536, so as any Minister looking out that
Bishop, who gave him Orders, may presently ascend in a right line of Bishops to
those Prelates, that lived in the reign of Henry the eighth, before the
reformation. And therefore if your own Priests be lawful, you may not quarrel
with ours, differing only from yours, in their renouncing of your impieties,
and superstitions.


Pap. This Record you speak of, is somewhat to the purpose, unless the
heresy of those first Bishops did disable them for granting of lawful
Consecrations, and Orders.


Prot. S. Basil. Nazianz. S. Ambros. S. Hierom. S. Austen: were in their times
called heretics. Lindan. panopl. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Heretic indeed, is a common word for us, in the mouth of every woman, that
is but a little Romanized. But is it not strange how Institut. of a Christian,
fol. 18
he should be an Heretic, that says the Creed, and the Lords prayer in that
literal, and explicit sense, and meaning, that all the Fathers of the Church
for the first 500. years understood the same? Yet this is nothing to the point
in hand. For first, if the Bishops in Queen Mary's time were lawful,
notwithstanding their being consecrated by Cranmer, and other tainted Bishops
(as you term them) why may not the Bishops in Queen Elizabeth, and King James
his time, expect the same privilege? And secondly, your own Dominic. a^ Soto.
in 4. Sent. d. 25. Biel. in 4 d. 25. q. 1. Con. 4. Capreol, in 4. d. 25. q. 1.
art. 3. etc.
Writers confess, that Heresy (which we suppose, but not yield these Prelates
fallen unto) cannot raze out from that Character of a Bishop, this inseparable
power of consecrating, and ordering.


Pap. Yet there remains an objection against your Church, that it cannot
possibly be a true Church, because it is severed from the true visible head
thereof the Pope of Rome.


Prot. This is a stale objection, and soon answered. The church of Eusebius. li.
5. c. 23. Eras. epist. in Agrippa de vanit. c. 59.
Asia severed from Pope Victor in the year 200. Baron. tom. 3. ad ann. 375.
Athanasius, and his fellows from Faelix and Tiberius in the year 375, Eusebius.
l. 7. c. 2. 3. 4. Casian. consult. art. 7.
Cyprian, and his brethren, yea and three National Councels from Pope Stephen,
in the year 250, Bellar. de To. Pont. l. 2. c. 25. and 46. Lindan. panopl. l.
7. c. 89. Possevinus in Apparat. titul. Carthag.
the Bishops of Carthage Schismatized from all Popes of Rome for an hundred
years together, about the year 409. lastly Bellar. de To. Pont. l. 2. c. 31.
Idem de Matri. c. 15. art. 2.
the Greek Church cut off from the Roman for 300. years, are sufficient
testimonies, there may be a true Church of God, though severed* and divided
from the Pope of Rome. And here in this kingdom it was no Protestant, but
Popish Bishops, that concluded in a National Synod, Institut. of a Christian,
set forth anno 1537. by Authority.
our King might (if he pleased) create a Pope of his own in his own kingdoms,
and dominions, and yet remain a member of the Catholic Church.


Pap. Well the best is you have been so tedious in your answers, that I have
(I thank God) forgotten all, that you have said for your reformed Church.


Prot. But I will help that quickly by summing up of all into these 12.
Positions:

1 We have a Church, as having Doctrine. Salvation. Discipline.


2 It is a portion of the Catholic Church.

3. It has a Spiritual union of doctrine with the untainted members of the
Church of Rome.

4 And yet has severed her self from the Church of Rome by crying against,
and dissenting from her Superstions.

5 Which some of us hold no true Church of Gods, in regard of the prevailing
Faction.

6 Although we judge charitably of the Salvation of some in that Church.

7 Who notwithstanding are saved not as Papists, but as Christians.

8 And in one lump, or communion with this Church lived ours before the
Reformation.

9 Which then for want of a General, did sever her self, by a National
Council, from the same.

10 Nor was it any by-respect of the Kings, but God, and the cry of that age,
that caused this reformation.

11 Nor do our reformed Churches dissent amongst themselves in doctrine, but
in outward polity, and discipline only.

12 Our Bishops and Priests come by a lineall Succession from Henry the eights
time, nor can a supposall of Heresy cut off this descent.


CHAP. 2. Of the Scriptures.
Pap. Do you then hold this Church of yours to be the ground of your Faith,
and reason of your believing, So as you do therefore believe all the points of
your salvation to be true, because the Church does teach, and instruct you in
the same? Or have you any other rule, and ground of your faith?


Prot. The Authority, and good conceit we have of Gods Church August. contra
Epistol. fundam. c. 5.
prepares us to believe the points of our Salvation, and serves as an
introduction to bring us to the discerning, and perfect apprehension of these
mysteries of our faith, but the Scripture only is the ground, and reason of
our believing. For as the John 4.29.
Samaritans were induced, and drawn on to believe in Christ by that talk of
the woman, but having heard Christ himself, profess plainly, they believe no
longer for her saying, but John 4.42.
because they heard him speak himself: So do we begin to believe; moved
thus to do, by the good conceit we have of the Church, but rest not in it, as
the ground of our believing, but only in the infallible assurance of Gods
truth in the book of Scriptures.


Pap. Then God help you, if that be your last resolution. For our Church
cannot err, but your Scriptures without the help of the Church, to tell you
so much, can never be ascertained unto you, to be the word of God; And
therefore what assuredness of belief can you propose your selves upon so
unsettled a foundation?


Prot. The Catholic Church indeed, Wald. doctr. fid. l. 2. art. 2. c. 27.
spread over the world, cannot err damnably, though the Church of Rome, and
all other particula Churches, may, as your own Writers confess. But the
Scriptures we know to be the word of God, not because the Church, or
Churchmen, do tell us so much, but by the Authority of God himself, Calvin
instit. l. 1. c. 7. d. 4.
whom we do most certainly discern to speak in his word, when it is
preached unto us. For if we bring pure eyes, and perfect senses, the majesty
of God forthwith, presents it self unto us in the holy Scriptures, and
beating down all thoughts of contradicting, or doubting things so heavenly,
forces our hearts to yield assent, and obedience unto the same. And therefore
if you doubt whether that which you read in your Bible be the word of God, or
find any reluctance in your understanding to the doctrine of the same, it is
in vain to fly unto either Church, or Churchmen, to be persuaded in this
point, but down upon your knees, and pray fervently unto God for Faith, and the
illumination of the Holy Ghost, which can only assure you of the truth of the
Scriptures. Calvin. instit. l. 1. c. 7. did. 5.
For after we are enlightened by the Spirit, we do no longer trust either our
own judgment, or the judgment of other men, or of the Church, that the
Scriptures are of God, but above all certainety of humane judgment, we most
certainly resolve, as if in them we saw the majesty and glory of God, that
by the ministry of men they came unto us from Gods own most sacred mouth.


Pap. But what certain ground of faith can you place on the Scriptures, seeing
by the several interpretations of men and women they are turned and wrested
like a nose of wax to every private design and purpose? Do not you observe
how the Catholics, Protestants, and especially the Brownists, and
Anabaptists, do fit all their turns out of the holy Scriptures? on which of
these senses, and imaginations is your faith rooted? or peradventure, have you
some odd capritchious kind of interpretation of your own apprehension to
direct you in these businesses?


Prot. We lay-folkes are licensed in the Church of England to read, Do all
interpret. 1. Cor. 12.30.
but not to interpret Scriptures, excepting only those passages, which
contain the necessary points of our Salvation, the which passages are so
plain, and easy every where, that any man, or woman of the meanest capacity
(especially if he, or she be instructed in their Catechism or grounds of
religion) may perfectly conceive, Staplet. cont. 6. q. 7. exp. si art.
and understand them. But for the harder and more difficult places, we leave
them to be interpreted by our Churchmen in their Sermons, and daily
ministry. For the ordering of which interpretations, there are (as I have
been told) 10. several helps, Observed out of D. Field, M. Hooker,
Chemnitius, and Trelcatius.
the which if they be followed will be sure, and infallible guides, to bolt out
the true meaning of each place of Scripture.

1 An illumination of the understanding by the Holy Ghost. 2 A mind free from
other thoughts, and desirous of the truth. 3 Knowledge of the Scriptures,
Creedes, Catechismes, Principles, and other Axioms of Divinity. 4 A
considerations how our meaning suites with other points of Christianity. 5 The
weighing of circumstances, antecedents, and consequents. 6 Knowledge of
Histories, Arts, and Sciences. 7 Continual reading, meditating, and praying. 8
Joint, and vniarring expositions of the Fathers. 9 Consenting decrees of
ancient Synods, and Councels. 10 Knowledge in the tongues.


Because therefore laymen, and women, Papists, Brownists, and Anabaptists, are
wanting in all, or some of these helps, they bring forth many times such
lame, and prodigious interpretations.


Pap. If we make the Scripture, and not the Church the rule of our Faith, how
shall we believe, the Creed, the Trinity, the Sacraments, the unity of Essence,
the three persons in the Deity, etc. words never read in the Bible, and yet
necessarily to be apprehended of us upon pain of damnation?


Prot. I say that all these things are set down in Scriptures, either in so
many syllables, or at leastwise by necessary inferences, and deductions. And
we do not therefore believe them because they are only taught by the Church,
but because they are rooted and grounded in the holy Scriptures, the only
stay and pillar of our affiance.


To sum up therefore all this Chapter,
1 The Church does prepare us, but the Scripture only does force us to
believe.

2 The whole Church cannot, any part thereof may err damnablie.

3 We are taught the Scriptures to be the word of God by the Holy Ghost,
moving in our hearts, and not by the Church sounding in our ears.

4 Laymen are to read, not to interpret Scriptures.

5 The miss of some rules causes wrong expositions of Scriptures.

6 All things necessary to be believed are either found in, or collected and
inferred from the Scriptures.

CHAP. 3. Of Justification.
Pap. HOW then do you learn out of the Scriptures, that you are to be
justified, and saved before God?


Prot. I am to be justified before God, by an Act single in it self, but
double in our apprehension, which is, By Gods not imputing unto me my sins,
and the same Gods imputing unto me Christ's righteousness, and withal by his
creating of faith in my heart by the Holy Ghost, to assure my Soul that God,
for the Active and Passive obedience of Christ Jesus has accomplished those
two former Acts, of not imputing my Sin, and of imputing unto me Christ's
righteousness.


Pap. A very easy, no doubt, and reasonable religion, which you have learned
out of the Scriptures. Here is no burden left for your own back, you cast
all upon Christ's shoulders by the means of these two fine words, Not
imputing, and imputing, and a third swimming notion of your own conceit (which
any man may have with a little imagining) termed by you faith, it would be
known therefore, where your Church has found out these words of Art, in the
holy Scriptures.


Prot. We do in all humility confess, that the globe of our sins, and the
world of that righteousness, which is to appear in the presence of Gods
Justice, is too massy for us to sustain, that are but dust and ashes, and
supportable only by that Atlas, Verba Lutheri ep. ad Henr. 8. tom. 2. ep. p.
290.
Christ Jesus, upon whose shoulders, not our conceits, but the goodness of God
has placed and pressed them. But that these words imputing, and not imputing,
are such Greek unto you, I do impute it to your not reading of Scriptures,
and taking up your religion by trust, and credit from such Fripperers, and
Brokers, as by lending your souls, a false opinion of merits and good works*
do diue into your purses, and eat up your estates, by way of interest. Not to
trouble you (as I might) with a thousand places, ask David, Psalm. 32.1.
whether not imputing of sin, and S. Paul, Romans 4.45.
whether the imputing of Christ's righteousness does not make us blessed, and
justified. For the words use your own eyes, and inspection. And for the
meaning, I refer you to August. tom. 8 in psalm. 31.
S. Augustines upon the one, and Amb. in ep. ad Romans c. 8.
S. Ambrose his commentary upon the other passage. Now that you fondly
imagine, that Faith, this heavenly hand, that reaches at this double Act, and
applies it to our own Souls, is such an apprehension, as you may command,
when you please out of your own fantasy, it is such a poor opinion, that no
Soul, warmed with the least touch or feeling of religion, but contemnes with a
most holy scorn, and reproach. I tell you, (and if you once have it, your
conscience will tell you no less) this Faith is the richest jewel in Gods
cabinet, Ephesians. 2.8.
and can never be compas'd by any endeavor of ours, until the Holy Ghost comes
down from heaven to set, and enchase it in our hearts with his own fingers as
it were. And being once obtained, it new moldes, and fashions the whole nature
of man, so as the understanding becomes more enlightened to know God, the will
to obey God, the affections, to love God, and our brethren. Nor can it be
preserved (to the comfort of our conscience) without daily praying, meditating,
doing good works, reading the Scriptures, hearing good Sermons, and perusing
of devout, and godly Treatises. My belief therefore is this: Gods not imputing
of sin, and imputing of righteousness is the worker, The Merits of Christ
the procurer, Faith wrought by the holy Ghost the instrument, or applier, good
works, or my inherent righteousness (poor as it is) a consequent only,
effect, and follower, of my justification.


Pap. I have heard some of your side, rail against the very name of inherent
righteousness, which you seem now to acknowledge, and embrace. Do Protestants
therefore challenge any other righteousness, besides that of Christ's, which is
imputed?


Prot. They do acknowledge a Sanctification, or inherent righteousness, in the
same sense as the ancient Fathers took the Word, but not as Jesuits of late
mistake it. We have righteousness inherent, or subsisting in us, according to
the which we shall be judged, but not according to the which we shall be
justified. You make your righteousness to go before as the cause; we ours, to
come after, as the effect of Justification. You suppose yours so absolute as to
euict from God; all we expect from ours, is, but to testify unto men, that we
are justified. You brag of a perfection of degrees, we only teach a
perfection of parts in our righteousness. For as in the dawning of the day,
every part of the heavens is enlightened, though none as yet in a full, and
complete splendor: so after the Act of Justification, apprehended by faith,
every faculty of the soul is sanctified, and made righteous, the
understanding, the will, the affections, the thoughts, the words, the deeds,
but none of those, so exactly perfect, as to implead a Justification at the
throne of God. We therefore wave off this little righteousness of our own, as
a piece of Esaias 64.6.
polluted cloth in the Act of our Justification, and cast anchor only upon the
merits of Christ. But according to your Doctrine of Council. Trid.
infused Charity, not the Almighty reconciled, but the man qualified, not
Christ patient, but an habit inherent, not God by grace pardoning, but an
instilled virtue (like a receipt of Mithridate) expelling sin, is the cause
of your Justification.


Pap. But have you any use of your Free Will in either righteousness; I mean
that imputed, or this inherent? Or are you (as some relate your opinions)
merely suffering, and passive, like so many stocks, and stones, casting not
so much as a sigh, groan, or short wish, toward this great work of your
conversion?


Prot. In our first conversion to be righteous, and the Act of our
Justification, we are like so many Niobes, or images of marble, which move not
at all, but as they are, in the whole lump, carted, and transported; Our
understandings not affoording themselves the least glymps of knowledge, nor our
wills, the least show of inclination unto this Act, but as they are either of
them powerfully bended by the Holy Ghost to lay hold by Faith on this imputed
righteousness. But in our second conversion to be more righteous, which we
call the Act of our Sanctification, we move like Arist. polit. 1. c. 1.
Daedalus his statues, or pageants upon wheels, dull, and unwieldy in our own
natures, but so quickened, and enliued by those engines of Grace, and motions
of the holy Ghost in our souls, and consciences, that now our understandings,
wills, and affections do cooperate, and run along, with the Grace of God in
all our works of piety, and devotion. To that imputed righteousness therefore
we have no freeness, or cooperation of our Wills: to our inherent
righteousness we have. We have no concurrance in that first Act of our
Justification, but we have a cooperation of the will (rouzed up, and excited by
grace) in all subsequent Acts of our Sanctification. The points therefore of
this Chapter are these: 1. Justification consists, in Gods not imputing of
Sin, and in his imputing of Christ's righteousness unto us. 2. It is not our
conceit, but the justice, and mercy of God, which lays this load on our
Savior Christ. 3. Whosoever is acquainted with the Scripture, cannot be
unacquainted with imputed righteousness. 4. Imputed righteousness is soon
apprehended, but infused Faith, must be first obtained. 5. We have an inherent
righteousness, which is the effect, but none, which is the cause of our
Justification. 6. Grace alone works our justification; Grace, and we together
(but we in the second place) our Sanctification.



CHAP. 4. Of Saints, Souls of the Dead, and those dependant questions.
Pap. We are scandalized likewise at your Church, because you give no more
reverence to the Saints then you do, neither praying unto them, nor adorning
their images, nor giving them any set employment above in heaven, or the least
care of us here on earth. Which smells very much of the heresies of the Epiphan.
Cainans, and Eunomians condemned so many years agone in the Christian Church.


Prot. What employment the Saints have in heaven, besides the contemplation of
God face to face, Hugo de S. V. l. 2. de Sacram. c. 11. Al^is. l. 3.
we know not, nor do Cassand. in consult. art. 21.
we deny their praying for us. Upon earth they receive in our Church, all that
honor bespoken for them in the primitive Church. We keep duly the memorials
of the blessed Virgin, and the twelve Apostles, and a yearly panegyricall
commemoration of all the Martyrs, and Saints of God: respecting them* as our
August. contr. Faust. l. 20. c. 2.
fellows and friends, though not as our Iouius hist. lib. 24.
Tutelar gods, and young little Saviors. We admire their lives, and as we do
not furiously deface, so do we not adore their images. Because August. in
Psalm. 113.
S. Augustine would feign know, where that Christian may be found, that prays
or adoreth, beholding an image. Idem de ciuit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 10.
We rear them no Temples, as to Gods, but trophies only of praise, as to
deserving men. Epi. ad Hebr. cap. 11.
S. Paul himself did all this, and he did no more. We dignifie them as Saints
by celebration, we dare not deifie them, as Gods by invocation. Your Eckius in
his Enchirid.
own men confess, there is for this praying to Saints neither precept nor
example in all the Bible. And Orig. l. 2. in Epist. ad Romans
Origin made but a question, Basil. cited by the Bishop of Lincoln.
S. Basil an If, NaZ. Orat. 1. in Julian* and orat. in Gorgon.
Gregory Nazianzene a thinking, or an opinion only of this, which you make an
Article of Faith. We are commanded to call upon Psalm. 50 15.
God, upon him Matthew. 4.10.
only, for he is our Psalm. 74.12.
King of old, and we are stark mad if we think to better our selves by
changing of Masters.


Pap. I, but how will you answer Antiquity: For I have been told, that there
are found in the writings of the Ancient Fathers, prayers made to many of the
Saints and holy men departed.


Prot. If you please to observe them well, you shall find, they are no
Orisons, but Orations. A certain kind of passionate, and rhetorical
exclamations made unto the dead, concerning some notable events happened unto
the Church in general, or the parties themselves in particular. This is easily
believed of them, who use to read the Greek Fathers, which are full of such
eiaculations in their affectionate Discourses. And that their passages, are no
prayers, this is an argument. Eliens. resp. ad Apolog. page 42.
Because there is not any of all these Fathers, when they treat of prayer, (as
it is their usual theme) of set purpose, and handle all the objects, and
kinds thereof, that ever mention one syllable of this prayer to Saints. This is
an answer will never be taken away by any of your side. Now if your Priests
took an hint hereby, to erect Masses for the Vide Epist. Vratislauiens. apud
S^^ltetum, Annal. decad. 1. p. 150
dead, I hope you know they loose nothing by the bargain.


Pap. You likewise contemn, and deride the Relics of the Saints, which are
showed, preserved, and adored in our Churches.


Prot. We are so far from contemning any thing in this kind, that did we
know them to be true relics, and no impostures, we should honor them more
then you do, to wit, K. James preface monit.
with an honorable, and Christian burial. We hear indeed that there were of
old August. de moribus Ecclesiae.
some Christians that attributed too much to the relics of the Martyrs, but
we hear from the same Father, August. de ciuit. Dei, l. 8. cap. 27.
The better sort of Christians did not so. And we hold it very idle to Plin.
Sec^ ^* l. 4. ep. 8.
propose for our imitation any other, then the best, and most absolute pattern.


Pap. You do also speak basely of the blessed virgin, and compare her to your
own wives, and such baggages.


Prot. A railing Frenchman does charge Melancthon with such a comparison,
Florim. Remond en son Histoir ex Hom. Mel. in euang. de incarnat.
but that book or passage he cites, is not to be found among the works of
that most learned and modest writer: Howeuer, our Church has never a Rogers in
art. 22.
Saint Ruffyn (as yours has) to heal all frenzies, and madnesses, and we
count no better of those desperate speeches, that any one shall vomit against
the glorious virgin. Yet I think your men abuse her far more, Leo 10. ep. ad
Bemb. 17.
one calling her a Goddess, another Rosar. Mar.
the Goddess of the sea, which is the title of Venus. Making of Mary the ever
Virgin a mere in Petr. Arbit.
Quartilla, that could never remember she was a Virgin. In every deed you all
abuse her. For Polan: synt. l. 3. c. 24.
as one well observes, when you say your Aue Mary's, you pray for her. But we
hold, as to pray for her to be most Aug. sermon. 17. de verb. Ap.
injurious, so to pray to her to be most Epiph. l. 3. aduers. haeres.
unlawful and superstitious.


Pap. Also you never use to pray for the dead, although the Ancients did so.


Prot. We dare not indeed For if they be in Heaven, P. Lomb. 4 sent.
distinct. 45.
we shall wrong them, if in Hell, we cannot help them; and Purgatory, Roffens.
contra art. Luther. art. 18.
your own men confess, was never heard of amongst the Ancients. Now for
those prayers for the dead in the old Liturgies, they were conceived (if you
mark them) for men dying, Caessand. prec. eccles.
and passing, not dead already, and so they are still used in the Church of
England, and most diligently, and deuourly in the Collegiate Church of
Westminster. But to stretch, and extend these Vide epist. Vratislau. apud
Scultet. Annal. dec. 1. pa. 152.
Collects to men stone-dead, and past their particular judgments was a pretty
project of the Monks and Friars, and they were very well paid for their wit,
and invention, as you shall find, when you shall have occasion to purchase a
Mass for any of your kindred departed.


Pap. Nay say you nothing of the Mass, for out of malice, and derogation from
the Sacrifice therein offered, you have bred in the people such a slight
opinion of the Blessed Sacrament, as they make of it, but a bare sign, or a
token, or a figure, or I cannot tell what: And dare not conceive Christ to be
there, for fear of imprisonment, or the high Commission.


Prot. We do indeed acknowledge no oblation in the blessed Sacrament, but a
See common prayer book.
lively commemoration of that oblation of Christ, which he offered upon the
Cross for our redemption. Nor any Sacrifice at all, but that Sacrifice of
Collects, prayers, and thanksgiving, which the Church powers out unto God at
the receiving of the Sacrament. And these commemorations, and collects, are the
reason, why the Supper of the Lord, was termed by the Ancients, a Sacrifice,
an Oblation, the Eucharist, the Host, etc. But the reverence due to this great
Sacrament is as obseruable, as the manner of Christ's presence therein is
inexpressible. The names of a figure, a sign, a type, and the like, we keep
to expound the words only, but not as though they were keys to open, and
unfold the manner of the mystery. The speech is to be expounded figuratively,
because Schoolmen in 4. sent.
This, and Christ's body (before the pronuntiation of the last syllable of the
words) are disparats and of a contrary nature. But Christ is present there,
for the matter Aug. confess. apud Cassand. consult. art. 10.
substantially, Calvin. in 1. Cor. 11.21.
truly, Melan. in ep. ad Palate. and Granguellam.
really, nay most truly, Fortunatus Caluinista apud Greg. de Valent. l. 1. de
praesen. Christi in Euchar. c. 7. did. Istius.
and most really, and more truly, and more really, then the bread and the
wine, but for the manner ineffably, and vnexpressably. And this is that
Caluinisticall doctrine, you so much cavil at, and deride.

1 We honor the Saints with Ecclesiastical observation, but not with a
Spiritual adoration.

2 The ancient Fathers made Orations, but no Orisons unto them.

3 The blessed Virgin is more abused by Papists who make her To give suck to a
Priest. Vincent. Spec. h^st. l. 7. 84. Mend Thomas a Beckets old hose. Cantip.
lib. 2. c. 29.12. Heal a scabd head. Caes. l. 7. c. 25. Clippe a Monk. Id. l.
7. c. 51. Kiss another. Id. l. 7 c. 33. Sing to a third. Id. l. 7. c. 22. Lie
between man and wife. Vincent. lib. 7. c. 8. Supply a Nuns place that was
gone to a Bawdy house. Caesar. lib. 7. cap. 35. Bring an Abbess to bed gotten
with child by her Seruing-man. Vincent. Spec. hist. lib. 7. cap. 87.


4 We are ready to bury, but not to adore relics.

5 We pray for men departing, as the Fathers did, not for the departed as the
Friars did.

6 Christ is in the Sacrament really for the matter, ineffably for the manner.


CHAP. 5. Some idle personal exceptions.
Prot. Have you any other points of our Religion that you stumble at?


Pap. These are the main points of your religion questioned. But some
aspers^ons more are cast upon the persons of your Ministers. As that they lie
wilfully, and against their knowledge in points of Divinity, and are thus
zealous in the cause, out of a desire only to preserve their great estates in
the Church, whereas our Priests have no other worldly comfort, but the
goodness of their cause, and the testimonies of their consciences.


Prot. Let your common discretion be your judge in this case, whether we, that
ground our doctrines upon the word of God, interpreted by those ten rules I
formerly set down, or these men, that put all to the determination of the
Church that is, to their own proper fantasies, and the gross exposition of an
unlearned Pope, are most likely to gull the world, with crotchets, and
Chimaeras. Besides, you know how full this kingdom is of men well read, as in
all sciences, so especially in Divinity. You know (and yet none knows it so
well, as they that best know him) the profound learning and deep apprehension
of the King himself, as having perfectly digested, the very body and bulk of
all sacred knowledge. And is this a stage for ignorance and imposture to play
their parts on? Or does this learned Monarch, the Lord of 3. Kingdoms, woed
and sought unto, by all the Catholic Princes, palliate his religion, in hope
of a Bishopric? These are poor and toothlesse aspersions. Then for our
Ecclesiastical estates, they are so par'de, and pol'de with duties, and
impositions (all which had their Original from the Court of Rome) that the
time of the charge of breeding up a minister, would raise him a better means
then he has in the Church in any other trade or trafficque whatsoever The King
is gracious to his servants of all professions. But a Country Minister cannot
inn for the harvest of a whole year, what a Jesuit can get in an hours
confession. Lastly, concerning these professors of poverty the Priests, and the
Jesuits, it is too well known they want no maintenance. What by traducing our
Nation abroad, and seducing our people at home, their bones are full of marrow,
and their eyes swell with fatness; and what the Statute has taken from us,
cogging, and cheating has drawn upon them, I mean the privy Tithes, and
Beneuolences of the Kingdom. But to choke this Objection in one word. That our
means is no cause to keep us in this profession, witness our Brethren in
France and elsewhere, who without the same means, teach and preach the self
same doctrine.


Pap. They also inform us that your Ministers have neither learning, nor
honesty.


Prot. It is true indeed, they teach their Nouices, that the greatest Doctor
in our Church, does not understand the common grounds of Divinity, and must of
Britanno-Romanus page 19.
necessity be put to his A. B. C. again. But common reason can inform you,
whether this be true or not. Again, they are only the base fugitives, and
discontented runnagates of our own nation, that spread these rumors, who
think their Countrie-men the grossest fools in Christendom, that they dare
thus amuse them, and lead them by the nose, with such impossible assertions.
And therefore I will give you a touch here, how other Papists have ingeniously
acknowledged the learning, and piety of many Protestants. Aeneas Syluius de
orig. Bohem. c. 35.
Pope Pius commended Hus for learning, and purity of life; Alph. lib. 2.
aduers. haeres. tit. Ador. haer. 2.
Alphonsus de Castro Oecolampadius for all kind of knowledge, and the tongues
especially, In annot. in Tert. coron. Militis. In defens. conc. Trid. l. 1. p.
41.
Rhenanus also Conradus Pelican as a man of a wonderful sanctity, and
erudition; Andradius likewise, Chemnitius for a man of a sharp wit, and great
judgment; Costerus all the Protestants for their civil behavior, their
alms, their building of hospitals, and forbearing from reuiling, and swearing;
Enchirid. c. 2. p. 101. De prohib. l. 2. c. 13.
Gretzer himself, our ordinary writers to be (for the most part) of great
learning, Recherches de la France, page 910. and 511.
and judgment, Stephen Paschier held Calvin worthy (set his opinions aside)
to be compared for zeal and learning to the chief Doctors of the Catholic
Church. Lib. 11. epist. 11. Epist.
Erasmus held Luther of that integrity of life, that his very enemies had
nothing to cast in his dish; Lindan. l. 3. Strom. cap. 33.
Lindanus acknowledged Melancthon to be adorned with all kind of learning. In a
word, your Writers themselves did so applaud the persons of their adversaries
for learning, and piety, that Index expurg. distinct. 2.
Pope Clement the 8. was feign to command all your Controuersie-writers to be
reuiewed; and these graces, and praises bestowed on our men, to be blotted out,
and expunged. And therefore when you next hear a Jesuit in this theme, think
upon these true relations, and withal laugh at him, and pray for him.


Pap. Sir, I have received some satisfaction, that matters are not so far out
of square in the Church of England, as I have been informed. But yet my
conscience will not serve me, to come to your congregations, because there are
(beside these triuiall) many other points of doctrine never heard of amongst
Protestants, which be in very deed the Caballas, and mysteries of the
Romane-Catholique Religion. You have been very tedious in your answers and
declarations, I pray you therefore bestow the last Chapter upon me, to show the
reasons, why so many Ladies, and good Souls refuse to conform themselves to
the Church of England.


Prot. With all my heart, I will therefore end my speech with the summing up
this fifth Chapter, and leave the event to God, and your Conscience.

1. The means of our Churchmen are not so great, as to make them maintain a
false religion, but their religion is so true, as it makes them contented with
any means.

2. Yet in other countries, where no hope of preferment appears, there
appears an equal zeal of our Religion.

3. Our Churchmen are commended for their lives, and learning, by the pens of
their prime adversaries.


CHAP. 6. Reasons of refusal to leave the Romish religion, collected out of
printed Authors.
Pap. I Cannot leave my Religion.


I. Reason.
Because, We must simply believe the Church of Rome, whether it teach true, or
false. Stapl. Antidot. in Euang. Luc. 10.16. page 528.

And if the Pope believe there is no life to come, we must believe it as an
Article of our Faith. Busgradus.

And we must not hear Protestant Preachers, though they preach the Truth.

Rhem. upon tit. 3.10.

Blasph.
And for your Scripture, we little weigh it. For the Word of God, if it be not
expounded, as the Church of Rome will have it, is the word of the Devil.
Hosius de expresso verbo Dei.

II. Reason.
You rely too much upon the Gospel, and S. Paul's Epistles in your Religion,
whereas, Blasph.
the Gospel is but a fable of Christ, as Pope Leo the tenth tells us. Apol. of
H. Stephen. fol. 358. Smeton. contra Hamilton. page 104.

And the Pope can dispense against the New Testament. Panormit. extra de
diuortiis.

And he may check, when he pleases the Epistles of S. Paul. Carolus Ruinus
Consil. 109. number. 1. volum. 5.

And control any thing avouched by all the Apostles. Rota in decis. 1. number.
3. in nouiss. Anton. Maria in addit. ad decis. Rotae nou. de Big. n. 10.

And there is an eternal Gospel, to wit, Blasph.
that of the holy Ghost, which puts down Christ's. Cirellus a Carmelite set it
forth.

III. Reason.
You attribute all your Salvation to Faith in Christ alone. Whereas, He is the
Savior of men only, but of no women. Dial. of Dives and Pauper, compl. 6.
cited by Rogers upon the Artic. and Postellus in Jesuits Catech. l. 1. cap. 10.

For women are saved by S. Clare. Mother Jane.
Some. in Morn. de eccl. cap. 9. Postellus in Jesuits Catech. lib. 8. cap. 10.


Nay to speak properly, S. Francis has redeemed as many, as are saved
sithence his days. Conformit. of S. Fran.

And the blood of S. Thomas a Becket. Hor. Beat. Virg.

And sometimes one man, by his Satisfactions, redeemes another. Test. Rhem. in
Romans 8.17.

IV. Reason.
In your Church there is but one way to remission of sins, which you call
Faith in Christ, but we have many. For we put away Our Venials, with a little
holy water, Test. Rhem. in Romans 8.17. Mortals, by 1. Merits of the B. Virgin,
Hor. B. Virg. 2. The blood of Becket, ib. 3. Agnos Dei, or holy Lambs, Cerem.
l. 1. t. 7. 4. Little parcels of the Gospel, Breuiar. 5. Becoming Franciscans,
confor. l. 1. fol. 101. 6. A Bishops pardon for 40. days, a Cardinals for a
100. days, and the Popes for eeuer. Tak. Camaer. apud Espens. in 1. ad Tim.



V. Reason.
You stand too precisely upon your Sacraments, and require a true Faith in the
partaker. Whereas with us, To become a Monk, or a Nun, is as good as the
Sacrament of Baptism. Aquin. de ingres. relig. l. 2. c. 21.

And the very true, and real body of Christ may be devoured of dogs, hogs,
cattes, and rattes. Alex. Hales, part 4. q. 45. Thom. part 3. q. 8. art. 3.

VI. Reason.
Then for your Ministers, every one is allowed to have his wife, or else
enforced to live chastely, whereas with us, the Pope himself cannot dispense
with a Priest to marry, no more then he can privilege him to take a purse.
Turianus found fault withal by Cassand. Consult. art. 23.

But whordome is allowed all the year long. See Sparks discovery, page 13.
and constitut. Othon. de concubit. cleric. remouend.

Abominable.
And another sin for June, July, August. which you must not know of. Allowed
for this time by Sixtus Quartus to all the family of the Cardinal of S. Lucie,
vessel. Grouingens. tract. de indulgent. citat. a Jacob. Laurent. Jesuit. lib.
page 196. vide Io. Wolfij lection. memorab. centen. 15 p. 836.

For indeed the wickedness of the Churchmen is a prime argument of the
worthiness of the Roman Church. Bellar. l. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 14. artic. 28.

And the Pope can make that righteous, which is unrighteous. l. 1. Decretal.
Greg. tit. 7. c. 5.

And yet can no man say unto him, Sir, why do you so? In extrau tom. 22. titul.
5. c. ad Apostolatus.

VII. and last Reason.
You in the Church of England have cast off the Bishop of Rome, Blasph.
whereas the Bishop of Rome is a God. Did. 96. c. Satis euidenter. and Panorm.
cap. Quanto Abbas.

FINIS.

