The Answer of the Masters of the Trinitie-house, to the special Objections of
the Patentee, for the keeping of VVinterton lights.
Answer to the objection of neglect.
WHereas it is objected, that from the eighth of Elizabeth, we never set up
light-houses at Winterton until this time: we answer, it is true. The reason
is, that until now, there was never cause, neither in the ^^^gements of our
selves, nor of the Masters of shipping, trading that coast. About 2 or 3 miles
from Winterton, 13 or 14 years since, we built 2 light-houses, and laid 2
booyes at a place called Castor: at which time we sounded all those channels,
but found no cause why to set up, or lay out any sea-marke, either for day or
night at Winterton. Some 10 years since, or thereabouts, we made 2 other
light-houses at Lowstoffe: at which time we likewise sounded all those channels
on that coast, but found no cause for any sea-marke at Winterton: so good was
the channel there, that we thought it not needful; neither was it held
necessary by others. Some 6 years since, or thereabouts, we sent six of the
chiefest of our Corporation, with ketches or boats to sound all those channels
upon that coast; and to erect, and lay out such and so many sea-markes, as to
them should seem good: yet found no cause to set up any light-house at
Winterton. But now some 4 years since* or thereabouts, in one Winter the sands
altered, and the channel grew dangerous: and presently after, fell a wrack of
5 or 6 ships: yet not so much by the alteration of the channel, as by a great
storm or tempest, that happened by night: which ouer-ruled the skill and
cunning of the Pilots, to the loss of the foresaid ships: yet were not all the
ships lost which were in this storm, and in the company of those lost ships:
for the whole number of ships was 35 or 40, of which only five or six were
lost.

That we erected a light-house, as soon as was cause; and that 10 or 11 months
before the Patentee.
Presently upon this, we made preparation, (which was seconded by a general
petition from all the owners and Masters of ships trading New Castle, and that
North coast) and began to build our Tower-light in March, and finished it in
June following; which cost us 600 pounds; and kept our lights from June to
April following, without any collection toward the charge. By which time the
Patentee obtained his patent (dated the xviij of Febr. 1617.) by virtue whereof
we were commanded to put out our lights: which we did. And afterward the
Patentee broke open the door of our tower-light, and kept his light in it,
until his own structures were erected.

The charge of the Patentees structures.
Whereas it is auerred and delivered, that the Patentee has been at 25 or 30
hundred pounds upon the charge of his structures, or houses built at Winterton:
we answer, that the like structures or houses may be built for 150 pounds, or
thereabouts. And for the surplus of charges, we profess, not to understand it,
neither do we think that the Patentee can give an account thereof.

His yearly charge.
For the monthly or yearly charges of keeping the said lights; we answer: that
it is about 11 or 12 pounds a month, which is 130 pounds, or thereabouts, a
year.

His yearly receipts.
Toward this his charge in erecting, and for his maintenance of these lights, 3
years or thereabouts he has received the collection of 2 pence upon every
chaldron of coals: which amounts yearly to the sum of 14 or 15 hundred
pounds; besides the collection of one penny upon the tun of all other ships
trading that coast: 40 pence for 6 pence.
which (being 40 pence upon every 20 chaldron) is near seven times so much as
the voluntary contribution (of 6 pence upon every 20 chaldron) accepted by the
Trinitie-house, for maintenance of their lights.

Now it rests to answer to the difference, between the Patentee, and the
Masters of the Trinitie-house, in point of quality, and care, for well keeping
of the said lights.

The Patentees unfitness.
Of the Patentee, we will say but this: he is no seaman. In the nature of
sea-markes, sands, channels, tides, etc. he neither does, nor can possibly
understand.

Quality, fit to keep sea-markes.
For the Masters of the Trinitie-house, in point of quality, who can justly
except against us? Are we not seamen, bred even from our childhood, in the
knowledge of marine affairs: of nauigable channels, sands, ebbing, flowing,
and setting of tides: in the knowledge of setting out of sea-markes, whether
for day or night? is not this knowledge within the compass of our element, and
of ours only? Are we not at home, when we are in our ships, surging in those
channels, and on the seas? who will or can dispute or reason with us in this
element? it is proper to us, improper to all other.

Care in keeping sea-marks
In point of care, may any be equal to us? we adventure our lives, our
estates, yea all our means within the compass of these channels: our hopes in
all depend upon the knowledge of channels, sands, and the well keeping of
sea-markes. His Majesty reposeth the trust, the care and charge of his Navy
royal (in point of conduction and pilotage) to us; we say, to us only:
neither will his Ma: repose this trust in any other Corporation or Company in
this kingdom. If all these weighty motives be not of force, to settle more
care in us, then in any other, for the well keeping of sea-markes, let us
suffer, and be hanged at the gates of the Kings Court, for example to others.

Authority for keeping sea-markes.
In point of authority, making for us: it is now 100 years, since we were
made a Corporation: it is 55 years, since the Parliament made a law, to enable
us, for the setting up, and laying out of all sea-markes: which accordingly we
have done: and never questioned until now, and that by the Patentee. The
examination whereof, by virtue of two several references from the King, came
to full hearing, before the right honorable Lords, at the Council board; who,
by two several orders (as by the said orders at large may appear) conferred,
and confirmed the whole, and sole keeping of all sea-markes, upon our
Corporation. After this, the Patentee got a third reference to Sir Henry
Yelverton, then Attorney general: he takes into his consideration, the legal
point only, (not meddling with the point of conuenience) and finding the want
of a negative in the statute, certified that the Patentee, by allowance from
the King, might do it, as well as we. VVhereupon he obtained his Majesty's
grant, and enioyes the benefit: to the great grief and discouragement of all
Merchants, owners, and Masters of ships trading those Northern coasts.

The consideration hereof, in all humility, we submit, to the mature wisdom
and censure of this most honorable Court.


