A DISCOVRSE OF DEATH, BODILY, GHOSTLY, AND ETERNAL: NOR UNFIT FOR SOVLDIERS
Warring, Seamen sailing, Strangers traveling, Women bearing, nor any other
living that thinks of DYING.

BY THOMAS TVKE.

PSALM. 89. 48. What man lives, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his
soul from the hand of the Grave? ECCL. 14. 17. All flesh waxes old as a
garment, and this is the condition of all times, Thou shale die the death. JOB.
17. 13. The grave shall be my house, and I shall make my bed in the dark.
LONDON, Printed by William Stansbie for George Norton. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR JOHN LEVENTHORPE Knight, and to the
right-vertuous Lady, the Lady IOANE LEVENTHORPE, his loving Wife. ()
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, many write, and many more do speak of Death: and it were
not much, if as many wrote thereof, as could write at all. For it is the Way,
that all must walk in: and although to all it be either very fortunate, or
very fatal, yet of the most it is forgotten, till it seem to seize upon them:
yea, even we, that speak and write about it, are sometimes too unmindful of
it; perhaps then also, when we speak and write upon it. But howsoever we do
forget it, it will be sure to remember us. It has been wisely said, that to
speak and think often and seriously of hell, is a good mean to save the
soul from hell: so I suppose that a sad and sober thinking, and remembering of
bodily death, will be a blessed help to keep the soul and body from
eternal death. It is strange to see the fears of many: yet even the fearful
sometimes show small fear of death, except then, when it is to be embraced.
Others well near with the fear of death are brought to death. Some will not
begin to live, till they feel themselves begin to die. And how many are
there, that are a-fraid of death, and yet dare play with the sting of death? It
were no great matter to handle a Snake, when her poisoning tooth is pulled out:
but to fly a Snake, and in the mean time not to fear that, which makes her
venom, were (I wot not well) whether more base, or foolish. I know not why
death should not be counted terrible, whiles her venomous and killing tooth is
in her head; but that being once pulled out, why she should affright a man, I
see no reason. For why should he fear death, whom death does help, not hurt,
and ease rather then end? He that dies, whiles he lives, lives whiles he is
dead: yea, and that death at last shall meet with death it self. Certainly
death cannot be ill to him, that lives well: neither is that worthy the name
of death, which is made the door of life. Yet I find the virtuous sometimes
appalled with her grisly looks. They are loath to part, that have lived long
together: and a man can scarce without some reluctation forsake the house,
wherein he was bred, and has ever lived, since he lived, to dwell in another,
though a better, Country. But (me thinks) the delicacie of the place, the
affluence of all good things there, amongst these the fellowship of the Saints,
the presence of that loving and beloved Savior, the fruition of the
All-sufficient God, together with a certain expectation of a joyful return
at last, should satisfy the departing Soul, and settle her unruly passions.

As for you (Right Worshipful) I doubt not but that God, to whom you strive to
live, has taught you both ere now to die. I write not these things therefore,
as intending to instruct you, but rather to show that the memory of your love
does live within me, and as one desirous by putting you in mind of those
things, which ye know already, that, whiles you live, the remembrance of them
might not die. Read them at your leisure, and enjoy them. And that God, under
whom they were begun and ended, give a blessing to them: unto whose saving
grace I do commend you both, beseeching him in Christ Jesus to vouchsafe you
his love while ye live on earth, and to crown you after death with eternal
life in heaven. London St. Clem. Ann. 1612. November 5. A day never to be
forgotten of true English hearts.

Your Worships to be commanded in the Lord, Thomas Tuke.

To the Reader.
I Suppose there is not one thing more common and less thought of then death.
Heu viuunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur, aut velut infernus sabula vana
foret.
All men must die, yet most men live, as if they thought they should never die.
Wherein men are very injurious to them selves; the sad and settled remembrance
of death being a notable furtherance of Repentance, and a profitable mean to
keep us from eternal death. For I pray you, why should man lift up himself
against his Maker, who ere long must fall into the earth? Why should we be
proud and insolent, who are but dust? Why should we insult over any man,
because we surpass him in wit, wealth, strength, honor, beauty? Are we not
all food for the Worms? Will not death knock all our bones together? Is not
our life a breath, a bubble? Why should a man pin his heart to the earth, and
set his love on the World? Shall not the earth devour him? Will not the world
forsake him? Note.
She is certain in nothing, but in uncertainty, uncertain in nothing, but
in her certainetie. If she do not him, yet of necessity He must forsake her.
We are here but Pilgrims, 1. Pet. 2. 11.
and Forrainers: Mors manet omnes: and we know not how soon our Pilgrimage
will end: neither can we carry the world away with us. We come naked, and we
go naked. Why then should we wed our souls to the World? Riches, pleasures,
wife, children, friends, honors, and all the things that the world can afford,
Linquenda tellus, and domus, and placens vxor. Hor. Carm. l. 2. od. 14.
are all mutable, momentanie, mortal: but man's soul is immortal: wherefore
then should it be set upon these things? Why not upon God, who is an immortal,
and immutable Good, only indeed able to give true and full contentment to the
soul? 2. Tim. 6. Iam. 7.
And finally why should men wallow in their sins, and deuote themselves unto
their lusts? Shall we not all die? And as the tree falls, so shall it lie. In
what estate we die, Eccl. 11. 3.
in that we shall be judged. Oh that we would therefore remember our latter
end! Oh that we would number our days, and think of our death, that we might
apply our hearts unto wisdom! Note.
Lie is uncertain, Death is most certain: if men could duly meditate of this,
that is most certain, they could not abuse and mispend that so much, which is
precious, but most uncertain. But besides that all men must once die, even by
the course of nature; death being by sin bred in the bone, and will never out
of the flesh: God, who has the keys of life and death in his hand, does by
many means bring men unto their ends: and sometimes he does punish ungodly
wretches by untimely and unexpected death, showing his anger by the manner and
occasion of his punishing. Famous were the Judgments of God upon those
persecuting Tyrants; Domitian, Hadrian, Valerian, Dioclesian, Maximinus,
Aurelian, Arnolphus, Bajazet the Turk, and Mamucha a Saracen.

The former was slain with Daggers by his own Servants, Domitianus. Apud
Sucton.
in his privy chamber, his Wife consenting.

The second having caused ten thousand Christians at one time to be crucified,
Hadrian. Spartian. lib. 2. cap. 12.
and still raging against them; God took him in hand at last, smit him with an
issue of blood, then with a consumption of his lungs, and lights, which he spat
out, thirdly with a dropsy, and being in horrible torment he would have killed
himself, but being hindered, he died in that miserable estate.

The third being taken prisoner in the Persian wars, Valerian. Eusebius. hist.
lib. 7. cap. 30.
Sapor the King of Persia used him as a block or stirrope to get on
horseback, and (as Eusebius says) made him to be slayed alive, and powdered
with salt.

The fourth in hatred of Christianity by public edict commanded the
Christians Churches should be beaten down, Dioclesian.
and their Bibles burnt and torn, and themselves to be put out of their
offices in the Commonwealth, Ruffin.
which had any: but God met with him, plagued him with strange diseases, fired
his house with lightning, and terrified him with thunder so, as that not
knowing where to hide himself he fell mad, and killed himself.

The fifth was smitten with a most stinking and vile disease, Maximinus.
which increased his cruelty, and at last killed him; Nicephor.
his carcass being rotten and full of worms. St. Chrysostom says the Apple
of his eye fell out before his death.

The sixth had his throat cut by his own servants. Aurelian.


The seventh rotted living, and sending forth lice and worms continually,
Arnolphus.
at length died miserably in the twelfth year of his tyranny.

Bajazet was taken captive by Tamerlaine, carried about in a Cage, and used as
his stirrope, and ended his days miserably.

Mamucha returning from the slaughter of many Christians, was with his whole
Army swallowed up of the Sea, few or none escaping of an hundred sail of
ships.

What need I say so much? The judgments of God are many and fearful in all
the world. Morindus a cruel Tyrant in this Island, was devoured of a Monster
that came out of the Irish Seas. Stow Anno mundi. 3659.
Popiel a King of Poland, an Vncle-murtherer, and a notable curser, Munst.
Cosm. lib. 1. cap. 32.
was with his wife (who consented to his Uncles death) eaten up of Rats.
Cerinthus perished with the fall of an hot-house upon him. Arrius voided his
guts. The Emperors Constantius and Valence, Socrat. Zozom
both Arrians, were punished by God; the former by a sudden, and inexpected
Apoplexy, whereof he died; the latter was burnt in a little house, Ruffin. l.
2. c. 13
in which he had hid himself in his slight from the Goths. But what need I
go so far for examples? All ages are full of them. And we see how God
suffers Adulterers, Drunkards, and other sinners which escape often unpunished,
to fall into thefts and murders whereby they come unto their deaths. Which
things, if men would duly consider, it would rouse them up by the grace of God
unto better care and conscience: which God grant unto us. But I will hold thee
no longer, but leave thee to consider the things I have prepared for thee.

Thine in Christ, Thomas Tuke.

A DISCOVRSE OF DEATH: CORPORAL, SPIRITVALL AND ETERNAL.
THere is, Three sorts of Death.
as of Life, so of Death, three different kinds; external or bodily,
internal or spiritual, eternal, or of both body and soul.

External or bodily death is, as Plut. comp. aq. and ignis.
Plutarke says, the Privation of all heat, or as Scal. Excre. 307 Sect. 23.
Scaliger speaks, the Priuatien of Life: or as they Plut. de consolat. Scal.
ibid.
both say, the Disjunction of the soul from the body, which two by God were
coupled to make one living, and perfect man.

Death, is a disjunction of the soul, not a destruction, Note.
it is a separation, and not an annihilation. Etsi morimur corpore, nunquam
tamen spiritu: for though (as Martialis says) we die in In Epist. ad Burdig.
regard of the body, yet we never die as touching the soul: because death (as
Lactantius speaks, De diuino praemio, lib. 7. c. 16.
Mors non extinguit hominem, sed ad praemium virtutis admit tit:) does not make
a man to be just nothing, but admits him to the reward of virtue, if he have
been virtuous: or else delivers him up to most grievous punishments, if he
have been vicious.

Amongst the heathen some there were, that held the death a dissolution of the
soul, as Democritus, Epicurus and Dicaearchus: others there were, which held
it was immortal, as Pherecydes, Plato, and many more. The Stoics (says
Lactantius) held that the souls of men continue, Lact. de diu. praem. l. 7. c.
6. 7. 13. Lib. 7. c. 10. Xenoph l. 8. de Instit. Cyri.
and that ( nec interuentu mortis in nihilum resolui) they are not brought by
death to nothnig. Cyrus instructing his sons a little before his death says,
that he was ((...), etc.) never persuaded that the soul af man died; when it
left the body: but says, that the mind, when it is freed from the fellowship
of the body, (...) is then most wise and understanding: and that, when a man is
dissolved, every thing in the body ((...)) besides, the soul returns ((...))
unto the things of the same kind, that is, are resolved into the elements, out
of which they were taken: and therefore he forbids his sons to think
((...)) that he shall be Nothing any more after his death. In like manner
Hermes describing the Nature of man says, Vid. Lactantii l. 7. c. 13.
that God made man of both natures, to wit, of an immortal nature, and of a
mortal, ((...)) making the same man to be partly immortal, and partly
mortal; which immortality is to be understood of the soul, experience
showing the body to be mortal and corruptible without all remedy. And
finally, the Devil himself, as he gave testimony to the divinity of Christ,
so has he by Oracle showed the immortality of the soul: Lact. l. 7. c. 13.
de diu. praem.
for being by Polytes consulted under the name of Apollo Milesius, Whether the
soul remained after death, or was dissolved, he answered, that the soul,
when it was departed from the body ((...)) is always free from the weakness
of olde-age, Lact. vbi supra.
and continues altogether vnvanquished.

To these testimonies of the Creature we may for better satisfaction add the
witness of holy Scriptures, Scriptures proving the immortality of the Soul.
Ec. 12. 7. Is. 66. 24.
which are the very Oracles of the great Creator. Solomon says, that when the
body returns to the earth, the spirit returns to God that gave it. Esaias
says, that the Worm of the transgressors shall not dye, and that their fire
shall not be quenched, which argues the mortal immortality, or immortal
mortatalitie of their souls. Accordingly our Savior shows in two parables,
that the souls of wicked men dye not with their bodies, but remain in
torments. The one is of him that said, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years: Luke 12. 19. 20.
but God said unto him, Thou fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul
from thee. The other of another rich Epicure, Luke 16. 22. 23.
who was grievously tormented in hell after he was dead. It is true therefore,
that as Lactantius speaks, Lib. 7. c. 12* de diu. praem.
Mors non funditus perimit, ac delet, sed aeternis afficit cruciatibus, Death
does not utterly kill and extinguish, but everlastingly torment and punish.

Now if the souls of the wicked dye not, but continue (though indeed
afflicted so, as that their life is worthy to be called and accounted death,
an euer-dying life, or an everliving death) it were very absurd to think that
the souls of the godly should perish with their bodies. Does not our Savior
say, Ioh. 12. 26:
upon the death of Lazarus, that had lien dead four days, whom he raised up
to life, Whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never die? Did he not
say to the Thief, Luke 23. 43
that was crucified with him, Luke 14. 13.
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise? Does he not profess that his
Martyrs are blessed, that they rest from their labors, (...)
and that their works do follow them? What blessedness have they now? what is
their honor, if their souls do dye with their bodies? And to what end should
that his Proto Martyr Saint Steven commend his soul unto him, Act. 7 59.
saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, but that he knew his soul did live,
when his body was dissolved? Or why should Saint Paul, if he did not verily
believe the immortality of the soul, desire to be loosed, Phil. 1. 23.
and to be with Christ, and use this boldness of speech unto the Corinthes. We
know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, 2. Cor. 5. 2.
we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens? And finally, if Christ Jesus be like unto his Brethren in All things,
Heb. 2. 17. and 4. 15.
as the Apostle teaches, Sin excepted: then it appears, that his Brethen
are like unto him: but Christ has a soul, which is immortal, and did not
dye, though his body lay dead a time: their souls therefore live ever, and dye
not with their bodies. And that we may not seem to forget that memorable
speech of our Savior to the Sadduces, Mat. 22. 32.
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: but he is the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: therefore these three are living in their souls,
though dead as touching the life of their bodies.

And thus our faith concerning the not dying of the soul is founded, fed, and
fortified by the testimony of the Scriptures, which being of infallible
verity, are simply to be believed, for God, the Author, and Inspirer of them.

Neither is Philosophy here of no use: therefore Julius Caesar Scaliger, Exerc.
307. Sect. 20.
by three reasons proves it, taken (as himself professes) from Aristotle,
and created Nature.

First, Philosophical arguments showing the soul of man to be immortal*
no simple is resolved into the grounds thereof: for it is composed of no
grounds: but the soul of man is a thing simple, and not compounded: for it is
an Act, (and no Act is a Power: therefore it is not compounded) and a Ground,
Principium effendi and agendi, which it cannot be, if it be compounded. It
follows therefore that the soul being vncomposed is irresoluble, and so
immortal.

Secondly, the soul is a celestial Nature: namely, a Fifth Essence, Arg. 2
differing from the Nature of the four elements: vnsubiect therefore to
corruption, whereunto all bodies elementarie are obnoxious.

Thirdly, if the soul do die, being a simple nature, it must needs be
brought to nothing: Arg. 3.
for it cannot be resolved into the grounds of it, because it has none (for
grounds are the acts of those things whereof they be grounds: and no such
ground as the soul, has a ground of it self besides God, into whom nothing
can be resolved:) now if the soul should be brought to nothing, then of
something nothing shall be made.

It is true indeed, Note.
that the soul and all created natures, may be corrupted and destroyed, how
simple they be so ever. For there is but one absolute and prime Beginning or
Ground of all things, which is God: all other things are dependant, they are
all from and by him. Now whatsoever depends on God, at his will the same
thing may be changed of God, and altered at his pleasure. But the souls of
men depend on God, and therefore at his beck they may be deposed from that
essence, in which he made them. Now they are not corrupted, because he will
not have them so to be.

These Arguments are of some soliditie, and worthy to be received: but as for
that, which some do bring to demonstrate the immortality of the soul, to
wit, because (they say) it is (not only A Deo, but also De Deo) of the very
essence of God, which is immortal, it is altogether unreasonable and wicked.
For so it would follow that the nature of God should be captiuated, Note.
deceived, altered, defiled, damned, and tormented. For though indeed we be
the Progeny of God, Acts 17. 28.
and partakers of the divine Nature, as the Apostles speak, 2. Pet. 1. 4.
yet are we not parts of his nature, neither does he communicate by generation
his nature to us, as a Father to his Children: For God has but one natural
son, which is Christ Jesus, who is begotten from all eternity, and has the
whole Nature of the Father in his person, neither is the Nature of God capable
of alteration or division: and for the speeches of these two Apostles, Note.
Paul and Peter, they are to be understood partly because God is our Architect
and Creator, and partly in respect of those excellent gifts and graces, which
shine in men, specially good men, more then in all other creatures, and partly
in regard of that new name, state or Nature, which is through the grace of God
in Christ bestowed on us. It is true indeed that the Soul in some sense may
be said to be Mutable (in deterius scilicet desiciendo, Note.
and in melius proficiendo) to wit, by waxing better or worse, in respect of
good and evil: yea, and Mortal, by dying either to sin by Mortification, or
by being dead in sin, How the soul may be said to die.
through bondage, and submission to it, or else by suffering torments for
sin, which deprive it of the joys of life; but to say that the substance,
the essence of the Soul, does dye, does perish, is dissolved, this is against
all sound reason, both Theological, and Philosophical.

It may be then demanded, Quaest.
if the souls of men dye not, when their bodies loose them, whether go they,
what becomes of them?

The Author of the Questions in Justin says, Quaest. 75.
that the Souls of the just are carried into Paradise, where is the company
and sight of Angels, and Arke-angels, and of our Savior Christ: but the Souls
of the wicked into Hell. Hom. 16. in Ep. ad Romans
Death ( says Chrysostom) does not sever us from Christ, but ioines us to
that company, which is with Christ. In Col. 1.
And Anselme agrees saying, So great peace is wrought by the death of Christ,
that the souls of the Righteous do now, when they go forth of the body,
forthwith enter into Heaven, the Angels being glad thereof. And this appears
to be true by that Parable in the Gospel, Luke 16. 22. 23.
which says that the Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom: the Richman also dyed, and was tormented after his death in Hell. For
where should the souls of men be after Death, but either in Heaven with
Christ, or in Hell with the Devil? Non est vllus vlli locus medius, Aug. lib.
de pec; mer. and remis. c. 28.
vt possit esse nisi cum Diabolo, qui non est cum Christo. There is not any
place for any man, to be any where but with the Devil, who is not with Christ,
says Saint Austen. There are two receptacles for men's souls, Heaven and Hell:
Tertium penitus ignoramus: Author Hypog. l. 5.
a third place we are utterly ignorant of, says one. The Scripture speaks of
no more, then two.

Thus we have seen what Death is, to wit, a disjunction of the soul from the
body, and not a dissolution of the Soul with the body; the soul remaining
vncorrupt, lib. 7. de diu. prem. c. 12.
and In aeternum, as Lactantius speaks.

Death, though, for the Nature of it, it be but one, and the same, to wit, a
temporary divorce or separation of the soul and body, which were married or
united by God himself, yet in respect of the state, into which men are by it
admitted, it is double: and in regard of the means or ways, whereby it is
effected, it is manifold: for as Seneca truly speaks, Mill ad hanc aditus
patent, there are a thousand ways to bring a man to Death.

In respect of the persons dying, Of a double Death.
and of that estate, which they are let into by death, death is twofold, a
death of the godly, and a death of the wicked, a sanctified and comfortable
death, a miserable and unhappy death. Number. 23. 10. Psalm. 116. 15.
Of the former, Balaam speaks in his wish. Let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his: and David in the Psalm, Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Of the latter our Savior
speaks in the parable when he says, Luke, 12, 20. Luke. 16. 22, 23.
O fool this night will they (the devils he means) fetch thy soul from thee:
And again, The rich man also died, and was buried, and being in hell
tormented, etc.

Furthermore, death we said was manifold for the ways or means thereof. Many
ways of death.
For albeit death be the common way of all flesh, Josh 23. 14. Maximianus.
(Omnibus est eadem lethi via, non tamen vnus Est vitae cunctis, exitijque
modus,) yet all men go not the same way unto death. Statius.
Mill modis lethi miseros mors vna fatigat. Death meets with us a thousand
ways. As into a great City, A Simile.
or into the maine Sea, so unto death there are many ways. It is as the
center, wherein all the lines do meet; a town of Mart, wherein many ways
from contrary coasts do end. Hos bella, Silius.
hos aequora poscunt: His amor exitio, furor his, and saeua cupido: Vt sileam
morbos. Some are eaten up of wars: some are swallowed up of the Seas. The old
world was drowned, the Sodomites were burned, 2. King. 13. 14.
the disobedient Prophet was killed of a Lion, the mocking children were
devoured of two Bears, 2. King 2, 23. 24.
Senacheribs Army was killed with an Angel, Herod Agrippa was eaten of
worms, 2. Chron. 32. 21.
Pherecides of lice, Act. 12. 23.
a King of Epirus was killed with a tile, a King of Israel with an arrow, and
of France with a dagger, 1. King. 22. 34, 35.
some have been swallowed up of the earth, some have been killed of Serpents,
some have been eaten of Wolves, Hatto Archbishop of Mentz. Anno Domini 940.
one was killed of rats, some by the fall of towers and trees, some by one
means, some by another.

But we will bring them to some heads, yet here we promise no accuratenesse.
There is therefore an ordinary way of dying, Read Numh. 18, 19. 30.
which is upon ordinary causes, and is common to all the sons of Adam since
their transgression: Of the kinds of death.
or there is a death by causes more rare and extraordinary, as by pestilence,
samine, battle, opening of the earth, wild beasts, and the like.

Or thus, 1. Kind.
there is first a natural death, which is when nature is spent, A Simile.
when her forces are exhaust. A light will go out of it self, when the flame
wants oil, wax or tallow to feed on. A mellow apple will fall of it self,
and through-ripe corn will shill without shaking. Job. 5. 26.
OF this death Eliphaz speaks, Thou shall go to thy grane in a full age, as
a ricks of corn comes in due season into the barn: 1. Chron. 29. 28.
and such a death Job, Job. 42. 17.
and David died, of whom it is said, they died in a good age, and full of days.

Secondly, 2. Kind.
there is a civil death, which is inflicted by the civil Magistrate, Who is
the Minister of God to take vengeance on him that does evil. Romans 13 4. Josh
7. 25. Mark. 15. 37.
Such a death died Achan under Ioshuah, and the two thieves under Pilate.

But it may be asked if the magistrate may lawfully take away the life of an
offender, Quest.
seeing no man is absolute Lord of the life of man, but only God? To the
soyling of this doubt, Sol.
if any be, we must know that the Magistrate is Gods Lieutenant, or God in
office, Psalm 82. 6.
according to the Psalm, I have said ye are Gods, 2. Chron. 19. 6. Romans 13. 1.
and as Iehosophat says, he executes not the judgments of men, but of the
Lord, whose creature he is, and whose person he represents, and who bears not
the sword for naught, but for the protection of the good, and for the terror
and suppression of the wicked. Those therefore that are cut off by the
Magistrate, as he is a Magistrate, or the Minister of God, as S. Paul does
style him, they are not cut off by Man, but by God, in as much as the
authority is Gods, by which they be cut off. And although we be all as one by
Christ, Gal. 3. 28.
yet is it in respect of the Communion of the Spirit, and not by reason of any
politic, or worldly parilitie. And albeit Christ has made us all Kings,
Revel. 16
yet we may justly say with Christ, Job. 18. 36
Our Kingdom is not of this world, though begun in this world: and our
regalitie may very well stand without wrong to Caesar, or his sword. But to
return.

Civil death is double, just, or iniust. A man dies justly, when he dies for
some wickedness committed, or for some notable villainy, as high treason,
intended and plotted, though not performed. Thus Ioab was slain at the
commandment of Solomon, 1. King. 2. 31. 46
as also Shimei, both of them by Benaiah. In like manner Bigtan and Teresh were
both hanged for intending and seeking to lay violent hands upon their King
Ahashuerosh. Thus justly died those Powder-Papists, Anno 1605. Nouemb. 5.
that most barbarously plotted with one blast to have blown up this whole
Church and State, under the wings whereof it is protected; Praise be unto
Christ for ever, who has honored us with this salvation, and let all good
people say, Amen.

Again, a man dies unjustly, when he dies undeservedly. Thus died Naboth under
Ahab, S. John the Baptist under Herod, 1. King. 21. 13. Mark. 6. 27. Note.
the Martyrs of Christ under Tyrants, and Christ himself under Pilate. For
though that Christ his death was most just in regard of God, to whom he was to
make satisfaction for us, whose room he did willingly stand in: yet Pilate had
no just cause to condemn him, nor the Jews to accuse him.

But suppose the Magistrate will take away a man's life without cause, Quest.
or for maintaining Gods cause; may not a man resist, take up arms against
him, or practice his death? No, in no case: for though he abuse his power, Ans.
yet thou may not break thy patience: the misapplying of his authority,
must not make thee forget thy loyalty. 1. Sam. 24. 6.
David's heart smote him, when he did but cut the very coat of his Sovereign
Saul. 1. Pet. 2. 19. 22. 23.
And Saint Peter says, It is acceptable, if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For hereunto (says he, that was
willingly crucified with his heels upward for his masters sake) ye are
called: for Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, that ye
should follow his steps: who when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed it to him that judges righteously.
1. Pet. 3. 14. 15.
Blessed are ye, if ye suffer for righteousness. And be ready always to
give an answer to every man, that asks a reason of the hope, that is in
you, with meekness, and reverence, 16, 14, 15.
having a good conscience. Yea, fear not their fear, neither be troubled. But
sanctify the Lord God in your hearts. For what praise is it, if when ye be
buffeted for your faults, 1. Pet. 2. 20.
ye take it patiently?

It is not indeed the praise of Martyrdom (for non paena sed oausafacis
Martyram, Cyprian
the cause makes a Martyr, and not the Cross:) but if when ye do well, ye
suffer wrong, and take it patiently, this is acceptable to God. And thus much
of Civil death sustained by the authority of the Magistrate, who ought to be
very wary how he smites, remembering that it is more Prince-like to save then to
destroy, and more difficult to revive one dead man, then to kill a thousand
living, and that the smallest member is not to be cut from the body, but for
the fafety of the body, and finally, that the Emperor Theodosius (Maluit sibi
homines religione, Ambros. de Obitu Theodos.
quam timore a stringere) thought it better to bind his Subjects to him by
Religion, then by terror. For ( Multos timere debet, quem multi timent) he must
needs fear many, who will needs be feared of many: (Quem multi timent, pauci
amant) whom many do fear, few do love: and quem quisque odit, perijsse
expedit. Sed piger ad poenas Princeps, ad praemia, velox, Quisque dolet quoties
cogitur esse ferox, Ovid. de Pont. l. 1. eleg. 3.
But a Prince, that is slow to punish, and ready to reward, and which is sorry,
when he is constrained to be severe, as it was spoken of Augustus Caesar, does
most resemble the Prince of Princes, and gains the love of his Subjects,
which is (says Seneca) Regi inexpugnabile munimentum, an invincible fortress
for the Kings protection. But we have too much digressed.

Thirdly, 3. Kind:
there is a voluntary, or rather a Wilful Death, when a man does of purpose
kill himself. Of this death died Achitophel and Judas, 2. Sam. 17. 23. Act. 1.
18.
who hanged themselves, and such as desperately cut their own throats, and
throw themselves into Wells and waters, or burn themselves up; as she, that
seeing her goods and bags consumed with fire, ran in a rage into the fire and
there dyed: thus also dyed Empedocles a Sicilian Poet, De Art poet sub finem.
of whom Horace thus writes, -- Deus immortalis haberi Dum cupit Empedocles,
ardentem frigidus Aetnam Insiluit --

That is, Whiles that Empedocles desired that men should count him an immortal
God, he leapt into the flames of Aetna; a Hill in Sicily, whence arises most
horrible smoke and flames of fire, to the end that disappearing on the sudden
from the sight of men, he might have been thought to have gone into heaven,
and to have been a God, as he did affirm unto his fellow Citizens, the people
of Agrigentum. But (by the way) mark the hap; The flame (as one says) more
just then he, discovered his imposture: for it cast up one of his pantables or
sandals, and so it was iusily coniectured that the poor ambitious wretch was
there consumed. Here sundry Questions are to be resolved.

First, Quest. 1.
whether upon any cause it be lawful for a man ((...)) to kill himself?

I answer no, Ans.
except God do by special and extra ordinary revelation of his will command.
The reason is, because a man is not created for himself, but for God: (...)
and no man is absolute and Sovereign Lord of his own life: Rom 14 8.
for we are not our own, 1. Cor. 6 19. and 3. 23. and 6. 20.
we are Christ's: our bodies and our souls are not ours, but Gods, as Saint
Paul does teach us. Our bodies are the Temples of God: if any man shall pull
down or destroy his Temple, if he have not express warrant for it, God will
him destroy. The sixth Commandment says, Ex. 20. 13.
Thou shall not kill, now he, that killes himself, kills a man, therefore he
violates the law, and so incurres the curse. And whereas true fortitude is
occupied about things, that might engender fear, and because (as Aristotle
speaks) nothing is more terrible then Death, Eth. l. 3. cap. 6.
it might seem therefore that those which kill themselves, are very valiant
men, and therefore to be commended as men endued with the virtue of true
fortitude. Note.
But in truth they are of all other most cowardly, which do kill themselves to
avoid discredit, shame, poverty, torments: for because they want discretion,
and courage to bear the cross, therefore out of passion, and through
saintnesse of Spirit they make themselves away. This is the courage of an Hare,
which fearing to be rent in pieces of the Hounds runs under the Hunter. Which
kind of fatal foole-hardmesse Ovid does elegantly set forth in these Verses,
De Pont. l. 2. eleg. 2.
Qui rapitur fatis, quid praeter fat a requirit?
Porrigit ad spinas duraque saxa manus.
Accipitrem metuens pennis trepidantibus ales
Audet in humanos fessa venire sinus.
Nec se vicino dubitat committere tecto,
Qua fugit infestos territa cerua canes.
He that the fates have met with, what does he seek,
But things as fatal as the Fates, he met with?
He graspes the sharpest thorns, and roughest stones.
The tired Bird, fearing the greedy Hawk,
Flies to a man, that is as greedy of her.
and so the Hind dreading the hou^ds, that chase her,
Takes up some neighbor house as Fatal to her.


What valor was in the Fishes in the Fable, which leapt out of the Frying
pan into the fire? What wisdom is it for a voiding shame to rush into a
shameful death. Is this courage to kill thy self for fear of being killed by
others? Fortitude has his name (a Ferondo) of bearing: Eth. l. 3. c. 9. Lib.
3. Cap. 7. Sub sinem.
And men are called valiant (says Aristotle) because they endure those things,
which are troublesome and bitter. But ( says he) for a man to kill himself,
that he might avoid poverty, or trouble, does not betoken courage, but
rather cowardice. For it is the point of a feeble and effeminate spirit to
shun those things, which are painful. Neither do they endure to dye for
honesty sake, but that they might escape and avoid some evil, or grievous
thing.

Secondly, Quest. 2.
it may be asked whether a man may not lawfully hazard his life, yea, and
expose himself to certain death for the Churches sake, or for the good of his
Country?

Yea, Aus.
no doubt he may and must, if necessity so require. 1. Joh. 3. 16.
Hereby ( says Saint John) we perceived love that Christ laid down his life
for us, therefore we ought also to lay down our lines for our Brethren. And
Saint Paul says, Acts 20. 24:
I pass not at all, neither is my life dear unto my self, so that I may
fulfill my course with joy, and the ministration which I have received of the
Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. And when Agabus by the
inspiration of the Spirit, Acts 21, 11.
had told Paul that the Jews should bind him and deliver him to the Gentiles,
whereupon some that heard it, 12,
with tears besought him that he would not go to Jerusalem; Then Paul
answered, What do ye weeping, 13
and breaking mine heart? For I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die
at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus. And unto the Philipians he
profesteth his willingness to dye for their confirmation, Phil. 2. 17.
Yea, says he, and though I be offered up upon the sacrifice, and service of
your Faith, I am glad, and rejoice with you all: And this kind of death is
very honorable. For (sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae) the blood of the
Martyrs is the seed of the Church. Persecutiembus creuit Ecclesia, Cyprian De
laud. Martyrij.
Martyriis coronata est. The Church (says Saint Jerome) increased by
persecutions, and was crowned by Martyrdomes. Tanta est virtus Martyrij, vt per
illam credere etiam ille cogatur, quite doluit occidere. So great (says Saint
Cyprian) is the force of martyrdom, that thereby even he is forced to believe
with thee, that was ready to have killed thee.

The Phoenix (as Epiphanius, A simile.
and others do report) when she is come to her full age, gathers in some
high mount a pile of Myrrh, Frankencense, and other Spices, which being
kindled by the heat of the Sun, she suffers her self to be burnt up; and
of her ashes there first breeds a little worm, which at last becomes a
Phoenix: so the Martyrs of Christ having gathered a pile of virtues and good
works, when they see the glory of God, and the good of the Church requires it,
expose themselves to the scorching heat of persecution, and sacrifice
themselves by patience in the flames thereof, that by their death the posterity
of the Church might be preserved, another generation of faithful Christians
springing (as it were) out of their ashes. A Simile.
Philo says that the Coriander seed being cut into little pieces, every
parcel thereof brings out as much as the whole seed would have done: so it
may be said that every inch of the Martyrs, every drop of their blood is
exceeding fruitful Ligabantur (says Saint Austen,) They were bound, beaten,
butchered, burned, and multiplicabantur, De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 6.
and yet they multiplied, insomuch as at last Christianity did prevail;
Emperors, Kings and Queens submitting their souls to the Scepter of Christ
Jesus, and being become noursing-fathers, and noursing mothers of the Church
which is the Spouse of Christ, Isa. 49 23.
as Esaias prophesied.

In like manner honorable and honest is their death, that die for the safeguard
of their King and Country. A Simile.
How ready is the hand to set it self before the head, caring for no danger
(that I may so speak) so that the head may be preserved whole. The King is
the Head of a Kingdom: what good Subject or Servant will not willingly glue
his life to save the life of his Sovereign? Hor. l. 3. car. ode. 2.
Dulce and decorum est pro patria mori: it is a sweet and honest death (says
Horace) which a man indures for his country. Patria est communis omnium nostrum
Parens: Our country (says Tully) is the common Mother of us al. Or. 1. in Cat.
Chari sunt liberi etc. We love (says he) our children, kindred, acquaintance:
but our Country alone has all the loves of all men ( omnes omnium charitates
patria vna complexa est) for which what good man would refuse to die to do it
good? Offic. 1,
For the Commonwealth is a name of an universal City, Cic. 2. de Leg.
on which we ought to bestow our selves wholly, and as it were to consecrate
our selves. A wiseman should refuse no danger for the safety of his Country:
for thus (says Tullie) he reasons with himself: Non mihi soli, sed etiam,
atque adeo multo potius, natus sum patriae: Ad Heren. l. 4.
I am not borne for my self alone, but also, and much more too for my
Country. Vita, quae fato debetur, saluti patriae potissimum soluatur: Let the
life, which is due to destiny, be paid especially for the safeguard of the
Country: O fortunata mors, Phil. 14.
quae naturae debita pro patria potissimum est reddita! O blessed death (says
he) which being due (as a debt) to nature, is paid especially for the
Countries good! And undoubtedly they, that willingly and devoutly lay down
their lives for God and their Country, being called thereunto, are of all
others most loving, and most courageous: neither do they die but live in
happy and eternal memory with God, who no doubt rewards their momentanie
cross with an immortal crown of glory in the heavens.

Thirdly, Quaest. 3.
it may be demanded, whether the death of Christ and of the holy Martyrs may be
called voluntary, seeing they died at the command and by the execution of
others.

I answer, Ans.
their death was voluntarily but not with wicked wilfulness sustained of
them. For Christ could have saved himself then, Math. 26. 53.
when he suffered himself to be apprehended, condemned, and executed: John.
10. 18.
for he had power to lay down his life and take it up, and might to do what
he listed: no man could take his life from him against his will: for being very
God he could not be compelled. 1. John. 5. 20.
And for the Martyrs of Christ, they died in deed by the malice of others, and
not through the malicious wilfulness of their own spirits: Note.
yet did they willingly die, choosing rather to die, then to deny their Lord,
and to betraie a good cause. A man will cast away his wares rather, A Simile.
then be drowned himself: so the Martyrs would willingly embrace the fire
rather, then dishonor God by cowardice, and loose their souls by Apostacy.
And that it may fully appear that their death was with their wills (though
not simply, Note.
as if they were in love with death, or were weary of their lives) ask the
cause of their profession. What made, who forced them to embrace the faith? No
man, but they willingly through the work of Gods Spirit received it. Again,
though they did embrace it, yet if they would have forsaken and for sworn it;
they might have saved their lives, and perhaps have come to preserment also,
many of them: but rather then they would deny their Lord, that bought them,
and his truth commended to them, they did willingly and cheerfully endure those
punishments which were laid upon them. There be two sorts of voluntary
deaths, Two kinds of voluntary death.
the one lawful and honest, such as the death of Martyrs, the other dishonest
and unlawful, when men have neither lawful calling, nor honest ends, as of
Peregrinus, who burnt himself in a pile of wood, thinking thereby to live for
ever in men's remembrance. So of Asdrubals wife, who at the surprising of
Carthage, rather choosed to burn out her eyes, and yield her body to her
country flames, then to behold her husbands misery, Judge. 9. 53. 54.
and to be her self a prey unto the enemy: finally of Abimelech, who made his
Page thrust him through and kill him, least it should be said of him. A woman
slew him: for a certain woman had broke his braine-pan with a stone. But the
holy Martyrs suffered themselves to be slain for the glory of God, the honor
of his truth, the confirmation of his people, Heb. 11. 35.
and the remonstration of their gratitude and fidelity, and that they might
obtain a better resurrection. Quest. 4.


Fourthly, it may be asked whether this willing and alacrious death of the
Martyrs deserved for the worthiness thereof to be rewarded with the ioies of
heaven?

Undoubtedly no: Ans. Romans 8. 23.
for everlasting life is ((...)) the gracious gift of God through Jesus Christ,
and not given for the blood of the Martyrs, which yet no doubt is very precious
in his sight. De compunct. cord.
Et si millies moriamur: Although (says Chrysostom) we should die a thousand
deaths, Et si omnes virtutes animae expleamus, though we should show the
perfection of all the virtues of the soul: Nil dignum gerimus ad ea, quae ipsi
a Deo percepimus, yet do we nothing worthy in comparison of thoses things
which we have enjoyed, of God. De verb. Apost. ser. 2.
Te coronat in miseratione, and misericordia says Saint Austen, God crowns us
in mercy and compassion. Notabis quod mors Christi sola potuit mererivitam
vitam aeternam: Excit. l. 9.
You shall mark (says Cusanus) that the alone death of Christ was able to
merit eternal life. Alij omnes Martyrs non merentur ex sua morte vitam
aeternam. Sermon. 61. in Cant.
No other Martyr by his death dotht deserve eternal life. Merium meum
miseratio Domini my merit, (says Bernard) is Gods meruie. How it appears that
Martyrdom merits not of God.
And to make it sully clear, by reason that by their deaths they could merit
nothing, I demand whether Martyrs stand not bound to Christ for his death,
which is their deliverance, to die for him, if he require it? It may not be
denied, a brow of brass would blush at the denial of it. I demand further,
who gives them courage and conscience to suffer death? Even God, of whom we
receive, what we have, and who for Christ does give unto men, 1. Cor. 4. 7.
not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him. Eueu Homer could say,
Phil. 1. 29. Iliad. 2.
(...), that God did increase and daunt the courage of men. And Pindar
likewise, (...), O God, great virtues (and what greater then fortitude and
piety?) do come to mortal men from thee. I ask thirdly, is God bound to the
Martyrs to give them courage, constancy, fidelity patience? No verily: for
God is ( Liberrimum Agens) a most free worker, tied to no man further then he
list himself. Romans 9. 18. Romans 11. 35.
He will do what he will, he has mercy on whom he lists. And who has given
unto him first? I demand yet once more; Is it by Gods gracious assistance, or
by their own proper strength, that the Martyrs did use their gifts and virtues
well, and not loose them, or use them indifferently? No man, though his head
were made of steel, could say but that it is by Gods grace that he does
continue constant in grace, and use his gifts with profit. For who does
confirm us unto the end, but God? 1. Cor. 8. Phil 1. 6. 1. Pet. 15
who but he does perform the good work begun, until the day of Jesus
Christ? By whose power are we kept and guarded through faith unto salvation,
but by the power of God? Of whom are we to desire strength, 1. Pet. 5. 10
confirmation, perfection, and establishment but of God? Whom to are we to
ascribe them, but to God. It follows therefore that the Martyrs for their very
martydomes stand rather bound to God, then God to them. No man having freely
bestowed upon another a gift, Note.
is bound by the good use of the said gift to bestow more, but he that
receives it, is rather bound to him, that gives it. But all the works of grace
whatsoever, though never so well used, are freely bestowed upon men by God, who
also of his free good will does enable them to use them well: therefore God is
not bound by the good use thereof to bestow more. And so consequently all holy
Martyrs stand obliged unto God, and all their reward (which is very great: for
according to their passions and their patience, such shall be their
everlasting possessions in Paradise) is of Gods mercy, and not for their
merits.

Fifthly, it may be asked if a man seeing his neighbor about to cut his own
throat, to drown, poison, hang, or otherwise to kill himself, be bound in
conscience to hinder him, if he may possibly?

I answer, Ans.
he stands bound by the law of charity. For if a man should save his
neighbors sheeepe from drowning, or his house from burning, how much rather
ought he to save his neighbor himself from perishing? It is true indeed,
which the Poet says, Hor. de. Art Puct sub. sinem.
Inuitum qui seruat, idem facit occidenti: He that saues a man against his
will, does as he, that kills him, that is, he out of his corruption of heart,
and distemper of brain accounts him as his murderer, that would save his
life, because he accountes it worse then death to live: Note.
but our neighbors corruption may not let our courtesy, his weakness and
wilfulness must not cause us to be uncharitable: and though he by reason of
distemper will take him for his enemy, that saues him, yet God, to whom every
man owes his life, does account it charitable, and agreeing to sound reason,
that a man should to his power hinder any man, that out of will and weakness
seeks his own destruction, and will not hold him guiltless of murder, that
wittingly and willingly suffers his neighbor to make himself away, if it lay
in his power to have hindered him with the safety of himself.

Sixthly, Quest. 6.
it may be demanded, whether for a man wilfully to kill himself be a great
sin, as it is commonly reputed, and whether it may be forgiven?

To the first branch of the question I thus answer. Ans.
It is a most grievous sin for a man wilfully to murder himself. One reason
against selfemurther.
For first, he sins against God, who out of his goodness lent him his life
to use it to his glory, and not to cut it off with shame and wickedness.
Indeed if a man's life were his own, and not Gods, The first common cause of
selfe-murder.
he might do with it what he would. Commonly a man makes himself away for one
of these causes; either because he counts his sins unpardonable, and that
with God there is no mercy for him: and this made Judas hang himself, who
notwithstanding his vile treason, and abominable covetousness, which brought
him to it, might have found mercy, if he had had the grace by Faith to have
come to Christ, and with true repentance to have returned: but to all his other
sins adding these of final desperation, and wilful murder, he did wilfully
deprive himself of mercy. Iudam traditorem non tam scelus, Lib. de vtil.
Poenit.
quod commisit, quam indulgentiae desperatio fecit penitus interire: The
villainy (says Saint Augustine) that the Traitor Judas committed, was not the
cause of his utter destruction, so much as his despair of pardon. Sceleratior
omnibus, O Judah (says Leo) and infaelicior extitisti, quem non paenitentia
duxit ad Dominum, sed desperatio traxit ad laqueum. Thou wast, O Judas, more
wicked and more wretched, then all men, for that Repentance led thee not to the
Lord, but Desperation drew thee to the halter. Ob,
Yea, but a despairing man will say, I have been a most grievous sinner all my
life long, how should I look that God should forgive me? let no man distrust
(says Saint Austen) let no man, Ju Ps. 50. Sol.
guilty to himself of his old offenses despair, Nouit Dominus mutare
sententiam, si tu nouer^s emendare delictum, mend thou thy faults, and God will
vouchsafe thee favor. Let thy end be good as the Thieves was, and Christ will
receive thee into his kingdom. Let no man despair of pardon (says Isidore)
though he repent about the end of his life: Lib. 2. de sum^ bono.
for God does judge every one as his end is, and not as his life was. And
suppose that God will not forgive thee: will thou therefore by killing thy
self make thy sin the greater, and send thy soul the sooner into Hell? this
is very madness, and extremity of folly. But why should thou despair?
Ambros. in Luke l. 2. Isid. vbi supra.
Desperatio certa mors est: desperation is certain death, faith Ambrose,
Aeternae ciuit atis ianuas nobis desperatio claudit: Desperation does shut the
gates of heaven against us: Ibid.
Desperare est in infernum descendere, to despair is to descend into Hell,
(says Isidore) On the contrary, Prima salus est declinare culpam, Hug. l de
vera sap.
secundae non desperare veniam, to avoid the fault is the first step to
salvation, and the second is not to despair of pardon. Do thou despair of
mercy, Quest. Sol.
as thinking that God cannot help and pardon thee? He can do all things:
with him nothing is impossible: neither can the fountain of his mercy be
drayned dry. Genesis 4. 8. 23.
My sins (said Came) are greater then can be forgiven. Mentiris, Cain, mayor
est Dei miserieordia, quam omnium peccatorum miseria: thou lie, Cain, (says
Saint Austen) Gods mercy is greater then the misery of all sins.

Or do thou despair, Quest.
because thou think God will not forgive thee?

Tell me, Ans.
O vain man, has God made thee of his counsel; how can thou thus think
with reason? Why do thou imagine that God has no mercy for thee? Is it
because thou art a grievous sinner? Who is not so? Is it because thou art not
worthy of mercy? who is worthy? Man's worthiness is unworthiness, and his
merits, demerites; if mercy succuored not, misery would swallow al men. But why
will not he have mercy on thee? Is not God merciful and tenderhearted? Be
merciful to thy self by repentance and true hope, and doubt. less God will
be merciful to thee by pardoning thee. Do thou think that he will not
hear thee, if thou call? Be not injurious to thy self: The Lord is near
unto all, Psalm. 145. 18.
that call upon him in truth. Come unto me, all ye, that are heavy laden,
Mat. 11. 28.
says Christ, and I will refresh you. Justly does he lack, that may have for
asking. Think thou that God delights in thy death? Be not injurious to God.
As I live, Ezck. 33. 11.
says the Lord, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked
turn from his way and live. Turn thee, turn thee, and despair not, and thou
shall live. Tertullian here exclaimeth, Jurat Deus, Viuo, dicens, cupit sibi
credi, God swears saying. As I live; He desires that men would believe him.
O beatos, quorum causa jurat Deus! O miserrimos, si nec iuranti Domino
credimus. O blessed men, for whose sake God does swear; but O most miserable
wretches, that we are, if we will not credit him, Ob.
though he do swear! But thou have lived long without repentance, thou have
long abused his lenity, and have settled on thy lees, it is now just that God
should set the feet of his Justice on thee, and tread upon thee like unsavory
salt, it is too late to repent, Sol.
repentance is hid from his eyes. It is true that God may justly deny thee
mercy now, seeing thou have neglected thy good, misspent thy time, abused his
gentleness. But God neither does always, neither hereafter will be ever do all
which he may may justly do: but he sometimes shows mercy, when men are most
miserable, and have very long abused his patience toward them. He vouchsafed
mercy to the Thief upon the Cross, that no man by reason of long or grievous
wickedness should despair of mercy. Despair not then, O Man, but hope in
God: he can forgive thee, if he will: he has not told thee that he will not:
he will forgive thee, if thou will repent: repent then, and repent of these
desperate imaginations, and he will remit thee. Cry out, and say, Lam. 5. 21.
Cant. 1. 3.
O Lord, help, O Lord forgive, Turn me, O Lord, unto thee, and I shall be
turned. Draw me, and I will run after thee. Hide thy face from my sins, Psalm.
51. 9 10. 11.
and put away all my misdeeds. Create in me a clean heart, and cast me not
away from thy presence.

And this is one common cause, to wit, the despair of pardon, which makesmen
make themselves away.

Another is very vanity of mind, The second common cause of Selfe-murder.
and to avoid reproach, insamy, beggary, contempt, and the despite of the
enemy. Thus Saul commanded his Armor-bearer to thrust him through with his
sword, least the Philistims should kill and mock him: and because his
Armor-bearer would not, 1. Sam. 31. 4.
therefore he killed himself: And his Armor-bearer seeing him dead, fell
likewise upon his sword, and dyed with him. 2. Sam. 17. 23.
In like manner Achitophel seeing his counsel was not followed, and no doubt
fearing the wrath of his Sovereign, which he had by his treachery deserved,
went home and hanged himself. Lucretia stabbed her self to renown her
chastity. Cleopatra applied venomous Serpents to her body, Hor at. car. in l.
1 Od. 7.
because she would not be carried as a Captive in triumph. Others (we have
heard) have hanged themselves, because the price of corn has fallen against
their covetous desire and expectation. Oh, what horrible injury is here offered
unto God! Such surely either think God is not, or that his eye minds them
not, or else they presume upon his mercy, or distrust his providence: but how
ever it be, it is sure there wants true wisdom, and fortitude of spirit, they
forget to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, and are not contented
with his corrections, and finally take upon them as if they were the Lords of
their own lives, and forget to wind their care upon his providence.

Now seeing these are causes of such selfe-murdering courses, we must needs
account such selfe-slayers guilty of grievous sin, whereby they are very
injurious to Almighty God, the Lord and author of their lives.

Secondly, Reason 2. against selfe-murder.
he that murders himself is injurious to the Church of God. For whereas he
should obey the doctrine taught him, which she commends unto him from Christ
her Husband, he flatly shows himself disloyal, unthankful, and unruly:
and is by this his wilful murder a grief unto her, and scandalous by his lewd
ensample. And whereas his life should upon necessity have been given away in
her service and for her security, it cannot now be, neither can he perform
such service for her, as he ought and might have done, if this murderous
spirit had not possessed and spoiled him.

Thirdly, 3. Reason.
he that murders himself, offers wrong unto his Country. For as he was borne
in her, so he was born for her. His life, which he owed to death, should (if
need had been) have been offered up in her service: but by this unnatural
murder of himself, he depriues her of all help and honor, which otherwise
she might have enjoyed of him, if true valor, faith, and wisdom had possessed
him.

Fourthly, 4. Reason.
he offers wrong unto his Parents, which under God were the causes of his life.
And is this all the thanks, the comfort, and credit, he does them, for their
generation, and education, care and cost, to make himself away, to be his
own hangman or executioner? Such a Son is a Shame to his Father, and an
Heaviness unto his Mother, and by his wickedness depriues them of that help
and comfort, which God and Nature claimed at his hands.

Finally, 5. Reason.
he is injurious unto himself: first to his soul, making himself guilty of
murder, and so of death: Secondly, to his body, which with his own hands he
does destroy, and deliver to corruption, being never able to repair it by
himself again, and depriues it of that honest and comely burial, which
otherwise it might have had with the bodies of the Saints: Thirdly, he marres
his credit, making himself famous by an infamous death, and gives just
occasion to men greatly to suspect his salvation.

We are now come to the second part of the Question, Second part of the 6.
quest.
Whether may this Selfe-murder be forgiven? Undoubtedly it may, if God will;
for Gods mercy is greater then the mischief and malice of any sin or sinner:
Ans. Selfe-murder may be pardoned.
and the death of Christ is of merit sufficient to wash away the foulest
wickedness, that can be committed. This therefore I say, a man that killes
himself, Note.
if he do repent of his murder, before he be dead, he may, and shall be
forgiven. Gods mercy may be bestowed, Inter pontem and fontem, between the
bridge and the water, between the stabbe and death. Note.
The sin against the Holy Ghost might be forgiven, if the sinner could
repent: but because he cannot repent by reason of the hardness of the heart,
which shall not be removed to death, therefore he cannot be forgiven. But
Selfe-murderers are not always (as those sinners) punished with final hardness
and impenitencie, and therefore they may be forgiven, and no doubt are
sometimes, then when God does give them grace to repent, and groan unto him for
his mercy. But let no man presuming upon Gods mercy dare to commit this
barbarous villainy, least by presuming on mercy, he meet with judgment, which
is the ordinary portion of presumptuous offenders: but rather let him pray and
say with David, Psalm. 19. 13, 14.
Keep thy Servant from presumptuous sins, and let the meditation of mine
heart be acceptable in thy sight: for indeed the meditation and intention of
murder is too too wicked and abominable.

To conclude, Quest. 7.
it may be demanded whether a man be guilty of his own death, if he shall be
killed, when out of a private humor, and desire of revenge he does either make,
or take a challenge?

Yes no doubt: Ans.
for though he did not simply will, but rather nill his own death, yet
because he left his calling, and did willingly agree and condescend unto the
means of his death, which is fighting, he becomes thereby guilty of his
death. And it is not enough to say that he did not intend to work his death,
but rather to save his credit, and honor, by offering or accepting the
challenge, and by sighting. For neither God, nor the positive laws of our
kingdom do allot and allow those means of saving men's reputations and of
righting themselves by them, but utterly condemn them, and punish the usurpers
of them: and besides, whatsoever he meant to effect by those irregular courses,
yet the event shows (when he is slain by them) that they were the means of
his slaughter, to which he gave consent without constraint. Note.
Yea, I add further, that whosoever holds this paradox, which is so commonly
received in the world, A Paradox of our unwise Gallants.
That the giving of the lie, or of foule-mouthed language, must necessarily for
the saueguard of honor be revenged with a Stabbe, a Stroke, or a Challenge
of a combat, He is an embracer of a murderers doctrine, and by holding it makes
himself a very Murderer in the judgment of GOD, who condemns all murdering
positions, intentions, and desires, as well as the acts of murder. And thus
much concerning voluntary Death.

Violent I take not Violent in the largest sense. 2. Sam. 18. 9. 14. 15.
death is when by force a man does die. Such a death did Absalon die, when as
full against his will he hanged in the Oak, where he was slain hanging, by
Ioab and his ten servants. Dan. 6. 24. Luke. 13. 4.
The like death died Daniels accusers, who being cast among the Lions were
crushed and killed of them. In like manner also this kind of death those
eighteen died, upon whom the Tower in Siloam falling slew: and of this death
Horace says, Lib. 2. Carm. ode. 17.
he had almost perished by a tree that fell upon him.

And that we may briefly conclude our discourse of the kinds and ways of
dying, Other ways of dying.
one man dies more easily, another with more difficulty, and greater pains:
One dies in his full strength, being in all ease and prosperity: Job. 22. 24,
25.
his breasts are full of milk, and his bones run full of marrow: and another
dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with pleasure. One
dies being wasted with long sickness, and lingering diseases: another dies
suddenly, without warning, Quaest. 3.
and beyond his expectation. Now it may be by the way demanded, Whether it be
lawful to pray against sudden death? Ans. It is not unlawful to pray (as in
our Letanie) against sudden death.
I answer thus; because our corruption is great, our sins are daily, our
aduersarieslie and subtle, ready to take all advantages, and because without
repentance men may not look for pardon, and because as death does leave us, so
the latter day shall find us, therefore least we should be taken unprepared,
it is fit and needful for us to pray that God would not take us away upon the
sudden: or if it shall seem good unto him to remove us suddenly, that he
would be pleased not to take us away unprepared for him: but that, whensoever
he does remove us, he would pardon and accept us, Note.
and be pleased to smite us, whiles we be either in some holy work of his
service, as preaching, prayer, meditation, or the like, or else in some honest
work of our honest calling, or at the least in no evil plot, nor about any
evil act.

Now finally, of sudden deaths some are by the distemper of the passions, Of
sudden death. Valor. Max. and Hen. Steph. ex Gregor. Gyrald.
as the death of such as die of fear, sorrow, or joy. Thus died that good old
Poet Phileman, who being near an hundred years old, and seeing (as he lay) an
Ass eat figs, fell into an extreme laughter, and having called his servants,
he bad them give the Ass some drink after his figs, and laughing very
earnestly so died.

Plutarch also writes of one Polycrita, who with joy conceived, De virtut
mulierum.
for that her life was granted, whereof it seems she was not a little
fearful, fell down suddenly, and so died. Again, some that die suddenly,
are taken away by the extraordinary hand of God, as Dathan and Abiram, whom
the earth opening her mouth by Gods command devoured: Number. 16. 30. 31 32.
Leuit. 10. 2.
thus also two sons of Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, suddenly were killed by fire sent
out from God. 1. Sam. 25. 38.
Nabal also the Lord suddenly smote and slew, not long after his churlishness
toward David. Others have died by the special permission of God, though by the
means of the devil himself: as Jobs children, who were suddenly slain with
the fall of the house upon them, which was blown down with a sudden storm,
Job. 1. 18. 19.
raised doubtless by the power of the devil. Others have been suddenly
dispatched with their own hands, as Lucretius the Poet: Jud. 3. 21.
some have been suddenly killed of others as Eglon, whom Ehud slew with his
dagger, or as the Princes and people of the Philistines, on whom Sampson with
the sorce of his arms pulled down the house, Iud. 16. 30.
in which they were assembled: or also as Sisera, Iud. 4. 21.
whom Iael slew with a nail driven into his head, as he was sleeping in her
Tent: but all these 1. Eg. the Phil. and Sisera.
perished without treason: but some others have been suddenly dispatched by
treason, as Senacherib, whom his own sous slew, Isa. 37. 38. 1. King. 16. 9. 10
as he was in his Idols temple, and as Elah whom his servant Zimri killed, as he
was in his drunkenness: and thus with inhumane barbarity should our noble king
with many mo have died in the Parliament house by the malice of wicked Jesuits
and their bloody scholars, An 1605. Nouemb. 5.
had not God from heaven delivered them, Whose name be praised for evermore,
Amen.

And thus from the kinds of death we pass unto the causes. Of the causes of
death. God inflicteth death. Psalm. 39. 5.


The first and highest Ruling cause of death is Almighty God. David says to
the Lord, Thou have made my days as an hand breadth. Hezekiah says, Thou will
make an end of me: to whom said God, I will add unto thy days fifteen
years. Isa. 38. 12.
By which it appears that God is ( vitae necisque, arbiter) the Author and
Ordainer of life and death. Yea the Lord by that commination unto Adam. Genesis 2.
17.
In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die, does plainly show that
in his hands is the power of life and death. Finally he says, Isa. 45. 7.
I form the light, and create darkness, the light of prosperity, the
darkness of adversity, the light of life, the darkness of death, I make
peace, and create evil, the evil, not of sin, but of sorrow, of troubles,
bloodshed, famine, pestilence, death.

To all things (says Solomon) there is an appointed time, Ec. 3. 1. 2.
a time to be borne, and a time to die: and who has appointed this time, Act.
1. 7.
but GOD, who has put times and seasons in his own power, as our Savior
teaches? And surely, if God number the very hairs of our head, doubtless he
has numbered the days and hours, Math. 10. 29. 30
and minutes of our life, and has set down the periode of our age. And if a
poor Sparrow cannot light on the ground without his will, surely then no man
can fall into the ground but by his will. Even the wiser heathen knew this,
therefore Hector says in Homer, Iliad 22.
(...) that God did call him unto death. Tertullian another Doctor says, Deus
vniuersa vtique, Contra Marcel.
disponendo praescituit, and praesciendo disposuit, that God has foreknowne
and disposed all things: if all things, then the lives and deaths of men. In
lerem. c. 12.
Saint Jerome says, What good things or evil things soever be in the world,
Non absque, prouidentia, and fortuito casu accidit, sed Iudicio Dei, not one of
them comes to pass by chance, and without providence but by the judgment of
God, if nothing, then not murders, manslaughters, killing. Finally, Saint
Austen says, De genesis cont. Manich. l. 1. c. 2
Voluntas Deiomniu^, quae sunt, ipsaest causa, that the will of God is the
very cause of all things, that are: and to conclude with the Prophets speech:
Who is he that says, Lam. 3. 37.
It comes to pass, and the Lord commands it not?

It will be thus perhaps objected, Ob. 1.
If God be the Author of death, then it seems he delights in the destruction
of his creature: for by death life is put out, and the bodies of men are
corrupted.

I answer thus, Sol.
Death is a punishment, or at the best, and to the best a trial, a correction,
a passage to a better life: now God ordaines and appointes death, not simply as
it is a destruction, but either as it is a punishment of wicked men, In what
sense God may be said to ordain and cause death. A Simile.
or a correction and trial of the godly, and as a means of deliverance to his
elect from worldly and wicked miseries. Even as a wise, potent, and just King
appoints places of execution, executioners, and the death of grievous
malefactors, not as though he delighted in them, but for the maintenance of
justice, the punishment of vice, and for the good of the Commonwealth: Or as a
Father, who makes and uses rods, not because he takes pleasure simply in
whipping, or in rods, but because he desires the good of his children, and
that they might be afraid of evil: Or finally, as a Landlord that pulls down
his Tenants house, not because he delights simply in pulling down of houses,
but for that he purposes to cure it of all rottenness and ruins, and to
build it for him new and fair again.

It may again be thus objected: Ob. 2.
If God appoint and ordain every man's death, then if a man murder himself,
or if he be killed by another, or be unjustly put to death by a Tyrant, God
(you will say) appointed and ordained that man's death, which you will say is
harsh.

I answer, Sol.
and let my words be well observed. Our Savior Jesus Christ we all know was
most wickedly put to death by the Judges iniust sentence at the malicious
pursuit of the Jews: now Saint Peter says expressly that he was delivered by
the determinate council of God, Act. 2. 23.
and that his enemies were gathered together against him: and what to do? To
do (says Peter) What soever thine hand, Act. 4. 28.
and thy council had determined before to be done. Thus therefore I say, if
any man kill himself, or be killed by others, no more is done then was of old
determined by the hand and counsel of Almighty God.

Thou will then reply, Ob. 3.
if a murderer do but what God willed and determined to be done, then he is to
be excused as one that fulfils the will of God.

Not so: Sol.
and the reason is, because though he did that act, No murderer is excused by
Gods decree.
which God would, and determined in his secret and eternal council to be
done, yet he did it not upon those grounds, and for those ends, which God did
propose unto himself. For all the works of God are done in wisdom and
justice: but the murderer is set a work by the devil, and his own inward
corruption. When the Father delivered his son, Epist. ad Vinc. 38.
(says Saint Augustine) and Christ his body, and Judas his master, wherefore
is God in this delivery just, and man guilty, but that because in one thing,
which they did, the cause is not one, for which they did it? Note.
Again, though a murderer do what the hand and counsel of God has
determined to be done, yet that is no warrant for his murder, because he
sins against the revealed will of God, the which is to be obeyed of every man
unto death: now Gods revealed will is that we should not murder. Ex. 20. 13.


It will be said then that the revealed will of God (which forbids murder) is
contrario to his secret will, Ob. 4.
by which he does determine and appoint it.

I answer, Sol.
the revealed will is not contrary to his secret will: for the revealed will
forbids murder simply as it is murder: but the secret decrees and wills it,
not as or because is is murder, sed propter coniunctum bonum, but for some
good conioined with it. For it is not possible that God, who is the fountain
of good things, yea and goodness it self, should will any evil for it self.

But that no man be mistaken, that reads these things, I will here briefly
show mine opinion in this point of murder.

First, Note.
I say God is not the Author of murder, as it is murder, but does detest and
condemn it, and puts no (not the least) malice into any man's heart, which
stirs him, or moves him unto murder.

Secondly, I say that which God does about murder, is comprehended in these
actions.

First, Three actions of God about murder. 1.
as the universal cause of all things he sustaineth man and all his actions,
so that no man could either be, or act any thing, but that God does sustain
him. Act. 17. 28.
For by God we are, we live, and move. All a man's actions therefore, as they
are actions, and every man, as he is a man, is the work of God, and therefore
also good. The action then (which is the material part or subject) of murder,
the naked action (I say) is of God, Note.
not the murder, which is the formal part, indeed the deformity of that
action.

Secondly, Act. 2.
God withholds his grace from the murderer, and leaves him to himself,
being tied to no man further or longer then he list. Now, as Hugo de Sancto
Victore says, Peccatu^ necessary sequitur ex gratiae subtractione, Sin
necessarily, follows upon the withholding of grace: but how? not as the
effect follows the efficient: Note.
for God does not put any murtherous thought or intention into their hearts:
but he does only deny them his grace, which should make them tender hearted
and loving: he gives Satan leave to egg them on, and offers them sundry
objects by themselves good, which they turn into occasions of evil, having
neither will nor power to stay themselves. And God may thus deal, because he
is bound to no man.

Thirdly, God orders and disposes the murder, and that is thus: Act. 3.
he directes it so, as that it proceeds no further, nor no otherwise, then he
pleases: sometimes he turns it to another end, then the murderer thought
of: sometimes he makes a way by it to punish some other sin, and sometimes
he turns it to the good of them, that are murdered.

But I will set down some sentences of the learned, of whom I have light my
candle: which I will propound as Answers to these ensuing Questions:

First, Quaest. 1.
is there any thing, whether good or evil, which is not by the will of God?

Non fit aliquid, Sol.
nisi omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo vt fiat, velipse faciendo: there is
nothing done (says Saint Austen) but that which the Almighty Enchir. c. 95.
will have done, Either by permitting it to be done, or by doing it himself.

Secondly, Quest. 2.
may not a man will that with an unjust will, which God does with an holy?

Fieri potest vt hoc velit homo voluntate mala, Sol.
quod deus vult bona. Enchir. c. 101.
It may fall out (says Saint Augustine) that a man may will that with a will,
that is evil, which God does will with a good.

Thirdly, Quest. 3.
Is it good that there should be evil?

Quamuis ergo, Sol.
quaemala sunt, in quantum mala sunt, non sunt bona: tamen vt non solum bona,
sed etiam sint and mala, bonum est. Nam nisi esset hoc bonum, vt essent and
mala, nullo modo sinerentur ab omnipotente bono: Enchir. c. 98.
Although (says Saint Augustine) those things, that are evil, as they are
evil, are not good; Yet it is good that there should be not good things
only, but evils also: for except it were good that euilles be, they would by
no means be permitted of that Good that can do all things.

Fourthly, Quest. 4.
is that, which is against the word, at any time done with the will of God?

Intelligendum est omnia vel adiunante domino perfici, Sol.
vel deserente permitti: vt intelligas tamen nolente Deo nihil prorsus admitti.
De Praed. and Great. c. 15.
Understand (says Saint Augustine) that all things are either done by Gods
help, or suffered to be done by his forsaking, that thou may know that there
is nothing at all committed if God nill it. Propterea namque magna opera Domini
exquisita in omnes voluntates eius, vt miro and ineffabili modo non fiat
praeter eius voluntatem, August. Enchir. c. 101.
quod etiam contra eius fit voluntatem: for therefore (says he) the great
works of the Lord are exquisit according to all his wills, that after a
marvelous and unspeakable manner, that is not done besides his will, which is
also done against his will.

Fifthly, Quest. 5.
does God will no more, then his will is to work himself?

Est Dei voluntas beneplacitum eius, Sol.
voluntas eius operatio eius and voluntas Permissio Eius: the will of God
(says Hugo) is his good pleasure, Lib. 1 de Sacr. c. 7. part. 4.
his will is his operation, and his will is his permission.

Sixthly, Quest. 6.
does not God will contrary things, if he do will those things, which he
does in his law forbid?

Yea (says Perkins) if he should will that the same thing should come to
pass, Sol. Depraedestin and great. p. 48.
and not come to pass in the same respect and manner: but God forbids sin,
as it is an evil: and does will it should come to pass, as it has respect of
good. Here upon Thomas Aquinas says, Sum. 9. 19. art. 9.
Deum velle mala sieri, and Deum velle mala non sieri, non opponuntur
contradictorie, cum vtrumque sit affirmatum, this is no contradiction to say
that God does will that evils should be done, and that God does will that
evils should not be done, seeing both the propositions are affirmative.

Seventhly, Quest. 7.
does God make men sinners, or does he only order them?

Saint Austen says, Sol.
God makes men just and orders them, De Genesis ad lit. imperf. cap. 5.
peccatores autem, in quantum peccatores, non facit, sed ordinat tantum: but
God makes not sinners, so far forth as they be sinners, but only orders and
disposes them. De ciuit. Dei l. 11. c. 17
And again, as God is the best Creator of good wills, it a malarum
voluntatum iustissimus ordinator, so is he a most righteous orderer of evil
wills.

Eighthly, Quest. 8.
is it injurious to God to say that he draws good out of evil, and uses
evils, as a wise Physician does poison, unto good?

Clemens Alexandrinus says, Sol.
it is a point of divine wisdom, Strom. l. 1.
virtue and power, not only to do good things, but also to bring the devises
of the wicked to some good and profitable end, and vtiliter iss, quaevidentur
mala vtatur, and to use those things profitably, which seem evil. Austen
says, Euchir. ad Laur. c. 101.
Deus quasdam voluntates suas vtique bonas implet per malorum hominum
voluntates malas: God does accomplish certain good wills of his, by the naughty
wills of naughty men. And Fulgentius says, De malo opere cuinslibet non desinit
ipse bonum operari, that God cease not of every man's evil work* to work
that, which is good.

But tell me yet again, Quest. 9.
though God put no corruption into any man's heart, yet does he not incline the
will to sin by offering a man objects, and by leaving him to himself, as a
Shepherd stirs up his sheep to eat by setting Hay or Grass before it, or
as a Huntsman stirs up his Greyhound to a course by showing him the Hare, and
letting the slip go?

Manifestum est, Sol.
etc. It is manifest ( says Saint Austen) that God does work in the hearts
of men (Ad Inclinandas little voluntates) to incline their wills, De great. and
lib. arbit. cap. 21.
whither he pleases, either to good things for his mercy, or to evil things
for their deserts, sometimes verily with his open judgment, sometimes secret,
but always just. De amiss. great. l. 2. c. 13.
And Bellarmine says that by a figure God exciteth men to sin, As an
Huntsman sets the Dog upon the Hare, by letting go the Slip, that held in
the Dog.

If these things then, which are spoken of sin in general, be applied unto
the particular sin of Murder, it will appear that every Murderer does (as it
is said of the Murderers of our Savior) Whatsoever the hand and counsel of
God had fore-determined to be done, Acts 4. 28.
and that God does permit, limit, and order him, as it seems best in his holy
wisdom.

Now we have seen how God is the Ordainer, and Inflicter of Death.

But further we must know, Sin the mother of Death.
that death comes by Sin, as the Apostle shows, and before sin there was
no death at all. Romans 5. 12.
For death is the wages of sin. Romans 6. 23.
Quoniam mors non naturae conditio, ised poena peccati, sequatur necesse est
poena peccatum. Because death (says Saint Austen) is not the condition of
nature, Depraed. and great. c. 11.
but the punishment of sin, it is necessary that the punishment should follow
the sin. For it is most certain that God has not made death (as though be
were in love with death for it self sake) neither has he pleasure in the
destruction of the living: Wisd. 1. 13. 15.
but unrighteousness brings to death, and man by forsaking God has procured
his own death. And although (as says Siracides) Life and Death come of the
Lord, Eccles. 11. 14.
yet not upon the same ground. For vita is a donante, Aug. retract. l. 1. c. 21.
Life is a gift of God, that gives it: but Mors is a vindicante, Death is a
punishment inflicted of God, auenging, as Saint Austen teaches. But let us
hear Saint Paul. By one man, says he, that is, by Adaem, Romans 5. 12.
sin entered into the world, and death by sin.

And that we may briefly dispatch the causes of Death, Note.
we must understand, that as Death is of God For sin, so it comes by diverse
means (as has been touched before) all which from the greatest to the
smallestare determined, ordered and directed by the Lord, so as that none of
them come to pass, but according to his most holy providence. And thus we
leave the causes of death, Who are Subject to Death.
and come unto the Subjects thereof.

Albeit Jesus Christ the Son of Mary dyed, yet we must know it was not by
his own desert ( for he knew no sin, 2. Cor. 5. 21.
he was no Sinner) but because it was his will to dye, Ioh. 10. 15. 18.
that by his death he might deliver us from eternal death, Romans 3. 25.
and sanctify our death to be the door of life unto us.

And although Adam dyed, yet it was not because he was a man, but because he
was a Sinner. For if Adam had never sinned, Adam had never died, Bucan. loc.
11. q. 13.
because God had granted him this grace, Vt posset non mori, si eius mandatis
obsequeretur, as to be able not to die, if he did obey his precepts.

This then I say, 1. Cor. 15. 22.
All the children of Adam by reason of sin (in which all but Christ are
conceived and borne) are all without exception subject unto death. Romans 5. 12.
By one man (says Saint Paul) sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death went over All men. Lib. contra Fortunat. disput. 2.
The law of sin (says Austen) is that whosoever shall sin, Genesis 3. 19.
must die. The Law of death is whereby it is said to Man, Thou art earth, and
unto earth thou shall return. Out of it we spring, because we are earth. Et
in terram ibimus propter meritum peccatiprimi hominis, And to earth we shall
return for the first man's sins desert.

But you will say, Quest.
How is it that Infants of a day old do dye, seeing that they commit no sin?

I answer, Ans.
Sin is either the corruption of nature, Why Infants dye.
or any evil, which proceeds as the fruits thereof: or thus, sin is either
original, or actual: the former is in Infants, though not the latter. For
even Infants are conceived and borne in sin, Psalm. 51. 5.
being naturally unclean and guilty of Adams first transgression. Aug. de
praedest. and great. cap. 2.
The stame of the root corrupted is so propagated and diffused through all the
branches, which arise thereout, that as Saint Austen truly speaks, Nec
infans quidem vnius diei a culpa sit primae praenaricationis alienus, indeed
an Infant of a day old is not free from the fault of the first transgression.

But it may be asked, Quest.
how Infants can become guilty of that, they did not give consent to? I answer.

The fall of Adam and Eve is the fall of all their Children begotten after the
common order, Ans.
even as the righteousness of Christ is become the righteousness and
salvation of all his Children: Why Infants are guilty of Sin.
because as Christ, so Adam was no private person, but represented all
Mankind, which was now within his loins. Lib. 16. de excel. Mariae. c. 10.
Because ( says Anselme) the whole nature of man was (in protoplastis) in our
first formed Parents, and nothing thereof was out of them, the whole nature was
weakened, and corrupted. As therefore, if it had not sinned, it should have
been propagated such, as it was of God created: it a post peccatum, qualem se
fecit peccando, propagatur: so since it has sinned, it is propagated such, as
it has made it self by sinning. Fuit Adam, and in illo fuimus omnes perijt
Adam, and in illo perijmus omnes. Adam was ( says Saint Ambrose upon the
Gospel of Saint Luke) and in him we all were: Adam perished, and in him we
perish all; In him, because we were all in him, because we are all of him, and
he as our Head and Representer received and lost for us all.

But it will be objected that Infants baptized have no sin, Quest.
it being taken away in baptism, how happes it then that Infants baptized
die? And how is it that the best Believers die, Reu. 1. 5.
seeing that their sins are vvashed away in the blood of Christ?

I answer, Ans.
with the Augustane Confession out of Saint Austen: Sin is remitted in
Baptism (non vt non sit, sed vt non imputetur) not so that it should no longer
be, but that it should not be imputed. It is destroyed (says Anselme) not as
if it were made nothing, In cap. 6. ad Romans
sed vt non cogamur ei seruire, but that we might not be compeld to serve it.
But to give a full answer; the reason why the Lord inflicts death on them,
Note.
that are baptized and do believe, is not as if their sins were vnforgiuen,
for they are for Christ forgiven fully: neither yet is it to be supposed that
they should have dyed, though they had not sinned: for death is not the
condition of Nature, but the Daughter and desert of sin: neither yet does God
take away their lives, as intending thereby to punish Them: for if sin be
forgiven them (as it is indede) then also all the punishments due to sin,
which follows sin, as the shadow does the body: God therefore inflicts
death upon his Elect, Note.
not as a Judge offended with them (for he loves them most dearly, Psalm. 116.
15.
and their death is precious in his sight) but as a Father, a Friend, or
gracious King* who by death does humble, try, amend, and deliver them from
worldly miseries, sinful diseases, and earthly discontentments, and brings
their souls into heavenly Canaan, to the fellowship of Christ, and those
blessed Spirits of Men and Angels, that tend upon him in the Heavens.

To return therefore to the point a fresh. All men must dye.
Every child of Adam is subject unto death. Heb. 9. 27.
It is appointed unto men that they shall once dye, says Paul, (...), Death is
a debt that all men owe. 2. King. 2. 2.
I go the way of all the Earth, says David, that is, I draw near to death,
which is the common course of all men living upon she earth. Tuscul. 1. Ovid.
ad Liuiam.
Moriendum est omnibus, All men must dye, says Tully.

Tendimus huc omnes, met am properamus ad vnam.
Omnia sub leges mors vocat atra suas.
To death (says Ovid) we do All of us go, it is the mark we have to, she
causes all to be in thrall her laws unto. Hor. Car. l. 2. od. 28. l. 2. ode.
3.
Omnes vna manet nox, and calcanda semel via lethi. Omnes eodem cogimur. Death
waits for all, the way thereof must needs be once trod. Thither we are
driven All, says Horace. There is no writ of privilege to exempt us: her eyes
are pitilesse, her heart is inflexible, and her hands will hold no bribes.
Piety, virtue, goodness cannot put by her stroke. Iliad. l. 6.
Hector in Homer is reported to have said unto his wife, that no man could kill
him before the time of death destinated unto him, (...),

(...): but as for destiny, (and such a thing is death) he told her that no
man, neither good nor bad, could escape it.

-- Nec pietas moram Hor. carm. lib. 2. od. 14.

Rugis and instants senectae
Afferet, indomitaeque morti:
Pretty (says the Poet) will cause no stay to death. Abraham, Moses, Ioshuah,
Job, David were godly men: but yet the Scripture says of them all; they died.

Strength is not able to withstand death. Homer. ll. 18.
(...). Hercules was a strong man, yet the strength of Hercules yielded unto
death, which overcame him. Milo was renowned for his strength of body, yet
Milo was weaker then death. Sampson was stronger then ever any mere man was,
yet was he overcome of death.

Fortitude and valor of spirit cannot out-stand death, but the most courageous
that ever lived, yielded unto death. David and his Worthies were valiant men,
Hor. carm. l. 2. od. 16.
yet all of them are dead. Abstulit clarum citamors Achillem, Achilles famous
for his courage was taken away by death.

Wisdom is a most excellent virtue, yet it is unable to conquer death. Psalm.
49. 10.
Solomon the wisest King that ever reigned, is of death dispatched. Wise men
die as well as Fools, and go whenever death calls them.

Eloquence is not able to charm death, but the most eloquent men that ever
lived, have also died, as Tullie, Demosthenes, and the rest.

Nobleness of birth and royalty are unable to encounter with death, and
ouermaster it. Alexander, Julius Caesar, and the most victorious Princes, that
have ever reigned, have stooped unto death, which subdueth all men! Hor. l. 1.
Carm. od. 4.
Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas, regumque turres. Death can
find way into Princes palaces, into the courts of Kings as well as into the
peasants Cottage. Magistrates are Gods in office, but yet as mortal as their
subjects. I have said ye are Gods, but ye shall die as a man, and ye Princes
shall fall like others. Agamemnon, Cyrus, Psalm 82. 6.
Nebuchadnezzar, and Augustus Caesar, were mighty Monarchs: but yet death
has preied upon them all.

Old age is venerable, youth is stout and lusty, swiftness and actiuitie are
commendable: but death reuerenceth not the gray hoires of the aged: it
respects not the green locks of the young: neither is there any by
swiftness of foot or dexterity of hand able to out-runne and out-match death.

Mista senum ac iuuenum densantur funera: Old and young die in heaps together.
Hor. carm. lib. 1. od. 28.
Death will not die under any Magistrate, neither will she be ouer-awed with the
hore-head, or grave behavior of any aged father. Both old and young are a prey
unto her. All is fish that comes unto her net. The Lambs skin is common in
the market, as well as the old sheep. Hor. carm. l. 3. od. 11.
Mors and fagacem persequitur virum, nec paroit imbellis iuuentae poplit ibus
timidoque, tergo. Death follows him, that flies him, and spateth not young
folks, Ovid.
though fearful of him. Serius aut citius sedem properamus ad vnam: First or
last we must all die. Yea but the beautiful peradventure may find better
favor. No doubtless: Rebecca, Bathsheba, Ester, Helena, Irene were goodly
creatures. Absalon and Achilles were gallants, yet all these with many more are
dead and gone. 2. Sam. 2. 18.
Asahel was as swift as a Roe, yet death out-went him, won him, Goliath was a
great fellow, but death was the greater.

Achitophel was very politic and subtle, Aristotle learned, Aesop witty,
Mithridates a good linguist: but they be dead all. Rich and poor, Craessus as
well as Codrus, wise and foolish, high and low, young and old, bond and free,
all men must die. Omnia peribunt, sie ibimus, ibitis, ibunt. All must away, I,
thou, and every man besides. Intrasti, vt exires: we came all into the world
to go out again. Contra vim mortis non est medicamen in hortis. No physic
can prevent death, no charm can let it, no wile can catch it, no bribe can
blind it, no grief can move it, no least can abash it, no place, no pleasure,
no man, Eccl. 3. 20.
no means can stay it. All go to one place, and all was of the dust, and all
shall return to the dust. Quest.
Shall all men then die? have all men then in former ages died?

Surely Saint Paul directed by God does tell the Sol.
Corinthes that All (meaning them that live at the very last gasp of the
world) shall not die: 1. Cor. 15. 5.
but all must be changed, by which sudden change they shall be stripped of all
corruption and mortality. And again, if ever any man in former days have not
died, or if any man shall be translated without death into heaven, as Enok and
Elias, who are now in their glorified bodies with Christ in heaven, it must be
confessed that such a translation and assumption is of mere favor by a
singular privilege, and not common: for commonly all men do die, and come not
into heaven, till they have been dead. In like manner, if any man have been,
or shall be smitten into hell alive in body (as Romulus, who by a devil was
carried away in a mighty tempest of thunder and lightning: or peradventure
Abiram and Dathan) this is to be counted to be by a singular and extraordinary
judgment: for ordinarily all wicked men do die before they go into hell.

Having spoken of the Subjects of death, Of the time of Death.
we come now to speak of the time, and number thereof: where we are to note
these things.

First, that God in his counsel has determined the year, the month, the
week, the day, yea the very hour, minute, and moment of every man's death
that dies. He that denies this, denies the providence of God.

Secondly, this time prefined by God for death, cannot be avoided by man, or
prorogued. For the counsel of God shall stand (says Esaias) Isa. 46. 10. 11.
and his purpose shall be performed. Even Homer brings in his Jupiter,
affirming, Iliad. 1.
((...)) that whatsoever he does will, shall irreuocably and undoubtedly be
fulfilled. Seeing therefore the day of death is defined in the decree of God,
it is not to be imagined that any man can ever die sooner, or tarry longer
then the time by God appointed.

Certa quidem finis vitae mortalibus adstat,
Nec deuitari lethum pete, Lucret.
quin obeamus,
A certain term of life to each there is appointed
And die we must, death cannot be avoided.
Lanificas nulli tres exorare puellas
Contigit: Martial.
obseruant quem statuere diem.
The purpose of God does stand unalterable,
His day for our death he keeps unchangeable.
For though it be true that the Scripture says of Hezekiah, that God added
fifteen years unto his days? yet it is not meant as if God did alter his
eternal purpose concerning Hezekias his death, Isa. 38. 5.
but gave strength unto nature now decayed in him, by reason of his grievous
disease, Note.
so as he should be able by his grace to hold out fifteen years longer: not
longer then God had from eternity determined, but longer then he now had
reason to look for, being wasted and worn with sickness and sorrow.

Thirdly, the time of deaths coming is not to all alike, or the same: for one
dies old, another in his full strength, Seneca. Herc. fur.
and from some, ( Prima, quae vitam dedit, hora carpsit) the hour that first
gave them life, did also take away their life.

Fourthly, no man can tell certainly how long he shall live, Deaths hour is
unknown.
nor certainly foretell the very time of his death, unless God do teach him,
or unless death be present and visible in his causes, Quis est, quamuis sit
adolescens, cui sit exploratum se ad vesperum esse victurum? Who is there
(says Tullie) though he a youth, who is certain of his life till evening?

Fifthly, Tul. 1. de finib.
death is a daily attendant. Mors quasi saxum Tantalo semper impendet. It hangs
and houers over us always. There is not one moment of life without some motion
unto death: We die daily (says Seneca) for every day we loose some part of
our life. Epist. 23.
Et tunc quoque, Note.
cum crescimus, vita decrescit, and even then, when we do increase, our life
does decrease. Hunc ipsum, quem agimus diem, cum morte diuidimus: this very
day, which now we live in, we divide with death. And as every man does carry
death about him in his forerunnrs, A Simile.
even so also every man the longer he carries it, the nearer he is to it, as a
glass, the longer it runs, the sooner its run out, less sand remaining in
it. Death is but once.


Sixthly, death befalles one man ordinarily but once. It is appointed to men
that they shall once die, Heb. 9. 27.
says the Apostle, Carm. l. 1. od. 18
Et calcanda semel via lethi: the way of death must once be trodden, says
Horace. Yet some we doubt not but that they have died twice, as Lazarus, and
the man that rose from death, when the Prophets dead body touched him, 2. King.
13. 22.
as he lay in his grave, and some others also: but this was extraordinary.
Thus much for the time and number of death: I will add here moreover two
things: first that it is an easy thing for a man to be deprived of his life:
secondly, that as death does leave us, so the judgment of God in the latter
day shall find us.

Of the easiness of deaths coming we need no long discourse: Death takes
possession easily.
experience shows that men are many ways easily brought to death. Our nature
is very frail of it self, and besides subject to many exterior anuoyances.
Nonne fragiliores sumus, quam si vitrei essemus? Are we not more brittle
(says Saint Austen) then if we were of glass? Vitrum enim et si fragile est,
tamen seruatu^ diu durat, for though glass be brittle, yet being kept it
lasts long. But though we keep our selves never so well, yet death will
steal upon us, and overcome us. For what is your life (says Saint James?) It
is even a vapor, Iam. 4. 14.
which is easily dissolved. And for external means, how easily can any thing
kill, if God permit? A little fire, a little water, a little weight, a little
bullet, a bone, a fly, what not, who not? Eripere vitam nemo non homini
potest: at nemo mortem: mill ad hanc aditus patent: There is none, says
Seneca, but can take away a man's life, but no man can hinder death: to it there
are a thousand passages. There are not more rivers run into the Sea, then
ways leading unto death. It is much more easy to destroy then to build, to
fall then to rise, soon is an house burnt down, that has been long in
setting up, corruption is readier then generation, and a tree that has been
an hundred years a growing is blown down or cut up in one day, and may
easily be soon consumed to ashes. Hor. car. l. 4. od. 7
Our life is transitory. For ( puluis and vmbra sumus) we are but dust and
shadows ((...)) nothing but a breath and a shadow. Eurip. Hor. 16.
The continuance of our life is very uncertain. Quis scit an adijciant
hodiernae erastina summae tempora Dij superi? Who knows if God will let him
live to morrow? And how easily may death arrest us? It is an easy thing to
blow out a candle, A Simile.
or to put out a little fire: so it is an easy thing to cut a-sunder the
thread of life: easily is the life of man extinguished; a little smoke or vapor
(such as is the life of man) is easily and soon resolved, and vanished out of
sight.

For the second; In what estate a man's last day shall find him in this estate (
says Austen) shall the last day of the world receive him: As death leaves so
the Judge finds men. Ad D^oscor.
Quoniam qualis in die isto moritur, talis in die illo iudicabitur: For as he
dies in this day such shall his judgment be in that day. As the tree falls,
Eccl. 11. 3
so it lies. For this life is the only time allowed unto man to provide
against damnation. Quando hinc excessum est, Cyp. Tract. ad Demetrian.
nullus iam poenitentiae locus: When we are once gone hence ( says Saint
Cyprian) there is no place for repentance.

I come now to speak of the commodities, that come by death. Of the
commodities of death.
Death unto the R^probate and ungodly does bring no good, but depriues them of
all earthly benefits: and though it rid them of many crosses, which they did
perhaps endure, whiles they lived, yet it makes them no true gainers, but sets
them in further misery, for measure greater, and for continuance longer. For
the wicked are in bitter and inextricable torments so soon, as death has
preyed upon them*

The true commodities then of death belong truly to the Elect and Godly, To
whom death is ^ndeed a benefit.
whose death is sanctified by the death of Christ, who by his death has been
the death of sin, which is the cause of death, and by fulfilling the Law for
us has made an entrance for us into heaven.

First of all, Commod. 1.
by death the Children of God are delivered from all worldly troubles and
vexations. Mors est malorum remedium, Vid. Plutarch. de consolat. ad Apol.
and portus humanis tempestatibus: Death is the remedy of all earthly euilles,
and brings us out of all storms and tempests.

Secondly, Commod. 2.
by Death the godly are delivered wholly from sin: after death they sin not
at all: but in their souls, and after the Resurrection in their souls and
bodies, they do serve God purely; God in his providence ordaining that the
Daughter should eat up the Mother, that sin the mother of death, should be
devoured by death.

Thirdly, Commod. 3.
by death the souls of the Faithful are brought into Abraham's bosom, and
enjoy the fellowship of those only, who are just and holy, and do live in all
peace and quietness in a Paradise of everlasting pleasures, where the King is
Verity, the Law Charity, the peace Felicity, and the Life Eternity.
Precious is the death of the Saints (says Bernard) precious without doubt, as
the end of labors, as the consummation of a victory, tanquam vitae ianua, and
perfectae securitatis ingressus, as the door of life, and the entrance to
perfect security.

And the only discommoditie, that death does bring unto the godly, is that it
depriues the soul of the body for a time: which discommoditie is not void of
many commodities, which do make amends. For by this departure of the Soul,
Note.
a man is taken from the sight and sense of many sins and sorrows, many
crosses and calamities: he loses earth, and gains heaven: he forsakes
men, but finds Angels and holy Spirits: he loses the company of his
friends on earth, but inioyes the face and fellowship of God, of Christ in
heaven: and though he leaves his body, which he loves most dearly, A simile.
yet he shall not be deprived of it always: he goes but as it were out of a
smokie and sluttish house, waiting a time (yet with unspeakable joy all the
while with pleasing companions there where is good being) till it be renewed,
and made clean. Whereupon Saint Austen says. In Ioh.
Qui cupit dissolui, and esse cum Christo, non patienter moritur, sed patienter
viuit and delectabiliter moritur, He which desires to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ does not dye as a Patient, but lives as a Patient, and dies with
delight.

Indeed Death to the wicked is full of discomforts. Death is discommodious to
the wicked 1. 2 3 4 5.
For it depriues them of their worldly promotions, profits, and pleasures: it
robs them of their Friends and Familiars: it depriues them of their bodies: it
abridges them of the light of the sun, the society of the living, and the
comfort of the creatures: and finally, it closes them up in Hell with Devils
and Reprobates, there to be tormented in endless, Aug. ad Julian. ep. 211.
easelesse, and remediless tortures, Vbi mors optabitur, and non dabitur,
where death shall be desired, but not granted to them.

Having thus far discoursed of bodily death, we will now see whereto it is
compared, and then answer a few questions, and so come to apply the former
doctrines to our edification, and this with as much brevity and perspicuitie,
as we may conveniently.

Death is compared to a Physician, What to death may be compared. Simile 1.
Death is a Physician. Adissimile.
because it cures men of all earthly miseries, as the Physicians cure men of
their maladies. But herein it ouergoes all Physicians: for whereas it killes
them all, they are not all able to kill it.

It is also likened to an Haven. Death is an Haven,
For as an Haven Isay. 57. 1. Reu. 14. 13. Adissimilitude.
The righteous are taken away from the evil. They rest from their labors, and
their works follow them. But yet here is some dissimilitude in two other
respects. In two cases Death is unlike an Haven.
For first, the haven entertaines and comforts all, whether good or bad: but
death affords no true rest, no true comfort, but to the godly only. For much
more miserable are the wicked after death, as may appear by the parable of the
rich Epicure in the Gospel: Luke 16. A second dissimilitude.
Secondly, sailors tarry not long in the haven, but put forth again, when they
see convenient, into the Seas a fresh: but men, when they once come into
Deaths Haven, there they continue till God will, there they tarry, and never
return more into this mortal life, they never come more upon this glassie
Sea, unless it be by an extraordinary work of God. He shall return no more
to his house says Job, Job. 7. 10.
neither shall his place know him again. (...), Diseases come and go, Vid.
Not. (...). Myth. l. 3. c. 13.
and return again: but death comes but once, neither did any man ever see
(says Agathias) a dead man to come again. Let the holy Land be excepted, and
it will not be denied, I think, except perhaps in Troas once a dead man was
by Paul revived. Acts 20. 9. 10.


Death is a Night.
Death is compared to the Night. For as the night is the privation of the
light, so death is the privation of life: as the night follows upon the going
down of the Sun, which is the fountain of light, so death ensues the
departure of the soul, A dissimile.
which is the Author of life. But yet here also is some odds: for the night
comes and goes, and comes again: the Sun does set and rise again: but when
our life is gone, when our death is come, we return no more to a life with
men on earth: our night ends not, our Sun rises not, until that determined
time of the Resurrection be fulfilled, which how long or how soon it will be,
before it be expired, God, that has appointed all times and seasons, can
only tell.

Medicine or Remedy, for it cures all crosses, it is a salve for all sores,
Agath. in Not. Com. vbi supra. A dissimile.
a medicine for all maladies, and the remedy of all calamities, Quae morbos
placat, pauperiemque leuat. But here is the difference; a man may choose
whether he will use a medicine or no: but death will not be denied, cannot be
eschewed, Dat cunctis legem, recipit cum paupere regem. And where as medicines
are applied during the residence of the Soul in the body: this medicine is
the reliction of the body, the discession of the Soul out of the body.

Again, Death is like Fire, that says not, It is Pro. 30 16. Death a fire.
so is Death vnsaturable, it is not contented with those infinite millions,
which it has already devoured, A dissimile.
but still waits to swallow up more. Indeed here is great diversity in
another respect. For there is no fire made by man, but it will either be put
out, or go out: but death is a fire, that man by sin has kindled, which he
is not able to extinguish, neither will it dye of it self. Christ alone is
able to slake it with his blood: he will be the death of death.

Moreover death is likened to an Haruester with Death is a Reaper.
or respect: so death moweth down all, and spares none: Mors resecat, mors
omne necat, nullumque veretur: it cuts up all, killes all, fears none. And as
the Haruester cuts down the corn, but is not cut up himself of the corn,
neither can be: so death takes away all, but it self is killed of none. Mors
mordet omnes, mordetur a nullo: it bites all, it deuoures all, A Dissimilitude.
it is bitten, it is devoured of none. Yet here also is something unlike: For
Haruesters tarry till the corn be ripe: but death stays not always till men
come to ripeness of age, but like a woman, that longs, pulls the green Apple
off, before it be half ripe, or like hungry Cattle, which croppe up corn as
soon as it sproutes up. Pelles quot pecorum, tot venduntur vitulorum. Infants
dye as well as old men: the Calves skin is as usually sold in the market, as
the old Cowes, and the Lamb goes to the shambles as well as the Ewe.

Tyranness, that pities neither age, Death is a Tyrant.
nor sex: and so death, altogether pitilesse, spares neither man nor woman,
neither young, nor old. Esops wit, Irenes beauty, Tullies tongue, the Infancy
of David's first child by Bathsheba, no respect whatsoever can withstand death,
obtain her favor. Indeed here is a difference: for as Iuuenall says, A
Dissimili. Satyra 10.
Ad generum Cereris sine caede and vulnere pauci Descendent reges, and sicca
morte tyranni, few tyrants escape vnmurdered: but no man can tyrannize over
death, no man can kill her. He that could kill a thousand with an Assesiaw,
Judge. 15. 15.
could not kill death with all his weapons. Euulsisque truncis Enceladus
iaculator audax. Horat. Carm. l. 3. Od. 4.
He (if any such) that could pull up trees by the roots and cast them like
darts, could not strike a dart through death. And they, that have been most
skillful in poisons, could not save themselves from the poison of death, and
poison her: no sinner can subdue her.

woman winged. For death is fruitful and very swift: Death is a flying woman.
it often takes men ere they be aware, and like a Serieant is at their backs
before they look for

Again, Death is a Sea.
death is like the Sea, which is terrible, not to be drained, not to be
turned out of his channel, and which breaking banks and prevailing without
mercy carries all away with it, which it meets with. And as into the Sea, so
unto death, there are many vvayes and means to bring men.

Besides, it is compared to the Lion in the fable, Death a Lion.
but none returned: so many die, but from death to life again we see no man to
return. It accepts as many as comes, but like a covetous niggard, it keeps
all and parts with none.

Finally, death is compared to Sleep. Homer Diogenes being wakened out of a
dead Sleep, Death a Sleep.
and asked of his Physician, how he did, Laert. lib. 6. Plutarc. Consol., ad
Apoll.
answered I am well, Nam frater fratrem amplectitur, for one brother embraces
another.

And Gorgias being near unto death and sleepic, if any man asked him how he
did, returned this answer, I am somnus incipit me fratri suo tradere. Sleep
begins now to deliver me to his brother, meaning death. Which two are something
alike. For death is common as sleep: and a dead man is deprived of worldly
cares, and is at rest in his soul, if godly, and his body lies in the grave
as in a bed: A Dissimilitude.
but yet a man sleeping is not wholly deprived of the use of his body: for the
pulses beat, the stomach digesteth, and the breath comes and goes: but death
depriues a man wholly for a time of all use of his body: Again, a man wakes
out of his sleep and returns unto the works of his calling a fresh: but a
dead man wakes not to the works of his former life: neither can he be
awakened out of the sleep of death, but by the power of God, of whom alone the
day of our resurrection is seen and known.

Thus much for the things, where unto death may be compared.

There remain certain Questions concerning death, 28 questions about Death.
worthy to be soiled, which I remembered not in time to set in their more
proper places, neither are they here so methodically digested, as plainly
resolved.

First, Quest. 1.
it may be demanded whether any death may be said to be natural, seeing it
destroys life, which is according to nature, Quae cupit suum esse, which
delights still to be?

I answer, Sol.
a thing is said to be natural more ways then one. How death may be said to
be natural.
Death being simply in it self considered is not natural: but forasmuch as
that which does necessarily follow the nature of a thing, and has the
beginning or ground of his existence therein, to which that, which is violent,
is opposed, is called natural, Note.
That death therefore, which follows the consumption and dissipation of the
natural moisture by the natural heat, seeing it comes of causes, which are
within the body, in that respect is called natural.

Secondly, Quest. 2.
it may again be asked, what natural death is properly? Sol.


I answer, Natural death described.
that properly is called natural death, when natural heat fails, by reason
that the moisture is dried up by it, as a lamp goes out when the oil is
spent. And this death is with much ease, and with little or no pain, as
Aristotle writes.

Thirdly, Quest. 3.
it may be asked, what violent death is properly?

I answer, Sol.
that is called violent death, when by accident, either the moisture is drawn
out of the body, What violent death is.
or the heat extinguished by some inward or outward violence and oppression.
Inward violence is by poison, A Simile.
gluttony, drunkenness, or such excess, as when a lamp is drowned in the
oil. Outward violence is when a man is strangled with an halter, as a fire
suddenly choked with some huge heap of earth, A Simile.
or ashes, thrown upon it; and many more oppressions of life there are of this
kind. So that, taking violent death in this largeness of sense, it will
appear that few die a natural death.

Fourthly, Quest. 4.
it may be demanded, when a man does die, or when the soul does leave the
body?

I answer, Sol.
then when there is a defect of those instruments of the soul, whereby life is
prolonged. When the body is become unfit for the soul to work with, then
does the soul forsake the body, which it loves most dearly, Note.
and not before. Death comes not by the impatience and fickle-mindednesse of
the soul, but by reason of the impotencie and unaptness of the body; A
Simile.
as a workman leaves his tool, when it is become altogether unfit for his use.

Fifthly, Quaest. 5.
but whence is it that one man dies sooner then another, that nature fails in
one sooner then in another?

I answer, Sol.
the highest reason hereof is Gods decree: but the Principal natural cause of
the length of life is first a fit composition of heat and moisture in the
sinews, The causes of long life.
marrow, spirits, etc. And secondly, the long and fortunate continuance of this
good temper, which being interrupted by diseases and other oppressio^s death
necessarily follows, and a man's life is ended, as an artificers occupation then
ends of necessity, when his tools are worn and past working with, A Simile.


Sixthly, Quest. 6.
whether natural death be by no means to be avoided (if a man escape violence)
seeing that the radical humor, as it wastes, may be repaired by nurriture,
and therewith maintained?

I answer, Sol.
that the radical humor may indeed by nourishment be daily renewed, yet that
restored moisture is not so good, as that which was wasted of the beat: This
answer belongs to the state of man's fall by sin.
it is not so pure as that, which was of the seed: it is not so well wrought and
excocted as the seed, neither so exactly mingled and attenuated. Seeing
therefore that which is restored, is not so pure as that, that was wasted, the
heat for want of convenient matter to feed upon at length is dissipated and put
out. Neither is the quantity of the humor restored so much to be respected,
Note.
as the quality: whereupon Auicennus says that, Though there were as much
restored, as is daily wasted, yet must we of necessity die. And besides all
this, we are all Sinners, Note.
unable to keep such a precise and regular diet, but that we shall offend
herein, and old age will steal upon us, do what we can. Festinat enins
decurrere velox Flosculus augustae, Juuenal. Satyr. 80.
miseraeque, breuissima vitae Portio, dum bibimus, dum serta, vnguenta, puellas
Poscimus, obrepit non intellecta senectus. Sensim, sine sensu senescimus.

Seventhly, Quest. 7.
what difference is there betwixt the death of a man, and of a beast?

I answer, Sol.
when a beast dies, his soul does vanish, and is dissolved: but when a man
dies, his soul still continues. For the soul of a beast is mortal: but the
soul of man is immortal, as has been showed. God (says Gregory) created
three living spirits: Three living spirits created
one, which is not covered with flesh: another which is covered with flesh, but
dies not with the flesh: a third which is covered with flesh, and dies with the
flesh. Primus Angelorum secundus hominum, tertius brutoru^ animaelu^: the first
is of Angels, the second of men, the third of brute beasts. And albeit the
Scriptures sometimes speak of the death of the souls, How man's soul is said
to die.
yet either the person or the life is to be understood, or such a death as is
not the extinction and deletion of the soul, but her separation from God, who
is her comfort and contentment. 2. Difference.
Secondly, the death of a man is wont to be with much comfort, or else horror
of hell it self, our conscience telling us of another state after death: but
beasts, because they have no conscience, no hope of heaven, nor fear of hell,
are not therefore subject to such passions, either of joy or sorrow. 3.
Difference.
Thirdly, when beasts die, they die for ever: but though death devour us, as
the Whale did Jonas, and bind us as the Philistines did Sampson, yet we shall
come forth again, the bands and snares of death shall be broken, and we shall
be delivered. For it is most true which Saint Bernard says: In Cant. ser. 107
There is a threefold state of holy souls: the first in the corruptible body
(and that is in this life:) the second out of the body, (and this is after
death;) the third in the body glorified (and that shall be at the
Resurrection,) And so there is a threefold condition of wicked souls: the
first is in their bodies of sin: the second is in misery out of their bodies
by death dissolved: the third shall be in eternal torments within their bodies
at the Resurrection: which Resurrection shall be of men, John. 5. Act. 24. 15.
Quest. 8.
both just and unjust, but not of beasts.

Eighthly, Whether may death be said to be evil?

Thales said that death was no more evil, Sol.
then a man's nativity: Laert. lib. 1. c. 1.
wherefore being asked by one, that heard him say so, Cur igitur tu non
moreris? Why do not you die then, Thales? He made him this witty answer: Ob
hoc ipsum, quia nihil refert. Potius enim habetur, quod accersitur: which is as
if he should have said, The reason, why I die not, and forsake my life, is
because there is no difference betwixt life and death one is not better then
another: for that is counted the better, which is desired. If therefore I should
hasten mine own death, it might be well supposed that I do account death
better then life, whereas I make no difference between them. But to pass by
this conceit of Thales: that we may answer rightly to the question we must
distinguish.

Death considered simply by it self, Ans. How death is an evil, and how not.
and as it is an effect of sin, is evil: for if life be good, then death
must needs be evil: and if it be an evil to be in Hell tormented, then to
an evil man death must needs be evil, because by death his soul is brought
into affliction in hell, and he altogether deprived of those benefits of life,
which he did before enjoy.

But death being considered as bereaved of her sting, Note.
which is sin, 1. Cor. 15.
and as it is sanctified by the death of Christ to be the door of life unto his
members, it is not in this respect evil, but rather good. Chrysostom says
well, Mors nonest malum: sed post mortem poenas dare malum est, Death is not
evil, but to suffer punishment after death is evil. Death is an evil, not in
regard of gods justice, for so it is good: but it is evil to him, that suffers
it; for it is a punishment, and a very curse to the wicked: But unto the godly
it is become a benefit* the grave is as a bed, Death is as a sleep, and the
soul is at peace with Christ.

9. Whether is the day of a man's birth or death the better? Quest. 9.


I answer, Sol.
if a man's birth and death be simply considered, surely it is better to be
borne, then to dye, Melius est nasci, quam denasci. But if we remember how we
are borne in sin, Psalm. 51. 5.
how we sin, as long as we live, Note.
and that our life is full of crosses: and if withal we do remember that
death, if we die Gods Servants, does deliver us from all worldly euilles, both
of sin and sorrow, and is the mean, whereby our souls are brought unto the
Cape of Hope, and Haven of pleasing rest, then surely we may say with Solomon,
Ec. 7. 3.
the day of death is better then the day that one is borne in: and melius esse
denasci, quam nasci.

10. Whether is better to dye quickly, Quest. 10.
or to live long?

I answer, Sol.
it is better for a Reprobate to dye betimes even in the cradle, then to live
till old age: because his sin increases with his years, and his punishment
shall be answerable to his sin. But for an Elect and godly man to dye
quickly, is better then to live long, and not better.

It is the better in this sense, Note.
because he is the sooner delivered from sin and sorrow: it is not so good in
another regard, namely because by his long life he may do much good unto
others, and he may come to such grouth of grace, and to show forth such
abundance of good works, as that his glory in the life to come may be much
augmented: for as we do excel in grace in this world, so we shall exceed in
glory in the world to come.

11. Whether is it lawful for a man to hasten his death, Quest. 11.
that he might be the sooner with Christ?

I answer, Sol.
we may not do evil, that good may come of it. Romans 3. 8.
The end makes not an act good, but the good ground of it, We must not die till
God call us.
the good form and the good end together. Thou shall not kill, says God, as
not another, so not thy self. Non est nostrum mortem arripere: It is not for
us (says Saint Hierome) to catch at death, but to accept it willingly if
others inflict it. Vnde and in persecutionibus non licet propria manu perire:
Wherefore also, when we are persecuted, it is unlawful to kill our selves.

12. Whether is it lawful to desire death, Quest. 12.
or no?

I answer thus: Sol.
To desire death merely for deaths sake, and only or principally to be rid of
grieuances is a certain weakness; and unlawful. But to desire death to be
delivered from all sin; and to be with Christ, and in the last place) to be
rid of crosses (and annoyances, so long as we refer all to the good pleasure
of our God, it is undoubtedly lawful, Phil. 1. 23.
and according to Paul's ensample. It was well said by Saint Austen: Potest
iustus just optare mortem in vita amarissima: si non concedat, iustum
pativitam amarissimam: a just man may justly wish for death, when his life is
full of Wormwood: but if God grant not this, just it is to suffer this most
bitter life.

13. Whether may a man pray against death? Quest. 13.


I answer, Sol.
to pray against death as it is the stipend of sin it is allowable: lu what
sense a man may pray against death.
again to pray against death, till a man have learned how to dye is lawful,
provided that he study and desire to be prepared and instructed: to pray
against death, till a man have effected some good work, which he desired to
see done before his death; and generally if a man's ends of his deprecation of
death be good, it is lawful for him to pray against it, Note.
Provided, that he commit all to the will of God, resting himself therewith
content, Job. 13. 15.
resolving with Job, that though the Lord do kill him, Job 17. 3. 4. 6.
yet to put his confidence in him, and so long as his breath is in him, to
speak no wickedness, nor to forsake his righteousness.

14. Quest. 14.
Whether is death to be feared? Sol
Epist. 88.


When thou have walked much and long (says Seneca) thou must return home. It
is folly to fear that, which thou can not avoid: he has not escaped
death, who has deferred it. Hac condition intraui, vt exirem, I came into the
world with this condition, to go forth again. Therefore for a man to torture
himself with the fear of Death, and as it were to dye for fear least he
should dye, is baseness of Spirit, and unchristian.

But yet altogether to be without fear of death is not good: Note.
for death being against Nature, doubtless Nature cannot but something fear
it: How death may be feared.
and for a man nothing to fear it is a certain oppression of Nature. Besides,
the fear of death, if moderate and mixed with Faith in the Death of Christ,
does further to repentance and sanctimonie of life, Aug. l. 2. de doct. Christ.
and ( quasi clauis carnis omnes motus superbiae ligno crucis affigit) does
fasten all proud and carnal motions as it were with nails unto the Cross.
Again, the moderate fear of Death makes us meditate the deeper of it, and
nihil sic reuocat a peccato, quam frequens mortis meditatio, and nothing (says
Saint Austen) does so much recall a man from sin, as does the often meditation
of his death. And finally, there is no better way to vanquish the terrible
aspect of death approaching, then a well tempered fear of Death before it do
come. Greg.
Sic mors ipsa, cum venerit, vincitur, si prius, quam veniat, semper timeatur.
Death, when it comes, is overcome, if, before it do come, it be always feared.

15 Whether is the suddenness of death in it self an evil? Quaest. 15.


I answer, Sol.
if the death be not evil, the sudde^ coming of it is not evil: When sudden is
evil.
Anselm says well: No^ nocet bonis etc. It is not hurtful to good men, though
they be slain, or die suddenly: non enim subito moriuntur, qui semper se
cogitauerunt morituros: for they die not suddenly, which have always thought
they should die. Precious in the sight of the Lord, always is the death of his
Saints: as it is said, Quacunque hora iustus moriatur, iustitia eius non
auferetur ab eo. Whenever a righteous man dies, his righteousness shall not
be taken from him. And as the Common saying is, Qualis vita, finis ita, a good
life has a good end, how sudden soever it falls out.

16 Whether is it unlawful to lament the death of Parents, Quest. 16.
Children, Friends, Kinsfolks, and honest Christians?

Not to be grieved at all for their death, Sol.
is a sin to be lamented with grief of heart. For they are our flesh, How we
may lament the death of our friends.
we have inioyed comfort by them, and are now deprived of it: and their life
sometimes is very profitable to the Church and Kingdom. To grieve then is a
thing both natural and honest. Contristamur (says Austen) set non sicut
caeteri. De verb. Ap. ser. 3 2.
We sorrow, but not as others, that are hopeless. Non culpamus affectum
(says Bernard) but excessum, In Cant. ser. 29.
we accuse not the affection, 1. These. 4. 13. 14.
but the excess, Saint Paul forbidding the Thessalonians to sorrow for the
dead, does not simply forbid all sorrow: but Sorrow not (says he) as other,
that have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus is dead, and is risen, even so
them, which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. And he himself
professes that God had mercy on him, Note.
in sparing Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 27.
Least (quoth he) I should have sorrow upon sorrow. What should I heap up the
examples of Abraham mourning for his wife Sarah, of the Israelites for Samuel,
of the Machabees for Judas their noble Captain, of David for Jonathan, of the
Widows for Dorcas, of Martha for Lazarus? Infinite are examples hereof. Note.
But this our mourning must be moderate, and mixed with hope. For they are not
( amissi but praemissi) lost. but sent before us. And ( Sapiens eodem animo
fert illorum mortem, quo suam expectat) a wiseman will take their death, as he
does expect his own. Whiles I was a writing these things, it pleased God to
take from me mine only son, before he was a fortnight old.
Filium meum memini me genuisse mortalem moriturum.

Thy child, that is borne to day, and dies to morrow,
Loses some days of rest, but years of sorrow.
Thou loosest wife, and friends, and parents dear,
The Heavens find them, though thou loose them here.
17 But of all the means of death: Quest. 17.
which are very many, which does death most certainly follow and attend?

Seneca shall give the answer. Epist. 30.
Other kinds of death ( says he) are mingled with hope. Sol.
A disease ends, a fire is extinguished, a man escapes a ruin, which was
likely to have oppressed him, the Soldier being ready to cut the neck asunder
held his hand back: nil autem habet, quod speret, quem senectus ducit ad
mortem: but there is no hope of escaping lest for him, whom Old Age leads
unto death.

18 Of all, Quaest. 18.
that die: who commonly forget themselves and die without sound repentance?

The sinner ( says Caesarius) is smitten with this punishment (Vt moriendo
obliuiscatur sui, Sol.
qui viuens In admonit. 6.
oblitus est Dei) that he should forget himself at his death, who forgot God
in his life. Et vix been moritur quimale vixit, and he, that lived ill ( says
Saint Austen) does scarcely die well,

19 Whom to is death most terrible, Quaest. 19.
and unwelcome?

Surely to those, Sol.
whose GOD is their Belly, whose portion is the world, whose end is damnation,
and whose conscience affrights them. Death (says Tully) is terrible to those,
In paradox.
who loose all things with their life, not unto them, whose praise is
immortal.

20 Who die most cheerfully, Quaest. 20.
and with least discomfort?

They questionless, Sols
whose conscience witnesses with them. Venientem nemo hilaris mortem recipit,
nisi qui se ad illam recte composuerit, No man gives death a cheerful
welcome, when it comes, but he that has rightly prepaired himself for her.
He dies most readily that lived most religiously.

21 Is there any thing in the world more certain, Quaest. 21.
and withal more uncertain then death?

No verily. Sol.
What ( says Saint Bernard) in humane things is there more certain, then
death, and what is found more uncertain, Death both certain and uncertain.
then the hour of death? She pitties not poverty, she reuerenceth not
riches, she spares not wisdom, manners, age: nisi quod senibus mors est in
ianuis, iuvenibus vero in insidijs: saving that death looks old men full in
the face, but lies skulking to take yongmen napping at unawares.

22 Does death make no difference between the bodies of the rich and the
poor, Quaest. 22.
the noble and the simple? And are all these worldly differences among men
become dead by death? Sol.


We are all borne naked (says Saint Ambrose) and we die naked: there is no
difference among the carcasses of the dead, unless perhaps the bodies of rich
men do savor more strongly by reason of their riot. A Simile.
And as a Merchants Counters upon his counting table may stand for a greater or
lesser number, as he pleases, but are all alike, when they are shuffled
together, and put in the bag: even so these earthly differences, which were
amongst men, whiles they lived upon earth, do all take their end, and die,
when death has once shuffled them together on heaps in the grave. Alphonsus,
asked what made all men equal? answered Ashes.

23. But of all kinds of death, Quaest. 23.
which is the best, and worst?

Doubtless of the best the death is the best, Sol:
and of the worst the death is the worst. Whose death is best.
Of the death of good men, I suppose the death of Martyrs to be the best,
because it is endured with show of the greatest virtues, and (as I think) is
best rewarded: and they lose that for God, which is most dear to nature,
namely life.

And of Malefactors their death is the worst simply, Whose death is counted
worst.
who have lived and die most wickedly: but theirs is counted most odious and
infamous, who either murder themselves, or else die by Law for their outrageous
villainies. Bias being asked, What kind of death was evil, The iuster the Law,
the worser the death.
answered ( Quod legibus constitutum est) That, which the Laws ordained,
meaning that which men have deserved for their wickedness, as treason,
murder, robbery. In like manner he in Plautus says, So I die not for my
faults, I care not much though I perish here: Qui per virtutem peritat, non
interit, He that dies for well-doing, does not die.

24. Why do not men know the very time, Quest. 24.
that is appointed for their deaths?

Saint Austen shall answer, Sol. Why God keeps from men the time of their
deaths De consolat. ad Apoll.
Latet vltimus dies, vt obseruentur omnes dies: A man's last day is kept secret,
that all days might be observed. Ad hoc forte nescis, quando veniet, vt semper
paratus sis: therefore it may be thou know not when he will come, that thou
might be always prepared. I suppose ( says Plutarch) that Nature knowing
the confusion and shortness of our life, would therefore have the period of
our life unknown to us: for it is commodious for us. For if we should forknow
it, many would pine away with untimely mourning, and would prevent death with
death: he means the fear of death would kill the^, whereas otherwise by course
of nature they might have lived longer.

25. Whether is a man worse at his death, Quest. 25.
or at his birth?

Peiores morimur, Sol.
quam nascimur, we die more evil then we are borne, says Seneca. But this is
our fault and not natures, Epist. 22.
if we consider it simply without relation to corruption. Indeed we are borne
in sin: but that sin is not acted of us, but by propagatio^ derived to us:
but before we die, if we live the age of a man, we die after the commission of
many actual transgressions. Nevertheless by the grace of God in Christ a man's
death may be better then his birth, and much more comfortable. Note.
For to be borne is a work of nature, but to die with Christian faith and
fortitude either for Christ, or in Christ, is a work above nature. I have read
of some, that are said to die, or to sleep in Christ: but I read of none, that
is borne in Christ: re-borne, and borne a new in Christ we may be said, Note.
but not borne. In brief, There is no man borne justified and absolved. But a
man may die justified and absolved. Now it is better to die justified, then to
be borne a sinner: It is better to die the child of Christ, Note.
then to be borne the son of Adam. This then I say; an old man dying (if we
regard him by himself) is worse then an infant newly borne: but if we consider
an Infant without Christ, and an old man in Christ, certainly it is much better
for him to die with many sins forgiven in Christ, then fot the other to be born
(though but with one sin) out of Christ, and so to die in that estate.

26. Of all kinds of death considered simply without respect of grace, Quest.
26.
or sin, which is the best?

Julius Caesar said that sudden death was best, Sol.
and a sudden death befell himself. But (as I take it) a sudden death,
except it be by the course of nature, without violence, What is the best death,
without reference to sin or virtue.
is not the best. For that doubtless is the best, which is most agreeable unto
nature: now a natural death is not simply sudden, because it is not without
messengers, and signs foregoing: yet sometimes it comes on the sudden, that
is, in a trice, or before a man thinks, or while he thinks, he may live a
while longer, or when he thinks not of it, A Simile
sometimes whiles he sleeps, sometimes whilst he is awake, as a mellow apple
which drops of, whilst a man sometimes is lookng on it.

27. Whether is it lawful for a man to pray that Quaest. 27.
God would tell him directly when he shall leave the world and die?

I would not say it is altogether unlawful, by reason of some extraordinary
occasions. Sol.
But usually and ordinarily it is not expedient. Why it is unlawful to pray to
know the time of our deaths.
For revealed things belong to us, Tu ne quaesieris scire (nesas) quem mihi,
quem tibi finem Dij dederint. Seu plures hyemes, seu tribuit Jupiter vltimakm.
Hor. car. l. 1. od. 11. Romans 14. 23. Psalm. 39. 5.
but not the secrets of God, such as are hidden seasons, locked up within Gods
breast, as the day of our death, and the day of Christ's coming. And as it is
no way fit to pray to know the day of judgment, the very time of the Judges
coming, so neither is it to pray to know the certain hour of death. For
though our end may be good, yet that is not enough to make a prayer good, but
it must be made in faith according to the will of God. But the curious
inquiring into such things has a check in the Scriptures. And though David
pray, Lord let me know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is, and
let me know how long I have to live: yet he means (as I take it) not to beg
the knowledge of the very point and article of his death, but desires God to
give him grace to acknowledge, consider, and duly to acquaint himself with
the shortness and frailty of his life, as to me it seems, by considering
the words ensuing, and by comparing it with Psalm. 92. 12. But howsoever it be,
we know ( Legibus viuitur, non exemplis) that good and obedient Christians must
live by laws. and not by ensamples. But I demand, why would thou know the
very moment of thy death? That thou might prepare thy self the better for
it? Thy meaning may be good, but this thine aim is of little moment. Note.
Know this, thou art a man, die thou must: this very day may see thy death:
prepare thy self this day. Spacio breui spem lougant reseces. Dum loquimur,
sugerit inuida aelas. Hor. car. li. 1. od. 11. Act. 1. 7.
Thou may die any day, to day, to morrow, next day, be therefore prepared
every day, to day, to morrow, next day, any day, every day: Miserable man, why
do thou not prepare thy self every hour? Think of thy self as if thou
werst now a dying, for thou know thou must die. It is not for thee to know
the times or the seasons, which God has put in his own power. If God will not
have thee know them, then desire not to know them. It is enough for us to know
we must die: how soon, or when, it skils not: it cannot be long to: for we
are but foam, and fume.

28. What honor ought the living to perform unto the dead? Quest. 28.


I answer, they ought moderately to be touched with the loss of them: Sol.
they ought to give them honest burial: they ought to commemorate and imitate
their virtues: The honors performed to the dead.
they should praise God for his graces given them, and for receiving them to
mercy, out of a miserable and merciless world: they ought to maintain their
credits: they ought not to misuse their bodies, neither speak evil of them:
if the deaf ought not to be evil spoken of, Leuit. 19. 14.
much less the dead: for who deafer then a dead man? who further off. Who
less able to answer for himself?

Having thus ended these questions concerning death, and dead men; I come now
to set down some principal uses of that, Uses of the former discourse. ^.
which has been said before.

First, seeing death destroys not the soul, though it dissolve the body, The
bodic is baser then the soul.
we see that the soul is of a more noble nature, then the body, and therefore
more to be esteemed, and with greater care and love to be kept and tended. As
God excels all souls, or as the Lady excels her handmaid, A Simile.
so the soul excels all bodies. Note.
What would a man have evil? Surely nothing, not his wife, not his son, not
his servant, Why should a man have an evil soul, that would have a good body?
not his horse, not his ground, not his fruit, no not his coat: and will thou
have an evil soul? For shame take care of it, that it be not evil. Evil it
is, or good. For ( Omnis anima aut Christisponsa, aut Diaboli adultera est,)
every soul (as Saint Austen speaks) is either the Spouse of Christ (and then
good) or the devils harlot, and so is evil. If evil, then thy state is evil;
and if death find it evil, it leaves it evil: and this soul which cannot
die, in respect of dissolution, yet it does die in regard of consolation, being
separated by evil, as well from God (who is the soul and solace of the soul)
as from the body, which in life it did enjoy with joy. And for so much as the
soul does survive the body, A comfort against the fear of death.
and live, when it is dead, it should comfort me^ against the dread, that death
brings with it. For they shall not be Nothing, nor Nowhere. Death does subdue
but one part, and that which is the baser of them.

Secondly, Use. 2.
seeing God inflioteth death, without whose providence it could not come, Why
death is to be borne with patience.
it teaches us in all patience, quietness, and humility to be contented
with his work, not opening our mouths against him, though he take us away in
the flower of our time, or by the cruelty of wicked men. And to them, that
truly serve God according to his will, it cannot but be a comfort that when
they die, A comfort to a good man dying.
they die not without the knowledge, but by the will and disposement of their
gracious and loving Master, who is able to save them in death, Dan. 3. and 6.
as he did Daniel in the Lions den, and the three Children in the fiery
furnace.

Thirdly, Use. 3.
seeing death is the fruit of sin, it should teach us to detest sin. Death
is not very pleasing, but rather odious to flesh and blood: How much more
odious then should sin be counted, A reason to hate sin.
by which death found entrance into the world, and without which no man had
ever died? Diseases, death, Sin a very Crab-tree.
and damnation come by sin: diseases hinder health, death ends life, and
damnation depriues man of the joys of salvation: will any wise man then
delight in sin, a thing so odious, hurtful and unhappy? Solomon being
directed by the Spirit of God calls him a Fool that makes a mock of sinue,
Pro. 14. 9. and 10 23.
and as a pastime to do wickedly. Does any man love the plague, the gout, the
palsy, the stone, the crampe, the canker, or the dropsy? I suppose no man.
All these diseases are the consequents of sin: the world had not known them,
had she not been acquainted with sin: and certainly these diseases are not
more hurtful to the body, then sin is to the true health and life of the
soul. Sin is a Tiger, a Bear, a Lion, an Aspe, a Viper, a destroyer both of
body and of soul.

Fourthly, Use. 4. Inordinate fear of death to be suppressed.
the inevitable necessity of Death, which lies upon all the world, condemns
the immoderate fear of Death in many men. There is no man so ignorant, but
knows he must die: yet when death is threatened, what fear is there, what
fainting, what tergiuersation, what impatience is there to be seen in many?
Senec. 78. epist.
Quid fles miser, quid trepidas? Eye wretch why do thou weep? why do thou
tremble? This yoke is laid upon every neck: thou go the way that all me go.
To this wast thou born, this has befallen thy Father, thy Mother, thine
ancestors, to all men before thee, and to all that succeed thee. Will thou not
think to come thither at last, whither thou have been a going always? Epist.
24.
Nullum sine exitu iter est: there is no journey without an end. We make our
life unquiet with the fear of death, and such is the madness of men, that
some by the fear of death are brought unto death: we ought to fortify our
selves, that we love not our life too well, and that we hate not death too
much: and when reason advises us, to dye, and not to fear. Vir fortis and
strenuus non fugere debet de vita, sed exire, a man of courage and spirit
should not fly out of life, but go out. Epist. 78.
To dye is not glorious, but to dye courageously is glorious.

Finally, Use 5.
seeing all men must dye, and seeing Christ will find them at the day of
judgment, as the day of their Death does leave them, it behooues all men to
prepare themselves for Death, that it may not hurt them, but rather help them.
To this end these things are to be considered, Rules of preparation against
Death. 1.
and performed.

First, he that would have comfort in his death, must believe in God the
Author of life, in Jesus Christ, who saues us from the power and evil of
Death, John 5. 24.
Verily, verily, I say unto you (says Christ:) He that hears my word, and
believes him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but has passed from death to life. And to Martha speaking of
himself he says, John 11. 25. 26.
I am the Resurrection and the life: he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lineth, and believes in me. shall never
die, meaning the death of the damned. Now Christ, who thus speaks to us, is
omnipotent, and true: Verbum eius ab intention non dissentit, quia Veritas
est: nec factum a Verbo, quia Virtus est. He is Truth, and therefore he
speaks, as he means: and he is Might it self, therefore he does as he
speaks. But he does profess and promise that those, that believe in him,
shall not perish by death, but live for ever: therefore we may be bold upon his
word, and should stir up our selves to believe. Note.
And let no man deceive himself: For he only does aright believe in Christ,
Who is a right believer, and who fantastical.
who believes him in his word and Sacraments, and in his Ministers speaking
according to his word. In vain it is for men to say or think they believe in
Christ, who believe not his Law, who regard not his Sacraments, who believe
not his Servants, declaring to them their Masters mind. This faith is not
faith, but fancy.

Secondly, Rule 2.
he that would dye the Death of the Godly, must repent of the sins of the
wicked. For without Repentance it is impossible to escape the damnation of
unrepentant Sinners. Ezekiel. 18. 30. 31.
Return (says God) and iniquity shall not be your destruction. Cast away all
your transgressions: For why will ye die? Qui per poenitentiam peccata diluit,
angelica foelicitatis consorsin aeternum erit. He, which by repentance purges
away his sin, shall be partaker (and says Saint Austen) of Angelical
happiness for ever. Five duties of a true penitent.
Now a true penitent person must be thus disposed. First, he must plainly
and from his heart confess his sins to God. Secondly, he must earnestly beg
Ezekiel. 18. 22.
If the wicked will return from all his sins, and do that, which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live, Note.
and shall not dye. It is not enough to set himself against one fault, but
against all, all, all, without exception of any. A Simile.
For one wing belimed may cause the whole bird to be taken, and one discase may
be the death of all the body: so one unrepentant of known enormitie, even
one (though there were no more,) may, yea and will be the ruin of the soul,
the destruction of the sinner. Fourthly,

Thirdly, Rule 3.
he that would dye comfortably in Christ, Iobn 3. 16.
should live obediently to Christ. For he that obeys not the son shall not
see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Now he, that will prove his
obedience unto Christ the Lord, must show it unto the Bishops and Ministers of
the Church, his Servants speaking unto them in his Name according to his Law.
Heb. 13. 17.
Obey them (says the Holy Ghost) which have the oversight of you, and submit
your selves. Certainly they, that dishonor, disobey, and disdain them,
dishonor, disobey, and disdain Christ their Master.

Fourthly, Rule 4.
it behooues us to weine our affections from the world: for the pleasures and
vanities of the world are very bands and boltes unto our souls, if we wed
our selves unto them, and they will make us altogether unwilling to depart.

Fifthly, Rule 5.
do good unto the poor and afflicted members of Christ Jesus; pray for them,
visit them, and advise them, help them, feed them, cloth them, Pro. 16. 6.
harbor them. By mercy and truth iniquity shall be forgiven, says Solomon,
Charge them that are rich, 1. Tim. 17. 18. 19
says Paul, that they be rich in good works, and be ready to distribute and
communicate, laying up in store for them a good foundation against the time to
come, that they may obtain eternal life. That which is given to pore
christians, Note.
because they be christians, Mat. 25.
is given unto Christ himself, who will recompense our temporal gifts with
eternal glory. Pore christians are as a rich fieldif: the rich will sow the
seed of their charitable almesdeedes on them, A Simile.
they shall by the heavens blessing receive a plentiful crop of eternal
happiness. On the contrary, he shuts against himself the doors of Gods mercy,
Iam. 2. 13.
who will show no mercy to his afflicted brother.

Sixthly, Rule 6.
he that would have comfort in his death, ought to live, or at least to die in
the love and reverent affection to the Church of Christ: neither mean I only
the Catholic Church, part whereof is triumphing in heaven, and a part warring
on earth: but that true visible Church, in which he is borne and baptized, and
to the obedience whereof he is most properly called. English Papists and
Brownists are liable to damnation. for their obstinate Schism.
For I do very much doubt of the salvation of all such as dye unreconciled to
the church, out of love with that church, unto the love and obedience whereof
God does call them. Let our Papists therefore, Brownists and such like spirits
take heed unto themselves, how they live and dye, out of love and loyalty to
this church of England, whereof they should be loving and obedient members: but
unto which indeed they stand ill-affected, disobedient, and undutiful. They
malice her, they write and speak against her, they speak evil of her, and of
her chiefest members. I mean not to dispute of her lawfulnes and truth: this
is all I say: Note.
if she be found to be a true Church of Christ, as it will appear one day, I
do much fear that these her enemies, her slanderers, her disobedient and
unruly children, will not be able to stand unconfounded before her Head, Reu.
22. 12.
and Husband, Christ Jesus, who then will recompense to every one according to
his works, even everlasting life to them, Romans 2. 7. 8.
which through patience in well-doing seek glory, and honor, and immort
alitie: but unto them, that are Contentious, and disobey the truth,
indignation and wrath. It behooues us therefore for our better assurance of
comfort and salvation, to know the true Church, and to cleave unto it being
known.

Seventhly, Rule 7.
let a man set his house in order, and dispose of his estate. Isay 38. 1.
It was the last wise work, which Achitophel performed. 2. Sam. 17. 23.


And finally, when death seems to approach (if it give him any warning; Acts
7. 59.
as usually it does) let him commend his soul with Steven into the hands of
Christ, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, craving for mercy, and not forgetting
that the joys of Heaven, after which he gaspeth, are far more complete, and
are able to give a thousand times more true contentment to the soul of man,
then all the transitory pleasures, profits, and preferments of this world can
do. The death of the godly commended.
He that is thus composed for death, shall not dye, but live for ever: his
death shall be as a pleasant sleep: his grave as a bed: and his soul shall
rest in peace with Christ, till the time appointed for the Resurrection of our
bodies be fulfilled.

Oh that men would think of these things, practice these things! Would thou
have comfort in thy death? then seek and sue for comfort in thy life. Would
thou be armed against the fear of death? 1. Cor. 15. 56.
then dye betimes to sin: Death is a Serpent, her sting is Sin: pull out
the sting by true repentance, and thou needst not fear the Serpent: Death can
not hurt thee, if thou hurt not thy self by Sin. Note.
Death is not (Interitus) Death to the penitent, (Introitus) but an entrance
into heaven: and the way is made, and the door is opened by true repentance,
and by Faith in Christ, who is the Sun of our glory, and the Salvation of
our soul, by whose death letum delethum, mortua mors est) death is defaced,
Note.
and dead it self. But would thou give hope of the truth of thy turning?
then turn, whilst thou may run on, repent when thou might yet sin:
defer not thy turning till thy death, least it be thought that the world does
forsake thee, and not thou the world, and that sin rather leaves thee, then
thou do leave sin, and that the cause of this turning is, not the love of
GOD and godliness, but the fear of death, and the apprehension of damnation
only. Take heed therefore, and deal plainly with thy self. I know many men
think well of themselves, and would count themselves much injured, A false
imagination of sundry persons
if they should be censured as evil members, which yet how they will avoid,
I cannot see. This is my reason, they are notorious and ordinary prophaners of
the Lords day; even those hours, that are destinated to the public worship
of GOD, even those very hours, are misspent usually in eating and drinking, in
buying and sclling and gaming.

This is a mortal sin (stat against the Law of God and his Church) Ex. 20.
8. 10.
and is commonly practiced of many: how is it possible for these Sinners to
have any true comfort? How can they be saved? Undoubtedly so continuing they
are in the state of death, Romans 6. 16.
and not in the state of grace. 1. Joh. 3. 8. 9.
For he that oheyes sin is the Servant of sin, is not borne of God, does
not serve God. And there is no way to escape but by true repentance, Ezekiel. 18.
21.
which consists in Auersion from sin, and in Conversion unto God; Is. 1. 16.
17.
these are the two celestial Poles or Hinges, whereon repentance turns. I
name this one sin: but there are others, as drunkenness, whoredom and such
like, which bear sway with many, and if they look not to it, will sway and
weigh them down into the pit of Hell. It behoues us all therefore to look
unto our selves. Death and the Judgment are the things most certain: but
when, or how, or where our death shall happen, that we know not. If we should
be taken away in our sins, all the world could not save us: but if we repent
unfeignedly, then happy are we: death cannot come amiss: we may embrace it,
kiss it, welcome it: we loose the earth, but we find Heaven, we go forth
of the wilderness into Canaan, out of the Region of death into the Land of the
living, the everliving, we go from Sinners to Saints, from Men to Angels, to
God, with him to live in immortal glory, and in glorious immortality, in
that Kingdom, wherein all shall be Kings, and of which there shall never be an
end; unto the which, God for his mercy bring us through Jesus Christ, unto
whom with their Holy Spirit be all honor, praise, and glory this day and
evermore, Amen.

Having finished our discourse of Corporal (or temporary) death, it remains
that we say something of Spiritual, and Eternal deatb. Of spiritual death.


Spiritual death is either of the wicked, or of the godly.

The spiritual death of the wicked is a certain spiritual separation of them
from spiritual and Christian grace and goodness, when as they lie dead
(without all godly feeling) Ephesians. 2. 1.
in sins and trespasses, their hearts being alienated from God, Col. 2. 13.
and true godliness.

This is a most miserable kind of death: for they, that are thus dead, are the
Servants of sin, the Vassals of Satan, the Children of wrath, out of the
state of grace, and in the Region and shadow of death, liable to damnation,
which to escape they can have no hope, while they continue in that estate.

The spiritual death of the godly is threefold. The spiritual death of the
Godly, is threefold.


The first is, whereby they are dead to sin. This death stands in the
disallowing and condemning

This death is the separation of the soul from the approbation, What death to
sin is.
love and embracing of wickedness. It is of God through Christ, and with much
comfort and contentment. For he, that dies to sin, shall never die fot
sin: he that dies to sin, does live to God: and whosoever lives unto God in
this world, shall live for ever with GOD in the world to come. The preeminence
of a Saint.
To die to sin is to live a Saint: and precious in the sight of the Lord is
both the life and the death of his Saints. They be like the Mountain that was
not to be touched: Ex. 19. 12.
They that touch you (says the Lord) touch the apple of mine eye: Zak. 2. 8.
and we know that the apple of the eye is very tender.

The second Spiritual death of the Godly is Romans 7. 4.
and this is because the Law does not condemn them, Gal. 2. 16. 19.
Note.
that are in Christ Jesus, who by justifying us through his righteousness does
deliver us from the curse of the Law, and rids the conscience of those
terrors, which the Law might cause by sin unpardoned.

Gal. 6. 14.


The World is dead to them, When the World is dead to a man.
when as they dote not on the world, but contemn all worldly things, and
account them as nothing in comparison of Christ Jesus, and his benefits. This
death is very needful: for he, that lives to the World, lives not unto GOD:
and he lives to the World, to whom the World is not dead, but who doteth on
the World, shall perish with the World: he that lives not to God in this life,
shall not live with God in the life to come.

Godly men are said to be dead to the World, How a man is said to be dead to
the World.
when the World coutemnes them, hates them, persecutes them, and wishes (as it
were) to be rid of them. This kind of death is the ordinary portion of the
Godly. For they being not of the World, Job. 15. 19. and 16. 3.
but of God, whom the World knows not, and being but as Forrainers and
Strangers, it is no marvel if the World frown on them, 1. Pet. 2. 11.
and show her self an unkind Stepmother toward them, it is no wonder
though wicked Worldlings beat them, bite them, bark at them, and fly at their
throats: for thus Dogs use to deal with Strangers, which they know not.

And thus much we have seen what death is in respect of the World, to wit,
the Separation and abalienation of our hearts from the World, or of the World
from us: and so much also for Spiritual death.

The third kind of death is called Eternal death, Reu. 22. 8
or the second death, What eternal death is.
which is the Separation of the soul from God, or the everlasting punishment
of the whole man, consisting of soul and body, from the comfortable presence
of GOD, 2. These. 1. 9.
in hell fire.

The Prouider and Inflicter of this death is God, God the inflicter of eternal
death.
who is a most just Judge, Whose very soul does hate the wicked, Psalm. 11. 5.
and him that loves iniquity. Tophet (which indeed is Hell) is prepared of
old. Is. 30. 33.
He has made it deep and large; the burning thereof is fire and much wood:
the breath of the Lord like a River of brimstone does kindle it. By which we
see that Hel-fire is prepared, and kindled by the Lord.

Now God does not ordain and inflict death for it self, Note.
as if he did delight in death and destroying: but it is for the clearing of
his justice: for if wicked men should never be punished, they would imagine
either GOD is not, or that he is not just. But all the world shall know that
God both is, and that he is just, and therefore he will punish wicked sinners,
Romans 2. 5. 8.
and by that mean declare his just judgment against vicious wretches.

The deserving cause of death of sin, Death the fruit of sin.
as ignorance of God, disobedience of the truth, especially of the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, Romans 6. 23.
and obedience of unrighteousness, 2. These. 1. 8.
as the Apostle shows, as also want of charity, Romans 2. 8.
and charitable behavior toward the poor and needy members of Christ
Jesus, as he himself does teach us. Matthew. 25. 41. 42.
Neither are these sins only meritorious of death, but even every sin, though
the smallest want of that, which the law requires, is in it self odious, and
deadly. For the wages of every sin is death.

The persons subject to this death are all the Sons of Adam, Who are subject to
eternal death.
is as much as all are Sinners: yet all of them shall not die this death,
namely they that are redeemed by the blood of Christ, who by his death has
delivered them from this death, by them through sin deserved.

Those then shall die this death, Who shall die this death.
that were reprobated of God, and who by their wickedness and hardness of
heart, which could not repent, have treasured up unto themselves wrath against
the day of wrath. Math. 25. 41.
Depart from me, ye cursed, says Christ into everlasting fire. The cursed then
are they, that must die this accursed death. I never knew you says Christ,
Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. They that shall die this death are such
as Christ knew not, Math. 7. 23.
owned not, never acknowledged for his: and such as whiles they lived, were
very hypocrites, nourishing some sin or other in their bosoms, though they
did many glorious and good works, as preach, baptize, eiect devils, cure
diseases, and were perhaps of great account with men. The Apostle says that
the Lord Jesus will render vengeance at his appearing unto them that know not
God, 2. These. 1. 8.
and obey not the Gospel. So that all, which are ignorant of God, and which
disobey the Gospel of his Son, shall die this death.

This then I say, All impenitent sinners shall be damned, all that believe not
in Jesus Christ, as Mahometaus, incredulous Jews, and all other Infidels, and
all that profess Christ in name, but deny him in example: All these living
and dying without sound repentance shall die this death. And I prove it thus.
Ioh. 8. 24.
Except ye believe, says Christ, that I am he, you shall die in your sins:
Note.
but the Jews believe not that Jesus the son of Mary was the Messiah
foretold: therefore they shall die in their sins. He that obeyes not the
Son, Ioh. 3. 36.
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him: but neither Jews nor
Mahometans obey Christ Jesus: Therefore neither of them shall live, but die.
Peter being full of the holy Ghost said, Act. 4. 8. 11.
that Christ is the Stone, even the fundamental stone of man's salvation:
Neither is there (quoth he) salvation in any other: 1 Pet. 2. 4. 6
for among men there is given none other Name under heaven, Act. 4. 12
whereby we must be saved. All therefore, that either deny him, or believe not
in him, and do not know him, whether Jew, Turk, Persian, Moore, Indian,
American, or who else soever, all such shall be damned, cannot be saved. Isa.
53. 11
For by his knowledge shall my righteous servant (Christ Jesus) Gal. 2. 15. 16
Instifie many. And we, which are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the
Gentiles, know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ. God (says Saint John) has given unto us eternal life,
2. Ioh. 5. 11. 12
and this life is in that his Son. He that has that Son, has that life:
and he that has not that Son of God, has not that life. But Mahometans,
Jews, and Infidels have not that Son, therefore they have not eternal life
(in spe) and shall not have it (In Re,) In hope.
but so continuing shall undoubtedly die the damned death of the wicked, In
actual possession.
for ought that man can tell.

I say further, Note.
that those, which profess Christ in word and in show, but deny him by their
deeds, addicting themselves to wicked lusts, as whoredom, pride, drunkenness,
avarice, idleness, epicurisme, those (I say) shall undoubtedly perish without
mature and true repentance. 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10.
Know ye not (says Saint Paul that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor theiues, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor raylers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
But among Christians there are offenders in all kinds of the sins aforesaid,
therefore (if they shall die in them) they cannot possibly escape damnation. Our
Lord says, that The fearful and vnbeleening, the abominable and murderers,
whoremongers, Reu. 21. 8.
sorcerers, idolaters, and all liars (wherewith the Christian world abounds)
shall have their part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death. And finally S. Jude speaking of sundry wicked Epicures
cept into the Church, Jude. 4. 13.
says that for them is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

Thirdly, I say that all they which professing Christ do notwithstanding add
unto the faith of Christ, Note.
and coin articles, which they do propose as necessarily to be believed to
salvation, all such I say by this their presumption do cut themselus off from
Christ, and shall undoubtedly perish except they shall repent. In like manner
they that do take from the faith any essential point, and needful absolutely
to salvation, they also are subject to damnation, which without repentance they
cannot escape. Ye shall put nothing unto the word, which I command you, Deuteronomy. 4.
2. and 12. 32
neither shall ye take ought therefrom: It was twice at least given in charge
by Moses. When Moses was now dead, and the government cast upon Ioshuah, God
gave him the same lesson in effect: Josh. 1. 7.
Thou shall not turn away from it to the right hand, nor to the left. In like
manner Agur says. Put nothing unto his words, least he reprove thee, and thou
be found a liar. Pro 30. 6.
I protest (says Christ) to every man that hears the words of the prophecy
of this book, If any man how precise, how pure, how holy, how austere, how
sanctified soever he seem, or how learned soever he be, Reu. 22. 18. 19.
and wit tie in the judgment of men, shall add unto these things, How
dangegerous it is to tract or add unto the word of Christ.
God shall add unto him the plagues, that are written in this book, and if
any man shall diminish of the words of the book (he means the true sense and
substance of the words) of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of
the book of life, and out of the holy City, and from those things which are
written in this book. If any subject, or subjects shall presume to repeal the
laws of the kingdom, or to make new laws, and to urge men to receive and
obey them, the king in the mean time unacquainted with their proceeding, or
disliking it, A Similitude.
they show themselves busy bodies, rebellious, turblent: and taking upon them
as kings they incur the displeasure of the king, and deserve no better then
death it self: even so are they the Children of death, Note.
who teach their Traditions in the Church, which is the kingdom of Christ, for
the doctrines of God, and devise new articles of says not heard of in the
ancient Church, and press them upon us as necessarily to be believed, and they
likewise, who destroy the faith, or maime it by their subtractions, and
denialls of Articles necessarily to be believed.

Let them look to it therefore, As Anti-trinitarians, Arians
that deny the Trinity, or the Divinity of Christ, and which deny salvation
by Christ alone, and they, that teach worshipping of images, As Papists.
adoration of relics, prayer for the dead, transubstantiation, and all they,
that believe it is of necessity to salvation, for every Christian to be
subject to the Bishop of Rome, affirming all to be Heretics, that refuse him
to be their chief Pastor on earth.

Finally, No salvation for sinners during their impenitencie.
all wicked and impenitent Sinners without exception of any, shall dye this
death. Wit, wealth, birth, beauty, strength, friends, attendants, these things
cannot exempt them. Tophet is prepared for Kings, Isay 30. 33.
if wicked: and Christ (as Jude speaks out of an ancient Prophecy) will
rebuke All the ungodly. Jude 15.
Saul shall not be delivered by his crown, nor Nabal by his Coffers;
Achitophel shall not be helped by his counsel, nor Absalon by his beauty, nor
Haman by his honor, nor Caiaphas by his priesthood, nor any man by his
greatness, by his high Offices, and spacious Kingdoms. These things cannot save
the body from Death, much less able are they to save the soul from Hell. Nec
prece, nec pretio: the Judge will not be persuaded by prayer, nor blinded by
bribing, nor perverted by any mean, Reu. 22. 12.
but will reward every man according as his work shall be, Romans 2. 6.
without respect of persons.

The nature of this death is not easily to be described to the full: Eternal
cannot be fully described.
for neither has the eye seen, nor the ear heard, neither has it entered
into man's heart to conceive the panges and torments, that are prepared for the
wicked. Only they, that feel them, are able (if able) to express them.

Nevertheless seeing the Scriptures are not wholly silent, Three things about
this death to be noted.
we may be bold to speak by their direction.

First therefore the damned are deprived of the favor of GOD, 1. Paena damni.
and the comfort of his presence.

Secondly, Paena Sensus.
they do endure horrible and very painful punishments, both in Soul and
body.

Thirdly, Aeternitas Paenae
their pains are endless, their tortures abide without ease for ever.

All these three Saint Paul affirms in one Verse together, 2. These. 1. 9.
when he says, they shall be Punished with everlasting perdition from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Here is (Paena Damni)
the punishment of loss and lack at the least expressed, and the eternity of it,
if not also (Paena Sensus) the punishment of feeling panges, and torments: but
our Savior shows that the wicked shall suffer Everlasting Pain: Math. 25. 46.
and Esaias says that their worm shall never dye, Esaias 66. 24.
nor their fire be quenched. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Plane fltetus ex dolor, stridor dentium ex furore, They shall weep (says
Bernard) for sorrow, and grind their te-th through rage. Hell fire is full of
pain, and altogether void of comfort. In fire two things.
In fire there are two things, heat and light: Hellfire is hot, but dark: if
it give light, it is not the light of comfort, but of misery, to let the
damned see those things, which might affright and grieve them. Note.
But this fire is not (as I suppose) such fire as ours is, neither is their
worm such a worm as creepes upon the earth, or as is bred in our body:
Hellfire is not like our fires.
but it pleases the Holy Ghost by these words to point out, and as by
simitudes to show unto us the griefs and gripes of the damned, which shall be
with much pain and horror, as the burning of a fire, or the gnawing of
worms. Lib. 4. de ortho. c. 28.
The Devil and the wicked (says Damascene) shall be delivered up into
everlasting fire, Non materialem, qualis est apud nos, not unto a material
fire, as is with us, but into such as is known to God. And Saint Austen does
thus somewhere dispute about this point: Lib. de cogn. verae vitae c. 40.
If the fire of Hell be corporal, it must be fed by corporal fuel, which
being once wasted it also must go out, But it is certain that hellfire shall
never fail, therefore it is spiritual: but if it be a corporal fire, but by
creation everlasting, then must the souls of men feel a corporal fire

The Gluttons Soul in the parable was tormented grievously, Luke 16.
burnt extremely: but with what fire? with hellfire indeed; but it is
improbable that elemenrary or bodily fire could affect a spirit out of the body.

But let us not dispute what kind of fire it is, Note.
but rather study to keep our selves from feeling it.

This fire, Math. 25. 41.
says Christ, is everlasting, semper vrens, nunquam exurens: torquet, non
extorquet: punit, sed non finit: it always burns, but never burns them up:
it pains them but kills them not: it afflicts, but ends not. It is called
Ignis inextinguibilis fire unquenchable: for it neither is put out it self,
neither does it extinguish those, whom it does torment.

Hellfire ( says S. Gregory) seeing it is (incorporeus) not bodily, In 20.
cap. Job.
it is neither kindled by the help of man, nor fed with wood, but being once
made it continues unquenchable, and stands not in need to be kindled,
neither wants it heat.

Neither must it seem hard that the pains of the wicked must endure ever,
Note.
For though indeed their lives had an end, Why the death of the damned is for
ever.
some sooner, some later, yet if we consider the infinity of his person, whom
they sinned against, and again that their sins left an immortal and
indeleble stain in their souls, and finally the eternal auersion of their
wills, that if they had lived ever, they would have sinned ever: if we
consider these things (I say) it will appear there is no cruelty or injustice
in the Lord to punish them with eternal perdition, so as that their death
shall be without death, their wants without want, their destruction without
destruction.

And that, The companions of the damned. The Place.
which does aggrauate their misery is that their companions are no better then
the Devils, and the place of their abode no sweeter no better then Hell it
self, which of all places in the world is the worst, the habitation of Devils,
void of order, full of horror, vbi nulla spes boni, nulla desperatio mali,
where there is no hope at all of any good, and no despair of evil.

But yet in Hell there shall be differences and degrees of pains, Difference
of torments.
even as in heaven there will be degrees of glory: For pro disparibus
ponderibus peccatorum, Lib. 4. contr. Donat. c. 19. de Bap.
erunt etiam disparia tormenta paenarum) as Saint Augustine speaks according
to the different degrees of sins there shall be different degrees of
torments. The servant, that knows his Masters will, Luke 12. 47.
and does it not, shall be worse beaten then he, that knows ir not, and does
it not. Christ tells the Scribes and Pharisees that, because under the cloak of
Religion they preyed on Widows, therefore they should Receive the Greater
damnation: Math. 23. 14. 15
and says that they make their seduced proselytes Two fold more the children
of Hell, then themselves. And speaking of them, that contemn the Gospel
offered them, Math. 10. 15.
he says, It shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom and Gomorrha, in
the day of judgment, then for that City.

As for the situation of Hell; Where Hell is.
to say precisely where hell is, Isay 30. 33.
it is not easy: below it is doubtless, as may appear by sundry places of the
Scripture, Luke 16. 26.
and far from heaven: Reu. 9. 11. and 20. 3. and 17. 8.
but that there is an Hell, to wit, Number. 16. 30. 33
a place appointed for the tormenting of wicked Angels, Jude 6.
and ungodly men, it is clear enough: our chiefest care should be so to
demean our selves that we may never come there. 2. Pet, 2. 4.


And assuredly whosoever is in the state of grace shall never come into that
horrid place prepared Note.
Whom Hell shall not receive.
only for graceless and wicked people.

He is in the state of grace, Who is in the state of grace.
which depends wholly on the grace of God, which turns not his grace into
wantonness, which delights not in ungracious wretches, which makes much of
those means of grace, which God has in his Church: and finally, who out of a
grateful spirit does bestow himself, his soul and service upon God,
laboring tooth and nail with might and maine for the advancement of his
honor, and the welfare of his house, which is the Church, being sorry at the
heart that his service is so simple, his weaknesses so many, and his obedience
so imperfect as it is, Certainly this man shall not dye, but live eternally:
not hell, but: heaven shall be his habitation: God does honor him with his
grace in this world, and will crown him with eternal glory in the world to
come.

Trin-Vni Deo Gloria.
Because these few pages left untouched should not be lost, I have set down
some Positions which are not disagreeing from the matter handled.

The first Position.
Death is not the End of man, if we speak properly.
THE end is that properly, to which a thing is ordained, (...), Aristot.
or for which it is, But when God mad: a man, death was not the end he shot at:
dissolution is not the scope of Gods creation, nor of Parents generation.
Again, (...),
the End by it self and of it own natnre is only good: but death of it self
and in it own nature is not good, but the privation of life, which is a
certain good: death came in by sin, is the fruit of sin, 1 Cor. 15. 26.
and is (as the Apostle shows) an Enemy. which shall be destroyed as an
enemy: and therefore death properly is not good, but evil: therefore properly
death is not the end of man. Furthermore, Finis est, quod maxim volumus, that
is the end, which we do chiefly desire: but neither God nor man does chiefly
desire death. A good Christian desires death, not for it self, but to be with
Christ, to be unburdened of his concupiscence. Many men out of distemper of
mind and an ill-informed will do covet death, and kill themselves: but yet it
is not for death it self, but for some respect besides: as Cato Vticensis
killed himself with his own sword, because he would not fall into the hands
of Julius Caesar: Sophronia to keep her chastity from the lust of Decius the
Emperor, who daily assaulted it by her husbands consent slew her self: Portia
the wife of Brutus, unable to bear the news of her husbands death, killed her
self with eating burning coals: Labienus hearing his books were condemned to
the fire, killed himself, because they should not die before him. Siluius
Italieus murdered himself to rid himself of the torments of his grievous and
incurable disease. Pontius Pilate, being banished to Vienna, and feeling the
gripes of an accusing conscience, and fearing punishment for his misdeeds, to
prevent all, killed himself. These and such like are the ends of Selfeslayers,
and not death it self. And albeit God do appoint men to die, yet it is not
death he aims at, but the manifestation of his justice in punishing sin, of
his power in raising men dead to life, and for such ends, as are best known
unto himself.

To conclude then, Aristot. lib. 1. de Anima.
Death is not properly a man's end non (...) sed (...) not the highest scope of
Gods creation: nor a man's perfection or be atitude, which is the full and
final fruition of Almighty God: but it is a certain Extreme, or the end of
privation, which end is the corruption and the dissolution of a thing.

The second Position.
It is just with God to smite Sinners with death, even in the very act of their
wickedness, and with that wherein they do offend.
Cornelius Gallus and Quintus Elorius, two Roman Knights died (as Pliny lib.
7. records) in the very action of filthiness. Arichbertus, eldest son to
Lotharius King of France died, as he was embracing his whores. Anacreon the
Poet, a notable Drunkard, was choked with the husk of a grape. A certain
African caled Donitius eat so much at a Supper that he died there with.
Philostrates being in the Bathes at Sinressa, devoured so much wine, that he
fell down the stairs, and almost broke his neck with the fall. Alexander the
son of Basilius and Brother of Leo the Emperor, being a very belly-god, one
day having crammed himself too full, as he got up his horse, he burst a
vein, whereat flowed such store of blood that he died. These and many more
such are the judgments of GOD upon Sinners and are in him most just. For first
his will is the rule of justice: but these punishments he does will and
ordain (for there is no evil in the City, no punishment, which he sends
not): therefore these must needs be just. Romans 6. 23.
Secondly they are deserved: for the wages of sin is death: Note.
and in that God does not strike every Sinner alike, the reason is, because
he is tied to no Law, but is a Law unto himself, and may do what he will.
But sometimes he is pleased to smite suddenly, to terrify the wicked, and to
keep his own in obedience, and to let all men know that there is a God, that
judges the world, and hates wickedness, and wicked men.

The third Position.
A wicked man, though wickedly and cruelly murdered, is not not therefore
discharged of his wickedness unrepented of, and saved.
SEnacherib was murdered of his sons, 2. King. 19. 37.
yet for that his own Idolatry and other sins were not forgiven. For men are
not saved for any good thing either done by the^, or for any evil sustained of
them. The Eastern Emperor Zeno was such a loathsome Belly-god, that his wife
Ariadne fell to loath bim, and on a day as he lay senseless (as his manner
was) through gurmandizing, she got him into a tomb, and throwing a great stone
upon it, pined him to death. This was a just punishment of a glutton, in regard
of God, though unjust in respect of her, that did it. This then I say, If a man
out of the state of grace be murdered, or die by an iniust sentence of the
Magistrate, yet he is not therefore delivered from the sentence of God, but must
suffer as he has deserved; that his untimely death being also long of his
sin. And though a wicked man or one not within the state of grace may die not
deserving it of man, as Archelaus King of Macedonia, who was murdered of one
Cratenas, whom he loved dearly, or as that forenamed father was of Adrameleke
and Sarasar his sons, yet is this their death justly sent from God, whom they
knew not, worshipped not, served not, as they should have done. Yea their death
may be justly punished in their murderers (as Cratenas was himself also after
murdered) and yet death deserved at the hands of God. For though God and the
murderer agree in the act, yet not in their grounds and ends: God therefore
pursues the murderer, because he violates his law so souly, he not bidding
him, Why God punishes a murder, which he does permit.
but forbidding him to murder, and putting no malice into his heart to make
him murder, giving him no commission, but only a certain permission, which
God being Lord of all, and bound to no man, may justly do.

The fourth Position.
The number of such as shall suffer eternal death, is greater then of them
that shall be saved.
MAny are called, Math. 20. 16.
but few in comparison of them are chosen: now none shall be saved but the
chosen. There are, and have been many, that never had a verbal calling. An
infinity of people there is at this day in the world, as of Turks, Jews,
Indians, Tartars, and other savage nations, in number beyond Christians: and of
all that rabble there can be no hope of life, Ioh. 3. 18.
so long as they live out of the Church, Heb. 5. 9.
and by no extraordinary favor, Ioh. 27. 9.
know Christ, who himself does teach that the way of life is strait, Math. 7.
13. 14.
and found of few, but that the way to death is broad, and full of travelers.
And finally, even among Christians, only those shall be saved which embrace the
true faith, and are obedient unto Christ, in those particular true visible.
Churches, in which they were bred and baptized, and to the obedience of which
God does call and tie them. Now how few these are to heretics, schismatikes,
and other factious firebrands, and evil livers, as drunkards, fornicators,
earthwormes, idle and unprofitable wretches, the multitude of sins and
sinners which swarm like the flies of Egypt in City and country does
demonstrate.

The fifth Position.
Whosoever does simply and sincerely will and desire to be delivered from
eternal death, shall not die, but live eternally.
I Make it plain thus; Note.
he that wills the end simply and sincerly, does seek out means unto it, and
does use those means: for if he know the means whereby he may obtain his
desire, and yet neglects to use the^, and cares not for them, he shows his
desire is but confused, uncertain, and insincere. If therefore a man with an
honest and true heart do will, wish, and desire to live, and to escape death,
he will seek out means to accomplish his desire, and when he knows them, he
will be careful to use them. It is an old and true saying, Wishers and
Woulders were never good Householders: the meaning whereof is to tax the
foolishness of such, as wish and would, but will take no pains, will use no
means. An idle peeson would be rich, but he will not labor: a trewant would
be a scholar, Note.
but he will not study. The truth is that he, that indeed would enjoy a thing,
will use means to compass it: If then I would not die, but live, I must not
run on in sin, I must not distrust God, I must not disobey the Church of
Christ, and kindle coals of contention, I must not contemn the word and
Sacraments, but I must believe in Christ, repent of my sin, beg their
pardon, reverence my Minister, love my Brethren, and take heed I give no
offense. Ezekiel. 18. 21.
Now he, that does carefully use the means of life, Ioh. 3. 16.
and auosdes the ways of death, shall undoubtedly live, and not die. But he,
that says, I would live, I would not die, and yet goes the broad way, and
regards not the narrow path, this man surely is wrong: his will is not simple
and sincere, but confused and misshapen; and except he reform his course, he
shall perish notwithstanding his wishing and woulding. Note.
Tell me, if a man shall say, he would be in health, and yet will use no
means of health, no good diet, no labor, nor the like, but delights only in
eating, drinking, glouzing, sleeping, idleness; tell me, does this man indeed
will health, and a good temper of body? He does not doubtless: he may wish
health, but he will take no pains for it, which argues very foolishness.
Every man would be saved, who would die? Balaam would not: no man would: yet
in the mean time who uses the means? Who leaves his sins? Who fights
with his lusts? Who honors his Minister as the man of God? Who thirsts
after Christ? Who is loving and obedient unto the Church? Is not sin
committed and countenanced? Is not the Sabbath commonly, and notoriously
profaned? Do not oaths, drunkenness, pride, idleness, and hard-heartednesse
abound? And are not many to seek (as it were) in the Alphabet of religion.
They know not which is the true Church, which are the people of God, which is
his house. Note.
What miserable times do we live in! How vain is the world! Men would feign
live, they would not die, they say, and yet they care not for the ways of
life, whereas if men did truly and effectually will to live, and to avoid
death, they would not run the broad way, but would show themselves wise men,
that is, as well seek out and use the means as affect the end.

The sixth Position.
Though a man feel not the fruits and working of the Spirit in him, yet he
must not despair of life, and think he is ordained to death, and must needs
be damned.
A Man may be called before death, though now he be in sin over head and
ears, Isay 59.
and altogether void of mercy: Gods arm is never too short to save, his ear
is never too dull to hear: neither does any man know what the purpose of God
is. Paul was as bad as one God; did call him, and so was the Thief, that was
called on the Cross.

Again, a man may be in the state of grace, and yet sometimes feel no
comfort, Note.
no working of the Spirit, even as a man in a swoone or sleep does live,
though he knows not so much, and a child (we see) lives before it knows it
lives.

I say finally, what though thou feelst no grace? what though thou be
nothing so good, as thou should be? Will thou therefore despair? Is there
no way with thee, think thou, but death? Wrong not thy self: where is thy
faith? we live by faith, and not by feeling. It is not thy graces in thee,
that does save thee, it is Gods grace in Christ unto thee, of which grace thou
may be partaker, though thou feel no graces in thee. Note.
And know this, that it is not so much thy love of God and thy knowledge of
Christ, which is saving to thee, as Gods love, whereby he loves thee, as
Christ's knowledge, whereby he knows thee, who knows and loves thee before and
better, 1. Ioh. 4. 10. 19.
then thou can know and love him. And certainly, if thou do earnestly
seek and affect his grace, thou have grace: for it is a grace to desire grace:
and it argues that, if thou do truly seek Christ for Christ, thou have
already found Christ, or rather that Christ has found thee. And finally, what
if thou find not all the works of the Spirit in thee? Note.
If thou find but one, there is reason of quietness. If feeling no grace,
thou do feelingly desire and covet grace, one drop of grace, this is a grace,
a voice of the Spirit, and there is reason of comfort, and why thou should
not be dismaide. One green leaf upon a Tree will show the tree is alive, one
sigh does argue life. Note.
This then I say, if out of the want of Christ thou desire Christ, if feeling
the want of the Spirit thou do desire and pant after the Spirit, assure thy
self thou art not void of grace, Christ does love thee, the Spirit has taken
possession of thee: stand not in thine own light, be not over wise, but be
ruled, and remember that Christ cries, Mat. 11. 28.
Come, unto them, that are heavy laded, Mat. 12. 20.
and is so pitiful that he will not quench the smoking Flax nor break the
bruised Reed. ()

Trin-Vni Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

