THE TREASVRE Of Tranquillity.

OR A MANVALL OF Moral Discourses, tending to the Tranquillity of Mind.

Translated out of French by T. M. Master of Arts.

LONDON.

Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, for SAMVEL RAND, and are to be sold at his Shop
near Holborne Bridge 1611.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN LORD RAMSEY, Vicount of HADINGTON, The most
valorous Rescuer of our King: And to the right Noble and virtuous Lady,
ELIZABETH Vicountesse of HADINTON, his wife, Honors increase.
Right Honorable,
BEHOLD I bring unto your Honors, this English Treasure of tranquillity of
mind. It is a treasure, and therefore worthy of you, who in the judgment of
all those that full know your worth, are worthy of the best Treasure that
either Nature or Art, honor or wealth are able to yield, and howsoever it be
but a small one (for how shall a mean man give any great gift) and even so
small that easily ye may hold it in one of your hands (in which regard I
confess it is but too unworthy of your greatness) yet my wish is that it may
serve for a testimony, howsoever small, of that no small affection and
obseruancie which unto your Honors I do bear: till at what time some greater
token of my duty appear, and come forth into the light under the luster of
your honorable name.

This little Manual does entreat of such moral means as may further a man to
the attaining of true Tranquillity; the which the Poets have painted out for
the pretiousnesse thereof under the names of Nectar and Ambrosia, the dilicious
bread and drink of their gods, Thereby giving us to understand, that the
virtue and efficacy thereof is such that it is no less able to make men like
unto God by felicity, then were Circes sensual cups to transform men into
swine by carnal voluptie. In it one shall see how a man may best fortify
himself against the violent flashings of his affections and the unreasonable
and unseasonable vproares of his passions, and how he may attain unto the
conquering of the same, and to the knowing of himself. In it may likewise be
seen how and in what manner a man must carry himself about callings, charges
and employments, both before, and after his undertaking of them, how to order
the whole important actions of his life. It will show a man how to foresee by
providence and foresight all kind of changes, and chances that usually do
occur, and how to comport our selves in them, and to keep a correspondency
with them, by carrying our selves patiently in adversity, and moderately in
prosperity. Lastly, in it a man may learn how to correct, or cover humors, how
to make choice of friends, and how to make use both of other folks fortunes,
and his own. All which instructions and directions therein mentioned, in the
most brief and bright manner, may serve very much for the attaining of this
foresaid Tranquillity, The learned Bishop Don Antonio Gueuara in his Castiliane
discourse, dedicated to the King of Portugal, touching the miseries and
vanities of the Court, thinks it a matter almost impossible for a Courtier to
attain thereunto so long as he follows the Court, in regard of the manifold
vexations of mind, which there do arise, because of covetousness,
contention, emulation, and ambition which commonly at Court are so rife: the
which grave Bishops judgment, if it be true, then truly Courtiers stand in
much more need of such furtherances of true Tranquillity as this is, then do
other men, and yet I dare persuade my self that your Lordships own self does
stand in much less need of such moral helps, then many other do. For ye
are so far from covetousness (which moral Writers do commonly call the
cankerworme of Courtiers) that your bounty and liberality is every where
known, and deservedly spoken of: and so free from ambition the Burriour of
Courtiers, that your modesty and moderation is to every one more then manifest.
The rising and exaltation of men is usually subject to envy, but it is your
Lordship good fortune that no man enuieth your good fortune, yea rather men
wonder how that it is not much more favorable then it is, considering the
greatness of your extraordinary desert, and your unmatched moderation in this
your Lordships present preferment. In reuoluing and reading the Chronicles of
our Country written by our learned Hector Boece, and by our famous Lesly,
Bishop of Rosse, the ornament of our I Will, I find that the ancient name of
Ramsey has in former times afoorded diverse famous, and King-fauoured
personages, your Lordships Ancestors and honorable kinsmen, which have done
acceptable service to their Country and Kings. Such a one was sir Alexander
Ramsey of Dalehouse Knight, who in King David Bruces time, was a most virtuous
wight, and according to the signification of his name in Greek) proved another
Greeke-alexander even a most strong helper of men. For he is recorded to have
been the most worthy Chiefetaine of those days, and so renowned for his
prowess that every Noble man was feign to have his son or kins-man to serve
under him. Such a one likewise was Sir William Ramsey, preferred in the said
Kings time, to be Earl of Fife, and Sir John Ramsey master household to King
James the third, and his greatest minion and favorite preferred to be Earl
Bothwell, These and such others, no doubt but that they deserved well, each of
them in his place: but all Albion, yea all Europe knows that your desert is
of a far more notable kind. God who gives deliverance unto Kings and
rescueth David his servant from the hurtful sword, did use you as an instrument
for the rescuing of our Sovereign upon Mars his day, and in that town and
place, where once Cunedagius King of Britains builded a Temple unto Mars. The
two too martially, and mortally affected men on their Mars-day, and in their
Mars-towne, would have to their bloody Idol Mars sacrificed the heart-bloud of
their King: But God in heaven who is the true Mars, even the God of Hosts, and
the most mighty rescuer of Kings on earth, kept his servants heart in his hand,
and by your happy hand prevented the spilling of his blood, yea more, he made
themselves the bloody sacrifice, and you the sacrificer. On the fifth of August,
they thought to have made our Augustus to taste of death, and to guste of the
grave. But God turned the day of our Augustus danger into a day of deliverance
for him, and of destruction for his enemies, and as the Lord made it a day of
preservation unto our King, so has he made it a day of gratulation and
thanksgiving unto the Lord, for that his unspeakable favor. The same is
likewise the Calender day of commemoration of the most godly and devout King
Saint Oswald, who was a King full of piety toward God, and of pity toward the
poor, as Galfride Malmesbury, Polychronicon, and venerable Beda do write. And
who King Iames-like was an uniting King, even of the two divided Kingdoms of
Northumberland, Deira, and Bernicia, and a teaching, yea a Preaching, and a
converting King. For after his returning home out of Scotland, whether he had
fled for fear of his too strong foes, where he had enjoyed protection, with
Princely liberty, the space of 18. years, and where he together with his
brother Oswy with many other young Nobles had been christened and confirmed in
the faith by the holy Scottish Bishop Aidanus, as Beda writes, he wholly gave
himself to the conversion of his heathenish subjects to the Christian faith,
and for the same purpose he sent into Scotland for Aidanus, whom he made Bishop
of Lindefarne, and Primate of Northumberland, unto whom also succeeded diverse
other holy men of the same Country, namely Finanus, Colmanus, Cuthbertus and
others. Even this godly King was accustomed to expound the Sermons and
instructions which Aidanus made in the Scottish language, to his people in the
English Saxon tongue: so that with greater reason may he be called, the Prince
of Preachers, then was Henry the fifth called the Prince of Priests as
Chronicles do bear. For Oswaldus was not ashamed in his own person to teach
and expound to his people, the Principels of the Christian faith, and that in
public, whereas the most virtuous, valorous, and victorius Prince Henry the
fifth (the father of that most pious and patient Prince Henry the sixth) yea and
the flower of the whole Henry's, and most worthy to be a pattern for our young
hopeful Henry to imitate, was called the Prince of Priests, for no other
cause, but for that he did honor and respect his Priests and Prelates
exceedingly, and took a great care for their honorable provision like another
Ezekiah. This blessed King Oswald, though in the beginning he got a great
victory over his too strong enemies, being many more in number then he, at his
erected cross in Heauen-field; yet in the end he fell Iosiah-like by the
heathenish hand of wicked Penda the Mercian King, and that on the fifth day of
August, being but a little elder then our Sovereign was on that same day of his
danger, Good Lord! how great a lamentation was there made in the North, when as
holy King Oswald fell in the field of Maxfield by the hand of the heathenish
Penda the Mercian King? even such a lamentation as was made in the South when
good King Josiah fell in the field of Megiddo, by the heathenish hand of the
Egyptian King Pharao Necho? And what great mourning should there have been
made both North and South, if our Josiah, and our Oswald, being almost of the
same age with them, who were equal in years all save one, had fallen on that
day with them by the hands of those two conspiring Pendas, and by the revenging
hands of two hard-hearted Pharaohs? For as Pharaoh is as much as revenging in
the Syrian; so were they two set upon revenge for their father, as the younger
brother did confess. But it was the Lords will that they should prove Pharao
Nechos, and yet that in the mean time our Josiah should be safe. That is to
say, that our Sovereign should Iacob-like prove a supplanter of his enemies,
and so continue to be a Josiah, that is a burning light of the Lords to this
land: and that those children of revenge, should prove lame reuengers, and such
as were smitten, for so do these words of Pharao Necho signify. They plotted
mischief in their hearts, and they would have practiced mischief with their
hands: and therefore the Lord made them lame in their hearts, and in their
hands, even both heartlesse and handlesse: so that they had neither policy, nor
power to execute their intended, and pretended revenge, yea more they were
smitten both by your hand, who did hit them on the teeth, and thunder on them
so sore that those evil men were blotted out from among men, and cast away
like two forlorn castawayes, in so doing your worthy actions did answer unto
the signification of your surname: for as Ram signifies as much in Hebrew as
high and casting away, so does Rameses signify a thunder, a hitting in the
teeth, and a blotting out evil.

At what time the sun was in running of his Giants race, being mounted on the
back of the celestial Lion, even from Aries top to Pisces tail; and that
Albions Sun was running his race under Aries, (which according to Ptolomee, and
the Astrologians, is the celestial sign of this head-Ile of men, as it is of
the head of man,) being mounted on the back of a Lilly-bearing Lion, running
as it were, with the Leopard, from Kentire to Kent, and from Catnesse to
Totnesse, for the prise of the Rosen Crown: At that same time, and even when
as he was come almost to his rinks end, and ready to lay hold upon the prize,
the Devouring Lion began to roar and rampe, and never to take any rest from
compassing till he had stirred up some compassing Sheba against David, the
beloved of the Lord, as the word signifies: For Jacob has he loved. But
behold the Lion of Judah, who feeds among the Lillies, and takes pleasure in
the gathering of Lillies, (as the spouse in the Canticles speaks) even he
help his Lilly-bearing Lion, and put into your Lordships young heart the
courage of a lusty Lion for the confounding of the old Devouring Lions
instruments, our Lilly-Lions f^es. Thus the Old Lion missed of his project, and
the Lilly-bearing-Lion ere it was long wan the prize.

In the spring time, and in the beginning thereof, when all things begin to
spring and to sprout, the Lilly of the North began to spring, and to put forth
both a white and a red flower. When Phoebus, the bright eye of the world, had
begun in the sign of Aries to ouershine the whole Hemisphere, then our
Phoebus, the bright star of the North, began to ouershine Albions whole Isle,
which is under Aries: yea and is as the heauen-fauoured head of Islands, yea of
lands, under the head of Aries, as is likewise the head of man. And my wish is,
that the whole body of Aries may once full into his hands who has already the
head. Ptolomie in his Astrological Construction, and Pontanus in his
celestial things, will soon show a man what I mean. Our King he even
entered to this Crown about that time that Almighty God entered into the world
by the creation thereof, and our Savior entered into the world for the
renouatio^ of the same by the assumption of our flesh: even then (I say) when
as JESUS the son of MARY, began in his blessed mothers womb to make all
things new, JAMES the son of MARY began his new Kingdom. At what time the
Lord JESUS came down from God in Heaven into earth, amongst men to make an
Union between Heaven and Earth, God and Man, yea and between Man and Man (for
all God and Christ's actions aim at union:) at that same time came King JAMES
down from the North into the South, to make an Union between North and South,
and between Men and Men, I mean between his Northern and Southern subjects.

Who as he is sprung from the blessed Bed of the white-red-rosie union of two
royal Houses; so has the eternal Vnion-maker appointed him to be the
auspicious Author of a far greater Lilly-rosie, and white-red-crossie union
of two ancient Kingdoms. To the end that two (once warring and iarring)
nations, might be reconciled and united in allegiance and love, as they are in
religion and language. The which thing Merlin many hundred years ago has
clearly foretold in these terms: Pacificabuntur nationes Regni, and Leo ad
stateram sedebit: Bruti nomine vocabitur regnum, and nuncupatio extraneorum
peribit. The nations and people of the Kingdom shall be pacified and united
by the Lion that shall rule. The Kingdom shall be called by the name of Brutus
Britany, and the other name which forrainers, that is, the Saxons, or Angles,
brought in, shall fail. Yea, the same Merlin has likewise foretold long ago
the plantation, and conformation of Ireland, by his Majesty's means in this
manner: Sextus Hiberniae moenia subuertet, and nemora in planitiem mutabit, di
uersas portiones in vnum reducet, and capite Leonis coronabitur. The sixth
(says he) shall ding down the walls of Ireland, that is to say, the thick
woods, forests, and trees thereof, by turning them into arable ground. The
diverse portions of it shall be brought into one, and it shall be crowned with
the Lions head.

The which prediction; me thinks, ought rather to be understood of our King,
who is not only descended from the ancient Irish Kings, no less then from the
English, British, and Scottish; but also is the sixth of the name of James,
bearing a red Lion in his Arms, and has also taken order for that foretold
plantation of Ireland: rather I say, then to understand it, and expound, it
with Alanus Magnus, of King Henry the first. Except he had meant it of our
hopeful flower of Princes, Henry the first Prince of Cambria, and of Cumbria,
Albions young Lilly-rosie-Lyon, and the first of that name since the Concord, as
the other was the first of the same name from the Conquest.

Finally it was but a few days after the festival time of the blessed and
glorious Saints (according to our English Calender) James the brother of John,
and Anna the mother of Mary, that Satan Herod-like thought and sought to have
killed James, the happy son of a matchless Mary, and the memorable mother of
great Britains greatest grace and united glory; and Anna likewise, a graceful
Mother of rest, according to her name, and the happy mother of so many hopeful
children. That great enemy of kings, yea of all mankind, I say, thought even
at that time to have slain both of them, James with the edge of the sword, and
Anna with endless sorrow. For he was sorry to foresee how that a golden-rosie
crown should be set upon their happy heads at this holy time. But the Lord
has preserved both (and long may he preserve, both.) and at that festival
time, at which satan thought to have feasted upon their fall, he made their
crown to flourish; for he set a rosy crown of pure gold upon their heads,
and clothed them with glory in the eyes of all Albion, yea, of all Europe. And
he that has set the Crown upon their heads, will keep it on in dispite of
the devil, and of all such blind-zealed passionatists, (I will call them no
worse) as have either sought, or shall seek hereafter to hurl down head and
crown into the dust, or to blow all up into the air.

And not only has the great King-crowner set upon his servants head a crown:
yea a triple crown of Union; but also he has put into his hands an Harp, the
which as Orus Apollo writes, is the hieroglyphicke, or symbol of Concord,
(for our God is a God of Concord, and our King is a King of Concord) to the
end that Dauid-like by the musical melody thereof, even by the gentle
moderation of his patient and peaceable mind, and by the pithy and pleasant
persuasion of his eloquent mouth, he may chase away Saul's evil spirit of
malice and murmuring from our minds, and make all our partialities and private
respects to depart, to the end; that Judah and Israel may be made one perfect
people in union and affection, as well as in subjection; and in love as well as
in religion. And truly if we be not worse-spirited then Saul was, and more
ungratefully affected then he, David's harping must at last chase away the
unclean spirit of Division from our heads, and bring home the clean and quiet
spirit of Union into our hearts, that in the end both North and South may join
hands, and sing to the praise of the God of Union, that sweet harmonius song
of Union: Ecce quam bonum, and quam iucundum fratres habitare in vnum.

O how happy a thing it is,
And joyful for to see,
Brethren together fast to hold
The band of Unity.
And truly David deserves a far better requital at our hands for his
harmonious harping, then that any of his passionate patients, whether North or
South, (for it is not the South alone that is auerse from Union) should with
graceless and gratelesse Saul, seek thus to wound his heart with the sharp
spear of obstinate opposition. And yet for all this he leaves not off
Orpheus-like, with the harmony and melody of his harp to charm and tame the
wild beasts of our iarring affections, passionate oppositio^s, and timorous
apprehensions, to the end that the Lion and the Leopard may be for ever made
faithful friends, and may even brother-like live and lie together (to speak
with the Prophet Isay) yea and dwell together as it were in one den.

Our Orpheus is laboring by all means with the harmony of his Harp, to turn
our swords into sithes, and our spears into spades, to the end that there be
no more hurting or fighting hereafter in Albion among our selves, and that all
former troubles and bypast quarrels may be forgotten, according as the
Scripture speaks. But if we will needs be more vncharmable, and untameable
then were Orpheus beasts at the sound of his Harp, then we shall have good
cause to fear, least we both prove at home, and be called abroad brute-anes
indeed. For if we will bite and backe-bite one another like dogs in the
beginning; beware least like the Lion and the Leopard, we consume one another
in the end. The which evil thing, I pray the God of Sion, and the God of
Union, who is likewise the God of Jacob, even of our Jacob, and of his Albion,
yea and of his Albions Union for ever to forbid.

The Lord who is the Author of Union, and whose nature is Union, as his number
is Unity, had purposed to make his servant the instrument of this Union. Even
Jesus the Prince of of peace, who is our peace, and has made of both, one, by
breaking down the stop of the partition wall, (as the Apostle speaks) he
had appointed to make James his servant to be Britains peace, and to make of
both kingdoms one, by breaking down the partition wall of partialities,
oppositions, passionate affections, and private respects. That great
King-crowner, and matchless Vnion-maker, I say, had even determined to adorn
and decore his servants head with an Vnion-diademne, whose price (like unto
King Lemuels virtuous woman) is far above the pearls. And hence it is, that
his enemies, which imagined mischief, and intended evil against his sacred
person; in the North to hurl him down into an hole, in the South to blow him
up unto the Pole, could not prevail.

Thus we see our sovereign graciously preserved, and in a manner gloriously
transfigured in the sight of his loving subjects, at the same time that our
Savior was most gloriously and visibly transfigured upon mount Tabor in the
sight of his three principal Apostles, Peter, James, and John. I say he was
in a manner transfigured at that same time, because at that same time, of a
supposed dead man he was found to be alive, and in effect did pass, or was
translated from death to life. Yea more, of a Prince he was transformed into a
Preacher, and a publisher of Gods powerful preservation, showed in his own
person, and of his praises for the same in the mids of the Congregation of
the people. The which he did perform in the most public manner, and in the
most public place, even upon the crossie Mountain of purity and contrition
(for so does the word Tabor signify,) I mean in the mids of the choysest
and purest City of the North, Edinburgh. At which time he appeared more
precious, and glorious in the eyes of all his loyal and loving subjects, then
ever he had done before. Yea even so precious, and so dear, that the eyes of
the multitude could not be satisfied enough with beholding him, both when as
he was upon the Crossie-mountaine, and when as he was come down.

True it is, that there were some which could not at first with incredulous
Thomas be persuaded of the Truth, except that they had either seen or felt the
very wounds and blows upon our Sovereigns Body, neither could be brought to
give trust to the true testimony of a seeing, yea a touching Thomas, even of a
Noble Earskin an honorable branch of honor (according to the Saxon
signification of his surname) I mean my Lord Vicount Fenton, then a valourous
Rescuer of our King, and now the worthy Captain of his Guard, and both then
and now, one of his Highness best deserving servants. Neither could the
testimony of your Lordships own self, a seeing, yea a touching John, prevail
with them, though your testimony was even sealed, not only with the
conspirators blood, but likewise with your own, whereof ye had the marks then
to show, and as yet still keep the skarre thereof in your skin. But both,
these have been better informed since, and the better part then, was fully
persuaded of the Truth, and esteemed that they had received, as it were, a
voice from heaven in this notable preservation and real transfiguration of
their Prince. This is my servant in whom I am well pleased, obey him, honor
him, and thank God for him: yea all his good subjects and servants there
present said in effect with Peter, James, and John, It is good for us to be
here, It is good for us to be here to see our King in safety, it is good for
us to have such a Lord as the Lord loves, such a master as is Gods servant,
and such a King, as the immortal King keeps. And the King himself: it is
good for me to have such subjects and servants, as love me so dearly that they
cannot be filled with looking on me, after my danger, and delivery, and it is
good for me to have such a foreward and toward servant in my need and at a
pinch as my young Ramsey. And truly my Lord even as your Christen name
signifies Grace, and the place where first your virtue did appear, signifies
the town of Grace, and as the person in whose cause it did appear is a Prince
full of Grace; so me thinks that God has wonderfully graced you in that he
would have your virtue to appear in this kind, and at that time: and in that
he would have the beginning of your Lordships exaltation to fall out in the
time of his sons glorious transfiguratio^: for even then did the Lord begin to
call you up from the low valley of worship, into the high hill of honor, where
ye were transfigured from the condition of the Kings Page, unto the Kings
preserver. Whereupon, of a Gentleman by birth and blood, ye were within a
while made a Noble Baron, yea and a worthy Vicount: and that which I had almost
forgot (pardon me I pray you, for it is because your Ls. order has not a
particular or patronal name) of a virtuous Squire ye were dubbed a courageous
Knight. And though you be not of any patronized order, as of the Palestinian,
White-crossie order of Saint John, according both to your Lordships name, and
the name of the place (being called S. John's town) where your virtue and
knightly valor did fist show it self, nor yet of the Castilia^ Red-crossie
order of S. James, according to the name of the festival time, near unto
which your Lordships virtue did appear, as also of the person, in whose cause
ye did so generously, and valourously venture your self, nor yet of any of
the two Aragonian orders, the one Black-crossie the other Red-crossie,
instituted by James King of Aragon, though I say your Lordships Knighthood has
not any such note or name, yet I am assured that all worthy personages will
honor your Knightly courage, and defer unto your virtue and worth, and
acknowledge you for King James his rescuing Knight: and this will serve you in
steed of a Saint James or a King James his order of Albion. But to shut up, at
last, my discoursing dedication, for the tediousness whereof I must implore
your Lordships, and the courteous Readers favorable excuse: as I honor your
Lordship for your worth, and your well deserving of our King, and whole
Country, both North and South; so must I tell you, that you are infinitely
beholden unto almighty God for your good fortune: whether ye regard your
Lordships honorable exaltation, or yet your happy association in marriage with a
graceful Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of the Noble Earl and Countess of
Sussex. The which your Lordships alliance with so ancient and honorable an
house, I doubt not but ye do esteem as one of the chiefest degrees of your
Lordships earthly felicity. Your Lordship knows who has said it, honorantes
me, honorabo, such as honor me, I will honor. Go on therefore in proouing
thankful unto God for the honor which he has already given you, and yet
he will give you more. For according to the measure of your honoring of God,
shall God make you to be honored of man; it is an easy thing for the great
King of hearts to open yet a wider door in our Salomons large heart to let you
in, and when he has once opened the door, it is as easy a thing for him to
shut it so fast, that ye shall never go out of it, for he that has the key of
David which opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens: has
also the key of our David's heart in his hand, and he opens, or shuts the
same, when and to whom it pleases him. Your Ls surname was one of those that
did favor the right of Edgar Etheling in England to the English crown at the
Conquest: and therefore was forced to sly with Edgar into Scotland, as our
renowned. Leslie Bishop of Rosse, and Hector Boece with others, do write. And
in Scotland it was endowed with lands, livings, and Lordships, and decored with
Titles of honor in the persons of diverse of your Ls honorable ancestors and
kinsmen, as I show in some particulars mentioned above, though not in all. And
now again it is come into England, whence once it did spring, to revive, now
after the Concord, the ancient honor which it had before the Conquest, in your
Lordships noble person.

(...) that even as God has made you the instrument of much honor and credit
unto both countries by the means of your virtue, and rescuing hand, so may ye
bear or reap the fruit of honor in both Countries. But least I seem to
some to speak too much, here I stay, wishing unto your Lordship, and your
worthy Lady for your stay, the fullness of Gods grace (according to the
signification of your two christen united names) together with the highest step
and top of stable honor; and so I rest.

Your Honors right devoted to all humble duties. JAMES MAXVVELL.

The Contents of this present Book.
DISCOVRSE I. HOw we must prepare our selves against the assaults and onsets of
our passions. DISCOVR. 2. Of the choice of callings, charges and affairs,
DISC. 3. Of providence and foresight. DISC. 4. Of each man's vocation and
calling. DISC. 5. Of a man's ruling and ordering his life. DISC. 6. Of the
diversity of actions. DISC. 7. Of the choice of friends. DISC. 8. Of
dissembling and disguising of humors. DISC. 9. Of Vanity. DISC. 10. Of
prosperity. DISC. 11. Of comparing of our fortune with that of others. DISC.
12. Of adversity. DISC. 13. Of sadness and sorrow. DISC. 14. Of the
afflictions of good men. DISC. 15. Of other men's faults and imperfections.
DISC. 16. Of injuries, indignities and wrongs. DISC. 17. Of poverty. DISC. 18.
Of death our last discourse, and our last debt.
Errata.
Page 4. for tried, read had. page 26. for ever read even. 34. for ever, read
never. page 86. for continuance, read continence. page 92. for cannot, read
can. page 104. for wretchlesly, read retchlesly. page 130. for mighty visions,
read nightly visions. page 140. for misteeme, read misken. page 150. for to
iue, read to live. page 153. for the fore, read to the fore. page Ibid. for
riotous, read with riotous.

Such faults as are in the pointing, the diligent Reader will easily espy, and
as I hope, courteously excuse.

A Manual of Moral Discourses, tending to Tranquillity of Mind,
DISCOVRSE. 1.
How we must prepare our selves against the assaults and onsets of our passions.

CONsidering that our happiness on earth does hang (next after the knowledge of
Christ) upon our actions, and that the soul is, as it were, the Fountain and
wel-spring thereof; our chief care (if we desire to live an happy life) should
be to make the better part of us quiet and calm, endeavoring by all means, that
it be not troubled, nor diseased by vulgar and popular opinions, as being
things much contrary to the excellent nature thereof.

There are two times, the one of prosperity, the other of adversity, wherein
the soul is wont to be vexed and tossed, with the passions of the inferior
part, as with so many violent and impetuous winds. And therefore we must herein
imitate the Mariners, which before they loose off from the port, do furnish
themselves with all things necessary and needful for resisting of the tempest
and storm: so must we provide our selves aforehand of such sound and
substantial discourse, as may anchor and stay the mind against the push of our
passions, when as they, like so many surging waves, do, nil we, will we, fling
themselves aboard into our boat, and even as Xenophon did exhort his fellow
Citizens to sacrifice unto God in the time of prosperity, to the end they
might find him the more ready and favorable when as they should inuoke him in
their adversity: So should we do, and withal, at our first leisure, we must
contract acquaintance with rectified reason, to the end, that when we shall
stand in need of her aid and asistance, she may come running to us at our
call, as knowing us by our voice, and having already an affectionate and
earnest desire for our defense.

The discourse of rectified reason is the master and daunter of all peevish
and perverse affections or passions. For, when as we have once taken good
notice of them by an earnest examination and trial, made and tried touching
the same; and that we have ripely and advisedly weighed both what power they
have over us, and what Empire we hold over them: They are not thereafter so
fierce, and furious in our behalf, but are more easily, and with much less
ado appeased and pacified. They therein not a little resembling our little
dogs, which will bark incessantly at such as they are wont to see, but by
and by are quieted as soon as they hear the voice of such as they know.

The wise have compared the commandment of the mind above this sensual and
terrestrial part of the soul, out of which our passions do spring, unto the
office of a Rider, who teaching, and training his horse, and sitting within the
saddle manageth and turns him at his will. But small credit should the Rider
receive, that should bring to the Tourneyment or Tilte a young horse, which had
never before borne the bit, nor galloped in the round, But he must needs in
the first place break him by convenient discipline, before he use him in any
errand or action of importance. In like manner before we put our backs under
the burden of any business, or expose our selves unto the public view of
the world, we must endeavor to break and bring under this wild and vnbacked
part of the soul, and make it, as it were, to bite upon the bit, by bringing
it to learn the laws and measures whereby it must be managed, and maistered
in all occasions, and at all occurrences, and in the mean time we must not
forget to enhearten and encourage it, by acquainting it with the pleasure and
contentement, wherewith is accompanied the issue and end of all worthy and
virtuous actions.

Meditation and Discourse is that which gives an edge unto the soul, and
makes it steelehard and vnpierceable, even unto the sharpest point of the
strongest passion, and usually we prove admirable at every such exercise as we
have before hand accustomed our selves unto, what difficulty soever it may seem
to carry with it. On the other side, there is nothing (be it never so easy)
which will not seem hard and difficult, and withal much trouble us, if it do
find us but nouices, and new apprentises therein. How often think ye, must
Canius have needs thought upon death, and reuolued in his mind what thing it
should be, who being condemned by the Tirant, and sent to the place of
execution, was so far from being any whit dismayed thereat in his mind, that
merrily, and as it were iestingly, he bid the Centurion, who came for him,
remember that he was stronger by the advantage of one table, then he against
whom he played at that hour? And who taking his leave of his nearest and
dearest acquaintance, for his last farewell, uttered no other words but these:
Now my dear friends, I shall presently find that which I have so long longed
after, and so much desired to know, if the soul be immortal, and whether men
in dying, do feel the separation of the Soul and Body which they endure? We
must needs think that this poor Pagane had a long time exercised himself in
commanding, and ouer-ruling his passions, and that he had aforehand armed and
fenced himself with fair resolutions, seeing that with such constancy, and
gravity he went to undergo a death both cruel and unjust. If the only desire
to understand, what should become of the soul after death, could make the
torment, and torture not only tolerable, but also acceptable unto him, what
resolution then ought the certain and assured knowledge of the souls
immortality, together with the hope of eternal felicity work in such as do
seriously meditate upon the same in their minds? May not these goods, think
ye, make unto such minds not only supportable, but even comfortable and
delectable, both death it self, and all other disasstrous afflictions, which
they endure, seeing they are as the waves which do push us forward unto the
sweet and sure port of everlasting rest and repose?

DIS. 2.
Of the choice of Callings and Affairs.

MAn is not borne to live his arms a cross, but rather, as one of the fairest
members of this fair frame, he must confer, and contribute his whole travel
and pain to the conduction and conservation of that civil society and
condition wherein he is placed. But because that of the choice which men make
of a calling, their rest and quietness does principally depend, and that
nothing does so much avail to the leading of a contented life, as when they
find themselves fit for the same: they ought, me thinks, before all other
things, to take a trial of their own strength, and seriously bethink
themselves of that charge which they are about to embrace. Because usually we
presume too much upon our own power, and attempt more then our ability is fit
to atchieue. And this error we see is incident almost to all our actions: hence
it is, that some will dispend more then their means may well bear: Others in
laboring and toyling go beyond their abilities; some are not masters of
their own anger; others there

DISC. 3.
Of providence and foresight.

Ye must take order that ye be not surprised of any human accident, whereof
(if it be possible) ye have not been beforehand prudently foreseen, which
thing ye shall easily perform, if in all the affairs ye shall take in hand,
in the first place ye do diligently fore-bethinke your self of such
inconveniences and cross encounters as may fall out in the same, according to
the nature, quality, and ordinary issue of the affairs: and certainly such
foresight does maruailously mittigate, sweeten, and abate the sharpnes, and
harshnes of all such sinister accidents and chances: the which cannot bring you
in so doing any sensible, or notable alteration and change, by reason of their
not coming upon you as unlooked for, But contrarily they do not a little
endamage such persons as suffer themselves to be surprised, neither do consider
how that nature sending the^ into this world, has allotted them rough, and
uneasy seats. Such men do not mind how that about their own doors many
times they have with their eyes seen the loving wives weeping and bewailing
their deceased husbands, and the husbands with dewy eyes burying their beloved
wives, and dear children. They do not ponder how that such persons as did
yesterday walk, and talk with them, to day dead, lie buried in their graves.
So apt are we to be deceived, and so little foresight have we in our own
fortune, that what we see daily with our eyes happen unto others, we never, or
sildome consider that the like may befall our own selves.

If we would take such notice of things as we ought, we should rather find
occasion offered us to marvel how that disasters, and dangers, which do
follow us at the heels, have delayed so long to overtake us, and having
overtaken us, how it could be possible that they should have handled us so
harmlesly, and gently as they have done. O how grossly we deceive our selves,
when as for fear that men take us to be timorous and fearful, we think ill
to forecast and foresee dangers, and will not a whit mistrust our own
judgment! It behooves the man who is minded to make sail, to know that he
is in the possibility to have a storm, and we must know that the chance which
has happened to one may likewise befall unto us, and that which hangs over the
heads of all, may fall upon any one of us all, without exemption or exception
whatsoever. The man who marketh well another misfortune as a thing which may
no less befall unto himself, then it has already done unto his fellow, has
this advantage, that before any such mischance take hold of him, he is already
armed against the fury and force of the evil. Then were it too late for a man
to make head against a danger, when it is already come, and bootlesse should it
be for him to say, I did not think, forsooth, that such a misfortune should
have befalne me. And why so I pray you? is there any wealth in this world
which has not following after at her heels poverty and need? or is there any
health that is not apt to be diminished by a lingering disease? or any honor or
grace which is not inpossibility to be turned into dishonor and disgrace? or
what high rising is there which is not apt to have a doleful down fall? or is
there any estate from the pedlar even to the Prince, exempt from alteration?
and that which has befalne to one may it not likewise befall unto another? It
were a matter both tedious, and contrary to our design, to discourse of such
as fortune (if so we may speak) from high rooms has brought low, and of
mighty men in a moment made miserable. In such a variety and vicissitude of
matters, if ye do not fore-bethink your self, how that all humane accidents
may touch you, as well as others, ye give adversities great power over you, the
which by the prudence of him that foreseeth them are not a little abated, and
made more mild. Our minds out of question, should be in greater rest, if our
actions were occupied about such things as be of a more certain and constant
condition. For at least having once attained them, we should content our
selves therewith, and enjoy the sweetness and commodity thereof, in tranquillity
and ease.

But seeing that in this world, all things are subject to tottering and
turning, and that there is nothing under the cope of heaven stable and firm:
the remedy most fit unto our infirmity is to foresee this instabilitie, and not
to passionate, and turmoyle our selves about those things, the possession
whereof is no less toylesome, and troublesome then was the acquisition and
purchase thereof. And therefore we must love them as things which may leave us,
and withal, we must have so much foresight that they never leave us the first.
When on a time it was told Anaxagoras that his son was deceased: I knew very
well, quoth he, that he was a man, and that he was borne to dye once. In the
like manner must we be prepared for all adventures. My friend has not
assisted me, well, I knew that he was a man, and one that might change. My
wife was very virtuous, and yet was she but a woman. The man that thus before
hand bethinketh himself of human accidents, shall never be taken at
unawares, neither shall he need to say, as customably the unadvised are wont: I
did not think of such a thing: unto whom the chances of fortune do occasion
much affliction and anguish, because they find themselves disarmed of this
wise foresight. The well-aduised Prince in time of peace makes ready his
preparatiues for the time of war. Ulysses ouerpassed many dangers and
difficulties, and yet none of them all did afflict him so soar, as one thing
which did take him at unawares, even the death of a dog which he loved
dearly. So that the common proverb we see proves true: That a person
surprised is half beaten.

DISC. 4.
Of each man's Vocation and Calling.

IT comes oftentimes to pass that such as do not think diligently of that
which they do, are seen to fall into such a kind of life as is paineful to
bear, and yet more uneasy to be abandoned. The which is certainly a great
difficulty, and a case that does require much prudence, and no less patience,
with piety to implore the aid and assistance of God; considering that patience
with humility in Gods behalf, is the remedy which most does lighten and ease
the evil. Consider the poor prisoners, what pains they endure in the
beginning to bear the burden that is laid upon their legs, but after that
they are once accustomed thereunto, necessity teaches them, and use makes all
such hard usage easy unto them. There is no manner of life, howsoever hard and
strict it be, which has not some kind of solace and refreshment, one or other
to sweeten the same. And truly there is not any one thing, wherein Nature has
so much favored us as in this; that she makes us to find the remedy, and
mittigation of our misfortunes in the sufferance of the same.

The case then so standing as it does, that man is borne obnoxious, and subject
unto all manner of miseries, we must consequently suppose that we are all of
us the prisoners of Fortune, who holds us tied, and fettered fast hand and
foot; and that there is no difference, saving that the fetters and chains of
some, are of gold, and of other some of iron. We are all of us in one and the
same prison, and those that hold others captive are in the like condition and
case themselves, in regard of others. If the desire of honor turmoileth thee,
the desire of riches does trouble another. If the baseness, and obscurity of
birth does afflict the, to others Nobility and greatness does bring a thousand
discontented thoughts: Art thou subject to the commandment and will of
another, that other is subject at least to his own, having his brains and his
breast beaten with ten thousand heart-burnings, and diseasments which thou
do not espy, in sum if ye mark all things well, our whole life is
nothing but a servitude wherein every one ought to take good heed how to
demean himself in his calling, and how he may content himself therein,
winking at that which is evil in it, and applying himself unto that which is
good. For there is no calling, howsoever painful and toylefull it be,
wherein the patient soul does not find some contentment and gain, though
that cunning and skill be more exquisite in time of adversity, then of
prosperity. For when as difficulties and crosses do present themselves, then
must we gather all the forces of our wits together, and set our whole vigor
and virtue against such imminent or present evils, reposing our whole
confidence in God. Jonas had ever leisure within the Whales belly to make his
supplication and prayer unto God, and was presently heard. In this manner all
accidents, howsoever grievous and uneasy they be, may be sweetened and lightened
not a little.

To this purpose also it is good that each one set certain bounds and limits
to the hopes of his life, and that he think with himself that howsoever
humane things be different and diverse for the outward semblance and show: that
nevertheless inwardly they resemble one another in their inconstancy and
vanity.

Bear not envy against such as are in higher place then your self, for
oftentimes that which we account height, is as a steep hill from whence a man
with very little ado is hurled down headlong. And truly such as have lived
content, have not been always those that have made the better choice, but
rather those who prudently and discreetly could carry themselves in that estate
and calling which they once made choice of, taking patiently the evil that
fell out therein, and endeavoring to redress such accidents as did cross
their desires, and for this cause Plato did compare the life of man to the play
at dice, whereat whoseuer does play, ought always to strive to have a fair
throw, and yet should content himself with any cast that comes. For seeing
that good or evil luck is not in our power, at least wise we must labor to
take cheeerefully our chance, and withal to thank God, for that the worst
that could, is not fallen forth. Men of weak wit, having fortune at will, are
so transported with joy that scarcely they know what they do, they are so
insolent, that no man can keep them company, they can abide nobody and nobody
can abide them. Whereas in the time of adversity they are so amassed and so
mela^cholious, that they are almost overwhelmed with sorrow and heaviness of
mind, ye shall see them like unto the sick of a languishing, and anguishing
disease, which can neither abide heat nor cold.

The Philosopher Theodorus was wont to say, that he gave his Scholars
instructions and lessons, with the right hand, but that they received them,
with the left, and so does it fare oftentimes not with a few, who with the left
hand take hold of the luck which fortune (I mean Gods providence) reaches
the^ with the right. It were much better in my judgment wisely to imitate the
wise diligence of the Bees, the which of Thyme which is but a dry and harsh
herb, do make the sweet and pleasant honey. So should we out of this harsh
and combersome life extract and draw whatsoever therein is good, and in the
mean time chase away what is evil therein, or case and cover it closly, and
who knows not but that such as are exercised in the actions of virtue can
draw, by a certain secret and supernatural kind of alchimie, good out of
evil? Diogenes was banished, but he made good use of his banishment, in that
he did in the mean time betake himself unto the study of wisdom. And this
shall not be so difficult and hard to do, as it seems to be, if by frequent
exercise ye do endeavor to acquire, the habitude and settled custom of living
content. Can ye not abide in the houses of Princes and great men? content you
then with your own. Do ye find your self incapable of government in the
Commonwealth? play then the good Citizens part and be content to obey. Thus
doing ye shall make unto your selves facile, and easy, that which most men
deem to be difficult and hard in the course of our life.

Moreover it shall much avail you in your discontentme^ts to represent unto
your self the great and famous personages of the time past: how and with what
wisdom, and courage they have remedied and borne the crosses and calamities
which befell them in this life, Does it displease you that you are destitute of
children? Consider how many Kings, Princes, and Potentates, have dyed without
issue. If poverty does vex you, weigh in your own mind, how many excellent
men have been likewise poor, who nevertheless have lived patiently without
co^plaining. On a day it was told the Philosopher Stilphon, that his daughter
had done amiss: the fault (quoth he) is not in me, but in her fortune and
mine. If the churlish and froward conditions of your own grieve you, set
before your eyes so many wise, honorable and illustrious men, as have quietly
comported with the importunities of theirs. Socrates had the most froward wife
in the world, and he said that, by enduring of her at home, he did learn to
be patient abroad. Look upon holy David a man after Gods own heart, who yet
was troubled and angered by his own children.

The world is full of such examples, and if we did not love our selves so much
as we do, it is certain that in the greatest crosses, and enco^brements of
this life, we should find comfort enough. For there is not any prison, how
dark or straight soever it be, which will not give place unto a song, to
refresh somewhat the poor prisoners perplexed mind. Finally, I say, that if
ye serve God and fear him, charity shall be able, of it self, to procure
peace and tranquillity unto your spirit: that which the whole world cannot
perform, although in word every one should offer you to do the same.

DISC. 5.
How a man must order and rule his life.

IT is expedient, in my conceit, that a man hold and keep a certain stayed
and settled manner of living, and that he vary not not with every wind. Ye
shall see many a one much subject to this vice of changing their manner of
living from day to day; so that they cannot ground or settle themselves upon
any thing whatsoever. Wherein they do resemble such folks as have ever been
accustomed to be at sea, who as soon as they begin to sail, run out of
one vessel into another, leaving the bigger to put themselves into a lesser,
and by and by leaving the lesser to return to the bigger again. And thus they
continue in changing, until at what time they know clearly that nothing can
fit them, because that whithersoeuer they go, their queasie stomachs does
keep them company, and consequently, their vomiting disease.

Likewise those that bring their passions with them unto their affairs, do
seek incessantly after a new manner of living, and never accomplish what they
have once begun. All things go against their stomach, all things displease
them, whether to be employed, or to be idle, to serve or to command, to be
married, or to be single, to have children, or to have none at all: finally;
nothing does fit their fancy, nothing does satisfy their desire, save only
that thing they have not: and such folk me thinks must needs live miserably,
and restlesly, as prisoners fettered in perpetual pain.

There is likewise another manner of men not much unlike unto the former, that
cannot keep themselves quiet, nor be at any stay, in any time, or in any
place. They cease not to go and come always intermedling with affairs,
without being thereunto called, and busying and bestirring themselves about
that which no wise concerns them. These men when they go out a doors, if ye
but ask them whither they go, they will answer you thus; I know not, I go to
do as the rest do. They run along the streets, they hant the public
places, and then they return home full of vexation and weariness, without any
design: for there is nothing that does so much irke and weary men's minds, as
to labor in vain. They are like unto the little Ants, which do graspe upwards
upon trees, and after they have mounted up to the top, have but the pain to
creep down again, the same way they went up, without bringing down with them
any good at all. Many do live in this manner, whose life is nothing else but a
boiling leisure full of tumults and toils, ye shall see them posting on with
such vehemence and speed, as if they would carry away with them all that they
find before them in their way. The public places, the Churches, and Markets,
are ordinarily full of such folks.

These be they which forge, and frame news at pleasure: they will be the
weighers of men's worthes, and the giuers of garlands. They will talk lauishly
of other men's lives, and discourse of other men's offices, keeping a babbling
coil. But the actions of a wel-aduised man te^d always to some certain end;
neither does he burden himself with more businesses then he can conveniently
put in execution. And truly the man that undertakes much, must needs, in my
mind, give Fortune much power over him.

DISC. 6.
Of the diversity of Actions.

MEn, me thinks, ought to take pains in inabling themselves to comport with
the time, and matters, according as they fall forth: and not to tie themselves
so much to one manner of living, but that in case of necessity they may well
leave it. For even as a man that is whole and sound, should not subject
himself to the keeping of one certain rule in his diet, but ought rather to
accustom himself to eat sometimes more, and sometimes less, at one time of
one meat, and at another time of another meat; to drink now of wine, and
then of water, to stay sometimes in the sun, and sometimes in the shade,
sometimes to labor, and sometimes to rest: so must a man frame and fashion
himself to all manner of accidents, for in so doing, any new accident
whatsoever, that can befall you (for there falls out an infinity of chances
in the course of our life) shall not trouble, nor disquiet you: yea though ye
be driven to betake your self to some other manner of living, yet shall ye do
it without much ado (providing always that temerity and rashness be away)
by reason that ye shall be so well inured thereunto before hand, that it will
be easy for you to give place unto the time that offers it self. And truly
the impotency, and weakness is all one, not to be able to change in time of
need, and not to be able to continue constant in a good course.

Moreover, we must mingle and temper our matters in such sort that they may be
fitted proportionably one to another. As for example. At one time to be
solitary, at another time to be in company, the one for our friends sake, the
other for our selves: for we must not always remain in our grave mood, for
that should make us to be abhorred: neither must we show our selves continually
iocund and glad, for that should make us to be despised. But we must carry our
selves discreetly, observing comeliness and conueniency of time and place, as
the life of man does require. For it is a needful thing for a man at one time
or other to recreate himself, by giving intermission to his more serious
affairs.

We read of Socrates, a most grave Philosopher, that he made no difficulty to
play and refresh himself with the little boys: and of Cato, a very austere
man, that sometimes he did feast his friends, thereby to refresh himself with
the pleasure of their company, and to recreate his mind, wearied with the
weighty affairs of the Commonwealth. Also of Scipio Africanus, that sometimes
he would delight himself with daunsing.

And this we have said to show that the mind of man requires some release.
Neither has that man his due liberty, who has not the means sometimes to be
at leisure. The fruitfullest grounds, if they get not leave to rest a while,
become barren in a short time. Continual labor makes the mind of man to
become slack and weak: even as lasinesse and luxury does make it heavy,
feeble, and faint. Our recreation ought to be as our sleep, which restores
our strength, and gives us breath to return more gayly, and joyfully to our
work. For if we should sleep continually, it should be a death and not a
sleep.

Those which of old did establish laws, have ordained there should be also
certain feast-dayes in the year, to the end men might in a manner be
constrained to surcease from the actions of their ordinary callings, and to
take their pastimes after their toils: and of old we find that many excellent
men were wont to allot some parcel of time to their recreation. Asinius Pollio
a great Orator was never so much busied in affairs, but he reserved for his
pleasure and pastime the two last hours of the day; during the which space,
he would not so much as read the letters which he received from his friends,
fearing lest they should minister unto him some new care and cogitation. Others
were wont to labor until noone, and the remnant of the day they did spend
about meaner matters. The lights which they distribute to servants at Court,
do like wise limit and bound the times appointed both for labor and rest.

There was a decree of the Senate of Rome, which did bear a prohibition that
no new thing should be propounded or mentioned in the last two hours of the
day. Furthermore, when a man is weary of his work, he does find himself
maruailously refreshed and restored when as he goes out into an open and
spacious place, and it seems that the free air does repair and renew the
strength and vigor of his dispearsed and spent spirits. For conclusion, ye
ought to love diversity and change according to the time, and take heed least
ye nourish, and cherish your mind too delicately and daintely.

For it having of the own nature great strength, providing that it be wakened
and rouzed up, it were not reasonable ye should suffer it through voluptuous
and delitious living to wax feeble and faint. And no sooner do ye come to that
point to be impatient and delicate, but as soon all things begin to cross
your good liking. To eat it goes against your stomach, to be hungry it
hurts you, to sleep it slays you, to be awake it vexes you: and as a
sick or queasie person, ye go on in a restless maze, always searching and
seeking after some new thing: such delicacie and tenderness has been the
cause that diverse have had much ado to comport with the very things which are
necessary in this life, as to lie, to sleep, to wake, to rise, to dine, to
sup, to talk, to walk, to cloth and unclothe themselves: so that some have
thought it a death to be always wearied in beginning a new again and so often
the same things. Such folks come to such extremities that hardly can they
manage, or maintain the manly courage of their mind; neither can they frame
themselves to all things, to know many things, to taste of many things, and
always in every thing to carry a good stomach. For in this case there is the
like reason and condition of the body and of the mind. Hence it is that ye
shall epsy some men so tenderly disposed, that a small noise of their
neighbor will annoy them, and the sound of a little bell will trouble their
brain. For as unto a crasie and ill-complexioned body, so unto, a drooping and
languishing mind it does semblably befall, that what thing soever touches it,
does prick it and sting it full sore.

DISC. 7.
Of the choice of friends.

SEeing that the life of man necessarily has need of friendship and fellowship
(for it were a matter both harsh and hard for a man to have always his mind
bended about business; and it should be yet more wearisome if he had not one
with whom he might take some release) I find that we prove commonly too
negligent and careless in making our choice. We ought in my judgment to choose
such folks for our friends as be of a mild and meek conversation, and who
because of their calm and quiet disposition do deserve to be loved. Neither is
there any thing that so much does content, and delight the mind of man, as does
a faithful and trusty friendship. For it is a great contentment to find a
person so disposed, unto whom ye may safely impart your most secret affairs:
whose counsel may advise you, whose cheerfulness may qualify all your cares,
and whose presence may appease all your pains, and expel your pensiveness of
mind: and therefore ye must endeavor to choose such friends as are free from
covetousness, and all notorious vice. For vice like the fire takes hold of
that which is nearest unto it. So that we must do as men are wont in the time
of plague and pestilence: which is to separate and sever the sick from the
whole: it being a contagion and an occasion of sickness to let them live
together. Nevertheless I do not like that we should be in our choice too
scrupulous, but seeing we cannot find folks altogether perfect, we must hold
those for good which be less evil.

But in the election of friends, ye ought chiefly to avoid such as be extremely
sullen or sad, who weep and wail at all things: and despair of all things,
alalthough otherwise they be such as do love you, and would prove faithful
enough unto you. For it is a thing that must needs trouble us much to have such
a man for our friend as is always sad, sighing and sobbing at every occasion.
For seeing that friendship, and fellowship is ordained to drive away
discontent, sorrow and grief, it were neither reasonable nor convenient to
choose such a one for your comforter and friend, as in stead of delighting you,
and of lightning your grief, should by his sullenness and sadness increase
your sorrow, and every day occasion unto you some new vain apprehension and
fear.

DISC. 8.
Of dissembling or disguising of humors.

IT is a great pain and a restless molestation of mind, for men to labor to
appear different in show from that which they are in substance. And a
marvelous trouble and torment it is for them to take always heed unto
themselves for the fear they have to be discovered. Look how often men look
on them, as often do they think that they are espied: so that in the end it
falls out that, nill they will they, they do bewray what humor and
inclination does bear rule in their breast. The excessive care they have to
hide their natural humor, puts them to an inexplicable pain: and again to
be discovered it puts them to almost an intolerable shame. So that in this
covered and masked kind of carriage there is not that pleasure and ease, which
is to be felt in the other plain and simple kind of conversation that nature
does lead each man unto. And though there be some little danger acco^panying
this plainness that a man may be the less esteemed of by the occasion of this
his inclination when it is discried: notwithstanding in mine opinion it were
better for him to be a little less accounted of, and to live openly, then to
have such a pain to disguise himself, and to carry himself thus
dissemblingly. And yet in both the two there is to be kept a reasonable
mediocrity and mean: for there is a great difference between a frank and
free fashion of behavior, and a negligent, or careless kind of carriage.

To understand this point somewhat the better, we have to consider how that
nature has endued man with two diverse qualities and properties: the one
general and common to us all, in making us reasonable and capable of
discourse, wherein we surpass the bruit beasts: the other particular to each
one of us, as to be inclined to gravity, to policy, to melancholy, or to some
such humor. In this every one should follow his natural inclination, providing
that it be not absurd, unseemly, or vicious. As if a man be subject to too
much laughter, it behooves him to endeavor to amend this imperfection. But in
such qualities, as are not blameable, it is good not to use counterfeiting,
cloaking, or dissembling. For it is a thing very uneasy for that man always
to play the grave, who is not naturally inclined to gravity, as to change his
countenance, to enlarge or raise swellingly his voice, to fashion and frame his
eyes and looks to austeritie, majesty, and greatness: The which gestures if
a man chance to forget through negligence and oversight, by and by he is
discried.

In my conceit it were much better for such a man to follow his inbred
cheerful inclination and gay humor in conuersing with others.

Notwithstanding, if it be a man's fortune to be preferred to a place of
dignity and honor, such as does require a grave, or severe countenance and
carriage, then in this case it behooves him to constrain and command a little
his iouiall inclination. But this must be done with much discretion and
moderation, and by degrees, and in such sort that this change offend no man.
And this kind of dissembling, or disguising of humors cannot be blamed; seeing
the quality of his charge does require it, for the seemly bearing whereof, he
must be content to take the pains to put aside, or rather to smother a little
of his facile and easy disposition.

But there are some which being indeed lightheaded and ridiculous, will
notwithstanding that men take them for grave, stayed and magnanimous: and there
are others again, who without cause labor to counterfeit and cover, or rather
smother their good inclination; for being borne of a mild and meek
disposition, they endeavor to daube themselves over with the untempered mortar
of inhumanitie, roughness and austeritie. And others there are who being very
cowards, will yet make show as if they were the most valorous in the world, and
by no means can they be brought to know themselves.

But yet this their colored and constrained courage they cannor carry far
off without discovery; The common saying always proving true, That no violent
or constrained thing has any long continuance.

DIS. 9.
Of Vanity.

IT is a thing very difficult, yea, I dare say impossible, that a vain and
ambitious man can ever attain to taste of this sweet and most desirable
tranquillity of mind, which the wise have so diligently sought for, by sea and
by land, on foot, and on horse, sparing no pains: for the man that has his
mind and heart eaten with the gnawing worm of ambition cannot attain to that
which he desires, to wit, that place, credit, and account, which he does
crave. And as of himself he promises always more then he can perform; so
likewise in his habites, attire, and all his other things, he does usually go
beyond his measure. So that he is found to be in the self same pain, wherein
are lodged all those which strive against the stream, or which creep and
graspe upwards against a steep brae, because in setting forwards they make too
much haste, therefore it comes to pass, that they do lie the further
behind. Contrariwise, the true means to attain unto ease is, for a man to
make a smaller semblance and show then indeed his power and ability does
bear, and to set aside all pompous superfluity and vanity, as well in his
attire, as in his train: and to hold always for his measure and rule that
which is necessary, not that which has no other ground but a vain opinion, or
a frivolous conceit: yea in our very eating and apparelling, we must take heed
there appear nothing so singular, or odd that men may in an extraordinary
manner take notice thereof. It is likewise very expedient and profitable, that
we refrain our hopes, and that we extend not our designs further then we
may well attain unto. As for riches, endeavor to come by them rather of your
self, then of fortune: and every way it is a principal point for a man to be
moderate as well in his actions as in his intentions. For when any tempest, or
storm of fortune shall fall out, it shall have the lesser power to prevail
upon him, and to give him the overthrow if it find him with his sails
gathered in, rather the^ hoysed up to

which sustain such a rank and dignity, that they cannot conveniently debase
themselves, except they either fall from their place, or at least, not carry
themselves in the same as they ought. And such men must employ their prudence
and wisdom in tempering their gravity, so that men may be brought to impute
it to their charge and calling, and not to the natural disposition of their
mind, and therefore it is good that they excuse themselves toward their
friends, and such folks as be of a meaner rank, whom they have known
familiarly before, that they have not the leisure to entertain them, and to
make much of them, by bearing the^ company, as otherwise they would very
willingly do: Yet so, that they use in the mean time, all the facility and
affability their condition and calling can suffer them to use; not bewraying or
showing any stormy, or angry mood, by their visage or words, if a man chance
to come to them at an unset hour, or yet speak to the^ somewhat more
importunatly, or indiscreetly then reason would require. For it is a like vice
for a man not to know how to carry himself in his prosperity, and not to be
able to comport with adversity: we ought therefore to observe an equality in
our whole life, and to show always (if it be possible) In all the changes and
chances thereof one and the same countenance, full of courtesy, mildness, and
gentle in behauour. Alexander the great did far outrunne his father Phillip
King of Macedon, by his high and excellent feats of war: but his father did
far surmount him in humanity and gentleness of mind. The Father was always
virtuous and well-beloved, but the son was oftentimes vicious and hated: In
such sort that there counsel is questionless wholesome and sound, which tell
us that the higher and loftier men are, the humbler and lowlier ought they to
be.

Scipio Africanus was wont to say, that even as men are accustomed to put wild
and untamed horses into the hands of Equiriers and Riders, that being daunted
and tamed they may serve them in their turns. So likewise is it needful to
tame proud and insolent persons, that have grown wild through the abundance
of fortunes favor, and to bring them again within the round and compass of
reason, by setting before their eye the wretchedness and weakness of humane
matters, and the mutability and instability of fortune. And for this end we
ought in our greatest prosperity to use the advice and counsel of our friends,
yea, then we should give them more authority and power over us then at any
other time to the end they may be the more bold toward us in telling us the
truth. We must also stop our ears to flatterers, which may very easily
beguile us: For at all times men do deem and esteem themselves, to be such,
as ought to be praised and raised to the skies, but most of all in time of
prosperity: In the which it is a thing very rare and difficult to find a man
who does not incline to attribute unto himself the cause of his own good
hap. Neither is there any other season in the which men more easily forget
God, then that when as they enjoy health and wealth, dgnity and felicity
according to their wish. In manner that mishap whenever it does happen them,
does serve them for a medicine, because it brings them home again unto the
knowledge of themselves.

This opinion of self-conceit for a man to think too much of himself, and to
give credit lightly unto the fawning lies of flatterers, makes men to
stumble, yea to fall into many gross faults, yea gives occasion of mocking
and scoffing them bitterly, and out of all peradventure it is a great
oversight, yea a fond folly for a man to rely more upon another judgment
concerning himself, then upon his own.

This Phillip (of whom we spoke before) seeing himself very mighty and
victorious, and considering with himself, as a wise and moderate man ought to
do, how that humane things do not always abide in the same stay, appointed
that one of his pages should have no other thing else to do every day, but only
each morning to salute him with these words. Phillip, remember that thou art a
mortal man. But how much more may the wise and wel-disposed Christian say
every day to himself; Remember that thou art earth, and to earth thou must
return.

DISC. 11.
Of the comparing of our fortune with that of others.

IT is much available for the attaining of this tranquillity of mind, that a
man setting aside all passions, consider with himself what means and
commodites he does enjoy, and in the next place that he set before his eyes
such men as have not so much: not doing as many are wont, who have their eyes
only upon such as surpass them, as admiring them, and reputing them only
happy and blessed. The prisoners hold them happy that are set at large; and
again, those esteem such blessed as are altogether free. The free think the
rich only fortunate, and the rich again those that command. They that command
account Kings of all other most blessed, and Kings those of their degree that
excel them in ability and power, hence it is that men finding themselves
unable to equal such as surpass them, they do remain discontented and no
wise satisfied with their fortune, wherein they both bewray their ingratitude
toward God, and beget a torment to themselves. A wise man will not be
malcontent, though many surmount him in means, but rather representing to
himself the great numbers of afflicted and miserable men the world does
afford, he will rejoice and be glad of his condition and case. If ye see then
a man well mounted and furnished with fair horses, richly arrayed, do but cast
down a little your eyes and consider how many there are that go a foot,
which, leading a poor life, esteem that of yours to be happy, for it is not
reasonable that the good fortune of one, or of a few, should have greater force
to make you discontent, then should the bad fortune of many have to move you to
be content. How many poor folks see ye daily, that live of their labors, and
are laden with children, and pinched with poverty, and which is worst of all,
have no hope at all to escape out of their misery? How many is there to whom
your life, which ye so much deplore, would bring much consolation and ease?

We are come unto a time so miserable, that one man's life depends more of
another then of it self: and the good of our neighbor does occasion us
greater grief then is the gladness we reap of our own. But if it were
possible for men to see unfolded the fortune of such as they esteem happy,
they should feel and find in it oftentimes more anxiety and pain, then they
do in their own. Who is he that does not account the condition of Kings of
all other to be most happy? And yet harke^ what a great King says of himself
in Homer: Great Jupiter has imprisoned me, with great perplexities and cares.
O how happy then are those that live in their little corners out of these
dangers and fears! And if it be so that ten thousand folks would be content
with the estate wherein God has established you, what reason have you to
complain, for that ye have not the estate and fortune of one whom ye envy?
Ye have no cause at all to slay your self with sorrow and care, for to
attain unto another man's rank, seeing there is nothing, that so much
troubles and tormenteth a man as this affection and immoderate desire of
mounting from one degree of dignity to another. For such folks ordinarily do
follow without consideration any hope whatsoever that offers it self; the
which if it fail to succeed according to their wish, they presently begin to
accuse fortune, and to accurse their hap; whereas they ought rather to blame
themselves for their rashness and lightness, and their want of foresight,
Neither do they consider what a folly it is for them, to impute unto another
the blame of their own weak understanding, and the fault they have fallen
into by following that which was either uncertain, or impossible for the^ to
attain unto. They are like unto those, in my conceit, which fret and fume for
that they cannot fly, or shoot an arrow with a bow as big as a plow beam.

The cause of this evil is the excessive affection men bear unto themselves:
whence it comes to pass, that in all things they will needs strive to be the
first. It is nothing in their eye to have wealth, except they have much more
then other rich men have.

Behold how this vice reigns, or rather rangeth in all estates. Dionysius the
first was not content to be King of Sicile, neither esteemed he his dignity
accomplished enough, because Philoxenus did surpass him in poesy, and Plato
in philosophy. Whereupon he fell into such a fury, that he condemned
Philoxenus to the quarries, there to wring verses out of the hard rocks, and
banished Plato out of his country.

And out of this immoderate love it does also proceed, that men will speak of
all things, thereby to show that they know all things: whereby they make
themselves oftentimes to be mocked at, as it once happened to Megabyses the
Persian, a man otherwise of great reputation, and valor, who having upon a
time entered into the lodging where the famous painter Apelles did plye and
practice his art, began to discourse touching the same, and would needs give
him to understand, that he understood the nature and secrets thereof. To whom
Apelles, as being a man wise, and well conditioned, thus answered: Truly, sir
Megabyses, before I heard you speak, I held you for a discreet man, for your
silence did grace your brave apparel, but since ye have meddled to talk of my
trade, trust me, there is not even vnill the smallest boy here that does bray
the okre, but will mock you for your labor.

Hanniball, that great Captain of Carthage, after that the Romans had chased
him out of Italy and Affricke, fled toward the king of Bithynia, where, on a
day, he was invited to go into the Schools, to hear a great Philosopher
discoursing of the stratagemes, tricks, and subtilties of war: his auditors
wondering at his eloquence and science of the military Art, asked of Hanniball
what he thought of him; who laughingly answered them: That he had known many
old fools, but that he had never seen, nor heard any man uttering so many
fond and foolish words as that man did, whom they all so much admired. And not
without cause did he answer them in this wise: considering how that this man
did take upon him to discourse largely and lauishly of a matter, which very
hardly can be taught or learned in the shade of a School, and that in the
presence, and audience of the greatest Captain, and most experimented wariour
that was then in the whole world. Which may teach every man to contain
himself within the compass of his calling, without meddling or troubling
himself with that of another man's. The which thing the Poets also have given
us to understand, when as they feign that their gods do content themselves each
one with his own calling and charge. Mars medleth with war, Minerua with
arts, Mercurius with eloquence, Cupido with love, Neptunus with the Sea, Pluto
with hell, Jupiter with the heavens, and so of the rest, each one keeping
himself within the bounds and lists of his vocation. And if it had chanced
that any of them should have encroched upon the office and function of another,
he should not have missed to be scoffed and chastised for his presumption.

Hence we may gather, that all things do not befit, nor become all men, and
that each one ought to consider what calling he finds himself most apt and
sufficient for, and that he content him therewith, and contain himself
therein. They that follow the profession of letters and learning, have need of
leisure and ease. He that will follow the Court, and labors to have the
countenance and acquaintance of great men, and to find access unto Princes,
must needs undergo much pains. So that these conditions, and the like, are not
fitting for all: and it stands each one upon to know whereunto he is most
apt. The Horse is fit for riding and running: the Ox for opening and laboring
the ground. The man that would be sorry for that he cannot bear a lion in his
bosom, as he could a little dog, were he not more then mad?

There are some, who without leaving any part of their ease, and of their vice,
would be as wise as the Philosophers that have both day and night studied and
traveled so much. The good wrestlers of old contenting themselves with their
prize, suffered the other Champions to win likewise theirs at running.
Contrariwise such as despising and disdaining their own good, do sighingly
seek after another man's, do they not live in displeasure and pain?

They say, that in times past, there was a notable kind of men in Baeotia,
which did complain of their gods because that their fig trees did not bear
grapes, and that their vines did not bring forth figs. We must imagine that
God has fashioned and framed diversely men for diverse affairs, and that each
one ought to content himself with that ability or place which God has
imparted unto him, without passing beyond his own, to pursue, and follow after
that which is another. For this kind of people make none account at all of
that which they have, but only of that which they would have: they go always
looking a far off, and little think of the place wherein they are.

There was of old, in a certain Temple, an image pourtraied, which did
represent the manner of men, that always wait on the time to come, and neglect
the good opportunity of the time present. The picture was of a Rope-maker who
did still work, but suffered an Ass that stood behind him to eat up his
work. And thus do the ingrate people in Gods behalf, who making no reckoning
of the goods they enjoy, suffer them to be buried in oblivion, and are always
covetous of things to come. In the harmony of the world, the differences, or
distances are to be observed: so likewise in humane things, all are not of one
sort. And as in music there are tunes and sounds, some grave, some sharp, and
some mean, of the mingling whereof the skillful Musician makes a sweet
melody: so does the prudent man make an harmony of the good and evil that
occur in this life, not taking the good or the evil alone, but consorting
and tempering the one with the other, as things which in this world can never
be fully severed. That fair proverb uttered by Eurypides, but used of all,
proving true: That sorrow and man's life are sisters of one womb.

DISC. 12.
Of Adversity.

Adversity is of it own nature grievous and heavy unto our hearts, as
sickness, the loss of children, or of friends, with such like other dismal
accidents. But yet in part we follow the popular opinion in the apprehension
thereof, and this we do principally in our own wants, and in the necessities
of ours, as also in the matter of affronts, circumuentions and scoffs, and
when as we imagine that the honor is not deferred us which we do deserve.

And against these crosses of the second kind, me thinks it were good for us
to apply unto our selves the saying of the Poet Menander, That which has
befallen you, is not indeed grievous, but only it seems to you so, and that
it is so, it may appear in that ye have your mind and body as much at
commandment as ye had before the cross did befall you. And against the
crosses of the first kind ye ought to consider how that ye endure nothing
contrary to the law and course of humane things, in regard that all these
accidents are annexed unto man's being, and that from his birth they are
allotted to him for ordinary: and the truth is that nature has not framed us
so feeble, to bear out adversity, as we make our selves to be. Let us rather
always think, that it is but our inferior part which is subject unto
fortune, and that we have the principal in our own power: and that that which
lies in us, as concerning virtue, cannot be overcome by any other thing else,
without our co^sentment: also we know that we have not need of any great forces
for the doing hereof; we having none to fight against but our own selves, and
seeing that the better part of the victory consists in maistering of our own
will: whereunto add this, that God will always favor the man who through the
aid of rectified reason disposes himself to be the stronger. Fortune (if so
it be lawful for a Christian to speak) may well make thee poor, abase thee, and
afflict thee, but she is not able to make thee vicious, lasie, or
ill-conditioned, neither can she bereave thee of the courage and vigor of
mind, wherein does lie greater strength to govern thy soul, then there is in
the Art of Navigations to direct a ship. For the Mariner, let him be never so
skillful and wise in his Art, cannot with all his skill assuage the surging
tempest of the Sea, nor yet take away fearful apprehensions from another man's
fantasy. Whereas virtue and wisdom in a well ordered mind does assure and
settle the body, for it preserves it from diseases through temperance, and
pulls it back from wicked and vicious dispositions by continuance, and
whereas any thing, wherein there is danger, shall present it self unto our mind
(as if it were in a dangerous shore) it is good that we leave it and pass
further: or else if the evil be unavoidable, let him comfort himself, and
think with himself that the haven is not very far off: and that his soul
goes out of the body, as out of a crasy or broken bark, holding death for a
sweet and assured harbor, chiefly considering that in regard of the nature of
the soul, her out-going from this life, is her in-going to a better. The which
consideration ought to add much unto the courage of Christians, Yea, and make
them not to fear that which brings afrightme^t unto others, And truly if
we had skill and courage enough, toward the blows of froward fortune, to
look her in the face, and to meet her in the way with a stout stomach,
prepared to sustain all her assaults, nothing in the world could dismay us, or
yet put us to pain. And this thing should certainly come to pass, if we
could once be accustomed never to promise to our selves any great or assured
hopes, or yet any certain and settled estate, during this miserable life, and
if we would take heed diligently, considering whether those things we do
account as evil, be so evil as we deem them to be, or if happily they be not
so evil but rather less then we imagine. Finally this thing should come to
pass if we would behold a far off, and wisely foresee frowning fortune, for
in so doing we might assure our selves, that at her coming she should not
afright us, but the nearer she came to us, the bolder we might be to look
her in the face, and to esteem her not to be so lusty and strong as her
picture would import, and if no man be able to boast during this life, so
far as to say, I am exempted from this bitter potion, at least may he say
thus, though I must swallow it down, yet shall I not be aghast, weep and wail
I will not, neither despair as many men do. I will not bring my self into so
deplorable a plight as diverse do, amidst their disasters. Though poverty pinch
me more the^ many others, for all that: will I not beguile my neighbor, nor yet
take that to my self, which to another does belong: I will not lie, much less
will I forswear my self. Breefly there shall nothing unto me seem so
intolerable, as that for to shun it, I would choose to become vicious. If by
honest means I cannot avoid indigence and need, at least necessity shall make
this necessity of mine easy to be borne. Besides that the common law of humane
things, does not allow us to esteem that thing heavy and vnbeareable, which so
many daily do carry and bear on their backs: for choose what manner of
afflictions ye will, ye shall find more men burdened therewith, then
exempted therefrom.

We must likewise comfort our selves with this consideration, that where there
is no sin, there can be no true evil at all: and that the virtuous man is
more calm and quiet in his deepest adversity, then is the vicious man in his
highest prosperity, and such were the crosses of the righteous men of old,
which by the help of the divine grace, were so accompanied with fortitude,
patience, and humility, that how-sharpe and rough soever they were, yet they
brought them not so much vexation and anguish as their conscience did them
consolation and ease, and even as those that are sick of a fever, feel sooner
and in more painful manner, the heat and coldness of their fit, then do
the whole and sound the sharpest cold of Winter, or the scorching heat of
Summer: so likewise does it fare, with those that are troubled with the fever
of their vicious affections, the which do burn and blister extremely and
continually their conscience: for they are much more vexed with the corrupt and
vicious qualities they do beget and bear in their bosoms, then are virtuous
men with all their adversities. For these having the inward and better part
sound and without wound, cannot be hurt by outward accidents, whereunto they
oppose a lively and lusty courage together with the force of an honest and
inviolable mind, which is a stronger force (truly) then any whatsoever else.
Think not that riches, howsoever abou^dant they be, cannot afford so great
contentment to the owner thereof, as virtue does unto the virtuous man, the
which is sufficient to make him content: For virtue in whomsoever it be, is
always the reward and recompense of her self. And even as the most precious
plants, and sweet smelling trees, though they be cut in pieces and dried, keep
always their sweet and pleasing sent, when as the unsavory and barren do
not please the sense, even then when they are whole and full of blossoms and
flowers: even so the virtuous man in the very midst of his adversity reapeth
more pleasure and contentment of his virtue, and honesty, then the vicious can
do of his wealth and superfluity, being beaten and scourged with a cursed
conscience. In one word, in what time, place, or condition soever ye find the
virtuous man, ye shall find him always content.

It is reported that Diogenes the Philosopher, seeing, on a time, a certain
man dressing and decking himself for a Festival day, said unto him thus: Why
do thou take such pains to trim thy self to day, considering that every
day is a festival day to the virtuous man? And truly every day of the life of
the virtuous man is a solemn day, and fit for a moderate rejoicing and mirth.
For if we look well unto the matter, the world is no other thing else but a
fair and holy Temple, into the which a man is brought to so soon as he is
borne: and within this Temple there is to be seen two bright Lamps, or
Torches set up, the Sun and the Moon, with many other starrie lights. There
may we see and behold diverse kinds of creatures, by the means whereof Man
attaineth to the knowledge of other essences, that cannot be seen. What a
sweet sight is it to see so many fair floods, and clear running rivers,
which send out always fresh water; to see so many fruitful, and flourishing
Trees, plants, herbs, and roots: the beautiful variety of beasts, and of
stones, together with the grassie hills, and high mountains on the one hand,
and the low valleys, and pleasant plains on the other? If man were so wise as
he should be, this same sight and show might serve him for a passe-time, and a
play. For what thing is there in this life more worthy to be seen then the
passe-times and pleasures which God does afford and offer us in his creatures,
if we could use the same as we ought? Why do we take greater delight in any
artificial sport of beasts, then we do to behold them acting the several
parts of natures play, each kind of them their own part, upon this fair and
wide stage of the world? Or is there any music sweeter then the chirping and
singing of birds? In sum, it is a great delectation to see and observe the
diversity of creatures which God has framed and formed each one to his kind:
we consume and spend away our life about so many purposes and practices, so
many toils and broiles, that hardly we do enjoy any part thereof, and yet for
all that we leave not to enjoy the other good creatures of God. If a man could
once attain to this point of perfection, as to rid his mind out of these
manifold entangleme^ts, and to give it some space and place to entertain,
cherish, and nourish it self with the knowledge of the creatures, and of the
Almighty Creator, nothing should, or could, cast it into any excessive sorrow,
except it were sin, for the soul being once united with him that made it by
contemplation and meditation, by knowledge and love, it should gather it self
together calmely and quietly, so that a man should lead and live continually a
gladsome life, considering that at one time or other some evil has befallen
him; yet oftener has he tasted of good. So that requiting, as it were, the one
with the other, he may well say that he has greater occasion to rejoice of
his good success, then to complain of the evil adventure of another time, as
we are accustomed to turn our eyes away from such things as offend us, and to
cast them upon green, and gay colors that please us: so should we divert
thee yes of our understanding, together with our thoughts, from sad and
sorrowful objects, and apply them to such as are more pleasing and agreeable
thereunto, neither must we be like unto the malicious man, who beholds
another man's faults with the eyes of an Eagle, but his own with the eyes of an
owl. But our perverseness is such, that very often we do resemble the
boxing-glasses, which draw and drink up the corrupt blood, and leave the pure
and clean blood behind. There was in former times, a certain rich wretch, who
had in his house great store of wine; but yet was so nigardish and near, that
he sold the best, and kept the worst for his own use: a certain servant of
his, observing this pinching and preposterous nigardlines of his master, fled
away from him: and being asked afterward, why he had left his Lord answered
thus: Because I could not endure to stay with a man, who having that which was
good, made choice of that which was evil. The Philosopher Aristippus, made yet
a far better reply, who having lost one of his three Farms, said thus unto
his friends, That it was babishnes to be sorry, for one Farm lost, and not to
be merry for the other two that did rest in his hands, seeing that all of them
had lain open to the same adventure. We are like unto little children, from
whom, if ye pull but one of their playockes and knackes, they will presently,
without more ado, fling away all the rest in despite. For if, of many good
things that we enjoy, it chance that one of them, either be taken from us, or
that it be lost, by and by we begin to bewail it, forgetting all that
rests behind in our hands.

But some man bewailingly will ask me, saying: alas! what have we? to whom
askingly I would answer: But what rather have we not? One has great
reputation and credit, another has wealth, and another health, one has a
wife according to his wish and will, another has sweet children, and another
faithful and trusty friends.

Antipater of Thrase did reckon it among his other good fortunes, that he had
sailed prosperously between Sicile and Athens, and we each one of us would
have all, though we have not in the mean time the understanding to thank God,
for the smallest thing. Neither make we any account or reckoning of the
greatest goods because they seem to us to be too common, as to live, to be in
health, to see, to hear, to speak, to enjoy peace, to eat and drink, to have
food for our belly, and clothes for our back, to see and enjoy the fruits of
the labourable ground, together with the commodities of the saileable sea, that
we can talk, or hold our tongue, sit, or stand, sleep or wake as we will. If
men would but consider in their minds, what displeasure and grief redoundeth
unto such as do lack any of these abilities, they would, no doubt, live much
more content then they do. What think ye would the sick give for the
benefit of health? the blind for the use of his eyes? and such as are despised
for a small measure of renown? we wretches are so blockish and blind, that
we can never prize the goods that we have, until that we be deprived of them,
and have them no more.

That which rests, I wish you always to be advertised that ye fall never so
far in love with the things of this life, that the fear ye have to loose
them vex you with unrest, or yet having lost them, immoderate sorrow for them
hurl you headlong into despair.

DISC. 13.
Of sadness, and sorrow.

Adversity does beget in us vexation and grief, according to the greatness or
smalnesse thereof: whereabout likewise there happens some fault: for now a
days we may see men, ordinarily, mourning and moaning excessiuely for many
things, not so much for that they have cause, as because it is the custom. One
lamenteth the mishaps of his neighbor, or friend, and carries a pale and
heavy countenance, to show that he is very sorry therefore, although he be
nothing sorry at all. This kind of customable compassion is altogether
unprofitable, in regard that even in your own adversity, ye ought not to be
sad, but only so far forth as reason does require, and not as custom does
command, How many is there who weep when others look on them, and do think
it should be a very ill favored thing, not to shed tears when as others do,
mourn? How many frivolous sorrows has it made many to slide into, to lean
too much upon the tottering and unstayed proppe of opinion? How much better
were it in such cases, to devise some new fashion, and to feel humane
accidents after that mood which best becomes wise and moderate men? What
good do their immoderate sighs and sobs, either to the living or to the dead?
Does their any there thing flow therfro, save that they wast themselves
wretchedly and wretchlesly away? For though it be true that oftentimes such
disasters and accidents fall out, that it is impossible for men to pass them
over without being touched with sorrow for the same: nevertheless we must
always beware to be more sorry then reason does allow, and seeing that time
ought to heal you in the end, it were a babishnesse not to prevent it wisely,
and to do that betimes, which once at last, nill we will we, it behooves us
to do.

How many men, shortly after the death of their children, or wives, have
recomforted themselves, as esteeming the time lost which they had spent in
sadness and in sorrow? For although it be true, that such persons are worthy
to be renewed in our remembrance, yet we ought to bring thereunto that
moderation and remedy, which at last will needs offer and apply it self, though
ye would never so feign it were otherwise.

DISC. 14.
Of the affliction of good men.

IT is not a small occasion of sorrow unto vigorous minds, and such as are
touched with humanity to see virtuous men vilipended or wronged: and truly it
seems to be nothing less then a heavy heart-break and almost an
unsupportable pain to behold wise and peaceable men afflicted, troubled, and
vexed, yea to be ill-vsed, and trampled, as it were, under feet by the vain
world, and to say the truth, it seems that this does touch us very near: for
when as we weigh with our selves that the portion and lot of virtuous men is
no other but affliction, and labor of mind, we do thereupon presently imagine,
that thereby our best hopes are hemmed in.

If then such a case disquiet you, (as ordinarily it does) think with your
self, that if they be honest and patient men then are they in that case so
much the more happy, because that in this life, which is so short, they
purchase to themselves a life eternal in the heavens, for ye must know that
the first good which such as go to rest in Gods house do obtain, is to be quit
and discharged from the tentations and torments of this troublesome life.

Moreover, set before your eyes the roll and scroll of the holy men of old, the
blessed Martyrs of Christ, of whom some have been beheaded, others have been
hanged; some have been burnt, and others have been broyled; some have been
cut in pieces, and others have had their skin pulled off. Besides that,
during their life they have been afflicted with hunger, nakedness, and need:
of whom certainly the world was not worthy, and therefore it had them in
horror, as those in whom it had no interest at all. But God loved them
dearly, and by his divine providence, which cannot be deceived, appointed
them to pass through such tribulations, as through a needles eye, into the
place of perpetual repose. Yea the pains and perplexities that virtuous men
do endure, do even prick them forwards to have a more earnest desire to loath,
and to leave this wretched world. So that in the end they dislodge out of a bad
and sad prison, they escape and slip out of the dark caves and obscure corners,
and having no deep apprehension of death, they find the fair beaten way that
leads them to a better life.

DISC. 15.
Of other men's faults and imperfections.

AFter that ye have thus disposed of your self, and have appeased your own
passions; yet shall ye have the vices of others, and the faults which are done
in public, making an onset against you, to trouble your mind. Considering
the disorder that is amongst men; which is so great, that scarcely can any
thing be found in the room where it ought to be, and that there is scarcely
any one that does the duty whereunto by birth and calling he was ordained. The
man who should prove the wise Judge, is a simple Citizen: and he that ought to
be but a mere citizen, is made a Judge, and that man does command who ought to
obey.

It is a strange thing to consider, how that almost every thing is corrupt and
sold, and how that, as it were, all things are turned vpside down. To see how
that the poor man is punished for every petty trespass, and the puisant and
wealthy person is spared: to see, I say, how the whole plotting and plodding of
men now a days, is altogether for money.

Again, it cannot but bring grief unto a good man's mind, to consider how
small occasion and example of living virtuously such persons do minister unto
us, as hold the chief offices and the first ranks in the Common wealth. The
virtuous man is holden every where as a monster, abhorred, despised, and
disdained. And what shall a man say, when as he weighs with himself the
variable and mutable disposition of the multitude, one while loving, and
another while loathing, at one time praising, at another time dispraising one
and the same thing, one and the same party? How many be the miseserable
changes that fall out amongst men? And what a hard case is it, when men make
none account of that they should diligently hear: and on the other side
hearken to that whereunto they should rather stop the ear? The dispite and
dislike that many have conceived, by reason of such courses, has made them bid
the world farewell, and moved them to withdraw themselves into the deserts and
solitary aboades, as not being able to behold with their eyes, that which did
breed, and bring so much displeasure to their minds. And therefore such have
chosen to live rather amongst the wild beasts, amidst the vaste wilderness,
and rocky mountains, then amongst so many wild men, swarming with vile and
wicked manners.

Nevertheless, in these, and such other occurrents as cannot be amended, man
must command and master his mind, and carry himself in such sort, that these
vnamendable evils make him not to abhor the company and society of men: but
rather he must take occasion thereof to be the more watchful and wary,
least he become one of those that forget to carry themselves discreetly amongst
men, he must also beware least he minister occasion to another to blame in
himself that which he does blame in his neighbor. A man must hold more on
Democritus then on Heraclitus side. Heraclitus did weep always at the faults
he saw men fall into; but Democritus did laugh at them always.

To the one, all that men do, did seem to be but misery: to the other,
fondness and folly. And it seems to be the better of the twain, when as
things amiss cannot be amended, that we sweeten them a little, if it were but
in covering them with the cloak of a fair show, and as it is a thing by all
likelihood more consonant to man's nature, to laugh at the manifold miseries of
our life, then mourningly to bewail them with tears.

But yet ye shall do better, if that about the vices of other men, and such
as are done in public, ye do keep a mediocrity and mean, neither always
lame^ting, nor yet always laughing at them: for it were both a miserable kind
of disposition, for a man to afflict himself excessiuely, by reason of another
man's miscarriage, and a pitilesse kind of passe-time always to be laughing
thereat.

But there be some, to whom this advice will seem to be of no weight: for
not only they cannot comport with the imperfections of their friends, but also
those of their enemies do put them to pain. The honors, the precedencies, the
wrongs, the incompetencies vex them: the importunities of their friends, the
waywardness, and pieuishnesse of their servants, and acquaintance trouble and
torment them daily. But how much better were it to have patience in such
accidents, chiefly seeing they win so little by willing and wishing the
amendment thereof? Ye must rather imagine and think with your self, that
these men, which thus take pleasure to annoy you, are as dogs which be borne
to bark. We must impute all this evil to their perverse nature, wherein they
are enough punished by the means of a perpetual perplexity and anguish, which
pricketh, and pierces their mind.

But if your weakness be such, as to stumble at all that ye see ill done,
by such as are about you, ye are then, in that case, merely forlorn. For if
the vices of strangers, or of those that be your own, come once to win ground
on you, to close with you, and to overcome you, ye shall be abashed, and
amazed to see how that all such importunities and troubles, like water, shall
run into you, as the rain does from the gutter into the base court, or from
a steep hill into a low valley. And out of all question, it is to be
indiscreetly tenderhearted for a man to be always sorry and sad, if those,
with whom we do hant, do not handle, use, or entertain us so carefully, or
respectively as we crave.

The immoderate affection we bear unto our selves, does deceive us, and the
delicacy of our condition makes that we cannot bear with the defects and
neglects of our servants, we not considering how that very often they know not
how to do any better. We require at their hands perfect things, when as yet
we our selves do fall into so many faults, and are subject unto so many
imperfections.

And most often we play the passionate and fretting man's part in our servants
behalf, either being moved by the distasts that our own ill conditions do
occasion unto us, or by the quality and kind of the business we have in hand:
and thus foolishly we cast the fault over upon them which are innocent, and do
the best they can.

There is also another thing which does bring unto us much disquiet, and that
is to affect too much one and the same thing, and thereabout to fall into
debate with our friends. For there was never yet any perfect friendship amongst
them which are led and miscarried with an obstinate emulation and contention
who shall overcome. If ye belabor, and accustom yourselfe, through ezercise, to
frame your self to times and persons, ye may easily govern and rule men at
your will, and withal purge them from such evil humors as ye find them
subject unto. And whenever it shall fall out, that it shall seem unto you a
thing impossible to comport with them; think that it is your fault, and that
this flows from your own inability: considering how that so many others
could, and yet can, very well comport with the same. For even as the sick are
wont to say, that they find all meats bitter, and contrary to their taste,
thinking that the fault is either in the meats, or in the man that prepared
them: but as soon as they see other men eat them, without going any whit
against their stomach, they do know that the imperfection lies in themselves.
In like manner, as often as ye call to mind, how that many others have
suffered, and yet do suffer, with a gaye and courageous heart, the most
troublesome, and toilesome accidents of the world, ye must confess that the
fault must be imputed to your own feebleness, and to no other thing else.

If the manners and conditions of your wife vex you, ye must bend them, and
bow them gently and softly, if it be possible, and that by using all kind of
mild and amiable means. But if your misfortune be such that ye cannot
prevail with her, by way of pleasing and peaceable persuasions, then it
behooves that wisdom and discretion teach you to endure patiently her
crosse-conditions, and to master and dissemble the evil which ye cannot
amend: otherwise be ye sure ye shall turn your house into a prison, your
quiet rest into restless coil, and your good name into an intolerable shame.

In your children require not that sagenesse and settlednesse, which ye find in
old folks: seeing that they were not borne old: This age carries in it many
things, the which if ye should endeavor on a sudden to draw to a perfection,
ye should undertake a task of no small trouble, and if in young trees ye are
content that they bear leaves and buds, why do ye require ripe fruit in your
children before the time? Who craves the thing that cannot be had, labors
for that he shall not obtain? The mean is to teach, and instruct them
diligently, to bring them up virtuously, and not to chide them continually, or
check them immoderatly: if peradventure they fail to do a thing as they ought.

DISC. 16.
Of Injuries and Indignities.

THere are some men, which could patiently comport with all other kind of
affliction: only they cannot away with an indignity and wrong. The which
thing, nevertheless, befalls them more for being persuaded that the injury
offered them is unsupportable, then for that it is so of the own nature. In
which case, one thing may avail you much; if ye can resolve with your self
to keep you aloof from the common opinion, and if ye can consider without
passion, each one of the things that are wont thus to toil, and turmoile men's
minds. For in so doing, ye shall see, if ye have reason to think upon the
wrong offered you so immoderately as ye do.

There is one kind of displeasure, which we call an injury, or wrong, that
is, when any one ouerthwarteth us in our affairs against all equity and right.
And there is another kind, which we call an indignity, or affront, when as in
our body, or name, we are used by word or deed otherwise then is fitting.

For both these kinds, ye ought to know, that the virtuous man is not subject
to receive any wrong: not that I do mean that there is none to offer, and
infer wrong, (for there is nothing so sacred, but there will be found
sacrilegious hands to touch it.) But that though there be not wanting
multitudes of men, whose tongues and hands have no other employment, but to
defile, and diminish, so much as in them lies, the honor of God, and of men:
yet, for all that, the virtuous man's mind is not a whit the less assured: and
though that such mischievous, and malicious men, level right at him to hit,
and to hurt him with their harmefull shaft, yet do they come short of their
aim; for either they hit him not, or if they do, they hurt him not at all for
an inviolable thing is not simply that which cannot be hit, but rather that
which being hit, receives thereby no hurt, or at least, cares not at all for
it. And thus does it fare with the virtuous man, who of himself offers no
man any occasion of offering him any wrong. And if it fall out, than a man, out
of a proud and haughty stomach, or rather out of a malicious disposition set
upon him, and assail him; he is then in that case like a brazen wall which the
darts of the wicked cannot pierce through.

Moreover, we know that the virtue and vigor of him, who in fighting has
vanquished his adversary, is always greater the^ the man's who never did try
the combat in his time. And even the very same must we think and say of the
virtuous wight, and well disposed person: who, like to good metal, the more he
is fired the more is he fined, the more he is opposed, the more is he
approved. Wrongs may well try him, touch him, or prick him, but they cannot
imprint in him any false stamp. And if (peradventure) some flout, or affront
be flung upon him, as it were, by the way; yet does he in the mean time remain
firm and unremoved, he makes no reckoning, nor yet takes any notice
thereof, as assuring himself that it does not reach so far as unto him. Add
also hereunto, that there is almost no man, but he will hold the wrong-offerer
for wicked, and the wrong-sufferer for honest, as not deserving any such
outrageous usage. The force and strength of his virtue appears so much the
more in this kind of adversity, and his mildness and meekness of mind,
shines so much the more clearly, by how much the more atrocious and grievous
the wrong offered was. But unto such as are of a more tender and dainty
courage, an indignity is more uneasy to be borne withal.

But would you see how men do measure wrongs by opinion? Such vanity there is
in the things of this world, that some will make less ado for a bloody blow,
then for a light box on the ear. Yea some will make a greater stir for a
vanishing hard word, then they would do for a deadly dint of a sharp sword.
We are fallen into such blindness and babishnesse, that opinion annoyeth us
more then the soar it self, being like unto little children, which are amazed
at a mummers mask. If it chance that a man be hindered, or wronged in his
goods, it is a wonder to consider what a coil he does keep about them. But
the discreet and well-stayed person, who judges of things according to reason,
not measuring them by opinion, as he holds all things, even as if it were by
borrowing so he feels the loss of them, as if they were things no wise his
own. And even as he should not cease to be content, though he had never had
them at all, so he takes the loss of any part of them, as the necessary
out-casting or forgoing of one portion to save another, in the midst of a
tempestuous storm. Yea the forgoing of his whole goods will not make him to
forget his own worth, and vigor of mind: he knowing well that not only his
goods, but also his life, honor, and whole happiness do hang upon him who is
the giver of every good thing. Such an one possibly has couzened you of so
many crowns, has deceived you of so many Ducates. Well, it is a damage he
has done you, yet is it a loss but of a part only of your goods, and not of
the whole. And the man that has the heart to give, or forgo the whole, can he
be much sorry to let go, or loose a part?

But if it be the manner of your loss which does most vex you: then in that
case ye have to think, that as your virtue would have you to comport with
Fortune and her frowns; so ought ye likewise to bear with insolent and
audacious men, which are no other thing else, but the hookish hands of the
same hard fortune. Trust me, that our impatiency does us much more harm, then
those, of whose violence, injustice, and wrong we do so bitterly complain.

What? (will some say) such a one did disdain to cap to me; such another in
speaking to me did not use that respect in my behalf as he ought, and I
thought he should have done: such a one did not give me place, but sat him
down before me, and such another would not give me the wall. What terms, I
pray you, be all these, but mere plaints flowing from the soft and feeble
courage of an effeminate mind?

Diverse things displease us, which otherwise would not do so, if we had the
skill and will to conster them aright, and to take them in the better part;
whereas through our own indiscretion, and distrust of our selves, we make
that an indignity which of it own nature is none, in so doing we judge our
selves well worthy thereof, and what other thing is it but lack of courage,
though we feel the wrong we have received never so sensible, not to be able
to tread on it, and to trample it under feet?

And if we will but weigh and observe how, and in what manner the mighty
visions and imaginations of dangers, which do present themselves in our dreams
do suddenly euanish, ye sometimes do make us laugh when as we remember the
same, we should do well to endeavor to do the like in our wrongs, even to
think when as any wrong is done us, that we do but awake out of a dreaming
sleep: a virtuous and wel-disposed man (assure your self) will be loath to
wrong you in your body, goods, or good name; and as for any ill-disposed
wretch, what shall it avail you to complain, seeing that he is no more his
own man then if he were mad? Ye will willingly endure any thing at the
hands of a man that is out of his wits, neither will ye make any complaint for
ought he has said or done to you, but will rather pity his case: in the like
manner must ye bear with the mis-behauiour of a foolish indiscreet person, who
is no better then a man out of his mind: ye will endure well enough what a
Iester or sporter will say unto you, be it never so unpleasant, and would
think it but a base part for you to inform against, or to complain upon such
a person, and if he chance to utter any pleasing word amidst his carping
discourse, ye take it and taste it as a sauory disport. Consider therefore how
unfitting and unseemly a thing it were that the same word uttered by one
should make you to laugh, and by another to lowre: the case so standing, that
the man that is in cholor has no more judgment the^ a simple Iester has; if
he have so much.

But what shall we say of those that are offended with little boys, and silly
women? persons that do offend rather of weakness then of a wilful or
wicked design? for conclusion ye shall never attain to tranquillity of mind,
if ye take in ill part every crosse-chance that does offer it self.

Some will say, this offense may be well borne with, but that other must not
be borne with at all. But these men do shut up virtue into a too strait
room, and confine her abilities within too narrow bounds, as if they should
say virtue may well vanquish this wrong, but not that other, truly if fortune
be not wholly beaten down and defeated, she will remain mistress. But what
if it be so, will ye say, that I have given some occasion to affront me in this
fashion? how then shall I, or can I, bear it patiently and go with an open
face? If the injury has his birth from your misbehauiour, ye must think then,
that it is not so much a wrong as a correction: and this ye ought to receive
as a discreet man ought to do, and withal make use of it as a chastisement of
your own miscarriage. If it chance that a man floute you for some imperfection
of your person, as for that your nose, eyes, or legs are not to their mind,
take not this to heart as a reuengeable wrong: for it is but a mere folly, for
a man to care much for that which falls not out through his own faults.
Fidus Cornelius did weep for very anger in the Senate, because Corduba
Struthio said to him scoffingly that he did resemble much a pilde Camel: see
what simpleness, if one counterfeit our gesture, lo we are by and by
offended. But what miserable blindness is it for a man to vex himself because
another does imitate his mode or manner of going. The mean were rather to do
thus, if nature has laid upon you any defect or blemish which does deforme
your body, which ye cannot cover, that your self were the first man should
speak of it, as knowing it better then any other: for by this means ye shall
take away from others all occasion of scorning or flouting you for the same:
Thus Vatinius was wont to mock himself, in regard of his neck, and feet
which were somewhat deformed: so that his enemies and ilwillers could not take
any advantage thereof to break upon him any bitter jest. Moreover it is not a
small policy to deprive the party that does you wrong of all the pleasure he
entendeth to reap, by holding your peace, as not thinking him worthy of so
much as one word of your mouth, or by leaving him there where ye found him, as
disdaining to brable or quarrel with him, or yet to take any notice of the man,
or of his manners: if ye will be advised by me, make never answer to an
insolent malapert person, for in holding your tongue ye leave with him lying in
his mouth, yea in his mind, his vice, folly, and rashness, whereas in
answering him, ye shall conform your self to his naughty nature. There is
nothing that equalizeth so much men among themselves, as the participation of
one and the same vice: neither can there any such chastisement befall unto an
ill-humored man as to make no reckoning, but to let vanish with the wind his
vain and unsavory words, for both by your silence are his speeches condemned
of impertinency, and he deprived of the pleasure he promised to himself by
provoking you to anger.

It behooves likewise a man to be very circumspect and wary in his jesting at
others. For we find by experience that men do commonly fly the company of such
as make profession of scoffing and mocking others. We find likewise that no man
can entertain certain amity and vnfaileable friendship with such an one as
is auerse from pardoning such as have offended him. The Emperor Caius Caesar,
a man of an injurious inclination, had in his army a certain Tribune, Cherea
by name; a man of a shrill, small and womanish voice in speaking, and therefore
one of whom they had no great opinion. This womanish-voiced man having on a
time asked the Emperor what should be the watchword: he of purpose to scorn
him gave him such a word as was dishonest. By reason of which indignity the
Tribune was so deeply offended, that thereafter associating himself among the
murderers which did wickedly sease upon the Emperor, he was the man who with
one blow did beat down the one half of his brains. So that he who seemed
unto Caesar to come somewhat short of a man, proved most the man (though
indeed he had more malice then manhood in his heart) in cutting off impiously
Caesar from being any more a man and a Monarch among men. To use such bitter
taunts bewrays want of discretion, and not to be able to digest them, does
argue lack of courage. Socrates hearing himself flouted to his face, did no
other thing but laugh thereat, without making any show of a displeased mind. It
is reported of him and of Laelius the Roman, that they two did so happily
entertain this Tranquillity of mind, that they were never seen to change their
countenance.

Moreover ye ought diligently to avoid all noise, brables and strife: for this
brawling and quarrelling humor alters not a little the whole man, and makes
him ill-conditioned. Be not lavish of your language, but rather sparing of
speech. Let your words be such as carry with them their due authority and
weight. And withal accustom your self to pass diverse things under the
great seal of sure silence.

Suffer not your self to be beguiled by the unreasonable opinion of the
misordered multitude, which do hold such folks only to be free as may do
what ere they list, be it never so evil, and such only to be courageous and
generous spirits as can put up no wrong.

It is true liberty for a man to live not according as his lawless lust does
lead him, but as reason does rule him: and to do not what ever sensually he
would, but what reasonable he should, And it is true courage and magnanimity
for a man to put up wrongs, to misteeme the^, not to be moved by them, but to
command his affections, and to overcome his passions. That which the man shall
never be able to do, who has not his spirit composed, and his mind ordered to
despise these vanities and delicacies, which do shake the feebler sort:
finally endeavor to have the upper hand in setting light by all humane
crosses, and popular conceits: for it is no sign of good health when a man is
always crying and complaining that they touch him, and in the same manner it
fares with the mind.

DISC. 17.
Of Poverty.

THE man that can make but that reckoning of life and death that he ought, I
fear not that poverty can afflict him, or yet bereave him of his rest, For it
were a thing very unfitting that he who can despise death, should suffer his
courage to be cast down, let alone, to be quite quelled by poverty and
need, which nevertheless is the thing the common people does most apprehend,
and most plain upon, when as they cannot attain unto a sufficiency of goods
whereupon to maintain themselves in a gay and gallant manner. They not being
able to content themselves with such things as may serve for their necessity;
but esteeming abundance and wealth man's sovereign good; and poverty, and want
his sovereign evil. And yet were it not better for a man not to have a thing,
then to loose it when he has it? And how is it possible in this life that some
should not loose, seeing that one cannot be rich, except many other be poor,
and many cannot inherit, except others do dye? And yet there is in poverty this
consolation, that as it is not subject to the receiving, and incurring of great
damages, so is it not accompanied with so many monstrous turmoiles as plenty
and abundance is.

And to think that rich men have more courage to comport with losses then
other men have, it is an error. For the pain of a soar is as sensible and
dolorous in a big body, as in a small; yea we fee ordinarily, that the
greatest men are the most tender and delicate.

The Philosopher Bion was wont to say, that the pain is alike which is felt by
plucking, or pulling the hairs from an head that has many, and from that
which has few.

All the difference that can be, is this; that the balde head has less hair
to loose, and consequently cannot feel so much smart as the other does that is
full of hairs.

Hence it is, that we see, for the most part, the poorer sort of people to be
more iocund and joyful then commonly the richer sort are, because they have
not so great care as they have, neither do they fear so deeply the storm of
adversity, as the richer sort do. For they are eaten up with this double worm,
the care of conseruing and increasing the goods they have got, and the fear of
loosing that which they enjoy. But poverty is a Castle and fort, assured and
fenced against fortune, yea the whole world. She fears nothing and is able
with all to defend herself against all her enemies.

Thou man whosoever thou art that go drooping and dying for riches, for
worldly pelf, and wealth, tell me I pray thee, if since thou have got them,
they have brought unto thee any more knowledge unto thy mind, or more
tranquillity and peace unto thy spirit, or more rest and happiness unto thine
heart, then thou had before, they came into thine hands? The wise men among
the heathen have taught us, how much poverty is to be prised and praised, when
as they did portrait and paint their Gods naked, attributing unto them all
things according as they conceited to be most befitting their natures: and as
for my self, I shall never repute that man poor who is placed without the
reach and power of fortune. There is one thing sufficient to express unto us
the nature of poverty, to wit, that no virtuous man speaks thereof, but he
praises it, and avouches that the wisest have been those who have suffered
the same with most contentment, and truly it is a great weakness and
tenderness in us not to be able to endure that which so many others have well
endured, and it can be no other thing but a vain apprehension and a friuoulous
fear of enduring and suffering which makes us so feeble hearted, for if we
were indeed of a generous and magnanimous disposition we would love and like
that for our selves which we approve in others, and therefore howsoever that
this peevishness and softness of ours is not altogether to be comported with;
we ought at least to limite our affections and dress our selves in such sort
that fortune may find the less advantage to offend us, for a little body that
can cover, and gather it self together under a buckler marches on toward the
enemy, much more surely then a bigger body does, that lies at large and open
unto blows, If it were not mine intention to husband the time, and to spare
paper, I could enlarge my discourse by reciting of almost innumerable examples
as well of heathens as of Christians, which have placed a great part of their
perfection in poverty. But ye ought to consider one thing for all, that Jesus
Christ was poor, who was Lord of the whole world: his Disciples were poor,
which did possess all things, and the Saints were poor which might have been
rich. If ye should never dye, I would advise you to set your affection upon
riches, but I see that those to whom they most befall, do find sooner the end
of their living then of their longing. But why should a man torment himself
for a thing that he must necessarily leave? and why is he not rather content
quietly with that which is needful, chiefly considering that the fairest kind
of wealth is for a man to be neither too poor, nor yet too far off from
poverty?

DISC. 18.
Of Death.

IT seems that all incommodities and misfortunes may be borne with, either
by the means of a long custom, or by the help of a strong discourse, only
death and the apprehension thereof, is the thing that puts us in greatest
fear.

Now the only remedy and true easing of this evil, is that ye make this
reckoning of the world, and all that is therein, that ye have nothing which is
your own, neither life, nor living, no not so much as your own self: but
that ye live always at borrowing, as holding your very life, not in property
but on condition to restore it unto him again, who has lent it you,
whenever he shall require it at your hands: yet for all this ye must not
not neglect it as thing not yours, but must keep it faithfully, and carefully
in regard that God has trusted you with the custody thereof, and when it is
time, to render it to him that gave it, not grudgingly, but gladly, and with a
cheerful countenance, in the mean time thanking God, the giver of all good
things, for the time ye have had the use and aid thereof, and saying unto him
in this or the like manner; Lord, I render unto thee again this soul, and
life, with as good an heart as it pleased thee to give me the same, yea even
even with a better and readier will then I did receive it, for when thou gave
me this soul, thou gave it to a little weak creature, which knew not the
good thou then did bestow, but now thou do receive it again at the hands
of a creature, more accomplished, who knows what it is he commends into
thine hands, and therefore rendereth it unto thee, withal franknesse and
readiness of will: and truly we may easily imagine that it is not a thing
otherwise difficult for a substance to return to the the p ace whence it first
came, the body therefore must return to the earth, and the soul (if it go the
right way) must go to him that gave it. To be short, that man doubtlesly
never learned well to iue, who knows not how to die: we must therefore in
this case be so affected toward our selves, as we are wont to be in the
behalf of fencers which must fight in a barred field, for we commonly hate
him that bears himself faintheartedly, and favor the other who out of a
brave courage had rather choose to dye then to be overcome. Besides that the
fear of death is sometimes the cause, or occasion of death, to him that flies
fastest from it.

And seeing ye know well, that life was given you upon condition to render it
(...) ought not to be so unjust, as to desire to enjoy that thing for aye,
which was given unto you to a day, by making your self Lord, and owner of the
thing whereof ye are only a depositarie or keeper.

Moreover men will say, that it is a matter much importing, to wit, the fear,
and apprehension of death, and that it is the extreme of all terrible things.
But ye ought to understand that Death is not to be found fault with for this,
seeing that it proceeds not from the nature of death, but from our own
imbecility: who are commonly overtaken and entangled with delights, with a
desire of this transitory life, and with an immoderate love of this miserable
flesh? And if ye take good heed, it is (...) self that is dreadful, as the
opinion which we hold concerning the same. For every man fears it according
to his judgment, apprehension, and conscience.

And if it be so, that ye have no fear thereof, but only for this occasion,
then lay the blame upon your self, and not upon it. For in this case it fares
with men of evil conscience, when they must dye, as it does riotous
spend-thrifts when they must pay their debts. They will not come to an account
for the distrust which they have of their ability to satisfy for what they
have done.

And to say that ye fear death, by reason that it is the last point and
periode of man, has but little reason in it. For the soul is always the
fore, it lives always, and cannot dye.

The Greeks call man's decease, the end, giving us thereby to understand, that
it is the period and end of wearisome life.

The holy Scripture calls it a sleep, to assure us of an assured
resurrection, and to the end we weep not, as the Infidels do, which are
without hope, Let us consider with our selves how many holy men and women have
prised it, and desired it as the only easement of all their anguish.

The writes of Solomon, Job, and the Histories of Gods Saints are full of the
praises of this Christian desire of death. What a vanity is it to love so much
this miserable life, this Iaile, this prison, this vale of tears, seeing that
the longer we live, the longer we live in sin, the more days we spend, the
more ways we offend, and so go on each hour purchasing unto our selves a
new pain and punishment?

Finally, to shut the door unto all fearful apprehensions of death, we must
learn to do two things which the world can never teach us; the one is to live
well, for a virtuous and Christian life makes even agreeabe the very memory of
death: the other is that we believe that the thing which it has pleased God to
afford us for a remedy, and easement of our manifold labors, and toils is
not so harsh, nor so horrible, as we do imagine it is.

And for a final conclusion, let us remember, how that the Saints have had
life in affliction, and death in affection.

The Authors Conclusion.
BEHOLD here the flowers that I have gathered here and there out of the garden
of the flourishing wits and writs of the wise, which I have passed mine eyes
over. Them I lay out in common between you and me, even as the busy bees do
in their hiues with all they have reaped in the fair and well furnished
gardens, or flourie fields, to the end we together may draw out thereof the
sugared honey of this sweet and pleasant Tranquillity of mind. I am of the opinion
for my part, that if the ancient poets had thoroughly known thereof, they would
not have put themselves in pain to compose any other Nectar or brue any other
Ambrosia besides this, for the diet of their gods: but should have thought them
well feasted in serving them with this dish alone, for all messes and at
meals. Seeing therefore we have the opportunity offered us of finding out, and
using so divine a thing, let us make use of it in the most thrifty manner we
possible may: acknowledgeing in the mean time that this Tranquillity we talk
of, is a gift from heaven, which the bountiful influence of the worlds-maker
must distill into our minds; he being the true and living wellspring whence
flows all our felicity and bliss. Whose name therefore (according as we are
bound) we bless and magnify for ever.

Amen.

FINIS.

