A TRIAL OF SVBSCRIPTION, BY WAY OF A PREFACE UNTO CERTAIN SVBSCRIBERS; AND,
Reasons for less rigor against non-subscribers. Both modestly written; that
Neither should offend.

ESAIAS. 44. 5. One shall say, I am the Lords: another shall be called by the
name of Iaacob: and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and
name himself by the name of Israel. 1599.

To such Ministers of the Gospel as would seem desirous of reformation; and
yet have subscribed to the Archbishop of Canterbury his Articles.
REVEREND Fathers, The reasons following were written (as I am persuaded) upon
occasion of that godly, wise, and peaceable motion, which was made in the last
Parliament for convenient favor to be showed to godly and profitable
Ministers, touching subscription and use of ceremonies. Whether the author be a
Minister or no, or what he is, I am not for my part, any whit inquisitiue; and
do wish, That all they who do love peace and truth, would diligently and
charitablie consider the reasons without hearkening after the reasoner, Least
they occasion trouble to him, who seems to desire the good of our Church. But
whosoever he be, I presume on his patience to publish his labors, For that
(in the judgment of sundry wise, and learned both Preachers and other, they be
thought worthy (for their pith and modesty) such publication, and may prove
(through Gods blessing) an happy mean somewhat to calm that tempest, which
(too long) has tossed the little Arc of Christ his Church. And therefore, I
hope, that none will be offended, if I help forward that good which (no doubt)
the author intended. If none: Then why should I fear that any of you will be
offended with me? Matthew. 26. 41.
And yet I know the weakness of the flesh, be the spirit never so willing, to
do well. Romans 8. 7.
For the wisdom of the flesh ( which is enemitie against God) will readily
suggest; That these apologeticall reasons will cause you to be worse thought
of; except ye either disclaim your subscription, or publicly justify the
same with sound reasons from Gods word. One of which I pray God ye may have
grace to do, That sincere teachers of the same truth, may either be
conformable together, or seek reformacion together. I will not prejudice your
judgment, much less with Aquila presume to expound unto Apollos the way of
God more perfectly: Act. 18. 24. 25 26. 2. 3.
Yet, seeing Apollos humbled himself to the informacion of a tentmaker; I
persuade my self, That ministers of the Gospel will give me leave (being none
of the greatest clearks) to seek resolution of this my doubt. For I freely
confess, That as yet I cannot see, but that ye have sinned against the truth
by your conformity. Yet so, That I reverence you as Fathers for your work
sake; and regard you as brethren for your profession sake, your sin of
conformity (if it be a sin) notwithstanding. For we are taught, to consider
one another, Heb. 10. 24, 25.
to provoke unto love, and good works; and not to forsake the fellowshippe
which we have among our selves, as the manner of some is.

The grounds (if I may so speak) of my doubting be two: First, The evidence
(so seeming to me) of certain scriptures. Secondly, The weakness (in my
poor opinion) of your excuses. I mean not to quote many places for my
purpose; and I cannot know all, you pretend for your selves. I must and will
therefore content my self with some few: yet the most pregnant (as I judge)
of either.

From the former (quoted in the margent) I take occasion (and I think upon
good ground) to speak to your consciences in these words: If woe be unto
them, Esaias. 5. 20. and 445.
that speak good of evil, and evil of good; If he that subscribeth should
subscribe to the Lord, that is, By subscription profess himself to be the
Lords; If he, Gal. 2. 18. and 3. 3.
that builds again the things, that he has destroyed, makes him self a
trespasser; If they be foolish that after they have begun in the Spirit; (
that is, insinceritie of the Gospel, Reason. 1
(as the Reasoner speaks) would now be made perfect by the flesh; and if
halting between two opinions, 1. King. 18. 2^.
deserve a just reproof: Then I may admonish you, 1. Tim 5. 1.
as Fathers, to make straight steps unto your feet, least that which is
halting be turned out of the way. Heb. 12. 13.
For in the wisdom of the flesh you speak good (by subscription) of carnal
rites; which heretofore ye have reproved in the spirit, and yet mislike in
your best judgment: So that ye build again the things ye have destroyed,
and seem (with some scandal) to halt between two opinions. But I pray you,
let us enter with humble hearts into consideration of your excuses.

First, It is auowed by some, That they have not subscribed simply; but with
protestations and exceptions, Though they be not recorded. Which (say they) is
not their fault. And (say I under correction) The Bb. of Canterbury and his
associates do well in not recording such protestations and exceptions. For; If
they require a lawful and godly subscription; Why then should they blemish
their proceedings with recorded protestations? But, Suppose their urged
subscription be unlawful, do ye not perceive, How the not recording of
protestations does check the weakness of subscribers, who (by protestation
do solemnly accuse their present subscription? Truly (me thinks) you
should either subscribe without protestation; Or, if you protest, you should
not subscribe. For, Is not this Protesting against some things, and
Subscribing to all, to halt between two ways, and to have an heart and an
heart? One heart for the mouth, and an other for the hand? Esa. 29. 13. 14
If the wisdom of wise me^ shall perish, when people come near unto God with
their mouth, and remove their heart far from him: May not I advise you to
repent, That ye have suffered your mouth to increase the sin of your hand;
Ecclef. 5. 5.
and to take heed, That ye say not before the Angel, That it was with
protestation? For why should God be angry with your voice, and destroy the
work of your hands? Romans 14. 22.
o blessed is he that condemns not himself in that thing, which he allows.

Other would iustisie themselves, Because (as they say) It is not affirmed by
their subscription, That all things in the Books of Common prayer, and of
ordeyning Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, be agreeable to the word of God;
but only said, That those Books conteyne nothing contrary to the word of
God. I might appeal to your consciences, Whether you think not some things
in those Books to be contrary to Gods word? But in my conscience (as I am
yet persuaded) This distinction cannot satisfy your conscience. For, If Christ
does say, Luc. 11. 23.
He that is not with me, is against me: May it not be said, That whatsoever
is not according to the word, in Gods public worship and service, is contrary
to the same? And the rather, because Esaias has set it down for a rule; Esaias. 8.
20.
If any speak not according to this word; it is because there is no light in
them? I pray ye consider, That howsoever, he be a good subject, who does
nothing contrary to the laws of his Prince, because the positive laws of
men be imperfect, as their makers be: Yet a good Christian ought to endeavor
in the obedience of faith, That all his actions in Gods worship (which shall
be surely judged in the day of Jesus) be justifiable by the word: Psalm.19. 7.
because The Law of the Lord is perfect: and the Scriptures are so
sufficient, That thereby the man of God may be made absolutely wise unto
salvation. 2. Tim. 3. 15. 17.
I can hardly withhold my self from disputing this case; Because I see, That
this distinction opens a gate to sin and superstition. For, as he who
teaches, That all things in Gods worship (for which we must answer before
God) must be according to the word: restrains man's inuentio^s, and
occasioneth the godly more thoroughly to reley on the scriptures: so, he, who
teaches, That it is sufficient that nothing be contrary to the word, gives
too much occasion of liberty to man's inventions, and causes wise men
(according to the flesh) to be less zealous in searching and depending on the
scriptures. But I desire the humble and godly to consider, whether ceremonies,
and an ecclesiastical government may be thrust upon Christ his Church (which
is his kingedom) without any warrant from Gods word? Exodus 25. 28. 40. and 31.
Seeing Moses ( that extraordinary Lawgiuer) and Bezaleel, 1, 2, 6, 7. and 39.
42. 43.
and Aholiab (miraculouslie inspired with cunning) could not make any thing
about the Tabernacle (no not a payer of snuffers), by their own invention; but
according to the pattern which God himself had showed upon the mountain: and
seeing our state and Church does forbid setting up of candles, Iniunction 3.
Because it is a work devised by man's fantasy besides scripture; condemns
Reservation of the Sacrament, Because it is not by Christ his ordinance,
Articles of Religion artic. 2^
and is earnest against setting up of Images in temples, though they be not
worshipped, Homil. of peril of Idolat.
Because it is not lawful and agreeable to Gods word, so to do. To come
somewhat nearer the point: Suppose such a distinction in God his matters may be
admitted: yet examine your hearts, whether that figg leaf will cover your
nakedness: Since the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons of our Church are said in
the Book of Consecration to be called to their several ministrations
according to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ: And by your subscription to the
third of the ArchBb. Articles ye prosesse, That ye believe all the articles
contained in the Book of Articles of Religion set forth Anno 1562 (the 36.
whereof allowed Bishopps etc.) to be agreeable to God: yet notwithstanding ye
have been and still seem to be persuaded in your conscience, That our Bishops
have not their calling from God; but were set up by man, and settled by custom
for unities sake.

A third sort of subscribers would cover their heads with the shield (not of
faith,) but of human policy and stand to it, That of two evils the less is
to be chosen: And therefore some things are to be tolerated, rather than the
Church should lose the benefit of their ministry. Reason. 5.
Whereunto though the Reasoner has well answered by opposing the wisdom of
the Spirit, which forbids us to lie, Howsoever thereby the verity of God
might more abound unto his glory, and by showing, How this lie, or politic
subscription draws a curse, and not a blessing upon the ministry of
subscribers against their own conscience: Yet give me leave to speak somewhat
to this excuse. I will not urge the opinion of that most reverend, learned,
Epist.12.
and godly divine Master Beza; who can give no other counsel, than that
Ministers having testified their innocence, and tried all remedies in the
fear of the Lord, should give place to manifest violence when they be
commanded not only to tolerate the ceremonies, and ecclesiastical
government of our Church, but also to allow them by their hand writing. For
there is great difference between toleration, and subscription. But I would
learn, whether that ground of policy be not to be understood rather of the
evils of pain and punishment, than of the evils of sin and guiltines: Since
by the doctrine of our Church, No sin is venial or pardenable in it self.
And I make this Quaere, Whether silence enforced, or temporizing subscription,
be the greater evil? Concerning the former, This is my persuasion, That as
God, Job. 13. 7. 9
(who needs not the lie of politic subscription, but can butide his Church
as he will) does not give an ordinary blessing to the ministry of such
subscribers: so the very silencing of faithful ministers that stand fast in the
liberty, Gal. 5. 1. Co^l 2. 20.
wherewith Christ has made us free against the bondage of man's inventions,
Philip. 1. 12.
does turn rather (as Paul's bands) to the furthering of the Gospel. For, If
an hundred godly ministers were suspended for not subscribing to all the
ArchBishoppes Articles, I doubt not but that their silencing would preach
reformation very effectually: Whereas your temporizing subscriptio^ does hurt
many ways. For thereby the ArchBb. is so hartened in his course, that he has
resolutelie said: That since God has so blessed him therein, that few of any
accoumpte withstand the same, he would not give it over now. Is not then your
politic subscribing the cause, why those few be so hardly dealt with, That
no mediation can prevail in their behalf? To say nothing of prosessours, who
seeing you (who have stood in the gappe) to subscribe at the last, do think
those few that now stand, more precise than wise, and become therefore less
comfortable to them than they have bin. But answer me: Is not this affliction
added to their sufferings by your fault? I say more, By your subscriprio^ ye
may seem (in some sort) guilty of preiudicing your brethren, not only for the
time present, but for ever hereafter; except by the standing out of some,
prescription be interrupted. For as many things enacted by Law, are antiquated
by non usage: so many things not commanded by law are established by custom
and prescription. This is not all: For as Peter's example Gal. 2. 12, 13.
drew not only the Jews, but Barnabas also into dissimulation with him: so
your temporizing subscription has been and daily will be an occasion to many
weak ones, if not of falling, yet of stumbling; if not of going back into
Egypt, yet of looking back toward Sodom. So that few be now so zealous for
reformation, as they have been. Which must needs be a great offense, and that
given by you, If (in your judgment) there be need of reformation. Shall I
tell you, That he who 1. Cor. 8. 12.
wounds weak consciences, does sin against Christ, who pronounces an
heavy judgment against him, Mat. 18. 6. 7.
that offends any of his little ones? Nay rather I beseech you by the mercies
of God, That 1. Ioh. 3. 20
If your own heart condemn you for subscribing against your conscience: ye
would fear him that is greater than you heart: Revel. 2. 5.
remember from whence ye be fallen, repent, and do the first works.

REASONS, why faithful Ministers should not be deprived or suspended, for
peaceable omission of prescribed ceremonies; much less for not subscribing to
the^, and all other parts of ecclesiastical policy, as to ordinances not
contrary to the word of God.
FIRST, Reason I.
their omission and scruple of such subscription, Respect of a conscience
probably informed.
is merely of a conscience fearful to offend, in allowing by act or hand,
any thing not warrantable by the word; and therefore a mere invention of man:
According to that of zealous David, Psalm. 119. 113.
I hate vain inventions, but thy Law do I love. For in a godly jealousy of
that spiritual whordome, ( Number. 15. 39.
whereof the people of GOD ought carefully to take heed) they hold; That
what soever is not according to the express scripture, or sound conclusion
from the same, is contrary to the word. Which their opinion; and omission
aunswering thereunto, seems unto them grounded upon the word and judgment
of authority. But since it is not answerable to my present purpose, here to
set down many of their reasons, drawn from the Tim. 3. 16, 17.
sufficiency of the scriptures, (which can suffer neither Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 5.
32.
adding nor diminishing, declining to the right nor to the left hand); from
the Gal. 2. 3, 4, 5. and 3. 2, 3. Ioh. 4. 21, 22, 23.
sincerity of the Gospel, (which can not brook Iewishe, much less Romish
ceremonies) And from sundry other good considerations general and particular;
I only crave favor to set down one or two, That the tenderness of their
conscience may somewhat appear to proceed, not from conceipted scrupulositie
without at least some probable persuasions.

THE general precept of the Apostle, Ephe 5. 8, 10, 11.
Walk as children of the light, approving that which is pleasing to the Lord,
and have no fellowship with unprofitable works of darkness, concerns not
only corrupt manners, but unprofitable ceremonies devised by man without
warrant of the word, at least by good consequence. For it is an Apostolical
canon, 1 Cor. 14. 26.
Let all things be done unto edification. And it is a Prophetical direction,
To the Law and to the Prophets: If they speak not Esa. 8. 20.
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. But the
said faithful Ministers see not how ceremonies prescribed, are profitable;
notwitstanding their godly significations pretended. For if Christ, Heb. 1. 1.
Act. 2. 17. Romans 16. 25, 26.
who in these last days speaks evidently by his Gospel and spirit, had
judged signifying ceremonies convenient unto edification; he would not have
abolished so many prescribed by Moses, Gal. 3. 23, 24, 25. and 4, 3, 4.
as being fit for children; and appointed so few, and those not only for
signification, but principally to be seals of spiritual graces. And
therefore this addition of signifying ceremonies, seems unto them to eclipse
the glory of Christ his wisdom and faithfulness in providing for the full
instruction of his people; contrary to the scriptures; which give him
testimony that he is (as Mat. 23. 8.
only so) a Ioh. 4. 25. Ephe. 4. 8, 11, 12, 13, 14 Heb. 3. 2
sufficient Teacher of his Church: Neither do they see, how the signifying
ceremonies be (otherwise) according to the word; And the rather, because that
other ca^non of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
Let all things be done honestly and by order, (so much urged in their
defense) does only command decent disposing of ceremonies (of order, not of
figure) and not, that what soever may seem tending to decency, is therefore
to be thrust into the Church. In consideration of which (so conceived)
unprofitableness, and vnwarrantablenes, the said Ministers dare not have
fellowship with prescribed ceremonies, In giving allowaunce by using or
subscribing. Again, this fearfulness of prescribed ceremonies, and general
subscriptio^, seems to them to be grounded 1 upon the second commandment, 2
the second petition, and 3 an use of the Lords supper, aunswerable to that
article of our Creed, where we say, I believe that the Church is an holy
communion of Saints. For the second commandment forbidding us to bow, or
yield to any Idol of man's invencion, (under the name of Graven Imaege, the
chief Idol; as all uncleanness is forbidden under the name of adultery, the
grossest pollucion of the flesh) does withal command all things in and
about the service of God, to be according to his revealed will. As appears by
the opposition or relative respect of these words: Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven Image; to these, of them that love me and keep my
commandments. And further, by conferring the use of Fringes, which the
children of Israel were to make upon the border of their garments set down in
these words: Nom. 15. 39.
And ye shall have the fringes, that when ye look upon them, ye may
remember all the commandments of God, and do them; And that ye seek not
after your own heart, nor after your own eyes, after which ye go a whoring.
In the second petition we pray, Heb. 12. 28. Mat. 13. 19. 1. Lu. 9. 2, 6.
That GOD would reign in his Church by the word of his Kingdom; which
teaches us, John 19. 15
That as a worldly kingdom cannot brook two Monarchs: So Christ ( Psalm. 2.
6. 7. Ioh. 5. 22.
to whom the Father has committed all judgment) is only Mat. 23. 8.
Master among his Disciples, and only 1 Timothy 6. 14 15.
Prince among his people. And therefore the Apostle ( Col. 2. 20 etc and 3. 1.
having reproved the unprofitable traditions of men; As, touch not, taste not,
handle not) exhorts the Colossians, to seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. As if he should say; Christ
only rules: Therefore ye are not to obey the commandments of men, but to be
ruled by him only. The use of the Lords Supper before mentioned, Saint Paul
him self makes, when he thus argues: 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17, 20.
Whereas the bread which we break, is the communion of the body of Christ, that
is, a seal of that communion, which we have with Christ, and one with an other
in him. Therefore we must be so far from having any fellowship with Idolaters,
that how so ever we pretend the safe keeping of our hearts for God; yet we must
not (no not only in body) be present at Idolatrous service. From all which,
they think (verily) that the spirit of God it self makes this argument: 1
Cor. 6. 14 15, 16, 17. b This forbids ye whole corruption in religion of
heathen or Antichrist, although principally, their false doctrine.
What communion has the light of the word, with the darkness of man's
inventions? What co^corde has Christ our Savior, with Beliall, the Antichrist
of Rome? And what agreement has the Temple of God (which is our selves) with
Idols of humane traditions? Wherefore Reave, 18. 2. 3, 4.
come out of Babylon (that is, the confusion, or confused worship and
government of Rome) and touch no unclean thing, Psalm. 51. 5.
But as man him self (who is borne in sin and conceived in iniquity,
Eccles. 7. 3^.
) so his own inventions which make him more sinful, Ioh. 17. 17. Deuteronomy. 4. 5,
6. 1 Cor. 3. 12. Iere. 23. 22, 28, 29.
can not be sanctified, but by the word; The hypothesis or ground of this
conclusion is a persuasion; That the ceremonies which they stumble at, be not
only the inventions of man; but part also of the Reu. 17. 4, 5.
scarlet woman her fornications: yea notwithstanding they were in use before
Antichrist was exalted; As John 7. 2.
circumcision was part of the ceremonial law, notwithstanding it was not of
Moses, but of the Fathers; And therefore such ceremonies are by the^ (in their
zeal) judged to be more fitting the whore of Babylon, then beseeming the
chaste spouse of Christ; 10 Cor. 11. 2. Psalm. 45. 10, 11. Col. 2. 18, 19, 20.
who should be conformable to her husband in simplicity and sincerity.

That their dislike of prescirbed ceremonies may (...) to them grounded, as on
(...) so on the judgment of authority, Let the reasons of removing other
ceremonies be well considered: Preface 2. to the book of common prayer.
which be these; They obscured the glory of God; they were unprofitable; they
blinded the people; they turned to vanity and superstition; they were abused
by the unlearned, and beseem not Christ's Gospel; which is not a ceremonial
law (as much as Moses was) but a religion to serve God, not in bondage of the
figure or shadow; but in the freedom of the spirit. To apply by particulars;
Hom. 8.
Piping and chau^ting, part. 2.
are said to have displeased God so sore, and filthilie defiled his holy house
and his place of prayer, That for them he has justly destroyed many Nations.
Iniunct. 3. and 23.
And setting up of candles; covering of shrynes, candlestickes, and all
monumentes of superstition; yea in the glass windows, not only of Churches,
but of houses too, are said, as to be taken away, so to be devised by man's
fantasies (not contrary but besides scripture; And therefore have not only no
promise of reward, but contrariwise great threatninges and maledictions of God,
for that they be things tendinge to superstition. If all these notes of
condemnation may be set, as well on ceremonies retained, as these removed;
Then tender consciences, which think them selves forbidden to be Deuteronomy. 7. 5,
6. and 14, 1, 2
conformable to Idolaters, as well in cutting the hair, as in upholding altars,
have (at least) probable cause to fear, how they allow by act or hand
ceremonies retained.

To conclude this first Reason, wherein I am of necessity longer, the^ I need
to be in the rest; I humbly refer to consideration, That whereas resolved
consciences are vncompellable, and her Majesty of her own Princely clemency,
did permit (among other) Bishop Heath, Execution of justice in England.
a popish recusant (but of conscience: not of a traiterous obstinacy) to
continue Lord Chauncellor; Whether it were not co^venient, that faithful
Ministers should continewe their godly and profitable Ministry, the omission
only of ceremonies notwithstanding Provided that such omission be with peace to
others knowledge; as it seems to be in truth to their own consciences; Least
(otherwise) the reverend Fathers Ephe. 4. 30.
grieve the holy Spirit of GOD by whom they are sealed unto the day of
redemption, and Mat. 23. 8. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
show them selves to be (not brethren) but Lords over Gods inheritance.

SECONDLY, Reason II. Consideration of indisserent things
let it be supposed, that their conscience (all the premises notwithstanding)
is erroneous. But let it be withal considered, that the error is only in
ceremonies; which by the now Archb. of York since he was a L. Bishop were
accounted the blemishes of our Church, and (in their best regard) are but
things indifferent. And therefore the Church is not to be defrauded of the
benefit of faithful Ministers their sound instructions, for only omitting
such ceremonies, and that of conscience with peace; Except it be religion to
Mat. 23. 25
tithe Mynt and Commyn, and to neglect the greater things of the Law. Saint 1
Cor. 7. 36.
Paul would not by his Apostolical authority, restreyne the liberty of
disciples touching Marriage, because it was an indifferent thing, and he
straightly forbids the weak to be condemned, Romans 14. 2, 3, 17. and 15 1,
2, 3.
for not eating of all things considering the Kingdom of God is not meat nor
drink; and we are to please our neighbor in that that is good to
edification, So that he Ga. 5. 11, 12 and 6. 12, 23
wished them cut of, who disquieted the Church by vrginge Paul finally
renou^ced, not only the necessary, but also the indifferent using of
Circumcision.
Circumcision with Christ, That they might rejoice in the flesh of their
brethren, that is, in their conformity in carnal rites.

All this being true, they Phil. 2. 3, 4, 16, 17, 18, 19. and 1. 18.
be no right followers of blessed Paul, who thrust out of the Church
profitable teachers, for only omission of indifferent ceremonies. Again Art.
of Religion, art. 34.
if every particular Church may ordain, change, and abolish rites or
ceremonies; It may be adjudged no capital offense for faithful Ministers (in
their several charges) only to omit indifferent ceremonies; And the less
capital, considering unity in doctrine, and conformity in divine service,
yea, all ready obedience otherwise to the Prince and State is faithfully
observed. Lastly if such only are openly to be rebuked, Eod. and Praefac. 2
to the book of common prayer. Iniunct. 22.
as openly break the traditions of the Church through private judgment, and
contemptuous wilfulness; then only omission (and that of conscience with
peace) deserves not so public and extreme punishments as deprivation and
suspension. For the sentence of singularity can not (with wisdom and
equity) be pronounced against them, who, not only have justified their
omissio^ with arguments 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
out of Gods word, which are published; and (think they) vnaunswered (write
never so many) so long as Master Cartwrights second Reply remains
vnconfuted; but also have the suffrages of reformed Churches ( Scottish, Dutch,
and French) round about us; which have abandoned such ceremonies. Yea by the
observation of some R. Dolema^s conference, lib. 2. ca. vlt.
Popish (though politic) there be few Protestants in England (besides such
as depend upon ecclesiastical dignities) which are not puritans, that is,
Fulk Retent. 16 concer^a. eccle. catho.
such as desire to have the Church thoroughly reformed. As for co^temptuous
wilfulnes, Their not inveying against ceremonies retained; their brotherly
conversation with other of contrary judgment concerning them; their patient
enduring extremities for such omission; their silence when they are suspended,
and mainteining the unity of our church, these ceremonies and great affliction
for them notwithstanding: (besides the said arguments which testify their
omission to be meerelie of conscience) do sufficiently clear them of
contempt and wilfulnes.

THIRDLY, Reason III. Question of warrant by law.
It may seem to them (indeed no great Lawyers) a quere, Whether their so
grievous punishments be iustifyable by the 1 Elis. cap. 2
statute, which punishes such as refuse to use the form prescribed for
Prayers and Sacraments, or obstinately use any other either form or
ceremony; but provideth not against discreet omissio^ of the ceremony though
the form be observed. As for enforcing general subscription, all men may see
and say: It is besides law. For the end of the only 13. Eliz. ^^pit. 12.
Statute for subscription, is to Keep Papists and other heretics out of the
Ministry; As is evident by these words of the preamble: That the Churches of
the Queens Majesty's dominions may be served with Pastors of sound
religion, Be it enacted, etc. Again, the Statute requires Subscriprion to
the Articles of Religion; and not to all, but such as only concern the
confession of the true Christian faith, and the doctrine of the Sacraments.
Yea that the exception of some Articles might be more manifest, (and for no
other cause) is this word only inserted. Lastly, the Bb. of Canterbury,
would not have made a special article for the approving of the book of common
Prayer, etc. by subscription; if such subscription were by that Statute
required. Now further, where there is no commandment, Romans 4. 15.
there is no transgression; where no transgression, no punishment. But wishing
the tollerating of peaceable and proffitable Ministers, and not the hurt of our
Church-gounernours; I forbear to show what danger they may incur by law,
who punish faithful Ministers and loyal subjects without law, for refusing
to subscribe further then law requires; notwitstanding they willingly offer
to subscribe so far. Only this I say (as a Professor of the word, Hab. 1.
13, 14
and no student in law) That whereas Habacuc compares wicked men devouring
men more righteous then they, to fishes of the sea that have no ruler over
them; we may learn, that were there is a sovereign, one subject is not to
tyrannize over an other, without lawful authority.

FOVRTHLIE, Reason IIII. Complaint of unequal judgment
let it be supposed, That peaceable omissio^ (not of divine service) but of
Ceremonies, be punishable in some sort by some law or other; And that the Bb.
of Canterbury his general subscription were to be enforced by law; Yet since
no statute (so far as they know) does expreslie set down what punishment
is due to either offense; they think, that (in equity) their fault, and (in
discretion) their calling, is so to be regarded, that punishment deserved,
exceed not the fault committed: But loss Ecclus 34. 23.
of living by deprivation or suspencion, is the next punishment to death;
Therefore they complain that more then severitie is done against them. For if
it be a grievous punishment to fine a lay man (so called) 10. 20. or 30.
pound: May not the grieved spirits of faithful Ministers, sigh; yea cry unto
God for that their bondage is such, That only omission, and that of
conscience with peace, is corrected with no less punishment, than loss of
living. Iniunct. 28.
Authority does not esteem them (as Ieroboams Priests) the basest of the
people; And the These. 5. 12, 13.
word does exhort us to know them, and to have them in singular love for
their works sake; Yea Psalm. 105. 14, 15.
it straightly forbids us to touch his anointed, or to do his Prophets
any harm; because God has reproved Kings for their sakes. Be it therefore
far from us, to admit it to be the pleasure of our gracious and Christian
Queen, That discreet and able Teachers (of her own profession) should be
subject to such extremities, without sufficient law, or so deserving faults.
Again, unlearned Priests that can but read (and therefore not to be admitted
to take charge of souls by any warrant of Hos. 4. 6.
God or Iniunct. 23. lib. cons. in ye h. quest. to Archd.
Man) are generally tolerated, not only for want of Ministers, but also in
pitiful regard of them selves, their wives, and their children. If there be
greater want of Preachers the^ of Readers, If as great pity to be showed to
Preachers brought up in learning fio^ their infancy; and therefore less able
to shift for them selves and theirs than Readers, that may live by their trades
or occupations, services, or other labors from which they came; And if there
be no 1 Timothy 5. 21, 22.
partiality in Church governors; Then Preaching Ministers may expect
tolleration of peaceable omission, or (at least) mitigation, of so grecuous
extremities.

LASTLY, Reason V. Great inco^veniences.
the due consideration of many and great inconveniences which accompany or
follow so extreme proceedinges, may move such as love 1 Cor. 10. 24.
Christ and the sheep of his pasture more then them selves, Phil. 2. 22.
or private respects; to allow or consent to tolleration or mitigatio^ in
these cases. For (first) such proceedinges constreyne many to use ceremonies,
and generally to subscribe against their own consciences. As may appear by
their protestations, or limitations before; and by their concealing or excusing
after subscription: Whereby they Romans 14. 5. 23.
sin, and so draw upon them selves and their labors, a curse, and not a
blessing. For their pretense of choosing the less of two evils (according to
the counsel of politiques) will not justify them against the doctrine of the
Apostle, which is; Romans 3. 7, 8.
That how soever the verity of God might more abound through our lie unto his
glory, yet we must not do evil, that good may come of it. Therefore 1 Samuel
15. 24. and 16. ^. 14.
as the spirit of God departed from Saul, and an evil spirit vexed him after
he had sinned against his conscience under pretense of a good end; So all
such co^formers may fear (that which is seen in too many) least the good
graces of Gods spirit decay in them, and they prove as ill, or worse, in
negligent teaching; heaping up of livings; and inveighing against such as
stand for reformatio, than they that never pretended like sincerity.
Secondly, such stopping of the mouths of painful and profitable Preachers
for ceremonies sake, is no less punishment to the Church it self, tha^ to the
Preachers; yea so much the greater, because fear of troubles for ceremonies,
make many convert their studies to Physic, Law, or otherwise; and idol
sheepheardes, or idle Nonresidentes, are for the most part, thrust into the
places of faithful Pastors removed. So that the proverb is fulfilled: Pro.
29. 1^ Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4, 5. Zach. 13. 7.
Where Prophecy fails, the people are scattered. Thirdly, such thrusting
out of faithful Ministers and Watchme^ for ceremonies, is occasion, as of much
Hos. 4. 1, 2, 6
sin, so of many papists, who are increased or confirmed, partly through
want of that diligent teaching which is in Cities and good Towns (as one of
themselves R.Dolema^^ conf. etc. lib. 2. cap. vlt.
observes), partly by impunity. For as the Turks have less feared
Croysadoes, ever since the Pope and his vassalls have fet them selves against
the Lutherans; so Papists do less fear the high Commission, when they see
the B. of Canterbury and his Colleagues, most earnest against Puritanes, so
called. And therefore (as it is generally to be observed) sincere Preachers,
are (for the most part) accused and persecuted by Church-papistes; and
partly, by that conceit which Papists take of the rest of their religion,
when they see such zeal for their supposed ceremonies. For Bristow makes it a
special motive to Popery: Motive 34.
That in ceremonies, and our book of common prayer, we apishlie imitate, (so
apishlie he writes) Catholics, and the Mass book. And therefore some
English protestants are scornefullie termed, Concertatio eccle. cathols.
Caluin-papistes, for such conformity. Fourthlie, such urging of ceremonies
has been, and is likely to be the occasion of scisme and contention amongst
professors of the same faith and religion. For they that suffer, think them
selves bound to follow the example of Christ, in Mat. 15. 2,3 9, 10, 11.
approuinge (as they may) the omissio^ of ceremonies, least their Ma.. 11. 4,
5, 6. 2 Cor. 6. 3. 4, 5, 8.
suffering should be scandalous, and they them selves for so suffering,
traduced as ill doers. Again, Act. 28. 17, 22.
professors occasioned by such suffering diligently to consider the cause,
find the^ selves bound, as well as their Teachers, to justify Mat. 11 16. 17,
18, 19.
wisdom in such sort as becomes her children. Hence it is that Act. 14. 4.
the multitude is divided, some holding with the Jews, some standing with the
Apostles; whereas if urging on the one side, and confuting on the other side,
were given over, our Church would be at unity in it self, As the reformed
Churches in France, Scotland, and the low countries are: for there is no
general difference amongst us, but about Romish (so reputed) Policy.
Otherwise, it is not to be expected (though wished) that contention will so
surcease. For (to say nothing of the schism of the Brownistes, to who^ these
ceremonies are great stumbling blocks, and therefore Romans 14, 13. 16. 19:
to be removed, or not so grievouslie urged, least the rent of our Church
prove greater and greater) I am persuaded; That howsoever the Ier. 10 9. 10
and 28. 1. 2. 6. 13.
railing of many, and fear on every side enforce Jeremy to cease speaking
in the name of God; and the cunning, but counterfeit prophecy of Hannaniah,
make him lay his hand upon his mouth for a time; yet the word of God will
be in his heart, as a burning fire; so that he shall be weary of forbearing, and
not able to stay from prophesying yokes of iron, in steed of those wodden ones
which Hananiah did or would break. And the rather, because May. Hooker (too
friendly a censurer of Papists) has (by Ezekiel. 13. 10. 5.
dawbing over, not only the walls of ceremonies, but also the grossest
corruptions, and that with untempered Mortar) provoked Jeremy, or some of the
Prophets, to Ezekiel. 22. 30.
stand in the gappe, to Esa. 59. 4. 16
contend for the truth; and so to 1. Cor. 4. 19. 20.
know, not his words but his power. For the kingdom of GOD is not in word,
but in power. Lastly, it is to be feared, That such contention only about
supposed relics of Rome, Such stopping of the passage of Gods word, which
should be 1 These. 3. 1.
free and glorified; and that to uphold but man's inventions; And such extreme
dealing with brethren (yea Fathers to be 1 Timothy 5. 1.
respected) only for ceremonies held but as indifferent things; will at
last, draw upon the whole land, most heavy judgments, if it be not by
better courses prevented. For if by contention we byte one another, let us take
heed least we be consumed one of another. For so advises the Gal. 5. 12. 13.
15.
Apostle in a like contention. Again, if God cast away 1. Sam. 15. 23.
Saul from being King, because he cast away the word of the Lord, and followed
his own device; If God destroyed 2. Kings. 23. 24.
children, only for mocking a Prophet; And if he that is least in the kingdom
of God Mat. 11. 9, 11.
is greater then John Baptist, who was more then a Prophet, The^ if rulers of
Mat. 24. 45. 49.
Gods householde, neglecting their proper duty, of giving each one his
porcio^ of meat in due season, begin to smite their fellows; and that more
severely then can stand with mercy and judgment; Deuteronomy. 25. 2, 3.
Thereby manifestinge greater contempt of their brethren, then childish
mocking: It is (I say) to be feared, That he by Mat. 10. 14 Act. 13. 50. 51.
whose prescription Paul and Barnabas (expelled by the Jews) shook off the
duste of their feet in witness against the^, Mat. 22. 6. ^
will in time send forth his wrath to destroy them, that over sharply
entreat his servants.

TO CONCLVDE, EPILOGVS.
If Ministers make scruple of conformity in prescribed ceremonies, and of
general subscription, merely of conscience, grounded (as it may seem to them
selves and to others) upon Gods word, and our Churches judgment; And
co^venient respect is to be had of such consciences: Secondly, if by the
practice and precept of the Apostle, indifferent things are not to be enforced
against the conscience of any, and by the doctrine of our Church, traditions
of men, are but indifferent things; And therefore only open and wilful
contemners are openly to be rebuked, and the said Ministers are freed from
wilful contempt, by many argumcntes. Thirdly, if the extreme censures of
deprivation and suspencion, only for peaceable omission (not of divine
service) but of ceremonies, be without law, As it is conceived probably; and
enforcing general subscription be besides the statute so perceived evidentlie,
and the rather because subscription, according to the Statute, is tendered
willingly. Fourthly, if harder measure should not be offered to faithful
Ministers (not the worst of her Majesty's subjects) then to civil men in
civil causes and to unlearned Priests, tolerated for personal pity and the
churches necessity; And learned Preachers be as needful as bare Readers: And
fifthly, If many and great inconveniences accompany or follow such extreme
dealing, As, first, enforcing many to co^formitie against their consciences,
whereby they provoke Gods curse upon their gifts and labors. Secondly,
Exposing the Church to the danger of the wolf and thief; by thrusting or
keeping out faithful Pastors, and enterteyning idol sheepeheardes, and idle
Non-residents. Thirdly, Confirmation of Papists through want of teaching, not
prosecuting the^ for zeal against Puritans, and countenau^cing their supposed
ceremonies. Fourthlie, Occasioning schism and contention present, and to come.
And fifthlie, Confusion threatened by contention, or some heavy judgment of
GOD for stopping the passage of his word and mouths of his Messengers, only
for omission of man's inventions: Then there may seem to be reason, why
faithful Ministers should not be deprived or suspended for peaceable omission
of prescribed ceremonies; much less for not subscribing to the^ and all other
parts of ecclesiastical policy, as to ordinances not contrary to the word
of God.

Inducements to make a Quaere, whether peaceable omission, only of ceremonies,
be punishable by 1o Eliz. Cap. 2o.
When that statute was made, the law makers did not imagine, That any (willing
to observe the form of service and Sacraments) would make scruple of so few
ceremonies retained, considering Popery was but then reformed: And therefore
(as it may be probably coniectured) they never thought of providing punishment
for omission only of ceremonies. Which may be the rather supposed, if these
Inducements from the statute it self be well considered.

such meaning, ceremonies would have bin me^cioned especially in the first
place.





Edwardes book (set forth in the fifth and sixth years of his reign) with one
alteracion or addicion of certain lessons, etc. But no word of alteration or
addition of ceremonies in that place, as afterward: Where we are referred to
the second year of his reign. Which is to be noted.



THE Hypothesis of these Inducements is a persuasion, That where the mind of
the law is not manifest, there a favorable construction, (not contrary to
express words) is to be made for the benesitt of the subject: But that statute
does not clearly provide punishment for omission of ceremonies, when the form
is observed: Therefore Ministers, (subjects not of the worst sort) distressed
by the privation and suspension (punishments not of the least sort) most
humbly desire an explanation of the said statute.

FINIS.

