A new book of spiritual Physik for diverse diseases of the nobility and
gentlemen of England, made by William Turner doctor of Physik.

Prouer. 12. The way of the folyshe man seems right in his own eyes, but he
that is wise will hear counsel.

Ad nobilem Britannum.
Viuere fi cupias multos feliciter annos
Et post hanc vitam regna videre Dei:
Pharmaca quae grata Turnerus me^te propinat
In mentem penitus sum, quam tutus eris.
Anno. 1555. 10. Calen. Martij.

To the right honorable Dukes and Earls, the Duke of Northfolke, the Duke of
Suthfolke, the Earl of Arundale, the Earl of Derbi, the Earl of Shrosbery, the
Earl of Huntyngton, the Earl of Combrelande, the Earl of Westmerlande, the Earl
of Penbrook, and the Earl of Warwik William Turner Physician wyssheth perfyt
knowledge in Gods holy word and grace to live acordyng unto the same.
Right mighty princes and honorable lords, this have I marked in diverse
places of Germani: that after that the burgesses and cytezenes have bylded them
cities, and have made good and wholesome laws for the maintenance of all kind
of good order there: have chosen unto them certain lords which they call in
their tongue Schermheeren, that is, defendyng lords, to defend their cities,
when as they are perfytlye bylded and set in good order: Knowing well by
experience, that there is no city so strongly bylded and well ordered, but it
shall have enuyers and mortal enemies at one time or other.

Even so I, after that I had made this little book, and set it in as good order
as I could, fearyng, nay rather precyslye knowing, that there shall many
arise, which will either slander it, and blame it, or else will condemn it and
burn it, as an heretical and seditius book: before they have cast and
reproved it by any sufficient witnesses, either of scripture, or of reason,
among all the hole nobilite of England, I am compelled by great need to choose
you, and desire you to be patrones, and defenders of this my little book only
so far as it agrees with natural reason, and with the written word of God.
If that any wise and learned man can reprove and justly overcome any thing
that I have written in this book, with reason and scripture, I will amend it
that is amysse: and recant it which is written against the scripture. But if
no such thing can be found in it: I beseech you as Gods ministers, and
officers under him, to defend it so long as it shall be found reasonable and
godly. But lest, I should put you, unto to much pain: I will answer
aforehand to sum objections, which I reken will be made against me. Some who
would be loath that their sores should be touched: will say, why do ye not go
about as well to heal the clergy, and the co^mones, as ye go about now to
correct us? There is neither of both those orders, but it had as much need
of Physike, as the nobilite has. I answer that if the clergy be sik, the
nobilite ought to be their phisicianes and healers.

How can the nobilite heal them: when they are sik them selves?

How shall the co^mones be healed, when as their physicians in politic
things, the noble men: and their physicianes in spiritual matters, the
shepherdes are both so sik, that they are not able to do their own duties?
Therefore it is not possible to heal the other two orders, except the order of
gentylmen be first healed. Forthermore, when as I intend to entreat of
diverse matters, after the order of physike: what a foolyshe Physician should I
have been, if that I should beselye have gone about to heal the legs and
the thyghes, and not offered any remedy at all, unto the heart, the liver, and
the head? When as all physik would that the principal parts should be first
looked to, and healed, because all the prosperity and health of the lower
parts, hang upon the health and welfare of the over and principal parts,
and the nether parts must needs be sike, as long as the over parts are not
perfytlye healed. This matter is proved to be true, not only by physik and
natural reason, Eccl. 10.
but also by the scripture which says. Eccle, 10. As the gouerner of the
city is: so are also they that dwell in it. Then seeing that these gentylmen
will be the principal parts, and the head of the common wealth: acording unto
reason and to nature, they must go before all the rest in the common wealth,
which thing they can not do, if they be not healed before.

Therefore it is necessary that the ge^tlemen be first healed. Where in, when I
have done as much as I can do for my part: I will offer some physike both
unto the clergy, and to the yemanry of this realm, lest I should seem to
favor one kind of men more then an other. If any man think that I dishonor
your lordshippes in dedicatyng my book unto you, and in speaking unto you and
to other lords, in many places of the book: as though ye were only the sik
men to whom I offer physik only to: I answer that therein, I dishonor you
not, but honor you as much as lies in me, whilse I make you the head of all
the nobilite in England under ye Queen. For when as ye are ye head of the
body of the nobilite, it were no wisdom for me to speak unto the sik belly
fete and back, which for lack of ears can hear nothing at all. When a man
has the gout in his too, or the ciatica in his huckell bone, or the collik in
his bellye, no wise physician will speak unto the too, nether unto the hukkell
bone, nether unto the bellye, but he speaks unto the head, which hears and
receives counsel, and physik also, for all the rest of the parts of the
hole body, and though these above named parts be only vexed, and the head
be hole and sound, yet God and nature have ordained, that the head shall both
receive all manner of counsel, and medicines, be they never so bitter and ugly,
for the vylest part of al ye body. Therefore I dishonor not your lordships but
honor you, as much as lies in me when as I do none other wise unto you, then
God and nature would that I should do. This in most humble wise I beseech your
lordshippes for the love that ye owe unto God, and to the common wealth of
England that ye look well upon my physik, and try it to the vttermoste, if ye
find it lawful, then take it unto you, and into you, and dispose it, and
send it to such parts of the body of the nobilite as have most need of it,
and I dout not, but that many that are now sick shall be well healed, to the
glory of God, and to the profyt of the common welthe. The Lord Jesus the
great Physiciane which is able to heal both body and soul: heal all them
that are sik, and save you from all enemies, both bodily and goostlye. Amen.

If thou be minded, (gentle reder) to read this book here following with
pleasure and profyt: amend these fautes following as I shall teach thee.
Red in the first lefe and al through the book cuntre and not country. In the
third lefe read surname and Dikson. In the.iiii. lefe read curtesey. In
the.vi. lefe and.xxx. line read for a, and. In the.vii. lefe read byldynge, and
in the last line red foles and no fowls. In the.viii. lefe read straight and
not straight. In the.ix. lefe read brute bestes and mules. In the.xi. read
manteyneth and not mantayneth. In the.xiiii. read in ye sight of God, clenged
and altares and not cle^sed and aultares. In the.xv. read contained. In
the.xxiii. lefe and.xiiii. line red wot for not, for man of law men of law.
In the.xxiiii. lefe and.xxxvi. line read manifest in the last line of the same
lefe saving one, read bodies. In the.xxvi. lefe read for eglates aglates. In
the.29. read for ponish ponished In the.xxxi. and.xxxii. line read where and
not when, in the same side red give me and not my. In the.xxvi. lefe read
Wolseys house and not Wolsey his house. In the.xlii. in the.iii. line make for
if sum: what if sum. In the.xlvii. lefe read betulle. In the.xlix. lefe read
for bag beg. In the.50. lefe and.7. line read fathers. In the.51. lefe read
field for fylde. In the.52. lefe read in the.30. line nether, in the second
side read scelerum and rimatur. In the.53. read penny and mo and not more. In
the.57. lefe and in 20.21. and 23. lines put out this superfluus sentence, and
he that knows not the cause of the disease how shall he take it away, for it
twyse together. In the.59. read chief. In the.62. read se iungere for se iunge.
In the.75. lefe read betokenyng. In the.78. read Ezechiel reherseth among the
causes of ye great etc. In the 79. lefe read springs out of In the.80. lefe
read for.3. iiii. either 3. iiii. or vncias.iiii. In the.85. and 31. line read
any stert vpppes are. In the 86. read sterlynges. In the.90. lefe read
episcopus for episcupos. In the last lefe of all read, Imprented at Rome by
the vatican Church against Marcus Antonius constantius, otherwise called
thraso or gloriosus Pape miles.
The contents of this book.
IN the first part of this book the auctor shows who be noble and gentle
men: and how many works and properties belong unto a noble or gentleman, and
where in his office chefelye stands: which he proves is to maynteyne
defend, and observe the written word of God, and the true worshippyng of him
according to the same, and shows that neither fair builded and trimmed
houses, nor yet rich apparel, dauncyng, lutynge, dycyng nor cardyng, haukyng
nor huntyng are the chief tokens, offices or duties of noble and gentlemen.

In the second part he proves great diseases to be in the true nobilite and
gentlemen, which lets them to do their offices and duties.

In the third part he names the diseases that are in the nobilite to be
these, the hole Palsy, the Dropsey, the Romyshe pockes, and the Lepre: and
shows the nature of the diseases, the danger of them, and tells the
remedies for every of the diseases acordyngly And in the end of the book is
added the prayer of Daniel contained in the.ix. Chapter of his prophecy.

To the noble men and gentle men of England.
THe love that I owe unto my Lord God, to my neyghbor, and my natural
country, has compelled me at this time, to offer unto you, my lords and
masters, some part of such substance, as almyghtye God has given unto me.
Which thing, except I should have done, I might have been easily proved,
nether to have loved God, nor my neighbor nor my country. He that has the
substance of this world, and sees his brother wantyng help, and shuts up
his bowels from him, how does the love of God abide in him? How can he love god
whom he sees not, which loves not his neighbor, whom he sees? How loves
he his neighbor that when he may save and help him, will nether help him, nor
offer any help to him at al? How loves he his natural country, which suffers
ye posts and pillars of his country (without the which his country must needs be
destroyed) for lack of help to peryshe, when as he can help them if he will?
Then when as almighty God has endued me with the knowledge of spiritual
Physic and se my brethren and country me^, the noble and gentyl men of
England, sore syck and like to peryshe, except they have spedye remedy, would
offer them no help, I might justly be iuged nether to love God, my neighbor
nor my country.

Therefore for the declaracion of my love unto all three I intend according unto
my bound deutie, to offer you some of my spiritual Physic, which God has
lent me, to heal such diseases as ye are sick in When as of late years I
practiced bodily physic in England, in my lord of Su^mersettes house, diverse
sick beggars came unto me, and not knowing that I was a Phisician, asked of me
mine almose. To who^ I offered to heal their diseases for Gods sake. But
they went by and by away from me, and would none of that* For they had much
lever be sick still with ease and ydlenes, then to be hole, and with great
pain and labor, to earne honestly their living. It were great shame, if any
noble man or gentle man, should be like unto a lyther beggar, as all they are
doutles (if there be any such) which had lever be sick in a death bringing
disease, that for a time they might have their ease and pleasure then to be
healed and to do their office with labor and pain, where unto almightye God
has called them. Other that are sore sick will not knowledge that they have any
sickness at all, and therefore will bid me bestow my physic upon them that need
it. As for the former kind, I will offer them physic, if they will not receive
it, I am discharged, and to their ieopardy be it. As for the other kind that
say that they are not sick, and pretend that if they knew surely that they
were sick, would both seek remedy for their diseases, and would thankfullye
receive such remedies, as are offered the^: I will prove by good authorite and
reason that they are sick, although they do not, nor ca^ not, perceive and se
their own sickness.

A sickness is a passion in a body, against nature, hurting and stoppinge the
natural work of the same body. Then they whose natural work is hyndered and
stopped, by some passion against nature: are sick.

But many noble men and gentle men in England do not their natural work,
that belongs unto their vocacion. Therefore there are many noble men and
gentle men sick in England. To prove that diverse gentle men and noble men in
England do not their offices that belong unto them: it is required that I
first tell, who is a noble man, or a gentil man, and what is the office of a
gentleman, and how many works and properties belo^ge unto a noble or
gentleman, and wherein his office stands. It is therefore necessary to show
what is a nobleman or a gentilma^, because in this book I make so often mention
of noble men and gentlemen, lest some should not know, to whom I ordeyne and
prepare this physic: Nobilis in latin be tokeneth any gentilman what so ever
degree he be of, so yt he be above the common people, and not only a Duke or
such gentilmen as are only above the degrees of a knight, as this word
Noble, is commonly used in our English tongue now a days. Nobilis comes of
Notabilis, by taking away of ta. He is Notabilis which is well known and may
be discerned from the common sort, by some excellent quality of body or
mind. A gentleman has his name of this word gens gentis, which may be called
in English, a folk, a nation, or a family, so that it appears, that a
gentleman is he, that is commed of some notable house, famely or surname: for
gentlemen, commonly have their surnames, other of their famely or mansion
houses, where as they were borne. The common sort of men which are no
gentlemen, in many countres, have none other name of their folk or kin, but
such as they received of their Godfathers, when they are baptized: As it is in
low Germany, and in Scotland: In low Germany where as I have been most, there
is almost no man saving gentlemen, that have any surname, or name of their
famely or kynred. For the yemen are either called by the towns that that they
are borne in, as Herman van Vtrecht, Ian van Munster, Henryk van der Busche: Or
of their fathers name, as Johan Henricus Bernard Clause, or of their
occupacion, or of their fathers occupacion, as Bert luchtemaker, Hanse Dretler:
The Scotts in great plentye and some English men, which are yeme^ men, and of
no famous famelye or kynred, have their syrnames, of their fathers christian
names, and of their fathers occupatio^s, as John Wilyems, Thomas Diksen, Rafe
Robson, Steven Gardener, Thomas Turner, Laure^ce Tailor, and many such other,
whose parents have been no gentlemen, but of the low, and base sort of the
people.

Hitherto have I only spoken of the etymologi of ye name of a noble man and a
gentle man. Now will I describe a gentleman as well as I can. A gentle or noble
man is an excellent person either in qualities of body or mind, or one that is
co^med of noble pare^tes and forefathers, ordened and promoted of God alone or
of God and his gouerners under him in earth, to dignity and to govern, either
all or some part of the common wealth, or church of Christ in matters
pertaynyng, unto the outward government. And this description is grounded
upon Scripture, Reason, and Philosophy, as I shall partly declare here after.

Of the office, works, learning and knowledge that belong unto a noble or
gentilman.
Now after that I have told you what a gentilman is, and that it is God that
makes and has made all right gentlemen, let us se for what end and purpose
he made them, and whether a gentleman serves for any purpose in the common
welthe or no, or he is but an idle superfluus and a dead part of the politic
body or no.

And if he be a part of the body, whether is he ye belly, that wastes all
thing, that the rest of the body wynneth: or he is an arm that defends the
body with his strength or the head that saves it, with wit and learning or no.
The common sort of gentlemen believes that God has made them in vain, and
that they are bound to do nothing at all for their living that they have, and
that the proper office work and calling of a gentleman, is only to hauk and
to hunt, to dyce and to card, to swear and to brag, to pype sing and
dance, and to make fine cursy, to banquet and to wear proud apparel, and to
have gorgius houses: The Philosophers and wise men of the gentyls, which by the
law of nature that was written in their hearts, knew partlye the nature of
god by his creatures: with one assent and agreement, hold that God made nothing
in vain. The same thing may ye learn of the parts of a man's body, wherein
no part is so little or small, but it serves for one purpose or other. As ye
may well learn of Galene the Phisiciane, in his book that he wrote, of the
use and office of ye parts of a man's body: Then when as the politic body of
the common welthe ought to be like unto the natural body of man (which is
called of some wise men ye less world) there ought no part to be in ye politik
body without office: wherefore if ye be creatures of Gods making, and true
members of the politik body, ye must needs have some work and office in it,
or else ye must be unprofitable branches, which bring forth no fruit, and
therefore worthy to be cut of, and to be cast into the fire. If ye require
scripture to prove it that I have proved before by Philosophers and by reason,
I will prove you by scripture that gentlemen ought to have some work and office
in the common wealth, and that they are not ordened of God to be idle and to
have no office, as many idle ruflers do believe at this time.

Moses says that God did se that all things that he made were very good.
Then if gentlemen be of gods creation, they are very good for somthynge. If
they be made good, and that for some good thing, then are they not ordened for
to be idle and unoccupied. When as almighty God said unto Adam, in the sweat
of thy brows shalt thou eat thy bread, he granted no privilege unto
gentlemen, that they should be exempted from all labor for they were at the
time of that curse, as well in the loins of Adam, as the yemen men were.
Therefore they must also labor, and have some office, and do some service to
God for their meat and drink, and for their other good turns, that they
receive of their lord and master almighty God.

Paul the Apostle in the second epistle unto the Thessalonians, cannot abide
such idle fellows as will go up and down, and will do no good for their meat
and drink. And the same Paul commands such as are warned to labor, and to
fall to some kind of honest exercise profitable for the common wealth, and will
not, should be excommunicated. The words of Paul. 2. these. 3
2. these. 3. are these. Brethren we command you through the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye wythdrawe your selves from every brother which behaueth
himself inordinatly and not according unto the ordinance which he has
received of us. For ye know how ye ought to follow us. For we have not behaved
our selves inordinatly amongst you. Nether have I received bread of any man
for nothing, but with labor and sweat, working day and night, for this end, yt I
would not be thargeable unto any of you. Not because that it is not lawful for
any of us, but that I might set my self out as an example unto you to follow.
For when we were with you, this did we co^mau^d you, yt if any man would not
labor, yt the same should not eat. For we hear yt there are some co^uersant
among you and living inordinatly, doing no work, but doing curiously. Them yt
are such, we comau^d and beseech in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
they workyng with quietness eat their own bread. Ye yt are my brethren, be not
weary of well doing. If there be any yt obeys not our word, certifye me of him
by a letter, and have no fellowship with him, that he may be ashamed. Hitherto
Paul: The Lord Jesus, our king and master also co^pareth himself unto a man
yt goes from home into a far co^tre, and he co^pareth his disciples and
christianes, unto such servants as have received their masters substance or
power, and have every man their work and office appointed unto them. Our
masters words are these. Marci. 13. As a man yt goes from home and leaves
his house, a has given unto his servants power, or his substance, and to
every man his work. etc. If gentle me^, that is to say, Kings, Dukes, Earls,
Lords, Knights and Squiers, be Christ's servants, and he has given unto
them, any of his power or substance, then has he given them also a work, for
he has appointed every one of his servants a work. If they have a work and
a vocacion, appointed unto them, then they are not without an office, then may
they not think that they are bound to do nothing profitable for the rest of
the congregation or politik body that they are of. When as Christ shall say
in the day of judgment, or in the end of every man's life, give account of
thy stewardship, shall the nobilite make no account at all? If gentlemen may be
idle, and have no work nor office appointed them, then shall they not need to
make any account of their stewardship. But they shall give account of their
stewardship, therefore they have some office and work appointed them, by the
king of heaven their Lord and master. Saint Paul says that we must al
(out taking no man) be opened before the judgment seat of Christ, that every
man may receive, according unto those things that he has done in his body,
whether it be good or euel. And Christ says that in the day of judgment,
they that have done good things shall go into everlasting life and they that
have done euel things shall go into everlasting fire.

Then they that are idle men and do no good, shall never enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but God has ordened heaven for gentlemen, for he would
that all men should be saved, therefore they are ordened to do good unto the
common wealth, and not to be idle. Some wytty gentleman perchance will say,
we shall not be taken out of the nombre of right gentlemen, for lack of labor
and for idleness, labor we not, when we hunt and hawk? is it not labor to
dance? he that hunteth long and follows ernestly his game, and he that
dau^seth long, laboreth I warrant you, and sweateth with laboryng, he that
dyceth and cardeth laboreth earnestly with his mind, thus do we. Therefore we
are not al together idle. Ye are in deed when ye do these things, nether
utterly idle, nor yet altogether well occupied your master which gave you your
lands and goods, will not allow these your unthrifty pastymes for a right
labor, because he commanded you never to occupye them, and therefore will he
say unto you, that brag so much of gentleness and nobilite, and do nothing
that belongs thereto, but hunt and hauk, and dyce and card, who required
these things of your hands. As ye have not done unto my congregation, so have
ye not done unto me. But ye have don no good unto it, therefore ye have done no
good unto me, therefore have I no place for you in my kingdom. Furthermore
haukynge and hunting, dycynge and cardyng, sweryng of great oaths, wearyng of
costly apparel, and buyldyng of costly houses, and trimmyng of them with costly
hangynges, are not the offices and labors properly and severally belongyng
unto a noble or gentleman. For Lions, Bears, and Wolves, hunt for Calves,
Fowls and such like beasts, Kytes, and Kestrels, hawk for chikens,
goslinges, and butterflies. As for dycyng and cardynge, and abominable
swearyng, and fine lutynge and daunsynge, and making pretty curtesye, baudes and
brothelles, ruffianes, and rybaldes, pypers and players, can do all these
things as well and do them as often as any gentleman in England does or can do
They that think that costly apparel does make a gentle or noble man, may be
both merely mocked and strongly confuted by a tale which was told me of an
honest man borne and brought up in Scotland. The tale was of one Ihoan of Low,
the king of Scotts fool. This simple man stood in a place where as many
lords and other gentlemen came by, but the sely fool nether greted nor put of
his hood to any of all the lords yt came by. The which thing a certain curtier
of the kings house seeing, rebuked ye fool sharply and bet him a little, and
threatened him, that he would whyp him, except he would great the next lords
that he saw. Poor John said that he would gladly great the next lords that
he saw, if the curtier would tell him, how that he might know a Lord from
an other man For he said that he knew not a lord from an other man. Then quod
the curtier, thou shall know lords by these tokens. They wear velvet and
have gold upon their cappes, and about their necks. Well quoth the fool, I
shall lexe token them as well as I kan. And upon the next day as soon as John
came abroad he saw a great sort of bishops and other lords mules standing
at the court gates, trapped with velvet and costly trimmed with gold, wherefore
he remembering his lesson, that ye curtier had taught him, straight way as
soon as he saw them, he went unto them, and cried a great while, to every one
after an other, gued day my lord, gued day my lord, even until the Curtier
his scolemaister, came out and saw him making curtesy, and gretynge the
mules. As soon as the fool saw his scoolmaister, he said unto him. Am I not
a good sun now? Thou art mad, quoth the curtier, for these are mules and no
lords. Why quoth the fool, but these wear velvet, and gold on their heads.
The curtier bet, the fool, and bad him learn better to ken a lord or else he
said he would whyp him naked. And as they were talking, suddenly came rydyng
toward them the sheryffe of Murra all in velvet, having a cappe all full of
golden agglettes.

The fool stepped forth to mete him, and as soon as he came nere unto him he
said, gued day my lord and ye be not a mule. Some man will say that the saying
or doing of a fool, is but of small strength to over throw the opinion of
many wyttye young men, which describe a lord, or a gentle man only by
costlye apparel. To whom I answer: Saepe etiam stultus fuit opportuna
loquutus.

That is, a fool often times has spoken things to good purpose, or in season.
Did not Balaams Ass speak wisely at a certain time? Well if any man be
grieved that his opinion should be confuted with the saying and doing of a
fool, let him choose one of these two whether he will, ye is, whether the fool
in this his doing did wisely or foolyshly. If he answer that he played the
wysema^s part in taking and halsyng the mules for lords: then must he also
do so, and call al brute beasts mules that are trapped with velvet and trimmed
with gold, lords: and give that name which belongs unto honorable men, unto
brute mules. If he played the right fool then is he a fool that takes and
greteth him for a lord which not by learning and knowledge, but only by
costlye apparel differs from an other man Well thus did the poor Scottishe
fool, were it not pytie that many wise English men (as they are taken)
should take and great mules for lords and gentlemen? Is it not possible yt one
mule may at this day carry an other? Master Latemer thought so when sir Martin
mydas rode to hear master Miles preach, and said when the sermon was done,
that his mule was as well absolved as he.

And as for buyldyng of costlye houses, and trimmynge of them with costly
hangynges and fair waynscot, many merchants use to do those things, better
the^ many ge^tlemen do, and yet for all that, are no gentlemen. Therefore these
things, are nether proper offices, nor works of gentlemen, nether the several
tokens whereby a gentleman may be known from an other common man. Then seeing
these are another offices nor works, nor marks belo^gyng properly unto a
gentleman, I must seek out what is his proper office, and what tokens he has
and ought to have, whereby he may be known from the common people. The propre
office and work of a right noble man, is, to set forth and defend the true
religion of almighty God, to defend the innocents and to ponishe the euel
doers, and to show justice and judgment unto all men, that are under his
government. That the setting forth of Gods word and the mayntenance of the
same, and the destroyeng of al false doctrines contrary unto it, belongs unto
a noble man, both general commandments, and proper examples in the holy
Bible, do plainly bear wytnes. Almyghtye God gives these commandments
following unto all his people, and namely unto the nobilite and iuges, which are
the chief workers of these commandments, and all such like as pertayne unto
judgment, and ponyshynge of horrible trespasses, although the commons be bound
in executyng of them, Deute. 7.
to aid them, and help them: Overthrow says almyghtye God, the aultares of
the heathen, break in pieces their images, and cut down their groves,
Deuteronomi. vii. It is also written Deuterono. Deute. 18.
xviii. If there by any prophet made froward with arrogancye, that will
speak those things in my name, which I commanded him not to speak, or will
speak in the name of other gods: he shall be slain.

Who shall se these laws executed, but the nobles and gentlemen. The^
belongs it unto them, to destroy all false and conterfet religion, and to
destroy all false teachers and preachers, and to maintain the true learning
of almyghtye God, and the preachers of the same. We read in the books of the
Kings and Paralipomenon, that all the most excellent and best kings, soon
after that they began to reign did mainteyne gods true religion, in puttyng
down of Groves, chapels and churches, wherein false religion was mayntayned,
and did set forth the true religion, and maynteyned the preachers of the same.
We read in the same books, that some of ye Kings, beside that they destroyed
ydoles and their tempels, did also both read the scripture in the Temple their
own selves, and sent out many preachers to preach ye true word of God,
which had been, before their days, in the time of their fathers hyd and
unknown unto the folk of God. 3. Reg. 15.
Asa as it is written in the.xv. chapter of the third book of the kings,
which did it that was right in ye sight of the Lord as his father David did
before him, took away the effeminate out of ye land and scoured quyte away,
all the fylth of the ydolles which his fathers had made. He removed also his
mother Maachan, that she should not be the cheffe in ye sacrifice of Priapus,
and in that place that she had hallowed. He also ouerthrewe her den, and
brake ye most fylthy ydole, and burnte it beside the broke Cedron. This did
the good King Asa, and he did it that was right in the syghte of god. But
though these things, had been good of them selves, yet if they had not
perteyned unto his office, or had perteined unto an other vocacion then to his:
God would have ponyshed him, for enteryng into an other man's office, as he
ponyshed the King Ozias with a perpetual Lepry, for entryng into the office of
the Sacrificers, when he offered up frankencense upon the fra^kencense altar.
^. par. 26.
But the scripture makes no mention of any ponishment of God that came upon
Asa for puttyng down of ydoles. But it says expresselye that Asa did it that
was right in the sight of God. Therefore it was his office to put down ydolles
temples, and to destroy ydolatrye. And it that is said of Asa, must have
place also in other good Kings, which did such like things unto these that
Asa did. Iosaphat as the.xvii. Chapter of the second book of Paralipomenon
bears wytnes: 2. par. 17.
was a right good man, and the Lord was with him. This Iosaphat after that his
heart had taken boldness, for the ways of the Lord, took also out of Judah the
high places and the groves. And in the third year of his reygne, he sent out
of his princes and ruelers, Benail, Abdia, zacharias, Nathanael, and Micheas,
to teach in the cities of Judah, and with them Levites, Semia, Nathonia, and
zabadia with other and with them Belisima and Ioram sacrificers or priests.
And they having the book of the law of the Lord, taught the people of Judah,
and they went about into every city of Judah, and taught the people. The same
Iosaphat as it is written in the.xix. Chapter of the fornamed book, went out
unto the people (he sat not playeng at dice and cards, nor dalyeng with his
maids at home in his chamber, nether went he out only to hu^tynge, or to se
Bearbaytinges) but he went out unto his people from Barsabe unto mount
Ephraim, and there he commanded them not to pay intolerable su^mes of money,
neither to return unto the learning that they and their fathers were brought
up in, from their tender years, and as their fathers found, taught and
exercised. But he called them again unto the Lord God of their fathers And he
ordained iuges of the land in every walled city, through out al Judah. This
good king, this good noble and gentleman, thought that it was his office to
destroy ydolatrye, and to send out preachers to preach the true word of
God, and he dysdayned not to go abroad in visitacion his own self, to call
his people again unto the true God, from the which they had departed and
fallen away. 2. par. 29, and. 30,
Ezechias the noble king (whom the spirit of god so greatly commends,)
rekened it to be one of the principal parts of his kynglye office, to destroy
all ydolatrye, and to purge the church of God, and to set for the with all
diligence the true word of God. And if this good and virtuous gentleman, take
it to be one of ye principal parts of his office, to destroy false religion,
and to set forth the right and true religion, all that are right gentle men,
and not ydoles and images of gentlemen will also reken it the principal part
of their office, as far as their commission will serve them, to destroy and to
put down ydolatrye, and to set out, and to maynteyne the true religion of God
and the ministers of the same. All ye then that are right gentlemen, hear what
the holy scripture reports of this noble gentleman. Ezechias was.xxv. year
old, when he entered into the kingdom of Judah, and he did it that was
pleasant in the sight of God. In the very first year and first month of his
reygne, he opened the doors of the Lords house, and he repaired them. And he
brought Levites and sacrificers, and he set them together in the Gast streate.
And he said unto the^. Hear me o Levites, and be you made holy, make clean
the house of the Lord God of your fathers, and take away al uncleanness out of
the holy sanctuary. He brake down the high places, and burned the images, and
cut down the groves, and brake the brazen serpent which Moses made, because ye
children of Israel offered frankincense unto it. Ezechias also wrote epistles
unto al Israel and Judah, to Ephraim and Manasses, that they should come unto
the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, and to keep the solemn feast of ye
Passover there. Certain spedy messengers, were sent forth into al Israel and
Judah, with the kings letters, at the commandment of the king and his
nobilite, proclamyng the contents thereof, according unto the kings
commandment: The sum of his letters was this. O ye children of Israel,
return unto the Lord God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Israel, and he will
return unto the remnauntes, which have escaped out of the hands of the
Assirians. Be not ye like unto your fathers and brethren, which ran away
from the Lord God of their fathers, which therefore brought them unto
destruction as ye se. Give your hands unto the Lord, and come unto his
sanctuary which he has hallowed for ever. Serve the Lord God of your fathers,
and the wrath of his great indignacion shall be turned away from you. etc. Thus
did the good king Ezechias think, that it was the chief part of his
vocacion, to destroy ydolatrye, and to set forth the true religion. The noble
and virtuous gentleman king Josias, who as the holy word of God bears
witness, did it that was right in sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways
of his father David, and nether bowed to the right hand nor left hand, took
it to be the most principal part of his office, to destroy ydolatrye, and
to set forth, and to promote, the true religion and word of God. And therefore
when as he was but a boy of xvi. years of age. As the.xxxiii. Chapter of the
second book of Paralipomeno^ witnesses, began to seek the God of his father
David, and in the twelft year of his reygne, that is, when he was but twentye
year old (for he began to reygne when he was but.viii. year old,) he
cleansed Judah and Jerusalem, from the high places and groves, from cast images
and graued images. And they destroyed before him the aulters of Baal, and they
destroyed the images that was set above. He cut also down the graven images
and the groves, and brake them in pieces, and he scattered and strowed the
pieces, upon the graves of them that had wont to offer, And burnt all the
sacrificing priests bones upon the alters of the ydolles, and he made clean
Judah and Jerusalem. But also in the cities of Manasses, Ephraim, and Simeo^
unto Nepthalim, he destroyed al such things. And when he had broken down the
alters and the groves, and had broken the graven images into pieces, and had
pulled down all the temples of false gods in Israel, he returned to
Jerusalem. And in the.xviii. year of his reign when as he was but.xxvi.
year old, when as the land was clenged and the temple made clean, he sent
certain of his servants to repair the house of the Lord his God. 2. par.
34.
And whiles they were about that business, Helkias the high sacrificer or
priest, found the book of the law, which was given by the hand of Moses in
the house of the Lord, and he gave it unto Sapha the secretary, and the
secretary brought it unto the King, and red it before them. After that the
king had heard the words of the law: he rent his clothes and commanded
Helkia and diverse other, saying: go your ways and pray unto the Lord for me,
and for the remnant of Israel and Judah, for all the words of this book that is
found. For the high displeasure and anger of almyghtye God, has been poured
upon us, for not keeping all the words that are contained in the book that is
found. Then what blind madness is it to commend gouerners and rulers, which
say that God has poured his vengeance upon us, because we have not kept
unwritten tradicions of man. I must now my lords and masters are you a
question, as it becomes the Physician to do with his patientes, and it is
this. If it had not belo^ged unto the king, and had not been his office, to se
the word of God set forth, that all the people might read it, and hear it.
What needs he to have rent his clothes, what should he have neded to desire
the high priest or sacrificer with other, to pray for him, and to send to a
prophetise to know the will of God in that matter? I think then ye will
answer, that because he had reigned.xviii. years and had not looked for the
holy scripture, in all that time nether set it out in his time, he thought him
self gylty, and not to have done it that belo^ged unto his office. Josias an
honest man and a true man, said that God was angry with him, because the book
of the Law was not sought for, and set forth by him, as it was his office to
have done. If that be true, all Kings and gouerners as well as he, are bound
to seek for the scripture, and to set it forth, or else the wrath of God shall
come upon them. Josias repented him very sore that the book was so long hyd,
and that he had not sought for it, and if he had not done so, as the scripture
does preuely teach us, he should have been grievously ponished for that the book
was so long hyd. Wherefore it is the office of all kings and gouerners, to
seek for the word of God, and to se that it be brought forth into the light,
that al men may read it, and learn of it, what they are bound to do unto
their Lord God, and to their supperiors here in earth and to their neyghbores.
Then they that other will have the same book, with other of like authority, to
be laid up that no man shall read them, or will not suffer them to be read in
a tongue that the people can understand, have an other spirit then Josias had.
Josias whom all good kings and gouerners ought to follow, was so earnest in
the setting out of the holy scripture, that he called unto ye temple all the
elders of Judah, 2. par. 34.
and all the people of Jerusalem, from the lowest unto the highest, and in the
presence of the^ al hered his own self the book of the law, and not one piece
of it alone as the text says all the words of it. If that this had not ben
his office to set forth the scripture. God would have ponished him for going
beyond his office as he ponished Ozias. But God ponished him not, but allowed
him in doing so. Therefore to set forth the word of God was his office, and
not more then his office, nor beside his office, nor against his office. And it
that was his office, was and is the office of all other kings and gouerners.
The^ it is the office, or one principal part of the office of every king,
gouerner and noble man to se that ydolatrye be destroyed, and that ye true
word of God, which is contained in the holy scripture, be set forth and
preached and known of all the people that are under their government. All ye
that are under the dignity of a king, may not say that this only belongs
unto kings and not unto you, for this belongs not only unto kings, but
also to all that say sanctificetur nomen tuum, hallowed be thy name. For all
they that would have gods name hallowed, must help to destroy such
religion as is against the honor of God, and to maynteyne and set forth as
much as lies in them the true religion of God. If that every private man be
thus bound to do, as far forth as his vocacion and calling does suffer him,
much more are ye my lords and masters bound, which receive and have your
lands and lyuelot, chieflye for this purpose of your Lord God, and are part
of the kings body, that is to wette, his eyes, ears, and arms without the
which he is not able alone in the common wealth to do his office and duty, I
think that he were a very arrogant king, that would think himself better
learned and wyser the^ the noble servant of God Duke Moses was, and yet he (as
his father in law told him truly) thought him self not able to govern his
people alone, and therefore he chosed out gouerners and iuges over thousands,
and some over hundrethes, and some over fyftie, and other some over ten. So
when as no king is able to do al things alone that pertayne unto his office,
every king must have noble men under him, to help him to do his office, that
belongs unto him, and to be partakers with the king in labor and office, as
they are partakers with him in honor and lyuelod above the common people: To
whom is it said I pray you? Vos dij estis? Ye are gods? is it said only to
kings? or is it also said unto you? If it be said also unto you, then if you
will take unto you such an honorable name with Kings, as to be called
gods, that is Iuges and rulers here in gods stead, you must be content to
take part of the office that belongs unto that name.

Therefore ye must also with the king destroy ydolatrie, and set out gods
true religion, as the noble gentlemen that were under king Ezechias did. What
other things belong unto the office of a noble man, and specially of a king,
besides ye mainteining of the true religion and the preachers of the same, the
words of Samuel partly tell us, after this manner. Behold the Lord has
anointed the upon thy heritage, to be a prince, and thou shall deliver his
people from the hands of their enemies that are round about them. But there
are other places clearer and playner then this, which declare more plainly the
office of a king and a noble man: 2. par. 9.
The, ix. Chapter of the second book of Paralipomeno^ teaches us that it
belongs unto a king and a gouerner, to exercise justice and judgment. In the
second book of the kings and in the.viii. Chap, where as David was praised for
doing of his duty, it is rehearsed of him that he did judgment and justice
unto all his people. Esaias in the first chapter of his prophecy rebukynge the
princes for leuynge of their office and duty and exortyng them again to do
their office, speaks these words unto them: Audite verbum Domini principes
Sodomorum. etc.

Querite iudicium subuenite oppresso. etc.

That is to say ye princes of Sodom, Esaias. i.
hear the words of the Lord. Seek judgment, help him that is oppressed, let
the fatherless child have judgment, defend the wydowe. And in the same
chapter where as he reproves them again for not doing of their duties, says
thus unto Jerusalem. Principes tui infideles. etc. Thy princes are
unfaithful, thieves fellows, they love al rewards, and follow after bribes,
they give no judgment unto the fatherles children, and the poor wydowes matter
can not come in to you, where as you are. Moses also in the.xviii. of Exodus
ordened certain princes and gentlemen, Exodus 18.
and chused them out of the strongest of the people, and he appointed them this
office, that they should judge the people under him, at al times, and not in
the term time alone, as it is now the manner in England. If any man require
authority out of the new testament to prove that it belongs unto the
Kings, Dukes Earls, Lords and other noble and gentlemen to exercise justice
and judgment, Romans 13.
and to defend the innocent, and to ponishe the evil: I will show two evident
places to prove the same. Paul in the.xiii. of the epistle unto the Roma.
declares expressedly, that the office of princes, is to defend the innocent,
and to ponyshe the euel. His words are these. They yt do well, need not to
fear the princes, but such as do euel. Will thou not be afraid of the power?
do it yt is good, and thou shall have praise of him. For he is gods servant
or officer to thee unto good. But if thou do it that is evil, fear, for he
bears not the sword in inuayne, for he is Gods officer, and an angry
aduenger unto him that does euel? Peter also in the second chapter of his
former Epistle, teaches us that it is not only the office of a king, to
defend the good and to ponyshe the euel, but that the same is also the office
of other rulers and officers under him, as ye be. His words are these. Be you
obedient unto every creature of man for the Lords sake, whether it be the king
as most execellent, or dukes or gouerners, which are appointed by him, for
the ponyshment of the euel doers, and for the comme^dation of weldoers. These
things are they, where in chiefly stand the office and duty of a right noble
or gentleman, and all these things are al Emperores, Kings, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, Knights, Squyers, and all other gentlemen bound to do. But these
things can they not do without great learning and knowledge, and specially in
the holy scripture. For how shall that noble man know, whether he be king,
duke, or earl, how to destroy ydolatrye and fats worshippynge of God, and set
out the true religion, which has not learned what is ydolatrye, and what is
true religion, and wherein the one stands, and wherein the other stands? He
that knows not both the contraries, knows not parfytlye one of them. How
shall he be able to judge and say this is right whyt, which knows not black?
How shall he know what is evil, that knows not what is good? How shall he
judge which is white, and which is black, that is blind and can se no
color? How shall he judge after ye civil law that never knew it? How shall
he judge after the law of God or man, that never learned nor knew any of both?
Aristotel.
Quae quisque no uit de ijs vere iudicat, eorumque est aequus aestimator,
Says Aristotel, that is, every man judges those things truly that he
knows. Therefore without great learning and namely in the word of God, no
person ca^ rightly exercise the office of king or gouerner, or of a noble or
gentleman. When a man of the contre, comes to a gentleman that is his
landlorde, or to a justice of peace, or to a knight or to a lord, or an earl,
or a duke, or a king, and accuses his neighbor of blasphemy or heresy, for
saying, it that was ones bread, ca^ not be made God. If the gentleman be
ygnorau^t in the scripture, to whom this accuser comes, and wot not what is
blasphemy, but only follows that learning that he has received of unlearned
priests, and false prophets, and puts in prison the man accused for this
saying, and the poor man dies in prison, in the mean season, which might
have lived if he had been out of prison, what shall we say of this Judge, is he
not a murderer? Think ye that on the day of judgment, when god shall inquyre
why that gentleman killed, or cast in prison an innocent, think ye that if the
gentylman answer: I knew no better, that God the great judge, which made
althing, and was never made: will allow this excuse? I trow not. Think ye
that the gentlemen of Cambridgeshyre and the Judges which keste John Ward
paynter into prison amongst thieves and murderers for saying that it was as
lawful to set a candle before his hat, as before a painted image, shall escape
vnponyshed if they did not repent them afterward? Will this excuse, I knew no
better, be then allowed in such as were by the expressed commau^deme^t of God
charged to have parfyt knowledge of the law of God? I trow nay. Was it not a
great shame that Judges which with a few other of that profession will and
are almost only called learned me^ should be so ignorant in scripture that
they kest an innocent into prison? namely when as a paynter told his matter so
that no scripture learned judge would have condemned him to prison but rather
would have commended him? That Iuges may learn herafter to judge better and to
avoid the shame that the foresaid iuges had, and the ponishment that abides for
them except they have repented the^ selves: I will rehearse the hole storye. Ihon
ward about xx. years ago made a fair painted image of S. Christophor where
unto he had joined a devout interpretacion of saint Christophors life and he
had set out the image very lively in a table, this set he before him in his pew
in the church to learn to be a right Christophor. But with in a month that
he had set up his table: certain supersticius people set were candels before
the image that he had painted, trimmed and set up.

Therefore he being offended with the supersticion of the people: keste down
all the candelles and took away out of the church his image again and carried
it home, and until he came again he left his hatte in the place where his
image was before. And when he came again to church, one axed him what he meant
to set his hatte in the place of his image, and he answered, to se whether any
will be so mad to worship my hatte as they were to worship my image. Think you
quoth the Papist to Ward that any man will be so mad to worship your hat. Ward
answered: they may as well worship my hatte as my image, for the hatter is as
holy a man as I am, and his handworke deserves as well to have candelles set
up before it as mine does. And for this his saying when as he was accused
thereof and confessed it: he was iuged worthy to have like imprisonment with
thieves and murderers. Would not the knowledge of scripture have don good service
unto these blind judges? yes a great deal more then.x. queyres of pedlers
french. But perchance the great men (I mean Kings, Dukes, Earls, Lords,
Knights, and other gentlemen) will say there are lawyers and learned me^
enough, to do this busynes, what if it be our duetye and office, to give
judgment in such matters, when as we may do this part of our office and
duty, by our servants or other, why should we be combered therewith? Do not
ye know my lords and masters, that there is none of you all that is so simple
in degree, or of so small living, but there comes often times some matters to
be judged by you, when as nether learned servant nether any lawyer is at
hand? who is so single a gentleman but he has some tena^tes? who has any
tenantes that are so quiet, but that at some time they fall out one with an
other? There is no gentleman that has so small a lordshyp but he must sometime
be a judge in such matters as learning is to be required in. Can he at al times
have his lawyer or other learned man by him? or will his lands, that is but a
poor gentleman and has many children, be able to find a lawyer, or learned
man at hand at all times? who is so simple a gentle man but that he is
sometime called to be a co^missioner in one matter or other? Must a gentleman
with shame, bring his learned man or lawyer with him, to the rest of the
commisioners: when as the matter ought not to be disclosed to any but only to
the commisioners alone? At Assizes and sessions both in matters of lands and
good, and of life and death who are more commonly chosen (if the matter be any
thing weyghtye) to be judges in such matters, the^ gentlemen? when as the
gentleman is kept fast in a housewith his fellows, is it not to late then, to
send for his learned man or his lawyer there? No kind of men ought so much
to be of the kings counsel as gentlemen both ought to be and are also. Shall
the gentleman being a counselor be suffered to bring his learned man or
lawyer into the counsel chamber with him? Gentlemen must often times go to the
parliament, and there they must entreat of matters, concerning the glory of
God, and the common wealth, and sometime matters of heritages and of lands and
goods, are entreated there. Sometime men are appeched of heresye, and sometime
of treason, so that they that are of the parliament, are both cou^sellers and
judges. Shall the unlearned gentlemen, judges and counselors in the parliament
house, be suffered to bring in with them thither, their lawyers and learned
men? But what if a King or a Duke, or any other gentleman had always a
learned man by him, and might carry him, to all these places above named.

How shall the unlearned King, duke, lord, or any other gentleman, if he be
unlearned himself, be able to judge, whether he that he hyreth for his learned
man, be learned in all such things as he shall be axed counsel of or no? or
whether he be but a bragger of learning, or a learned man in deed? And though
he be learned in deed, how can the unlearned gentilma^ know, whether his
learned man, judged after his learning or no, and whether he gives good
counsel or ill, or gives true judgment or false, when as he that is unlearned
can not tell whether his learned man do after his knowledge or no, or for a
brybe, or for his friends pleasure gives euel counsel or false judgment? If a
man were blind, and when he hears men go by him, and inquired of them that go
by, whether there be any man that will be his gyde, for half of that which
they two can get with beggynge or no. There comes one to him and offers him
self to be his gyde, and he takes him. Now how can the blind man tell whether
his gyde be blind or no? And if he do know that his gyde can se: how shall
the blind man know whether his gyde leads him ye right way or no, or what
not the blind man, when he byddeth his gyde lead him into the church, whether
he leads him unto the galowes or no? I ask one of the flattering Ciphers
which call princes young lords and other young gentlemen from their books, to
haukyng and hunting, and such other idle pastymes, saying to their masters,
what need ye to study, ye have lands and heritage enough, ye need not at al
to study, except ye intend to be scolemaisters or a man of law, or priests.
Master Cipher, if your master commanded you to ride from London to Ca^brige
in the mids of winter, whether had ye lever ride blyndefelde through bushes
and briars, through thycke and thynne, following an other man which leads thy
horse by the bridle, or thou had lever ride bare faced and seeing, that thou
might choose the way thy self? If thou had lever choose thy way thy self,
then to be led blyndefelde through a foul way, even by him that thou trustest
best, and knows the way best in all thy masters house. What kyn a
dissembling and unkind best art thou which for fear only of falyng in a
poole, or rentynge of thy face a little, had rather se thy way thine own
self, then to be led by a gyde be he never so perfyt, and yet will counsel
thy master to go blyndfelde with uncertain and unknown gydes, through such
matters, as if he hit not upon the right way, shall be in ieopardye of lesyng
both his body goods and heritage, yea and his soul to? Let al noble me^
beware of such noughty counsel, lest they fall into an hole palsy, that is, a
waryng of al mouyng and felyng which can not be helped with any man's physik if it
be ones old. The remedy to avoid this perillus and foul disease, is, whilse
it is but yet in the beginning, for gentlemen to go earnestly unto their
books, and to say to such talewanyng talkers these words, auaunt idle and
unlearned best, because thou art unlearned thy self, and art nether borne to
bear rule in the common wealth, nether haste learning, nor wit to receive
learning, thou would have me to be such an ass as thou art. If ye use this
medecin I warrant you, that ye shall never come into the danger of the foresaid
perilus disease. But of this disease I will speak more largely herafter. This
false opinion that a king or a noble man, need not to be learned his own
self, so he yt have learned officers, is contrary both unto the ordinance of
nature, to the ancient philosophers learning, to the holy scripture and to the
examples and life, both of alwyse heathen kings, and of godly and religious
kings, which are commended by holy scripture. The same are also enemies unto
the co^mo^wealth, and the honor of the realm that they are of, as I shall
prove at large here after.

This can no man deny, but that nature has ordened in all living beasts,
birds and fyshes, that part which governs and rules all the rest of the
body, should have most knowledge, and manifest wits and senses. Nature has
ordained that the head should govern and rule, al other parts of the body,
and therefore, where as she has given, unto all the rest of the body but one
sense or wit, that is to were, touching or felyng, she has given unto the
King of the body, the head, even of brute beasts, al ye.v. Wits, that is
hearing, seeing, taistyng, smellyng, and felyng, and to the head of a man's
body, beside all these reason and understanding. Then as so many wits or
senses are nedefully required in the head that has the rule but of one body,
how much wit, learning and knowledge is to be required in that head that has
the rule of an hundredth bodies, Is there not much more wit and knowledge
required in the head that has the government, and rule of.x. thousand
body? Where are now the false flatterers, and the enuius learned men that
would have none learned but themselves, that say that a King or a Queen, or
any other prince, which has committed unto his cure and charge, two hundredth
thousand me^nes bodies need not to have any more wit learning and knowledge,
then a man that has but one body to govern? who will be angry with the hele
if it hear not? who will be displeased with the kne, because it can not se?
who will be myscontent with the thygh, if it can not smell? who will chyde with
the breast, because it can not taist?

But if any of these want in ye head, then is all the hole body hurt thereby.
Be the head never so fair and well favored to look to if it have not such
wit as is required in it, not only men will mock it and call it blockheade, but
even the brute fox will say unto it as far as Esop may be believed. O
pulchrumsme cerebro caput. O what fair a braynles head art thou. Though the
head of the common welthe be never so well trimmed and appointed with gold and
precious stones, if he have no more wit the^ a poor fool of the country
has: what will all that costly apparel help the commonwealth: does costlye
apparel and gorgious houses and great welfare help the commonwealth? nothing
at all. The head in a ma^s body gives felyng and mouynge unto all the rest
of the hole body that is sensible. If the head be wytlesse and without sense,
how can it give unto ye body, it that it has not it self. The bishop of Rome
of late years taunted very properly such a painted wytles head (as there are
to many in England) after this manner. A bishop of Germany a Duke by his birth
and a goodly man of person, came to Rome to show himself to his father the
Pope, the Pope spoke latin to him and Italien, but he could speak nothing at
all but Duyche. Therefore when the Duche bishop was gone forth, the Pope answered
one that asked him how he lyked the Duche bishop, after this manner, par la
corpe de sancto Francisco e la bella bestia, that is by saint Frances body he
is a trime fair or proper beast. What think you will wise men think,
although they dare not say so much when they se a lustye rutterken with a
hawk on his hand and dogs following him, and a golden cheyne dobbel about his
neck, with a cappe al full of egglates, and a bushe of feathers in it as great
as a capones tail, which can scantlye wryt his own name, and saving the
shape, has nothing else of a man? Will they not think of him as ye fox
spoke of the painted head? and it that the Pope spoke of the foresaid bishop?
yes I warrant you, for all his bragges, his swearyng and staring, and proud
lokes. A certain Italien being demanded the question who was a gentleman,
answered thus in latin meaning of an unlearned and wytlesse gentleman, Est vna
bestia sedens super bestiam, portans bestiam super manum, habens bestias se
sequentes and insequens bestias. That is, a wytles and an unlearned gentleman,
is a beast sitting upon a best, bearyng a best upon his hand, having bestes
following him, and he following bestes also. It is therefore against nature, that
he that is a best in wit and learning, should be the head of reasonable men in a
commonwealth, or that the head of the common wealth should be a best, that is,
a man with out al wit and learning, differinge nothing from a very best,
saving in form and lyknes. The noble philosophers also thought it mete that a
king should be learned, and therefore said Plato, as I remember.

Happy is that common wealth, whereas either philosophers are kings, or kings
play the philosophers. Vigetius in his first book de re militari, and in the
first chapter, requires learning of rulers and gouerners in these words. It
becomes no man to know better things and mo things, then a prince, whose
learning may be profitable to all his subjects. Therefore princes ought to
give them selves unto the study of wisdom. Scipio the greater, when as he
had any leisure from war and from cyuil busynes, gave himself as Plutarch
writes unto his book, and said, that when he was idle after that manner, he did
then the greatest work and labor.

Julius Caesar one of the noblest gouerners that ever was or ever shall be,
thought learning so necessary for a gentleman, and namely for an high
maiestrate, that whiles he was a warfaire, he had his spear in the one hand
and his book in the other. King Alexander the conqueror as noble a man and
as well borne as any noble man of this our time is, thought it so greatly
belong unto a gentle man to excel in learning and knowledge, that when as he
had herd tell that his master Aristotell had set out his books of natural
philosophy, wrote unto him after this manner following. Where as thou haste set
forth abroad the books of Natural philosophy, thou have not done well, for in
what other thing shall we be able to excel other men in, if they be made
common to all men which we have learned of the, for it is my desire to excel
all other men, rather in learning and knowledge, then in nombre of hosts and
great riches, this far Alexander, which, I would have you mark well.
Mithridates the king of Pontus and Bethinia, because he knew himself to be
the head of al his subjects, and that it was his duty to give judgment in
his own person in very many matters, took such pain to learn to do his
duty, that he learned.xxii. diverse tongues, eue^ as many nations as he was
king over, and answered every man parfytly in his own tongue. The same was so
well learned in philosohhy and physic, that he made of his own wytre a
sovereign remedy against poysone and many grievous diseases of a man's body,
called after his name unto this day Mithridatium.

Alfonsus the noble king of Arragon said that an unlearned king was like unto
a crowned ass, and where as there was a King of Spain which said, that it
was not semyng that a noble man should be learned, he said that his sayng was
the voice of an ox and not of a king. If that a noble man regard not the
works of nature nether any good reason, neither any authority of Man, let him
hear what almyghtye God says by the mouth of his servant David in the
second psalm Et nunc reges intellig^te and erudimini iudices ierre, Bet you
understanding o ye kings and be you learned o ye that judge the earth. Here
have al kings a plain commandment to seek seek for learning and to be
learned, and not only they but al other which by their calling are ordened of
God to judge his people, or to give sentence between one man and an other.
Almighty God in ye.xvii. Deute. 17.
of Deuteronomi, gives an expressed and a plain commandment unto kings
that they should diligently study the scripture, the words of God are these.
After that the king sytteth in his seat of dignite or his kingdom, he shall
wryt out for him self, the Deuterono, of this law in a volume, and he shall
take the copy of the offerers or priests of the trybe of Leui, and he shall
have it with him, and shall read it all the days of his life, that he may learn
to fear his lord God, and to keep his words and ceremonies. The same
commandment was given unto the noble gentleman Iosue, the Judge and gouerner
of the children of Israel in these words. Take a good heart unto the, and be
very stout, that thou may keep and fulfill all the law, which my servant
Moses has commanded the to keep. Thou shall not turn from it nether to the
right hand, nether to the left hand, that thou may understand al things
that thou do. Let not the volume of this book go away from thy mouth, but
thou shall be occupied in it day and night, that thou may keep and do all
things written in it. It is a marvelous thing to se how that noble men and
women are so busy to keep those things that ye deuel, the world and the
flesh have found out and commanded, and how slack and slow they are to do
it ye God has commanded so earnestlye. The deuel devised dycyng and cardyng
and wanto^ daunsyng, the world with the deuell has found out to costly
proud light and temptyng apparel, the flesh with the deuel has found out
wa^ton balades and books of love and lechery: whether are there mo gentlemen in
England that follow ye counsel of their Lord God, which byddeth them study
the scripture and be exercised therein, or of them that follow the counsel of
the aforenamed enemies both to God and man? Will ye not now my lords and
masters, take those phisicianes for murderers of your souls, which forbid
you to eat of almighty gods triacle, that is, to read his word which he
has so earnestly commanded, for the saving both of your bodies and souls.
Are they worthy to be of a kings counsel or of a queen's counsel that have
burned this book which God inioyneth you to read, and have ponysh the
readers thereof as heretics, if they be of the same judgment still? Now let
us se whether that the commandment of God concerning that princes should be
learned, and the scripture to be red of al kings and rulers, was so
understand of holy men even as it stands, that is, that they should study
and read ye scripture in their own persons, or they must learn the
scripture and read it and know it only by their chaplaynes, and other such
like officers, as the most part of princes and noble men expound that
commandment of God now a days. All blessed and happy and holy me^ read the
scripture and are exercised in it night and day, their own selves in their
own persons. Then they that will not read ye scripture nether night nor day
in their own persons, nether ar exercised in it, are cursed unhappy and
wicked, be they never so rich, noble and so holy in the sight of the blind
world. David in the first psalm describing a blyssed, happy and godly man,
proves it that I said now to be true. Blessed is the man (says David) whose
will is in the law of the Lord, and in his law is exercysed in his mind, and
thinks upon it both day and night. And the cursed man or the wicked man,
sytteth in the seat of scorners, that is to say, will nether be virtuously
occupied in gods word them selves, nor will suffer other to read it, but mock
the readers of it, as they do now a days, that for a spytfull mock, call the
readers of Gods law gospellers, and sometime heretics, and mock them that
either in open preaching, or in preuie admonition tell them of their fautes, and
exhort them to godlynes and virtuous living. David in the.119. Psalm. 119.
psalm, bears also wytnes that the commandment of almighty God, concerning
the scripture to be read and studied of kings judges and noble men, ought to
be understand that they should read it, and be exercised in it in their own
persons, and they that talk not with them selves of the scripture and are not
exercised therein their own selves, are not blessed happy and godly, but cursed
unhappy and ungodly, for he says. Beati qui scrutantur testimonia eius, in
mandatis tuis exercebor, and considerabo vias tuas, in iustificationibus tuis
meditabor, non obliuiscar sermones tuos. Seruus tuus exercebatur in
iustificationibus tuis, nam testimonia tua, meditatio mea est and consilium
meum iustificationes tuae. Ne auferas de ore meo verbum veritatis vsquequaque.
Confunda^tur superbi quia unjust iniquitatem fecerunt in me, ego autem
exercebor in mandatis tuis. Tribulatio and angustia inuenerunt me, mandata tua
meditatio mea est concupiui salutare tuum, and lex tua meditatio mea est. If it
be true that ye noble men which search and seek for the commandments of God,
and study the law of God and are exercysed therein, are good and blessed men,
the^ are they euel cursed and unhappy men, which search not for the
commandments of God, nether study the scripture, nether exercise them
selves there in. The reason is good, for all the good kings whereof is mencio^
made in the scripture, were diligent setters forth and readers of the
scripture, and the wicked and ungodly kings cared not for it, read the books
of the kings, and the books of the cronicles, and you shall find this that I
say right true. 4. Reg. 22.
In the.xxii. of of the.iiii. of the kings ye may se in the historye of
Josias, how that al his forfathers that were euel kings cared not for the
scripture, but let it lie many years buried and hyd, so that they were not
exercysed therein according to the expressed commandment of God. If ye require
one private example of one man, Iere. 36.
read the.36. of Hieremie the prophet, and there shall ye find how that the
wicked king Ioachim, cut in pieces the word of God, and burnt it in the fire,
and sought after and persecuted Hieremie, the author of the book and Baruch
the writer of it, as certain ge^tlemen both of the laite and also of the
clergy have entreated of late years the Translators and the Prynters of
Christ's testament, and as the Bible is handled now in some churches in
England and namely in westminster. I mark also that David in this psalm
whereof I have made mention, says.viii. times, that he was and would be in
time to come, exercised in the law of God. If he were a true man and no liar,
though he had said it but ones we ought to believe him. If we do believe him, ye
may se that David the good king, which was so much exercised in the
scripture, understands the commandment of reading and studyeng the
scripture, to perteyne to the kings and gouerners them selves, and to their
own persons, and not only unto their servants and clergy. King Solomon
as well borne and as noble a man as any is this day in Europa and as wise a
man, and as well learned as any cou^seller in England, or else where, and
therefore knew ye meaning of the commandment of the scripture to be read of
princes, thought not scorn to sit in judgment in his own person, and
because he knew that it was his office to give judgment unto his people, and
that he could not do that of fire well except he had great learning and
knowledge when as almightye God offered unto him to give him frelye what so ever
he did axe, answered God after this manner following. Thou haste showed great
mercy to David my father, and have ordened me king in his place:

Now Lord God let thy word be done which thou promised unto my father David.
For thou haste made me a king over a great nombre of thy people, which is as
vntellable as the duste of the earth. Give my wisdom and understanding, that
I may go in and out before thy people, for what man is able to judge worthily
such a great nombre as is of this people? God answered and fayd unto him.
Because this has more pleased thy heart, and haste not axed riches and
substance and honor, nether the lives of them yt hate the, nether long life.
Thou have axed wisdom and knowledge, yt thou may judge my people, over ye
which I made the a king, wisdom and knowledge ar given unto the, and I will
give the riches substance and honor also. David this noble gentleans father
in.119. psalm. desires God.xiiii. times to teach him his witnesses and his
co^maundeme^ts, but wherefore I pray you? that God should teach him to say
the.x. co^maundeme^ts, or to read them only in diverse tongues? Nay, for he
could say them by heart well enough. But for this end said he so often, teach me
thy commandments that it myghe please God to give him the true understanding
of the scripture, that he might order his life according unto his
commandments. Where upon seeing that David so wise a man and so well learned,
desired almightye God so earnestlye, and so often, to teach him the
understanding of the scripture, and exercised him so much in it: it follows
that as the true understanding of Gods word is necessary for a prince, so
it can not be had without prayer, great pain, labor and exercise.

Then when as God commands Kings and Judges to be learned, and learning
can not be had with out great study and labor, it appears very plain that
the chief labor that a noble gentleman should be occupied in, al ye days of
his life, is the study of scripture, and such other writing, as help to the
understanding of the scripture, and to the declaracion of the same. Lucius the
first christian king of our land, who sent to Rome for Baptisers and
preachers, and received the baptism of Christ with all his, after that he had
received the christian faith, caused many books of latin to be translated into
his own natural tongue, he also parted and bestowed the day and night after
this manner, he spent eight hours in study and in prayer.viii. hours in
hearing of causes, and eight hours in slepynge, and in such necessary
things as were necessary for his body Picus the noble earl of Mira^dula, said
a very notable saying, which I would al earls and noble men should mark and
bear away, and it is this. Learning is unto a Yoma^ man in the stead of
silver, to a gentleman in the stead of gold, and to earls and princes in ye
stead of precius stones. Now my lords and masters, whether is it more mete
that we shall follow the counsel and examples of al wise philosophers and
most noble kings, that were under ye law of nature, and the commandment of
holy scripture, and the example of all holy and noble kings under the law of
Moses, and also the saynges and doings of the best kings yt were under the
law of the Gospel, which thought it necessary for kings and noble men to be
learned, even their own selves: or to follow the counsel of a sort of
unnatural and unlearned curtely crows, which say that a king or a noble
man need not to be learned, but that it is sufficient for him, if yt his
chauncelers or chaplains, and other officers belonging to him, be learned for
him As far as I can perceive, ye that are noble men and gentlemen, and now,
specially ye that are of the Queen's counsel, and are lords of ye parliament:
had never more need of learning, then ye now at this present time have. For ye
religion which has been brought in again of late by the might of gods
word, and has been received thorowout al this realm, saving of a few
obstinate Papists, and has be^ brought to this perfection that it is now at,
not only with great labor and ieopardye, but with the deaths of many an
honest and learned man, is now taken for heresye and false doctrine. And yet
there is no small no^bre of them, that will adventure, both life and goods,
that it is ye true religion that was exercised in king Edwardes days, and that
it, which begins now through out England to take place again, and was
allowed in the time of the late kings, king Henry the.vii. and the viii. war
right Papistrye, and false learning of men, only able to be defended, by
long time, and the falsely pretended authority of Christ's Church, which will
bring in and set forth none other doctrine then such as her husband Christ
has commanded and allowed. This co^tencion is about no small matter, it is
about gods service, and about the true doctrine religion and worshippyng of
God. The salvation and da^nacion of many a thousand, hangs upon these matters,
therefore seeing that God has made you gouerners under the Queen and judges in
these matters ye had need to look well upon the word of God, that ye give not
sentence against gods truth, to the destruction of your own souls, and
many thousands mo. The one part brings forth scripture and the written
word of God, and the other part brings forth, long customs, fathers, and
the authorite of the Romyshe church, which has erred shamefully many
hundredth years, and no man is able to defend the contrary. I do perceive that
some of you are indifferent, and are not married unto one kind of men more then
another, wherefore ye may in these controversies, be ye more indifferent
judges. But I hear say that there is an other sort of the nobilite, that are
so partial in these matters, that are now in controversy, that what so ever
reason or scripture be brought of the other part that they favor not, they
will not believe it, but yet without any reason or scripture or any other
sufficient proof, or trial of their doctrine: embrace and gladly receive, all
such doctrine and tradicions as their chosen prophets teach them whom they
favor and fantasye. The same affectionate people, which trust so in these
men without any trial of their doctrine whether it be good or bad, are so
tender over their own bodies, that they will nether ear any meat nor drink
any drink, though their cokes and butlers be never found fautye in their
offices in all their lives: except there be an assay taken of their meat and
drink before. Yea I hear say that some dare not eat of the meat that is
dressed of their common cooks in the common kytchens, be the cokes never so
honest men and these will neither trust their cooks nor assayers and therefore
eat no meat but such as is dressed of their maidens in their own presence,
in their own secret chambers. Would to God these loved their souls so well,
and the souls of all them that are under their gouerme^t, as they do their
own natural bodies. As the meat of the body if it be good, fedeth and
norysheth the body and saves it from peryshynge, and if it be poisoned it
kylleth the body, even so the doctrine or preaching which is the food of the
soul if it be good saves the soul, so if it be noughty and false, it
poysoneth and kylleth the soul. Is it the^ godly wisdom to se and try it
which goes into their bodies with their own eyes to be good and wholesome
before they receive it? and to receive of their old gostly cokes what so ever
they dress for them unseen, untasted, and unassayed? Though their bodily cokes
have served them never so long, they will take nothing that is dressed of them,
except they se it with their own eyes assayde, why trust they then their
spiritual cooks so well that without any further assay or trial, receive into
their souls, what so ever meat they dress for them and give them? Perchance
they will say that seculare and married cooks, having wives and children, may
easily for a brybe, be brought to poysone their masters and maistresses, but
spiritual and unmarried men are more to be trusted in their spiritual cookery,
because they are wyuelesse and need not to be compelled unto poysenynge for
lack of lyuinges because they have enoughe, and also by touching daily the
body and blood of Christ, are holyer then the worldly cooks are, and so
hallowed with the holy oil wherwyth they were anointed in the time of their
consecracion, that they can not kill us with poisoned meat, as the secular may
easily do. And therefore what so ever our spiritual cooks send us, that is
good and wholesome, that will we receive, without any further trial.

We know them and trust them so well. To whom I answer that not only foreign
stories, but also that our own cronicles bear wytnes, that these spiritual
wyueles cooks for all their touching of their Christ's body daily, and for
all their holy ointment, have even bodily poisoned not only kings and
princes, but also diverse other honest men, besides that I can prove, that
spiritually they have poisoned many thousands. In the city of Berna, iiii.
freres poisoned a tailor with the poisoned bread of the sacrament in our days,
and the same were burnt for their labor. A spiritual and wiueles cook a black
monk, well anointed, poisoned king John as our stories bear wytnes. We read
in diverse stories ye monks and other wyueles anointed cooks, poisoned not
only Emperors and kings, but also poisoned the sacramental bread which they
took for their Lord and their God The^ even wyueles spiritual cooks will
poysone kings and queen's, when as they are not aferd to poison their God him
self. Thus far have I spoken of bodily poison. But as touching spiritual
poison, that is to say concerning marring of men's minds with false doctrine, the
co^ningest and best betrusted cook yt they have now at this time, who
rueleth the roste alone, has either served out poison unto king Henry
the.viii. and to al Europa, or else Queen Mary is a bastard, if false doctrine
be poison of the soul, and she be a bastard that is borne out of lawful
matrimony. Steven Gardener an under cook in the Cardinal Wolf Wolsey his
house, and afterward allowed of king Henry the eight, to be a master cook
and his principal cook for a long time, r^led the roste in ye kings house,
as boldly and as saucely, as his master did before him, as ye blow upon his
cheke that my Lord of Warwyke gave him, may bear wytnes. But when as this
cook should serve out a dyshe of obedience unto the king and unto all the
West church, he poudered it with such poison, that he made the king an hoar
master, our Queen's mother an hoar, and our Queen Mary a bastard. Is it good
trustyng of such a wyueles anointed cook? Are not then wyueles cooks as
much to be suspected of spiritual poison, as other cooks are to be suspected
of bodily poison? Yea and a great deal more. For your bodily cooks were never
taken with any such offece, for if they had been taken therewith, they should
have been streyghtwaye hanged or scalded to death for their labor. This cook
for all his poisoned service, is so trusted now, that he is made Chancellor of
England, and president of all the counsel. But lest any man should deny yt
their master cook S. Guard. did ever any such thing I will bring his own
words, wherein he confesses openly to all the world his deed, and as yet, I
for my part, have never herd nor red, that he repented him of his so doing His
words are these. The Leuiticall commandments, of the forbidden and
unnatural horyshe matrimonies, pertaynyng unto the chastity and clenenes of
matrimonye (wherein the hole fellowship of man's life is contained, and the
beginning of increase of issue stands) have always so ben taken as first, to
be given in deed unto the Jews, because they were expounded to set clearly
forth the law of nature and therefore should always perteyne unto all kinds
of men. Wherein doutles both the voice of nature, and the commandment of God
agreing together, forbad it that was contrary unto the condition of both.

But amongst these, when as the commandment of not mariyng the brothers
wife, is also contained, what other thing either ought, or could, the
excellent majesty of the king of England do, then that he has done, with
the great consent of his people, and the judgment of his church, that is,
that he deuorsed from unlawful ba^des or couenauntes, should enjoy lawful
marriage, and that he obeyeng the commandment of God (as it was mete) should
forsake her, whom nether law nor right would suffer him to hold still. In
which matter, when as the sentence of Gods word had been sufficient, (which al
men are bound to obey) yet ye most sacred kings majesty, disdeyned not to
put unto it the voices of the most ancient and grave men, and the judgment
and censures of the most famus universities of all the world. Thus far has
master Gardener spoken the cook, whose cookery ye will not suspect, because he
has been always so honest and true. But let us se what manner of service he
serves, and sends unto all the world, and how honestlye he thinks of our
sovereign lady Queen Mary, and Queen Katherin her mother. First he says that
the mariyng of the brothers wife, is an unnatural, horyshe incestuus marriage,
and he judges the matrimony between the Queen's father and mother to be such,
and therefore he says, the king did well, in breakyng the unlawful bands of
matrimony, whylse he put his unlawful wife away. Ye may se my lords and
masters, that this man calls and judges Queen Katherin, to be none of king
Henry's lawful wife, which saying conteyneth in it, that King Henry the
eight, was an incestuus horemaister, that Queen Katherin was an hoar, and that
Mary their daughter now Queen, is a bastard. For who so ever lies with a
woman, that is not his lawful wife, is an hoar master, and she that has
carnal copulacion with a man, yt is not her right husband, is an hoar, and the
child that is begotten and borne of these.ii. is a bastard. I pray you my
lords (if ye dare) axe this cook, whether he will abide by this cokery or no.
If he will not abide by it, the^ may wyueles cokes so^tymes, send poiso^ to
their lords or ladies tables, as well as married cokes. If he will reca^t and
deny this his saying, and say tongue ye lie, the^ ye must not suffer him to
have this new found glorius name of Constantius, Consta^tius
which he gave him self in his book of ye sacrament, Iacta^tius.
but let hi^ be called iactantius, for that agrees with this his condition,
better then constantius does. But if he will stand to his old saying, and
defend that his meat had no poison in it, and that the marriage was unlawful
between the Queen's father and mother, I marvel why that master Ridley of late
bishop of London, and diverse other, are ponyshed as traitors for ye same
words, and that this man shall be taken for the Queen's high friend. Gardener was
long at Rome, in labourynge as I herd say to obtain of the Pope a license
of dyuorce for the king, and it is like that he purchased in the mean time a
pardon of the Pope, that he might say what he list for his life time
vnponyshed, which pardone belyke some men (that think that the Popes license
is still in full power and strength,) seeing the same pardone, suffer him to
enjoy his pardone at his pleasure, and gives him leave to do and say what he
list. If he said nothing but the truth, in saying that the marriage between
the Queen's father and mother was unlawful, yet there are other words of his
own, that will condemn him to be a perilous cook, and a poysonyng cook. In
the very first leaf of his book, of his obedience, he confesses, that he with
many other grave and learned me^, by a folyshe and an old superstition for a
season wythstode the truth. If he wythstode the truth for a season for the
same time he held with falshod (for to wythstande the truth, is to hold with
falshode) and he that holds for a season with falshode, and teaches and
preaches the same, he serves in the same time out poison, for wholesome meat,
and therefore is more to be suspecte in his spiritual cookery, the^ the bodily
cook, is to be suspect in his cookery, which at no time was co^uicted either
by word or deed, to have done any other thing, then became a christian man to
do. In the same place he granted plainly, that he departed from the truth,
and that he was a ielous follower, and an earnest defender of the law and the
letter, and that he did never any thing more unwillingly, the^ to go away
from those opinions that he once had taken, what so ever they were. He says
also, that he was not like unto Paul, which when as he was overthrown was so
obedient to the voice of God, that he said, Lord what wylt thou have me do. If
a man think that these sentences be not in his book, I will reherce his own
words in Latin as he wrote them. Neque vero dubito quin in ha^c eandem, aut
certe aut multo dissimilem cogitationem mecum multi, ijque docti graves ac boni
viri inciderint, quibus inepta quadam, and inueterata superstitione impeditis
veritatique aliquamdiu reluctantibus, eadem hec cogitatio omnes dubitationis
scrupulos prorsus ademit, lucemque vere veritatis diuina operante gratia
attulit atque adduxit. Equidem autem vt de meipso ingenue confitear, cum legis
and litterae, vt ita dicam, aemulator ac propugnator essem acerimus, nec
quicquam illibentius vnquam aut inuitius facerem, quam vt a receptis
qualiacu^que essent discederetur, quo quidem longius men's in ear, iudicium a
veritate recessit, hoc certe vehementius, atque acrrius quiddam in veritate
agnoscenda passus videbar, non aliter sane atque oculi tenebrarum caligine
hebete; iam facti, ad subitum irradiantis luminis splendorem solent
obstupescere. Mihi na^que illud haud datum fuit, quod diuo Paulo constat
accidisse, qui simulatque a deo prostratus ceciderit, vocem obedientiae
protinus emisit, dicens, domine quid vis me facere?

Hoc enim electo illi vasi vberior Dei gratia contulerat, vt vocem corripientis
Dei, and ab errore reuocantis, confestim agnoscens totum se Deo co^mitteret
regendum, and ei in omni veritate statim obediret ac pareret in omnibus. etc.

Now may ye se by his own words, that he was an enemy unto the truth, he
that was ones an enemy unto the truth, may now also be an enemy unto the
same again, and whether he be a friend at this time or a foe unto the truth,
how can they judge, that either want al judgment, or if they could judge, will
not take the pain. I beseech you my lords for the love that ye bear to God,
and the common wealth, axe him in what opinions he went from the truth; whether
it were in defendyng holy water and holy bread, in ye inuocacio^ of saints, in
purgatory, in the iustificacion of works, in the nombre of the Sacraments, in
the ceremonies of the Church or in defendyng of the real presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament, or in what other articles he erred in? Because he did
not tell in what points he erred in, it may chance yt he is fallen into ye
same errores again, as we se certain of his sect, which had forsworn in the
two last kings days diverse errores, and had subscribed to the contrary, and
now afreshe are fallen into the same errores again. If that master Gardener
allow his doctrine still, of king Henry's marriage let him set forth the same
doctrine in English at large, because the common people may learn some
wholesome doctrine of it even as he, or at ye lest some of his, have handeled
master Barlowe, which wrote a noughtye and a false lyeng book, compelled by
fear to do so. But if he will not set out his book in English both because
he knows in his conscience that it is a false book, and an heretical book,
and therefore will not knowledge it now to be his book, because he was compelled
by fear to write against the open truth: he (or at the least some of his
popyshe prentises) is very uncharitable and unjust unto master Barlowe, which
ha^deleth him otherwise then he would or will be handeled him self. If that
men and women that are so married unto certain men, that they will not examine
their doctrine but take it to be ye very truth what so ever they say, would
stand to the judgment of the holy scripture, I should easily condemn them
for their so doing, and prove that they did plain contrary unto the mind of
the holy ghost. But because they care not for scripture, I will let them alone,
and talk a little with you my lords and masters, that are indifferent men and
have not sworen to hold with the words of any one scole master. Saint John
in the.iiii. chapter says. 1. Io. 4.
Ne cui vis spiritui credatis, sed probate spiritus an ex Deosint. Believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God or no, but they
believe all spirits, that hold with the mess, purgatory, holy water and holy
bread, invocation of saints, and such like ordinances of man, and try not
whether they be of God or no, and if they would try the spretes should they not
try them with the word of God? Have they knowledge in the word of God? they
confess they have none at all, but they say that it is enoughe for them, to
try all doctrine, with their fathers faith, and other of their old ancetores,
and with the authorite of the catholyke church. What if some of their
forfathers or else of their mothers, within these few hundredth years were
heathen men, or heathen weme^, shall it be mete for them to judge all
doctrines, by their fathers faith?

Which of their fathers or mothers was not a Papist? Shall men judge ryghtly
matters of religion, by the faith of papists? What if their fathers have
erred, shall we be compelled to follow their fathers errors? that were great
pytie. What if some of their fathers bylded Abbayes to find a sort of idle
monks in, and founded chantre prestes to sing for souls in purgatory?

What if some of their fathers put down abbayes and chantres, how shall they
judge here who did better, and whom they and we ought to follow? If some of
their fathers held this opinion, that it was lawful to put away their
lawful wives, and to cleue to hores, as some of them can not deny, but that
their fathers have both so believed and also so done? Was this a good believe, I
think that they their selves will say that the believe was naught.

Shall it be then mete to examine al doctrines with their fathers faith, and
their ancetores believe? If any of the idle and vnscripture learned traditioners
(for so must we call them, because we may call no man now a Papist) do hold
that it is not required, that a King or a Queen or any ruler should be well
learned in the scripture because all matters and controversies of religion
ought to be tried by the authority of the catholyke church, meaning thereby
the common consent of almost all the bishops prelates, and universities in
all the west part of Europa and the determinacions of general counselles: I
answer, if we should follow the judgment of this catholyke church: then should
we boldly pronounce that the marriage between king Henry the eight, and his
first wife Queen Katherine, was not lawful. For the most principal part of
the catholyke church of our time as it is taken, that is the most part and
most notable universities of this part of the world and the most part of
learned men, and all the Bishops of the church of England saving one,
condemned the marriage between king Henry the eight and lady Katherine this
Queen's mother. I have enowe to bear me wytnes that it is true yt I say,
Cuthbert. Steven Sa^pson
beside Cuthbert now bishop of Durram, Steven bishop of Wynchester, and Samson
now bishop of Couentre. But if these foresaid Universities and bishops of
England had been corrupted for money, as scolares are poor and sometime grant
it that ought not to be granted for money, namely such where as yt Pope
bears rule, and these.iii. fornamed bishops as some other lawyers do, as
they be, had sold their tongues and handwrytynges for money and promotion and for
their princes favor: Yet the old Canones and general counselles are not so
to be suspected of corrupcion as paraduenture some of these forsaid bishops
be: hear therefore what the old Canones and counselles judge of this matter.

This that I will allege is written in the second part of the decrees,
the.xxvii. cause and second question Cap. Si quis disponsauerit sibi aliquam,
and praeueniente mortis articulo, eam cognoscere non potuerit: frater eius non
potest eam ducere in vxorem. That is if any man be handfaste or betrouthed unto
a woman, and he being prevented with death could not have carnal copulacio^
with her: his brother may not mary her.

Gregory the bishop of Rome also speaks thus of this matter, in the same
place as he is alleged.

Nulli christiano licet de sua consanguinitate, vel qua^ cognatu, suus habuit
in matrimonium assumere.

It is not lawful for any christen man to mary any of his own kyn or her that
his kynsman has had. The same Gregory says also these words in the same
place. Si quir vxorem desponsauerit. etc. If any man betrouthe or be handfast
unto a wife, or give earnest unto her and he being taken away by death before
and so can not mary her, none of this man's kyn may take her afterward to
wife. Iulianus also bishop of Rome as he is alleged in ye same place, has
the same sentence and almost the same words, saying that nether the brother
that lives nor any other of the kynred may mary her that was betrouthed unto
the brother or kynsman that is departed.

Prince Arthur did not only betrouth the Queen's mother, but also mary her and
lie with her, therefore by these men it was not lawful for his brother
afterward to mary her.

In the.vii. Chapter Concilij Aureliani this law was made by ye church
concerning the mariyng of the brothers wife.

Frater superstes ne thorum defuncti fratris ascendat. Let not the brother go
up in to the bed of his brother that is departed.

It is also written thus of the same matter in an other counsel called Concilium
Neocaesariense in the second Chapter.

Mulier si duobus fratribus nupserit, abijciatur vsque ad mortem. If a woman be
married unto two brethren, let her be cast away until her death.

Now may ye se whether it be safe to leave the written word of God and to
trust upon the traditioners catholyke church or no, which if men would give
credit to, the^ should they believe that king Henry the eyghtes marriage with
Katherine the Queen's mother was unlawful and that our Queen were a a bastard.

But ye that are right shapen gentlemen, and not vain braggers of nobilite, I
trust will follow the right and true christian gentlemen, whereof Luke makes
mention in ye xvii. Chapter of the Acts, in these words. Hi erant summo
genere nati inter cos qui erant thessalonicae, qui receperu^t sermo nem, cum
omni animi promptitudine, quotidie scrutantes scripturas an hec ita se haberent.

These were of a noble birth, or of ye chefest of the nobility, amongst the^
that were in Thessalonica, Act. 17.
which cherefully, or with all redynes of mind, received the word and
serched daily the scripture, whether these things were so or no, that is,
whether Paul's doctrine and saynges were agreynge with the scripture or no.
Now as many as will be in deed, it that they are called, that is right noble
men and gentlemen, let them follow these right christian gentlemen, and take
them for a patron to follow, and then shall they be able to give right
judgment in matters of religion that are at this time in controversy. But if
they will not follow these gentlemen, but will be wylfully blind, and suffer
them selves to be led, whether so ever it shall please their blind guydes to
lead them, they may as well tarry at home, as come to the parliament house, to
sit there, except they will other sleep, or else tell the cloak whylse learned
men, dispute the matters that are in contention, as I have seen some gentlemen
of the first head do, when I was a burgesie of late, of ye lower house. If that
it perteyned not to gentleman, by the reason of his office to be learned yet it
were expedient for the honor and honesty of the realm, that gentlemen should
be learned. For when as either ambassadors being learned gentlemen come into
England or English gentlemen go as ambassadors unto Emperors, kings, or
other noble and learned gentlemen, into strange lands, if our noble men be
learned, iit shall turn to the honor of the hole realm, but if they be
unlearned, the strangers will reken us al to be brute beasts, when as our
heads are so brutyshe and unlearned. About.xiii. years ago, it chaunsed that
I was in Callice, and whylse I was there, the prince of Salerne came thither
out of Italy, with many noble gentlemen. At that time two English
commisioners were sent thither, to scour the town of traitors. And no
depute as yet appointed, nor being there: these two English commissioners
must welcome ye prince and his nobles that came with him, and when as the
gentleman spoke first Italian unto our men, afterward latin, and as far as
I remember french to, our gentlemen could not speak one word again to
them, in any of those.iii. tongues. The one was an Earl, and the other a knight.
When as they should walk together, because our Earl would show the stranger
a cast of English curtesye, when the stranger would have given the honor
and higher hand unto him, he cried stylle (thynkyng that he behaved him self
Erlely and gentlemanly) nothing else, but by gods body I will not, by gods
body I will not, by gods body I will not, as though his gentlemanship had
stande^ in great sweryng. Was not this a great shame unto all England, that
there was no better choice in England, but that such two must be sent forth,
which were so unlearned, and namely unto such a place, as strangers of all
nations, and of all degrees commonly resort unto?

Now have I proved by man's learning gods holy word, and by natural
reason, that it belongs unto al princes, gouernores and noble men to be
learned and by the holy scripture, that ye office of a prince or of any other
governor, is to set forth gods true religion, to destroy false and
conterfet religion, to exercise justice and judgment, and to defend the
innocent, and to ponyshe the mysdoers. But the most part, of the noble men
and gentlemen in England, is not learned, and does not this their office which
God has appointed them. Therefore it follows that the most part, of the
nobles and gentlemen of England is syck. For I have proved before, that he is
syck that can not do his natural office or work, which nature has appointed
him to do or work. Let us now se what diseases they be that hinder the
nobilite to do their office and duty that they are called to.

Of the hole Palsy or numnes through all the body.
SOme of the nobility as far as I can gather, are syck in the apoplexia, that
is a disease, that makes all the hole body number and without felyng, and
speaking. They that are sick in this disease, are also called taken, Some call
this disease a Palsy, but a palsy is properlye in ye one side, when as this
sycknes is over all the body. It that is the numnes in a natural body, is
vnlearnednes in the polityke body of the nobility.

For as he that has the hole palsy, can feel nothing, nor speak any thing
him self, and can not go but where as he is carried of other, so an unlearned
gentleman yt has no learning nor knowledge himself, but trusts only to
other men's learning, is carried of his counsel, be it good or bad, whether it
shall please them, is syck in a spiritual Palsy. As there is no more miserable
disease in a man's body, then a palsy is, for he that has it, is as it were a
living carrion, and makes al his friends weary of him, and ca^ do nothing that
belongs unto a man: so in the politic body of a ge^tlema^ unlearned, is an
unprofitable burden of the earth, and is in no part able to do the office
that belongs unto a ge^tlema^, and therefore has no more of a ge^tlema^ the^ a
painted image has of a man. The palsy in a natural body, comes of cold and
tough humores, which are engendered in the head, by often dronkennes, and to
much excess of meat and drink. If the age, the time of the year, and the
strength of the patient, will abide it, the letting of blood in the beginning
is very good, for the healynge of this disease, but if it be differred to
long, the^ is ye disease incurable. Eue^ so the spiritual hole, palsy,
ignorance, when as young ge^tlemen in their youth begin to loyter, and will not
learn, but will ru^ne a huntyng and haukynge when as they should be at their
book, they must be let blood often times in the buttokes, for the noble
spiritual physician. Solomon in the.xxii. of the Proverbs, teaches us this
remedy, against the spiritual palsy, Pro. 22.
and the recepte of it is this. Stultitia colligata est in cord pueri, virga
disciplinae fugabit came. Folyshnes or vnlearnednes, is bound together in the
heart of a boy, but the rode of correction will drive it away. If that the
disease be so great that nether words nor herbs be able to heal it, the^ we
must according unto the greatness of the disease, use remedies made of greater
things. Therefore this receyte that I will apoynte, will be very good, both to
avoid the disease, and to drive it away, after yt it has been taken of a
child. Recipe virgarum betulce aut salicis, manipulum vnum, and quotidie pueri
natibus, adhibeatur ad sanguinis vsque effusionem, donec conualuerit. Plus
millies me dicamentu^ hoc efficax esse probatum est. And Solomon in the.23.
Pro. 23.
of his Proverbs, says plainly that this remedy, can not hurt any child.
Noli says he, subtrahere a puero disciplinam. etc. Take not away correccion
from a child, for if thou beat him with a rode, he shall not dye. Thou shalt
beat him with a rod, and thou shalt deliver his soul from hell. The rod and
correction give wisdom, but the child that is suffered to have his own will,
shall shame his mother.

Thus far Solomon, if this disease be ones healed in ye nobilite, it shall be
the easyer to heal al other diseases, which they have and are in danger of.
They that are disposed unto this disease, or have it, must vomit out the
opinion that the parasites hold, that gentlemen need not to be learned, and
they must absteyne from to much wine, and from al excess of meat and
drink, and then by ye grace of God they shall be hole. If this physyke had been
well practiced L. years ago, there had not been so many sick in this palsy as
now are. And they that now for age, and by the oldnesse of the sycknesse, are
incurable, might have been easelye helped. But seeing the old palsy, can not
be helped, by man's physyke, let us carye with our prayers, al old ignorant
men unto Christ, that he may make them feel his truth, and speak of his word,
to the glory of God almighty.

Of the Dropsye.
I Se so many tokens in many gentlemen in England, of the dropsy, that I
must needs think, that there are many ge^tlemen sick in that syckenes.

The common tokens of all the.iii. dropsies, are these. To be swelled and
puffed up, with wind and water, and to be excedyng thursty. The first kind
called, Anasarca, is almost of hole water. The second kind called, Ascitis,
is of two parts water, and one part wind. The third part called,
Timpanitis, is of two parts wind, and one of water, as some phisicians hold.
The nobility in my time have swelled so much, yt nether their own clothes,
which they had wont to wear, nor their fathers clothes, which was as byg men
as these be, will not hold the^, but they must have bygger clothes and more
costly garments. Some swell so great, that they can not be content, with their
fathers houses, which were as great men as these be, for their fathers house
will not hold the^, for they bylde wyder houses, and mo then their fathers
did, for one or two will not hold them. And some swel so great, that all the
houses, that their fathers and they have builded, will not hold them, but they
must also have bishops houses, and deanes houses, parsons houses; vicares
houses, and poor beggars houses called hospitalles. And yet they swell so
great that all these will not hold the^ (except they amend their manners)
until they come to hell. There is a place great enough, for such as can
never get place enoughe for them, but either by craft, or by compulsion, or by
frayng of their inferiors, or by unshamefast begging, get their places and
houses from them. The other kind of common tokens that the watersyke have, is
an excedyng great thyrst, and so great that the more they drink, the more
they desire to drink, and no drink is able to quench their thyrst. Such a
thirst have some of the nobility now, and such one has some had of late:
wherefore the nobilite has now and has had the dropsy. Some having lands of
their own to live on, have peltyngly gone about from court to court, biynge
fermes and bargaynes and ouerbyddyng al me^, so yt pere me^ ca^ get no
reasonable price of any ferme, or bargain for the^. So^e are so thirstye of
fermes, and namely of benefyces, that they snatch up all the reuersions that
can be had in a country, though the fermers have yet.xl. or.l. years to come.
There is one knight that has ten benefices in one shere in his hands, and an
other has.xxii. as credible persons have told me. Some are so thyrsty for
the fermes of vicarages and parsonages, that they bag or bye the aduousons of
them, of the patrones, and as soon as they fall, they will let none have the
benefice, but such as will let them the benefice to ferme, with house, and
land, and tithes, with all that belongs thereto.

Other drink up the glebe land and let the rest alone. Some have by brybery,
simony and other unlawful ways, robbed many a poor paryshe in England, of
their parsonages, and persons, and have dronke^ up quyte the parsonages for
them and their heirs, for ever, wherwyth ye church of Christ had wont to be
fed, both bodily and goostly. Some new gentlemen have dronken up, not only a
great part of bishops lands, but also have dronken up diverse churcheyardes,
hospitalles, chapelles and chauntries, to patche and cloute up their lyuynges
with all, because their father left them never a foot of land. One of the
nobilite law of late years, a pretty church with a good large church yard,
the same was lord of ye town there, and he desired the paryshe that they
would let him, have the church and churchyard promysing them a new church
and a new church yard, in an other place, the poor tenauntes durst not say
him nay, because he was their lord. In the mean season, he lent the paryshe
a foul evil favored hole, an end of an old abbey, very strayt and narow,
evil covered, and every day like, to fall upon the poor peoples heads, and
as for other church, the poor people ca^ get none, unto this hour Where is
there any good parsonage in England, but it is either bought, and dronken up of
some gentlemen, or else is let to ferme to some gentleman. As with great honesty
and praise, the noble men's servants, had wont to come home to their
masters houses, with hares, wild cattes and foxes upon their backs, so with
much shame, they come with tithe pigs by their tails, with tithe eggs, and
tithe hemp and flax. Well, they that came from the donghyl must go thither
again. Nature will out, although it be holden in with forke a while, as the
dauncyng of the ape does testefye in Esopes fables, which dau^ced well, until
the nuttes were caste^ abroad in the flower. In deed I find this dropsy for
the most part always in the crowish stert vppes, Crowish stert up.
and not so much in the right and old nobility. How be it, even some of the
stock of the old nobility, have grown and gone out of kind, and are also
sick in this common sycknes. There was an earl within these few years, that
had land and good enoughe, and could not quench his thyrst therwyth, until
he had gotten one of the greatest deanryes in England, and so was made my
Lord deane also. But he left to his successors, the lands vndiminshed, and
therefore did much better then he should have done, if he had taken the
Deanerye quyte away into his own hands for ever, for him and his heirs.
Some have been so thirsti of late yt they drank up not only hole comones, and
great fyldes but also the very high ways, and the foul puddels in them. A
certain fellow of mine, which had been long from his friends gat leave to go to
them, and went thetherwarde, but when he came within a little of his fathers
house, he could find no way a long time into his fathers house, the thirsty
gentleman had so dronk up all the high ways there. Some have drunk up of late,
hole rivers and meres, and fennes, which had wont to be common, and will not
suffer a man to angle therein, nether any man to put a veast there, but let them
to ferme. Some when as they have dronken up as much of the co^mones of abbey
lands, of bishops lands, of deanes lands, of persons lands and of
beggars lands (I mean of hospitalles) as would serve.iiii. as honest and as
honorable men as they be, yet for to spare their own drink at home, are not
ashamed to beg drink of such poor me^ as I am. When as I had but.74. lib.
to spend in the year, my first fruits yet unpaid. And yet they never gave me
a cup of ale undeserved i^ al their lives. I have yet copies of their begging
letters here in germany to be witnesses of their shameless beggynge. I would
there were some act of parliament made against such valiant beggars, which
vex poor men as I was, much worse then the lousye beggars do.

Honest gentlemen that are not syke in the dropsye, when as they are very
thyrstye, and enter into a city, they do not light and drink in the first
alehouse that they se in the city but for saving of their honestye, differ to
drink, until they come into an honest in, and there they drink as much as
they need but no more. He that is an honest gentleman, will lever suffer great
honger and thyrst at home, then to earne drink in the market with sellyng of
coals, or bear, or of bullockes, of plowes, of sheep or of shepes do^ge, or of
piss, or of such like vile things, as some have done, and do at this time,
with shame enough if they were not past shame. Buth such gentlyme^ as the
dropsye has taken away their honestye and shamefacednesse from them, that
they care not how they get drink, whether it be with honor or shame, so that
they may have it, while as some gentlemen, yea some Knights and lords do
now in England not be ashamed to sell oxen, sheep, bear, corn, mele, malt,
coals and things much vyler then these be. Now it is evident, that there are
many of the nobility of England, sick in the spiritual dropsye, let us se
whether it is any perilus disease or no. This dropsye is a disease very hard
to heal, and kylleth many a man and woman and it brings not only death, of
both body and soul, but in the life time mocketh men, and brings men into
false opinions. The holy scripture says, that the spiritual dropsy, brings
death and everlasting damnacion, as Paul.i. Corin.vi. 1. Cor. 6
witnesses in these words. Nether thieves, nether covetous men, nether
dronkerdes, nether cursed speakers, where extorcioners, or raven ous men, shall
have the heritage of the kingdom of God. He that is syke in the dropsye,
thinks that plentye of drink shall help his disease, and that his drink,
shall be turned into blood, and that he shall be noryshed therwyth. So is it also
in the dropsy that our gentlemen are sick in.

They think that in heapyng together of much gold and silver, in getting of
many fermes, in getting of many benefyces, that their gredye appetite shall
therwyth be quenched, but they are deceived.

For the noble poets in these verses following affirm the contrary.

Crescit amor nu^mi, quamtum ipsa pecunia crescit. Quanto plura parasti, tanto
plura cupis. Semper auarus eget, quare? quia competit vsus. Tangere parta
timet, cur? ne minuatur aceruus.

At primum scelerem matrem quae semper habendo. Plus sitiens patulis, runatur
faucibus aurum. Trudis auaritiam. Crescit indugeirs sibi dirus hydrops.

Nec sitim pellit, nisi causa morbi.

Fugerit venis, and aquosus albo corpore langor.

The love of the penny grows, as much as the pkny grows. The more things
that thou haste gotten the more thou desyrest. A covetous man is ever nedy, and
why? the use requires, he is afraid to touch that which he has gotten, and
why?

because that his heap should not be mynished or made less. But first thou
thurstest down couettousnes the mother of myschiefe, which the more it has,
the more gold it gapeth for with open jaws, and is more thyrsty. The cruel
dropsye fauourynge it self to much: can not put away thyrste except the
cause of the syknes fly out of ye veins and the wattery siknes leave ye pale
body. The preacher in ye.v. Eccle. 5.
cha. confirms the same, that the poets have said. A covetous man, says
he, will never be filled with money. Furthermore as in the bodily dropsye, the
great plentye of drink, is not turned into blood, nether into any good
noryshment of the body, but is turned all into water and wind, and the body is
never ye better there by, but filled with il moisture which ingendreth a new
thyrst, so is it also in the spiritual water syknes, the gold and the silver,
the lands, the houses, the fermes, the sheep and the bullockes, often times do
nether the covetous men them selves any good at length, nether their chylder
for whom they are so gredy, and so careful. For some dice away their sheep,
some law away their bullockes, some banquet away their benefices and fermes,
some piss all that they get against the walls, some wait their euel gotten
goods upon hores and harlotes. And though they keep their goods still for
them selves and their chylder, for a while as some do, the^ unthrifty son,
will as vnthryftelye spend, his fathers evil gotten goods, as his father got
them unlawfully, or uncharitably did hold them from the poor people, which
ought to have part of them. Nature, philosophye, and holy scripture, and the
common and daily experience do teach us, that ye goods of the covetous men,
for the most part, nether profyt the couetus man him self, nor make his
children rich, in such riches at ye least, that will endure. For the common
saying is that ye third heir shall never enjoy goods or lands evil gotten.
A couetus gentleman, is like a gredy gliede. A gliede otherwise called a
pottock, or a kyte, has the form and fashion of an hawk, and a far of
looks very like an hawk, which is a noble bird, but if ye come nere hand
him, ye shall know him by his whinning, and lamentable pewynge, as though he
could never get enoughe, ye shall also se him do other things, then a right
hawk does, which for the most part, fedeth upon his own pray, that he
has gotten him self. The kyte rests but little, and is almost always
flyeng, and ever he looks downewarde to the earth after one pray or other. In
the time that he byldeth his neste he caryeth all that he can catch and
snatche, unto it, rags, cloutes, napkins, kerches, boys cappes, and sometime
purses, as I have herd say. And all the hole year through, there is no pray
ye comes amysse unto him, he eats upon al kind of carrion, he thinks no
shame to eat worms, he cleketh away goslynges, ducklinges, chickins, and al
kinds of yo^ge birds yt can not fly, or otherwise provide for the^ selves.
He is so bold so^e time in England, (I never saw it so nether in Italy, nether
in any part of Germany, where as I have be^) that he dare take butter and
bread, out of boys hands in yt streets of towns cities and villages. He is
more vnshamefaced the^ ever any begging friar was. For he will without any axyng
or beggyng, take away trypes and puddynges from wives, whylse they are in
washing of them. And this does he most eranestly and unshamefastly, when as
he has young. But what profyt comes unto him and all his, for his manyfolde
robbery and rauin? very little. For he abides still a foul kyte, and his young
ones, as I have seen it my self, ar always slaueryng it out, that the father
has stolle^ and robbed for the^. Mark here how that nature teaches us, how
that it which is gotten with rauin and robbery, is as soon spent and wasted of
the children, as the couertus fathers have gotten it. David in the.36, psalm
speaks thus of the couetus men, and of their heirs and children.

The arms of ye sinners shall be broken: Psalm. 36
but the Lord strengthens the ryghtuous. The Lord knows the days of the
undefiled, and their he ritage shall be for ever. But the enemies of ye Lord,
anon after yt they be set in honor, and be alofte, they shall fade as smoke
vanyshe away. The unrighteous shall be ponyshed, and the se^de of the wicked men
shall peryshe. Salomo^ also in the.xx. Pro. 20
chapter of his proverbs, witnesses that such heritage, as is gotten hastily
and with covetousness, shall not endure. The heritage says Solomon, whereto is
great haste made in the beginning, shall not prosper at the length.
Ecclesiasticus writing both of the right godly gentle, and of the ungodly and
false gentlemen, says these words, Ecc. 44
Ecclesiastici. 44. Al these have gotten glory, in the generations of their
kynred, and in their days they were praised. They that were borne of them,
have left a name to tell the praises of them. And there are some whose memory
are quyte worn out. They have perished, as though they had never been, and
they are borne, as not borne, and so are their children with them. But the
other men are of mercy, who have not wanted god lines, and a good heritage
continues, and the sede of their chylders children, has stand in the
testament, and their children for their sake, abide for ever. Their sede and
their glory shall never decay. Eccle. 5.
Ecclesiastes in the.v. chap. has a saying not unlike unto this. The covetous
man (says he) shall never be filled with money, and he that loves riches
shall not take any profyt of them. Besides all these authorities, we learn by
experience daily, that co^monlye the greatest and grediest gatherers, are not
always the rychest at the length, and that their children, for the which they
use such catchyng and snatchyng, either are taken out of the world, or else
become fools or unthriftiness, so that the euel gotten, and uncharitably holden
riches, prosper not, in the chylder of the watersyck. Ye remember what
gentlemen, sick in the dropsy, have of late years ben taken away, from al their
gredely, and uncharitably purchased lands, ye can name some chylder, which
have lost by their fathers death all that they prepared for them. Ye know
also one watersyck gentleman (if ye will give me leave to call such a carle a
getlema^) which had dronke^ up almost an hole contre, that his children might
have drink enoughe, who is now chyldles, and has not the^ for whom he had so
gredely scraped and scratched so much riches together. Whether drank king
Henry the seventh, or king Henry the.viii. more? I think that there is none
of you all, but that ye will say, that king Henry the eight drank.xx. tons
more then his father did.

For he drank up all the monkries, freries, and nunries in England, he drank
up the tenthe part of all spiritual men's lyuynges in all the hole realm.
Yea and all the profytes and first fruytes of all benefyces, that fell in his
time, for the first year after that he fell in to the great dropsye, that
is, sense the making of the deuelyshe and abominable act of first fruits
and tenthes. If one man had seen both the kings, cut up after their deaths
as it is not unlike but doctor Chambers did, perchance he should have seen as
much blood in king Henry the seuentes heart, as in king Henry the eyghtes,
and perchance more. But I let that pass and will talk of it that is better
known: Whether of these two dyed the rycher? the greater drynker or the less?
which of these two kings heirs was left rycher, at the death of his father?
ye will say I am sure, that the heir of the less drynker was left much
rycher. Or else what neded king Edwardes counselors and good housbandes, so
often cry, the king is poor, the king is poor, and to get all the chauntries
in England unto him, and so often to spoil the bishops lands, to enryche
him therewyth? ye se therefore, that in both the kinds of dropsy, that the
exceeding plentye of drink, nether quenches the thyrst of the syke, nether
helps the disease, nether increases any good blood. Therefore seeing that the
spiritual dropsye (wherein diverse gentlemen of England are sick in at this
time) brings at length death of both body and soul, and makes such a
folishe opinion in them, that they believe, that it that most of all engenders
the syknes, helps it, and that it that most destroys both the blood and
natural heat, ingendreth both the same, it must needs be a perilous
disease. Then where as it is so perilous a disease, they that are syke in it,
had need of some remedy for it, which I intend to offer unto them. But before
I show the remedy of this disease, it is mete that I show the causes of it,
that I in healyng of it, may show the practice more like a workman, then a
fool, for he that knows not the cause of the disease, how shall he take the
cause away of it? And he that knows not the cause of the disease, how shall he
take it away, and he that takes not the cause of yt disease away how shall
he take the disease away, when as the cause abydyng still the effect must
needs follow. It is also necessary for all my patientes, to know the cause of
their diseases, that after that they are ones healed, they may exchewe the
disease, by puttyng away, and auoydyng the causes of it. It shall be also
necessary for them, yt are not yet sick in that sycknes, but are disposed
naturally thereto, to know the causes of this disease, that by flyeng and
eschuyng the causes of it, they may avoid it. Sycknesses come two ways,
most commonly of a natural cause, and sometime, though it be but seldom,
immediately of God, without any natural cause, for the reue^ging and ponyshyng
of some open sin or offense. As for an exemple. The leprye most commonly
comes of a melancholic humor, or of a salt burned humor, that is in a
man's body. But we read that without any such natural cause, it comes
immediately of God, ponyshyng so^e notable and open offense, 4. Re. 5. Nu. 12.
2. pa. 26.
as it came unto Gehasi, to mary Moses sister, and to king Osias. The bodily
dropsye commonly comes of the stopping of the liver, and the stoppyng
commonly comes either of cold or of gross humores. Even so the spiritu all
dropsye comes of cold or gross humores. Under the name of cold humores, I
understand such spiritual drink, as is not warmed with an earnest preacher,
but is coldely served out, without any zele or feruentnes in sprete, after
which manner, our newtralles and manpleasers of late, and now the latin
sacrificers, serve the people in England. By gross humores, I understand
fleshely and gross ceremonies, which were never tried with the fire of Gods
word. But as this is the common way, whereby me^ come to the dropsye, so is
there also an other preuye strange and seldom way, whereby I reken that many
of our gentlemen, have fallen into the spiritual dropsye. That is, by the
ponyshment of almyghtye God, which suffered them to fall in to this sycknes,
for their open sins, as he brought the.iii. aforenamed persons, into ye
lepry. The noble and well borne, king Henry ye.viii. by the counsel of certain
of his scripture learned counselors, took in hand to reform and heal some
of his clergy, which was so sick in the dropsye, that they had almost
dronke^ up a quarter of the hole realm, and according unto the word of God,
and his bound deutye, he began to drive out of his land, the seven kinds of
people, whereof is motion made in the seventh chap. of Deuteronomi, that is,
the Hethites, the Bergelces, Deu. 7.
the Amores, the Canarees, the Pherisees, the Euees, and the Iebusees. And in
deed he healed the clergy after one manner, that phisicianes use, that is, per
ablati onem, and he drove out after a manner the foresaid enemies of God, which
had gotten them, by continuance of long time, seven new names. If any man
will know their names, that he drove out, their names are these. Iacobites and
Minorites, Augustinianes and Carmelites, whyt monks, black monks, and
Chanones. etc. Because he could nether heal all ye watersyke alone, nether
could alone drive out so many enemies, he commanded his nobilite to help
him, and they not vnwyllyngly took his part. But how healed they the dropsye,
and how drove they away the seven heathen nations? Surely nether according
unto the rules of bodily, nor of spiritual phisyck. What manner of phisiciane is
he that comes unto a house, where as there are some parsons syck, because
they had to many humores, and others for lack of sufficient humores, and other
are not syck, and he not only commands them al together both syck and hole
to fast alyke, for the space of an hole year, and to give him for his labor,
al it that they should have eaten that year: but enioyneth the^ al alyke, for
all the time of their lives ever after, to depart with the tenth part of the
meat, that they had wont to spend, and to give it unto him? Have not the
noble phisicia^s occupied the same physic, whylse they went about to heal the
clergy? yes doutles. For some of the clergy had to much, and some to little,
and some no more the^ enough, and yet must every man have one kind of
medicine, all must be purged, both the sick and the hole and all must fast
and keep one diet, both the hole, and the two kinds of sick. Would these
phisicians be content, that doctor Wendy, or doctor Owen, doctor Wotton or
doctor Huic, or I, should practice with them so, if we were called to their
houses to heal certain syck persons there? Doutles they would not. Wherefore
when as they do otherwise unto their brethren, then they would be done to them
selves, they have broken the rule of our master doctor Jesus, the chife
phisician, and have committed an open sin, that all the world may se. For the
which sin, God has suffered them to fall into this foul dropsy, that they
are syck in now, even as he ponished Gehasy with a lepry, for co^mittynge the
same sin, that our gentlemen did. For as Gehasy sinned in covetousness, in
taking of rewards, of the heathen man yt his master healed, having no
commandment so to do, so these when as they had no commandment of their
master Christ to take the goods of the clergy, for the reformyng of it:
sinned in couetusnes, and fell into ye same siknes yt the clergy had. And so is
it now comed to pass, yt the phisicians which took in hand to heal other
me^, are fallen into ye same syknes the^ selves, and have need of phisicians to
heal them. The same in dryuing out of the aforsayd seven nations, brake openly
the commandment and rule of ye great Phisiciane, which in these words
Deuteronomi.vii. Deu. 7.
gave this commandment. When as the Lord thy God, shall bring thee into the
land, wherinto thou shalt enter, and take possession of, shall drive away
many nations of people in thy sight, the Hethites, the Gergeze ets. etc. thou
shalt burn in the fire their graven images. Thou shalt not desyer the gold
and the silver whereof they are made, nether shall thou take unto thee any
thing of them, lest thou stu^ble or do amiss, because it is the obominacion
of thy Lord God. Nether shall thou bring any thing of the ydolles into thy
house, lest thou be accursed, as it is. Thou shalt defye it as fylthynes, and
thou shall loathe it, as dyrte and uncleanness, because it is acursed.

This open co^mauudement of God, has our phisicianes, of our clergy openly
broken. For they took unto them selves, not only all the lands of the heathen,
and al their gold and their silver, but also all their images and their
abominable ydoles, and carried them home into their houses, or at the lest into
the kings house. That to put down ydolatrie for riches sake, and to take the
ydoles to a man's own proper advantage, displeases God hyghly, ye may
learn by the overthrow, that the children of Israel had, of the cytesyns of
Hay, and by the death of Acham, who was put to death myserably with all his,
for stealing of certain jewels and other orname^tes perteynyng unto ydoles.
Iosu. 7.
Iosue vii. and also by the death of the Jews, that fought under the
Machabees, which after their death, were judged, of the church therefore, to
have been slain of their enemies because they had taken privily unto them
selves, of the offerynges of the ydoles, ye may se that God took it for a
great sin, to take the spoils of ydoles and ydolaters, to a man's own
self, because that he ponyshed it twyse with death. Wherefore it is a greuus
sin, to destroy ydoles and ydolatrye, not for Gods love, but for their
spoils and riches sake. But how ponysheth God, these gold thyrsty
phesicians? Even with the same sycknes, that they went about to take from their
patientes. For God says, thou shall bring nothing of their ydoles, to thy
house, Deu. 7.
Ne tu sias anathema sicus illud est: that is, lest thou be made accursed, and
abominations as it is After now that the causes of this dropsye are know, it
follows next to be done, that I should ordeyne a preparatiue. When as the
disease comes of cold, and of the stoppynge the liver, our preparatiue must
be made, of such herbs, as are hot and bitter, therefore as many as will be
purged of this evil humor, that makes the dropsye, must take this bitter
preparatiue (for much use of sweet watery and cold meats, make the dropsye.)
Go to the church and desire a learned man to make a bitter sermon against
covetousness, of the which sermon, take one good draught fasting in the
morning, and and other an hour before supper, with an ounce of repentance, at
each time for the space of fourten days, and then take.vi. dra^mes of the
purgation, which may well be called, hiera zachei, and it will scour them
that have the dropsye so perfytlye, that there shall not remain one pint, of
that thyrst making water, If yt it can not be found ready made in the
poticaries shoppes, make it thus. Luke 19
Dimidium bonorum tuorum, da pauperibus, si quem defraudaueris, read ei
quadruplum, Give the one half of al thy goods the poor, if thou have taken
any thing away from any man unjustly, restore.iiii. times as much to him
again. If this purgation be to strong and to bitter, and would purge to sore,
then take less of it, and make equale restitution, according unto ye value of
it that is taken away from any man. After that they be thus purged, because it
is a strong purgation, and a bitter, and makes the takers of it very weak,
and after that a man is healed ones of this disease, he may lightly fall into
it again, I will ordeyn and make the water syke, a confortatiue, and
immediately after also a preservative, to save them yt they fall not again into
their old disease. Their confortatiue, shall be this that follows hereafter.

Luke 19. Math. 3. and. 11.
Venit filius hominis, quaerere and seruare quod perierat. Non veni vocare
iustos, sed peccatores ad poenitentiam. Poenitentiam agite and appropinquabit
regnum celorum. Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis and onerati estis, Math. 11
and ego refocillabo vos, Sic Deus dilexit mundum, Ioh. 3.
vt vnigenitum filium suu^ daret, vt omnis qui credit in eum, non pereat,
Ezech. 13
sed habeat vitam eternam. Nolo mortem peccatoris sed magis vt conuertatur, and
viuat.

Now will I teach you a good triacle or preservative. The preservative is
this.

Non concupisces vxorem fratris tui, Exo. 20.
non domum, non agrum, non seruum, non an cillam, non bouem, non asinum, and
vniuersa quae illius sunt. Non fitis solliciti quid esuri sitis, aut quid
bibituri, aut quo induamini. Math. 6
Primum querite regnu^ Dei, and iusticiam eius, Pro. 10.
and hec omnia adijcientur vobis. Non patietur Dominus vt anima iusti fame
laboret. Leunculi penuria and fame laborant qui autem do minu^ inquirunt nullo
bono destituu^tur. Deu. 17
Cum fueris rex constitutus, non multiplicabis tibi equos. Non habebis vxores
plurimas, neque argenti and auri ingentia pondera. Rex iustus erigit terram,
vir auarus destruit came. Pro. 30.
Mendicitatem and diuitias, ne dederis mihi, tribue victui meo necessaria, ne
forte satiatus alliciar ad negandu^ and dicam. Quis est Dominus, aut egestate
compulsus furer, and periurem nomen Dei mei: Seiunge ab hijs, qui questum
putant esse pietatem. Est autem questus magnus pietas cum animo sua sort
co^tento. Nihil enim intulimus in mundum, videlicet nec esser re quicquam
possumus, 2. tim. 6
sed habentes alimenta and quibus tegamur, his contenti erimus. Caeterum qui
volunt ditescere, incidunt in temtationem and laqueum and in cupiditates
multas, stultas ac noxias, quae demergunt homines in exitium and interitum,
Siquidem radix omniu^ malorum, est auaritia. Vos qui diuites estis in praesenti
seculo, ne sitis elato animo, neque spem ponite, in diuitijs incertis, sed in
Deo viuente, qui praebet nobis omnia affatim, ad fruendum. Benefacite vt
diuites sitis bonis operibus. Estote faciles ad impertiendum, libenter
communicantes, recondentes vobis ipsis fundamentum bonum in posterum, Psa. 39.
vt apprehendatis vitam eternam. Spera in Domino and fac bonitatem, and
inhabita terram, and pasceris in diuitijs eius. Delectare in Domino, and dabit
tibi petitionem tuam. Nouit Dominus dies immaculatorum, and hereditas eorum in
aeternum erit. Inimici vero Domini mox vt honorificati sunt and exaltati
deficientes quemadmodum fumus deficient. Junior fui, Psa. 36.
and senui, and non vidi iustum derelictum, nec semen eius querens panem. Psa.
118
Iniusti puni entur, and semen impiorum peribit. Inclina cor meum in testimonia
tua, and non in auaritiam.

I have written this in latin for their sake, that had lever read their
confortatiue and diet in latin, then in English. But if I should leave this
latin not turned into English I would be aferde that some unlearned persons
should abuse this my writing, as the Popyshe sacrificeyng prestes and the
common popyshe sort of the unlearned people, abuse the physic of Christ
written in latin. For when as Christ had made many noble medecines against
diverse diseases, and the Apostles and Evangelists had written the same in
Greek, and learned men had turned them out of Greek into latin, some of the
common people beleuyng that Christ's medicines was very good, desired ye
prestes to read unto them Christ's preparatiues, purgations, confortatiues and
diet to their comfort, and for the same cause they came every sunday unto the
church. But ye Popyshe prestes read over ye sick persons heads, Christ's
above named medicines i^ latin, as though the bare redynge of the phisicians
byll in a strange tongue, should help the syck men, when as they understand
never one word thereof. And the same prestes, nether taught the people, how
they should use their preparatiue, nether their purgation, nor confortatiue,
nether did they declare what diet the people should hold, but read the diet
and other medicines in a strange tongue. I will therefore make my hole counsel
and my other medicines in English for them that understand no latin, and yet
I counself them that are sick in this disease, when as I counsel them yt they
daily read this confortatiue, and preservative, that they look for no help
of the only reading of them, but yt they should do those things that are
written, and not only hear them, or se them, or say them, but also order
their life according unto the co^fortatiue and the foreappointed diet. The
son of man came, to seek out and to save, that which was lost I came not to
call the ryghteous, but sinners unto repentance.

Repent you, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Come unto me all ye that
labor and are lade^, and I shall refreshe you. So God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son, that all which believe in him, should not
peryshe, but have life everlasting. I will not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he convert and live. The preservative. Thou shall not desire thy
brothers wife, nor his house, nor his land, nor his servant, nor his maid,
nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his. Be ye not careful, what
ye shall eat, nor what ye shall drink, or wherwyth ye shall be clothed. First
seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof and al these things
shall be given you. The Lord shall not suffer the soul of the ryghteous to be
grieved with honger. The young Lions are greues with penurye and honger, but
they that search out the Lord shall lake nothing that is good. When thou
shalt be made a king, thou shalt not purchase unto thee many horses, thou
shalt not have many wives, nether exceadynge great weight of gold and
silver. A ryghteous king sets up the land, but a couetus man destroys
it. Extreme poverty, nor great riches give not unto me, give me necessary
things for my living, lest paraduenture I being filled, shall be intysed unto
the deniyng of thee, and say, who is the Lord? or I being compelled with
poverty, should stele, and forswere ye name of my Lord God. i. timo. vi. 1.
tim. 6
Separate thy self from those which think gaynes to be godlynes, for
godlynes is great vau^tage, when a man is content in his own mind, for we
brought nothing into the world, nether we can carry any thing out thereof, but
having sufficient fode and clothing, let us be content therwyth, for those
that will be rich, enter into many temtacions and snares, and wicked desires
folyshe and hurtful, which drown men and cast them into death danger and
destruction. For covetousness is the root of all evil. You that are rich in
this present world, be not of an high mind, 1. tim. 6
and put not your hope in uncertain riches, but in the living God, which shall
give you all things plenteously to inioye them. Do you well, that ye may be
rich in good works. Be you easy to distribute, gladly giving part, layeng up
for your selves, a good foundation against the time to come, that ye may take
hold of everlasting life Psalm. 37. Psalm. 37
Trust in the Lord, and do good, and dwell upon the earth and thou shall be fed
in the riches of it. Delight or trust in ye Lord, and he shall give the thy
desire. The Lord knows the days of the undefiled and their inheritance
shall be everlasting. But the enemies of the Lord straight way as they be
honored and set up, they fading away, do vanyshe as the smoke. I was young,
and am old, and I have not seen the ryghteous forsaken, nor their sede
beggynge their bread. The ungodly shall be ponyshed, and the sede of the wicked
shall peryshe. Move my heart unto thy witnesses, and not unto covetousness. So
far the preservative. After that they be ones perfytly healed, they must not
only use this foresaid diet, but they must also exercise them selves, lest
they by to much rest, fall into their sycknes again. For this diet that I
have prescribed after Gods phisik, will not help except they be exercised in
some good works: for the spirit of God says, Psalm. 33.
declina a malo, and fac bonum. fly euel, and do good. But your chief
exercise shall stand in going walking and runnyng, Exercise
ye must rune with David, Psalm. 118
which said, viam manda torum tuorum, cucurri, I have run the way of thy
commandments, ye must also walk as David says, in lege Domini, in the
law of the Lord, and ye must go as the same prophet said, a virtute in
virtutem, from one virtue to another. Although there be many virtues wherein,
a christian gentleman ought to be exercised: yet there is none that is more
fyte to wythstande this dropsye, nor more becomynge a right gentleman, then is
liberality, for it is not one of the vnsurest tokens, where by a gentleman is
known from an other man. Because the way of liberalite is euel to find, and
there are.ii. ways of each side of it, and every one of them is much
broader, then ye way that leads unto lyberalitie is: I will tell you what
lyberalite is, and wherein it stands, and what vices be contrary unto it.
Liberalite.
Liberalite is a virtue, which stands in gyuyng and in taking, but rather in
geuyng. In gyuynge, to whom it is mete to give, and to receive of them, of
whom it is convenient to receive. Aristotle in the first book of his ethikes
confirms my saying thus. Aristotel.
Liberalis est dare, quibus dandum est, potius quam vnde accipiendum est
accipere. etc.

That is, It belongs rather unto a liberal man, to give to them to who^ he
ought to give, then to receive of whom he ought to receive. The end of
liberalite.
The end of liberality in philosophy is for honesties sake, in the
scripture, for Gods sake and our neighbors. A liberal man says Aristotle,
will give so much and in such time as is mete, and it that he does, he does
gladly, and not unwillingly. But he that gives unto them, to whom he ought not
to give, and not for honestye nor for virtues sake, but for some other cause,
he is not to be counted lyberal. A liberal man, will never receive of them, of
whom it is not lawful to receive. Nether is he much dysposed to crave or
beg, because he that gives, receives not gladlye. Yet shall he receive of
them, of whom it is mete that he should receive. And yet he shall not give
unto all men, that he may have store to give, at time convenient, and to whom
it is mete. The most part of the prodigalles, receive of them, of whom they
ought not to receive, and for that cause they become couetus. For when as by
gyuynge, they begin to want their selves, they are compelled to lay hands
upon other men's goods. For they have a desire to give, but they care not
whereof, nor how they give. Couetusnes stands chieflye in gyuynge of less
then a man ought to give, and in passing measure in receyuyng. So that
lyberalitie is set between.ii. vices, yt is, prodigality and couetusnes. Thus
far have I rehearsed unto you the mind of Aristotle whose learning in this
matter, is not contrary, unto Christ's learning. Therefore we may be the
bolder to follow it. The common opinion of diverse gentlemen.
The common sort of gentlemen think them selves very lyberall, if they bestow
upon dogs.xx.li. in the year, and the rest of their goods upon gentlemen
and other rich men, though they spend not.iii. farthynges all their life up on
one poor ma. The manner of noble men's houses, and gentleme^s houses
(commonly) is this. If a gentleman come to the house, whether he be known or
not known, yet either, for to receive such good chere again of the stranger,
or for good fames sake, that he may be called a lyberal gentleman, and a good
house keeper, the master of the house will bid him welcome, and make him good
chere. But if any poor man, either an artificer, or a plowma^ would have any
meat or lodging at the gentleman's house except he be known and like to do
some pleasure again it shall be told him thus: This place is no Inn, nor
alehouse, therefore get you hence. As for the ragged beggars, if the dogs have
left any bones, and slauered bread and noughtye drink, that is Gods part
and theirs, other shall they have none, though not in all gentlemen's houses, yet
into many. This is also the manner in some great me^nes houses, that if any man
come into the hal in a ierken or a sleueles cote, he may not sit down and
dyne there, with sleued men, and sleued beasts there. But the vssher will
command him to depart. And it is also meruell that any such poor man, may
come in at the gate, so ar they only hated, in the gentlemen's houses, to whom
almost only, liberality ought to be showed. This commonly used liberalite in
England now, is no true liberalite, but rather prodigality, for it is quyte
contrary both to ye liberality that God describes and appoints, and also
unto it that all wise natural men have written of, and have commanded their
disciples to occupye. Almighty god in the lviii. cha. of Esaias speaks unto all
Emperores, kings, dukes, earls, lords, knights, gentlemen and al other rich
men Frange esurienti panem tuunt. etc. Esa. 58.
break thy bread unto him that is hongry, and bring into thy house poor and
wanderyng me^, or wayfaring me^, or strangers that have no houses, into thy
house, and when as thou shall se a naked man cover him, and despise not thy
flesh. This commandment of God, is commonly broken in occupyenge of
lyberalitie. For the poor men have not the bread broken, nor the herborles
are lodged.

Christ in the new Testament teaches us, how that we should exercise and
occupy lyberalitie after this manner. Luce. 14
When as thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nether thy
brethren, nether thy kynsfolkes nether thy rich neyghbors, lest they also bid
the again, and so be rewarded for thy good deed. Nay rather when as thou
make a self call poor, weyke, lame, and blind, and thou shalt be blessed,
because they can make no recompense unto the but thou shall be recompe^sed, in
the resurreccion of the ryghteous.

Now what manner of Christianes are ye, that exercise your lyberalitie for the
most part, quyte contrary unto the ordinance of God the father, and of his
son Jesus Christ? The prince of this world, for whose sake ye occupy your
liberality, upon the rich that need not, will reward you after his fashion.
But ye king of heaven shall say unto you, that feed the fat and the rich
only and despise the poor hongry. Mat. 25
I was ho^gry, and ye have given me no meat, I was herborles, and ye gave me no
lodgyng etc. As ye have not done to these, so have ye not done unto me, go your
ways ye cursed, into everlasting fire. For the auoydyng of this hot and
insufferable fire, and that ye may also keep honest and honorable houses,
according unto your states and vocacions, this is my counsel. Make.iii. kinds
of gesthouses, and.iii. dynynge places, let one be made for them that are
vncle^ly or are suspecte to have been in places infected, a little from your
gates, other without or within, let certain standing messes of meat be daily
prepared, according to the rentes of your lands, for these poor folk,
whether they come or no, this can not be lost, that ye bestow upon these, for
ye bestow it upon Christ himself. Let there be one rome for honest plowmen,
artificers and other strangers, under the degree of gentleman, let some nombre
of meses of meat, be also provided, acustomably, every day for these. If there
come no strangers give this meat unto the poor neighbors and laborers in
the village or town next by These ones done, ye may make your fre^des, and al
manner of honest gentlemen such chere as your conscience shall counsel you,
and as your lands will. be able to bear such expenses. If that ye be disposed
to keep right and christian hospitalite, ye must keep it as I have told you,
or else your liberality will not be allowed for liberality of almyghtye God. If
that ye will be perfyt in lyberalitie, ye must have some to go before you to
lead you the way, for we are all blind of nature, of who^ ye may learn to
go a good pace in the high way of liberalite, that ye nether fall into the
way of covetousness nor of prodigalite. 3. gydes
There are iii. gydes which if ye will follow ye shall not miss but find the
high way. Nature, good men both under the law of nature, and under the law of
God, and God him self. Of the which comes both the lyberalitie that nature
teaches, and lyberall men have exercised and do exercise. They that write of
the nature of the right egle, say, that when he has gotten a good pray, and
has tasted a little of the best of it, he cries and calls other birds to
him, and lets them eat with him. After the same manner sparrowes,
goldfynches, lynettes and such small birds, that fly by flokkes together, if
they find any seeds that like them, they call other of the same kind unto
them, because they would not eat alone, but have company with them. The Emperor
Titus used every day at the least to do one good turn to some body, Titus
doing.
and if at any time about night, he perceived that he had given no reward that
day he was very sorry: Abraham and Lot, called into their houses all that they
saw pass by, and made the^ good chere, as the.xviii. Genesis 18 and.19.
of Genesis and the.xix bear wytnes. Ezechias gave unto the people when they
came unto Jerusalem to worship God there and to keep their Passover to the
Lord, 2. par. 30
a thousand oxen, and.vii. thousand sheep, and the noble me^ gave them a
thousand oxen and ten thousand sheep. Here was a right scripture man, and an
image breaker, and his gentlemen were also right scripture men. I would se when
as any unlearned blind traditioner, that was unlearned in the scripture, did
ever give his commons any such gifts, as this scripture learned king, and
his gentlemen, gave unto his commons, because he and they would have the
people continue in the law of God, and in his service which he appointed
them. In my time one king at one parliament time to make men the sonner to
embrace Gods religion, which he took in hand to set forth, toke^ away from
the commones and from the gentlemen, much above the value of a thowsande
oxen, and.vii. thousand sheep, but I have not herd much of it that he gave at
any time unto the commons, to make them embrace their new and true religion.
All ye that are right gentlemen and true gospellers, follow these noble
gentlemen, and though ye can not overtake them, follow them as nere as ye can
and not the gredy gripes, which having crooked claws, ever receive, and never
give any thing. Almyghtye God gives all thing that all men and al living
creatures in ye world receive, and for all that he gives: he receives
nothing, saving a kind heart and a thankful. The nobler that any prince is,
and the mightier and rycher, the more nere he ought to be a follower of almighty
God. Who keeps open household at all times, and as well provides for flies,
sparowes, pisemiers and young rauenes, as he does for old goshaukes, herones,
bustardes, swa^nes, egles, and great oxen. As I have set you these.iii. God,
nature, and good men, to be followed and to be your gydes, because I would ye
werfully exercysed, I will appoint you whom ye ought to fly and run away
from, for it belongs unto him that will appoint a diet well, as diligently to
tell, what things ought to be avoided, as what ought to be occupied. Fly the
water birds.
Ye must fly from al kinds of waterbyrdes, which exercise both the water and
the land, that is, from the couetus men, that are both lay men and spiritual
men, as they are called, and from all such, as can not be content with one
sufficient vocacion or office, but will have many, to the hynderaunce of their
brethren. Also ye must absteyne from the horse leche, from the Tyk, from the
Sow, and the Molde, and from the Heron. All these are to be eschued above all
other beasts and birds. Avoid the horse leche.
The Horseleche and the Tyk have mouths to receive blood, and they tarry still
in one place until they be full, but they have no place to avoid it out
again, and so keep it all to themselves. A sow is always among the dyrt, and
never does good until she dye. Then her puddynges and bags go abroad, and
every body of the house has his part of her. For as long as ye Sow lives,
men nether have milk of her, nor woll. And for gredines so^e time she eats
and worrieth up her own pigges, as some gentlemen have done, which for money,
have sold their daughters away, to pokky old carles, and their sons, to
young euel favored, meseld, and noughty horyshe and evil manered wenches. The
mole,
The Mole is ever in the earth, and there can he shyfte for himself well
enough, he has a long snowt, and eyes to, but can se nothing at all. There
are to many folowers of this mole, which in erthly matters, ca^ talk meruelus
wyttely, but take them ones out of ye earth, yt is, out of world and erthly
matters, the^ are they stark blind, and can se nothing at al. But in smellyng
profyt and advantage, be it never so far of, they are nothing behind ye
mole, The Heron.
with his long snout. The Heron is ever about the water sides, and ever fyshyng,
and yet is he ever lene, and as so^e does say, ye fish sometime goes out, as
fast at the one end as they are taken in at the other. The heron and his
folowers are to be eschued of all right gentelemen, which as they gredely get
riches so they vnthryftlye spend them again, and yet nether they, nor theirs
are the better thereby.

Now have I told you the tokens of the dropsye, the causes, and incomodities,
and ieopardies of the same, I have taught you likewise a preparatiue and a
purgation or two, to heal it wythall. I have also told you, a confortatiue,
to comfort you, after your purgatio^, and what diet ye should keep, after ye
are healed, how and what manner of exercise ye should occupy, what things and
whom ye ought to follow, and whom and what things ye ought to fly and
eschew. If that ye follow all this my hole counsel, I dout not but ye shall,
both be delivered, of this present dropsye that ye have now, and also as
long as ye live, shall never fall into it again, by the help of almighty God,
who have you always in his keeping.

3 Of the Romyshe Pox.
THere is yet an other sore disease which has reigned long, and yet reygneth
amongst diverse noble and gentlemen, which may be called in latin, se^abies
Romana, superstitio, fucata pictas, falsa religio in greek etholochriskia, in
English the Romyshe pokkes, false religion papistrie, and unwritten worshippyng
of God, fathers fantasies.

The Romyshe pokkes is a disease of the mind which makes a man worship God
not according unto his written word but after the tradicion and ordinance of
the bishop of Rome. This disease in many phi^tes, is like unto the french
pokkes A great outward sign of the french pokkes, is when the nose of a man is
almost all eaten away and the patient sneueleth and speaks euel fauoredly.
Signs of the pokkes.
An other is, when as all the chylder that a man gets, have the pokkes. But
of hyd signs in spiritual diseases, we ought not to speak except they be
declared, either by the patient himself, or else by other sure tokens which
declare the inward syknes. Therefore I will not speak of the inward signs,
except they burst out by them selves. But I do se daily, ii. manifest tokens
of the Romyshe pokkes, in the nobilite of England. The first token is, that I
se diverse gentlemen's spiritual noses, so quyte eaten away, that they can
speak nothing of Gods word, and his written truth, but sneuel always of
will works, of pylgrimages, of images, of purgatory, of Messes, and of Diriges,
and such like stuff, and if any man offer any other doctrines unto the^, then
these above named, because the Romyshe pokkes has eaten away their noses and
judgment, can smell nothing at all. I se diverse young men which never were in
Rome which are shamefully ouergone in the Romyshe pokkes, which doutles
received the disease of their fathers. They can abide nothing, but such as
has been allowed of them of Rome. So that there are both old and young
gentlemen, that are sick in the Romyshe pokkes. As there are other signs and
tokens of the french pokkes then I have rehearsed, so are there other tokens of
the Romyshe pokkes, how be it the tokens are not always true, but they are
commonly true.

Some that have the french pokkes, want all the here of their berdes, and
the here falls of some of their heads, either all or in part, which disease
is called of some pilorella.

A sign of the romyshe pox.
Which things are also no small nor unsure tokens, of the Romyshe pokkes. For
there is not one gentle man of the clergy, that has the Romyshe pokkes, in
the hole realm of England, that has his hole head covered with here, but
one patche is bare. For the Romyshe pokkes is so sore in their heads, that it
leaves not one here in their crounes Look if ye can se any right Romanist
priest in England, that has his hole head covered and vnpilled. Yea and ye
sorer that the disease has taken any man, the less here has he, and the
balder is his crown. Whereby I gather that my lords the bishops, are sore
syck in this Romyshe pokkes for they are almost all heerlesse, and balde even
unto the ears which thing ye shall not greatly wonder at, after ye I have
showed you the beginning of this disease how it sprange first up, and how
men are infected with it. Let me se if there be any right shapen papist, of
the lay gentlemen, that has any here upon his beard? If there be any, they
are but few.

They that are sore infected with the Romyshe pox can not abide the sight of a
bearde, and therefore judge all them that have beardes, to be heretics. But
seeing that it is my deutie, not only to heal them that are now syck in this
disease, but also to teach other how to avoid the same: it is necessary that
I tell, how this disease first spronge up and how men are infected and come by
it.

The french pokkes began thus, as diverse good authors write. When as the
French men came into Italy, a warfare, and were in Naples, there was there a
noble hoar, which had this abominable french pox with whom, because she was a
noble hoar, many noble men lay with her, and some unnoble. But as many as lay
with her, caught the disease, afterward called the french pokkes of her, and
they infected once, infected other hores, and other here is, infected many other
men of every sort, and because it began amongst the Frenchmen, it was called
the french pokkes. After the same manner also, spronge up the Romysh pokkes.
There was a certain hoar in Italy, which had a perillus disease called false
religion, and she was so fine and fair speaking, and so beauteus to look to,
that she called and intised unto her, all the kings and nobilite of the earth,
and intised them to lie with her, and they committed fornication with her, of
who^ they were all infected with her disease, and so caught the Romish pokkes.
Some will think that I geste, and speak but fables, but if ye will read
the.17. of the Apocalips and the preface of saint Hierom that he wrote before
saint Marks gospel, ye shall find that I speak ye truth in earnest. Apoca.
17
The words of S. Ihon in the Apocalips are these. Come I shall show thee the
damnacion of the great hoar, which sytteth over many waters, with whom have
committed fornicacio^, the kings of the earth, and they that dwell in ye earth,
have been made dronken with the wine of her horedome. And the spirit took me
away into a wilderness, and I saw a woman sytting upon a red beast, full of
names and cursyng, having.vii. heads and.x. horns, and the woman was gyrded
round about with purple and scarlate, and gylded with gold and with precius
stones, and perles, having in her hand a golden cup, full of the abominacions
and uncleanness of her lust, and in her browe was written a name, a mystery.
Babilo^ the great mother of horedome, and of the abhominacions of the earth.
Hierome.
Saint Hierom in the preface before saint Marks gospel says these words of
Babylon. Papias bishop of Hierapolis makes mencio^ of this mark, and Peter
under the name of Babilo^, figuratively betokens Rome, makes mention of him,
saying: that church greteth you, which is in Babylon, which is partaker of
your election, and my son Marcus also. Now may ye se that Rome, is the hoar
of Babilo^. But how that Rome, has inferred all Europa, we may easily learn
of the decrees and decretalles, and of diverse historiographers, wherein we find,
that false religion, superstition, and ydolatrie, was found out by the Romyshe
hoar, allowed, offered, yea and thrust into all kingdoms of Europa, by the
same, and so earnestly commanded to be kept, that they that would either speak
against ye baggage of Rome, or would not receive it, were taken for heretics,
and put to shameful and painful deaths. There is so^e (...) amongst yt learned
me^, who brought into this land, the Romish pokkes. We read in old
histories, that the Brita^nes received the true and unleavened religion in the
time of king Lucius, the king of the Britannes, and that it continued
undefiled, unto yt time of Gregory the great, who sent into England a
monkyshe apostle of his, which brought with him the Romyshe pox in to this
land, that is to wete, crosses, copes, vestments, shauyng of crowns, syngyng
and rynging. etc. with an infinite sort of superstitius and abominable
ordinances, ceremonies and learninges of men, where with the hole church of the
Brita^nes at length was infected and poisoned, and the live word of God
choked, or at the least shamefully mynished, and these trifles received and
occupied in the stead of it. Other hold that he brought not ye romish pox,
saying, that he brought ye faith into England. The truth is (which can be
easily proved by the church story of Bedes writing,) that the Brytannes had
the faith many years, even.cccc. years and more before that Austen came into
England, and that the same Austen, Austen.
although he brought in the faith to the English, yet brought he with him the
Romyshe pokkes, which did not only infecte the English, but also the
Brytannes, if that the Romyshe pox stand in crowns, coules, vestmentes,
crosses, syngyng of latin in the church, with such other Romyshe tryfles and
ordinances, as it is easy to be proved both by reason and by scripture. But
who in our days, restored and renewed the Romyshe pokkes in England, (when
as it was almost taken away, partlye by Luters books, and other new writers,
and partly by preaching, and by the translacion of the new Testament, Doctor
Steven
and the reading of the same) it is not hard to give. Doctor Steven was long
with the hoar of Babylon, and as it does appear, lay with her there, for he
doutlesse brought the Romyshe pokkes into England again, and infected many a
christian soul therwyth. The same has so defended his lemanis horedome here
in England that all the other Romyshe horemaisters, are nothing to be compared
with him. For that intent that ye may save your selves from the Romyshe
pokkes, I must show you certain other tokens, where by they that are most
infected with the disease, may be known, that ye may avoid them. What so
ever man ye shall se, with a great balde plat in his crown having woman's
clothes above man's clothes, and a messayer with all, take him for a pokky hoar
master of Rome, for the hoar of Rome, gives such garments, unto her chief
pokke lovers, and requires of them to were such garments as badges and
tokens for her sake.

And they to please their lemman, do wear such womanly apparel, that they may
please her, and continue still in her love and favor, as sardanapalus desyered
to please his lemannes, when as he put on womans clothyng, whylse he tarried at
home, when all his counselors and commones were fyghtyng with the enemies of
his realm. They are also syoke in the Romyshe pokkes very sore, and it is
very leopardous to eat or drink with them that are not ashamed no more of
their bare plat that is bared with the pokkes, but for their lemmannes sake
love it so well, that they bless it, and cross it, with the paten of the
chalyce, as a very holy holy thing. If any man would be free from the Romyshe
pokkes, let him nether eat nor drink with these pokky merchants, nether
suffer to breath upon him in their confession boothes. They that love their
children, let them take heed, that none of these pokky prelates, put any of
their pokky spattell in to their chylders mouths, lest they be infected with
this perilus and evil favored disease thereby. But lest ye should think that
this disease is not greatly to be cared for, as though it never brought death,
I will prove you that it brings both death and damnacion. Apoca. 18.
In the.xviii. of the Apocalips the voice which came from heaven, said to them
that dwelled in Babylon. Go out of Babylon o my people left ye be partakers
with her of her fautes and lest ye receive not of her plages. Apoca. 18
The^ they that go not out of Babylon, but continue in Babylon, yt is in the
Romyshe pox, must be damned with the hoar of Babylon.

Moreover the hoar and the horemaysters, must be ponysshed with like
ponyshement, but the Romyshe pokkye hoar must be damned, therefore all her
pokkye lovers must be damned also, I prove the same matter thus. All men that
preach doctrines or learnynges which are the commandments of men, worship
God in vain. But al Romyshe preachers, preach and teach doctrines and
learnynges, which are precepts of men, therefore all Romyshe preachers worship
God in vain. Mark the argument.
But all they that worship God in vain shall be damned, and al Romyshe preachers
worship God in vain, therefore all Romyshe preachers shall be damned.

If all Romyshe preachers shall be damned, then shall all they be dampened that
believe Romyshe preaching, for if one blind lead another, as Christ says,
they both fall into the dirhe. Then when as all doctrine, Matthew. 15.
which is the commandment of man only and not of God, and the Romyshe pokkes
are all one, all that have the Romish pokkes, except they be healed of them,
shall be damned with them, of whom they received them. Then when as the Romyshe
pokkes, is such a perillus disease, it is very needful, that all they that
are sick in that sycknes, be healed thereof. To the healing of ye Romish
pokkkes, a strayt diet, many purgacions, and a good confortatiue, afterward
are required. And such diet as the bodily phisicia^s inioyne to them that are
sick in the french pokkes, must I also inioine unto al them that are sick in
the Romyshe pokkes. They that cure and heal them that are syck in ye french
pokkes, inioyne their patie^tes to drink water, wherein is sodden the powder of
guaiacu^ or lignum sanctum, and yt they shall eat only twyse baked bread called
bisco and none else, and of it and of al other meats, but a small quantity,
that is to wet, but.iii. ounces or iiii. at the most. Every fyfte day or
syxte: they must be purged, and often times must they swet, that all the euel
humores may go.iiii. ways out, by the pores, by the foundament, by the water
vessels, and by the mouth. Even such like dyer must they keep, that are syck
in the Romyshe pokkes, for they have gotten it, of spiritual fornication, but
fornicacion comes of to much drinking of wine, and to much eating of sweet
meats, and to much noryshynge of the body, as Terence says, fine cerere and
baccho friget Venus, without plentye of meat and drink, the lust of the body
is cold. Ezech. 16.
And Ezechiell reherseth amongst the great and shameful lechery of Sodom and
Gomor plenty of bread. Then when as the excess of the hoar of Babylons wine,
and the eating of the great quantity of the leven of the pharisees, have
brought these sik folk unto spiritual horedome, and there of have gotten the
Romyshe pox, when as it that is gotten by to much, ought to be driven away by
abstine^ce, and by euacuacion or oursettynge of it that is superfluus.

My counsel is this therefore, that ye which are syck in this sycknes, for the
space of your life time forbear from the Romyshe wine and from the leven of
the pharisees, Matthew. 16
which is counterfeit holiness, and from all men's inuencions. Ye shall eat no
other bread, but such bisco, or twyse baked bread, as Christ has blessed, and
the apostles have delivered unto you, beware of the sweet stolen bread.
Whereof ye scripture makes mention. Eat of the bread of life, Ioh. 6.
whereof saint Ihon makes mention in the.vi. chapter. And ye shall drink no
other drink for your life time, but the water of life, Ioh. 7.
which spryngeth of Christ's well. With the which water alone, our chief
phisician healed an hoar of Samaria which had had six lovers, Joan. 4.
one after an other. Because the matter of this disease is very gross, we must
prepare it with bitter herbs as is repentance, and such other, as with their
heat or bitterness will cut them in sonder, and will make them ready to go forth,
with the purgations.

Drink of this drink every day, two great draughtes, and one upon the night,
and read the compositio^ of your preparatiue every day ones at the least, that
when as it is once dronken up, ye may make it fresh again: your preparatiue,
shall you make thus. Take a gallon of ye water of repentance, and sethe in it
al these herbs following.

Psalm. 118.
Erraui sicut ouis quaeperijt. Peccauimus cum patribus nostris, iniquitatem
fecimus. Pro. 14.
Est via quae videtur hommi recta, nouissima autem eius ducunt ad interitum.
Esa. 53. Math. 15.
Nos omnes quasi ones erraui mus, quisque viam suam sectatus. Frustra me colunt
docetes doctrinas and praecepta hominum. Deute. 12.
Non facietis singuli quod sibi rectum videtur, sed quod praecipio tibi, hoc
tantu^ facito nec addas quiequam nec minuas. 1. Ioh. 1.
Si quis venit ad vos, and hanc doctrinam non attulerit ne recipiatis illu^ in
domum, neque dixeritis illi aue, qui dixerit illi aue, co^municat eius operibus
malis. Iniquitatem meam ego agnosco, and peccatum meum, Psalm. 60.
contra me, est semper. Auerte faciem tuam a peccatis meis, and omnes
iniquitates meas dele. Cor mundum crea in me Deus, and spiritum rectu^ innoua
in visceribus meis.

The English of your preparatiue.

I have erred as a sheep that perysheth. We have sinned with our fathers, and
we have done wyckedly. There is a way the which seems right unto a man but
the end of it, leads to destruction. We have all erred as sheep, every one
following his own way. They worship me in vain, teaching doctrines that are
the precepts of men. Ye shall not do every one of you yt seems right in your
own eyes, but that that I bid you, that only do, nor thou shall not add any
thing thereto, nor mynishe any thing. If any man come unto you and brings
not this doctrine with him, se that ye receive him not into your house, nor ye
shall not say unto him, god speed, for he yt so says unto him God speed, is
pertaker with him of his euel deeds. I do acknowledge mine in iquite and my sin
is always against me. Turn away thy face from my sins and put away al my
iniquites. O god creat in me a new heart, and make now win me a right spirit.
When as ye have dro^ke^ out this drink ones or twyse ye ^euel humores ar
prepared, the^ take this purgacio^ folowi^g.

Recipe hierae magorum conuersoru^ 3. vi. aquae vitae praedictae. 3. iiij. cale
facito super carbones decretorum, decretalium clementinarum extrauagantium,
librorum sententiarum and omnium librorum papisticorum been vstorum, and tu^c
totum ebibe.

That is to say, take.vi. drames of the bitter medicines of yt turned
sorserers, and.iiii. ounces of the above named water of life, mingel the^
together and warm them upon the coals of the decrees the decretalles,
Clementines, extrauagantes, of the master of the sentences, and of all other
such popyshe books, well burnt into coals, and the^ when the drink is warm,
drink it hole out If that this hiera be not made al redye let your apoticaries
read the.xix chapter of the second book of the christian phisician Lucas
Anthiochenus, Act. 19.
and there they may find the description of this hiera. The noble phisician
Lucas, tells how that there were a certain number of sorserers, which had
gotten by readyng of the books of Egypt the pokkes of Egypt, the same
sorcerers when as they had herd the preaching of Gods word, fell quyte
away from that horedome, and lest they should be brought unto witchcraft
again, they burnt up al their books, which were judged to be worth at the least a thousand pound. After that ye have dronken this purgation, then shall
ye take an other, much like unto the former, and the purgation may be called
in latin, Confectio Mosi and in English the confection of Moses, whereof.vi.
days after the other purgatio^ ye shall take an ounce, with.iii. ounces of aqua
vitae above named, and drink al up. If that this drink be not found made
ready in your poticaries shoppes, your poticaries may learn to make it, by the
second book of Moses. When as the children of Israel, Exo. (...)
had fallen into the hethnyshe pokkes, and had committed spiritual fornicacion
with the golden calfe, he burnt the calfe into powder, and to heal them that
were hurt with the calfe he gave them the powder of the very same to drink
with water. After the same manner shall ye make your purgatio^. Such things as
ye have committed fornicacion with, must ye burn, and drink ye powder of
them with water. But ye have committed spiritual fornicacio^ with crosses,
pixes, singing bredes, copes, vestments, images, alters, roodloftes, paxes,
mesbokes, Instruments of spiritual fornication.
grayles, antiphoners, processionalles, corpresses, chalices, patentes, bedes,
banners, holy water stokes, super altares, and such like Therefore ye must
burn al these, and cast the ashes of them into the water, and drink as much
of the^, as comes unto your part, that is about the quantite, that I have
prescribed before. This call I the confeccion of Moses, because he began first
to heal men after this fashion.

How be it lest any scripturescorner, which can abide nothing but man's learning
should despise this manner of healyng of sik folks, with ye eating of such
things destroyed as have hurt them before: ye shall know that the most
excellent phisicia^s, have made a very sovereign medicine against all venum and
poison, even of the most poisoned beasts that is, even a Veper. For the
venemus Veper with other certain medicines the head and tail cut of, eaten,
and received both heals them that are bitten of ye Veper and of other venemus
beasts, The vypers of England would be thus served.
and preserves men from poisons that shall be taken afterward. The Scorpion
also, a deathbryngyng best, killed, bruised, and laid to, heals his own
poisoned byttyng. When he is roasted and eaten and taken into the poisoned man's
body, he is a good remedy for the same poison. Diascorides, and Galenus
wytnes this to be true that I have told you. Therefore dispyse not your
medicin, because it is both agreyng unto the scripture, and philosophye. After
that ye have dronk up this for said purgation, the next day after take as
much as ye ca^, of the noble sirup, Letificantis Christi, use that every day
ones or twyse, until ye be perfytly hole. The medicine called Letifica^s
Christi, is this. The son of man is comed to save it that is lost. It is a
true saying and worthy by all means to be received, Luce. 19. 1. timo. 1.
Jesus Christ came into this world to save sinners. Mathe. 11.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I shall refreshe you. So
has God loved the world, yt he has given his only begotten son, that al
yt believe in him should not peryshe, Ioh. 3.
but have life everlasting. When ye are healed perfytly of this disease, lest
ye catch it again, as a thousand in England did of late, which appeared
unto al me^, to be fre from this disease, for the space of many years ye must
avoid the company of all such, as are sik in that disease, (for it is an
infectiue disease) and from the Romyshe wine, Math. 16.
and from the leue^ of the pharisees from Messes, Diriges, Letanies, Legendes,
and all other sacrifices and services devised by the hoar of Rome. From the
which except ye absent your selves, ye ca^ not choose but be infected again
with the Romyshe pokkes, which will bring you from Christ, to everlasting
death at length. Exercise your selves in readyng of scripture, and in hearing
of good sermons, and by the grace of God ye shall be delivered from this foul
death bringyng disease, and ye shall never fall into it again.

4. Of the Leprye.
AFter that I have told remedies for the inward diseases of the nobility and
gentlemen of this realm, I intend to show my counsel to them that have
outward diseases, that they may be healed also. Among all outward diseases
that I do perceive the nobilite to be vexed wythal there is none fouller, then
the lepre, or leprosye as some men call it. I perceive by many tokens, that
very many are sik in this disease. The bodily lepre is taken diverse ways,
either by euel diet, or by eating or drynkyng, or keeping company with them, that
have the bodily lepre. But the spiritual lepre wherein our gentlemen are sik,
is taken by accompaniyng with them that have the spiritual lepre. The signs of
ye bodily lepre, are taught in the scripture at length. Leui. 13. and also of
diverse noble phisicians. Leui. 13.
But at this time I shall not need to write, any of the tokens of the lepre,
that I intend to heal, for it is well enough known already. The lepre that
vexes you of ye nobilite, is, the defamation and shame that comes unto you
by the receyuyng into your order, fellowship, apparel and leuerye, such
persons as shame you, and your hole order, and make you look as euel favored
in the syghte of all wise men, as a bodily lepre defaceth and makes euel
favored the contenaunce of him that has that foul disease. There are two
sorts of me^, which bring this lepre unto you, proud stertvppes, or self
made ge^tlemen, ii. kinds of stertuppes.
and lordely bishops. There are two kind of stertuppes, or self made
gentlemen, nether promoted by God, nor the king, to the dignite that they take
upon them. The former sort are crafty witted fellows, which have gotten under
their masters much gold and silver, wherwyth they have purchased much good
land, and have spoiled many a good personage and vicarage.

These although they have commed to their riches by deceiving of their
masters, and by bribeyng and poullyng of their poor brethren vnmercyfully,
yet forgetting that they came late from the doughyl, will be taken for gentlemen,
and will wear gentlemen's apparel, and such do ye allow and admyte into your
company and fellowship as gentlemen, when as they are the pestilent plages of
the common wealth, and the defacers and shamers of al true nobilite. The other
sort of stertuppes, which are idle belly bestes, come from the donghyll as
well as the other, but when as they can not otherwise come to their desired
purpose, which is to be gentlemen, that is to go gayly, to do nothing, and to
be had in regard, they steal and rob, dice and card, dance and sing, and
flater right gentlemen, and turn them selves into all fashions, to get
wherewith, that they maintain the opinion of nobilite, which they have taken
upon them. These two kinds with the bastardes that are nether borne to a foot
of land, nether have any science nor honest occupacions to get their liuinges
with al, enter into the name fellowship, company, and clothyng of gentlemen, and
because the first kind, that is the rich stertvppes steals craftelye, and
the other two beggarly sorts, rob openly, and are often times taken with
roberies and are hanged, they shame and dishonor the hole nobility, and make
men think that all gentlemen are naught, because there are so many that are
called, and give them selves for gentlemen, and are taken for gentlemen, that
are thieves robbers and ruffianes, and very pestele^ces of the common wealth. For
the helping of this lepry that ye have taken by such: this is my counsel,
that ye that are right getlemen in deed, if there be any poor bastardes, of
your kin, or name, if they be young, put them to the scole. and hold them at
it until they be either preachers, lawyers, or phisicians, or if they be not
fyt for learning, then put them to occupacio^s, to be merchant men, or of such
like calling. If ye beggarly stertvppes come to any place where as ye have any
autorite to exame^ the^, inquyre how they get their lyuynges and if they ca^
not show how they come by their ly lyuinges, the^ appoint the^ to labor, but
if they will not labor, then set these with the old idle bastardes, that
live, upon spoylyng and robbyng, dycyng and cardyng, in ships to the grene
land, or to other lands, not as yet well known. If they can win any thing
there, let them either tarry there, or else come hime again with such riches as
they have won, that they may live thereon like honest men. If they be drowned
in the way, or be killed in the onsettynge of any land, they shall nether
shame you, nor cu^bre the common wealth any more. As for the ravenous rich
stertuppes, me think it were best that ye followed the birds, which when they
saw the vain glorious crow as Esop tells, braggyng her self of her false
nobilite, Esops Crow.
took each one their own feathers from her, and sent her to the donghyll
again, from whence she came. When as Solomon byddeth men follow the Pisemire,
and men ought therefore not to be ashamed to learn of the Pismire, Prouer. 6
so ought ye not to be ashamed to follow the birds. Nay if ye follow not the
birds in some points, the birds shall be witnesses against you in time to
come. To apply this fable to the truth, ye should do well in my judgment, if
ye obtained a commission of the high magistrates and went to every place of
England, where as any stert^ppes and there should make a proclacion, A
proclamacion
that if sir Matthew mukforke, had taken any lands or goods away from any
poor man, or from any co^munaltie, either by subteltye, threatenyng or
maistership, and of they could prove the same, that he should be restored unto
his lands and goods again. This done, that is contained in this
proclamacion, we should se a great sort of braggers, brought to shame, and
confusion, and so should ye not be blamed, for the ravenous robrye of such
covetous kites as will never be filled Or if this way seem to long, it were
mete that ye obtained this license of the parlame^t, that al dukes, earls,
lords, barons, knights, and their right begotten sons, might have autorite,
when so ever they saw any stertup, which could not spend cc. ^luck (...) crow
pou^des in the year, of his own truly gotten lands, wearyng silk velvet or
any golden cheyne, to carry the crow to the next market town, and there to
pluck the crow, that is to cut his clothes al in pieces, and to take his cheyne
from him, whereof the right gentleman should have the one half, and the
poverty of the town the other. Elizabeth the countess of cast Freseland when
she had learned surely, that a certain yomannes wife had guarded her gown
with a broad guard of velvet, she sent her officers unto the crow, and cut al
her gardes in pieces, and condemned her in a great su^me of monye, for her
pride. Me think ye do very evil, to suffer every man that list to come into
your lyuery, apparel, fellowship and order, and refuse no man what so ever he
be. Sterlyng rookes, thoughes, and doves, with many other kinds of birds fly
each kind together, and eat together, and can not well suffer that birds of
other kinds, should be in their company, and either drive the^ away, or else
fly from them. Sheep go together, swyne go together, and gottes go together,
heringes swime together, haddokes swime together, and minds swime together,
and so for the most part: al fyshes birds and beasts, keep only company
together with them of their own kind, and as much as lies in them, either
drive away, or fly the company of other kinds. Only the nobilite of
England suffer al kinds of men to come into their order, and lyuery, to their
great shame, and sometime to the loss both of their estimacion, and also of
their lives and goods. The salters will receive none into their lyuery and
company but salters, the grossers, the haberdasshers, the mercers, and all
other company do the like. In the Universities masters of art, and bachelors
of art, will suffer none to wear the apparel belongyng unto them, saving only
such as are allowed, and admitted, unto those degrees and ordinances. If a man
put a prestes cap upon a sowes head, and a tippet about her neck, and set her
up against a stall in chep side, and set many round shyues of rapes before her,
that she might eat them, would not all the hole order of sacrificers be angry
with him that clothed the sow so? If that a man should shave an Ape in the
crown, and set a mytre upon his head, and put a rached upon him, would not the
bishops be miscontent with him that did so? And yet ye the noble men of
England, nothing regardyng in this behalf, the honestye and honor of your
order, suffer hogs and dogs, crows, and kites, and al other kinds of
wild beasts (as touching their conditions) to go in your apparel, and to be
also continually in company with you. Do ye not suffer dycers and carders, and
al kinds of unthriftiness, not only to go in gentlemen's apparel, but also
receive them into your houses, and there to dyce and card, and to exercise
such like pastymes with you? And has not many a well borne gentleman, ben
brought both to shame, and to loss of his goods, and sometimes to a shameful
end, by ye means of such company? Ye suffer not only such vile beasts to
shame your order, with their euel manners and noughtye conditions and to infecte
you with their lepre: but ye suffer a sort of false Apostles, to take your
honor from you, and to be your lords, and masters, and to occupye your
offices, which should belong only unto your order and dignite. Is not this as
it were a certain kind of lepre in your faces, to be thus defaced and shamed
by these crafty foxes? There are two kinds of gouernores or rulers in the
common wealth, or in ye church of God, for in the common wealth of
christianes, ii. kinds of ruelers
is the common and outward church. The one kind of gouernores is appointed of
almighty God, to defend man's soul, from the assaults of the world of the
flesh and the deuel, with the preaching of Gods word, to receive into ye
church by baptyme, and to drive forth of ye church by exco^municacion, to
ministre the sacraments according unto the ordinance of Christ, and to admyt
ministres and shepherdes to their offices. These have their commission
committed unto them in these words. Euntes docete omnes gentes, baptizantes
eos in nomine Patris and Filij and spiritui Sancti. Go and teach al nations
and baptize them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, Math. 28.
other commission have they none saving to excommunicate, to pray, and admit
ministers to their offices whereof is mention made in diverse places in the new
testament. Because even in Christ's time ambition and desire of superiority,
had crepte into ye very hearts of his apostles: and he knew that after his
time, that the successores of his apostles, should also be earnestly pricked of
the deuell thereto: he gave an expressed commandment, that his apostles should
nether be lords nor should leave the ploughe and look bakwarde, to the world,
and to worldly besynes, in these words. Vos scitis quod principes gentium
dominentur eis, Luce. 22.
vos autem non sic, ye know the princes of the heathen people be lords over
them, and they that are great, exercise power over them but ye shall not be so.
And Peter to put his masters commandment in mind, 1. Pet. 5.
says unto the Apostles and preachers thus. Ye shall not exercise lordshippe
over the parysshes, or as some textes have, against the paryshes. Now these
falslye named Bysshoppes (for so do I call them because they look not unto
their flocks, leave their own office of preaching and ministryng of the
sacraments, and of sitting in judgment to se them excommunicate, that are open
trespassers undone,) become embassadoures (for where is there any embassache,
but a Bishop must be one thereof most commonly) president of Wales, and of
York, Justices of peace, and some full lordly, sit at Sices and cessions
among temporal iuges, leauyng their own courts, to some syngle sir John, or
to some blind bryber. Other are commed as I hear say now, to be
counselors, even in temporal matters, in great no^bre, and one is now clom up
so high, that beside that he is a knight of the garter, and a great lord, is
also the high chancellor of England, and president of the counsel, and is
above all the lords, both temporal and spiritual, of the hole counsel, and
so lordlye behaueth him self, that without the knowledge of the rest of the
counsel he sends forth commissiones (as he did of late to Wells by doctor
edgeworthe) and offers pardon alone, Edgeworth. latimer
as he did to master Latimer, as though he were either king of England, or
else had the queen and all the counsels hedes under his gyrdle. Either there are
gentlemen in England enowe to be embassadores, presydentes of Wales and York,
Justices of peace, Counselors, Chauncellers of England, and Presidentes of
the hole Counsel, or there are not. If there be not enough, it is exceeding
shame for you, and for your hole order, that among so many as ye be, have not
a few learned and wise men amongst you, which are able to do your duties
belonging unto your dignity, but ye must, contrary to the will of God, and
to the shame of the hole land, desire bishops to do your duties, and
offices, to serve in temporal matters for you. If ye have enowe wise and
learned gentlemen, to do and execute all these above named offices, then is it
shame for you to be so lither, as when ye are able to do your offices your own
selves, either desire or suffer the bishops and clergy, to do your offices
for you, whereby they take unto them selves, the honor and dignity dew unto
the nobilite and spoil you utterly of your name, same, and renown, which
your fathers in times past, have with great labor, ieopardye, yea sometime
with the loss of their lives, won for you. I Beware that ye spin not at home,
whylse other go a warfare abroad, lest that chance unto you, that chanced
unto Sardanapalus. We red both in Josephus de bello Iudaico and also in
aegisippo, that the gentlemen of the Jews, were so lither and vnlustye to do
their offices belongyng unto them, that the high prestes took their offices in
hand, and at last became both prestes and kings, and had all the noiblitie
under their girdelles, as these high prestes of your time will handell you, if
ye pluk them not bak betyme.

The bishop of Rome after the coming of Christ, by to much sufferi^g of the
nobilite at the begi^ning, has so like an iuy, nay rather like a ca^ker, crept
upon the nobilite, that he has clom over al knights, lords, earls, dukes,
kings, and emperores, and has brought them in such subieccion and slavery,
that he makes the best of them al kiss his fete.

The bishops that ye have in England now, are not only of the same false
opinions in religion, that the Pope is and was of, but of the same false,
proud, lordly and ambitius order that the pope is of and eiusde Coruipulli, and
burdes of the same raven. For as the Pope contrary unto the ordinance of
Christ, which was, Luce. 22. 1. Pet. 5.
that no one apostle should be head of the rest of his fellows, has inhaunsed
and set him self above al other elders and bishops. Eue^ so have the
bishops of England after ye same manner, lyfted up them selves above all the
elders of this realm, which by the word of God have as much authorite, as
they have or ought to have. For the word of God in the new testament nether
shows nor makes any difference, between an elder which is in latin,
presbyter, and a bishop, which is called in latin episcopos. But your
bishops, will have none to be called episcopos, but them selves, and other
me^ will they have only to be called presbyteros. If ye saw them now how
slauely and bondly they handle the rest of the clergy in their conuocacion
house, ye would say that they were the Popes right shapen sons. For where
as there sytteth but seven or eight lyn in wering bishops, at the table in
the conuocacion house, if there be.lx. pastores and elders that are wolwerers,
as long as they shall tarry in the bishops conuocacion house, so long must
they stand there before their lords, though it be.ii. or.iii. hours, yea
and that be the wether never so cold, or the men never so old or sikely, bare
heded. Is this pride to be suffered? Now may you se how they would handel
you, if they could get the higher hand over you, which surely is like to
come to pass, if you look not to your selves betyme.

This is tried to be true in all ages, that where so ever the idle order of the
vnpreachyng prelates, ca^ get power to their desire, they cast under them, and
bring under their subjection all the nobles and all the hole layte. Beside the
Pope the father of this proud order, other have subdued the layte and brought
them into shameful subjection. The sacrificyng prestes, of the cathedral
church of Mense in Germany, wan the city from the seculare magistrates, and
brought all the hole city in to their subieccion, as it dureth yet still unto
this day. The bishop of Mense, the bishop of Worms, and the bishop of Colen,
came boldly unto Henryche the.iiii. Emperor of that name, and took his crown
of his head in a castle a little from Mense, and clearly deposed him, because
as the bishops said, he had made Abbattes and Bishops by simony, but the
story tells yt this was the cause. He would not allow the Popes doing, and
therefore was thryse acursed of the Pope, and therefore the chylder, could not
suffer him to reygne whom their father hated. The bishop canones and
prebendaries of Colon, upon a time assayed to bring all the hole city in to
their bondage. For in the year of our Lord.1074. as the hystorye says.
Episcopus aliquod sibi vsurpauit, in vrbe dominum, ciuium abutens officio. The
bishop took unto him unlawfully certain government or lordshippe in the city
and wrongfully occupied the office of the cytizenes, at which time it chanced
that a certain cytizen had a ship, which the bishop would have taken away by
force, but he wythstode the bishop and gathered the city on his side. The
bishop perceyuyng that the citizenes would rise against him, made a long
sermon unto the citizens, wherein he threatened gods curse, unto all those
that took part with the foresaid cytizen. The citizens being sore grieved with
his vndiscre^ sermon, at night after following altogether rose up against the
bishop, and burst into the bisshoppes palace, and slew diverse there, but the
bishop fled to Nuice, where as he gathered a great hood, and set suddenly upon
the city, and suffered his soudiers to spoil the city, and as many as they
could get, they either cut of their heads or put out their eyes, and so he
brought the city into his bondage. But afterward the Coleners delivered them
selves from that bondage. And in the year of our Lord.1260. the bishop went
about ones again to bring the city into bondage but the cytizes marked him
well, and disapointed him. At length for all that two canones had the borow
master to dinner, and when he came, the canones bad him go into a fair
chamber, Merke the canones of Colones banquet.
wherein was a hongrye Lion, and as soon as he was in, they clapte to the door,
and let the lion do with the borow master what he could. But the borow
master, put his left hand into the lions throat, and with the other hand,
took out his dagger, and killed the lion, and within few days after he hanged,
hard by the cathedral church, the two canones. But after that rose such
strife among them, and the bishop, that it could not be ended, until ye
cytezens wan their lyberte with the sword. The bishop of Luke in the year of
our Lord.1460. was so desyrus of lordship over the city, yt when he could
not win the city him self, he procured Charles duke of Burgondye to besege
the city, and when the cytezens saw, that they were not able to make their
party good, they fell to entreat for peace, but the bishop would not hear
them, and therefore suffered his cousin Charles to kill.xl. thousand men, and to
drown.xii. thousand women, in the flood Mosa called the Mase. This practice
has been so common among the unpreaching prelates of Germany, that the
Germaynes made this ryme of their ambition and cruelnes. The ryme of ye
germans against ye ambition of ye clergy.
Monike nunne^ vnd papen. Segen rotten vnd apen. Vliege^ rupen vnd muse, horen
keuer vnd luse. Dardi crygen di ouerhandt, vorderuense stead vnd landt. That
is, Monks, nonnes and papes, gotes rattes and apes, flies, caterpillars, and
myse, hores weueles and lyse, where they get the ouerhand, they destroy both
city and land. But what need I ferche examples far of out of strange
cuntres, when as we have so many at home: read the practice of prelates, and
there shall ye find, what ambitius minds they bear, and how gladly they would
raygne over you. Call to your remembrance Thomas Wolsey the Cardinal and
bishop of York, and his handelyng of the nobilite in his time. Look now upon
your lord of Winchester, your lord Chaunceler, your lord President of the
counsel, is not he a chykke^ of the same cok? Let al noble me take heed of this
lordly pape betyme, lest some of them which can not abide his vnbearable
pride, have such a reward at his hands as the duke of bockinggam had, at his
father wolfes Wolsei his hand. The remedy against these lepres biles, scabbes,
scalles, lumpes, pokkes and cancres, which disbeuty and dysgrace the face of
the hole nobilite at this time, is to drive these idle ambitius bishops home
to their bysshoprykes, and to cause them to preach Gods word there truly,
and to study your own selves night and day to get learning, and until you
may be learned your selves, to make good and honest ciuilianes and scripture
learned common lawyers, and other learned me and no prestes in the mean time
to be knights and lords, cou^sellers, Justices of peace, chauncelers, and
presidentes of the marches, and to take your own of fices upon you, and do
them, your selves. And after that ye be learned your selves, ye may, not
wythstandynge take as many as ye shall need unto you, of these foresaid lawyers,
and learned men. But hold in no wise the bysshoppes from their pulpittes,
lest the vengeance of God fall both upon you and them, Upon you, for holdyng
of them from doing of their duty, upon them, for not doing of their duty. If
ye drive these foresaid falsely named lords and gentlemen out of your order and
company, and will do your offices and duties in your own persons, as
almyghtye God would have you to do, then shall ye have just honor in this
world, and in the world to come life everlasting.

The prayer of ye prophet Daniel contained in the.ix. chaptre of his book,
very necessary for this troublesome time.
We beseech the o Lord, thou great and fearful god, Baruch. 1.
that kepest covenant and mercy with them which love thee, and keep thy
commandments. We have sinned, we have offended. We have been disobedient,
and gone back: yea, we have departed from all thy precepts and judgments. We
would never follow thy servants the prophets that spoke in thy name to our
kings and princes, to our fathers and to all the people of the land. Thrano.
1.
O Lord ryghteousnes belongs unto thee, unto us pertayneth nothing but open
shame: as it is come to pass this day unto every man of Judah, and to them
that dwell at Jerusalem. Yea, unto al Israel, whether they be far or nigh,
through out all lands, wherein thou strowed them, because of the offenses that
they had done against thee. Yea O Lord, unto us, to our kings and princes,
Psalm. 106
to our fathers, even unto us al, that have offended thee belongs open
shame. But unto thee, O Lord our God, perteyneth mercy and forgyuenes. As for
us, we are gone back from him, and have not obeyed the voice of the lord our
God, to walk in his laws, which he laid before us, 2. Pet. 1. Zacha. 6.
by his servants the prophets: yea all Israel have tra^sgressed, and gone
back from thy law, so that they have not herkened unto thy voice. Deute. 27
Leui. 26. Baruch. 2
Wherefore the curse and oath that is written in the law of Moises the servant
of God. (against whom we have offended) is powered upon us. And he has
performed his words which he spoke against us, and against our Judges that
judged us, to bring upon us such a great plage, as never was under heaven,
like as it is now come to pass in Jerusalem. Yea, all this plage, as it is
written in the law of Moises is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer
before the Lord our God, that we might turn again from our wyckednes, and to
be learned in ye verity. Therefore has the Lord made haist to bring this
plage upon us, for the Lord our God is ryghteous in all his works which he
does: for why? Haruch. 2 Exo. 12.13.14.
we would not harken unto his voice.

And now, o Lord our God, thou that with a mighty hand haiste brought thy
people out of Egypt, to get thy self a name which remains this day: we
have sinned (o Lord) and done wyckedly against all thy ryghteousnes: yet let
thy wrathful displeasure be turned away (I beseech thee) from thy city of
Jerusalem thy holy hill. And why? for our sins sake and for the wyckednes
of our fathers, is Jerusalem and thy people abhorred of al them that are
about us. Now therefore, o our God, hear the prayer of thy servant and his
intercession: O let thy face shine over thy sanctuary that lies waste: for the
Lords sake. O my God inclyne thine ear and harken (at the leest for thine
own sake.) Open thine eyes, behold how we be desolated. Yea, and the city
also which is called after thy name, for we do not cast our prayers before ye
in our own righteousness, no: but only in thy great mercies: O Lord hear: O
forgive Lord, O Lord consider, tarry not over long, but for thine own sake
do it, O my God: for thy city and thy people is called after thy name. Amen.

God send us peace and quietness in Christ, and destroy the works of
Antechriste.

All good people say. AMEN.
Imprented at Rome by the vaticane church, by Marcus Antonius Constantius.

Otherwise called, thraso miles gloriosus.


