CERTAIN GODLY AND DE^

Made in latin by ^ in GOD, ^ Cuthbert Durham, and translated ^mas Paynell, ^



To the most virtuous lady and most gracious Queen Marye, daughter unto the
most victorious and most noble prince, King Henry the eight, king of England,
France and Ireland. etc. Thomas Paynell wysheth most prosperous health and
felicity.
I (...) even from your tender age hitherto, has euydently and continuallye
given your self to all kind of virtue and prayer, the pure refection, and
fode of the spirit and soul of man: I your graces daily orator, to encreace
(if it may be encresyd) and augment your devotion, and spiritual meditations,
have translated these few and compendious prayers, written in laten, most
devoutly and lernedly, by the reverend father in god, Cutbert Tunstall, for the
spiritual consolation of all devout christians, christianly to accept and
embrace the^, and with celestial meditation vertuosly to use the^. For in these
orations and prayers, is nothing else comprised, but the sincere and true word
of God, our most consolation and comfort, with a certain general confession,
so christianly and devoutly indyted and knit together, that no mortal man
(except he be stonye hartyd) can read it without tears and remorse of
conscience. I would wyshe therefore (if I may be so bold as to wyshe your grace
a good turn) yt your hyghnes with the whole company of your virtuous ladics,
and chaste damselles, your graces most beautiful and pleasant mayde^s, would
when opportunity of time shall serve, pervse these heuenlye prayers, deuoutelye
read them, and continually mind and record them: For they well waide and
considered: shall be unto the spiritual reder an immortal comfort both of
body and soul, and to your grace a heavenly consolation and pleasure. Thus our
Lord Jesus preserve your grace. (...)*

(...)
O Creator and gubernator celi and terre and totius mundi, atque omnium, que
facta sunt: sancte, fortis, immortalis, omnipotens, terribilis, just,
misericors, and miserator, domine deus.

Ego miser and infelix immensa flagitiorum mole obrutus agnosco ac confiteor me
and fuisse, and esse peccatorem long omnium, qui vnquam vi xerunt
sceleratissimum: and tam v^hementer oculos tue maiestatis offendisse: vt non
solum non suum dignus vocari filius tuus, sed neque infimu^ seruus tuus, imm^
vero neque vt terra vestigijs pedum meorum prematur. Quanto minus, vt offeram
tibi sacrificium aliquod, vel laudis, vel gratiaru^ actionis. Nam s^ cel
estibus ministris tuis clarissimis spiritibus, lucifero videli^et and
complicibus ^ius non pepercisti: sed pro vno tantum commisso rebellionis and
suber vie peccato, eteo quidem momentaneo, quod contra te cogi tarunt: de summo
celorum habitaculo deiectos eternis tradidisti supplicijs cruciandos, quid ego
scelerosus homu^cio dicere? quid pretexere poter^? qui non exiguis, sed
immodicis, non pauces, sed innumeris, no^ occultis, sed manifistis vicijs te
offendi: et adhuc quidem offend re non cesso, peccata peccatis accumulans.
Ueru^ enimvero pijssime pater, quia pater misericordiarum tu es: and
miserationes tue super omnia opera tua: qui no^ vis mortem peccatoris, sed
magis vt conuertatur and viuat: de tua misericordia sum fide^s ad tue
maiestatus clementiam, que sola michi spes superest: humilis confugio: petoque
s^pplex veniam et remissionem omnium peccatorum meorum, quibus vnquam a teneris
annis vsque in hanc horam sieve scienter, sieve ignoranter, bonitatem tuam
offendi.

Que sane tu Deus quem nullum latet secretum: long me lius nosti, quam ego
ipse recensere possum* Peccaui namque grauiter and super numerum arene maris,
in super bia et vana gloria, in ira and odio, in inuidia, in auaricia, in
accidia, in gula, in libidine, in diuini cultus neglectu, in vanis iuramentis,
in illicitis concupiscentiis, in blasphemia, in obtrectationibus, in mendaciis,
in verbis ociosis, in immodico risu, in iocis, in vanitatis aspectu, in auditu,
in gustu, in tactu, in cogitationibus, in sermonibus, in sactis, and in omnibus
in quibus humana ^^agilitas vnquam peccare potuit. Id quod factum esse co^
fiteor mea culpa: mea inquam maxima culpa. De quibus omnibus michi homini
perditissim^ et infelicissimo peccatori tu mitissime deus per immensam et
inenarrabilem misericordiam tuam propicius ignosce. Tu namque es creator meus,
et pater meus, adiutor meus, and protector meus, dominus meus and deus meus: tu
es spes mea, fiducia mea, fortitudo mea, defensio mea, consolatio mea, el
liberatio mea, vita mea, salus mea, et resurrectio mea. Tu ^s firmamentum meum,
and refugium meum, (...), and desiderium meum, adiutorium meum et patrocin^um
meu^. Quamobrem precor atque obsecro te miserorum liberator adiuua me, et
saluus ero. Reg^ me, et defend me: Uisita me, et consolare me: Illumina me, et
resuscita me mortuum in peccatis. Et quia factura tua and opus tuum sum domine,
ne me queso, derelinquas: nam et si malus, et si venia indignus sum, tamen
semper tuus sum. Ad quem ergo confugiam nisi ad te Domin^ Deus? Si tu me
despicis: quis me respiciet? Si tu me eijcis, quis me suspiciet? Redu^ itaque
ex viciorum ^atebris me seru^ fugitiuum, et innumeris peccatorum maculis
sordidatum ab^ue in font tue pietatis.

Quia quantumuis immundus sim, tu me mundare potes. Quantumuis cecus sim: tu
potes me illuminare.

Quantumuis sim infirmus: tu potes me sanare. Immo quamuis mortuus quamuis
sepultus sim: tu me resuscitare potes. Multo namque mayor est pietas tua, qua^
mea impietas. Tu potes plus remittere: quam ego committere: tuque plus parcere,
quam ego peccare. Ne ergo respice me secundum mea demerita domine: neque
attend multitudine^ iniquitatum mea^um: sed secundum multitudinem miserationum
tuarum miserere mei: and propicius esto michi miserrimo peccatori. Miserere
quoque illorum mi sericors deus: quibus vel ego aliqua^do prebui: vel qui michi
vnquam prebuerunt peccandi occasionem: absolve nos per infinitam pietatem tuam,
et dignissima merita vnigeniti filij tui domini nostri Jesus Christi, et
sanctissime matris eius Marie, et omnium sanctorum tuorum, ab omnibus iniqui
tatibus and peccatis nostris. Et quia pro ta^tis sceleribus condignam peniten
tiam agere non valemus, nec tibi satis facere: pone crucem and mortem, penasque
et angustias, qua^ vnigenitus and dilectus filius tuus d^ minus noster Jesus
Christus in hac vita perpessus est innocens: pro peccatis nostris cleme^ter
abolendis, and lar gire nobis ad te redeuntibus veram contritionem, pura^
confessionem, emen dationem vite continuam, ac facultatem and gratiam
promerendi vitam et gloriam sempiternam.

(...)
O Creator and governor of Heaven, and earth, of all the world, and of all
things that are made: O holy, strong, immortal, almighty, terrible, just,
merciful Lord GOD. I a wretch, and unfortunate, overwhelmed with the great
burden and wait of sin, acknoledge, and confess, my self to have been, and
to be the most wicked sinner of all other that ever lived, and so grea^lye to
have offended the eyes of thy majesty, that not only I am not worthy to be
called thy ^onne nor yet thy inferior and lest servant, yea not to tread upon
the ground, how much less to offer unto the, any sacrifice of land or thanks
giving. For why. if you haste not spa^yd the celestial mynisters, thy most
clear and noble spirits, that is Lucifer and his companions, but for the
only offense and sin of rebellion, and pride, that they even suddenly and in
a moment thought against the, have delivered them, cast down from the high
habytacle of heaven, to be tormentid with eternal pains: What may I miserable
wretch say, or what may I lay for my self? the which has offended the not
with small, but with very great, not with a few, but with innumerable, not with
secret, but with manifest vices, and as yet, heping sin upon sin, does not
leave of nor cease to sin. But most merciful father, inasmuche as thou art
the father of mercyes, Psalm. C.xliiii.
and that thy mercyes ar above thy works, nor will not the death of a sinner,
but that he should rather convert and live: I trusting greatly unto thy
mercy, and having no other hope left me, do approach and fly unto the
clemencye of thy majesty: And mekelye I do ask and require the forgeuenes and
remissyon of all my sins, wherewith I at any time from my tender age unto
this hour have offended thy goodness wyttynglye or ignorantly: the which
things, (...)
thou O GOD from whom nothing is hydden, do know a great deal better*
than I can rehearse them. I have offended grievously, and above the number of
the sands of the sea, in pride and vain glory, in anger and hatred, in envy,
i^ couetuousnes, in slothefulnes, in glutteni, in lecheri, in negligence of
divine honor, in vain oaths, in unlawful lusts, in blasphemy, in
slaunderyngs, in lies in idle words, in unmeasurable laughyng, in iestes, in
vain looks, in hearing, in tastynge, in thoughts, and in words, in deeds,
and in all things, that the frayltye of man at any time might have offended
in, the which thing, I confess to have been done through mi fault, yea I say
through my most greatest fault. For the which, O most meakest God, forgive me
a man that is utterly lost and most unhappy, for thy great and unspeakable
merits sake. For why thou art my maker, my father, my helper, and my
protector, my lord and my God, you art my hope, my trust, my strength, my
defense, my consolation, my delyueraunce, my life, my health, and my
resurrection. Thou art my stablyshment and my refuge, my light, and my desire,
my help and my succor. Wherefore I pray and beseech the, the deliverer of the
miserable, to help me, and I shall be saved: to govern me and defend me, to
visitte me, and comfort me, to illumine me, and revive me that am dead in
sin. And forasmuch as I am O Lord thy creature, and thy workemanshyppe, leave
me not I pray the, for although I am evil, and vnworthi of forgeuenes, yet
for all that I am always thine. To who^ then shall I fly O lord God, but unto
the? If thou despise me, whoo shall look upon me? if thou cast me of, who shall
receive me? Therefore bring me thy fugytyue servant out of the lurkynge
places of vices, and wash me defiled with innumerable spots of sins, in the
fountein of thy piety and mekenes. For how fylthy soever I be, thou canste
cleanse me. How blind soever I be, thou can give me my sight. How sick
soever I be, thou can hele me. Yea and if I were dead and buried, thou can
revive me. For thy pity is far greter, tha^ is my Impiete. Thou can
forgive more, than I can do, and pardon more, than I can trespass.
Therefore, O Lord, behold me not after my demerites: nor consider not the
multitude of my iniquytyes: but after the multitude of thy mercies, ^
have mercy upon me, and be mercyful unto me a miserable sinner. And merciful
god, be merciful unto them, unto whom I have at any time, or they unto me
given any occasion to sin, and through thy infinite mercy and the most worthy
merytes of thy only son our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his most holy mother
Marye, and of all Saints, absolve us from all our sins, and iniquities. And
inasmuche as we are not able to do worthy penance for our sins, nor
satisfye the: set the cross and the death, the pains and the anguyshes,
which thy only and well-beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ, an innocente,
suffered mekely in this life, for the abolyshment of our sins. And give us
that return unto the, true contrition, pure confession, continual ame^dment
of life, facultye, and grace to deserve life and glory everlasting. So be it.

(...)
BEnedicta sit su^ma and inco^prehensibilis trinitas, pater, and filius, et
spiritus sanctus: deus, dominus paracletus, Charitas, gratia, communicatio.
Genitor, genitus, regenerans. Uerum lumen, vera lux de lumine v^ro, vera
illuminatio. Fons, flumen, irrigatio. Ab vno omnia, per vnum omnia, in vno
omnia. Ex quo, per quem, in quo omnia. Uiuens vita, vita a viuente, viuentium
viuificator. Unus a se, vnus ab vno, vnus ab ambobus. Qui est a se, qui est ab
altero, qui est ab vtro que. Uerax pater, veritas filius, veritatis spiritus,
spiritus sanctus. Una ergo pater, logos, paracl^tusque, essentia, vna virtus,
vna bonitas, vna be^titudo. A quo, per quem, et in quo beat viuunt omnia:
quecunque vere et beat viuunt. Quem trinum deum in personis, et vnum in
substantia diuinitatis colimus et adoramus, patrem ingenitum, filium de patre
vni genitum, spiritum sanctum de vtroque procedentem, et in vtroque
permanentem, sanctam trinitatem, et indiuidu^m vnitatem, vnu^ deum
omnipotentem. Summis namque laudibus te veneranda trinitas a nobis miseris par
est celebrari: qui cum non essemus, potentia tua fecisti nos, et cum per culpam
nostram perditi fuissemus, tua et p^etate et bonitate mirabiliter nos
recuperasti. Quocirca maiestatem tuam oramus atque obse cramus: ne nos erga tam
immensa beneficia tua ingratos, ne ve miserationibus tuis indignos vnquam fieri
si nas: sed per gratia^ tuam nobis augeas fidem, spem, et charitatem: vt
fructum bonorum operum tua benignita te proferentes ad vitam te largiente
perueniamus eternam, vbi in sanctorum adsciti numerum, gloriam tuam, que nos
saciet, in sempiternum cernamus. Interim dum vita suppetit: preconia tua nos
oblectent sedulo co^tinentes. Gloria patri, qui nos creauit. Gloria filio, qui
nos redemit. Gloria spiritui sancto, qui nos sa^ctificauit. Gloria sum et
indiuidue trinitati, cuius operationes procedunt ab ipsa tota: Cuius imperium
sine fine manet. Te decet glory eternitas, te decet laus, te decet hymnus.
Tibi debetur omne decus, tibi honor, tibi gra tiarum actio, qui es deus noster
in secula seculorum. Amen*

(...)
BLessed be the high and the incomprehe^sible Trinity, the father, ye son
and the holy Ghost, god lord, and comforter, charity, grace, and
communication. The begetter, the begotten, and the regenerans. The true light,
the true light of the true light, the true illumination. The founteine, the
flood, the irrigatio^. Of one al things, by one al things, in one al things.
Of whom, by whom, in whom all things. A living life, life of the living, the
geuer of life of the living. One of him self, one of one, one of both. The
which is of him self, the which is of another, the which is of both.

The father is true, the son truth, the holy spyryte, the spyrytte of truth.
The father, the son, and the holy ghost is then but one essence and being,
one virtue, one goodness, and one beatitude. Of whom, by whom, and in whom, al
things (whatsoever they be that live truly and blessedly) live blessedlye.
Whom we do worship and adore three gods in perso^es, and one in substance of
the divinity, the father unbegotten, the only begotten son of the father,
the holy ghost procedynge of both, and in both remaynyng, holy trinity, and
unity undivided one god almighty. It is mete and convenient, O honorable
trinity, that we wretches with high lauds and praises, do honor the. For
wha^ we were not, through thy pour thou made us: when that through our own
fault we were lost: yt through thy pity and goodness did wonderfullye recover
us. Wherefore we pray and beseech thy majesty, that at no time thou suffer us
to be vnthanke full unto these exceeding great benefits, nor yet unworthy of
thy great merytes, but through thy grace to increace in us faith, hope, and
charity, that bri^ging forth through thy benignity, the fruit of good works,
we may come (thou granting the same) to life everlasting, where that we called
to the number of saints, may behold thy glory, the which shall satisfye us
for ever. ^
In the mean time of this our life, thy praises shall delight us singing
co^tinualli, glory be to the father, that has creatid us: glory be to the
son that has redeemed us, glory be to the holy ghost that has sanctified us:
glory be unto the high and vndeuyded trinity, whose operations and works,
proceed of it wholly, whose empire continues without end. The eternity of
glory besemeth the, lawde besemeth the, and hymns beseme the. Al worship is
due unto the, and all honor and thanks the which art our God for ever. (...)

(...)
ADoramus te sa^ta trinitas pater et filij, et spiritus sancte, maiestas in
effabilis, vnus deus omnipotens, et tibi gratias agimus qui nos ad imaginem et
similitudinem tuam creare dignatus es, vt per memoriam, intelligentiam, et
voluntatem, tibi similes efficeremur. Has tres anime vires in nobis deprehen
^imus, per quas te recolimus, contem plamur, concupiscimus. Per memoriam, que
intelligentie parens est, imaginem tuam referimus deus pater eterne lucis, et
sapientie, domin^ nostri Jesus Christi. Per intelligentiam, que memory proles
est, imago tua in nobis lucet Domine Jesus Christ, qui es splendour
eterniluminis, et sapientia a patre genita. Per voluntatem, que directio est
amantis in amantu^, et amantem cum amato copulat, imago tua in nobis agnoscitur
spiritus sancte paraclete, qui es patris et filij amor, concordia, et
complexus. Similitudo autem tua in nobis cernitur. O sancta Trinitas, quando
virtutum splendore ornamur.

Uitam igitur nostram quesumus semper dirige, ne imaginem in nobis tuam vicijs
maculemus, sed vt sinceris mentibus te meminerimus, te intelligamus, teque
amemus. Da nobis fidem recta^, spem firmam, charitatem per^ectam, vt per eas
nostra in te memoria figatur intelligentia lume^ sumat, voluntas in flammetur.
O trinitas omnipotens tu Deus es, et dominus, tu rexes immortalis: ex quo
omnia, per quem omnia, in quo omnia, cuius regnum et imperium manet in eternum.
O trinitas omnipotens tu viuens vite origo es: Tu pulchri tudo perfecta: Tu
delectatio beata. O Trinitas omnipotens, tu triplicem rerum machinam,
celestium, terrestrium, et infernorum creasti. Quamobrem admiramur te in
incomprehensibili diuinitate tua. Glorificamus te in omnibus operibus tu is:
gratias agimus tibi pro innumeris beneficiis tuis. O Trinitas eterna da nobis
semper cogitare, lo qui, et agere sola ea, que tibi place^t. O Trinitas eterna
concede, vt omnia facta nostra se^per ex te prodeant: per te dirigantur, et in
te consummentur. O Trinitas eterna aspira, vt super omnia, te primum diligamus.
Deinde proximos nostros sicuti nos ipsos. Tum inimicos eti am quo legem tuam
seruemus.

O Trinitatis immensa instilla nobis planctum de flagitijs commissis, timorem
de imminentibus supplicijs, spem de consequenda venia.

O Trinitas immensa largire vt peccata nostra preterita per veniam deleantur,
presentia per continentitiam refrenentur, futura summo ueantur per cautionem.

O Trinitas immensa, da nobis contritionem perfectam, confessionem integram,
emendationem vite continuam.

O beata Trinitas prebe nobis sancto rum angelorum tu orum pium et fidele
presidium, qui nos in vita instituant, consolentur et protegant.

O beata Trinitas pacem firmam de celis mitte, ne nos infestent hosts, caro,
mundus, et demones.

O beata Trinitas omnem concupiscentiam carnis, omnem concupiscentiam oculorum
omnem superbiam vite procul a nobis pelle.

O veneranda Trinitas nos a bello, and ^ame, et pestilentia conserua.

O veneranda Trinitas largi^^ nobis, dum viget sanitas, cursum vite tibi
gratum. Qua^ do infirmitas ingruet, desideratam mentis et corporis valetudinem,
in tota autem vita memoriam recolendi nos in hoc mundo non habere ciuitatem
manentem. O veneranda trinitas nobis a lege tua declinantibus digneris animum
resipiscendi dare, eius autem studiosis discendi cupiditatem accendere,
proficientibus vero in ca tue diuinitatis illustration^ tandem aperire. O
clementissim^ Trinitas da ministris sancte Ecclesie tue been viuendi et docendi
gratiam, populo eis commisso man^at^ tu^ discendi studium, vtrisque ^utem
sedulum in ^ua lege profectu^.

O clementissima Trinitas reple reges et principes metu te reuerendi, gratia se
agnosce^ di mortales, et sapientia been regendi populum sibi commissum.

O clementissima Trinitas corrobora religiosos, vt mundana contemnant, legem
tuam obseruent, et vota sua tibi reddant. O pijssima Trinitas presta cunctis
virginibus incorruptam castilatem, coniugatis ^idam matrimonij custodiam, in
medio statu degentibu^ continendi gratiam. O pijssim^ Trinitas pauperibus et
afflictis prebe consolationem and patientiam, diuitibus et potentibus
compassionem, and misericordiam, vtrisque vero mutu am inter se charitatem.

O pijssima Trinitas dona captiuis me^tis ^reptionem a peccato, corporis
liberationem a custodia, et liberatis tibi seruiendi voluntatem.

O benigna Trinitas deduc iter facientes ad finem eius prosperum, ma re
nauigantes ad desideratum portum, omnesque mor tales ad regnum tuum celeste.

O benigna Trinitas fac rect^m fidem ^uspicantes tua iuuet gratia. Proficientes
fortitudo confirmet: perfectos comitetur humilitas: atque vniuersos per
seuerentia comme^det.

O benigna Trinitas concede superbis honorum despectionem et humilitatem veram,
^uaris diuitiarum contemptum et largitionem piam, libidini et ventri deditis
subiugationem voluptatum et vite mundiciam, iracundis et inuidis animi
refrenationem et charitatem: Seuis et truculentis ma^sue tudinem and modesti
^m: Iniquis et impijs iu^^itiam et pietatem, vani^ et mendacibus verba
veritatis, vafris et dolosis morum simplicitatem: Omnibus denique christian is
male viuen tibus penitentiam. O Trinitas misericors accende clemens gentibus,
Iudeis, et hereticis, vere fidei lumen, vt in tua essentia tres personas
confitentes, et de omnibus catholice fidei articulis recte sentientes, ad te
solum et verum deum toto cord^ conuertantur. O Trinitas misericors pro sanctis
in gloriam recepti^ gratiarum actiones tibi offerimus, pro defunctis purgandis
preces, pro damnatis iustitie tue preconia.

O Trinitas misericors, nostras tibi precationes, supplices offerrimus pro
viuis et defunctis, quibus prodesse possunt, vt illis culpas abluas hijs penas
remittas, tuamque gratiam et gloriam co^feras vtrisque.

O Trinitas admiranda tu potentia omnipotens, tu sapientia in^narrabilis, tu
bonitas es immensa. O Trinitas admiranda tu lumen es omnia illuminans: tu
veritas insuperabilis, tu consolatio summa. O Trinitas admiranda tu fons, tu
flumen, tu irrigatio es omnis boni. O vera ominino essentia, tu vita es
sanctorum: tu gloria, tu speculum. Glorificent idcirco maiestatem tuam. O
trinitas honoranda cuncti celorum ciues, patriarche, prophet, apostoli,
martyrs, confessores, et virgins. Glorificet maiestatem tuam tripertita
ecclesia tua in celo, et in terra, and in purgatorio, te inuocans. Glorificet
maiestatem tuam tolera^tia tua, qua peccatores suffers: iustitia tua, qua bonis
premia tribuis, et malis tandem penam, sed super omnia misericordia tua, qua
culpas clemens remittis. Glorificet maiestatem tuam omnium rerum creatio,
dispositio, et conseruatio, Glorificet maiestatem tuam omnis anima, que
vegetatur, omnis anima que sensit, omnis anima, que intelligit, Glorificet
maiestatem tuam deus simplex et trine, tripertita hierarchia celestis, ter
tripertitus angelorum ordo, omnis spiritus celestis, omnis spiritus humanus,
sine intermissione dice^s, Sanctus, Sanctus, sanctus, Dominus Deus sabbath.
Pleni su^t celi et terra gloria tua: O sanna in excelsis* Amen:

^
WE adore and worshype the, O holy Trinitye, the father the son, and the
holy ghost, an unspeakable majesty, one god omnipotent: we thank the, that
have vouchsaued to create and to make us like unto thy own symilitude and
image, that we through memory, understanding and will, should be made like unto
ye We perceue these three powers of the soul to be in us: by the which we
remember, co^template, and desire the. By the memory (which is the pare^t of
understanding) O god the father of eternal light and wisdom of our lord Jesus
christ, we represe^t thy image. By understanding (the which is the child of
memory) thy Image, O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the brightness of the
eternal light, and the wisdom begotten of the father, does shine in us. By
the will (which is the direction of a lover to him wards that is beloved, and
copleth the lover, and him that is beloved together) thy Image is known in us,
the spirit of the holy conforter, which is the love, the concord, and the
embracementes, of the father, and the son. Thy similytude, O holy Trinity,
when we are adurned with the bryghtnes of virtues, is seen in us. Therefore we
beseech the continuallye to direct our life, that we bespotte not thy Image,
which is in us, with vice, but that we may remember the, understand the, and
love the, with sincere minds. Give us a right faith, a steadfast hope, and
perfect charity: that through these, our memory may be fastened in the, our
understanding may receue light, and our will may be inflamed. O almightye
trinity, thou art god and lord, thou art a king immortal, from whom are al
things, by whom are all things, in whom are al things, whose kingdom and
impire contynueth for ever. O omnipotent trinity, thou which live art the
beginning of life thou art the perfect fairenes, and the blessed delectation. O
omnipote^t trinity, thou have created the three frames of things, celestial,
terrestyall, and infernal.

Wherefore we in thy incomprehensible dyuinitie do marvel at the, we in all
thy works do gloryfye the, we give the thanks for thy innumerable benefits.
O eternal Trinity, grant us continualli to think, to speak, and to do those
things only, that please the. O eternal Trinity, grant that all our
acts, and deeds may proceed from the, may be directyd by the, finished and
consumyd in the. O eternal Trinity, grant that above all things we may
first and principal lie love the, then our neygheboures as our selves, and
the^ to thentente we may keep thy law, our enemies. O unmeasurable Trinitye,
instill and power heuines into us, for our sins committed, and fear for the
pains that ha^ge over us, and hope to obtain forgeuenes. O unmeasurable
trinite grant our sins committed, may be stryken out through forgeuenes, yt
our present fautes may through co^tinence be refrained, and that those which
are to come, may be by some cautio^ and men^s removed O unmeasurable trinite*
give us perfect co^tritio^, entire confession, and a continual ame^dment of
life. O blessed trinity: grant us the pitiful and faithful aid of thy holy
Aungelles, the which in this life may instruct us, confort us, and defend us.
O blessed trinite, se^d us from heaven steadfast faith, that our enemies the
flesh, ye world, and the deuyles trouble us not. O blessed Trinity drive
far from us all concupiscence of ye flesh. ^
al concupiscence of the eyes, and all pride of life O honorable trinity,
co^serue and keep us from war, hunger, and pestilence. O honorable Trinytie
give us whyleste we be in health, a course and an order of life, that may be
pleasant and thankeful unto the: and when syckenes shall grow upon us, a
desirefull health of soul and body, and in all our life a memory to remember
us, that in this world we have no remaini^g place O honorable Trinity,
vouchsafe to give us, yt declyne from thy law, a mind to repent, and to
kyndle their desires, ^
that are studious to learn it, and at the last, to open unto those that do
profit therein, the clerenes of thy divinity and godhed. O most m^kest
trinitye, give unto the ministers of thy holy church, grace both to live well,
and to teach well: and to ye people committed unto the^, a desire to learn thy
commandments: and un to them both, a diligent furderaunce and profit in thy
law, O most mekest trinity, replenyshe kings and princes, with fere to
reverence the, with grace to knowledge the^ selves to be mortal, and with wisdom,
well to govern, and rule the people committed unto the^. O most mekest
trinity, fortifye the religyous, that they may despise worldly things,
observe thy law, and keep their vows, made and promised unto the. O most
merciful Trinity, grant unto al virgins vncorrupt chastity, unto those yt
are married a faithful custody of matrimony, and to widose, grace to contain,
and to live continentlye. O most merciful trinity, grant unto the pore and
afflictyd, consolation and patience, to the rich and those that are in power.
compassion and mercy, and to them both, mutual love among them selves, and
charity. O most merciful trynitye, give unto the emprysoned a withdrawynge
mind from sin, ye deliuerau^ce of their bodies out of prison, and being
deliuerid, a will to serve the. O benign trinity, conduct and gide those that
iorneye, to a prosperous end of their iorneye, and those that sail and traues
ye seas, to a desirous port and haven, and al mortal men to thy celestial and
heue^lye kingdom. O benign trinity, let or cause thy grace help and aid
them, yt begin a right feith, and that fortitude may confirm those that go
forwards and profyt therein, that humility may accompany those that be
perfect, and that perseueraunce may commend all men. O benign trinity, grant
unto ye proud the contempt of honors, and true humility: to ye auaritius and
couitus, the co^tempte of riches, and meke liberality: to the voluptuous and
gluttons, the subiugation and overthrow of voluptuousnes, and clenes of life:
to the irefull and envious, the refreynynge of the mind, and charity: to the
hard and cruel, mekenes and modestye: to the unjust and vnvnpitifull,
justice and piete, to vain me^ and liars, ye words of truth, to the craftye
and deceitful, simplicity of manners: and lastelye to all christians living
evil, penance. O merciful Trinity, kyndle and in flame the gentyles, Zues,
and heretics, with the light of true faith, that confessing th^e persons in thy
essence, and judging ryghteouslye, of all the articles of the catholyke
faith, they may with all their hearts turn unto the, the only and true God.
O merciful Trinity, we offer thanks unto the, for the saints into thy
glory receued, and prayers for the dead, ^
that must be pourged, for the damned, the praises of thy Justice. O merciful
Trinity, we humble offer up unto ye, our prayers, for the living and the
dead, unto who^ they may be profitable: to thentent you shall wash and blurre
out their fautes and remitte to these their pains, and to them both confer
and give thy grace and glory. O marvelous Trinity, in power thou art
omnipote^t, in wisdom thou art inenar^able, thou art the light that
lightneth all things, thou art the truth that can not be ouercume, thou
art the high consolation. O marvelous Trynytye, thou art the fountain, the
floude, and the irrygation, and waterynge all goodness. O true essence in deed,
thou art the life, the glory, and ye miroure of saints. Therefore O honorable
Trynitie, all the citezens of heaven, patriarchs, prophets Apostles, martirs
co^fessors and virgynes, shall glorifye thy majesty. Thy tripartite church
calling unto the in heaven, in earth, and in purgatory shall gloryfye thy
majesty. ^
Thy tolleraunce and patience, where with thou suffrest and bearyste with sinners,
thy Justice, where with thou rewardest the good, and does punish the evil, but
above al, thy mercy where with thou which art meke does remit sin, shall
gloryfy thy majesty. The creation di^position, and conservation of all things
shall gloryfye thy majesty: every soul that lives, every soul yt perceueth
and every soul yt vndersta^dith, shall gloryfye thy majesty. O simple god in
trinity, the tripertite celestial Hierarchi, the order of Angels tripertite
in three, every celestial spirit, every humayne sprite, shall gloryfye thy
majesty, saying wtoute any intermission. Holy holy, holy, Lord God of
hosts. The heuens and the earth are full of thy glory. Glory be to the O lord
most high. So be it.

A Prayer first to every person of the holy (...) to the holy (...).
God the father of heaven, have mercy upon us.
O Holy lord father almightye, everlasting GOD, of who^ God thy son is unto
the, the founteine of diuinitye, consubstantiall, coeternall, and equal, borne
before all worlds: by who^ the holy ghost workynge with him, heaven and earth,
and all things, vysyble and invisyble, comprysed in them, thou with an
unspeakable workemanshype and adurname^t have created: We honor the, we
worship the, we adore the, and for thy great and innumerable benefytes, we
thank the. Be merciful unto us mortal wretches we beseech the, and despise us
not given to si^ne, inasmuch as we are thy hand work: but through thy infinite
clemency, deliver and keep us from all evil, and from all sin.

O god the son redemer of the world, have mercy upon us.
O Lord Jesus christ the son of the living god, which art the true and the
omnipotent god, the wisedo^e, lively word, brightness and image of the father,
unto whom with the father and the holy ghost, is like honor, the self same
glory, coeternall majesty, and one substance. Whom descending from the high
arc and trone of heuens into the world to take flesh of his mother, a
virgin, thou have willyd through the cruel pain of the cross, to restore unto
us our innocencye again, we honor thee, we worship the, we adore the, and
for thy great and innumerable benefits, we thank thee, we beseech the, not to
suffer us, redeemed with thy blood, to peryshe, but through the great pains of
thy death, to deliver and keep us from all evil, and from all sin.

God the holy ghost, have mercy upon us.
LOrd God the holy ghost, which art co^substanciall, coeternall, and equal
with the father and the son, procedynge from them unspeakably, the which
descendidst in the form and shape of a dove, ^
upon the selfsame son baptized of Ihon* and dydst sit upon thy holy
disciples, ^
appering as were in fierye tounges. We worship the, we adore ye, we honor ye
and tha^k the. for thy great and innumerable benefytes. Drive from us we
beseech the, the darkness of al ignorance, and kyndle in our minds the light
of thy divine knoledge, and inflame in us the heat of most mekest love
toward the father, and the son, and thee, the spirit of them both.

Holy Trinytye one god have mercy upon us.
Lord god omnipotent, yt has vouchsafyd to create and to make man like unto
thy similitude and Image: grant, that the spots of vices, defyle us not,
whom thou the maker of all the world, after the ineffable example of thy self
haste created, and save us through thy mercy, who^ our sins shall lose if
thou be not present to help us.

^Orde god omnipopotent, that have given us a fre will to do well or evil, give
us so thy grace, that we may avoyde those things, thou defendyng us, which
are evil, and to do those, thou helpyng us, which are good.

^Orde God omnypotente, of whom is all wisdom and prouydence, thou doeste
know what is expedient for us mortal men, as it plesith the, and as it shall
seem best to thy majesty of us, so be it, but yet with mercy.

Precatio ad (...) Trinitatis personas, et (...).
Pater de celis Deus: miserere nostri.
DOmi^e sancte pater oi^pote^s eterne deus, a quo deus filius tuus, tibi
diuinita it is fonti consubstantialis, coeternus, et equalis, ante omnia secula
genitus est, per quem cooperante spiritu sancto, celum et terram atque omnia,
que in eis visibilia et inuisibilia continentur, inenarrabili tum opificio tum
ornatu creasti, te veneramur, te colimus, te adoramus, tibi ob immensa et
innumera benefitia tua gratias agimus. Esto nobis, obsecramus, propitius
miseris mortalibus, et ne despice nos flagitijs obnoxios, cum simus opus tuum,
sed ab omni malo ac ab omni peccato libera et serua nos per infinitam
clementiam tuam.

Filij redemptor mundi Deus, miserere nostri.
DOmine Jesus Christ fi^i Dei viui, qui es derus et omnipotens deus, sapientia,
viuus sermo, splendour, et imago patris cui cum patre et spiritu sancto compar
est honor, eadem gloria, co^terna maiestas, vna substantia* (...) Quique de
summa celorum arce descendens in orbem terre, carnem ex matre virgin mortalem
sumere, et ad instaurandam nobis innocentiam per dirum crucis supplicium mori
voluisti: te veneramur, te colimus, te adoramus, tibi ob immensa et innumera,
beneficia tua gratias agimus. Ne nos perire sin^s precamur, tuo redemptos
sanguine, sed ab omni malo ac ab omni peccato, libera et serua nos per immensos
mortis tue cruciatus.

Spiritus sancte deus, miserere nostri.
DOmine spiritus sancte deus, qui patri filioque consubstantialis, coeternus,
et equalis es, ab ^is ineffa biliter procedens, quique super eundem filium a
Iohanne baptizatum descendisti in columbe specie, superque sanctos discipulos
tuos in linguis velut igneis apparens co^sedisti: te veneramur, te colimus, te
adoramus, tibi ob immensa et innumera beneficia tua gratias agimus. Pelle a
nobis, que sumus, omnis ignorantie tenebras, lumenque divine tue scientie
accende in mentibus nostris, et amoris pussimi in patrem, and filium, et te
viriusque spiritum, ardorem in nobis inflamma.

Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus, miserere nostri.
DOmine Deus omnipotens, qui ad imaginem et similitudinem tuam homine^ facere
dignatus es, pres^a, ne nos fede^t viciorum macule, quos ad ineffabile tui
exemplar totius opifex mundi creasti, et quos peccata nostra, si tu no^ ad sis,
perdent, tua serua misericordia.

Domine deus omnipotens, qui liberum nobis arbitrium been aut male agendi
tribuisti, sic gratiam tuam nobis confer, vt que mala sunt, te prote gente,
vitemus, que bona sunt, te adiuuante, faciamus.

Domine deus ompotens, a quo omnis est et sapientia, et prouidentia, tu seis,
que nobis mortalibus expediunt, sicut tibi placet, et quemadmodum tue maiestati
de nobis miseris videtur, ita fiat cum misericordia. Amen.

(...)
JESUS, which after the innumeramerable torments of thy body, hangyng very
wekely upon the cross, vouchesauedest to dye for us, have mercy upon us.

(...).
O Most mekest Lord Jesus christ behold and look upon us wretchyd sinners, with
those thy merciful eyes, with the which thou beheldest Peter in the hal,
whileste he denied to know the. And at supper Marye Magdalene, whilst she
anointid thy fete. And upon ye cross, the meke these, whylest he knowledged
the to be a king. Grant unto us from the most beninge founteyne of thy
mercy, that after the example of Peter, we may bewail our sins, and yt we
as Mary Magdalene did, may burn in thy love, and vehementelye love the, and
that we, as the thief has optayned paradise, may se the in thy kingdom, the
which doste reygne god, with God the father, and the holy Ghost, thoroweoute
all worlds. (...).

(...) Jesus.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the which being god immortal, tokest up on the a mortal
body, to make us laws to live holely and virtuously. For that thy love unto us
we mekely pray the, yt thou suffer not us, inta^gled with the snares of vices,
utterly to perysh, who in time past through Adams contumacy were rejected, and
now have made us the heirs of thy kingdom, but that thou as meke and
merciful, wilt withsafe to abolishe our flagitius sins and wyckednes, the
which are mo than can be numbered, and greater than can be spoken or
rehearsyd, which does reign god, with god the father and the holy ghost,
thoroweout all worlds. (...).

A prayer to be said before the crucifixe.
O Merciful Crucifix, the redemer of all people, whose head was fylthely
lacerate and torn with a crown of thorn, whose hands and feet extendyd upon
a cross, were through boryd with nails, whose hole feeble body was hanged on
high, and two thieves to his ignomini and shame, fastenyd on his right and
left hand, of the which the one despysyd thee, the other knowleged the to be
a king, whose spyryte commended unto the father, was given up to redeem us
withal. And being dead, thy side through percyd, guysshed and powered out
water and blood. What toungue can worthelye express, what mind can
conceive those innumerable pains, the which thou an innocente haste suffered?
We beseech the, for these so exceadyng great torments, to illuminate our
souls, with the light of thy knowledge, to moderate our understanding, to
stre^gthen our hands to good works, to convert our feet steps and
goynges to thy ways, to dyrecte our thoughts, words, and deeds, and last of
all to bring us wretches, unto thy kingdom: where that we with thy holy
Angeles, may have thy fruition: the which do live and reygne God, with god
the father and the holy ghost, thorowoute all worlds. (...).

A Prayer unto God.
O Almyghtye Lord God, which art the trinity of persons in unity of
substance, which have been eternally, art now, and shall be the blessed GOD
for ever thorowout al worlds, we commend our souls into the hands of thy
power to be kept both days and nyghtes, and all the hours and momentes of
our life. O god the maker of al men, have mercy upon us, and O king and
governor of the world direct us, keep us, through the faith of thy
patriarchs, the merytes of thy prophets, the predication of thy Apostels the
victories of thy martyrs, the charity of thy confessoures, the contynence of
thy virgynes, and through the intercession of all thy Saints, the which have
pleasyd the from the beginning of the world. Holy Abel the which first of all
other received ye crown^ of martirdo^e, Gene. 4.
shall pray^ for us. Holy Enoche, Gene. 5,
the which walked with god, and translated ou^^ of the world aperyd no more,
shall make obse^^ations for us. Holy No whom god in the time of the flud
preserved for his Justice sake, Gene, 7,
shall pray for us. Faith full Abraham, Roma, 4,
the which stedefastly believed God and was imputyd unto him for Justice, shall
make supplications for us. Gene, ^^
Holy Isaac, being obedient unto his father gave us when he should have been
offered up, a figure of our lord Jesus Christ, that was offered up a sacrifice
for the salvation of the world, shall make intercession for us. Happy Jacob,
(...) which saw the Angels of god, ^
coming to mete him, shall be a mean unto god for us. Joseph the well-beloved of
his father: ^
whom his brethren did sell, shall pray for us. Holy Moses, ^
with whom god spoke face to face, shall make supplycatyons for us. Holy
Dauyd, whom O lord thou haste chosen after thy own heart and mind, shall help
us. The prophet Helias, ^
whom you tokest and lyftidst up in a fierye charette, shall make
obsecrations for us. ^
The Prophette Heliseus, whose bones by the only touching of the dead, have
reuiuyd the dead, shall pray for us. Holy Esaias, whose lyppes were clensyd with
celestyall and heuenlye fire, shall pray for us. ^
O Lord, ^
let Hieremye whom: thou have sanctyfyed in his mothers womb, help and pray
for us.

The holy Prophette Ezechiell which saw the marvelous visyons of GOD, ^
shall pray for us. Holy Daniell a man gretlye beloved, the which losid and
declared the kings dreams, ^
and was delivered out of the lake of lions, shall pray for us. The three
children Sydracke, ^
Mysac, and Abdenago, which were delivered from the fire, shall succure and
help us. We call unto our help the twelve Prophets, Oseas, Iohell, Amos,
Abdias, Jonas* Micheas, Nau^, Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggeus, Zacharias, and
malachias All the Apostels of our Lord Jesus Christ, Peter, Paul, Andrewe,
James, Ihon, Thomas, James, Philippe, Bartholome, Mathewe, Simon, Thadeus,
M^thias, as, and all the discyples of lord Jesus Christ, shall assiste us. All
the Martyrs of Christ, confessoures* and vyrgynes, and all that are elect,
shall make intercessyon for us, that we may overcome all the temptations of
our enemy. Drive from us O lord the concupiscence of glutteny, and give us
the virtue of abstynence. Put to flyte from us, the spyrite of fornication, and
inspire and pore into us the love of chastity. Restrain from us cupiditie,
and give us voluntary poverty. Quench in us irefulnes, and kyndle in us the
mekenes of manners, and the charity of god, and of our neighbor. O lord
cu^te of from us, the heun^s of the world, and increce in us spiritual joy.
Repel from us ye pride of the mind, and give us the compunctio^ of the heart.
Diminishe our pride* and make perfect in us true humility, for we are
wretchyd, and unlucky men, who shall deliver us, from the bodi of this death, ^
but thy grace? O merciful god, we are to excedyng great sinners, and our
sins are innumerable, and we are not worthy to be called thy servants. O
lord cause us to wep^, mollify our hard and stonye hearts, and kyndle the
fire of thy love in us, the which are but ashes of death. O Lord deliver our
souls, from all the deceytes of our enemy, and keep us in thy will, tech us to
do thy will, for you art our God, to ye be honor and glory thoroweoute all
worlds. (...)

(...)
AL hayle undefiled vyrgyn Marie, mother of the son of God, elected and
chosyn above al other virgins, the which even from the womb of thy mother
Anne, a woman most holy, have been of the holy ghost so sanctified,
illuminatyd, and so gretlye defended with the grace of God almighty, that unto
the conceptio^ of our lord Ihesu christ thy son, and whylest thou dyddest
conceive him, and unto the time of his birth, and whilst thou did bear
him, and continuallye after his birth, thou continuedest and remaynedste a
vyrgin of al other that be borne most chaste, most vncorrupt, and of body and
soul all thy lift, most immaculate and vnbespottyd. For truly thou have far
passyd al other virgins, how many soever have been hitherto sense the beginning
of the world or ever shall be to the later end there of, in a sincere conscience
of an impolutyd mind. By these thy most excellent gifts of heavenly grace,
infudid in the by god very singularly. O vyrgyn and mother Marye, above all
other women and vyrgyns, we pray the which art unto us miserable mortal men
a merciful patroness, that you wylt vouchsafe to make intercession to God the
father omnipotent, and to his son Jesus christ, borne certenlye as concerning
his divinity of the father before al worlds, and of the, concerning his
humanite, and to the holy ghost, that our sins may be forgeuen us, and
that we, the spots of our sins through thy intercessyon, clean wypyd out,
may merit continually to rejoice with the O holy virgin, and to praise the in
the kyngedome of heaven, without end. (...)

A (...) unto god (...) ^he (...) which have (...) that (...) for them.
Have mercy, we beseech the O Lord god have mercy, for the precious death sake
of thy only son our Lord Jesus Christ, of those souls, ye which have no
intercessors that remember the^, or that does put the in remembrance of them,
nor no consolation, nor hope in there torments, but only that they are
created and made like unto thy similitude and Image* and markyd with the signacle
of thy faith the which other through the negligence of those which are alive,
or of the slydynge course of time are clean forgotten of their friends, and
posterity. Spare them O lord, and defend thy workmanship in them, nor
despise not the work of thy hands, but put forth thy hand unto them, and
being delivered from the tormente of pains, bring them through thy great
mercies, the which are celebratyd and estemyd above all thy works, to the
fellowship of the heavenly citezins, (...), 144,
which live and reigneste God, through all worlds. (...)

FINIS.
(...)*
Jesus qui post innumeros corporis tui cruciatus pendens in cruce languidus pro
nobis mori dignatus es, miserere nostri.

(...).
PEspice clementissime domine Jesus Christ nos miseros peccatores illis tuis
miserationem prese ferentibus oculis, quibus in atrio petrum respexisti, dum
nosse te negabat. In cena Mariam Magdalena^, dum tuos vngebat pedes. In cruce
latronem supplicem: dum regem te agnoscebat. Nobisque de benignissimo
misericordie tue font largire propitius, vt ad exemplum Petri peccata nostra
defleamus. Sicut Maria Magdalena tui amore fiagrauit, te vehementer amemus,
quemadmodum latro paradiso potitus est, in tuo regno te videamus. Qui cu^ deo
patre et spiritu sa^cto viuis et regnas deus, per omnia secula seculorum. Amen.

(...) Iesum.
DOmi^e Jesus christi, qui Deus immortalis, vt nobis leges sancte viuendi
ferres, corpus induisti mortale, pe^ illum nostri amorem te supplices preca^^r,
ne sinanos viciorum laqueis implicatos omni^o perire, quos ob Ade contumatiam
olim abdicatos, pius nunc effecisti regni tui coheredes, sed flagitia and
scelera nostra, que plura sunt, quam vt numerari, maiora, quam vt enarrari
dice^do possint clemens abolere digneris. Qui cum deo patre et spiritu sancto
viuis et regnas deus, per omnia secula seculorum. Amen.

Precatio (...).
OPie Crucifixe redemptor omni^m gentium, cuius caput corona spine^ feed
lacerauit. Manus in crucem expansas, pedesque protensos claui per forarunt.
Totum corpus ela^guidum sublime pependit. Duo latrones in ignominiam dextera
leuaque suffixi. Quorum alter te spreuit, alter te agnouit regem: Spiritus
patri comme^datus pro nobis redimendis emissus est. Mortuo transfossum latus
sanguinem et aqua^ fudit. Que lingua digne exprimere, que men's concipere
poterit penas illas innumerabiles, quas innocens es passus? Per he^ tam immensa
tormenta te precamur, vt animas nostras lumine scientie tue illustres. Capitis
sensus modereris. Manus nostras ad opera bona corrobores, pedes et gressus
nostros ad vias tuas conuertas, cogitationes, verba, et facta nostra dirigas.
Demumque perducas nos miseros in regnum tuum. Ubi cum sanctis angelis tua
fruamur gloria, qui cum deo patre and spiritu sancto viuis and regnas deus, per
omnia secula seculorum. Amen.

Pr^catio (...).
DOminator domine deus omnipotens, qui es personarum trinitas in vnitate
substantie, qui ab eterno eras: nunc es, et in eternum eris benedictus deus in
seculorum secula: Comme^damus animas nostras in manus potentie tue, vt
custodias eas diebus ac noctibus, singulisque horis et mome^tis vite nostre.
Miserere nostri deus omnium conditor, et dirige nos rex mundi gubernator:
Custodi nos per fidem Patriarcharum, per merit^ prophetarum, per predicationem
apostolorum, per victorias martirum, per charitatem confessorum, per
contine^tiam virginum, per intercessionem omnium sanctoru^ et electorum tuorum:
qui tibi placuerunt ab initio mundi. Oret pro nobis sanctus Abel, qui primus
martyrij coronam accepit. Obsecret pro nobis sanctus Enoch, qui ambulanit cum
deo, et de mundo translatus amplius non apparuit. Roget pro nobis sanctus Noe:
quem deus in diluuio propter iustitiam seruauit. Supplicet pro nobis fidelis
Abraham, qui firmiter credidit deo, et reputatum est illi ad iustitiam.

Intercedat pro nobis sanctus Ysaac, qui immolandus obediens patri figuram
prebuit domini nostri Jesus Christi, qui pro mundi salute victima patri oblatus
est.

Interueniat pro nobis felix Jacob, qui angelos dei venientes sibi in occursum
vidit.

Precetur pro nobis dilectus a patre Joseph, quem fratres sui vendiderunt.

Supplicet pro nobis sa^ctus Moses, cum quo locutus est dominus facie ad
faciem.

Subueni^t nobis sanctus David quem elegisti Domine secundum cor tuum.

Obsecret pro nobis Helyas propheta, quem in celum in igneo curru leuasti.

Oret pro nobis Helyseus propheta, cuius ossa contactu mortuum suscitarunt.

Roget pro nobis Sanctus Esayas, cui labia mundata sunt igne celesti.

Assit nobis beatus Hieremias, quem sanctificasti Domine in vtero matris.

Deprecetur pro nobis sanctus Ezechiel propheta, qui visiones dei mirabiles
vidit.

Exoret pro nobis sanctus Daniel, vir desyderiorum, qui somnia regis soluit, et
liberatus est de lacu Leonu^. Succurrant nobis tres pueri qui ab igne liberati
sunt Sydrac, Mysac, and Abdenago. Inuocamus in auxilium nostrum duodecim
prophetas, Osee, Iohel, Amos, Abdiam, Ionam, Micheam, Nau^n, Abachuc,
Sophoniam, Aggeum, Zachariam, et Malachiam. Assistant nobis omnes apostoli
domini nostri Jesus Christi, Petrus, Paulus, Andreas, Iacobus, Johannes, Thomas,
Iacobus, Philippus, Bartholomeus, Matheus, Simon, Thadeus, Mathias, et omnes
sancti discipuli domini nostri Jesus Christi. Intercedant pro nobis omnes
martyrs Christi, et confessores, virgins, et omnes electi, vt superare
possimus omnes tentationes inimici. Depelle a nobis domine concupiscentiam
gule, et da nobis virtutem abstinentie, ^uga a nobis spiritum fornicationis, et
inspira nobis amorem castitatis. Cohibe a nobis cupiditatem, et largire
voluntariam paupertatem. Extingue in nobis iracundiam, et accende mansuetudin^m
morum, et charitatem Dei et proximi. Abscinde a nobis domine tristitiam seculi,
et au ge nobis gaudium spirituale. Repelle iactantiam mentis, et tribue
compunctionem cordis. Minue superbiam nostram, et perfice in nobis humilitate^
veram, qui miseri sumus, et infelices homines. Quis nos liberabit de corpore
mortis huius nisi gratia tua? Domine deus misericors, nam nos peccatores sumus
nimis, et innumerabilia sunt delicta nostra, et non sumus digni vocari seru^
tui. Resuscita domine in nobis fletum. Mollifica cor nostrum durum et saxeum,
et amoris tui ignem in nobis accende, qui sumus cinis mortis. Libera domine
animas nostras, ab omnibus insidijs inimici, et conserua nos in tua voluntate,
doce nos facere voluntatem tua^, quia deus noster es. tibi honor et gloria, per
omnia seculorum secula. (...)

(...)
Salve intemerata virgo Maria, filij dei genitrix pre ceteris electa
virginibus, que ex vtero tue matris Anne mulieris sanctissime, sic a spiritu
sancto tu^ sanctificata, tum illuminata fuisti, munitaque tantopere dei
omnipotentis gratia, vt vsque ad conceptu^ filij tui domini nostri Jesus
Christi, and dum eum conciperes, ac vsque ad partum, et dum ^um pareres,
se^perque post partum, virgo omnium, que nate sunt, castissima,
incorruptissima, e^ immaculatissima et corpore et animo tota vita permanseris.
Tu nimirum vniuersas alias long superasti virgins syncera mentis impollute
conscientia, quotquot vel adhuc fuerunt ab ipso mundi primordio, vel vnqua^
future sunt vsque in finem mundi. Per hec nos precel lentissima gratie celestis
dona, tibi virgo et matter maria ^re ceteris omnibus et mulieribus et virginibus
a deo singulariter infusa, te precamur, que miseris mortalibus misericors
patrona es, vt pro peccatis nostris nobis condonandis inter cedere digneris
apud deum patrem omnipotentem, eiusque filium Iesum Christum, secundum
diuinitatem quidem ex patre ante omnia secula genitum, secundum humanita tem
autem ex te natum, atque apud spiritum sanctum, vt peccatorum nostrorum maculis
tua abstersis intercessione, tecum sancta virgo semper congaudere, teque in
regno celorum sine fine laudare me^^amur. (...)*

(...).
MIserere, que^umus, Domine deus per preciosam mortem vnigemti filij tui domini
nostri Jesus Christi, miserere animaru^ illarum, que apud te sui memores no^
habent intercessores: quibus non est consolatio, nec spes vlla in tormentis,
nisi quod ad imaginem et similitudinem tuam create, et fidei signa culo
insignite sunt, que vel superstitu^ negligentia, vel temporum labente cursu, in
obliuionem amicorum aut posteritatis venetunt. Parce eis domine, et defend
plasma tuu^ in eis: nec opus manuum tuarum despice, sed porrige eis dexteram
tuam, atque a penarum cruciatu liberatas perduceas ad societatem ciuium
supernoru^ per immensas miseratio^es tuas, que super omnia opera tua celebres
habentur. Qui viuis et regnas deus, per omnia secula seculorum. (...)

IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN POVLES CHVRCHEyarde at the Sign of the (...) by John
Cawoode. Printer to the king and (...)* Anno. 1558.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


