NEW ESSAYS: MEDITATIons, and Vows: Including in them the Chief Duties of a
Christian, both for Faith, and Manners. By Thomas Tuke, Minister of Gods Word,
at S. Giles in the Fields.

LONDON, Printed by N. O. and are to be sold by William Bladon, at his Shop in
S Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bible. 1614.

To the Right ver tuous and Honorable Lady, the Lady Alicia Dudley.
MADAME,
AFter I had written these lines, (for I know not well how to call them) I long
discoursed with my self, whom to I might present them: At length I bethought
my self of your Ladyship, whom I deemed very worthy of them; and am bold,
under your Name, to publish them unto the world. If herein, or by any other
means, I may further your knowledge or devotion in true Christianisme, I shall
rejoice. I seek for nothing, but your soul for Christ, that in him it may be
presented pure and perfect unto God. Your Wisdom, and not your Wealth, that
you may be wise in Christ Jesus, according as S. Paul does teach you: If any
man among ^or. 3. 18
you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be
wise: for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. To know Christ
well, is the chiefest learning; and to serve him truly, is the greatest
freedom. Mary was happy in bearing him, more happy in believing in him, in
that she bare him in her breast, whom she bare before in her belly. And though
every Lady cannot be a Mary, a Mother to him in the flesh; yet every true
Christian Lady is a kin to him in the faith, flesh of his flesh, and bone his
bone, a very member of his body in a spiritual sense. Whosoever (says he)
shall do Mat. 12. 5 Luke 8. 2
the will of my Father, which is in heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister,
and Mother. And this is the better: for the Christian blood, as Christian, is
the best blood in the world A man in any other blood may perish: but he that
has this blood in his heart, shall never perish. If a Christian, during a
Christian, may be damned, then say that Christ himself may be damned also.
Which, what religious ear can endure to hear? But I will detain you no
longer: but leave you to those things which I have prepared for you. If they
shall find your kind acceptance, they have what they come for; and I that for
what I sent them. Use them, and peruse them at your leisure: and God give them
favor in your heart. The great God of heaven and earth protect and bless you,
and all your children, and keep you all for ever in his faith and fear, that
ye may see his face to the eternal comfort of your souls in heaven.

Saint Giles in the fields, October 5. 1614. Your Ladyships in Christ Jesus,
Thomas Tuke.

To the Courteous Reader.
GEntle Reader, I have written this book for thee: if thou use it, it is
thine: if thou abuse it, it is not thine, but mine. Quarrel not with the name,
if thou dislike not the nature. As children, so books, which are the birth of
men's brains, have not ever the fittest names. It is oftentimes as Godfathers
please. If thou dislike the name, call it what thou will. Wonder not that new
books do still fly abroad: the world is full of new brains; Wherefore not
of new Books? They that are of active spirits, were beter do this then
nothing. As for my self I bring with me no nouelty, as I think, but that,
that is old and true, though (it may be) cast in a new mold. I suppose both
young and old helped forward the Tabernacle, and after that the Temple: and it is
my joy to do any thing I can, for the Church of Christ, If I can bring but one
Lace or Pin to the trimming of His Bride. Read, and consider what thou
read. Let me find thy loving and vnsparing censure in discretion. If I
shall perceive any thing to be amiss, it shall hereafter be corrected: If it
shall find entertaiment with thee, I may be encouraged to prepare more of
this kind hereafter for thee. Thus I commend my book to thee, and both it and
thee to God.

From my Study in Saint Giles in the fields, this 5. of October, 1614. Thine in
CHRIST: THOMAS TVKE.

ESSAYS.
Of God.
WHILES I think of GOD, my thoughts are swallowed up as of a gulf, and I
loose my self, rather then find Him: His brightness dazeleth mine eyes; and
I cannot reach Him with my Line, and sound Him with the Plumet of mine
Understanding: He is so deep that I cannot go down unto Him; He is so
high, that I cannot mount up unto Him: He is so great that I cannot comprehend
Him; He is so large that I cannot measure Him: He is so Wise, as I cannot
conceive; and so Good, as I am not able to express. Alas! How shall a Bushel
contain all the World? How can a Bucket hold all the Ocean; or a Spoone lade
out all the Water, that is therein? How can a Fool diue down into the depths
of Wisdom; or he that is evil, fully understand Him that is an infinite,
and inexplicable Good? Yet this have I learned; He is Great without Quantity;
He is Good without Quality: He sees all things without Eyes; He hears all
things without Ears; He knows all things without discourse: He made all
things, and yet has need of nothing; He fills all things, but is filled of
nothing; He gives all things, but takes nothing; He is in all things, but is
polluted of nothing: No thing can help Him, nothing can hurt Him; nothing can
add to Him, nothing can be taken from Him. O GOD, Thine Execellency does
surpass mine infirmity! Thy Beauty, draws me; Thy Fullness contents me; Thy
Mercy stays me. I would be Thine, even Thine, and none but Thine: I desire
nothing against Thee, nothing besides Thee, nothing with Thee: O LORD, nothing
but Thee. Thou art my Lot, my Love, my Portion, my prime Content: If I have
Thee, I have All; if I lack Thee, I lack All: If Thou be with me, I care
not though men, though devils, though all the world should be against me.
LORD now lift up the light of Thy Countenance upon me, and grant me Thy peace,

Amen.
Of Christ.
CHRIST is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Which way would thou go? He is
the Way. Whither would thou go? He is the Truth. Where would thou
remain? He is the Life. Would thou walk? He is the Way: Would thou not
be deceived? He is the Truth: Would thou not die? He is the Life. CHRIST
was Poor to make us Rich: He was made a Sinner, that we might be made
Saints: He was made a Curse, that we might obtain a Blessing: He Dyed, that
we might live: He Descended into Hell, that we might Ascend into Heaven. In
Him we have all things, and He is all things in us. If thou be hungry He
is Meat: if thou thirstest He is Drink: If thou be wounded, He is a
Surgion: If thou be sick, He is a Physician: If thou burn, He is a
Fountain: If thou be cold, He is a Fire. If thou be a sinner, He is
Sanctity: If thou be laden with iniquity, He is Justice: If thou want
help, He is a Succor: If thou be weak, He is Strength: If thou be
weary, He is a Shadow: If thou fear death, He is Life: If thou hate
darkness, He is Light: If thou would see GOD, He is thy Glass: If thou
would have access to GOD, He is the Way: If thou would enter into heaven,
He is the Door, the Key, the Keeper. O LORD, how sweet is Thy Name! How
pleasing is Thy Service! How easy is Thy Yoke! In truth he is worthy death,
who refuses to live to Thee: He is a fool, that is not wise to Thee: He is
just nothing, that would be something out of Thee. It is meet that he should
wither, that will not grow in Thee: He deserves to perish wandering, that will
not walk in Thee. Misery be his end, that seeks not Bliss in Thee: Death
be his Destiny, that seeks not life in Thee: And Hell his heritage, that
seeks not Heaven in Thee. Thou made all things for thy Self: He that will
be something to himself, nothing to Thee, amongst all things he begins to
be nothing, and of things evil he deserves the worst. Keep me therefore in
Thy love, that I may not leave Thee: Preserve me in Thy Breast, and do not
loose me: If I leave Thee, I loose Thee; in loosing Thee, I loose my soul, my
self, and all things with me.

Of the Holy Ghost.
THE third Person of the blessed Trinity is called the Holy SPIRIT, because He
hallowes us, and being Himself Spired, does also inspire good things into us.
The scholar learnes quickly, when the Holy GHOST is his Teacher: The eye sees
distinctly, when the Holy GHOST does enlighten it: A man judges truly, when
He does direct him: and lives holily, when He does dispose him. The SPIRIT
is but one In Person, yet seven, yea seventy times seven in His gracious
Operations: He has Wisdom for thee against thy folly, Understanding against
thy dullness, Counsel against thy giddiness, Courage against thy cowardice,
Cheerefulnes against thy sluggishnesse, Tenderness against thy hardness,
Comfort against thy fears, Light against thy darkness, Truth against thy
lies, Humility against thy pride, Faith against thy dissidence, Hope against
thy desperation, and Charity against thy cruelty. He is given unto men for
salvation, when their heart returns unto GOD: for succor, when in our agonies
He relieues our infirmity: for solace, when He whispers into our hearts that
we are GODS Children: and for heat, when He kindles in our souls the zeal
of GOD, and Charity to our neighbor for CHRIST His sake. Think we well? it
is of Him: Will we well? It is by Him: Affect we well? It is His work: Or
live we well? It is by His direction: He lightens our mind, giudes our
reason, strengthens our memory, moves our will, and rules our affections. But
because a man sees Him not, therefore shall he deny his Essence, or his
Presence? Thou see not Air, the Wind, thine Heart, thy Brains, thy Soul.
The operations of the Air does show it, the noise and whirling of the Wind
does prove it, the panting of the heart does express it, the thoughts and
imaginations of the Brains does declare them, and life, sense, and motion,
does show thy soul is in thee: Even so spiritual motions, and an holy
conversation, does argue the presence and presidence of the SPIRIT in us. The
Holy GHOST appeared in a Dove, and in fiery tongues. He dwells in them, that
are innocent, meek, and constant: and whom He fills, He makes them seruent,
and likewise eloquent: He inflames their hearts with the heavenly fire of an
holy zeal, and makes them speak the praises of GOD: He therefore has the
Holy GHOST, who with his mildness and simplicity quenches not his zeal, nor
with bitterness of zeal, looses not his mildensse, but harbors both
together in a discreet, pious, and peaceable Spirit.

Of the Holy and Individual Trinity.
THREE are better then One: but here Three are One, and One is Three: and he
that has One, has All: and he that wants One wants All. What One is, All
are: What One has, None lackes. All Three are one GOD, all Three have one
LORDSHIP, Amongst Them there is distinction, but not division: a plurality of
Persons, but a singularity of Nature, Consubstantiall, Coeternall, and
Co-aequall. To be busy in inquisition about the TRINITY is wicked curiosity;
to bleeue It soberly, is faithful security; but to see It, as It is, is
perfect and full felicity. Nature cannot match this Mystery, therefore the
similitudes used to express It must be warily considered, and not strained
too far: As that of the Sun and Fire, which have three things, motion,
light, and heat; of the Jewish Ephah, a measure of three bushels: of the
Soul; which is furnished with Memory, Understanding, and Will; of Water in the
Spring, River, and Pond; or of the Finger, Hand, and Arm. Then here, there can
be no where more dangerous crring, nor more painful seeking, not more
profitable finding. It shall not grieve me, if I doubt, to ask: It shall not
shame me, if I fail, to learn O Verity, Charity, Eternity, O Blessed and
Blessing, TRINITY, Holy, Holy, Holy LORD GOD of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are
full the Majesty of Thy Glory! Whiles I think of Three, I shut up my thoughts
in One: and whilst I muse on One, mine eyes are dazeled with the sight of
Three: It is my misery that I am a stranger from Thee; I shall be happy, when
I shall be with Thee, see Thee, and enjoy Thee. (*) (*)

Of Christ.
Our blessed LORD and Savior is called JESUS CHRIST: The former Name is
Hebrew, the latter Greek: the one signifying a SAVIOVR, the other ANOINTED:
for He is both to Jew and Gentle an Anointed Savior, Anointed with the oil
of gladness above his fellows, to be a King, Priest, and Prophet, unto his
Body: His Person is but one, but his Natures are two: One Divine and Uncreated,
the other Humane and Created: He must be man, that He might be able to die:
He must be GOD, that his death might be Meritorious, He must be Man, for
man had finned, and Man must therefore suffer: He must be GOD, that in
suffering He might overcome, and that dying He might raise Himself to life.
Man indeed could suffer, but GOD alone could vanquish and overcome. O
inestimable favor! GOD would become Man, that we men might be reconciled
unto GOD. The Son of GOD was made the son of Man, that the sons of men
might be made the sons of GOD. He became a Servant to make us free: He
would be inglorious, that we might be glorious: and being LORD of Life He
would suffer death, that we, which had deserved death, might have by Him
eternal Life. LORD JESUS, whom have I to intercede for me with GOD in heaven,
but thee! Whom have I to guide and comfort me, whiles I live with men on earth,
but Thy SPIRIT? In whom desire I to end my days and die, but even in Thee?
With whom would I live, when I do remove, but even with Thee? Grant that I may
so live to Thee, and so die in Thee, that I may live eternally with Thee: But
my life does scarre me, for when I sift it, I find it is either full of
sin, or empty of good. And if any fruit appear therein, it is either so
feigned, or so imperfect, or some way, or other, so corrupted, as that either
it cannot please, or cannot but displease the most righteous and holy Judge.
What shall I now do? Or whether shall I go? Thy Passion, O LORD, is my
refuge, and singular comfort: Therein is my confidence, on that I stand. Thy
Mercies, are my Merits; Thine Indulgence, is my Justice; Thy Grace, is my
Glory; Thy Cross, my Crown; and Thy Death, my Life. JESUS is a Name full of
delight and sweetness: Mel in Ore, Melas in Aure, Iubilus in Cord: Honey in
the mouth, Melody in the ear, and Joy in the heart. I will rejoice and trust
in Thy Salvation: I will not contend against Thee in the Valleys, nor on the
Mountains: The King of Israel is a Merciful King: Thy mercy it is, thy
mercies, O LORD, that I only thirst for. My soul thirsts after Thy mercies,
as the chased Heart does after water. LORD JESUS in Thy mercy, make me pertaker
of Thy Merits.

Of the Law.
THE Law says: Do this, and thou shall live. It rests not in faith, but
exacteth action, and promises life to them which keep it: It allows not
infirmities, but requires all perfections: and if a man fail but in one point
thereof, it denounces a curse unto him: Alas then what are we, what shall
become of us, who are grievous and continual sinners? Our very Justice being
strictly sifted by the Law, which is the rule of Justice, would be found
injustice: and that would be contemned in the strict judgment of the Judge,
which is commended in the judgment of the worker. But could not this Law have
been exactly kept? Surely Adam might have kept it, if he would: but as the
case now stands, we cannot but trangresse it: Neither yet is there injustice
in GOD: For by commanding things impossible He makes not men sinners, but
humble, that every mouth should be stopped, and that all the world should be
made subject unto GOD: because by the works of the Law no flesh shall be
justified in his sight. For when we have received a commandment, and perceive
what is wanting in us, we are put in mind to send up our cries into heaven,
and GOD will have mercy upon us: and that so we may know that we are not
saved by the works of righteousness, which we have done, but by His own
free Mercy: For indeed therefore was the Law given, and is yet urged to show,
not what we can do, but what we should do, and that the proud might see
his weakness, and seeing it might be humbled, and being humbled might
confess it, and confessing it might be saved: Not resting upon his own
dignity, but on GODS Dignation; not in his own justice, but in the
Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST. Being therefore terrified by the Law, let us
seek for comfort in the Gospel: And seeing all hope in our selves is cut off
by the Law, let us fly to CHRIST JESUS, Who is the fulfilling of the Law, and
in Whom, whosoever believes has the perfection of the Law. They say, the
Elephant (as knowing his own deformity) loves not to look into clear water:
Foul faces would have false glasses; and such, as would vent their copper,
love not the Touchstone: And they, that have deceiptfull wares, like not the
light. But I do desire to understand the Law exactly, that I may see all my
deformities and foulness, mine hypocrisies and false-dealings, that so I
might be brought to a loathing of them, and finding mine imperfections toward
the Law, I might be provoked to seek for the perfection revealed in the
Gospel: I will endeavor to keep the Law exactly, but when I fail, I will fly
to the Grace of the Gospel speedily; as knowing that not by mine own justice,
but by the justice of CHRIST I must be justified, and that I am not saved for
any graces in me, but by the grace of GOD in CHRIST unto me.

Of Sin.
SIN is the transgression of the Law: If there were no Law, there could be
no sin: The Law claims obedience, and when it is transgressed, then sin is
committed: And the more men wander from it, the more they sin. The cause of
sin is not GOD, who is Truth and Goodness, Wisdom and Justice, but a man's
own will, yielding to the devil. For it cannot be that He should make us
fall into sin, who makes us rise from sin; and that He should be the
Author of that, whereof He is revenger. And though Satan be politic to
beguile, yet has he no power to compel: he cannot make thee sin, except
thou will. It is true he can bewitch thy body, inchaunt thine eyes, and dull
thy ears, whether thou will, or no: but he cannot compel thy soul to sin,
he cannot make thee sin against thy will. A man standing in a shower of
hail, or bullets, or being among persons infected with the plague, may be
stricken and infected, though he would not be so: but no tentation darted from
the Devil no bad example, scandal or suggestion of any sinner can do thee
harm, except thou yield unto it. Know that when thou sinnest, it is not
against, but with thy will: For the foundation and root of sin is in our
selves; and whosoever sins, is the proper cause unto himself of sin. It is
true that God does harden the heart, and deliver men up sometimes unto a
Reprobate sense, but how? Not by the insusion of hardness, or immission of
corruption: but by not imparting mercy, and by leaving a man to himself, and
delivering him up into the hands of satan. For then He is said to harden,
when He does not soften; to deliver them, when He does not retain them; to
give them up, when He lets them go; and to lead them into temptation, when
He does not deliver them. When therefore I shall commit a sin, I will not
accuse GOD, I will not impute all to the devil: but I will condemn my self,
smite my breast, and say with the Publican: GOD be merciful to me a sinner.
I have hard some complain, they cannot choose but sin. O fearful bondage! O
unhappy necessity! But who constraines the^ against their wills? Nothing. But
thus it is: Evil thoughts of sin beget delight, delight consent, consent
action, action custom, custom necessity. What shall a man do, that is thus
entangled? Let him beware of custom, for the custom of sinning takes away the
sense of sin; and let him prevent, or mortify, evil thoughts, which are the
devils harbingers; for he lodges not, but where they have taken up his lodging
for him. There are some use to minish their sins; either they are not great,
or they are not many. Sure it is, that the smallest sin, that can be, being
the offense of the greatest Majesty, deserves death, and therefore is great
enough to destroy the soul: and though there were but one, yet that were one
too many. For one foot of a bird taken, or one wing belimmed, may cost her her
life: One hole in a Ship may sink her: One bullet may kill as well as twenty.
The smallest sin is in it nature mortal: yea the omission of the smallest
duty, which the Law of GOD requires, deserves eternal death. For cursed is
every one, which continues not in All Things, which are written in the book
of the Law, to do them. If the smallest curse of GOD be too great to suffer,
then the smallest sin against GOD, is too great to do: As I therefore desire
to escape all curses; so will I, by the grace of GOD, be careful to avoid
all causes, and will never count that little which might make me sustain so
great a loss as is the forfeite of my soul.

Of the Gospel.
THE Gospel is good news from heaven of remission of sins, reconciliation to
GOD, redemption from hell, death and condemnation, and of resurrection to life
and glory by the merits of our LORD and SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST. O happy news! O
joyful tidings! What news more welcome to prisoners, then of a Goaledeliuery?
What more pleasing to malefactors, then to hear of their Princes pardon? What
would a blind man more willingly hear of, then that his eiesight shall be
restored to him? Or what better tidings can be brought to a man sea-beaten,
and spent with labor, then that he shall most certainly obtain an haven,
where he shall most safely rest, free from the malice of Pirates, and fury of
all foul weather? Yet for all this the Gospel, with many, finds but poor
acceptance. It is because men have no thorough feeling of their miseries: they
feel no misery and therefore affect no change. What cares a clunch for
learning, or good manners, that blesses himself in his rudeness, and
inciuility? What cares a man for meat, that feels no hunger? What do you
talk to him of clothes, that feels no cold, nor nakedness? The lack of
things causes estimation, the sense of lack. When men have been worn with
wars, how pleasing is the news of a true and constant peace? When a man
feels his disease, and sees death staring in his eyes, O how welcome is the
Physician? How welcome should he be, that would bring him news of a
medicine, which he might easily have, that would cure him, and set him up
again? When Seamen have been long at Sea, and spent their victuals, and
water, even a pound of bread would be worth a pound in silver; and a little
fresh water how welcome would it be unto them? And if men would but duly
consider of their captivity, slavery, miseries, and necessities, into which
they are driven by sin, and wherein they are inwrapped, they would be glad
to hear of deliverance: And beautiful should be the feet of those, which
shall bring unto them glad tidings of peace. I will therefore examine my self
by the Law, that I may be brought to esteem of the Gospel: I will mediate of
my slavery, which I am brought to by transgressing the Law, that I may duly
respect the liberty, which is Preached in the Gospel. Mine own bitterness
shall make me delight in this Sweetness, and mine own ungraciousness in
this so great a Grace.

Of the Law and the Gospel.
THE Law says, do this, and thou shall live: The Gospel says, Believe in
the Lord JESUS, and thou shall be saved. In the Law there is severity, but in
the Gospel mercy: In the Law there is reserved no repentance, but by the
sentence thereof he that sins, must die: But the Gospel admits repentance,
and promises life to him that turns unto GOD. The Law terrifies, but the
Gospel pacifies: The Law discouers sin, but the Gospel couers it: The Law
requires a man's own justice, but the Gospel Preaches pardon in the justice
of another, to wit, of CHRIST. The Law is written, after a sort, in the hearts
of all men, Pagans and Christians; but the Gospel is not so generally known
to all. And the Gospel was not first, and then the Law: But the Law was first,
and then the Gospel. To find out my sins, I will veiw the Law: but to read
my salvation, I will look into the Gospel. To despair of my self, I will
weigh the Law: but to hope in CHRIST, I will receive the Gospel. If I were
disposed to stand upon my good deeds, I would stick to the Law: but being
desirous of mercy, I will fly to the Gospel. If I would stand upon my
justice, I would plead the Law: but craving Grace, I go to the Gospel. Yet this
will I do, because the Law is the rule of good works; I will endeavor to
keep it with care and conscience: Yet every day will I pray, and say; GOD be
merciful to me a sinner.

Of Good and Evil.
GOOD is more ancient then evil: Sanctity is elder then sin: vice is younger
then Virtue. There was first an Angel, then a devil: First a Man, then a
sinner: First, a True-man then a thief. In good no man can be too much; in
evil no man can be too little. He that would increase in good, let him
think he has yet too little: He that would decrease in evil, let him
remember still he has too much. The way to learn virtue is to unlearn vice:
He takes the ready course to become good, which repents of his evils: And
He only will prove a Saint, which feelingly confesses himself to be a
sinner.

Of the Church Universal.
THE Holy Catholic Church is the Corporation or Communion of Saints,
Triumphant in Heaven, and Militant on earth. This is the Mystical Body of
CHRIST, who is the only Head thereof, by whose SPIRIT every Member thereof is
animated, as every part of the natural body is animated of the soul: And from
which Head every true mystical Member deriueth all Spiritual life, sense, and
motion. And as the Moon receives her light from the Sun, so does the Church
receive all her brightness, both of grace and glory, from JESUS CHRIST. This
Church is the Vine of GODS delight, the Spouse of CHRIST, His Fair One, His
Wel-Beloued, GODS House, and City, the LORD and Keeper whereof is GOD; the
Wall His omnipotent Grace, and gracious Omnipotency; the Watch-towers are His
Providence and Omniscience: Her Ensigns, or Arms, are Faith, Righteousness,
Peace, Charity, and joy in the Holy GHOST: Her foundation is the doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles, Her Gate is CHRIST, Her Religion is the service of
the blessed TRINITY, Her Citizens are all poenitent and true Believers, and all
the Saints of GOD. This is the Mother of us all; he that has not Her for his
Mother, has not GOD for his FATHER. This is GODS Family; he that serves not
Him in it, serves the devil out of it. This is the Court of the great King:
He that is not Newborn in it, is some base-borne caitiffe, and not counted
among the Sons of the King.

Of the Militant Church.
CHRIST has a part of His Mystical Body triumphing with Him in the heavens,
and He a part warring under Him here on earth. This is a Spiritual Building,
made of living Stones, hewn out of the Rock CHRIST JESUS. This is Noah's Arc,
out of which there is no means to escape the floods of vengeance. This, like a
Ship, is weather-beaten with the raging winds, and waves of worldly troubles,
yet is not swallowed up. This Church, though far and wide dispearsed, is yet
but One, as many Members make but one Body, many Branches make but one Tree,
many Rivers make but one Sea, many People make but one Kingdom. And One she
is, because she acknowledges but one GOD, confesses one Faith, is ruled by
one Head, animated of one SPIRIT, participateth of one Baptism, and is
governed by one Law. This Church Militant is the Sub-vrbes of the Church
Triumphant: None must enter into This, but he that has first passed That:
None shall triumph like a Victor, but he, that has fought like a Soldier:
And he that would wear a Crown in This, must first take up His Cross in
That. The proper and essential Members of this Church are all of them holy by
the imputation of the Merits of CHRIST their Head, and by the powerful
operation of the Spirit of CHRIST, which is within them: And all these are
infallibly known only unto GOD, who sees the secrets of the heart, and can
certainly judge of inward virtues. As for the judgment of men (which may be
deceived with shows, as the Birds were with those artificial grapes of Zeuxis)
it is uncertain (if of others) except there be some singular revelation; and
rather an opinion of charity, then a conclusion of certainety. This Church
Militant is in the world, but not of the world: All her Members are strangers
in the earth, but descended from heaven; generated not of man, but regenerated
by the Holy Ghost, not begotten of mortal blood, by the appetite of the flesh,
or will of man, but of Immortal Seed, by the Word of GOD, according to His
Will. The only Husband of this Church is CHRIST JESUS: For He only has her,
holds her, leads her: To Him alone she owes her love, her loyalty and
fidelity. The Friends, (not the Husbands, for she has but One) of this Bride,
and Bridegroom, are all true Christians, specially Pastors, which hear the
Voice of the Bridegroom, and take great delight therein, eschewing the voice
of strangers. The common condition of this Church, and all her Members, is
affliction and persecution: But she counts nothing more glorious, then to
bear the reproach of her Husband, who is troubled in all troubles, remembers
all her sighs, and enbottles all her tears: And she has this property, that
like a Garden she is greenest after a shower, like Camomill she is most
odoriferous being trodden on; like Spices, She is most fragrant being rubbed,
or bruised: Whiles she is persecuted, she flourishes; whiles she is
pressed, she spreads; whilst she is injured, she vanquisheth: whilst she
is corrected, she learneth; and then gets up, when she seems to be beaten
down: Then is she most valiant in the Truth, when she is most oppugned for
the Truth. Being laden with tribulations, she gathers strength; being watered
with the blood of Martyrs, she takes Spirit, in sorrow she reapeth solace,
being straited she is enlarged, her very tears do feed her, and her fastings
do refresh her; and those things do make her floate aloft like cork, which
make worldlings, like lead, sink down unto the bottom. This Church is the
pillar and ground of the Truth, so termed of her service, because she does by
her Ministry Keep, Confirm, and Preach the Truth; not that she has
authority over the Truth, for the Truth is the ground and pillar of the Church:
But she has authority over her children, and against all Heretics, from the
Truth, with which she is betrusted to preserve and Preach. I will therefore
enquire for the Scriptures in the Church, and for the Church in the Scriptures:
For the Church shows the Scriptures, by her Ministry; and the Scriptures
demonstrate the Church by their Authority.

Of particular Churches.
THE Sea is one: yet by reason that it washes on many Countries, it obtains
many names, as British, Spanish, Adriaticall, Mediterranean. So all true
Particular Churches in the world, make but one Catholic Congregation, though
by reason of the Countries, States, or Nations, in which they are dispearsed;
or else because of diverse outward forms of government, they are called by
sundry names. These Churches by reason of their open profession of the Gospel,
and by reason of their outward forms, are called visible, and may be seen,
though which of the Professors in them be truly Saints, and appertain to
GODS Election, and which are only gilded pot-sheards, and not truly
sanctified, no man can define precisely. These Churches are like the Arc, in
which were all kind of beasts, clean, and unclean; like a Barn, where there
is wheat and chafe; like a Garden, where is flowers and weeds; an Army,
where are men, and milksops; a Net, wherein are good fish and bad; a Kingdom,
or City, wherein are good Subjects, and false, or unworthy varlets. Now these
Churches are then reputed true, and counted the daughters of the Catholic,
when they profess the true faith of CHRIST, and maintain the true worship of
GOD, For there is the Church, where there is true Faith, says Hierome; where
GOD is feared and praised, says Austen; where the Sacraments of CHRIST are
rightly celebrated, and His Word heard and conserved, says Beda; Where there
is consent in the Faith, and consanguinity of the Apostles Doctrine, says
Tertullian; Where GOD appears, and speaks with his servants, says Ambrose.
Into what Church therefore, soever, I shall come, and shall perceive the
soundness of worship, and the Faith of CHRIST Preached and maintained in the
same, I will live peaceably, and submit my self to the ordinances of GOD
therein, most willingly.

Of Christians.
CHRIST is the King of Kings, and LORD of Lords: and Christians, of all men,
are only of His Royal Blood, bone of His Bone, flesh of His Flesh, animated
with His SPIRIT, sprung from His Loins, swayed by His Scepter, and partakers
of His Glory: Christians are not under the Law, but delight in the Law: For he,
that delights in the Law, studies to deal according to the Law: but he which
is under the Law, is dealt with according to the law. Every Christian, as he
is a Christian, must say with Christ; My Kingdom is not of this world: And
though it be his destiny for a time to live in this world, yet his desire, and
endeavor should be ever to live, and love, as one not of this world, but
redeemed from the world. Many are Christians in name, not so in deed, for they
that are CHRIST'S, do crucify the flesh, and fleshly desires, and are not ruled
by their flesh, but governed by His SPIRIT. In vain is he called Christian,
that is in nothing like to CHRIST. What will it pleasure a man to be reputed
that he is not. He is indeed a Christian, that resembles CHRIST his Master,
that shows mercy to the miserable, that feels the smart of others, that
being injured breaks not forth unto revenge, that can live inglorious for the
glory to be revealed, that prefers heaven to earth, and GOD to Mammon, that
counts it his meat and drink and pleasure, to do the Will of his Father,
that takes up his Cross in this life, and bears it with patience, and which
judges him only happy in his death, which dies either in CHRIST, or for
CHRIST. CHRIST endured the Cross, before He obtained the Crown; and suffered
Shame, before He entered into His Glory. O Christian, thou art a delicate
Soldier, if thou think to win the field without fighting, or to triumph
without troubles! For the whole life of a Christian, if he live according to
the Gospel, is labor, toil, trouble, crosses, Martyrdom.

Of the Ministers of Christ.
ALL the Apostles had equal power: What Peter was all were; what Peter could
all could. There was indeed amongst them disparity of gifts, inequality in
years, difference in conditions, but an identity of power, an equality of
authority; all being equally partakers of one and the selfsame Office, of one
and the selfsame Power. These had authority over nature, to sure it; over
devils to subdue them; over all men, to convert them. To these CHRIST JESUS
gave power to work mighty wonders, to bind and to loose, to open and shut the
doors of heaven: These he sent into the world, as the Sun his beams, as the
Rose her sweet smells, and as the Fire his sparkles; that as the Sun
appears in his beams, as the Rose is perceived in his smells, and as the Fire
is seen in his sparks; so the potency of CHRIST might be acknowledged in
their Virtues, and His Majesty discerned in their Ministry. These were the
Planters of GODS Vineyard, the Architects of His Temple, the Fathers of His
Church, the Champions of the Faith, and Trumpetters of the Gospel; who with
their siluer-sounding blasts made the Valleys sing, the Mountains ring, and
filled the ears of all. These were men of mercy, such as had obtained mercy,
showed mercy, and by whom GOD wrought his works of mercy. They neither lived to
themselves, nor dyed; but unto Him, that dyed for them, and for His sake also,
even for us, receiving light from the Father of Lights, and spending themselves
like Lamps, in giving light unto others. Successors to these are all faithful
Bishops and Priests, who are not Masters of the Church, but Ministers; not
Lords but Servants; not Authors of the Faith, but Preachers; not Makers of the
Truth, but Keepers: To whom is committed the word of reconciliation, the
dispensation of the Mysteries of GOD, the power of remitting and retaining
sins, the care of the Churches, and the keeping of the Faith. These simply,
as they are Ecclesiastical persons, have no secular power, and authority: for
if the Master, then the servant must also say; My Kingdom is not of this
world. CHRIST came not to make them Princes, but Priests: Not Monarkes, but
Ministers: He gave them the keys of heaven, and not of Cities, or Kingdoms:
He committed the Word unto them, but not the Sword, and gave them authority to
deal with men's souls, but not with their States, or Substance. Now to make a
true Minister, it is requisite that he have a true Power, a true Mission; for
otherwise he runs unsent, and rules, but not by CHRIST: And that he Preach
the Truth, or else he abuses his Power. This is a most reverent and holy
calling, not instituted by man, nor Angel, nor any other creature, but by
JESUS CHRIST, the Head and Husband of the Church: And they that are thereof had
need to have a thousand eyes, because they live not to themselves only, but
to the people also: And they are as a Beacon upon a Hill, a City upon a
Mountain, a Candle upon a Table: all men's eyes are fixed on them. By teaching
and living well they teach the people to believe and live well; but by living
ill, they teach GOD how to condemn them. And in truth a good life, is a good
Sermon, and oftentimes an ill Pastor destroys as much with his ill life, as
he builds up with his good doctrine.

Of men, no man is better then a Christian, and of Christians, no man is better
then a good Priest: But he that is vicious, is like a piece of dung with a
Diamond in it; and as the water in Baptism, which is profitable to others but
perishes it self: But yet GOD may work effectually by the Ministry of wicked
men; for their power and calling is His, and their wickedness is their own;
that is holy, though they be unholy: Their authority is not the better for
their godliness, nor the worse for their ungodliness. The light is not
polluted, though it pass by polluted places, or persons, neither is the soul
corrupted, though it should be in a corrupted body: so neither is the power
and authority of the Minister stained, though he be full of stains himself.
And as water, whether it run through a pipe of Wood, or Stone, or Silver, does
good unto the ground: so the Word and Sacraments are available to the
Receivers, whatsoever the Minister be that gives them. Neither are we to
respect riches, age, greatness of gifts, nobleness of birth in a Minister, as
if he were to be contemned, when these things are wanting; but we are to
regard especially his place and power: for the power varies not with the man,
neither is the Word and Sacraments of greater respect, for any personal
respects in the Minister. Water has the properties and effects of water,
whether brought in an earthen Pitcher, or a cup of gold, or silver. And though
the more excellent gifts a Minister has, the better it is, yet his power is
not thereby greater, or more excellent: but still it is the same, as a Diamond
is, whether set in gold or silver: Or as the authority of a Justice is the
same, whether he have more wisdom, godliness, and insight in the Law, or a
lesser measure of the same. And of all faithful and true Ministers of CHRIST
it may be said, how different soever in their Age, Wealth, Birth, Breeding,
Gifts, They are the Dispensers of the Secrets of GOD, and ((...)) Coworkers
with Him: For without them He will not save men, and without Him they cannot
save men. I say He will not: for who, that contemnes the Baptism of man, is
Baptized with the Holy GHOST? Whom does GOD admit into heaven, which is not
admitted by the Minister into the Church? To whom will GOD give His Son for
food to his hungry soul, but to him that receives Him in the Sacrament? Whose
sins are loosed in heaven, but he, that is loosed by the Minister on earth?
Who is wedded unto CHRIST JESUS, as a Virgin, but he, that is prepared and
fitted for Him by the Minister? Or who is received of GOD, as an holy, living,
and accceptable sacrifice, but he, that is, as it were, tied to the horns of
the Altar, and presented of the Priest, perfect in JESUS CHRIST? And if it
happen that a man be saved without the Ministry of man, say it is a rare, and
extraordinary favor, and a thing, whereof no man should dare to presume, least
by presuming upon extraordinary grace, and contemning the ordinary means, a
man do justly for presuming deprive himself of grace, as by his negligence
he deprived himself of the means of grace. But yet there are which meanly
esteem of the Priesthood, because they spy vices in Priests. But it were
wisdom to distinguish between a man and his manners; between a Priest and
his vices, and equity not to contemn all for some. It were better to make much
of the evil for them*, that are good, rather then for them, that are evil, to
contemn the good: For it is better to do good unto the evil, though
undeserved, then to deprive good men of the good, which they do deserve: And
he is a very Cham, that will blaze, or sport at, the nakedness, or
infirmities, of his Father. Arise o LORD, and look upon Thy Servants: Let Thy
Priests be clothed with Righteousness: And praise ye the LORD, all ye
Servants of the LORD, ye that stand in the house of the LORD: Praise the LORD
ye sons of Aaron; Praise the LORD ye house of Leui: All ye that serve the
LORD, praise the LORD: Holiness becomes His House for ever.

Of the Scriptures, or Word of God.
THE Scriptures contain sufficient matter for a man's direction to eternal
life: They are the rule of faith, and the measure of good manners. Would thou
know what to believe? They will instruct thee. Would thou know how to live?
They will teach thee. Would thou discern thine errors? They will enlighten
thee. Would thou amend thy life? They will persuade thee. Would thou find
comfort? They will afford it thee. Thou art blind, but They are Light; Thou
art diseased, but They are Sound: Thou art evil, but They are Good: Thou art
deceitful, but They are Faithful: For thy wants there is in Them a supply:
for thy superfluities They have a remedy. The ignorance of the Scriptures is
the ignorance of CHRIST: Neither can he know GOD, that is ignorant of his
Word. GODS Word a Meat, Drink, and Physic or the soul: Yet as these things
hurt the body rather then help it, if they be not well entertained, so is it
with the Word: Yet the hurt lies not in the Word, which is good; but in the
heart, which is naught. The Sun shining upon a bed of Roses, makes it smell
well, but upon a dunghill, it makes it stink; The fault is not in the Sun,
but in the dunghill. To some the Word is the savor of life, to others it is
the savor of death, and the more they hear, the worse they are, but this is
through their own corruption. Rain falling on a meadow makes it flourish, but
on a flint, it does but wet it. And water, which quenches fire, inflameth
lime. And such the Word appears by reason of the diverse objects, whereon it
works. The waters of Marah being bitter were made sweet by a Tree thrown
into them. The waters of Jericho being unwholesome, and the soil sterile, were
healed and corrected, after Elishah had cast his salt into them: So are men's
hearts amended by the Word applied to them; and of bitter are made sweet, of
barren fruitful, by the blessing of GOD upon it: And as Jonathan, recovered
his sight and strength by the honey, which he tasted of in his faintness: So
the children of GOD are comforted and refreshed by the good Word of GOD, which
they receive with hunger into their souls. This Word is in it self the same,
though it be not brought by the same men, or in the same language to us: as
gold is gold, whether it be given a man in a purse of velvet, or a pouch of
leather; and the selfsame man may be clad either in silk, or homespun
russet. It skils not therefore so much who brings it, as if he bring it. We
will take money out of a slouens hands; Elias will eat his meat, though a
Raven bring it: And thirsty Sampson will take his drink out of the iaw-bone of
an Ass. The light is not the worse because it stands upon a wodden
candlestick; nor learning any whit the less to be respected, because it is
covered under a threed-bare gown. Well, howsoever the Word comes, or whosoever
brings it, it shall be welcome to me, so long as it is the Word of GOD, and
not the fables of men: It is mine appointed food, I will receive it, whether it
come in a platter of wood, or in plate of silver, or whether the Cook, that
dressed it, be virtuous, or ill disposed.

Of Hearers.
IT is good to take heed, not only what we hear, but how: As it is not
amiss for a man to consider what he eats and drinks, as in what fashion.
Some times death is in the pot, and poison mixed in the cup. I would be loath
to let venom in at mine ears, or let-them swallow poison. And though a man
should receive that, that is good, if he receive it not well, it will rather
do him hurt then good. Even good food does sometimes turn to bad humors,
though the fault be not in the food, but in the feeder. And works though
externally good, yet if they be not well performed, will prove but little
beneficial to the worker. There are some, that like the Athenians, have their
ears open only for novelties: Some come to hear and not to learn; some
regard delight and not profit, and words, rather then matter: some will give a
man the hearing, but they will believe no more thenlikes their humors: And many
show themselves Censurers, not Scholars. Some are pleased with the voice, and
delight in great sounds; but whatsoever the sense be, it is not of so great
request. Ye shall have many quarrel with the Preacher; his speech is plain,
his voice low, he has no good action, his words stuck like burres in his
throat; He whips his Auditors, he is too full of the Fathers, he meddles
too much with Controversies, he railes upon the Parish, he is an easy Divine,
it was a plain Sermon, he Preaches nothing but Law: or he is mealemouthed,
he Preaches his hearers a sleep, he sings Placentia, he is loath to offend:
Or he is never well, but when he is inueighing, he speaks daggers, and he
aimed at somebody. Infinite are the quarrels, that people pick with their
Preacher. On the contrary, I have heard some highly commend the Sermon: Oh it
was a rare Sermon, he is an excellent man, it was the best Sermon that I ever
heard, he is an admirable Preacher. It is well: but I will ask thee: What
rare effects did it work within? What wonders wrought it in thee, what
excellency, what goodness, have thou received, or gained, by it? Bless not
thy self in commending the Preacher, rest not in the naked commendations of
his Sermon: Account that an excellent, a rare, and a good Sermon, which
produces rare effects in thee, makes thee better then thou wast before, and
stirs thee up to excel in virtue. Account him admirable, and wonder then,
when he works wonders in thy soul. Thy Preacher cares not so much for thy
verbal commendations, as thy real. Good conversation is his best
commendation, his commending stands in thine amending, and thy godly practice
is his best praise. The Sheep, that says nothing, commends his Sheepeheard,
when her skin is whole, her fleece fair, and her self wel-liking, He hears
well, that does well; he learnes well, that lives well: and thy knowledge is
praiseworthy according to thy practice: And he only does prove a good Hearer,
which hears the truth in humility, believes it in simplicity, and obeyes it
with alacrity. The Word of GOD is our food, our ears are our mouth: but this
meat is not like bodily food turned into us, but we by believing and obeying
it are turned into it. Now he is the only happy hearer, that is translated
into the Word, so as that he may be able to say; I live, but yet not I, but the
Word of GOD does live within me. And this is, when a man's reason, will, and
affections; are brought under the Word, and when his conversation being
transformed, is now conformed to the Word.

Of the Sacraments.
THE oath of Soldiers to their General, was called Sacramentum; by which name
also Or rather Baptism and the LORDS Supper.
water in Baptism, and Bread, and Wine in the LORDS Supper are usually called.
Because as Soldiers, when they received the presse-mony, did solemnly swear
to their Captain, or General, that they would be faithful and loyal to
him: So we whiles we partake of these holy Mysteries instituted of GOD in His
Church, do bind our selves with the like Vow, that we will live and die in
his cause and service. And as they, at the taking of that Oath, gave their
names to their Emperor or Commander, and were received into his protection: So
we, when we receive these Sacraments, do likewise give our names unto
CHRIST, and are received into his tuition, that under his banner we might
fight a good battle, keeping faith and a good conscience. And as there we do
yield over our selves unto GOD; so GOD does bind Himself to us by Pacts and
Promises after a manner sealed up. Sacraments are signs of things, being one
thing, and signifying another. Every Sacrament is a Mystery, but every
Mystery is not a Sacrament. Sacraments, are not Nata, but Data: Not Natural,
but by Divine appointment: And their dignity depends upon their Author. They
are not the better, because the Minister is good, that does deliver them, nor
the worse, because he is evil. They are such as he is, in whose authority
they are given, not as he is, by whose Ministry they are dispensed: And
though they be hurtful to them, that deliver them, being wicked; yet they are
profitable to them, that receive them, being Prepared. And though the Receiver
have a perverse faith, or come unprepared, and in sin, yet he may partake of a
true and entire Sacrament, if we respect the signs, and not the things
represented by the signs. In Sacraments there is a change, not of Substance,
but of use; not of Nature, but of condition. For by these elements consecrated,
there is a signification, obsignation and exhibition of CHRIST and His
benefits. Sacraments are necessary in respect of GODS Commandment, and as they
be means of receiving CHRIST: yet simply, not the defect of Sacraments, but
the contempt of them, does damn a man: If a man would have them, but cannot,
and dies in the desire of them, no doubt he may be saved: But indeed he that
may, but cares not for them, and so departs, questionless as he scorned the
signs, so he shall be deprived of the grace. It is just, that he should miss
of the Kernel that cared not for the Shell, that he should loose the Land,
that contemned the Lease, or Deed; that he should be deprived of CHRIST, the
Bread, and Water, of Life, that regarded not the Water and Bread of CHRIST.
There are two Sacraments, Baptism, and the LORDS Supper: By Baptism we are
admitted into the Church, received into the service of the blessed TRINITY, and
have our sin remitted, though not at first extirped. A man is borne a sinner,
but by Baptism he is made a Saint. A man is, by birth, a limme of the devil,
but by Baptism he is made the member of CHRIST: A man may be newborn, and
not Baptized; but he is not so, if he skorne to be Baptized. There are some,
that make small account of Baptism; but for my self, I make more reckoning of
my Baptism, then of all the riches in the world, as knowing that these can
neither help, nor hurt so much, as the other: and that the comtempt of these
may stand with a man's salvation, whereas the contempt of Baptism is punished
with damnation. By the LORDS Supper we are nourished and preserved in the
Church: In those hallowed signs of Bread and Wine CHRIST JESUS and all his
Merits are signified, sealed up, and exhibited unto every worthy Receiver: For
as there is in an Obligation, or Legal Instrument, an assurance and conueyance
made of money, goods, or lands, from one to another: So in the Sacrament, under
these elements, there is a most sure conueyance and exhibition of CHRIST JESUS
unto every prepared Communicant. And although we take the Bread by it self,
and the Wine by it self, yet we must not imagine that CHRIST is given by
peece-meale; but two signs were ordained to show that we have perfect food in
CHRIST. For it is but an hungry dinner, where there is no meat; and a dry
feast where there is no drink: Now to signify that CHRIST is Meat and Drink
unto us, and that in Him we shall have a full refection, therefore two signs,
one of Bread, which strengthens the heart, another of Wine which allaies the
thirst, and make it merry, were by CHRIST ordained.

Of Communicants.
I Do much wonder at the foolish averseness, and perverse folly of many men,
that make so small account of this Blessed Sacrament, that they must by fear
of Laws be driven to it. They are out of charity, they want good clothes,
they are not yet at leisure; they allege I wot not what, their very excuses
do accuse them. Who bids thee be out of charity? Why art thou not reconciled?
Who requires fine apparel at thy hands? It is a good heart, that is exacted of
thee: Grace, not garments; thy soul within thee, not thy clothes about thee.
And why want thou leisure? Thou have leisure to eat, to drink, to play, to
sleep, to be vain and idle: Why have thou no leisure to feed thy soul, to
refresh thy spirit, to receive thy Savior? Thou have leisure, but it is not
thy pleasure. Thou can not come; nay, thou will not come. Thou can not,
because thou lists not. If thy profit call thee, thou go; if thy pleasures
call thee, thou followest; if thy flesh call thee, thou make have; If thy
companions whistle, thou trudgest: But CHRIST calls thee, thou tarriest, thou
findst excuses; there is a bone in thy leg, thou can not come. Must the
horse be forced to the Manger, must a Sheep be compelled to graze, must the
hungry (and almost starued) Ox be entreated to eat his Hay? Surely thou art
not hungry, thy soul is not a thirst, thou art so maydenly that thou must be
entreated; thou art so wanton, thou must be compelled unto thy food. Yea, but
thy do imagine that thou can have CHRIST without the Sacrament; this is thy
fancy, but thy fancy is no faith: If thou contemnest the Sacrament, thou
contemnest CHRIST: Contempt of the Law does argue contempt of the Lawmakers:
neglect of the ordinance bewrayes neglect of the Ordainer: And he, that will
not receive CHRIST, as He does offer Himself to be received, is like to loose
Him, for ought that can be known: And he, that will not when he may, it is
very probable, when he would, he shall have nay. But thou will hereafter put
off excuses: thou will be wiser, thou will not defer to come. Come then, but
come prepared: Come in charity; for he, that hates a Christian, shall never
be loved of CHRIST, neither shall any man enjoy the LORD, but he, that is in
charity with his servants. What has he to do with the bread of CHRIST, that
contemns the least Member of His Body? Come in repentance, with washed hands
and heart: for these holy things belong not vno Dogs, nor Swine. Come in
humility, acknowledging thy self unworthy of the least crumme upon the LORDS
Table, not relying upon thine own merits, but upon the LORDS mercies, not
upon thine own dignity, but upon His Dignation. Finally come in a good
belief, believing only in the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and that by these outward
things, He with all His Merits, are represented, sealed, and exhibited unto
thee; and not imagining that the Bread is turned into the Body of CHRIST and
the Wine into His very Blood; but knowing that these things do in their
substance still continue, and withal desiring that thou thy self might be
truly transformed and turned into Him, that thou may be able to say with
Saint Paul: I live, yet not I, but CHRIST does live within me.

Of the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist.
THE Bread and Wine in the LORDS Supper is holy Bread, holy Wine, turned in
use, but not in shape, but not in substance, remaining what they were, yet
being what they were not. They have eyes, and see not; ears, and hear not;
touch, and feel not; mouths, and taste not; noses and smell not; reason, and
understand not, which say it is not Bread, it is not Wine, when once the words
of Consecration are pronounced. Yet are they truly, but Sacramentally, the
Body and Blood of our LORD and SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST: Even as the Circumcision
was the Covenant, as the Paschall Lamb was the Passover, As the Rock was
CHRIST. Parchment and the Wax sealed put unto it in a Bond, Lease, or Deed of
Conueyance, wherein is made an assurance of money, goods, or houses, or a
Collation and Conueyance of Lands in Lincolneshire to a man in London, is still
Parchment and Wax, yet more then Ordinary in respect of use; and having these
things in his hand, he can say, here is my money, House, or Land; not that they
are turned into money, Houses, or Lands, but because by them he has assurance,
or an assured conueyance of these things unto him. And so is it with
Sacramental Bread and Wine: Yet here our Assurance is firmer, the Conueyance
is more undoubted: because man may deceive, and the greatness, or malice of
adversaries may oppress; but GOD, who by these things does offer and exhibit
CHRIST and His benefits to us, cannot deceive, will not falsify His Covenant,
but will most certainly perform all His promises; provided that we stand unto
the conditions, to which we are tied: Neither man, nor devil, nor any
creature, can hinder or keep us from receiving CHRIST in the Sacrament, if we
stand not in our own way, and let our selves.

Of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
DIVERSE in the Scriptures have been called by the name of JESUS; as Jesus the
son of Nun: Jesus the High Priest, the son of Iosedeck: and Jesus, which was
called Iustus: But CHRIST has this Name with a maine difference from them all.
For whereas they were no more then men, our JESUS is GOD and Man, in one and
the selfsame Person. They came into the world by an ordinary generation, as
we do now: but He was borne of a Virgin pure, that knew no man. They had not
their name given them expressly by GOD, but by men: but He had His name from
GOD, by the mouth of an Angel, GODS Messenger. They all had need of this
JESUS, that they might be saved by Him, otherwise they had perished all: They
were the sons of men; but He is the Son, the eternal Son of the eternal GOD.
They might be means to save others, especially from exterior dangers and
enemies: but this JESUS, by His own Personal Power, and Merits has saved
all true believers from their sins: He has delivered them from satan, He
has redeemed their souls from death, and has purchased for them the glory of
the Kingdom of heaven. This Name He had from all eternity, as GOD, but He
received it in the womb, as Man: and in, and at, His resurrection He made
manifest the truth thereof most fully. This name of a Savior (for so JESUS
signifies) is a name above all names: For it is the name of GOD, I am (says
he) and besides Me there is no Savior: None of all the Titles of GOD, are so
precious with Him as this of Savior, in which, with his glory, is joined our
salvation. Even the very name of GOD, without this Name, has no comfort in it.
Shut out this JESUS, and GOD is a consuming fire, and there is no dealing with
Him: But in this JESUS, GOD has reconciled the world to Himself, who without
Him is an enemy to it. The name CHRIST (which signifies Anointed) is not
equal unto the name JESUS, for the end is above the means: Now He was
Anointed to be our Savior. Princes are called the LORDS Anointed, but
salvation is of the LORD; that is proper to Him: He, He is the Savior, and
besides Him there is no other. And indeed JESUS is the very name of GOD, but
GOD cannot be Anointed: He that gives all, can take nothing; He is the
Annointer, and is not, nor can possible be anointed. Therefore CHRIST cannot
be the name of GOD: And yet even our JESUS is our JESUS CHRIST, Our Anointed
Savior; which Anointing is spoken of Him, and that truly, as He is Man, and
Mediator, between GOD and man. This JESUS is our LORD, He has bought us with
His Own Blood, and He is far above all other Lords in the world: For other
Lords in case may be disobeyed; but This in no case: Other Lords are by Him,
both as men and as Lords, and both they and their Lordships are subject to
change: but He is immortal, and of His Kingdom there shall be none end.
Other Lords are sinners, and mere men: but He is GOD also, and the Sanctifier
of sinful men. They, if they will be saved, must serve this LORD, and throw
down their Crowns at His feet. Other Lords cannot do, what they do desire,
but CHRIST can. They cannot save all, that follow them, and advance all their
Subjects: But He saves all that trust in Him, and serve Him, He makes them
all Kings and Priests unto His FATHER. And whereas other Lords have their
natural infirmities, and passions, of choler, Melancholy, etc. by which their
servants are sometimes vexed, yea and wronged too: Our LORD is so exquifitely
complete, and absolute, as that He cannot offend, or wrong, any man by any
mean: but is able to give full contentment unto all, and is all things to all
His servants, and in them all.

Of Blasphemy.
TO blaspheme, is properly to hurt, or wrong, one in his name or fame. GOD is
three ways blasphemed: First, when that is denied unto Him, which is His due:
when that is imputed to Him, which belongs not to Him, and when that is
attributed to another, which is proper only unto Him: He blasphemes GOD, that
says GOD cannot save him, or which says GOD is not just, or that He sees not
all secret things, or that He regards not the sighs and tears of his people:
He likewise blasphemes GOD, that says GOD has a body, like a man: or that it
is long of GOD that men do sin. Thirdly, he blasphemes GOD, that says the
devil can make a man, or raise a man, truly dead, to life. He is an evil
man, that will speak evil of his Maker: and sure the heart is not right, if
the tongue speak wrong; He that speaks ill, thinks not well. Doubtless GOD
will not justify the man, that condemns Him; He will not hold him
guiltless, that would make Him guilty; He thinks not well of him, that
speaks ill of Him. GOD has given a tongue to the beast, but the faculty of
speech only unto man; He is very ill requited, when by this tongue His Name
is blasphemed. The tongue was given a man to praise GOD, not to blaspheme and
accuse Him. It is a fearful evil to turn that to evil, which was made for
good: It is a grievous sin to speak ill of GOD with the tongue, which was
made of purpose to speak good of Him: And questionless, if men must give
account (at the judgment) of their idle words, then blaspheming and hurtful
words shall not be forgotten.

Of the Old and New Testament.
THE Old Testament, and the New, for Substance, is one and the same. The Old
infolds the New, and the New unfolds the Old. The New is covered in the Old,
the Old is discovered in the New. The faith in both is one: either one, or
none: For Nature it is the same in both: but in the New it has received light,
evidence, and distinction. There has been an increase of Faith: but how? Not
that new points are added, but the former are amplifyed, and explained. An
infant has all the parts of a man, but these parts by years are enlarged: And
an Oak is contained in the kernel, but time produces all the parts and
branches. Even so the faith of our forefathers before CHRIST, and ours since,
is for Sense and Substance, one and the same, but since it has received his
growth, his evidence, and illustration, but yet in the same kind, sense, and
understanding.

Of Justifying Faith.
IVSTIFYING Faith is that gracious gift, whereby we believe in the justice of
CHRIST for our justification, and look upon him with confidence, who was
lifted up upon the Cross for the cure of our souls, as the Brazen Serpent was
for the cure of the Israelites, being stinged with serpents; that as they by
looking to the brazen Serpent were cured of their bodily hurts, so we by
beholding or fixing our belief on JESUS CHRIST crucified, should not perish,
but have eternal life by Him, being by the grace of GOD in Him, delivered from
all our sins. By Faith then a man's goes out of himself, and goes into CHRIST
JESUS: By faith he forsakes himself, and cleaues unto CHRIST JESUS; By faith
he stands not upon his own righteousness, which is required by the Law, but
desires to be found in the righteousness of CHRIST, which is revealed in the
Gospel: by faith he puts off his own rags, his own wisdom, holiness,
justice, and puts on CHRIST JESUS, and applies him, or at the least would feign
apply Him to himself, as some rich robe, or glorious garment, that being
clothed in his Wisdom, Holiness, and Justice, he might appear in the
presence of GOD His heavenly Father (as Jacob did to Isaac in Esaus clothes)
and so obtain His everlasting blessing: This Saving Faith is a most precious
jewel of the soul, full of comfort and content. Thou can not see GOD, but
thou may behold His Works; This is His Work, that a man believes in His
Son JESUS CHRIST: If then thou do truly believe, thou may be sure that
GOD is in thee, and has taken possession of thee. Would thou know how the
Sun goes in the heavens? Then look unto some true Sun Dyall, in it the
motion of the Sun above appears. So, would thou see how the Son of
Righteousness CHRIST JESUS is affected toward thee? Ascend not on high, scale
not the heavens; but descend into thy self, and examine thine heart for thy
faith; for thy faith apprehends Him, follows Him up and down, and looks
wishly upon Him; Thy Faith eyes Him, touches Him, holds Him, and will not let
Him go. And mark, even as thou by thy faith do apprehend Him, so He by His
favor does comprehend thee: as thou do acknowledge Him, so He does
acknowledge thee: as thou do enter into Him, so He does inuiron thee: as
thou do content thy self with Him, so He delight Himself in thee: as thou
do rest and leave thy self on Him, so He does offer Himself as a prop to
stay and hold thee up. Not that we begin, and He follows; but He
begins, and we follow: even as the Dial follows the Sun, and not it the
Dial; or, as the motion, and turning of a Boat at Anchor, follows the motion
and turning of the water, and not it the Boat: or, as as the dryness of the
Ways, follow the dryness of the Weather, and this that: or finally, as the
Sea follows the Moon, and not it the Sea. By this Faith we hear with
profit, we walk with comfort, we work by charity, we hope for glory, we
enjoy tranquillity, and though we be not justified for the merit of it, yet
are we justified by it, as by that only mean, whereby we behold and hold,
believe and place, our confidence in JESUS CHRIST, who was made unto us, of
GOD, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. So Saint Paul,
knowing that a man is not justified by the works, but by the Faith of JESUS
CHRIST: We also (Paul and Peter) have believed in JESUS CHRIST, that we might
be justified by the Faith of CHRIST, and not by the works of the Law: Because
by the works of the Law no flesh shall be justified. Epiphanius says,
justice is by Faith, without the works of the Law. Chrysostom says, He has
saved us by Faith alone. Theodoret says, by bringing only Faith we have
received pardon of sins. We judge, says Ambrose, according to the Apostle,
that a man is justified by Faith, without the works of the Law. Jerome says,
thou know that thou, as the Gentiles, have found life in CHRIST, not by the
works of the Law, but by Faith alone. To omit many, hear only now Saint
Austen a word, or two: When the Apostle says, a man is justified freely,
without the works of the Law, by Faith, it is not his drift, that when Faith
is received and professed, the works of Justice should be contemned; but that
every man may know it is possible for him to be justified, although the works
of the Law have not gone before; for they follow him, that is justified, and go
not before him, that is to be justified. So then, we for our parts are
justified before GOD only by Faith: but we, and our faith also are justified
before men by good works, as the goodness of a Tree is showed by the fruit,
the goodness of a rose by her sweet odors, the cunning of a workman by his
works. And though Faith be not alone, but very well attended, yet it
iustifies alone: as the eye sees alone, the ear hears alone, the mouth tastes
alone, the legs go alone, but yet are not alone, but are coupled to other
parts of the body. He that has this faith, has all the virtues of a
Christian; he that wants it, wants all: With it a man is something, without it
a man is worse then nothing. A man has all that has himself; he has nothing
that wants himself; but he has himself that has his Savior, and he has
his Savior, that believes in Him, and by the virtue of his faith does seek
and serve Him. It it not faith, but faithlesnesse; not trust but distrust, for
a man to put affiance in himself: I will therefore distrust in my self, that
I may believe in CHRIST: I will despair of my self, that I may have hope in
Him; and I will loose my self in my self, that I may find my self in Him: I
will not distrust in His might, because He is Almighty; nor in His good will,
because He is most merciful, and cries; Come unto me (not ye that are
worthy, but) ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

Of Hope that makes not ashamed.
HOPE is the wishing and expecting of some good to come. True Christian hope,
is that work of the SPIRIT in a true Believers heart, whereby he patiently
waits for those good things, which GOD has promised unto him in JESUS
CHRIST: This hope is certain, and not false; begotten of faith in the promise
of GOD: It is the anchor of the soul, which would be split in pieces with
storms and tempests, and driven upon Rocks and Sands, or loose it self in
the vaste Ocean of this unquiet and sinful world, if it were not preserved
and stayed by Hope, fastened on our LORD and SAVIOVR CHRIST JESUS, who is the
ground of our hope, our staff, our stay, our comfort and contentment. Joy is
the motion of the heart upon some present good, now enjoyed: But Hope is the
hearts expectation of some good to come: Which good the faithful heart does
long and look for; not led thereunto by the evidence of humane sense or
reason, but moved by the evidence of faith, which is the promise of GOD. The
way to come to true Hope, is to have no hope in our selves, but to receive all
our hope from faith in the Word of GOD. For to hope in the creature is to
despair of the Creator: Neither does he truly hope in CHRIST, that does fix
his hope on any thing out of CHRIST. To despair is a grievous sin, for a man
thereby denies the Power of GOD, who is Omnipotent, or His good Will and Mercy,
who will cast away no humble Suppliant, but knows how to alter His Sentence,
if thou can tell how to perform repentance. It is true, desperation does
destroy thousands, but presumption does kill ten thousands. There is no more
dangerous presumption, then for a man to expect salvation by his own deserts,
or to ground his hope of eternity upon his own perfections. His waxen wings
wherewith he soars on high, will not be able to endure the heat of GODS
Justice, but with Icarus he shall most surely fall, and perish in the gulf of
hell. So, it is very vanity for a man to hope for heaven, whiles he is always
(like a Mole) rooting and turning up Mountains of enormities against the
heavens, and laying sin upon sin (as the Babilonians did stone upon stone)
and so threatening heaven with their sins, as they with their Tower. The
sinner may not hope for heaven, but the Saint only; the humble, and not the
proud; the penitent, not the man addicted to his own lusts, and hating to be
reformed. For the promise of Eternal Life is made, not to Infidels, but to
Believers; not to the rebel, but to the penitent; not to the presumptuous, but
to the poor; not to the children of the world, but to the true spiritual,
sons, and daughters of the Church of GOD. Adulterers, Drunkards, worldlings,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of GOD. They cannot be saved, except they
repent, and when they do truly repent, then GOD accounts them no longer
Adulterers, Drunkards, Worldlings, but does forgive them. And as without
repentance they cannot be saved; so without repentance they cannot hope to be
saved. If they look to be saved, and yet run on in their sins, they look in
vain: This their looking being the presumption of fancy, not the expectation
of faith. It is but a castle built in the Air, imaginary: Or like an house of
clay set in the waters. LORD JESUS, thou art mine Hope, mine Honor! I will
begin and end in Thee. I would be found in Thee, and not in Me. I will
desire, seek, and wait for life in Thee, in Thee alone, in nothing else. I
do long, and look to see the face of GOD in the Land of the Living: But it is
because Thou art mine, and I am Thine, and Thine I desire to be, and none but
Thine, for ever and ever. For this hope is not a man's, but a Christians: Thou
art the author of it, not Alam: It is of Faith, not from the flesh: We have it
not by generation, but by Regeneration: Neither can any man be possessour of it
longer, then he continues Thine, even Thine, and none but Thine, ruled of thy
Spirit, and not ouer-ruled of his flesh.

Of holy Charity.
LOVE is an uniting affection, by which the heart is knit unto the thing
beloved, and by which the knot is continued knit, and not dissolved. For as
hatred loses, so love binds: that divides, but this unites; that causes
abhomnation, but this delectation; that contempt, but this contentment. Love,
that is good, has for his object good. As evil, either true, or seeming, is
the object of hatred; so a true, or seeming good, is the object of love. A true
love is fixed on a thing, that is truly good. This is a rare and excellent
virtue; that, which appeaseth GOD to man, and reconcileth man to GOD; that
which made the Son of GOD come down to men, and the sons of men go up to
GOD; that, which ties GOD to us, and our hearts to Him. Knowledge is in the
soul as a Candle in a dark room: yet without Charity, the greatest Clearke
is but an empty bladder; or like a vaste house full of light, but void of
treasure; he may have Learning, but he wants Grace. This holy affection,
makes the poor man very rich, and the want thereof makes a rich man very
poor. With it, a man is as an Angel: Without it, he is even as bad, or
little better, then a devil. This is the soul of all learning, the condiment
of all virtues, the root of all good actions, the ornament of all Christians,
the keeper of true peace, the mother of true obedience, and that, without the
which, a man has nothing, is nothing. A man may have wealth as Nabal, wit, as
Achitophel, beauty, as Absalom, honor, as Haman, strength as Goliath, the
Sacraments, as Judas, and yet be wicked and cast away for ever: But a man
cannot but be good, whose love is sincere and good: And as soon shall the
devil be saved, as a charitable man condemned. But who is this charitable man
indeed? Even he that loves GOD in CHRIST, and every good Christian for CHRIST
His sake. Many will boast of love, as many brauadoes will brag of wealth,
they have not. If to for swear, and swear idly, if to profane the Saboath,
and to contemn sacred Persons, Places, Offices, Acts and Exercises: If to be
stout and sturdy to superious, If to brow-beate, stabbe, quarrel, rail,
threaten, and revenge: If to paint the face, and die the hair, to wear a long
lock, or to abuse our neighbors wife, daughter, or servant: if to rob,
purloine, embezle, or beguile: If to oppress, and grind the faces of poor
people: If to be idle, and unprofitable: If glutting, glouring, pranking,
lying, slandering, flattering, and evil speaking: If these be charity, the
world is full of charity; and such charitable persons, are rife, as the frogs
of Egypt, which would venture into the Kings Court. But if these be not, as
indeed they are not, then may we justly complain, and say: There is men
enough, but few lovers; much enormity but little Charity. Some commend Charity,
but show none; and think they have it, when no fruit thereof appears.
Charity needs none of their praises, but they stand in need to be praised by
Charity, which loves only to be commended of her children. It is true, Charity
it self is not seen, but it is manifested by her operations; as the heart by
panting, as the wind by blowing, as the Air by drying, or as the spirit and
juice of a tree by the apple. And it is as impossible for Charity to be in the
soul without signs, and friuts, as for fire to be without heat, or for
water not to wet them, that touch it, or for the soul to be in the body, and
yet to show no virtue, or comfort, thereof unto the body.

Of Gods Love to Man.
THERE is no man living, which, as a creature, is not loved of GOD the great
Creator; which appears in that He is said to be the SAVIOVR of All, and to
cause the Sun to shine, and the rain to fall, even on the wicked. He loves
Humanity, but hates impiety; the Man-head is beloved, but malice in it is
detested: He likes well of the Nature, but dislikes the sin: That, which is
His, He loves, but that which marres His, He hates: His own Image He loves,
but the deformities thereof, made by man, are altogether displeasing in his
sight. Now when all men had transgressed, and by transgression had made
themselves the children of death, it pleased Him to pass by foam, being tied
to none, and some others to choose in love unto Eternal Life. But what loved
He now? The men, and not their manners; their nature, now under great
corruption, but not corruption it self: Their persons, not their
preuarications. And why loved He them? What moved Him to make that difference?
Surely nothing but His own good Will: Mee^re mercy in Him, no merit at all in
them; His free Dignation, and no dignity or deserts of theirs: His free favor
to them, and no foreseen faith in them. But GOD, that had nothing to love in
a sinner but his Humanity, in a true Saint has also Christianity: then Nature,
but now Nature and Grace too: In Generation the Humane Nature, in Regeneration
a certain Divine Nature. If the devil hate all men, but especially all
Saints; then we may be sure that GOD loves all men, but especially all holy
men: And if the devil hate and pine at the graces of GOD in men; then
questionless GOD loves all His graces, in whomsoever He finds them. O the
riches of the love of GOD unto His chosen! O inexplicable kindness! O
irrecompenfable favor! What is man, that Thou should regard him, or the son
of man, a worm, a wretch, the child of death, that Thou should cast thine
eyes upon Him? When all were fallen, and had deserved nothing but wrath, but
woe, but death, eternal wrath, eternal woe, eternal death; Thy mercy, Thy
mercy, not at all deserved, pittyed some, but did pass by others as
amiable and as miserable as the other. O how unspeakable is Thy love to Thine!
How admirable art Thou in all Thy ways! Even Thine enemies have Thou received
unto mercy; Thou have punished their sins in the Flesh of Thine own Son,
and in Whom Thou do Crown them with grace and glory. O GOD, Thy Love brought
the Israelites out of Egypt, ouerwelmed their persecutors, guided them in the
wilderness, trod down the Nations for them, and brought them into the land of
Canaan: Even so, o LORD, Thy love unto us, redeemeth us from our bondage,
saves us from hell, treads down our enemies, protects and directs us in the
world, and safely brings us into the Land of Promise, the Land of the Living,
where we shall see Thy Face, and enjoy the joys of bliss for evermore. O
LORD Thy love is life, Thy favor is felicity: LORD, let the light of Thy
countenance shine upon me, and grant me Thy love, which Thou bear unto
those, whom Thou love ever, and leauest never.

Of Man's love to God.
LOVE of GOD does knit fast the heart unto Him, makes it delight in Him, and to
be contented with Him. What cause has man to love Him, it is not hard to
conceive, seeing He is altogether good in Himself, and the cause of all good
in, and to him. Are we, live we, understand we? We must ascribe it unto
GOD. Are we men, or are we good men? Have we Grace, or expect we Glory? The
praise belongs to Him. The measure of our love should be unmeasureable, and
the end endless. The heart, wherewith we love Him, should not be half, nor
hollow, but such as He made in us, whole, and undivided, simple, and not
double. How equal is it that man should love His GOD, seeing it is the
substance of His Law, and seeing he is so much obliged to Him for the tokens of
His love to Him. How needful is it, seeing otherwise he cannot love his
neighbor in Him, no nor perform any Act or Office of Religion, pleasingly in
His sight? And how comfortable, seeing it is the work of GODS SPIRIT in him,
and an undoubted effect and token of GODS love to Him, and of his faith in GOD?
And yet it is a wonder to see how rare this duty is amongst us. How sildome
do we think of GOD, or of His service? What capital and foul enormities
are every where heaped up against Him? How usual is it with men to turn His
Grace into wantonness? How do the pleasures and cares of the world deprive
Him of our hearts? How common is the contempt of His holy Ordinances? How great
is the profanation of His holy Day? How customably is His fearful and
glorious Name, vainly used? And how wantonly do men deal with His sacred
Word? What little zeal and courage is there in us for His Glory? Alas, we
talk of love, but demonstrate little. The heart of the lover is rather where
it loves, then where it lives; a man cannot but obey his Lord, whom he dearly
loves, and will make much of any thing, that belongs to that he loves. But
our hearts are buried in the earth, we are ever rooting in the ground, we
have cast off the yoke of GODS Commandments, we are frozen in our dregs,
and make account of any thing rather then that which concerns His Honor:
which does discover our hypocrisy, and witnesses against us that we are
lovers of pleasures, profit, preferments, of any thing rather then of Him: Yet
is there nothing able to do us so much good, as He: Nothing so worthy of our
love, as He: Nothing, to which we are so much indebted, as to Him: Nothing,
wherein we can find so much comfort in the love thereof, as in the love of
Him: Nothing, so well able to ravish our hearts with the delight thereof, as
He is: And no man so regardfull of our love, as He is, and yet stands not
in need of us at all, nor of our love. We desire His love to us, why then
should we not remonstrate ours to Him? We would have our children and servants
love us, it is reason therefore that we should bestow our love on Him, being
our Loving LORD, and gracious FATHER in JESUS CHRIST.

Of the Love of Christ.
CHRIST is our LORD and SAVIOVR, therefore we ought to love Him, as men in
love redeemed by Him, and received into His service. He loves Him as his LORD,
that willingly submits his soul unto His Scepter, and offers himself to be
ruled by His Laws: He loves Him as his SAVIOVR, that relies upon His Merits,
seeks to Him for His Grace, and rests in those means of life and
godliness, which He has ordained in His Church CHRIST is the Husband of His
people, and therefore to be beloved of them, as of His Wife. And those love
Him as their Husband, that wed not their hearts to any other, that keep their
souls chaste for Him, that delight to be under His shadow, and which in their
hearts, say, with the Spouse in the Canticles; Stay me with flagons, and
comfort me with apples; set me as a Seal on Thine heart, and as a Signet
upon Thine Arm: Thy Love is better then wine. If ever our love was deserved of
any, then of CHRIST JESUS; Who became man to bring us into grace with GOD; Who
was poor, to make us rich; Who humbled Himself, to exalt us; Who came down
from heaven, to fetch us from hell to heaven: Who both lived and dyed for us,
that we might escape eternal death, and might obtain Eternal Life. And
finally, because perfection procures favor, and beauty is the Lodestone unto
love: We must needs bestow our love on Him, in whom is nothing but perfection,
nothing but beauty. In Him are all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge
hidden: In Him is the fullness of the Godhead Bodily: He is Fairer then the
sons of men, Grace is diffused in His Lips: GOD has anointed Him with the
Oil of Gladness above His Fellows: He is White and Ruddy, the chiefest of
ten thousand, wholly delectable. LORD JESUS, tie mine heart fast to Thee by
love; sever it from all earthly things, even from it self, that it may be
wedded wholly, and solely unto Thee, unto Thee, and unto none but Thee, and
that for ever.

Of Self-love.
CHRITY begins at home: It is natural for a man to love himself; He that
loves not himself, is unfit to love another: Or how can he take care of
another, that is careless of himself? True self-love is a furtherer of all
virtues, specially of temperance and such other, as concern our selves. For
he, that loves himself truly, wills well, and does well unto himself, and
embraces those virtues gladly, by which he may be mended. There is a blind and
foolish self-love, too too common in the world. You shall have some ravished
with the admiration of themselves; they are the Mountains, all others are but
Mole-hils; all their Geese are Swans; all their virtues are ten-foote long, and
all their actions are good, because they are theirs; all is spoken in Print,
that is spoke by them; they see not their wants, but imagine they have, that
they have not: So they swim, they care not though all do sink; so they may
have, they care not though all besides do want; they will forgive and flatter
themselves in most grievous vices, excusing themselves, extenuating their
faults, and contemning all the admonitions of others. And finally, their
praises of others is very sparing, almost nothing, but they can speak bigly of
themselves, and think nothing well done, but what they do themselves. This is
a pernicious and fearful sin, the madness of the mind, the impediment of
all virtues, the shame of Religion, and the cause of all enormites: He that
loves himself aright, loves himself Holily that is, in GOD, for GOD, and
under GOD: and Justly, that he may be righteous, and that by selfeloue he
proves not himself injust: And Discreetely, not ouerweening himself, but with
wisdom be having himself toward all, as is requisite for him. The good man
that loves himself, as he should, wishes well unto himself, does good unto
himself, agrees with himself, dwells with himself with willingness,
rejoices with himself, where there is cause of joy, and sorroweth with
himself, when there is matter of sorrow; and in brief, does earnestly covet
and labor his own peace, inward, outward, and eternal. On the contrary, a
wicked and profane Athiest, Epicure, and Worldling do not truly love
themselves, but rather hate, and hurt themselves with intemperance, worldly
cares, and other vices: they study not to garnish their souls with spiritual
virtues, but follow riches, pleasures, and preferments, which to wicked men are
never good, but ever hurtful. Neither do they agree well together within
themselves, because their appetite and sensual part does strive against their
reasons, and either they ever labor of a stupifyed, or with a vexed and
unquiet spirit. And hence it is also, that sensual and evil livers, as
drunkards, whoore-mongers, spendthriftes, and such like persons, love not to be
alone, and like not priuacie, and retired thoughts, but frequent Alehouses,
Tauernes, Plays, and seek out voluptuous and boon companions, such as
themselves, because they love not themselves, delight not in themselves, agree
not with their consciences, but are vexed with the remembrance of their vices
and iniquities, disquieted with the fear of punishment, and pinched with the
gripes of an accusing and tumultuous conscience. Briefly, men truly good do
only truly love themselves; but evil men do not love themselves at all, but
either hate, or love amiss.

Of love to our Neighbor.
A GOOD Christian has two things in him to be beloved, Grace and Nature. As
he is a man, we ought to love him; but as he is a good man, we ought to love
him the more. He, that hates a man, loves not his Maker; he, that hates a
Christian, loves not his Master. He that hates either Man or Christian, is
neither Christian, nor Man, but a devil incarnate. Some boast of their love to
GOD, which show no love to man for GOD: This boasting is vain and false, for
he that loves GOD, will love His Image: And certes he that loves not the
child, cares as little for the father. But our neighbor is ungodly,
graceless, roytous, and voruly; Yet must we love him, if not because he is
good, yet that he may be good; if not the man, yet the man-head; if not the
manners, yet the man. Gold is good, though dross be naught: Wheat may not be
thrown away because of chafe; neither will we hate our bodies, because there
are deformities, or diseases in them. Neither will all love serve the turn;
but we ought to love our neighbor in truth, not falsely; in deed, not
verbally; in the faith, not against it; in that, that is just, and not
unrighteously; in judgment, and not undiscreetly; in measure, under GOD, and
not above Him: and constantly, not for a start, as if some ague-fit were on us.
There is very much love in the world, such as it is, but very little Christian
Charity. For this seeks the good of her neighbor, and not his goods: This
loves to give, and not to pull away: This bears much, for bears much, and
rejoices in the truth: This loves a man, not for his greatness, but for his
Graces; not for his birth, but for his New Birth; not for his honor, but for
his Holiness; not for his wealth, but for his Wisdom: and finally for CHRIST
and in CHRIST: for CHRIST, because CHRIST does love him, and bids us love Him;
and in CHRIST, either because he is CHRIST'S, or that he may become CHRIST'S. But
this is the condemnation of men, that the Church, and Her Children are come
amongst them; but men love the world more then the Church, and sinners more,
then Saints.

Of loving, and of being loved.
IT is better to love, then to be loved: for Action is more excellent then
Passion; and the praise of virtue consists in action. To give, is more gracious
then to take: Now in loving there is a gift, in being loved there is a taking.
Honesty is better then Commodity: Now to love is a point of Honesty, to be
beloved is a matter of Commodity. GOD delights more in the love, wherewith he
does love, then in the love, wherewith he is loved: And mothers naturally
rejoice more to love their children, then to be loved of their children, and
like better to do good to them, then to receive good from them. Besides, a man
may be loved of a man with Christian love, and yet be but an hypocrite; but a
man cannot love with Christian love, but he must needs be a Christian. A man
may be loved of his neighbor for GOD, and yet neither love GOD, nor be loved
of GOD: but a man cannot love his neighbor for GOD, but he does much more
love GOD, and is most certainly beloved of GOD. And finally, it is no pain,
but rather pleasure; a gain, but no grace to be beloved: but to love a good
thing well is grace; yea, oftentimes a man must sweat and strive with great
contention (so auerse and tortuous are our hearts by sin) before he can
fasten his affections, and fix his love on spiritual things, which are most
worthy of his love, and remove it from those things, that are rather to be
loathed and forsaken, as noisome, and pernicious to him.

True friendship stands in true mutual love, where love fails, there
friendship falls: But that a man may prove a friend unto another, it is
necessary that he be a friend unto himself: For how shall he will well, do
well, agree well, or dwell well with another, that fails in these things
towrds himself?

But this, as touching love, is worthy observation: that those that do good
turns unto others, do more love them, to whom they do them, then these, that
do receive them, do love those, that do them: Provided that they do their good
turns out of sincerity, not for by-respects. CHRIST loves us better then we
love him: Parents love their children more then their children love them.
Tutors love their Pupils more then they their Tutors. He that receives a
benefit is (as it were) the work and creature of his Benefactour: Now the
worke-man loves the work, more then the work does love the workman: The
creature is deerer to the Creator, then He to it; and the cause loves the
effect more then it the cause. The Usurer is unworthy the name of Benefactour,
because he loves his Debtor for gain, seeking rather to benefit himself in
his Debtor, then his Debtor in him: And to speak properly, as he is an Usurer,
he loves him not: for love seeks not her own good, but the good of him whom
he loves; Now the Usurer seeks his own good only, and leaves his debtor to
look to himself, showing him only a little outward indulgence for a time,
until he may have his debt paid him again with vantage. But indeed to gain
love, and to be counted a Benefactour, is not any way more easily attained to,
then by doing good turns unto men freely, seasonably, unasked, and in
secrecy: but some cannot do a man a good turn, but they must cackle so long
and so loud, that all the world may take notice of it; which argues that they
regard fame more then friendship, and to walk upon the tongues of men, rather
then to live within the breasts of their friends and followers.

Of Faith, Hope and Charity.
FAITH, Hope, and Charity, are three notable gifts of GOD, without the which
it is impossible for any man to be saved, though no man shall be saved for
them. A man shall be saved in them, but not for them; for that, which merits
our salvation for us, that is, redemption from all sin and sorrow, and
fruition of Eternal Glory; that (I say) is not any thing in us, but something
without us: It is not quality, gift, or grace infused, but the Justice of
CHRIST imputed. Faith believes, Hope expects the thing believed, and Charity
Jove's it, linkes the soul unto it. Faith is as the mother, Hope, and Charity,
are her two daughters: Because I believe, therefore I hope, and as I believe,
so I love. Faith believes that GOD is true and faithful in His Word: Hope
waits whiles He show Himself to be so. Faith be gets hope, hope being
begotten preserves faith. Faith beholds, and holds fast the Word of Promise:
Hope looks after the thing that is promised in that Word. Love unites the
heart both to the Word, and to the thing that is promised in it: Hope is the
waiting for a good to come, but Faith believes things past, present, and to
come. I believe that CHRIST was borne of a Virgin, that He now sits at the
right Hand of His FATHER, and that He shall come hereafter to judge the world:
Faith takes CHRIST, and works by Charity; Charity works not by Faith, as
an instrument, but arises from Faith, as from the fountain, whereout it
flows. Christian Faith beholds CHRIST in the Word and Sacraments: But
Christian Charity ties the soul, not only unto CHRIST, but also unto all His
Members, in and for His Name. Love is not caused by hope, but hope rather
caused by love; for because a man does love GOD, therefore he does expect and
tarry, and that with desire and longing, till he do enjoy Him to his fill. And
if he did not love Him, he would not desire and hope to see Him, but rather
fear, and grieve. Finally, Faith, Hope, and Charity, are three excellent
virtues, but Charity is, in two respects, the chiefest. First, because Charity
is profitable to our Neighbors, whereas our Faith and Hope does them no good
at all, were it not for Charity. Secondly, the love, whereby we love CHRIST
and His Members now, shall be continued and perfited in the world to come: but
whereas now we do by faith believe, and by hope expect and desire to see the
face of CHRIST hereafter: Then, when we do see and enjoy Him, this faith, and
this hope are at an end; and whereas here in this life we walk by faith, and
not by sight, and feeling, in the life to come we shall see face to face, and
know as we are known, and want no feeling nor sight of that, that is pleasing
and solacious to the soul. And whereas men hope for that, they see not, how
can they hope for that they see? But GOD shall be seen of His Saints in the
world to come, and their sight shall ravish them with His love, their corporal
and intellectual eyes, then glorified, being as doors or windows to let in
His Love into their hearts, which will most willingly entertain Him, and rest
upon Him, as upon their Center, and sole Contenter.

Of Gods Word.
GODS Word is a Fire, It must be warily meddled with: If thou will not suffer
It to burn up thy lusts, It will burn up thee: if It consume not the sin,
It shall consume the sinner. Art thou a cold? It is fire to warm thee. Art
thou drossy? It is fire to purge thee. Art thou in darkness? It is a fire to
enlighten thee. Is thine heart void of zeal to GOD, or love to Man? It is a
fire to inflame thee? Art thou frozen upon thy dregs, or art thou so hardened
that no impression can be made upon thee? It is a fire to thaw and melt thee.
This Word shall be destruction to him, that will receive no instruction from
It: It will prove his desolation, that makes it not his consolation: It will
condemn thee, if thou will not suffer It to control thee: and if It shall
not help thee, It shall undoubtedly hurt thee. This Word is an Hammer, if It
soften not a man, and make him tender, It will harden him and make him tough:
If It beat not down the sin, it will knock down the sinner: And if the
heretic will not be beaten with It from his heresies, It will beat him down
one day thither, from whence all heresies spring. An hammer hurts not the air
or water, which yields unto it readily, but breaks and bruises that, that
makes resistance. He that resists the Word shall be broken; but he, that
yields unto it, shall receive no hurt. He that would surely break a thing
with an hammer, must not only move the hammer to it with strength; but he
must so lay the thing, that it slide, slip, or shrink not from the blow: so
they, that indeed would have their hearts softened, their proud hearts battered,
or any lust contused, let them apply the Word of GOD unto them closely, and not
leap or shrink aside, when it is ministered and fitted to them. And what
Minister soever brings with him this Fire, this Hammer, entertain It, use It,
apply thy self unto It. If the Fire, if the Hammer be the same, If it be GODs,
receive it with the same affection, though the men be not the same, that bring
it. The Hammer is not the worse for him that holds it, nor the Fire for him
that brings it. The Minister is to be received and honored for the Word, and
not It for him. In brief, the Smith can do nothing without his Hammer and
Fire. Ministers are Smiths, and men naturally are like iron unwrought or
unformed, or rather indeed ill-wrought, and illformed. The Word, that is, the
Law and Gospel, is the Fire and Hammer, by which through divine assistance
they work them, fashion them, and make them fit instruments, and vessels for
the service of GOD in His House, which is the Church. How precious therefore
both to Priest, and people should this Hammer and Fire be in a true account
thereof within their souls?

Of Good-deeds.
SVCH are good works, as are, and are done according to the will of GOD
revealed. For the rule of well-doing is not our wills, who are but servants; but
the Will of GOD, who is our Master, whose will is Just, and the Rule of
Justice, GOD being able to will nothing but right and good, seeing He is
Wisdom, Truth, and Goodness it self. And a thing may be according to His
Will, and yet not be done of him that does it, according to it. A good deed is
ill done, if it be not done for manner as well as for matter, according to the
Will of GOD. For if a man do that that is good, and think it is evil, that
man does sin: Not only because he thinks that evil, which is not evil;
but also, because he judging it to be evil, yet does it. Even as a man may
lie, when he speaks the truth, if he think that is a lie, which he speaks,
when he speaks it. Again, if a man do that whereof he doubts, and is not
persuaded of the lawfulness thereof, he sins: For whatsoever is not of
Faith is sin. And finally, though a man do a thing that is good, yet if he
do it not to GODS Glory, but for his own, or for base respects, and not in way
of obedience to GODS Commandments, he questionless commits a sin. A good
man only can do a good deed: For an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit,
and a corrupt fountain can send forth no wholesome water. Good deeds are
necessary to salvation, as the way to the Kingdom, but not as the cause of
reigning. They are not the causes of salvation, but the works and testimonies
of them that are to be saved. And they are not the matter nor form of faith,
but they are true effects, undoubted tokens, and inseperable companions of true
Faith and of true Charity, if well performed. For Faith and Charity are not
idle and unfruitful, but labourious and full of goodness: And though our
well-doing be no cause of our Blessedness, yet it shall not want a reward, but
as we do abound therein in this world, so shall we exceed in glory in the
world to come: The more we flourish in fruit in this life, the more we shall
flourish in felicity in the life to come. But some have been heard to say,
they can do no good deeds, they have no riches, they are but poor. These are
deceived; thou have not a penny, have thou a prayer? Thou have no goods to
give, have thou good counsel? Thou can do no deeds of comfort, have thou any
words of comfort? Thou have no bread, have thou a blessing? Thy legs are lame,
thou can not go well; thy hands are lame, thou can not work well; have
thou a good tongue, can thou speak well? There is no man so poor, but he
may benefit his neighbor one way, or an other: If any way it is a good deed,
if he do it well. And GOD accepts any thing, a cup of cold water, if there be
no better, the widows Mite, even any thing, hair to the building of the
Tabernacle, a pin to the dressing of his Bride. And suppose a man do a good
deed to a wicked man, yet if he do it not for his wickedness, but either
because he is a man, or that he may win him unto goodness, or show himself a
follower of GOD, who is kind unto His enemies, and does good even to the
wicked, surely he does a good, and shall not loose his reward. And say that a
man should be kind unto some hypocrite, thinking him to be a Saint, because
he could not discern his simulations, being so cunningly carried, yet shall
the benefactor be rewarded of GOD, Who regards his affection, and sees his
heart, and will recompense him according to his love, and not according to the
condition of the party, which did not deserve it. If a man's benesicence
proceeds of benevolence, and be performed in the name of CHRIST to the glory
of GOD, it shall never want a recompense. For GOD is not not iniust to forget
the labor of our love; and as men sow, so shall they reap; as they brue, so
shall they drink. Our gifts shall be recompensed with glory, our pains with
pleasures, our labors with life. Do well, and have well: Live well, and die
well: He that does well to the Servant for the Masters sake, shall be sure to
receive a reward from the Master Himself: It shall never be said that he,
that was kind and loving to the Child, is unkindly and hardly dealt with of
the Father. Let us not therefore be weary of well-doing; for in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not.

Of the knowledge of God.
ALL Men affect knowledge by a certain instinct of nature: How unmanly a vice
then is it to affect the ignorance of GOD, our Maker, Ruler, and Redeemer,
Whose Nature, Beauty, and Perfection does more excel all the world, then all
the world excels the meanest creature that is in it? We study to know the
nature and perfection of things, that are, by far, less worthy to be known:
Yea, sometimes we will search into things forbidden, and sometimes take pains
to know that, which is not worthy of those pains. Except we know GOD, how
shall we take Him alone to be our GOD, and not defile our selves with idols?
Unless we know Him, how shall we love Him, how can we trust in Him, how can
we serve Him? Do men love that they know not? Will a man serve he knows not
whom? Will a man make account of that, the worth or use whereof is unknown
unto him? Or will a man acknowledge and believe in one he knows not? We are
spiritual Priests and Princes, is it for a Priest to be ignorant of his GOD?
Does it become a King to be ignorant of the KING of Kings, who set the Crown
on his head, and put the Scepter into his hand? Even beasts, and birds know
their owners, keepers, feeders, and is it a seeemely thing for man, whom GOD
has made their Lord, to be ignorant of Him, by whom they live, and move, and
have their being, and long of Whose mercies it is, that they are not consumed?
To know GOD rightly is a note of GODS people: They shall all know Me from the
least of them even to the greatest of them, says the LORD: and an infallible
argument of blessedness: This is life Eternal, that they know thee the only
true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST whom Thou have sent, who is very GOD, blessed for
ever. On the contrary, affected ignorance of GOD is the brand of wicked men,
who say unto GOD, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of Thy
Ways: This ignorance exposes a man to the judgments of GOD: whose wrath is
kindled by this sin. The LORD has a controversy with the inhabitants of the
Land, (says Hoseah) because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of GOD
in the Land: My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. This ignorance is
the mother of superstition, and profaneness, and the reason why men fear not
GOD, but are disobedient and vnawfull. Therefore they in Job, that had said in
their hearts, We desire not the knowledge of Thy Ways, say also: Who is the
Almighty that we should serve Him? And what profit should we have, if we
should pray unto Him? If a man be disposed to devotion, yet being ignorant of
GODS Will, he will devise some Will Worship, and foolish ad-inuentions, which
are as pleasing unto GOD, as Lukewarm water to the stomach, as apish
complements to a grave man, or as painting and pranking is to a stayed and holy
Matrone. Besides, the ignorance of GOD makes men do that against the truth, and
the professors of it, which otherwise, it is very likely they would not do.
Ignorance of CHRIST made the Jews to crucify Him, and Paul to persecute Him
in His Members. They shall excommunicate you (says our LORD) yea the time
shall come, that whosoever kills you, shall think he does GOD good service:
and these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
FATHER nor ME: And for the life to come, it shall be no help to say; we
would have served Thee, had we known Thee. But why did you not know Me? For
mine Eternal Power and Godhead are seen by the creation of the world. The
heavens declare the glory of GOD, and the firmament shows the works of His
Hands. But besides the book of Nature, you had the Scriptures, Moses, the
Prophets, and Apostles: besides the world, you had the Church, I sent you my
Messengers, in whom I spoke continually to you, and entreated you to learn and
serve Me. It is evident therefore that ignorance will not serve the turn. For
the LORD JESUS will render vengeance unto them, that know not GOD, and obey not
His Gospel, which shall be punished with everlasting perdition, from the
presence of the LORD, and from the glory of His power. And finally, whereas all
the vanities, pomp, and glory of the world, which we do so much admire, shall
perish with the world: this our knowledge of GOD, begun in this world shall
be perfited in the world, to come. Now I know in part, but then shall I know,
even as I am known. Then a man shall have Light without darkness, Knowledge
without ignorance, Wisdom without folly, Understanding without dullness,
Judgment without error, Reason without perturbation: Then shall all the
Saints see GOD, and serve GOD always, and for ever.

Of Serving God.
IT was well said of a father to his son: Know thou the GOD of thy father,
and serve Him. How shall a man serve Him, that does not know Him? And what will
it profit to know Him, if he do not serve Him? But if men do serve Him,
they shall end their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures: Or if
He try them with the Cross, He will afterward honor them with a Crown.
Their griefs shall end in Glory, their mourning in Mirth, their tentations in
Tryumphes, their vinegar shall be changed into Wine, and though they have
sown in tears, yet they shall reap in Joy. What desire thou in a Master?
Wisdom? His Wisdom is infinite. Greatness? His Greatness is
incomprehensible. Strength? He can do all things, nothing is impossible with
Him. Valor? He is not afraid of death, nothing can dismay Him. Magnificence?
He is the LORD of Hoasts, clothed with Glory and Honor: He covers
Himself with light, as with a garment, and spreads the heavens like a
curtain. He makes the clouds His Chariot, and walks upon the wings of the
Wind. He sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof
are as Grasshoppers. He brings the Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges
of the earth, as vanity: His garment is white as snow, the hair of His Head
like pure wool, His Throne like the fiery flame, and His Wheels as burning
fire: Thousand, thousands Minister unto Him, and ten thousand thousands stand
before Him. Would thou have a Master rich? The earth is the LORDS, and all
that is therein, the round world, and all that dwell within it. One that can
advance thee? Promotion comes neither from East, nor West, nor South, nor
North, but from GOD, Who throws the proud from his Pinacles, raises the
needy out of the dust, and lifts up the poor out of the dung, that He may
set Him with Princes, even with the Princes of His people. Or One, that is kind
and loving, patient and compassionate? The LORD is gracious and merciful, slow
to anger, and of great mercy. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear
Him; He will hear their cry and save them. Men will serve men, specially such
as may do them good, or defend them from harm: Why then should we not much
more willingly serve GOD, who is able to save a man, though all would destroy
him, and to destroy him, when nothing can save him? If He bless, who can
curse? If He curse, who can bless? Sometimes a servant serves a Master, who
grows weary of him, because he thinks he may prove costly to him. Many
Masters having served their turns shake off their servants, as a dog does
water, or as a man would do burres: and a good servant may sometimes wait
long, and get little: But GOD never forsakes, or turns out His servants: He
lets them not serve Him unregarded, but as they honor Him, He honors them:
And the more they serve Him, the freer they are in this world, and the greater
rewards they shall receive of Him in the world to come. And it is to be
observed that young folks usually do give themselves to be servants of men:
Why then should they not give themselves to the service of GOD, whom to serve
is indeed to reign, and in whose service that may be gotten which cannot be
found in the service of any mortal man? O that we would remember our Creator
in the days of our youth, and inure our necks to His yoke, whiles we are
fresh and tender! But what must be the Rule of our service? Surely, not our
wills, who are but servants, but His Will, who is our Master, which he has
revealed to us in His Word, to which we ought to conform and apply our selves
infeare and humbleness, indeuouring to obey Him in all His commands,
sincerely, cheerfully, and to our end; so shall we be sure to dye in His
grace, and to be raised up from the grave of death to possess the glory of
Eternal Life.

Of the Sower and his Seed.
THE Sower went out to sow. Every true and faithful Minister of CHRIST JESUS
is a Sower, GODs Word is his Seed: Man's heart is the ground that should receive
it. The Word is a very rare and admirable Seed, altogether matchless. For by
it men are made Christians, sinners are made Saints, dead men are made alive:
From it all manner of virtues spring, and with it are nourished. And were it
not for it, the whole world, and even the Church it self, would be worse then
a wilderness, and turned into Sodom and Gomorrah. But as it is in vain to sow
Seed in the fire, air, or water, or any where, but in the earth, which is in
the middle of the world: and that it may prosper well, the ground must be
quiet, not troubled, or tossed, nor continually trodden on, and both it and the
seed to be cast into it must be pure and good, not mingled, or corrupt. So it
is bootlesse to sow the Word in the ears only, or in the eyes, or
understanding, and memory, or indeed any where, if not in the heart, which is
in the midst of a man: And that it may thrive and flourish, the heart must be
quiet, and not disturbed or tossed with the storms and tempests of fleshly
passions: It must be cleansed of noisome and stinking weeds: It must not be
trodden under foot and continually walked upon by wordlly cares, carnal
desires, and foolish fancies, which keep a great coile, and are always
trotting up and down in worldings, belly-gods, and natural men: and the seed
must be sown purely, and not mingled with the tares and darnell of heresies
and errors. A Ship cannot sail without Sea-roome, and seed cannot thrive
without Earth-roome; No more can the Word without Heart-roome. If the ground
receive not the seed into it, and cherish it, and give it scope to root it
self in it, the seed cannot prosper, and come to perfection. So the Word of
GOD thriues not, except the heart receive it meekely, cherish it lovingly, and
give it room to root it self thoroughly. Drunkenness and gluttony do drown
this Seed; covetousness and worldly cares do choke it; unchaste desires do
scortch and burn it; rage and contumacy repel it; hatred and malice pinch and
bite it; hardness of heart and double mindedness will not suffer it to root
well. Every man would have his ground good; yea what is there that a man would
not have to be good? his wife, his child, his servant, his friend, his fellow,
his apparel, his house, his horse, his dog, he would have all good, and
shall himself be naught? Shall the heart, which is the only seed-plot of the
Word, which is able to save his soul, shall it be evil, and suffered to be
evil, and ouergrowne with evil weeds? Why is it that the rain falling, and
the Sun shining upon a well ordered Garden makes it sweet and flourishing,
but upon some other piece of ground, and it brings out nothing but Moss and
Weeds? The fault is in the ground, not in the Sun or Rain. So one man is
benefited by the Word, it takes well, and brings forth fruits in him; and
another does not reap any good by it, it proves not in him by reason of his
vncapablenesse, and wicked lusts, that will not give way unto it, but makes him
to resist it and rebel against it. A man may set or sow in our fields, whiles
we sleep, or though we would not: But the Minister cannot sow the Word of
GOD in our hearts, if we snort in sin, if we be regardlesse of the Word, and
will not receive it. Seed may be picked out of the ground, and eaten of birds,
whether a man will, or no: his corn may be burnt, his plants may be stolen,
or pulled up, and broken down, though he would not; But we and the Word, that
is sown or grafted in us, cannot be separated against our wills (our Bibles
may be taken from us by force, but the Word ingrafted in us cannot be taken
from us against our will) the birds of hell cannot steal it from us and pick
it out, except we our selves be willing: if ever we and it do part, we must
thank our selves. Seed sown in the ground after a time comes up, and
flourishes for a time, but at length it decays and withers. For this is the
nature of seed; it is partly turned into the ground, and turns the ground
partly into it: It turns, and is turned; it suckes, and draws to it a
certain nurriture out of the ground, at length shootes out, grows up, and
increases a certain space; then in process of time it decays, and at
length dies. But the Word does otherwise: For the Word being sown in the
heart, that entertaines it, takes, thriueth, comes up, and bears fruit: It
is not turned, but it turns the heart; It is not corrupted, but rather
corrupts and kills the evil qualities, that are within us: It it is no
whit turned into man, but it rather turns a man into it, and works him to it
will; It suckes no nourishment from man, but it affoords strength, and comfort
unto man; and it never decays of it self, It dies not, neither can it be by
any means rooted up or taken from us, but by our wills. We yielding consent
thereto. If ever it fail and die, if it be parched and dried up, it is long
of us, and not of it. There is no plant, which time kills; Nature has
appointed it a time to live, and a time to die; be the ground never so good,
the years never so seasonable, the heavens never so benign, yet it must decay
and die. But if the Word be planted in a good and honest heart, it cannot be
rooted out, nor perish; except the ground prove barren and naught; except a man
do wax weary of the Plant, unless a man would be rid of it, it will not
away, but will grow up with him, and will save his soul by the blessing of
GOD. This Seed is at this day scattered in all places amongst us, yet it takes
but badly in the most: The Seed is good, but the ground (as it seems) is for
the most part naught: That is the only good ground, which receives it gladly,
gives it free passage willingly, and brings sorth the fruits thereof
patiently. Men never more delighted in goodly Gardens and Orchards, in variety
of fruits and flowers, then at this day: But without doubt there is none of
all their Seeds or Sets comparable to this. For this brings fruits of all
kinds, that are good; Fruits, of which a man cannot surfeit; Fruits, without
which a man is more miserable, than a very beast; Fruits, for the which a man
shall be crowned with life eternal; Fruits, which themselves are fruitful,
one fruit brings forth another without the corruption, loss, or lessening
of it self. And whereas all their feeds, are not able to save the body from
death, this Seed is able to save the soul from hell, and to give a man
assurance that his dead body also shall be raised up from death to life. Their
seeds, and their plants, and flowers, do replenish and beautify their grounds;
but this Seed and the fruits there of do fill and garnish the soul. Those,
if they prosper, do commend the soil; but this, if it thrive, does commend
the soul: They may show who is rich; but this, and the fruits thereof declare
who is Religious: They may perhaps tell who is wealthy, great, and glorious in
the world; but These point out a man, that is wife and good, and endued with
the Grace of GOD. Finally, a man may do well enough, as touching his soul,
though he should want or refuse other seeds: but the refusal and lack of
this Seed is very dangerous. He that contemnes or puts away the Word of the
LORD shall undoubtedly perish, without repentance. Yea, and if we be gotten by
it, what shall become of him, that is without it?

Of Ignorance.
IT is better to be ignorant, then to err: Simple ignorance is better then
indiscreet knowledge. Ignorance a bad mother, has two as bad daughters,
Falsehood, and Doubting; that is the more miserable, but this the more to be
pitied: that is the more dangerous, but this the more dolorous. Affected
ignorance of that which a man should know, does double the finne. For it is one
to be ignorant, and another, and that worse, to affect it, and to be pleased
with it. It is no small matter for a man to know that he does not know: For it
is the way to get knowledge, to know that a man does want knowledge. None prove
ranker fools, then they that think they have all wisdom. Many things worthy
to be known, are not known; either because men care not to know them, or
else because they think they know them, when they know them not. He that is
the best, and knows the most, will ingenuously acknowledge that he knows not
many things, which he ought to know, and that there are many things worthy to
be learned, which yet he has not learned. A wise Scholar will not so much
content himself with what he does know, as enquire after those things which
he does not know; not blessing himself with what he has learned, but
endeavoring to learn what he has not learned. He that sees the light,
knows how to judge of darkness: But he, that is blind, cannot judge of
colors. A blind man (they say) swallows many a fly. Ignorance is the mother
of superstition; but true devotion affects knowledge. It is an evil not to
know what is lawful to be done, as to do that, which a man knows should not
be done. When a man knows not GOD, he knows not how to worship Him; and
when he knows not himself, he knows not how to behave himself. From the
ignorance of GOD comes despair; from ignorance of ownes self arises pride,
and foollish philauty: The ignorance of our selves is the beginning of sin,
the ignorance of GOD is the consummation of sin. He commonly knows most,
that knows he is ignorant of much: He knows but little, that thinks he is
ignorant but of little: But he knows just nothing, that imagines he knows
all, and is ignorant of nothing. It is an easier punishment not to be able to
live, then living not to be able to know things needful to be known. It
were better to die being furnished with knowledge, then to live being fraught
with ignorance: It were better to have knowledge, and to die like a man, then
to be an ignorant sot, and to live like a beast.

Of Idols.
AN idol is nothing. Something it is in his conceit that does adore it; but
indeed it is not that which he does think it is. And because it is nothing, it
can do neither good nor hurt. Nothing can do no good. Some thing cannot come
from nothing: And nothing can do nobody hurt. Nothing can do no hurt to him,
that knows no thing to be nothing: Yet this nothing hurts him, that thinks
it something; not because it is in nature some thing, but because he thinks
it something, when it is nothing; and worships nothing in steed of something.
The idols of the Heathen had eyes, and saw not, ears and heard not, noses and
smelt not, hands and felt not; and they, that made them, were like unto them,
and so were all they that trusted in them. That is, they lackt their senses, or
else they might have easily discerned that they were but statues, and standing
vanities. But Popish Wafer-idol has no eyes at all, no ears at al, no nose at
al; no hands at al, and such are they that make it and adore it: For if they
had their senses, they might perceive it were a piece of bread. Of a truth,
LORD (said Hezekiah) the Kings of Assyria have laid waste all the Nations, and
have cast their Gods into the fire: for they were no Gods, but the works of
men's hands, therefore they have destroyed them. If it be possible for this
Romish Wafer-God to be thrown in the fire, and that it should be destroyed
of men, yea of mice, as it is, by the same reason it does appear, that it is
no God, but the work of men's hands. Saint Jerome writes that at the time,
that the Virgin Mary fled into Egypt with our SAVIOVR, all their Idols fell
down, and were defaced, and that their Oracles ceased. And Commestor likewise
says that upon our LORDS Birthday, the Temple dedicated by the Romans to the
Goddess Peace, in Rome fell all in pieces to the ground.

Of the punishments of sin.
SIN is a thing so odious unto GOD, that it cannot escape unpunished. Even the
SON of GOD must dye, rather then that sin should go unpunished: But it is
worth noting how GOD does fit his punishments to the sin. Because the
Gentiles ((...)) approved it not, judged it not profitable to acknowledge GOD,
but reprobated Him, therefore He delivered them up ((...)) to a roprobate
mind, and void of judgment, that as they had neglected and dishonored Him,
so they should neglect and dishonor one another. The Sodomites sinned with
fiery lusts, and were destroyed with fire and brimstone: Their sin was
unnatural and rare, and their punishment was unusual, and very terrible to
nature. Nadab and Abihu sinned with fire, and were consumed with fire.
Adonibezeke had cut off the thumbs and great toes of seventy Kings; so the
people of Judah cut off his. As thy sword (said Samuel to Agag) has made
women childelesse, so shall thy mother be childelesse among other women, and
so he hewed him in pieces before the LORD in Gilgal. Lucian, as like a dog
he was ever barking against Christian Religion, so by GODS judgment he was
devoured of dogs. Alladius a Latin King counterfeited lightening and
thundering, by an artificial devise, that his subjects might take him for a
God: but it came to pass that his house was fired with true lightening, and
overthrown with floods and foul weather, and so he perished, being burnt and
drowned all at once. Bladud the son of Lud, a Necromancer, made himself
wings, and assayed to fly, but the diuill forsook him in his journey, and so
he fell and brake his neck. Olaus Magnus tells of a Pyrate called Otto, who by
the devils help would to the sea, and raise up storms to drown his enemies,
but at last was drowned himself. Picus Mirandula says, there was a coniurer
in his time, who as he had the society of the devil, so he was carried
clean away with the devil, and never heard of after. Pliny writes how
Cornelius Gallus dyed in the very act of filthiness. Anacreon a drunken An.
Dom. 1346.
Poet, was choked with the husk of a grape. Popiel a Polonian King, and an
Vncle-murtherer, used ordinarily amongst his other oaths and cursings this
also, If it be not true would rats might devour me, and was accordingly set
upon with an Army of rats, which fallyed forth of the dead bodies of his
Uncles, and afterward devoured him to the bones, notwithstanding any means
used to the contrary. So those three, that had bound their lying accusation of
Narcissus with a curse, were met within the like. One said, if I lie, I pray
GOD I may perish by fire, and his house being set on fire extraordinarily, he
and his perished in the flames. The second said, if I speak any thing but
truth, I pray GOD I may be consumed with some filthy disease, and so he was.
The third seeing GODS judgments upon his companions, confessed their
wickedness, and lamented with such a flood of tears, that he wept out both
his eyes. But among all judgments those are most fearful, when GOD punishes
one sin with another, one wicked act or habit with an other, and wicked acts
with wicked habites, and contrariwise. See how He punished Adams pride with his
eating of the fruit forbidden: David's adultery with murder: Achitophels
treason with selfe-murther: Judas covetousness with treachery, and that with
desperation. The heathen, because they turned the truth of GOD unto a lie, and
served the creature, forsaking the Creator, therefore GOD gave them up unto
vile affections. And the Apostle prophesying of the followers of that man of
sin, says that, because they received not the love of the truth, GOD shall
send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies: All which does show
how loathsome sin and sinners are in the sight of GOD, and should stir us
up to vomit it up as poison, and to fly from it, as from a Serpent.

Of Repentance.
TRVE and sound repentance is a turning from vice to virtue, from evil to
Good, from the devil to GOD. Repentance is the change of the whole man, and
not of half. The judgment sanctified by the SPIRIT must condemn the evil,
the eyes of the understanding being opened to discern it, and approve the
contrary good; the will must will the good, and nill the evil: The affections
must hate, fear, and abhor the evil, and love, like, and delight in good;
and the conversation must not be an exercise of evil, but an open forsaking
of it, and a practice of the contrary good: First therefore a true Repenter
must see and understand his sins, by considering himself and his ways by
the Law of GOD, which shows both good and evil: For if a man see not his
faults, how shall he condemn, confess, and fly them? Or if he view not
himself in a true glass, how shall he see his true complexion? And if he
try not his actions and cogitations by a true Rule or Touchstone, how can he
truly discern their irrectitude, and hypocrisies? Yet because after our
examination sin may lie hid unseen in one corner, or other, therefore to
show our hatred of sin, and that we think not we have all light in these
toodarke houses of mortality, it behoues us to pray that GOD would forgive us
our secret sins: He wants light, that thinks he has all light; and is in
darkness, that thinks no darkness is in him; and no man further from
perfection, then he that thinks he sees all his imperfections. Secondly,
when a man sees his sin to be sin, he must yield it is sin, he must
acknowledge it, and not deny, lessen, nor defend it. Sin defended is
increased; The defense of sin seen is even death to the sinner that defends
it. And how does a man repent of that, which he labors to maintain? Si homo
peccatum non agnoscit, Deus non ignoscit: If a man, when he sees his sin
prohibited, yet will not acknowledge and yield it is sin, but will plead for
it, excuse and color it, questionless he will not leave it, neither will GOD
leave him unpunished. Thirdly, when a man discernes his sin, and acknowledges
the vileness of it, let him enter into judgment with it, and condemn it: For
except he do condemn it, GOD will not pardon it. If he condemn not it. it
shall condemn him. Unless he adiudge it unto hell, it will debar him of
entrance into heaven. Fourthly, let a man finding himself guilty of sin
arrest, arraigne, accuse, and condemn himself, confessing his sin freely
unto GOD, and exclaiming against himself unto GOD, saying; I have sinned, I
have sinned grievously against thee. I deserve nothing but confusion, I am
unworthy of thy favor, I am unworthy to be counted, or called thy Son, Thy
Servant. Except a man will arraigne, indite, and condemn himself, he shall
not be able to stand unconfounded before his Judge; either he must condemn
himself, or he shall be condemned of GOD. Neither is a man in deed fit to
desire absolution, that finds not himself worthy of condemnation: Neither is
he prepared to sue for grace, till he have condemned himself as a graceless
wretch. Fifthly, let him nill it, hate it, loath it, be afraid of it, and be
sorry for committing it, even because it is an offense of GOD, his gracious and
loving Master. For a man does not indeed repent, except his sins, which
before were sweet unto him as honey, be now in his taste as bitter as gall:
except he loath them, as before he loved them; except they be now painful,
as before they were pleasing; and affect him now as well with dolor, as they
tickled him before with delight. Finally, let a man crave pardon of it of GOD,
and forsake it in his practice, and addict himself to those good duties, that
GOD requires of him. For GOD grants his pardon to them that beg it: And
though many men will scornefully put off a beggar, yet GOD gives his alms to
none but beggars: But with what face dare a man beg pardon of a sin, he
means not to forsake? Therefore if he will have GOD forgive it, he must
forsake it. Except he let it go, GOD will let him go; but let him give sin
his dismission, and GOD will grant him his remission; spare not thy self, and
GOD will spare thee. Cease from thy sin, and do^ that that is pleasing in the
sight of GOD, and GOD will be thy GOD, thy saving GOD for evermore. O
repentance, what shall I speak of thee? By thee sick men are cured, wounded
men are healed, dead men are raised, health is increased, Grace is preserved,
the legs are strengthened, the eyes are restored, sin is abandoned, virtues
embraced, the mind illumined, the heart comforted, the conscience quieted, and
the life adorned. We sin daily, so we should repent daily; and as we fall,
so should we rise. To sin is not so dangerous, as to live in sin. If a
breach in a sea-wall be not stopped in time, it will both wax bigger, and
endanger the dry Land. If a Ship continually let in water, and be not
continually pumped out, it will sink her. If a Mole be suffered to run in a
Meadow, she will spoil it. If a sword be let rust in the scabberd, the rust
will mar either one or both. So if we stop not the breaches and holes made
by sin in our souls, it will sink them: If we kill not that Mole, it will
waste us; If we skoure not our selves from that rust by true repentance, it
will consume us both soul and body. Alexander Seuerus made an act that none
should salute the Emperor, that knew himself a Thief; so no man should
presume to profess, or speak to CHRIST JESUS; no man should dare to put up
his suits unto GOD. that by sin robbes GOD of his glory, and continues in it
without repentance. For GOD hears not sinners: If I regard wickedness in
mine heart (says the Psalmist) GOD will not hear me: But GOD hears the
desire of the poor. The righteous cry, and the LORD hears them. The LORD
hears them, that are of a contrite heart: His eye is upon them, that fear
him: He will also hear their cry, and save them: And they fear Him, that do
repent of sin, and turn unto him. For the fear of the LORD is to hate
evil, as pride, arrogance, and the evil way, and by the fear of the LORD men
depart from that, that is naught. Neither is it enough to forsake some
notorious and grievous offense; but even all, all without exception of any;
all, all are serpents, poison, and pollutions. One hole in a ship vnstopt, one
breach in a wall vnrepaired, one wing belimed, one claw taken in the snare, may
in danger and loose all: so but one sin known and cherished, discerned and
not dissmissed, one faculty, one affection, but one intrapped and captiuated of
a sin espied, and yet beloved, even but one is able to destroy the soul, to
damn the whole man, both soul and body: Yet though sin be very dangerous,
and continuance in it more, yet how usual is it with us to delay our
repentance? Tomorrow, next week, ere long, next year, or before I dye: Yet a
little sleep, a little slumber, anon, one hour longer, one half hour, a
minute. O LORD, how unwilling are we to rise, being once laid down! Being
once fallen a sleep how loath are we to be wakened! being sick with a
pleasant frenzy, how, how displeasing a thing is it to come into our wits
again! And to see our madness, we that know not whether we shall live an
hour longer, no not a minute further, yet we will promise to our selves a
day, a week, a month, a year, old age. Yea we will live in a state, in
which we would be loath to die. Away, away with these delays, let us redeem
the time, which taries no man's pleasure. Let us repent now, that we may have
our pardon now, let us live like Saints, least we die like devils: Let us
leave our sins now, now, whiles we have time to sin. For if a man will not
leave sin, till he can sin no longer, sins leaves him, and not he them.
He that will not part from his sin, till his soul be ready to part from
his body, it is to be seared that he parts not with sin, but his sin with
him, and that he is not willing to let go his sin, as long as he is able to
keep himself. O LORD preserve me from the deceipts of sin: Hide Thy face
from my sins, and put away all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart,
o GOD, and renew a right spirit within me. Show me the way that I should
walk in, and stay my steps in thy paths, that my feet do not slide.

Of perseverance in the Faith.
THE Faith is a peerless Jewel once given to the Saints, never to be left
or lost: Without perseverance in it neither the fighter obtaines a victory, nor
the Victor his Garland. Take away perseverance, and sortitude has no praise,
weldoing has no reward, and a good belief no favor. Not he that began
well, but he that holds out to the end, he shall be saved. He that is
faithful to the end of his life, he shall enjoy the Crown of Life, But they,
that withdraw themselves, shall perish: Thou destroyest all them (o LORD) that
go an whooring from thee. But what will thou do to persevere in the faith?
First, intend and purpose it. Secondly, pray earnestly for it, and trust not to
thine own strength. What is man, if GOD forsake him? A Reed, a Rush, a Leaf,
a Shadow, a Bubble, a Something Nothing. Thirdly, make nothing an Article of
thy Faith, whereof there is no warrant in the Word, and professing that, which
is indeed a truth, be able to prove and show it out of the Word. I suppose
many would have stood out for the truth in Queen Mary's days, which did not,
had they been acquainted with the Scriptures, and seen them speaking for it.
But he, that shall profess Articles of the true Faith, and be not certainly
persuaded in his heart by testimonies of the Word, that they are true,
doubtless this man (except greater grace befall him) will not be able to
endure the tyrants sword. What? Shall a man cast away his life, loose his
liberty, undo wife and children, forsake all pleasures, profits, and
preferments, and that for a faith, which he can show no ground for? Though
there be a ground, yet if he see it not, if he be not sure of it, he will
forsake his ground, and for fear give out. Finally, receive the faith, for the
faith sake, even because it is the good Word of GOD, wholesome, true, and
saving: And embrace it not for any external respects about it, as riches,
honor, prosperity, liberty, or numerositie of professors. For if we follow it
for these things, then, when they are removed, we shall forsake it; even as
ravens do a karcase, when the flesh is eaten up, and as false-hearted persons
do their friends, when their wealth is gone, and their state subverted. If a
Master take liking of a servant, because he sees him faithful and quick,
then will he like him still, whiles he perceiues those virtues in him. If he
take him for his youth or beauty, then when these things fail, he will wax
weary of him. If an Husbandman love and esteem of a piece of ground because it
is fruitful and pleasant, he will love and make account of it, during the
delicacy and fertility thereof. The Faith of CHRIST is no changling, one and
the same for ever: if we receive and follow it simply for it self, because it
is true, good, and needful, then except we strangely change our selves, which
GOD forbid, we shall still embrace and follow it: but if we receive it for
the favor of men, for honors, riches, credit, or because we would not be
out of the fashion, then when these things shall be separated from the faith,
and when the confessors of it shall be dishonored, impouerished, disgraced,
imprisoned, Martyred, then, then we shall renounce it, and give it our
unfriendly farewell. For our heart will cleave to the things it takes delight
in, and will follow no thing longer, then those things do follow, for which it
followed it. I doubt not but that some, which knew our Religion to be the
truth, would have openly acknowledged it, and not have renounced it, in those
Marian days, but that they received and professed it before, not because it was
true and holy, but because preferment, ease and liberty went with it, and the
sword was for it; and when they saw the sword turned against it, and fire
threatened, they turned likewise, and set fire on their faith. A bellygod will
always forsake GOD for his belly. The shows of Hypocrites and
trencher-friends, are but as the light of Meteors, the guilt of pot-sheards,
the paint of harlots, and themselves as vapors, summer-birds, or houses of
reed, which will endure neither wind nor fire; or much like whoores, which will
show love whiles a man has money and means to content their humors; but these
things and their love must die together.

Of Humility and Pride.
WE need not define humility, but rather show it. It is an excellent virtue,
and very comely for us, that are worms, ashes, shadows. Me thinks the
pollutions of our birth, the miseries of our life, and the putrefaction of us
ensuing death, being well considered, should make us truly humble. But
besides, he whom. GOD will honor, must be humble; For GOD resists the
proud, but gives grace to the humble. A Bucket is not filled except it be let
down low in to the Well: An house is not strongly mounted, unless the
foundation be laid low. A Tree sends down his roots low, that he may shoot
up his branches high. Mountains are dry and barren, when the Vallyes are well
watered and very fertile. Trees stoop most, that are most fruitful. The door
of Life is strait and low, a man must stoop and not swell with pride, or else
he cannot enter. This pride is a miserable vice loathed of all men, except the
proud; yea, neither can one proud man endure another. There was never any pride
safe, though never so strongly guarded. For devouring all things to uphold her
self, she depriues her self of love, and is bereaved of all means, which may
defend it. Pride will have a fall. Pride was bread in heaven, but she was
thrown out quickly, and was never so happy as to be received in again:
Other vices strive only to be; but pride would corrupt virtues and good
works, that they might not be. If a man do good deeds and be proud of them,
he has lost his praise: If he have Nobility, beauty, strength, riches,
credit, learning, wit, valor, gravity, humanity, virginity, and be proud
thereof he has lost the grace of all these things, and his reward with GOD.
Euagrius being asked what was a proud heart; answered, it was virtues fan, a
cisterne without water, and an Inn of Thieves. There are some so ambitious of
promotion, that they cannot tarry opportunity, but will forcibly clime up,
though sometimes it be to their greater fall. Some, when they are got up
themselves, pull up the ladder after them, that no man shall come up after,
except they list. Some, so they be uppermost themselves, are well content with
any, but love not any should be above them. Some perceiving a man to have some
singular parts in him, far beyond their own, will to their utmost keep him
under, fearing least his light should put out theirs, or that if he were any
body, they should be as no body. It is not unusual with sundry sorts of men by
their diet, and rich apparel, and fair appearances to ^^guile the world. One,
to be counted a better man then he is, will ruffle it out in bravery: Another
will be a Subsidie-man, to shift a while with his Creditors, or to be reputed
some body, being no body. Another to draw eyes unto him will turn Pea-cocke,
and in colors put down the Rainebow. Pambo spying a certain woman flaunting
it in very sumptuous apparel, fell a weeping, and being asked why he wept so
much, answered for two causes; one, the destruction of this woman; an other,
because I (quoth he) which profess my self a Christian, do not so much study
to please GOD by innocence of life, as this woman desires to please men with
her vanity. Another will vent his pride in rags, hunting after the praise of
men, being great or rich, but sick of vain glory, thirsting to be reputed
humble and contemning the world, because he keeps not state, as men commonly
will. Antisthenes may glory more in his worm coat, then a modest man will in
costly garments: For pride lies in the heart, and can show it self as well in
rags as in roabes. Diogenes seeing certain young men of Rhodes very richly
clad, with laughter said, this is nothing but pride: Afterward seeing the
Lacedaemonians in ill apparel; This is (quoth he) another kind of pride. The
man saw that pride did not always show it self in bravery, and garish
appaparel, but sometimes also in very beggary, and base array, whiles a rich man
being vainglorious will affect to go in course or base apparel, thereby
hawking after the praise of men. Others, because they would appear more lovely
then they are, are wont to paint their faces, being either ashamed, or weary of
the faces that GOD and Nature lent them. It is true, nature may be corrected,
but that nature must be plaistered, that I find not. The sinful soul may
be amended and refined, but that a new face should be given it, when the old
manners and dispositions are retained, and that a man would make a glorious
profession, where he shakes not off his inward rebellions, this is nothing but
hypocrisy and vain glory: So a man having a bad complexion of body, or color
of face, may lawfully by Art, or Industry, alter it, if he can, and make it
better; but to lay a plaster on his face, to lit and paint his skin, or hair,
that he may seem better colored, then he is indeed, his complexion being
nothing bettered, but rather waxing worser, this is very vanity, nothing but
pride and cousenage. Phillip King of Macedony had made one of Antipaters
friends a Judge: but understanding he did use to die his head and beard, he
displaced him again; saying, there was no reason why he should be trusted in
an Office, seeing he was not trusty in his hair: It being likely that he that
would use deceit in coloring his hair, where there was no great gain to be
gotten, would much more use deciept in his Office, where deceit sometimes
brings great commodity. I have heard a fellow say sometimes, he cares not for
any man, he fears no man's displeasure: What does this discover, but pride, and
folly, foolish pride, and proud folly. There is no man almost, but he may do
the best man good, or the greatest harm. Has not a fly choakt a man? was not
a rascal the death of the great French King? And yet the fellow fears no
body, cares for no body. When pride is in, the wit is out: They say, when they
spleen swells, the body pines, and whiles a caske is full of wind, it is void
of wine: So we may truly say, the soul prospers not, virtue is in truth a
stranger, whiles the heart does swell with pride, and abounds with arrogance
and selfeconceitednesse. In one word, there are none better then the humble,
there are none worse, then are the proud; and as honor follows the humble, so
perdition waits upon the proud.

Of Hearing and Speaking.
IT is good counsel, which Saint James does give; Be swift to hear, and slow
to speak: GOD has given a man two ears, but one tongue, thereby teaching us
to hear more, and to speak less. The ears He has made open, without a
cover, but He has enclosed the tongue within a double fence, the lips and the
teeth, thereby showing that we should be quick and swift to hear, and slow to
speak. GOD has given a tongue to every beast that is void of reason, but the
faculty of speaking only unto man, to whom He has given an understanding
spirit, whereby He would instruct us that reason should rule our words, and
that our tongues should not run before our wits: And He has made our ears
Erect, to hear heavenly things, and not hanging down (like Bloodhounds) as
if they had been made to hear earthly things, or lies and errors, which come
out of hell it self. The ear serves to learn with, the tongue serves to
teach with: a man learnes not with his tongue, nor teaches with his ears.
There is a time (says Solomon) to keep silence, and a time to speak: A
fools bolt is soon shot: but a wise man will consider what he speaks,
whereof, when, where, why, how, and before whom: And his words uttered in
season are like Apples of Gold, with pictures of Silver: their inside is better
then their outside, but both good. Some speak very much, not because they have
the Art of speaking, but because they want the skill to hold their peace: He,
that knows not how to hold his tongue, knows not how to use his tongue: He
is the only skillful man, that knows when to speak, and when to hold his
peace. Either a man should not speak, or speak to purpose: Either he should
be silent, or his words should be better worth then silence. Three things are
very commendable in a man, Wisdom in the mind, a certain Manly modesty in
the countenance, and a well governed silence in the speech: Simonides and
Xenocrates were wont to say, that they never repented them of their silence,
but that they were sorry sometimes for their speeches. If men did well consider
that life and death is in the power of the tongue, and that in many words there
cannot want iniquity; and that an account must one day be given of every idle
word, certainly they would not so abuse their tongues, as they do, to
swearing, and lying, to taunts, and slanders, to cursing, and railing, to
wantonness, and vanity; neither would they be so vnreuerent in the House of
GOD, as they use, by babbling and whispering; seeing they should come thither to
pray, and not to prate, to use their ears, and not to abuse their tongues.
Nothing is ours longer then we use it well; Our tongues are not ours, if we
do abuse them, but our enemies, for whom we use them, when we do abuse them.
An evil tongue comes from an evil heart. For were the heart good, the tongue
could not be naught. A messenger, which a man sends to his neighbor, may lie,
or revile, and speak evil, and deliver a false errand, whether the man, that
sent him, will, or no, or though he think not of it, or mean clean
contrary; but a man's own tongue, which is the messenger, or interpreter of the
heart, can say no other, then the heart does bid it. Evil must be minted in
the heart, before it be uttered in the tongue. A good heart causes a good
tongue, and a naughty heart a naughty tongue.

Of painting the face.
IF that which is most ancient be best, then the face that one is borne with,
is better then it, that is borrowed: Nature is more ancient then Art, and Art
is allowed to help Nature, but not to hurt it; to mend it, but not to mar
it; for perfection, but not for perdition: but this artificial facing does
corrupt the natural color of it. Indeed GOD has given a man oil for his
countenance, as He has done wine for his heart, to refresh and cheer it; but
this is by refection, and not by plaister-worke; by comforting, and not by
dawbing and covering; by mending and helping the natural color, and not by
marring or hiding it with an artificial lit. What a miserable vanity is it in
a man or woman beholding in a glass their borrowed face, their bought
complexion, to please themselves with a face that is not their own? And what
is the cause they paint? Without doubt nothing but pride of heart, disdaining
to be behind their neighbor, coffeehouse with the work of GOD, and vain
glory, or a foolish affectation of the praise of men. This kind of people are
very hypocrites, seeming one thing and being another, desiring to be that in
show which they cannot be in substance, and coveting to be judged that, they
are not: They are very gross Deceivers; for they study to delude men with
shows, seeking hereby to be counted more lovely creatures then they are,
affecting that men should account that natural, which is but artificial. I
may truly say they are deceivers of Themselves; for if they think they do
well to paint, they are deceived; if they think it honest and just to beguile
men, and to make them account them more delicate and amiable, then they are in
truth, they are deceived; if they think it meet that that should be counted
GODS work, which is their own, they are deceived: If they think that they
shall not one day give account unto CHRIST of idle deeds, such as this is, as
well as of idle words, they are deceived; if they think that GOD regards not
such trifles, but leaves them to their free election herein, they are deceived.
Now they that deceive themselves, who shall they be trusted with? A man, that
is taken of himself, is in a worse taking, then he that is caught of another.
This selfe-deceiuer, is a double sinner: he siones in that he is deceived, he
sins again in that he does deceive himself. To be murdered of an other is
not a sin in him that is murdered; but for a man to be deceived in what he is
forbidden, is a sin; it were better to be murdered, then so to be deceived:
For there the body is but killed, but here the soul her self is endangered.
Now, how unhappy is the danger, how grievous is the sin, when a man is merely
of himself endangered? It is a misery of miseries for a man to be slain with
his own sword, with his own hand, and long of his own will: Besides, this
painting is very scandalous and of ill report; for any man therefore to use it,
is to thwart the precept of the Holy GHOST in Saint Paul, who says unto the
Phillippians in this wise, Whatsoever things are true (but a painted face is a
false face) Whatsoever things are venerable (but who esteems a painted face
venerable? which is venereous rather then venerable:) Whatsoever things are
just (but will any man of judgment say, that to paint the face is a point of
justice? Who dare say it is according to the will of GOD which is the rule of
justice? Does the Law of GOD command it? Does true reason teach it? Does Laws
of men eioyne it?) Whatsoever things are (chaste and) pure: (but is painting of
the face a point of chastity, which is so commonly used amongst impure whoores
and curtezans? Is that pure that proceeds out of the impurity of the soul, and
which is of deceit, and tends. unto deceit? It that chaste, which is used to
woo men's eyes unto it?) Whatsoever things are lovely (but will any man out of
a well informed judgment say, that this kind of painting is worthy love, or
that a painted face is worthy to be fansied?) Whatsoever things are of good
report: If there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these
things. But I hope to paint the face, to wear an artificial color, or
complexion, is no virtue; neither is it of good report amongst the virtuous. I
read that Iezabel did practice it, but I find not that any holy Matrone or
religious Virgin ever used it: And it may perhaps of some be praised, but
doubtless not of such as are judicious, but of them rather hated and
discommended. A painted face is the devils Looking-glass: there he stands
peering and toying (as an Ape in a looking-glass) ioying to behold himself
therein; for in it he may read pride, vanity, and vainglory. Painting is an
enemy to blushing, which is virtues color. And indeed how unworthy are they to
be credited in things of moment, that are so false in their hair, or color,
over which age, and sickness, and many accidents do tyrannize; yea and where
their deceit is easily discerned? And whereas the passions and conditions of a
man, and his age, is some thing discovered by the face, this painting hinders
a man's judgment herein, so that if they were as well able to color the eyes,
as they are their hair and faces, a man could discern little or nothing in
such kind of people. In brief, these painters are sometimes injurious to
those, that are naturally fair and lovely, and no painters; partly, in that
these are thought sometimes to be painted, because of the common use of
painting; and partly, in that these artificial creatures steal away the praise
from the natural beauty by reason of their Art, when it is not espied, whereas
were it not for their cunning, they would not be deemed equal to the other.
It is great pity that this outlandish vanity is in so much request and
practice with us, as it is.

Of Prayer.
PRAYING is the begging of things needful, as the removing of some evil, and
the conferring of some good: When we hear, GOD speaks to us; When we pray, we
speak to GOD. Some wish for this, and some for that; But I wish for my self:
For if I have my self, I lack nothing; but if I lack my self, I have
nothing. Some say, Who will show us any good? But I say with David, LORD lift
thou up the light of Thy Conntenane upon me, cast me not away from Thy
presence, and take not Thine Holy SPIRIT from me. For where His SPIRIT is,
there is Life; but where it is not, there is nothing but death: And he that
has His Grace, has all; but he that has it not, wants all. How ever people
think of themselves, I for my part will think my self to be the greatest
sinner, for I know more sins and imperfections in my self, then in any man
else; and therefore I will not boast with the Pharisee, but beat my breast and
say with the Publican, GOD be merciful to me a sinner: Amongst beggars, not the
neediest or honestest, but sometimes the strongest, and loudest, runs away
with all the alms: But GOD sees the secrets, and knows the necessities of all
His Suppliants, and bestows His favors on them that are most humble, and
poorest in spirit, not respecting strength of sides, loudness of voice, or
show of violence and importunity, but intention of Spirit, devotion of
affection, the loud cries of the heart, and inward vehemence, inward and
substantial violence and importunity. Some pray they may keep their goods,
some their credit, others their friends or children. I will pray that I may
keep my self, for if I keep my self, I have something, but if I loose my
self, I am nothing, yes some thing worse then nothing. Some say, they are
turmoyled with their sins, which they cannot be rid of, but still they come
again like the fits of an ague. Their course is to pray with feruency and
continuance. When Moses prayed, the Israelites prevailed: When Christians
pray, their flesh is foiled. It is good for them to resolve, and resolutely to
decree the leaving and extinguishing of the^: and further to avoid occasions,
which are as matches to give fire to them, or as bellows to blow them up:
Thirdly, duly and daily to weigh the danger and vileness of them: fourthly,
to meditate well of the excellency and commodity of those virtues, that are
contrary; and finally, in no wise to forget, but to remember to pray earnestly
for GODS assistance. It is more easy to drive the devil out of the body, then
to conjure his messenger, the flesh, or any fleshly lust out of the scule, when
it has once taken possession of it. Only GOD can take the strong man, bind
him, and cast him out; and GOD will not do it, except He be entreated. It is
strange to see how earnestly men will beg for money, meat, drink, clothes,
of men, but yet forget to beg spiritual Graces of GOD. It appears they
beg them not, because they are for the most part, rude, sensual, impious,
idle, and very enormious. Now if they did as feelingly, and as instantly beg
grace of GOD, as they do outward things of men, certainly GOD, who is far
more merciful and openhanded, then the kindest men, would not, could notedeny
them, but would hear their cries. Men being sick pray earnestly for health,
being ready to be undone, pray heartily to be delivered; but are not so
earnest for their souls to be cured, and disburdened of their sins. What is
the reason? There men have feeling of smart, of pain, of danger; but here they
use to be senseless and stupid, and scarce think of hell, till they be
almost in it. Men use sometimes to be very weary of beggars, away with these
beggars, you were here but the other day; I met with you but yesterday; I have
not now for you; and yet all this will scarce put off an impudent and cunning
beggar. But Almighty GOD does delight in beggars, provided they ask with
warrant from the Written Word, and in the name of the Uncreated, and Eternal
WORD. The obtaining of one favor should animate us to beg anoother: He
leaves not giving, till we leave asking; and what He gives, He gives it
Candide without repining. One said, (...), Prayer should be his meat and
drink. But some with us may say; meat and drink shall be our prayer. The
Apostle says, Pray continually, but they eat and drink continually; Bacchus,
Ceres, Venus, are the Gods they worship; and a kitchen, cellar, or chamber is
the Temple, they most delight in. In prayer there is Art enough, if there want
not heart; and GODS hand is not straightened, if man's heart be enlarged. Some in
prayer stand much upon method, but with GOD that prayer is methodicall, which
is material, and wants not order, whiles it is powered in the sense of want,
out of an honest heart. Faith and hope are to our prayer, as wings to a Bird;
she cannot fly without these, nor it ascend without them. There are two
necessary qualities in every Petitioner, Humility and Constancy; When we deal
with GOD in prayer, we must not talk of meriting, but we must beg mercy,
making our selves (as indeed we are) worthy nothing: And we must be constant,
and not take a nay. The young bird opens her mouth, and never leaves gaping,
till the damn has satisfied her; so we ought never to give the LORD rest,
until He have made us a gracious answer: It is His fashion of purpose to put
men off, because He will exercise, and put in practice, their faith and
patience, and teach them to know by sense that they are not heard of merit,
and because He will learn them to make greater account of His favors, when
they come. What shall I say more? He that does pray well, cannot live ill: he
that in his prayers deals best with GOD, in his practice likewise deals
best with men.

Of Almsdeeds.
WHAT an alms did GOD give us, when He gave us His Son? What a matter then
is it if we give our bread, drink, or money? The poor give us their prayers,
what then though we give them our pence? A prayer is more worth then a penny,
the prayer of a Saint, then a penny in silver. Prayers are of power with GOD,
when silver is not: But yet thy silver is of reckoning with Him, if not
hoorded, but distributed amongst His poor ones. A man that gives an alms,
does himself an alms, for as he shows mercy, so he shall receive mercy; but
condemnation without mercy, belongs to those that will show no mercy. How can a
man beg of GOD, that will show no mercy to them, that crave mercy of him? Who
dare ask an alms, that will not give an alms? But I hear some say, they are
poor, they have nothing to give: But they have; they can give good words, they
can defend their neighbors good name, they can pray for them; some thing, even
the meanest of all can do, if he list, wherein he may express his charity and
compassion. Do what thou art able: GOD stands more upon the mind, then the
gift, the widows mite is acceptable. Some avoid poor folks, and contemn
them, love not to dwell by them: Surely these men are fallen out with GOD, and
now care not for the poor, which are His creatures; both in that they are men,
and also poor men. Nay, it is grievous unthankfulness in the richto contemn,
or to be regardlesse of them: for GOD made them poor for their sakes, partly
to do service to them, and partly that by releeuing them, they might lay up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
obtain eternal life: It is an easy matter to cavil against the poor: They
are naughty people; not all: the best are bad enough, till GOD made them
better. And who were we all, both rich and poor, great and small, when GOD had
mercy on us, and bestowed His Son upon us? If thou can not give them because
they are honest men, yet give them because they are men, and to see if they
will learn to mend by this thy weldoing to them. Even a Turk, Jew, Pagan,
Thief, may have our alms, though not in the name of an Infidel, Heretic,
or Theife, but because they are men, the creatures of GOD, in whom GOD is to
be respected, who is their Creator. But of all, the Saints, and such as excel
in virtue, should have our alms, to them our weldoing chiefly should extend it
self, for in them CHRIST JESUS does offer Himself unto us, He is the
receiver, to Him our pity is showed. Now sure he that will deny CHRIST, does
deserve to be denied of CHRIST. If we are even for Natures sake to succor a
sinner; then much rather are we to releive a Saint, because besides his Humane
Nature, he has also a certain Divine Nature in him; He is not only a
creature, but a new creature, not only a son of Adam, but a Child of GOD,
and a Member of CHRIST; But in all our works of mercy which we do, we must
aim at GODS Glory, and not our own, and still remember that they flow from a
merciful mind: for beneficence without benevolence, is but maleficence: and
he, that does an alms but not of mercy, shall not receive the reward of mercy.

Of Man.
MAN, a little world, a Map of all the world, the Lord of all inferior
creatures, was created holy and happy, good, and glorious, but now by sin he
is become a world of misery, an ensample of imbecility, the spoil of time, the
image of inconstancy, the picture of vanity, and very mortality. There is no
creature could be evil to man, but that man is evil to himself: If a man
would not, and did not hurt, himself, the devils could not, and other things
should not: but things grew hurtful, when man grew sinful; and men now
feel evil, because they are evil, and must suffer, because they sin. To be
borne a beast is not a sin, but for wilful ignorance and affected
blindness to be compared to, or to be like a beast, when GOD has endued a
man with reason, and shows him the means of light and understanding, this is
a sin, a grievous sin, a fault of the will, and the condition of a beast is
better, then of this man. He was borne a man, and lives a beast; and this his
sin deserves such a punishment as never beast did, does, shall, or can
endure. Man was created to be a friend to man, but now (excepting devils) men
are the greatest enemies that men can have: There are some serpents, beasts,
and fishes, which will not stick to make their prey on man: But all these do
not devour so many men, as men do. As for GOD, He is enemy to none, that
truly loves himself in Him. It is true, He is an enemy to the wicked, but it
is for their wickedness, let them cease from their wickedness, and be
friendly to themselves, and He will not be their enemy, but their truest
Friend. GOD made every sencible creature with some defense, He gave some
Wings, to some Talants, to some Tushes, to some Claws, to other Horns; but
He has made man Armelesse, to teach him to be harmless, and He gave him
witin steed of weapons, that considering his own weakness, he might still crave
aid of GOD, whom he ought to make his Castle, Comfort, and Defense. GOD made
the world for man, and man for himself; therefore the world should serve man,
and not man the world: He should possess and master it, and not it him. And
because GOD made both it, and him, it for him, and both it and him for
Himself, there is great reason that a man should behave himself, and use it
so, as that GOD may be glorified by him. But of all the honors wherewith GOD
did honor man, this was the greatest, that His Eternal, and true Natural
SON, assumed the Humane Nature, and wedded it to the Divine in one and the same
Person, and in that Nature performed, and suffered (even unto death) whatsoever
was needful for man's eternal Redemption, and Salvation, His Name be praised
throughout all Generations, and for ever, Amen.

Of Adam.
ADAM was the first of mankind, made of the earth by GODS own Finger, endued
with a reasonable soul, void of sin, and furnished with Wisdom, Justice,
Holiness, and all perfections fit for that kind of Creature, yet so, as that
he might both loose himself and them, if it were his pleasure. Adam was the
root of all mankind; for all he received, for all he lost, for for all he
stood: If he had continued fast we had not been undone for our mothers
fault. Because not she, but he sustained all out persons,. The Scripture
says, in Adam all do die: and, by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners. Adam in many things differs from all his children; For Further, Adam
sinned, but we all are punished: but now, if the father eat the sour grapes,
the sons teeth shall not be set an edge.
he was made, but they all (except the Virgins SON) are begotten. He had
GOD for his Maker, they have Men for their fathers: He had no mother, but they
have; even he that had no Father, yet had a Mother: He was of clay, they are
of blood: He was a created, a complete and perfect man in one day, at one
time, they are a growing many years, He had such a body given him, for
quantity, qualities, and color, till he spoiled it by sin, as none of his
posterity, except our LORD, ever did enjoy. He had that authority in his
countenance, and that great and absolute command over all earthly creatures,
which never any of his guilty children ever had, have, or shall have, unto the
end of the world. And finally, whereas we are all borne sinners, and are made
Saints by our newbirth, He was not borne, but made a Saint, and when he had
fallen, like a devil, he was raised up again to be like an Angel, and was
made a Saint again, surer then ever he was before. For Adam created, had a
power not to sin; but Adam regenerated cannot loose the grace of
Regeneration: Adam now glorified can not, has no power to sin. Adam was the
type of CHRIST, For as Adam was made of the earth by GOD without a Mother, so
CHRIST was made by GOD of the Virgin Mary, without the seed of a man: Adam was
the father of all the living according to the flesh, so CHRIST is the Father of
all, as touching the faith: Adam slept, that Eve might be made; so CHRIST
slept on the Cross, that the Church might be made: Whiles Adam slept, Eve was
made of his rib taken out of his side; so whiles CHRIST was a sleep, His Side
was pierced, and Water and Blood issued, by which the Church is cleansed. Upon
a Friday we were all created in Adam; upon a Friday we were all Redeemed in
CHRIST: By the disohedience of Adam, all the children of Adam were made
sinners; by the Obedience of CHRIST all His Members are Justified. In Adam all
that are truly men dyed: In CHRIST all true Christians are made alive, and
saved. Adam was the father of natural life, and withal the Prince of Discord:
CHRIST is the author of a Spiritual and Celestial Life, and the Prince of
Peace.

Of the Uirgine Mary.
MARY the Mother of our LORD, daughter of Eli, and wise of Joseph, was a
Virgin, never knowing man, before she had brought forth the SAVIOVR of the
world, into the world, and continued a Virgin ever after: For though JESUS be
called her Firstborn, yet it is not as if she had any other after, but
because she had no child before Him: And al-be-it James be called the
brother of our LORD, yet it is not meant that he was of the same Womb, but of
one Blood; for indeed they were sisters children, which Scriptures sometimes
call brethren, as was the Hebrew custom: And though Saint Matthew say that her
Husband knew her not, till she had brought forth her Firstborn Son, yet it
follows not that he knew her after, but puts it out of doubt that he knew
her not before. So it is said that Michol had no children till her deaths day.
This Virgin questionless was endued with excellent virtues, and was, no
doubt, in godliness, and other Virgine-qualities, inferior to none, no not to
the purest, chastest, holiest, iustest, and modestest, that ever lived of that
Sex. She was most blessed, yet her happiness consists in her Regeneration,
rather then in her Generation, and in being the Member of CHRIST rather then
His Mother, and in that she bare Him in her heart, as well as in her Womb.
The WORD was not only made Flesh in her, but she also was made Flesh of His
Flesh, and Bone of his Bone, and was animated by His SPIRIT. She did not only
bring forth that man, that was Essentially GOD, but she also believed in that
God that is substantially Man. And whereas other women either bring forth
nothing, as Virgins; or sinners, as all mothers; this Virginmother brought
forth a Saint, a SAVIOVR, by whom both she, and all that love Him truly, are
saved and redeemed. I envy not her praises, but I would not that the mother
should be so advanced, as that the Son thereby should be dishonored; nor that
whiles the creature is exalted, her Creator should be depressed: For even her
own Son was her Father, He made her, that was made of her: She that gave Him
Flesh, received both Flesh and Faith from Him; and though she brought Him into
the world, yet He redeemed her out of the world. Some out of vanity will call
her the Queen of heaven, she is in truth a Saint in heaven, shining in
heavenly glory, more then any Queen or Empress in earthly, here below, yet
she is not the Queen of heaven: For her Son received not his Royalty of her,
neither has He invested her with any I mean it not, as if any of them were
either gracious, or glorious, in the same degree with her.
other Royalty, then such as He has bestowed on all, whom He has loved and
washed from their sins, whom He has made Kings and Priests to GOD. It is
the pleasure of some to call her our Lady, a Title which she knows belongs
not to her, though perhaps endowed with greater grace and glory, then any other
Saint besides. For CHRIST JESUS is our only LORD, and hers as well as ours;
and as He received not His Lordship from her, so He has not bestowed it on
her. He is the only Head and Husband of the Catholic Church, Militant, and
Triumphant, whereof His mother is not a Mistress, but a Member; and which has
indeed a LORD, but not a Lady. This only will I add, he that speaks, or
only thinks a thought dishonorable of the Mother, it is pity he should
receive any honor by her SON.

Of the Incarnation of Christ.
THE WORD was made Flesh, He that was true GOD, became also true Man, without
division of Person, or confusion of Natures, assuming that He had not, and
continuing what He was. Being Creator He became a creature, that we
creatures might be brought into favor with our great Creator: Being GOD He
was made Man, that what we had lost by man, we might recover by Him, that was
GOD and Man. Being GOD He took the nature of man upon Him, and married our
flesh unto His Deity, that man, which was for his adultery separated from his
GOD, might by Him, who was truly Flesh, be married and joined anew unto his
GOD. It was miraculous that a Virgin chaste should bring forth a Son, but not
to be doubted of, considering Gods Omnipote^ce. For He that could make the
world of nothing, He that was able to take Ada^ out of the earth, He that
could give Sarah a child in her old age, He that made Aarons rod bud: He was as
able (doubtless) to make the womb of a virgin fruitful. For with him nothing
is impossible: if he do but speak the word, it is done. It is strange that
God should be man, that a virgin should be a mother, that the mother should
be daughter to her own son; and that a mortal and weak woman should
conceive and bring forth the immortal and Almighty God. But let us turn up
our eyes to God, and grant that he is able to do that which we are not able
fully to comprehend. In things of wonder we must ascribe the reason of work to
the power of the worker. In a word, our Savior, by his Incarnation, has
honored both sexes: Man's, in taking of his shape: and Woman's, by being
conceived, borne, and brought up by a Woman: And so amends has been made in
that Sex: For as a Woman brought sin into to the world, so a Woman also
brought forth, and brought up that SAVIOVR, by whom alone we are delivered
from our sins. As by a Woman came Sin, Sickness, Sorrow, Bondage, Error,
Death: So in a Woman came a Savior for Sinners, a Physician for the Sick, a
Comforter of the Heauy-hearted, a Redeemer for Captives, a Guide for Straglers,
and even Light and Life it self for them that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of Death.

Of Miracles.
A Miracle is some extraordinary thing done by the power of God, above the
course of nature, such as was the creatio of the world of nothing, the dividing
of the red sea, the standing of the Sun in the days of Joshua, the
Mother-hood of that untouched Maiden, the turning of Water into Wine, and such
like.

Some things may be above nature, as the conversion of a sinner or true says
in Christ, which is above created and corrupted nature, and yet no miracle,
being common, ordinary, and usual in the Church. Some things are strange and
wonderful, yet no miracles, because there are natural causes of them, though
perhaps not certainly discerned always, nor of all, as Comets, Earth quakes,
Eclipses, (excepting that Eclipse of the Sun at the Crucifixion of Christ,
which to see it was ashamed and amazed:) so it is maruailous, (but not
miraculous) that the Crocodile should eat, and not move his neatheriaw, that
the Salamander should endure the fire unburned, that Pismires should provide for
Winter, that the King amongst the Bees should only want a sting, that a Worm
should work out Silk, and that a Spider should draw a Web out of his own
bowels to entangle the Flies with. Furthermore, some things are strange and
beyond nature, yet not miraculous, not truly miracles, because they are done
by the power and assistance of the Devil, as are many things said and done by
such are possessed of Devils. Miracles were wrought in the Primitive Church
very often, till the Christian Faith was sufficiently confirmed: but now having
been so abundantly confirmed, so generally believed, he were himself a very
wonderment, that will not now believe it without a wonder. And because that
Antichrist shall come with his lying wonders; that is, either not true, but
appearing to be true; or, truly tending to maintain his lies and errors,
therefore we must take heed of wonders, that we be not by new wonders misled
and drawn away from the old way. For his wonders serve not to confirm the
faith, but to try the faithful. This is a Lesson never to be forgotten, No
sign, no wonder, no miracle must withdraw us from Christ and his faith: but
and if any Man or Angel should preach otherwise then we find written in the
holy Scriptures, or shall presume to add to, substract from, or to change the
faith received, we are to hold him as accursed. If there arise among you a
Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, (says Moses) and give thee a sign or a
wonder, (and the sign and wonder which he has told thee, come to pass)
saying, Let us go after other Gods, which thou have not known, and let us
serve them: What then? Thou shall not (quoth he) give ear to the words of the
Prophet, or dreamer of dreams: Why so? For the LORD your GOD proves you to
know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your
souls.

Of Marriage.
MArriage is the Conjunction of but one man, and but one woman: for if it were
lawful to have two wives at once, our Savior would not have said, that he
that puts away his wife, except for adultery, and marries another, commits
adultery. The Man and his Wife are a matrimonial Creature: the Man is as the
soul, and the Woman is as the body. The Man [as Soule] is to animate and rule,
the Woman [as body] is to be animated and ruled of the Man. The soul (they
say) follows the temperature of the body as concerning operations: and it is
often likewise seen that the house goes much after the House-wifes humor: The
husband is the wives head, the wife then is as the husbands body. Who but
madmen will mis-vse their bodies? And who but bad women will mis-vse their
heads? Our women are very curious in decking and dressing of their heads, I
would they were as careful in pleasing of their husbands. I hold them best
careful, that are careful of both their heads together. Of both her heads,
what if I said her husband was the better? For her own head is but head of her
body, but her husband is head both of her head, and of her body: her head
serves to rule her body, but her husband serves to rule her head; her head is
the better part of her body, but her husband is the better part of her self.
It is true, he without her is a bodilesse head; and as true again, she
without him is a headless body: Wisdom, Forecast, and Direction, belong to
the head, to Obey, to Bend, and to be Governed, are for the body. Sure he is
an ill head, that wants wit, forecast, care, and government; and she is as
bad a body, that is unruly, intractable, and which will not be directed. A good
wife is like a Merchants Ship, laden with all kinds of virtues, as it were with
wares; she is for labor, and not to lie still, and is fitted for burden
rather then for battery; Her Pilot and her Owner is her husband. It is
certain, women must be obedient to Princes, as Subjects; to Pastors, as
Sheep; but to their husbands only as they are their wives. We requite in a
looking-glass principally, that it do truly show us the color of our faces,
for though it be set in gold, or be decked with pearls, yet if it be
deceiptfull, we care not for it; the Gold or Pearls may be esteemed, but it
is contemned. The principal commendation of a wife, is not gold, silver,
wealth, or out ward bravery, but Modesty, Chastity, Piety, Verity, Sobriety,
and Humillity; If these things be in her, she is worthy love, and will win
the heart of any man, that is a man, and not a Bedlem, that is a man, and not a
devil: But though she bring wealth and worship with her, yet if these things
be wanting in her, which were chiefly expected of her, and are most required,
surely she is but as a deceiptfull glass; a man is merely cousened in her:
And though she have brought with her coffers of gold, yet can she not but be in
truth contemned; except she mend her manners. Riches, Beauty, Bravery,
greatness of birth, in a vicious, proud, profane, and headstrong woman, are
but as good flowers, or fine feathers, stuck in a piece of dung.

Of a King.
GIVE unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's. Caesar is every free, full, and
absolute Monarch. The things of Caesar are Love, Honor, Reverence, Obedience,
Fidelity, Tributes, Subsidies, Customs, and supreme Authority under GOD, over
all his Subjects in all Temporal and Secular things. A King is a cetaine Mixed
Creature, made of all the people in a Kingdom. Man is a little world, and a
King is a little Kingdom: There is not a man within his Kingdom, but he is as
a part and member of the King: Therefore as every member of the body serves in
his place for the good of the whole body, and is obedient to the head, where
wisdom, power, providence, and government lies: So every Subject should serve
for the good of the State, and seek it in his place, and should show himself
obedient to the King, who is his Head: And as the head challenges a right in
every member, and therefore does good unto them all, and is affected with
compassion, if even the smallest of them be wronged, or ill affected: So a
King has a certain right in all his subjects, he should animate and rule
them all with his authority, and by his Laws: he should study the welfare of
them all, and should be affected truly with all their wrongs and miseries. The
head will yield to the cutting off an ill-affected member, choosing rather that
one should perish, then all; but it is not simply delighted in the death of any
of the members. So a good King loves not to destroy any of his subjects, but
had rather save a thousand, then kill one; yet he does, as it were, enforce
himself to draw his sword, as knowing that it is better to cut off one, then
disturb or loose all. But though the head may determine to cut away a member,
yet does it not by it self, but by some other member, or instrument: so though
judgment and determination belongs unto the King, yet executions thereof are
fittest by far to be performed of others. But al-be-it the head agree to the
destruction of a member, yet no member is seen to lift it self up against the
head with violence (as it were) to strike, or hurt it: So is it altogether
savage and unnatural for Subjects to lay violent hands upon the sacred bodies
of their King, who is as Mount Sinai, which, was not to be touched under pain
of death. Mercy and Justice are two saue-gards of a King, and most comely for
him. If nothing can be safe from him, there can be no safety for him: His
safety and security stands in the safety and security of his Subjects, of whom
it is safer for him to be loved, then to be feared: It is surer for him to tie
them to him by Princely humanity, then to exasperate and awe them with
tyrannical severity. The King of the Bees himself is alone without a sting;
Nature would not that he should be cruel, and has left his anger without a
weapon. Doubtless Clemency is a Princely virtue. Herein a King may show
himself like the KING of Kings, who though able easily to be revenged of all,
that do offend him. yet is he so indulgent, that he pardons many, and
sometimes deferres the punishments of His veriest enemies, and strikes not
always, when cause is given Him. Every King should remember to serve the KING
of Kings, CHRIST JESUS, to whom all Kings are Vassals. It is just that they
should be punished with rebellious, treacherous, unfaithful, and wicked
Subjects, that themselves neglect the Laws of their SOVEREIGN, and are
unfaithful to their GOD: And herein a King does most of all serve CHRIST, to
wit, in doing that good, and hindering that evil, which he could neither do,
nor hinder, but as he is a King. Some think a woman may not reign. What did
Debora among the Ifraelites? If women (as many Virgins, and Widows) may be
Ladies and Mistresses of servants, even Males, Why may they not be Queens, if
the Providence of heaven bring them to it. The Regal power is neither
Masculine, nor Foeminine, but Divine. Sons are tied to honor their natural
mothers, and surely without stain unto their sex, and what blemish or
indignity can it be to men to honor their Political Mother? He that honors
an absolute Potentate aright, whether King or Queen, honors the power and
authority, which is Divine and not Humane, and honors the person for the
Power, and not the Power for the person: Be the person good or bad, the Power
is good, it is of GOD: And it may fall out that an evil man may be a good
Monarch: But whatsoever the Monarch is, the Monarchy, the Monarchs power is
ever good, and never bad: For there is no power, but of GOD; and the powers,
that be, are ordained of GOD: Whosoever therefore resists the Power,
resists the ordinance of GOD. And they that resist shall receive to
themselves condemnation. Let every soul therefore be subject unto the higher
Powers, and not because of wrath only, but even for conscience sake.

Of Death.
DEATH is not evil, but to an evil man, for to the godly death is good, to
the wicked death is evil; to him it is the door of life, to this it is the
entrance into hell. The sting of death is sin, pull out this sting, repent of
sin, and death can do hurt, but good. Fly from sin, and death cannot be
fearful. The sooner the Saint dies, the sooner he comes to his Crown. The
longer a man lives, the more time he spends upon the Seas; the sooner a man
dies, that dies well, the sooner he comes into the haven. He dies well, that
lives well; a bad death cannot follow a good life. He lives and dies well, that
lives and dies in the faith and fear of JESUS CHRIST, who is Rest to him that
travels, Health to him that is sick, Refreshment to him that is weary, and
Life to him, that dies eitheir for Him, or in Him. Death is not evil, but an
evil death: This evil death no man dies, which dies either In; or For the
service of CHRIST JESUS.

Of the Immortality of the Soul.
THE soul (says Austen) is a created Substance, Invisible, incorporeall,
Immortal, being like to GOD, that made it. It is possible that the sold
should be destroyed, as it was for the Sun to stand still, for the sea to
stand divided, for the fire not to burn the three children, but this is not by
the nature thereof, but in regard of the power of GOD, who is able, if He
pleased, to turn the whole world into nothing, as He once made it of nothing.
But indeed the soul of a man shall never die, shall never be dissolved as is
the body, but continues whole and firm for ever. For the proof hereof I
suppose it the surest way for every man to fortify himself with the undoubted
testimonies of holy Writ. The Spirit (says Ecclesiastes) returns to GOD that
gave it. The soul of the poor beggar was in joy, but the soul of the rich
Epicure was in torment, after their bodily death. CHRIST said to the Thief now
a dying: This day shall thou be with Me in Paradise: And to His FATHER, Into
Thine hands I commend my Spirit. Steven being now ready to depart, prayed, LORD
JESUS, receive my spirit. Saint Paul says, We love rather to remove out of
the body, and to dwell with the LORD: And again, I desire to be dissolved,
and to be with CHRIST. By which it is most certain that the soul does live
after the body is dead: But what though the soul shall live for ever, if it
live in pain, as the souls of the damned do? Surely it were better not to be,
then to be tormented and out of ease: Therefore let us die before we die, and
leave our sins before we leave the world. If our souls do die to sin in
this life, they shall not die by sin in the life to come: If they live to GOD
by grace in this world, they shall live with GOD in glory in the world to come.
The world is mortal, but the soul of man is immortal; Why should that, that
is immortal, be pind on that, that is mortal? Why should the soul that
cannot die, be buried in the love of those things that cannot but die, and come
to nothing? The body is mortal, the soul is immortal: why should we make
more account of That, then This? Why should we desire a good body, and care not
though we have a naughty soul? If we neglect our soul, we shall not save our
body: if we forget out souls, we forget our selves. The soul was not made for
the body, but the body for the soul: The soul therefore shoule be preferred
to the body, but he which neglects the chiefest, and sets most by the meanest,
corrupts both, and condemns himself; But he, that looks well to his
soul, though he be more careless of the body, yet he shall not prove
unlucky; for in tendering the safety of his soul, he shall save his body also.

Of the Resurrection of the Body.
THERE is a resurrection of the just and iniust; the just shall rise to judge,
the iniust to be judged; the just shall be absolved, the iniust shall be
condemned: Even that body that fell, the selfsame shall rise again by GODs
Omnipotency: For even they that sleep in the dust shall rise; that must rise
again that fell; this mortal must put on Immortality. I shall see GOD in my
flesh (says Job) mine eyes shall behold Him, and none other for me. If there
were no resurrection, then is not CHRIST risen again, for in Him we all dyed
in Him we are all raised up from death; and this we have in So, the day shall
come when we shall have it in Re. Neither is there any reason that another
body, and not the same, which served CHRIST, and suffered injuries for Him,
should be given unto a man, but it is host just that the same body, which was
burnt, or butchered, for CHRIST, should be glorified of CHRIST, and that a man
should receive his reward and rest, in that body, in which he performed his
service. The body restored shall be a true body, and not a Spirit: For Gloria
non tollit naturam, sed extollit: Glory does not destroy, but perfect, Nature.
All defects, deformities, weaknesses, and imperfections, shall be removed, and
all fullness, feature, favor, strength, and perfections, shall be given it:
And whereas many fall in their infancy, children of a spanne long, yet it is
not to be imagined that they shall be raised up of such a stature, but in the
stature of a man, and yet the same body; even as the body of an old man for
substance is the same it was in his youth, or childhood, though enlarged, and
otherwise disposed. And al-be-it it shall rise a spiritual body, yet it
follows not that it shall be a Spirit, no more then it was (...) a soul when
it fell, because it was (...) an animal, or (soule-body) natural body: but it
is a natural body now, because it is nourished and preserved by natural
means, as food, raiment, sleep, physic, recreation, labor: A soule-body,
because it is governed of the soul; so it is called then a spiritual body,
because it shall be at the Spirits command, and shall be more pure and subtle
and fuller of agility, then it is in this world, and shall not have need of
such natural and bodily helps, to succor and sustain it. In a word, all
glorified bodies shall have a temper of elementary qualities brought to such an
equality, that heat shall not overcome moisture, nor this that, but there
shall be peace for ever without discord and contention. There is nothing goes
from these bodies, nothing is put to them; there is no defect, no superfluity,
no aliment, no excrement; their temperature is altogether invariable. Neither
may it seem harsh to any, that these our bodies shall be raised up again; For
GOD that knows their frame, and is thoroughly acquainted with their substance,
is Omnipotent and Eternal, and can most easily do it. If an Image or Statue
were broken in pieces, yet so long as the worke-man, that made it, lives, and
whiles his skill lasts, his memory and fancy fail not, and matter wants
not, there is hope it may be made again, as good as ever. But GOD our Maker is
One and the Same for ever, and both can and will perform all his Promises made
in His Word. The hour shall come, in which all that are in the graves shall
hear His Voice (the voice of the Son of man) and they shall come forth, that
have done good, unto the resurrection of life, but they that have done evil
unto the resurrection of condemnation. O that my soul might rise from sin in
this world, that my body might rise from death to Life and Glory in the world
to come.

Of the last Judgment.
WE must all appear before the judgment seat of CHRIST: He shall judge
the world, that was judged of the world: He shall condemn sinners, who was
Himself condemned for a sinner: He will recompense to every one according as
his deeds have been, and no man shall escape His Power: Fair words can not
deceive Him, gifts cannot corrupt Him, entreaty cannot move Him, fig-leaues
cannot delude Him: But as men have brued, so shall they drink; even as they
have baked, so shall they eat. They that have done well, shall speed well, but
they that have followed reprobate and wicked courses, shall be condemned. The
more Grace men have showed, the more Glory they shall receive: and the more men
have sinned, the more smart they must suffer. O that we could say with Saint
Jerome, As often as I think of that day, I tremble all over; For whether I eat,
or drink, or whatsoever else I do, me thinks I hear that terrible Trumpet
sounding in mine ears, (Surgite mortui, venite ad iudicium) Arise ye dead,
and come to judgment. O that we would judge our selves in this world, that we
might escape the fearful judgment of the wicked in the world to come.

Of Life Eternal.
THEY, that have served GOD aright in this world, shall live eternally with GOD
in the world to come. They that have lived unto CHRIST, and have dyed in the
faith and fear of CHRIST, shall be raised by the Power of CHRIST, and shall
enjoy His face for ever to their unspeakable comfort, and contentment, and as
men have excelled in grace, so they shall exceed in glory. It is more easy to
tell what shall not be in that life, then what shall be. There shall be no
mourning, nor misery, no want, nor weakness, no sin, nor sorrow, no
weariness, nor weeping, no death, nor dolor, no hunger, nor thirst, no ach,
nor anguish, no diseases, nor discontentments, no troubles, nor tentations. But
what shall be there, who is able to express? No eye has seen, no ear has
heard, no heart has yet conceived. What are the good things which GOD has
prepared for those that love Him. There is supreme Felicity, perfect Liberty,
true Charity, sweet Eternity, immortal Happiness, and happy Immortality,
Eternal Security, and secure Eternity. There GOD shall be seen without end,
loved without loathing, and praised without wearines. There is whatsoever is
desired, and nothing is desired which is not there; Thy food is not thy
raiment, nor it thy light, nor these thy money: but there God will be all in all
to all his children. They shall possess him, and he them for ever, and for
ever: For that life shall see no death, those joys shall have no end, that
state shall never sustain a change. This life, this state, these joys, God of
his mercy grant us for Christ Jesus sake. To whom with the holy Ghost be
ascribed all honor, praise, power, might and majesty, now and evermore, Amen.

Trin-vni Deo Gloria.

