THE TRVE TRIAL and Turning of a Sinner.

OR, THREE PLAIN AND profitable Sermons, teaching the Search and Trial of our
ways, Repentance of Sin, and true turning unto God.

The sum whereof was preached at Feuersham in Kent Aug. 3. 1606.

By Thomas Tuke.

ZACH. 1. 3. Turn ye unto me, says the Lord of hosts, and I will turn
unto you.

EZEKIEL. 18. 21. If the wicked will return from all his sins, that he has
committed, etc. he shall surely live, and shall not die.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and virtuous Lady, Christiana, wife to the Right
Worshipful Sir John Leueson Knight: grace from God, both temporal, and
et^^nall.
MAdame, rare and admirable are the favors which we have received of the Lord,
and by his grace enjoyed now almost fifty years together. He has given us
his Word and Gospel, his laws and statutes: he has planted a Vineyard
amongst us, and sent his Prophets unto us. He has brought us out of
captivity from under Weasterne Babylon, and dispelled the Egyptian-like
darkness of Romish superstitions. He has not dealt so with every Nation.
Moreover, he has imparked us with the pales of Peace, and hedged us about
with the Lawrells of Prosperity. He doo^h fill our barnes with plenty, and
causes our cups to run over. He has put the Palms of victory into our
hands, the Garlands of triumphs about our heads, and has made our very
enemies seek to be at peace with us. He has turned our spears into spades,
our swords into sythes, and our pikes into pens; yea to make a perfect and
plenary demonstration of his love unto us, and hatred of our Adversaries, he
has of late vouchsafed to us both Prince and People, Neuem. 5. 1605.
a very wonderful and great Deliverance, from a most barbarous and universal
confusion, plotted, and almost performed by the children of Babel, the Minians
of that purple Harlot. But how do we remonstrate our thankfulness and love to
him? Alas, our ingratitude is too-too manifest. Our sins do testify the
same to our faces. Ignorance, Oaths, Prophanations of the Lords day, Neglect,
yea and palpable Contempt of the Gospel, and of Gods faithful and honorable
Ambassadors, with many other grievous and transcendent enormities, do so swell
and abound in the multitude, as that if they were not by force held in with the
piles of wholesome laws, and the banks of government, they would quickly
ouerflow, and bear and beat down all before them. So that the Lord may say
of us, as Moses sometimes said of Israel: Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
But he that should have been upright, when he waxed fat, spurned with his
heel, and forsook God that made him, and regarded not the strong God of his
salvation: not much unlike we are (for the most) to the young Hindes mentioned
in the book of Job, who when they are waxed fat, and grown up with corn,
Go from their dammes, Job. 39. 7.
and return no more unto them. Josephus writes, that the River Jordan does
carry the Fishes so long sporting themselves, and floting aloft, till at
length it casts the^ headlong into the Dead Sea, Mare mortuum.
where they perish: so it seems our prosperity, through the corruption of our
hearts, has trained us on so long, that we have fallen into a Sea of sins,
and a gulf of wickedness. What can we now expect of God, besides the
complement of that dreadful minace upon us, with which, the declining church
of Ephesus was sometimes threatened: Reave. 2. 5.
to wit, the removing of her Candlestick out of his place unless she did
repent? If we therefore desire the continuance of the Gospel among us, and of
all outward blessings, which attend upon the true professors and embracers of
it, we must in the fear of God, Search and try our ways, and turn again
unto him. Amend your ways and your works (says the Lord) and I will let you
dwell in this place. Ier. 7. 3.
2. Chron. 30. 9.
The Lord our God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face
from us, if we convert unto him. Pliny says, Plin. lib. ^. cap. 26.
that the Riuer-horse feeling himself too fat, Plin. lib. 8. c. 26.
and overmuch grown, pricketh a vein in his leg with some sharp reed newly
cut, and by letting himself blood, does so help himself, and prevent the
danger, which he was subject before to fall into: so when we swell with pride
and self-love, and when we wax gross spirited, and fat at heart, and when
the corrupt humors of our souls abound, our best physic is, to prick our
hearts with true compunction of spirit, and remorse of conscience, and to let
our selves blood of those corrupt humors by true repentance, and godly
sorrow. If we neglect the performance of these duties, we may justly fear,
that the Lord will remove his favors from us, and give them to a people that
will bring forth better fruits. To help forward this godly practice, I have
compiled, penned, and now published, these sequent exhortations: which I
dedicate and offer unto your Ladishippe, especially because I know you love
this Doctrine, and the faithful practisers of the same. Thus taking my humble
leave, I recommend you to the grace of God.

Cuxton. March. 25. 1607. Your Ladyships in all duty, Thomas Tuke.

The principal Contents.
1 An eleven doctrines are orderly collected, and their applications severally
annexed. 2 Sundry reasons to move us to search our selves. 3 Many mo^iues to
persuade us to search narrowly and soundly. 4 Diverse reasons, to move M^nisters
to join themselves in their exhortations. 5 Many reasons why every man ought
to busy himself in searching of himself principally. 6 Sundry causes why we
should try our ways, after that by searching we have found them out. 7 The
true Touchstone of trial: here sundry Judges are rejected for sundry reasons.
8 These points with their reasons are discussed and propounded. 1. Who must
turn. 2. From what. 3. To whom. 4. Where. 5. When. 6. How. 9 All these things
are illustrated by many fit similitudes, and other comparisons: or at least the
chiefest. Many other particulars are taught, which the godly Reader may find,
if it please him to peruse the Sermons through.
SERMONS PREAched at Feuersham in Kent.
Lament. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.


THis mournful prophet, Jeremy, having in part described and declared the
perplexed and lamentable condition of his countrymen, and both testified and
justified, as well the righteousness of God in afflicting them for the multitude
of their transgressions, as his mercy in moderating their misery, and
preserving them from a full and final destruction; he does in these words
propound unto them a very serious and sober exhorta^ion, consisting of three
branches. The first is contained in the three former words, Let us s^arch. That
is to say, let us diligently inquire after, seek, and labor to find out. The
second is couched in the next words, And try our ways. That is, let us prove
our thoughts, our words and works, after that by diligent and due searching we
have found them out. The third is comprehended in the last words, And turn
again unto the Lord. That is, after exact inquiry and faithful examination,
let us relinquish and abandon all that is amiss, repenting of it, and
relenting for it, and let us come home again unto our father, and turn back
unto his ways, from which we have gone astray like straggling sheep. Then
instructions are many, both excellent and profitable.

Doct. 1.
For so much as the holy Ghost does in the forefront of this exhortation
advertise us to search out our ways: I conclude and gather, that this is a
duty necessary to be performed of every sinner that desires to make a sound
conue^sion of his sins. Because it is a duty so much neglected, I will use
some arguments to incite and persuade you to the practice of it. In the first
place, consider that it is not man but GOD which commands us to make this
search. 2. Tim. 3. 16.
For the whole Scripture (whereof this sentence is a part) is given by
inspiration from God, and the holy men of God, (whereof this Prophet was not
the last, nor yet the leas^) did all of them speak and preach as they were
carried and directed by the spirit of God. 2. Pet. 1. 21.
Homage belongs to a King, honor to a father, and obedience to a master.
God is our King, our Father, our Lord and Master. Iam. 4. 12.
He is the only lawgiver, that is only able to save and destroy. He
exhorts us to search our ways: therefore as we respect his grace, and fear
his anger, as we would not be reputed and regarded as disloyal subjects,
disobedient children, rebellious and refractary servants, let us in all humility
of heart, and sincerity of soul and conscience submit and obey. Secondly, we
shall not know our ways, what they are, and whither they lead, unless we take
some pains in searching of them out. A Prince cannot know the state of his
kingdom, a physician cannot discern the constitution and habit of a man's body,
without some good and co^petent search and inquisition: so no man can judge of
the condition and state of his soul and body, and know the case and quality of
the kingdom of his heart, except by searching he do labor to attain
thereunto. He that knows not his ways, cannot examine them: how then shall
he be able to reuert and turn from them if they be not good? On the contrary,
our searching of them is a very good furtherance and preparatiue to our trial
of them, and turning from them; like the needle, which prepares a way for the
thread, which follows it. For as a man perceiving himself to be wounded or
any way diseased, is moved to seek about for a remedy: even so when a sinner
by ransacking his life and heart, finds out his spiritual wounds and
diseases, he is by the grace of God prepared and provoked to seek for cure,
and to be delivered of his grieuances.

Thirdly, he that intends to build, will search the foundation, whether the
ground be sound or sandy, whether fast or false. Salvation is a fair and
goodly building. Now he that builds it upon ignorant conceits, and blind
presumptions, deceives himself, and dishonors his Savior: therefore it is
good for a man to search himself, and lay a firm foundation; the top will
fare the better for the bottom. If the groundworke be not stable, the
building cannot stand: and where there is no sure searching, there can be no
sure working. Moreour, he that desires a plentiful Crop, must view his seed,
and search it for Chafe, Cockell, and other noxious and infestant seeds: so
he, that desires to be fruitful in good works, must search himself for the
seeds of sin, which ingendreth nothing but stinking weeds.

A discreet and faithful Magistrate will search his kingdom, for
treacherous, rebellious, and other pernicious persons; specially if he have
had certain intelligence of them: Revel. 1. 6
so we that are made Kings and spiritual Magistrates by Jesus Christ, should
search all the corners of our kingdom for our sins, which lurk within us like
traitors, and are ready to pull the crown from our heads, and snatch the
scepter out of our hands, yea and blow up the whole Parliament of our souls.
God has given a man reason to be as a Prince to rule him, it being ruled by
the line of his Law: the supreme faculties of the soul, be the Peers or
Nobles: the senses are the guard and attendants: the outward part are as the
Commons: and our Sins, and sinful Affections, are traitors, rebels, and as
factious and infectious persons, which disturb the peace of the Commonwealth,
and being desperate and irreconciliable enemies unto the State, do strive to
dismount the Prince from her Throne, and utterly to ruinate and subvert the
kingdom, which God by his holy spirit has begun to plant within us. Wherefore
like politic and faithful Princes, it behooves us to make search in all the
parts of our kingdoms, and as it were with Hoe and Cry to pursue our enemies,
that by searc^ing having found them out, they may be brought to their trial,
and at the bar of Conscience ^eceiue sentence as they have deserved.

Finally, the searching of our ways is a means to prevent the judgments of
God* For when men will not search themselves, then God searches them out by
crosses and afflictions. When men forget to search their ways, then God does
oftentimes put them in mind of this duty by his rods, and leads them (as it
were) by the lip. When men run headlong on an end in irregular and wretched
courses, never thinking of their way, he does sometimes thrust them forward
into desperate and irrecouerable casualties and calamities, yea many times to
the loss of their dearest lives: as the devil did violently drive the the
Gadarens swine into the sea. Mar. 5. 13
Sometimes he thrusts them into the mire of affliction, and makes them to
stumble and fall upon some stone in their way, or pricketh their feet with the
thorn of some sharp and grievous cross, and so puts them in mind of their
way, and teaches them to think of their ungodly courses. When men suffer
Satan to ride them, as the Ass did Balaam, Number. 22.
and to abuse them to Gods dishonor, then God does often cause his Angel (as
I may speak) to stand in their way with the naked sword of adversity, and so
hinders their enormious proceedings. Therefore it is a point of christian
wisdom, and wise christianity, to call our selves in time to a reckning, and
to make a mature and faithful inquisition and disquisition of all our ways.
Search your selves (says Zephany) even search you, Zep. ^.1^.
O nation not worthy to be loved, before the decree come forth, and ye be as
chafe that passes in a day, and before the fierce wrath of the Lord come upon
you.

The consideration of these things serves to convince and condemn the common
custom of most men, Use. 1.
who walk on securely in ignorance and other ungodliness, and either sildome
or never take true notice of their ways; as if a man did not greatly care
whither he trauells, or how he trauells, whether right or wrong, whether in
dirt or dry ways, by light or night, so that he do travel. Yea many are so
far from searching their ways themselves, as that they w^l not willingly
suffer others; like the foolish and vnpatien^ Pa^^ent, which will not let the
S^rgeon search his wounds; or to the man that has stolen goods about him,
who cannot abide to hear of searching. If the Minister shall set open their
gates of craft and cunning carriage, and shall cut down or break open these
think and ^igh hedges of their deep hypocrisy, whereby they hide their ways
(as much as may be) from the eyes of men, and shall by that means or any other
discover their ways, and make them see the filthiness of their steps, then they
stamp* they storm, they strike privily with their teeth like Bores, and they
bite like serpents: and if their counsel served, and the times permitted, they
would openly show their ma^ice, and vnchaine their hatred. All which
conuinceth them of gri^u^us impen^tencie and carnal security. Is it not
strange that men should search and censure other men, and forget themselves? Is
it not strange that all men naturally should affect, and delight in searching,
some for riches, some for renown, one for profits, an other for pleasures, a
third sort for promotion, and yet few, or almost none in comparison, should
search after their ways, that if right, they might mend their pace and haste
an end; if wrong, they might in time retire, and fetch a straiter compass
unto new Jerusalem, where there is renown without envy, promotio^ without
pride, wealth and no woe, pleasures but no pains, yea all the good that either
thought can think, or will can wish? Moreover, is it not strange that men
should be blown every way with the blast of an earthly Prince, as to turn
Turk at his command, or to buckle and bend the kneee to his pleasure in any
thing; like the bird called Cepphos, which is carried every way with the wind,
and yet to stand like stocks at Gods command, to move nothing at all, or at
the least not to remove? Is it not strange that many, which dare no more
withstand the word of a king, then the ship, Act. 27. 15.
that Paul was in, could (antophthalmein) outlooke or withstand the stormy
wind Euroclydon, antipiptete
yet are nothing afraid with brows of brass to outface and resist, yea to
rush against the Spirit of GOD in the ministry of his Prophets, Act. 7. 51.
as Saint Steven said the rebellious Jews did. A King says to his subject,
For the breach of every commandment and exhortation is eternal death
search, or thou die for it: he searches. The King of Kings says to all his
subjects, search or ye die, yea the death of soul and body: very few regard
what he says, as if either he iested with them, or as though the mouth of his
mercy were so wide, that it both could and would swallow up his justice for a
little of their lip-labor, in a fit of sickness, or when they are to shake
hands with the world; which argues a fearful distemper in their souls,
even a spiritual Apoplexy, which has deprived them of all true sense and
motion, as if they were possessed with the spirits of those, whom Isaiah says,
Isa. 28. 1^
had made a covenant with Death, and an agreement with hell: or at the least,
cast in the same mould with many desolute and ungracious youths, who having
exceeding kind and affectionate parents or friends, do play upon them in
hope of pardon, abusing their leuitie to the satisfaction of their own Just,
presuming upon their mild and gentle disposition. Use 2. Gal. 1. 4. Romans 12. 2


But we (beloved) being redeemed out of the world, must not fashion our selves
unto the world. Would thou know thy self? then search thy self. Would
thou try thy ways? then search thy ways. The Justice cannot examine a fellon,
till he be found. A man cannot weigh a thing in the balance, except he have
the thing. Would thou repent of thy sins and turn from them? then labor
to know them, strive to find them out. Mat. 8. 9.
Shall the Centurion in the Gospel (being a man under the authority of an
other, and having soldiers under himself) command one to go, and he goes:
an other to come, and he comes: an other to do this or that, and he does
it? And shall the Lord, (who is over all, and under none) command us to do
this or that, and shall we refuse? Shall he bid us search? or shall he say by
his Ambassador, Let us search, and shall we not search? Know ye not, Math. 12
50. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3.
that he, which does the will of God, is the brother, the sister, yea and the
mother of Christ Jesus? Christ himself did speak it. But as the Apostle
says, this is the will of God, even your sanstification: so say I, this is the
will of God, even the searching of your ways. God does will it, then let not us
nill it. God does affect it, therefore let us effect it. Shall the wicked hunt
after the godly as a Partrich upon the mountains? 2. Sam. 26 7. 2.
Shall wicked Saul seek, for David to kill kim, so soon as he had
intelligence where he had hid himself, notwithstanding the Lord had forbidden
murder? Shall cruel Herod bid the wise men search diligently for our Lord
with a secret intention to m^rther him? Math. 2. 8
and shall not we seek and search diligently for our sins, that we might
sac^ifice and slaughter them, 2. King. 25
as John did the Priests of Baal? They had no commaun^emen^, we are ^omma^nded.
They were forbidden, (I speak not o^ Iehu) we are bidden and exhorted. He
which defireth to have either good Bees, or good by his B^es, must search their
Hiues, for spiders, waspes, drones, and mise: So if we would have the graces of
God to flourish and swarm within us, we must search the Hiue of our hearts for
sins, which are as waspes and spiders. Brush down the spinner-webs of
covetousness: kill the drones of laziness: drive away infidelity and
inordinate cares, which rob God of his honor: (which should be performed in
the temple of our spirits) and troubles the spirit of God, which as a Be
works within us, building, breeding and refining. If the king should not view
and search his Ports, neither by himself nor by his Ministers, they might come
to be as well harbors for Pirates, as havens for honest Merchants: so if we
will not search and survey our hearts, they will be rather hog-sties for sin
and Satan, then houses for the holy Ghost. If the channel of the haven be not
sometimes searched, and if straight passages amongst Syres and Sands be not
sounded and well observed, there will be many shipwrackes and losses, which
with wisdom and labor might have been prevented: even so, if we do not
search our hearts, and sound them with the line of Gods law, and the plummet
of his word, with a faithful heart, a painful hand, and a diligent care, and
if we do not observe and note our course and compass, all our rodes, and all
our ways, the ship of our conscience will be so torn and crazed, that it
will either not at all, or very hardly be brought into the haven. Let us
therefore, as we respect the voice of the crier, as we regard the favor of
God, as we either tender our welfare, or fear the shipwreck of consciences,
yea the everlasting loss of our souls and bodies: let us in the fear of God,
make conscience of this duty. There is no dallying with edged tools, there is
no jesting with God. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, neither will he be
abused. Gal. 6. 7
And so much for this first lesson: a second follows.

It is not sufficient for us to search our ways, Doct. 2.
but we must search them narrowly. For the word Search, signifies to search
by uncovering and making things naked, that are secret and hidden; as if a man
should search for gold, in the mine, being in the bowels of the earth, where
there is much earth, but little gold oar. Thereby showing, that sin is
crept into corners, and lies close in the marow, and lurketh like a serpent in
the bones, and that our ways (being many) are not easily discerned; like the
way of a bird in the air, of a fish in the water, or a moule in the earth.
This made David cry out in the 19. Psalm, Ps. 19. 12.
Who can understand his faults? cleanse me from my secret sins. And Solomon
says, Ec. 7. 31.
that God made man righteous, but they have found out Many Inventions; even so
many devises, and so many ways, as exceed in number the hairs of their heads,
and the stars of the heaven. Therefore he that would know and try his ways
aright, and repent as he ought, must very diligently search and view them,
prying into all the corners of his heart, and observing all the courses of his
life. There be four strong reasons, which should move us to perform this
duty. First, man's heart is a mine of deceit, and a sea of subtilty, and
therefore unless he dig deep into it, and diue low, or sound it to the
bottom, he is very like to beguile himself, thinking all is well, when nothing
is well. Many men's hearts are like many Quag-mires, which are rotten ground
within, and yet seem solid earth above: and like the painted sepulchers, Matt.
23. 17.
which our Savior speaks of, fair without, but foul within; therefore if we
look but on the outside of our hearts, we may be deceived. Secondly, the times
are so corrupt and vicious, and sin is grown so shameless (like a strumpet)
and yet so subtle (like a serpent or sophister) as that if we search not very
circumspectly and iudiciously, we shall pass by many vices, which lie close
covered under the names of virtues; like some young hunters that bauke the
hare, thinking they saw nothing but a clot. Covetousness is counted good
husbandry: drunkenness goes for good fellowship: pride is counted
cleanliness: Machiauilianisme is reputed policy: usury of many is thought but
thrift: painting of faces is pleaded for: Plays (though lascivious) are
defended: swaggering and swearing are made the marks of noble spirits: yea
what sin is so vile, which is not either made of or minsed? yea there be many
works that men do, which are good as concerning their outward substance, and
glorious in appearance, and yet evil in the doer, being done without faith and
for sinister respects, and therefore abominable in the eyes of God; something
like the fruit which grows near to the Dead Sea, Mare m^rtuum.
which being ripe, makes a fair show, but within is full of cinders or ashes,
as some do write. Wherefore if we search but superficially and not thoroughly,
we shall take and embrace evil for good, as Ixion did the cloud for Juno. And
because sin is become so wily, as that it presents it self unto us in the
habit of the harmless sheep, being in heart a wolf, we must desire God to
open our eyes, and take away the web of ignorance. For if we want the eye of
the mind (which is knowledge) as Izhak wanted the eyes of his body: surely,
Genesis 27.
as he bestowed his blessing upon the younger in stead of the elder, upon
Jacob in stead of Esau, so we shall set our heart amiss, and bestow our
blessing wrong, taking vice for virtue, because it comes disguised.

Thirdly, we had need search our ways very surely, because the seed of all
sins is sown in our hearts and there has taken root, and shall not till
we die be altogether consumed. Now if our hearts be polluted, our ways cannot
be pure. For if the fountain be bitter, the brook cannot be very sweet: and
if the root be corrupted, the branches fare the worse. When men call to mind
the murder of Caine, the churlishnes of Nabal, the unnatural ambition of
Absolon, the wickedness of Haman, the cruelty of Herod, the malice of the
Jews, the treason of Judas, the blasphemies of Julian, and the barbaritie of
those savage Romanists that would have blown up the Parliament house, An. 1605.
they do condemn and accuse them to the pit of hell from whence they came.
Beloved, there is in us by nature an inclination unto all these sins, and a
thousand other; therefore we must observe our ways very narrowly, least we
should be overtaken, or if we find pollution in them, that we may in time
redress them. If a king knew certainly that there were traitors in all the
quarters of his kingdom, which plotted his death and the destruction of his
Kingdom, he would be very wary how or where he walked, and he would be as
industrious in searching out his enemies. If a man knew the^e were some in his
house that would (if they could) cut his throat and rob him, he would be
very circumspect. If a City had certain intelligence that there were some in
the town, that would either fire it over their heads, or betray it (if it were
possible) to their enemies, surely they would not be secure, but would use all
means possible to find them out. Verily (beloved) we are pestered with
enemies. Our ways are many, our works are many, and not one of all these, no
not the best, but it is polluted with some sin or other. So many sins as a
man has, so many enemies he has to the salvation of his soul: To. 6. 23.
for the ways of sin is death. But our hearts, our heads, our hands, yea all
the powers of our souls, are tainted with sins, all which conspire against
us with Satan, to work the eternal destruction of our souls and bodies.
Therefore it stands us upon to use all diligence to find the^ out.

Fourthly, we are by God commanded to keep our hearts With all diligence,
Pro. 4. 23
which we can never do, unless we view them thoroughly, and search our ways
with exceeding care. How can a Governor of a City keep and defend it in the
time of war, when the enemies do begirt it, unless he have a narrow eye unto
all the in-rodes and out-rodes of his soldiers, and to the behavior of the
townes-men. So we shall never defend the Castles of our souls, and preserve
them from battery, and being taken, having so many enemies within us, without
us; before and behind, yea on every side, unless we do well observe the
in-rodes of our senses, the out-rodes of our affections, the flight of our
thoughts, the cries of our consciences, the works of our hands, and the
ways of our feet, Otherwise we may as soon keep a foe to molest us, as a
friend to maintain us: a Judas to betray us, as a Joseph to befriend us: a
false-hearted Dalila, as a faithful Jonathan. Wherefore (brethren) as we
either respect the glory of God, or desire our own peace and prosperity, let
us make conscience of this duty. Shall many men take pains to commit
wickedness, Ier. 9. 5.
and shall not we take pains to please God by doing of his will? 1. Pet. 2.
15.
But as Peter says, This is the will of God, that by well doing ye may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men. So I say, this is the will of God, that
by diligent searching of your ways, ye may be prepared to repent of your
ignorance, and to forsake all your follies, and so to stop the mouth of your
accusing consciences, and silence those that condemn your profession for your
notorious vices. Know ye not that all the duties of Christianity must be
performed with zeal and diligence? He that requires a sound conversion,
cannot away with slack and slothful searching. We must strive to enter in at
the strait gate, Mat. 7. 13
if we will be partakers of heavenly glory: even so we must strive to find
out our ways, if we desire either to walk aright in the way of life, or to
change our ways if they tend to death. Prou. 27. 23.
Must men (as Solomon advises) be diligent to know the state of their
flocks, and must they take heed to their herds? and does it beseem us to
neglect the knowledge of our ways, and to be careless in keeping of our
hearts? Shall we roll every stone, and use the utmost means to raise our
selves in this world; and shall we not use this first means, that we may be
reclaimed to God in this world, and may be raised by him in the world to
come? No pardon, no peace: no penitencie, no pardon: no repentance, no
remission. And do we think to repent of our ways before we know them? And
is it possible to know them without faithful searching of them? What is the
cause men turn so much, and return so little? Mouent non pro mouent.
What is the reason, that men move so fast, but move not forward? Surely, one
reason is, because they do not understand their state aright, which no man can
attain unto, without accurate and faithful searching of his ways. He that
would know the cause why his corn thriueth not, why his vines flourish not,
and why his trees prosper not, must search diligently for weeds, for
superfluous branches, and other annoyances. So he that would know, why he
grows not in grace, and thriueth not in knowledge: why he does either go
backward, as the shadow did in the dial of Ahaz, Isa. 38. 8. Ios. 10. 13 Psa.
19. 5.
or stand still as Ioshuas, sun did, and not go forwards as David's did,
which comes forth as a bridegrooms out of his chamber, and roioyceeh like a
mighty man to run his race, he must diligently ransacke his heart, and search
his ways, and so he shall perceive the reason, and discern the lets.
Therefore (beloved) as we desire the grounds of our hearts should be fertile,
the vine of Gods graces should spread, and the tree of our souls should
flourish: as we desire the peace of conscience, and that we should return to
God, and God to us, let us with all fidelity, search and find out our ways.
For though it be no cause to work it, no merit to deserve it, yet is it by the
blessing of God, a notable furtherance and preparation; even the first stone
toward our spiritual building, and the first step to the true conversion of
our hearts and minds unto God. And this shall suffice for the first branch of
the Prophets exhortation. The second follows. And try our ways. Doct. 3.
The original word of that which is translated (Try) signifies to search
out, try, or examine to the ground or bottom of a thing. Whence I conclude,
that we ought to the utmost examine and prove all our ways* whether they be
foul or fair, right or wrong. And here I will first show why we ought to
make this trial, and then by what. For the first; this trial is a means of
thankfulness. For if after serious examination, we do find them good, we
shall be stirred up to magnify the name of God, for directing our ^eete aright
in the paths of his precepts, and for preserving us from falling down and
wandering out. If we find them evil, yet then we shall be provoked to praise
him for sparing of us, and not taking us away in our sins, as we did deserve, A
servant or child cannot but commend his masters, and his father^ leuitie, that
with patience does bear his offenses, and forbear to punish him, as he has
transgressed. So we, that are the sons and servants of the Lord, cannot (if
there be but one grain of grace within us) but extol his love and
long-suffring toward us, in bearing with our sins, and sparing of his
judgments, far otherwise, then by trial of our ways, we find that we
could either merit or expect. And as the man, that considers by day what
dangers he did escape by dark, is occasioned to give thanks to God for
preserving of him: so when we shall duly consider, how near we were to the pit
of destruction, by reason of our sins, and yet how favorable God has been
unto us (even then when we could not see to walk aright) as that he did not
confound us in our ways, we are occasioned and provoked also to glorify the
name of God for moderating his justice toward us*

Secondly, the true trial of our ways will be a means to further our seeking
of God, and his grace. For when a man after trial perceives his tickle estate
by sin, he is prepared (if not provoked) to seek out for safe deliverance.
As a man perceiving the danger of his disease seeks to the skillful Physician
for a remedy: so when a man by diligent and faithful searching and
examination of his ways, shall discern his defectes, and the dangerous
diseases of his soul, he is incited to seek to Christ the only true
Physician of our souls for cure. And as the swallow perceiving her self
almost blind, presently seeks out the herb Celandine, and the Heart feeling
himself shot with arrow, does (as some say) by and by run to the herb Ditany,
or Dictandor: so when a man finds himself by trial almost blind with sin,
and his soul stricken with the darts of iniquity, he is prepared (if not
persuaded) to seek out to Christ our Celandine, our Dictander, yea our
Panacaea, which heals all our spiritual maladies and diseases; the Plethory
of pride, the Consumption of envy, the Dropsy of Covetousness, the Frenzy
of anger, the Crampe of fearfulness, the Lethargy of forgetfulness, the
Apoplexy of a dead and flinty spirit. Furthermore, as the King of some
country, seeing the multititude of his enemies, both foreign and domestical,
and perceiving his inabilitie to withstand or overcome them (as it were)
constrained to seek for help to his neighbors abroad: so when the true
Christian man by trying of his heart and ways, shall perceive his enemies to
be both mighty and many, and himself insufficient to conquer and subdue them,
he is moved to seek abroad to his neighbor and elder brother Christ Jesus,
that so by the virtue of his death, and operation of his spirit, they may be
quelled and subdued.

Thirdly, this trial is a means to prepare a man for the work of repentance,
and returning from finne. Also the physician by one receipt prepares a way for
an other: and as the Carpenter or Ioyner by one of his tools procures a way
for an other: so the Physician of our souls, and the great Carpenter of our
spiritual building, by causing us to prove our ways, prepares us to redress
them, and fitteth us for further works. The traveler perceiving himself to
be out of his right way, does presently bethink with himself, how he may
come into it again: so we that are travelers and wayfaring men, perceiving by
true trial, that we are not in our right way, are thereupon forthwith
disquieted, and moved to go back again or search it out. When a bird
perceiues the danger of the snare or net, she seeks to fly away: so when the
child of God sees what damage he is like to sustain by reason of his
sinful courses, which he has found out by faithful examination, and what a
net of venga^ce he is like to have cast over him, he does seek to escape and
get away.

Fourthly, God has two fannes: the one of his law, the other of his
judgments. God has two fires: one of his word, an other of his wrath. He
that would not be fanned with the fan of his judgments, mus^ fan himself
with the fan of his law: and he that would not be burnt up with the fire
of his wrath, must prove himself in time with the fire of his word. He that
tries his ways, whether they be good or evil, is very like to escape all
danger: whereas he that ploddeth on, and never regards them, is like to
stumble on the stones of vengeance, and fall upon the stakes of Gods
indignation, which are every where laid and set in those ways, which are not
strait and good. Pro. 16. 2. and 21. 2.
To conclude this first point, All the ways of man (says Solomon) are clean
and right in his own eyes: Pro. 30. 12
and there is (as Agur affirms) a generation that are pure in their own
conceit, and yet there is no man living void of sin. For as there is no
metal without some dross, and no body without some corruption: Eccl 7. 22
so there is no soul without some sin, and no man so pure who has not some
pollution in him. Wherefore, seeing men are naturally given to sooth up
themselves, and to think better of their estate then reason requires (for by
nature the whole frame of our hearts is Only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5.
and grace in this life does but waste and weaken nature, and not wholly
consume it) it is a thing both convenient, Romans 7. 18. 23.
commendable, and necessary to try our selves to the utmost; as also all our
ways, least we do deceive our selves, thinking our condition safe and sound,
being in deed and truth (whatsoever in appearance) corrupt and wretched; like
a fuzball (it may be) which seems solid, but being broken or trod upon,
does straightway vanish like a leame of lightning. And thus much concerning the
reasons which should make us try our ways. It remains now to show by what
we ought to make our trial. For if a man measure with a wrong wand, and weigh
with false weights, or a deceitful balance, he shall delude himself, and
make but bad work. If thou would try thy ways by humane learning, it
cannot truly tell thee what the nature and desert of sin is in all respects:
yea it makes that sometimes a virtue, which God esteems but a vice.
Secondly, if a man will be tried by his companions, undoubtedly (if they wear
the cognizance of the world, and be of her stamping) they will persuade him
his state is good, and that he is a right good companion, though his case in
deed be very vile and lamentable. If thou consult with thine own flesh, it will
make thee believe all is well. It, like an unruly jade cannot endure the
reigns; and like many malecontent and froward malefactors, cannot away with
trial; therefore if it be judge, it will never be condemned. If we will be
tried by the church of Rome, she will teach us that many mortal sins are but
venial and trifles: she will persuade us that murdering of Princes,
rebellion, equiuocating (o^ lying) and many other horrible sins, are in some
case lawful and laudable. Fifthly, if we will try our ways by the ways of
the world, and her children, then we shall approve that as good which God
de^esteth as most wicked, and condemn that as evil, which is very good and
acceptable in the sight of God. For the world is blind, and her judgment is
corrupt and partial: her scoales are false, and her weights unequal. Whence
it is, that virtue oftentimes walks on foot upon the ground, when vice does
ride upon the horse, and is rejected when that is received. Yea we see the
world like an Alcumist, has made a vice of virtue, and turned vice into a
virtue; so as that the profession of virtue, is reputed ignominious, and
derided of the world; therefore she can be no competent judge. Sixthly, if we
will try our estate by the Devil, Who is a liar, Ioh. 8. 44.
he will either persuade us that our case is desperate, when yet there is hope
in respect of Gods mercy, and Christ's merits: or else he will whisper in our
ears, that all is well, when in truth our condition is very pitiful, and with
tears to be deplored. And this Lullabee he sings usually to the witch, till
she come to the stake, and to the carnal man, till he come to his grave, and
so rocks them fast a sleep in the cradle of sensual security. He speaks all
for his own advantage, and therefore his sentence is to be rejected and
exploded. By what then must we try our ways? even by the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord. For they declare unto us the will of God, and show us
what we are to will, and what to nill: what to love, and what to leave: what
to perform, and what to pass by. These will teach us, when and how to walk:
when we are to sit, and when to stand: when to rest, and when to rise and run.
These will guide us aright, and show us when we are wrong. For the statutes of
the Lord are right, and his commandments give light unto the eyes. Psalm. 19.
8. 11. Psalm. 119. 104, 105. Psalm. 119. 144, 151.
By them are his servants made circumspect, and purchase understanding. Thy
word (says David) is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths, the
righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting, and all thy commandments are
true. Gods precepts must be our practice* and his law must be the line of our
obedience. His word must be the rule of our works, and the determiner of all
our ways. All is not gold which glisters: all coin that has Caesar's image
upon it, is not current, but sometimes counterfeit: neither is all good corn,
that so seems. We must therefore take unto us the Touchstone of Gods word,
and the Fan of his law, and make our trial by them; and so we shall
discern which is gold, and which is gilded copper; which is of Gods own
stamping* and which has come from the Mint-house of our flesh, and from the
forge of the devil, and which is good and clean wheat, and which corrupt and
chaffie.

The consideration of these points, Use 1.
teaches us in the first place, to be careful to know and understand all the
commandments of God, legal, and Evangelical; because by these we must prove
our ways, as malefactors are tried by the Law. Psalm. 119. 15. 18.
David says, I will meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy ways. Open my
eyes that I may see the wonders of thy Law, Psalm. 119. 24, 64, 73
and teach me thy statutes. Thy testimonies are my delight, and my counselors.
Give me understanding, that I may learn thy commandments. Shall we labor to
know the laws of men, and to ^^derstand the secrets of nature? and shall we
not labor to learn Go^^ law, and to understand the secr^t^ thereof? Shall we
get stones to try our gold, whether it be pure metal, or but base? and
shall we have scales and weights to prove whether it be light or weighty? And
shall we not get the knowledge of Gods word, that we may prove our ways? It
will show us their nature, and is able to sound our hearts to the bottom.
Therefore all ignorant persons are far from the performance of this weighty
duty.

Use. 2.
Secondly, the consideration of these things, serves to convince and condemn
the multitude of negligence and frowardness. Some cannot try their ways,
because they want the eye of understanding, and the true touchstone of of all
truth and falsehood, of vice and virtue: therefore though they sometimes attempt
to try their ways, yet because their eyes are out, and guess by groping, as
Isaac did in an other matter, they are vsuallye (if not always) deceived, as
well (or rather worse) then he.

Some again will not make this trial; like many men that have run long and
much on the score, and cannot endure to hear of a reckoning. Thirdly, there
are some that dare not view the Law, Occultum quatiente auimo tortore
flagellu^, Iuuen.
it seems vexed with the gripes of a guilty conscience, and possessed with
the spirit of slavish fear; like the Elephant, who being guilty to his own
deformity, cannot abide to see his face in fair water: and like slaves, that
being afraid of the whip, cannot endure to have their offenses scanned, or
themselves examined. Finally, some will indeed try their ways, but not
thoroughly, only coldly and ouerly: and some will try one way, but not an
other: some, but not all. Whereas the Prophet exhorts us to make an exact and
perfect trial of all, and not of some only, and therefore he says; Let us
try our ways, Use. 3.
and not way, or some of them.

Wherefore (brethren) let us use all care and conscience in this duty. Let us
learn to know Gods will, and labor to understand his commandments, and
withal, let us faithfully try All our ways, so near as is possible by them.
Would thou see the face of thy soul? then behold it in the Glass of Gods
law, and thou shall easily perceive whether it be fair or foul, whether pale
or fresh? Would thou discern the bottom of thy heart, whether it be clear
and grauelly, or muddie and clammy? sound it with the long line of Gods law,
and with the weighty plummet of his precepts, and thou shall obtain thy
desire. Would thou know the condition of thy ways? then measure them with
the met-wand of his word, and examine them by the old and ancient way of the
faithful Patrairkes and Prophets, chalked out in the sacred scriptures.
Would thou turn out of by-pathes, and walk aright, and with an even foot?
then view thy ways with diligence. I have considered my ways (says David)
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. Surely, Ps. 119. 59.
that man which proves his ways aright, is in the high way to heaven, and in
a fair forwardness, to make a sound conversion. Now he proves his ways
aright, that does it sincerely, cheerfully, diligently, maturely, constantly,
and in conscience of Gods commandment, desiring pardon in the name of Christ,
for the imperfection of his work, and striving daily to amend it. And thus
much for this third Doctrine. Doct. 4.
A fourth follows. In that Jeremy says, Let US search and try our ways. I
gather first, that no place or privilege, no calling or descent whatsoever,
can exempt a man from the performance of this duty. These were Israelites, the
seed of Abraham, men of diverse ages and degrees, and himself a Prophet. The
yoke of Gods commandments is lai^ upon every neck. And why should not gold
be tried as well as meaner metal?

Doct. 5.
2. I conclude again, that poverty, penury, crosses and calamities must not so
dismay us, as that we do forget, or should think it too late to search and
examine our ways, as if God had utterly cast us off. These people were in
extreme distress. Lam. 1. 1. 3. Lam. 2. 2, 11, 12, 20, ^1.
Jerusalem was become a tributary. Judah was carried away captive. All the
habitions of Jacob were destroyed. Their children and sucklinges swooned in the
streets, and perished in their mothers bosom through hunger. The women were
constrained to eat their own children. The old men lay in the streets, the
young men and virgins were slain with the sword. Lam. 4. 4.
The tongue of the sucking child claue to the roof of his mouth for thirst. 5.
They that were brought up in scarlet, embraced the dung. 10.
The hands of the pitiful women, did seethe their own children for meat.
They drank their water for money, Lam, 5. 4, 5, 12, 14.
and their necks were under persecution. Their Princes were hanged up, and
their Elders were disgraced. All the palaces of Israel were consumed. Lam. 2.
5, 15.
Jerusalem was hissed at. All their enemies barked against them. The Temple of
the Lord was profaned. Lam. 3. 46 Lam. 2. 7, 20. Lam. 4. 16
The Prophets were slain in the sanctuary. No mercy was showed to the Elders,
and no reverence given to the Priests. Yet notwithstanding all this their
misery, the Prophet exhorts them to search and try their ways, and to
return unto the Lord; thereby showing, that there was hope of recovery, and
no time past, to ransacke and reform themselves. For the Lord is rich in
love, the door of his grace, and the bowels of his mercy, are never shut up
against the penitent. Ps. 145. 9. Ps. 89. 32, 33.
His mercy is over all his works, and he will not always chide, neither is
his love removed from his children, when he does visit their transgressio^
with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes. Therefore no affliction (how
grievous soever) must daunt our spirits, and dull the edge of our courages, and
make us abstain from the performance of these works, as if all labor herein
were spent in vain.

Doct. 6.
3. Furthermore, hence I gather, that even those which are actually converted
and regenerated, had need to search and try their ways, and may very well be
exhorted thereunto. The Prophet was a holy man of God, not only by virtue of
his special calling, by being a Prophet sanctified and set apart for the
service of God, but also in respect of his general calling; for without doubt
he was the child of God, and so no question were some of those, to whom he
speaks. The Romans and Corinthians were many of them truly sanctified, Romans
1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2 Romans 15. 14. 15.
yet Paul bestows many exhortations upon them, and some not much unlike to
this. There is no river without some mud, 1. Ioh. 1. 8
no way without so^e mire, dirt or dust: so there is no man without some
corruption, and no man's way void of all uncleanness; therefore every man
(how good soever) had need to search himself and prove his ways.
Furthermore, as there is no ground so fat, which may not sometimes be well
watered with a shower of rain: so there is no man's heart so fertile, but may
abide the sweet and wholesome dew of heavenly exhortations. Is there any vine
without some superfluous sprig, or any tree without a water-branch? so there is
no vine in Gods vineyard, no plant in all his Orch-yard here upon the earth,
but has his fault. 1. Ki. 8. 46
For there is no man (as Solomon affirms) that sins not. Now godly
exhortations are as pruning knives to lop off the superfluous branches of
sin, and as the river Nilus is to part of Egypt, so these must be as manure
to fatten, and as water to moysten the barren and dry grounds of our hearts.
Which things no doubt shall be effected by them, if it please the Spirit of God
to open the pores of of our souls to receive them in, and the blessed Son of
righteousness to shine upon us with the beams of his love, and to warm us
with the heat of his grace. Wherefore we ought with all reverence and
obedience, both hear, and bear the word of exhortation.

Doct. 7.
Lastly, from this word (us) I conclude, from the Prophets example, who
includes himself in this exhortation, that it is fit and commendable in the
Minister (though he stand in the room of Christ) sometimes to include
himself in his exhortations. 2. Cor 5. 20
Though it be lawful to say with David, Examine your own heart: Psalm. 4. 4.
and with Paul, Let every man examine himself; yet it is neither unlawful,
nor vncommendable for us to say also with Jeremy; Let us search and examine our
ways. For first, Ministers are wayfaring men as well as others; secondly,
they are subject to erring as well as other men. Iam. 5. 17.
Helias was (as James says) subject to such passions, as other of Gods
children are. Peter sinned, as other pro^essors did. Thirdly, by this means,
their exhortations will be more forcible; seeing they persuade them to do no
worse, then they either would, or should do themselves. Lastly, shall the
wicked say to a man, Come with us, cast in thy lot among us, Prou 1. 11. 14.
Prou. 7. 18 Ps. 64. 5.
we will lay wait for blood? Shall the harlot say, Let us take our pleasure
in dalliance? Shall ungodly men exhort and encourage one an other to commit
wickedness, and shall not the godly Minister animate and exhort himself with
others, to do that which is commanded of God, commendable among men, and
comfortable to the conscience? He that speaks not unto himself, as well as
to an other, is either like a clock, that tells the time for others; or like a
mark in the way, which rotteth it self, whiles it stands to direct others.
Therefore, as Jacob set party-colored rods before the sheep, Genesis 30. 37, 38,
39.
that they might bring forth young of party color, and so they did: so let all
Ministers set before their eyes the practice of this Prophet, that they may
walk in his steps, and do as he has done before them. And thus much for this
seventh instruction.

Doct. 8.
Moreover, though the Prophet knew full well that God had ordained and ordered
all things in an eternal and immutable decree, and therefore had eternally
determined who should search and try their ways and turn to God, and who
should not; yet he does exhort them all indifferently to the performance of
this duty. Gods counsel must not make them lazy, his decree must not make
them do nothing, or keep the Prophet from preaching to the^. For as he has
decreed the end, so he has determined the means and way thereunto. As he
has ordained a man's salvation, so has he subordeined his conversion, calling,
and justification. As he has eternally set down, who shall turn unto him, so
he has eternally set down, that he shall search and examine his ways. God
did mean that Paradise should be a fat and fruitful place, and therefore
he provided a river to water it, Genesis 2. 10
which went out of Eden. God had decreed that the walls of Jericho should be
cast down, and so withal, for the effecting of his purpose, he did appoint
that seven Priests should sound seven trumpets, Josh 6. 4* 3
and that all the people should shout very loud, and so the walls should fall
flat down. So God has decreed that his Church should be a fair and fruitful
Garden: and to this purpose he has appointed, that it should be watered with
wholesome exhortations, and has appointed his ministers to keep and dress it.
God has from all eternity purposed that the gates of hell, and walls of
sin, should in some be flung from their hinges, and shaken to the ground: and
to effect his purpose, he has commanded ^is Prophets and Ministers to sound
out the ^rumpet of his law and gospel, at the sound whereof he raises the dead
from the grave of sin, and dri^eth down (when and in whom he pl^ase^h) the
^owers of pride, the bulwarks of concupisence, the castles of iniq^i^y, and
sorely shakes (if not shiuereth) all the muniments and foretresses of the
devil.

Use 1.
First therefore, let all Gods Ministe^s, with this holy Prophet, remember to
perform their office, notwithstanding the immutabilitie of Gods eternal
counsel.

Use 2.
Secondly, let all men be careful to use the means, as well as they are desirous
to attain unto the end; for otherwise they may justly fear the wo^st. For the
holy Ghost faith, that the sons of Eli did not obey their fathers voice, 1.
Sam. 2. 25.
Because the Lord would slay them Therefore, ^f we shall contemn the counsel
of the Prophet, it is to be f^ared, that God has a purpose to take us away in
our sins.

Thirdly, Use. 3.
all those profane and godles wretches, are to be condemned, that cast off all
care of religion, and live like monsters in the world. It is (they say)
bootelesse for them to search, to try, to strive to serve the Lord, conside^ing
that their death or life is in the decree of God set down without possibility
of alteration. This which they say, is both false and foolish: but it is an ill
need that will grow on no ground. Foolish it is; for if they speak the truth,
they may as well expect to live, and yet abstain from me^^e and drink. And it
is as false as foolish; For as God has decreed life and found repentance, so
he has decreed faith, obedience, searching and examination of our ways. The
holy Ghost teaches, that Promotion comes neither Ps. 75. 6.
from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South b^t 1. Chro. 2^. 12.
from the Lord: so he shows that the way to rise with comfort, is to honor
God, to wait upon him, and not to swer^e from his ways. For 1. Sam. ^.30.
God will honor those that honor him, and will Ps. 37. 34
exalt those that attend upon him and keep his way. Act. 27. 22, 23, 31, 34,
43.
Paul assuredly knew that none of those, that were in the ship with him should
perish, yet he did exhort them to receive their meat, and told the Centurion
and his soldiers, that if the ship-men stayed not in the ship, they
themselus should perish: and when the soldiers afterward were purposed to
kill the prisoners, the Centurion moved by God, hindered their intent, and so
all were preserved. Therefore let no man think it needelesse to convert, if
God have decreed his salvation, or labor lost to search and prove his ways,
because of the constant nature of Gods eternal counsel: but rather let him
therefore use these means, that so he may both show himself submissiue to
this voice of God, and gather assurance to himsel^e, that he is one of those,
whom God has decreed to receive to mercy. Do we think that the Prophet
would have exhorted us to do it, if it had been needless? Are Gods
commandments idle and unprofitable? He that will live, must labor: he that
desires health, must exercise his joints: he that would be learned, must use
his wi^s, and study: so he that will be saved, must repent: and he that would
repent, must search and try his ways. Ps. 119. 9
If a young man would redress his way, he must look unto it according to Gods
word: and so if a young man would know whether his way be good or evil, he
must examine it by his word. He that desires to know the disposition of his
friend, must try him: so he that desires to know the affections of his heart,
and the nature of his ways, must prove them, that he may do with them, Exodus
4. 3.
as Moses did with his rod, which while it was a rod, he kept it in his hand,
and used it familiarly, but when it proved a serpent, he ran from it. He
which neglects the means, barreth himself of the end. He that will not
work in summer, is likely to starve in winter. To proceed, Let us search and
try OUR ways.

Doct. 9.
For So Much as Jeremy requires that we should search and try our own ways, I
gather, that our principal and special care and diligence must be in
learning to know our selves, and laboring to discern our own courses* He
does not say, search thy neighbors way, but thine own: he says not, let us
try the ways of the Assyrians, Egyptians, or Aethiopians, but let us try our
ways. So David says, Psalm. 4. 4. Zeph. 2. 1.
Examine your own heart upon your head* Zephaniah says, Search your selves:
and Paul says, Let every man examine himself. 1. Cor. 11. 28 2. Cor. 13. 15.
And again, Prove your selves whether yoe are in the faith; examine your
selves: know ye not your selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, e^cept ye be
reprobates? The saying is, Nosce te ipsum* Know thy self. And the Apostle
says, Gal. 4. 4, 5
Let ouery man prove his own work, for every man shall bear his own
burden. Every soul must answer for his own sin. 2. Cor. 5. 10.
Every man must receive the things which are done in his own body. It is
wisdom therefore for every man to search and examine his own ways. Who can
know thy ways so well as thy self? Who will be so faithful to thee as thy
self? Egomet sum proximus mihi: every man is nearest to himself. Amor a
seipso, love begins with a man's self: how can he be faithful to another,
that is careless of himself? With what face can a man offer to take a moa^e
out of his brothers eye, having a great beam in his own? How dare thou
counsel they neighbor to search and try his ways, and nothing regardest
thine own? What have thou to do to take the word of exhortation into thy
mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast the word of
exhortation behind thy back? Why do thou meddle with other m^ns maladies,
if thou neglect thine own? Physician, first learn to cure thy self.

If a man lay but a very little object close to his eye, it will so take up his
sight, as that he shall not see many things a far off: so if we would set our
own ways before our eyes, and view them as we ought to do, we should not
be so curious and cunning in searching other men's, If a man's house be on fire,
as well (or rather ill) as his neighbors, questionless he will not be so
careful for his neighbors, as that he will be careless of his own. Our
souls are on fire with sin: why then should any man neglect himself, and
forget to quench his own, and bestow all his pains (if any at all) in slaking
of his neighbors? Seeing our ways are as foul and as uneven as our
neighbors, why should not our chiefest care be to repair and make straight
our own, unless we had rather see our neighbors shoes cleaner then our
own? Is it unseemly for a Prince to be skillful in the state of foreign
kingdoms, and either negligent or ignorant of his own? And is it seemly for
us to search and examine the conditions of other men, and never to discuss our
selves, and search our own? Every man has a Commonwealth within him, le^ him
be most conversant and occupied in his own. It is no point of good husbandry
for a man to acquaint himself with his neighbors grounds, goods, corn or
cattle, and to know neither the nature, the names, nor the number of his own:
therefore Solomon says, Pro. 27. 23.
Be diligent to know the state of thy (thine own) flock, and not thy
neighbors. Even so, it is neither Christian thrift, nor wisdom to be
curious in prying into other men's ways, and laborious in judging them, and to
be obliuious or ignorant of our own; and therefore Jeremy says, Let us search
and try our (even our own) ways, every man his own ways by himself. As
every shepherd looks to his own sheep, every mariner to his own mast,
every founder to his own metal: so let every man look to his own ways.
The wise virgins were careful for their own lampe^: so let us look to our
own professions. The Be trims her own have: so let us dress our own hearts.
The bird frequenteth her own neast. The Cony keeps her own burrow. Pro. 31.
27
The good huswife minds her own house, and carries it about with her like a
snaile: so we must haunt our own hearts, and have greatest respect, and a most
watchful eye to our own ways. The good heardsman chiefly searches his own
flocks. The good husbandman does most of all sea^ch and try the quality and
nature of his own soil: so we must chi^fly husband, search and examine our
own souls, our own affections, our own works, and our own ways. The
Apostle says, that he that provides not for his own, 1. Tim. 5. 8
denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. So it may be truly said of
him that dooh not search and prove his own ways, that he does deny
obedience unto God, and is in a wretched condition, not able to prove himsel^e
better then a Pagan, setting aside his outward profession, and name of a
Christian, which stands him in no more stead, then for a rank beggar to be
reputed rich; or for a man to be entitled Emperor of all the world, and yet
to want a house to shroud his head. Here then comes to be condemned the common
custom of many curious and captious persons, that forget themselves. and busy
themselves in searching and examining their neighbors. Pro. 7. 11.
Solomon says of the harlo^, that she is bab^ing and loud and her feet cannot
abide in her house. So these men delight in babbling of other men's sins, they
are loud and shril in sounding out the faults of others^, and in censuring and
taxing their ways, but they pass by themselves, they love not to tarry
within the doors of their own hearts. They will search others to the quick,
and pass their verdict on their ways to the highest strain of the Law, but
in the mean time they meddle not with themselves, or make but a very par^iall
trial. These men like crows, are best at ease, when they are feeding their
corrupt humors upon the carrion of other men's sins, or like the flesh-flie,
that always delights to sit upon the soar. I tax not the lawful searching and
examination of other men's ways, made by the lawful Magistrate, the godly
Minister, the honest Master, and religious parent, or of any other, that
keeps himself within the lists and limits of his calling. Only this I say,
let curious inquisition be abandoned: and let him that searches and tries
the ways of other men, be mindful of his own; lest he prove no better (at
the best) then either the lantern, which bears a light for others to see
by: Caprificus.
or the wild fig tree, which (as they say) gives that to others, which it
has not it self. So let him take heed, lest he be an occasion and help to
others for to repent by discovering their ways unto them, and yet be through
his own default the destruction of himself, in that he did not discover and
ponder his own. Thus much concerning the two former branches of the Prophets
exhortation, which I beseech you (brethren) be mindful of. Shall the Ox know
his owner, Isa. 1.^.
and the Ass his masters crib, and shall we be ignorant of our ways, and not
know our selves? If we would not, then we must search and try them. Would
thou have the vessel of thine heart cleansed of the lees of sin? Ezekiel. 36. 25.
As thou must get it rinsed with the clensing water of Gods Spirit, so thou
must search and examine it thy self; or otherwise thou will not think it is
so full of dregs and corruption as it is, and so will be more secure then is
meet.

I proceed now to the third bra^ch, Doct. 10.
And let us turn again unto the Lord. Doct. 10.
Whence I gather these two Doctrines. First, that sins sets a man out of his
right way, and makes him wander from the Lord: for he that will have
fellowshippe and favor with God, is exhorted to turn from his sins. Sin
does vntune the strings of the heart, and puts the limbs of the soul out of
joint. It makes one stray like a sheep, and leads one from God to the devil;
from life to death, from heaven to hell. Therefore, though it sometimes bring
honey with it in the mouth, like a Be, yet it never is without a sting in the
tail. For that which Solomon says of the harlot, is m^st true of sin. Though
it be as soft as oil in the beginning, and as sweet as the honey comb to the
taste of the sinner, Pro. 5. 4. 5.
yet the end thereof is bitter as worm wood, and as sharp as a two edged
sword, the feet thereof go down to death, and the steps take hold on hell:
it causes many to fall down wounded, Pro^. 26.
and slaieth the mighty, Wherefore then should men delight in sin, and
embrace the bosom of iniquity?

Secondly, Doct. 11.
and so to conclude this text, from these words of the Prophet, I am taught to
teach you, That it is not sufficient for a man only to search and try his
ways, but he must also turn from them (if he find them wrong) and seriously
repent himself of them. For therefore we search and try them, that discerning
them to be evil, we may forsake them. The end of fishing is not angling, but
taking; the end of fowling, is catching; the end of plowing is not working,
but sowing: so the end of searching and proving our ways, is, that we may
repair them, and and return to God. Therefore when the wise man had said,
Pro. 4. 26 27.
Ponder the path of thy feet: he adds immediately, And let all thy ways be
ordered aright, turn not to the right hand, nor to the left, but remove thy
foot from evil. As the Sessions and Assizes are held for the repressing of
enormities and injuries, and for the suppressing of irregular and vicious
persons: so we hold this Assizes in our souls, for the arraigning, enditing,
examining, judging and condemning of our sins, that dying unto sin, we may
live unto God with peace of conscience, and tranquillity of mind. Secondly, if
we do only search and examine our ways, and proceed no further, we shall make
our selves more inexcusable, and increase our condemnation. For if after the
performance of these things, we shall perceive our ways to be our own, and
not the ways of God, and will yet content our selves, and not seek to mend
them, we shall the more displease his Majesty, we shall aggrauate our
punishment, and make our selves more guilty of our own destructions. For it
is not so much the committing of sin which condemns the sinner, as the
continuing in it, without conversion from it, being seen and known. If a man
were fallen into deep dungeon or pit, and would not seek to come forth, when
he might be delivered if he sought in time, he makes himself guilty of his
own death. If a man by searching of his wounds, did perceive the present and
future danger of them, and yet would hide them, and use no means to have them
cured, he may thank himself for his present pain, and future perishing. If a
man did either see or foresee some ignominy, ruin or calamity would befall
him, and yet would take no pains to remove or prevent it, he should show
himself unwise, and careless of his good. Beloved, what man soever shall
examine and search his ways, shall find himself to be in a dungeon of
iniquity by his nature, Sin inuironeth or hemmeth a man about. Heb. 12. 1.
he shall perceive himself to be environed with sin on every side, he shall
see his soul polluted with the leprosy of sin, and wounded with many deadly
wounds: and he shall (if he look to the fruit and effect of them) plainly
see, that nothing belongs unto him (by reason of the filthiness of his ways)
but everlasting shame and confusion. Therefore i^ he will not seek abroad for
d^liuerance in time, if the worst do fall (and surely no other can be with
reason looked for of him) he may thank himself, and say, that he has
perished through his own default. He saw the snare, and would not fly away:
he perceived the danger, and would not seek to prevent it: he does wittingly
cast himself into the fire of Gods wrath, and run upon the pike of his own
destruction: showing also, that he neither loved God, nor hated sin. He is a
very strange traveler, who professes that he does in earnest purpose to go
the next and nearest way to London, and yet perceiving himself to be out of
his way, and seeing the right way, does for all tha^ keep on in a clean
contrary way: Will not all men say, that he is either phrantique or foolish?
So then if we would not be reputed worse then mad, when by the searching and
trial of our ways, we find our selves to err, let us either turn into the
right path, or else let us not profess that we intend to go to Heaven.

Wherefore (I pray you) does David speak in this sort, I thought I will take
heed unto my ways? Ps. 39. 1.
Why does he take this head? even that he might Not sin with his tongue.
Even so, wherefore must men, or do men search and consider their ways?
surely, that they may turn from the evil of them unto the Lord. Had Paul no
rest in his spirit, when he was in Troa^, 2. Cor. 2. 13.
because he found not his brother Titus there, but presently departed and went
away? In vtramque aurem ^^^mire.
and is it fit that any man should be rechlesse and at quiet with himself,
when after inquisition and examination of his ways, he finds not his elder
brother Christ Jesus in them, but only sin and sinfulness, and when he
cannot say, as Paul says of himself to the Romans, Romans 7. 23
I see an other law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind: but
more truly (it may be) as Peter said to Simon Magus, Act. 8. 21. 23.
Thine heart is not right in the sight of God, I see that thou art in the gall
of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity? Is there not therefore cause
sufficient to make them move one foot further, and to add turning to their
searching?

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON.
The Text: Let us turn again.
I Am now come to speak of this last duty, whereunto we are exhorted by the
Prophet. And here I will show who must turn, from what they must turn, to whom
they must turn, in what and wherein they must turn, when they must turn, how
they must turn, and why they must turn. Of these seven points I mean to
speak in order, briefly, and with perspicuitie.

First point. Who must turn.
For the first, Let us turn again. The Prophet speaks directly to the
Israelites, men, women, young, old, etc. And his speech also belongs unto us.
Romans 15. 4
For whatsoever things are written aforetime, are written for our learning.
From whence I conclude, that Whosoever would not die but live, must turn, and
return; whether he be Jew or Gentile, regenerate, or unregenerate, Pastor or
people, noble or ignoble, rich or poor, old or young, of what sex, condition,
or calling so ever he be. For first, There is no respect of persons with God,
Romans 2. 6. 11.
but he Will reward every man accordind to his works. With him neither
circumcision nor uncircumcision avail any thing, but a new creature. Secondly,
God is an absolute Lord over all men whatsoever, therefore all men are bound to
keep his commandments, among which this is one, and not the meanest, as may
appear by the practice of the Prophets, who do often and earnestly urge this
duty. The Apostle Paul says, Act. 17. 30
that God does now command: All men every where to change their minds: 1.
Cor. 7. 19.
and teaches the Corinthians, that circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision
is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God. Thirdly, 2. Cor. 5. 27.
all men without exception of any saving Christ, who knew no sin, are by
nat^r^ deed in sins, the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 1, 3, 12.
without God, and aliants from the commonwealth of Israel; therefore if they
mean to live, they had need to turn. Yea even the most faithful servants of
God, are not only subject to go astray, but do daily err and offend, and
therefore they also must repent and turn. Fourthly, men of all sorts and
sexes, desire the comforts of this life, and everlasting happiness in the lif^
to come, therefore all of them must look to their ways and turn. Otherwise
they must look for none, and if any befall them, they are rather banes unto
them then ben^fites, so long as they live in their sins, without true
repentance. Oh (says God) that my people had harkened unto me, Ps. 81. 13,
14, 16.
and Israel had walked in my ways: I would soon have humbled their enemies,
and turned their hand against their adversaries: I would have fed them with the
fat of wheat. Isa. 16. 19
Take away (says the Lord) the evil of your works from before mine eye, cease
to do evil, learn to do will: If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the
good things of the land; but if ye refuse and be re^ellious, ye shall be
devoured with the sword. Re. 22. 14.
Blessed are they (says the Angel to John) that do his commandments
(whereof this is one) that their right may be in the tree of life, and may
enter in through the gates into the City. Fifthly, not only old men, but
young men also must amend and turn. The prophet speaks to young men as well as
to old. David says, Ps. 119. 9. Ecc. 12. 1.
Wherewith shall a young man redres his way? Solomon says, Remember now thy
Creator in the days of thy youth, whiles the evil days come not, nor the
years approach, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. Quod noua
testa capit, inueterata sapit. A vessel savors longest of that liquor,
wherewith it is first seasoned. Therefore the Spirit of Wisdom says, Teach a
child in the trade of his way, Pro. 22. 6.
and when he is old he shall not depart from it. He that will have his
horse serviceable when he is old, must break him whilst he is young. He
that will have a straight tree, must streighten it when it is tender. If thou
would be fit to serve God when thou art old, invre thy self to his service
whiles thou art young. If thou desire to be a far and straight tree in thy
crooked days, turn from thy crookedness betimes and streighten thy self in
thy youth. The Lord required a sacrifice, Leu. 2. 14.
in which was offered ears of corn, dried by the fire, and wheat beaten out
of the green ears. Gene. 4. 4.
Abel brought for an offering unto God of the first fruits, and fat of his
sheep: so we must give God the green ears of our years, the prim-rose of
our age, the first fruits of our life, and the fat of our days. He that would
have God kind unto him when he is old, let him turn unto him whiles he is
young. It is unseemly for a man to give his youth unto Satan, and to keep his
old rotten bones and feebled spirits for God. The Lord disliketh that men
should bring him lame, torn, and sick things for offerings: yea he says,
Mal. 1. 13, 14.
Cursed be the deceiuer, which has in his flock a male, and voweth, and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. Sixthly, all men have souls as well
as bodies: therefore all men must be careful for them, as well as for these;
yea rather more careful, because the soul is the more excellent and more
divine and noble part of man. Agu^ showed himself regardfull of both in his
prayer, when he says, Pro. 30. 7, 8.
Two things have I required of thee: deny me them not before I die. Remove
far from me vanity and lies: here appears the care of his soul. Feed me
with food convenient for me; here he shows the honest care he had of both
soul and body. Food makes for the good of the body: convenient food makes
for the good o^ both. He that carketh for his body, and cares not for his
soul, makes a God of his belly, and resembles the Pharisees, Matt. 23. 23.
who were diligent in tithing of mint and annise, but omitted the weightier
things of the Law, as faith and mercy. Now wherein can our care for the wealth
and weal of our souls more easily appear, then in our true repentance and
unfeigned conversion? He that says he has care of the health of his soul,
and will not turn to God, does as if a man being ready to perish in the
water, should profess that he would gladly live, and yet will use no means,
or take no pains to come out. All men do wish the welfare of their friends.
And art thou not thine own friend? Ve quaerae patriae comm^dae quisque suae.
It thou be so, then art thou bound to convert. Nature teaches every man to
seek the good of his own country: so grace will teach a man, if he have but
one drop thereof in his heart, to seek the prosperity of that commonwealth
and country which is within himself. Now the prosperity of any country
consists in freedom from evils, and the fruition of good things. And
whosoever turns truly, shall be delivered from the greatest evils, and
shall enjoy the greatest good, even God, who is goodness it self, who with
the strength of his arm, and by the power of his grace, will fetch them out of
Aegipt, the land of spiritual servitude, and deliver them from thraldom under
Pharaoh and the Aegiptians, from bondage under Satan and sin, and will
conduct them safely through the wild wilderness of this wretched world, into
celestial Canaan, whither our elder brother Christ Jesus is gone before us, to
prepare mansions for us. Seventhly, every man complains that the world is
naught, therefore every man to stay this complaint, must amend and convert. If
every complainer would turn from his sins unto GOD, the world would be
good. The world is not naught, but the people in the world: as a goodly City
may have godless Citizens, a fair house may have a foul inhabitant, and a
good Landlorde may have bad tenants. There is no reason for a man to complain
of the world, till he have forsaken the sins committed in the world. He
that exclames against the world before he does renounce the fashions of
worldlings, discouers the skirtes of his mother, and defiles his own nest. If
every one will needs accuse the world as naught, let them first reuoult from
the world, and shake hands with the world: let them come out of the world, as
the Israelites came out of Aegipt, and as all true Israelites are commanded to
come out of Western Babylon, Reu. 13*4.
and then let them not spare to censure and condemn the world. First turn
from thine own naughtiness, and then say the world is naught, and that the
wisdom of the world is enmity to God. Moreover, every man was in Adam created
according to the image of God: and every man by Adam was deprived of this
image: neither is it repaired in any man, nor any man restored to it, till he
do convert, and repent: and then the Holy Ghost begins to grave and draw it
upon the tables of hearts, and faces of our souls. But almost every man will
say, that he does desire the reparation of this reunited image within him: and
without doubt if a man could with these fleshly eyes behold this image, Mat.
17. 3, 4.
as Peter beheld Moses and Elias with Christ upon the mount, it would
exceedingly move him, as that sight did Peter; it is so fair and lovely to
behold, so as that if his heart were not made of marble, it would so fill it
with delight, and so ravish his soul with the love thereof, that as Peter said
upon that glorious sight, Master, it is good for us to be here, so he would
wish from his heart, to be partaker of it, and think no price too costly for
it. For it is as a mirror, wherein a man may in part behold the f^^e of the
invisible God, and a glasle wherein we may see the countenance and color of
our first estate. If any therefore lust (as he does profess) to be partaker of
this glorious Image consisting in holiness and righteousness of heart and
hand, Ephesians. 4. 24
let him turn his feet from the ways of sin, into the ways of God, and he
shall not fail of that which he says he does long after. Nulla salus bello,
pacem te poscimus omnes.
To conclude this point, all men covet peace, therefore let them all convert.
Would thou have true peace of conscience? thou fayest thou would. Then I
say unto thee, turn. For There is no peace (says God) unto the wicked, who
do not turn. Is. 57. 21.
Would thou be at peace with thine enemies? then turn: Pro. 16. 7.
for When the ways of man please the Lord, he will make also his enemies at
peace with him. And without doubt there is no peace comparable to that peace
and amity which is among the faithful: so that if all that seem to desire
peace, would repent and turn, the Lion would become a Lamb; and the Wolf a
sheep, all cruel conditions would be cast away, and the whole world would be
at perfect peace within it self, both for outward agreement, and inward
affection. For the union of the Saints in firm and indissoluble. The Prince of
the air must blow exceeding hard, if he made any great commotion then in the
world. If all men amongst us would seriously turn to God, the world would
suffer a very great and admirable alteration. For both the wicked should
renounce their wickedness, and the godly would not stumble and fall so often as
they now do; many occasions, scandalls, tentations, and allurements being
removed by the conversion of their neighbors. Then we might indeed be well
called the people of God, and the anointed of the Lord: our land might be
truly called, the Land of righteousness, yea and the Land of the living: then
should we see the beauty of Sion, and the prosperity of Jerusalem, otherwise
then now we can. Every man will say that he does affect and desire these
things, therefore let every man turn to the Lord, or else be silent.

Thus much concerning the first point, Who must turn? even every man that
desires the grace of God in this world, and everlasting glory in the world to
come. For he rewards every one according to his work. Ps. 62. 12 Ps. 92. 9.
All the workers of iniquity (that will not turn) shall be destroyed. He
powers contempt (even) upon Princes, Ps. 10. 40. Romans 2. 9. 10.
which will not turn unto him. Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul
of every man that does evil: of the Jew first, and also of the Grecian: but to
every man that does good (even to every man that turns unto God) shall be
glory, and honor, and peace.

2. Point. From what men must turn.
The second thing to be considered, is, From what we must turn. Which, though
it be not expressly set down, yet it is employed in the word Turn. For
whosoever turns, must needs turn from something, either from some person,
or some place, or from something else. What are we then to turn from? Surely,
from Satan, from the world, from the ways of the wicked, and from all our
sins. We must turn from whatsoever thing may either keep us, or draw us
from God and his ways. We must avoid every thing that may disturb the peace
of conscience, and hinder the salvation of our souls.

Whatsoever thing may cause us to displease the Lord, and may provoke his wrath
against us, must be forsaken of us. The Mariner must beware of rocks, and
the traveler of crosse-paths, and by-waies. So we that would sail with the
ship of our consciences, to the haven of everlasting happiness, and would come
to new Jerusalem in due season: that is, when the sun of this life does set,
and the evening of our days is shut up, we must beware of the foresaid
evils; for they are as rocks in our rode, and do either molest us in our
way, or seek to lead us out. Shall we delight in the devil, and dance after
his pipe? Know ye not that he compasses the earth too and fro, Job. 1. 7. 1.
Pet. ^.8.
and walks about like a ramping and roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour? We should rather hide our selves from him, and desire the Lord to
pa^e his claws, and break his teeth. Know ye not that he wrought our
downefell at the first, and daily seeks the dishonor of God, the disgrace of
the truth, and the desolation of the Church? He is the prince of darkness, the
god of this world, the bli^der of men's minds, the accuser of the faithful, the
father of lies, a sinner from the beginning of the world, Ioh. 8. 44. 1. Ioh.
3. 8.
a sworn enemy to Gods glory, and the architect and first motour of man's
misery. Let us therefore fly from him, as a bird from the fowler, when she
spies him. And what is the world (I pray you) but a Theater of vanity, a
mirror of madness, an ocean of some iniquity, a labyrinth of error, a gulf
of evils, a moon of inconstancy, a wheel of turning, a shop of deceit, and
a spectacle of ungodliness? Why should any man therefore wed himself unto the
world, and not seek to be divorced from her? Or if he be already free,
wherefore should he be enamoured with her? If she dote upon thee, and s^nd
messengers to to thee, as Aho^ibah is charged by the Lord to have dealt with
the Assyrians: Ezekiel. 23. 16.
if she be so shameless as to woo thee, as the Harlot which Solomon speaks
of, Pro. 7. 13.
with a braze^ face intised the foolish young man; yet be not thou persuaded by
her: let not thine heart decline to her ways, and wander not in her paths. If
the world cast her eyes upon thee, Genesis 39. 7,
as Potiphars wife did upon Joseph; and if she tempt thee to commit adultery
with her, as she did Joseph; if she say to thee, Pro. 7. 18.
as Salomons Harlot does to that fool, Come, let us take our fill of love, and
our pleasure in daliance: if thou be daily sued unto by her, as Joseph was by
his Mistress; yet as he denied her request unto the end, and said, Genesis 39. 9,
10, 12.
How can I do this great wickedness, and sin a against God? so do thou
repel the darts of her amorous language, and like an adder stop thine ears at
her alluring incantations. Rather let her have thy garment, and be content to
be accused falsely, and condemned to the prison, as Joseph was, then that by
condescending to her unlawful suit, thou should displease or divorce thy
self from God, or break thy promise plighted to him in thy Baptism, of
purity and Penelopes constant fidelity. The world is something like the foolish
woman, the wise man speaks of, Pro. 9. 16.
which says to the foolish passenger, come hither: but she sets her guests
in the depth of hell. By her two naked and painted breasts of profits and
pleasures, she uses thousands to commit, fornication with her: but as the
holy Ghost says of those which are intrapt with the craft of the subtle
Harlot, Pro. 7. 21, 22, 23.
so we may truly say of them that are seduced with the world; They follow her,
as an ox that goes to the slaughter, and as a fool that goes to the stocks
for corection (who go on cheerfully, not knowing their future misery) and as a
bird that hastes to the snare, being ignorant of the fowlers policy. The voice
of the world is like the fowlers call, which causes the bird to be caught:
and her allurements are like the bait which hides the hook, that is the bane
of the fish. And when she is most iocund and obsequious, then she is most
pernicious and dangerous: as the stillest waters are the deepest and most
deceitful. If therefore the world shall come forth to meet us, as Iael did to
Sisera, Iud. 4. 18.
and shall say to any of us as she did to him, Turn in, turn in to me, be
not afraid: let us beware that she do not cover us with the mantle of
security, and take heed lest she beguile us with the milk of her pleasures,
and the butter of her profits, though set before us in a lordly dish, Iud. 5.
25.
as she set hers; lest yielding to her with bold credulity, as Sisera did to
Iael, we be stricken through the temples (as it were) of our souls with her
magical enchantments, Iud. 4. 27.
as the temples of his head were stricken thorough by a nail in her hand, and
so we die as he did. For her house is the way unto the grave, Pro. 7. 10. 27.
which goes down to the chambers of death, as the wise man speaks of the
woman of whorish behavior. So then, albeit the wicked intiseme^ts of the world
be pleasant in the beginning, yet are they bitterness in the latter ending:
and like the book that John was commanded to eat, Reu. 10. 9
sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the mawe: and so hurtful to the stomach of
the soul, as that if a man do not cast them up, it is no more possible for
him to live, either the life of grace or of glory, then it is for that man to
live the life of nature, who has swallowed down pills of poison, he drank
with sugar. Let us therefore take heed of her charms, and turn from her. 1.
Ioh. 2. 15
Love not this world (says John) nor the things that are in this world. If any
man love this world, the love of the Father is not in him. No man can serve God
and Mammon. Mat. 6. 24
We must leave the world, and the world must leave us; therefore why should
we fix our love upon the world, or bend our love unto the world? Whereas all
other creatures have but four muscles to turn their eyes round about, O^
homini su^^l^me d^dit.
God has given man a fist to pull up his eyes, from the earth to heaven. And
whereas all other creatures bow downwards to look to the earth from whence they
rose, and to which they must return, God has fitted man a body, that he
might behold the heaven, the place of happiness, and the Paradise of
perpetual pleasures. We are redeemed from the world; let us therefore so
live in the world, as by our lives we may declare that we are not of the
world. For as much as our inhearitance is in the heavens, let us have one
foot there fixed, where our inheritance is. We tread upon the earth with our
feet, therefore let not our hearts be interred in it, but let us trample upon
earthly things. Though we live in the world, yet let us not be polluted of the
world: but as the Swan swims in the water, but is not drowned of the water, so
we must live in the world, as a ship floateth aloft upon the sea, or a bird
upon the water, and we must take heed that the love of the world do not
leake into our hearts, lest we make shipwreck of our faith, and break in
pieces the vessels of our consciences. An^ ^f any do leake in, we must pumpe
it out with speeds, by true repentance, and seek to stop the passage. The
Mowle lives in the earth, and yet receives no hurt at all, neither to her
flesh, nor to her coat. So we that live in the world in the midst of a
crooked generation, should like pilgrims, so alienate our affections from it,
as that we may receive no damage by it, neither in our hearts within, nor in
our profession and practice without: but as a stone being cast into the dirt,
will still remain a stone: so though we which are living stones, 1. Pet. 2, 5.
do live in the world, which is full of the dirt of sin, and puddles of
iniquity, yet let us remain as we are made by grace, living stones of Gods
spiritual Temple. To this end, let us turn from the world with our hearts,
let us beware of her witchcraft and sorcerie, let us not turn in unto her at
her call, let us not drink of the cup of her fornications: and finally, let
us seek the kingdom of God, Mat. 6. 33 Col. 3. 1.
and the things that are above: and let us have our conversation in the
heavens, where our commonwealth and kingdom, our head and husband is, Pet. 3.
21
and will be until the time that all things be restored which God has spo^en
by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began.

Thirdly, we must turn from the ways of the wicked. This the Spirit of
wisdom teaches us, when he says: My son, walk not thou in the way with
sinners: Pro. 1. 15.
refrain thy foot from their path. Pro. 4. 14, 1^* Pro. 2. 15.
Enter not into the way of the wicked, and walk not in the way of evil men.
Avoid it, go not by it: turn from it, and pass by. For their Ways are
crooke^. The way of the wicked is as darkness. Pro. 4. 19 Psalm. 1. 6.
The way of the wicked shall perish. If thou would not walk in a crooked
path, an obscure and dark lane, and in a way that shall come to naught, yea in
a way that leads from heaven to hell, and from life to death, then thou must
decline and turn from the ways of the wicked. God does command thee to turn
from them: In the name of God I do beseech thee to turn from them. Be not
disobedient unto his voice. He that obeys him, Pro. 1. 33
shall dwell safely, and be quiet from fear of evil. But those, that stop
their ears at his voice, and will not obey his word in the ministry of his
Prophets, do fall upon the sword of vengeance. As when God cried, they would
not hear, Zach. 7. 11, 12, 13
but pulled away their shoulder, and made their hearts hard as an adamant: so
they shall cry, and he will not hear. We all know that it is the will of
God, that we should forsake the ways of the wicked, who are his enemies. But
that servant (says Christ) that knew his masters will, Luke 12. 47.
and prepared not himself* neither aid according to his will, shall be beaten
with many stripes: with many more then he that knows not his will, and does
it not. Can a man be in a mill, and not be mealy? Can a man be in a shewer of
rain, and not be wet? Can a man stand long upon a quag-mire, and not sink?
And is it possible for a man to walk in the ways of the wicked, which are full
of the mire of wickedness, and dirt of iniquity, and not to be polluted? Or
i^ it like, that he shall not sink into the pit of perdition, if he shall
stand in the way of sinners, and refuse to come out? No wise man, especially no
honest man will delight in the courses of slaves and traitors: but the wicked
are slaves. First, they are slaves of the devil: for he That commits sin,
is of the Devil, 1. Ioh. 3. 8. 2. Pet. 2. 19.
and of whom soever a man is overcome, even unto the same he is in bondage.
Now, what slaves are they, that are in slavery under a very slave? Secondly,
they are the slaves of sin. For Whosoever commits sin is the servant of
sin. Ioh. 8. 34 Pro. 19. 28. Pro. 4. 16. Ioh. 20. 12
But the wicked drink iniquity, as fishes do the water. Their mouth (says
Solomon) swalloweth up iniquity. They cannot sleep, except they have done
evil. Wickedness (as Zophar says) is sweet in his mouth, he hides it under
his tongue, and will not forsake it. Therefore he cannot but commit sin, and
that with greediness, and with full consent of heart. Now he that is the
servant of sin, and a slave to his own concupiscence, is in seruitide under
the devils bastard, yea and strumpet also, and in thraldom under his own
mortal and unplacable enemy.

Thirdly, the wicked are the slaves of the world. For their profession is
pinned upon her sleeue. Ter. Eunuch.
As Dorus in the Comedy denied the truth, (which before he did profess) when
Phaedreae bad him: so the wicked man at the worlds command, is ready to say,
and unsay, to profess or deny any thing, how gross or evil soever; he makes
the world his God. Furthermore, they are very traitors and rebels unto God.
They are enemies to his crown and dignity: they rob him of his honor: they
rebel against his laws: they trample upon his commandments: they break
down the pale of his precepts: they tear his titles with their tongues: Ps.
37, 12.
and they practice against his loyal and obedient subjects. Does it therefore
beseem any honest and liberal minded man to walk in their ways, and to
run in their races? They cannot suredly do it without great blemishing of
their own loyalty, and injury to the glory of God. Furthermore, Prou. 15. 9
Pro. 21. 27.
The way of the wicked is (as Solomon says) an abomination to the Lord. If
his sacrifice be an abomination unto him, and if his very prayer be
unacceptable to him, his ways (which are simply evil) must needs be very
offensive in his sight. Now then, were it not horrible impiety for a man
either to set his feet in his ways, or not to remove them and depart away
with speed, if they be already in them? 1. Tim. 5. 22.
Paul forbids us to be partakers of other men's sins. But he that walks
in the ways of the wicked, cannot but transgress this commandment. He that
runs their courses, is a scandal unto them, an occasion to harden their
hearts, and to hinder their conversion, and shows plainly that they were all
cast in one mould, and are all (even he as well as they) servants to one Lord.
But he which turns from them, shows his hatred of them, and is a
furtherance to help forward their conversion also. For as when one sheep
breaks away from the drouer, she is an occasion to move many other to
follow her: so when one man breaks away from the devil, who drives men to
their slaughter, he gives an occasion to many that see him, to depart in like
sort. One bird perceiving the fowlers wiles, by flying away, is a motive to her
fellows being in the same danger to do the like: so one man by leaving the
ways of the wicked, and so escaping the danger prepared for him, occasioneth
the wicked also that behold him, to take their flight from sin, and to fly
from the wiles of the devil. To conclude this third point, God commands us
to ask for the old way, Iere. 6. 16.
and to walk therein. Now if we must walk in the old way, which is the good
way, and we shall find rest for our souls, then we must leave all new ways,
which are evil ways, or else we shall find pains for our souls. God
commands us to Walk in tho way of good men, Pro. 2. 20.
and to keep the ways of the righteous: it follows therefore that we must
turn from the ways of the wicked. Pro. 4. 18. 19.
For their ways are contrary; ^he one shines as the light, the other is as
darkness: the one is of God, the other of Satan: the one is of the way of
love, and leads unto life, the other is the way of lust, and leads unto
death: the one is the way of Gods children, the other of the devils. In the
one we must go, as Israel requested Sihon to let them pass through his
country, saying: Number. 27. 22.
Let me go through thy Land: we will (...) turn aside unto the fiel^s, nor
into the vineyards, neither drink of the waters of the wells: we will go by
the kings way, until we be past thy Country. The way of the godly, is the
Kings hie way to heaven: we must go along in it till we have passed through
this vale of misery, without declining from it on any side. We must not break
into the fields of covetousness, nor into the vineyards of vain delights,
neither must we drink of the waters of sinful pleasures, or pleasing sins.
But as the Israelite promised to go by the hie way, and to turn neither unto
the right hand, nor to the left: Deu. 2. 27.
so we must keep our way without wandering out; therefore it follows, that
we must abandon, and turn from the ways of the wicked. For how glorious and
fair soever they seem in show, Psalm. 1. 6. 2 King. 9. 30. 33.
they shall vanish and come to naught; like the painted face of Iezabel, and
the colors of the Rainbow. Fourthly, we must turn from our own sins; Zach.
1. 4.
original and actual, of what name or nature soever, in what place, at what
time, and upon what occasion so ever done, whether by commission of evil, or
omission of good. For first, our sins are the works of the devil, as our
goodness is the gift of God. Our original corruption (which as a reprosie
has polluted all our parts and poores) is the f^end of sin, and the very
spawne of the devil, whereof he does beget children according to his own
Image. From it all our actual transgressions (how barbarous and exorbitant
soever they be) do proceed and issue, as the rivers do from the sea, Eccles.
1. 7
and as light does from the sun, or as worms do from a loathsome carrion.
Secondly, our sins do pollute, and deforme us. As a Ringworme does disfigure
the face: Ezekiel. 14 11.
so sin does deforme the soul. As a Canker does consume the flesh, as rust
does eat the iron, as dust and chafe do corrupt the corn, and as fur
vessels do corrupt good wine: so sin does defile our souls, and corrupt our
consciences, and misshape our affections. Thirdly, sin is very bitter and
pernicious. The life of any sin affected, is the death of the sinner infected.
It is of a viperous disposition: the birth of sin, is the death of the sinner.
It is like the worm Midas, which eats the Bean, wherein it is bred: and the
Moath, that consumes the cloth, in which she received her life. Sin is not
much unlike unto the lovers of Aholilah, Ezekiel. 23.
who when they had bruised the breasts of her virginity, and powered their
whordomes upon her, dealt cruelly with her, and slew her with the sword: so
sin shall breed the sorrow of all such as dote upon it, and delight to
commit adultery with it. And as the Lord threatened Aholilah, Ezekiel. 23. 25.
that her lovers, with whom she wilfully defiled her self, should cut off her
nose and ears: so sin (without special mercy) shall not only deforme our
selves, but strippe us and leave us naked for the judgments of God to seize
upon. Therefore as Paul shook the viper from his hand, Act. 28. 5.
so let us cast away sin from our hearts. As he was careful to preserve his
life from those bloody votaries, Act. 23. 17.
who had vowed his death: so let us be careful to defend our selves from
sin, which works the destruction of our souls. Wherefore was Adam exiled
out of Paradise, but for his sin? Why was the old world drowned with water,
but for their sin? Why was Sodom burnt with fire and brimstone, but for
sin? Paul's sinful zeal made him a persecutor. Sin made Absalom ambitious,
Haman malicious, Nabal a churl, and Judas a traitor. Sin caused Korah and
his company to be swallowed up of the earth: Number. 16. 32. Exodus 14. 28. Leuit.
10. 2. Psalm. 107. 34. Pro. 28. 2
sin made Pharaoh and his people to be consumed by the water: sin
occasioned Nadab and Abihu to be devoured with fire: sin caused Her^d to be
eaten with worms. God turns a fruitful land into barronnesse, for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein. And the Spirit of wisdom says, that
For the transgression of the Land, there are many Princes thereof: that is,
many and no small alterations in the state. Our sins are the cause of our
sorrows, and our wickedness is the worker of all our wretchedness. It is the
cause of all disorder and dissension, in Church, in Commonwealth, and Family.
Yea, it oftentimes is the cause, why the sinner is punished by committing of
other sins; Romans 1. 24 28.
therefore Paul says, that God gave the Heathen (for their wickedness) up to
their hearts lusts, and delivered them over to a reprobate mind, to commit very
fearful and odious enormities. Plin. not. Hist. l. 8. cap. 23.
Sin is like the Serpent Amphisbaena, which has (as it were) two heads, one
before, an other behind at the tail, as if she were not hurtful enough to
cast her poison at one mouth only. Sin wounds at both ends: in the one it
wounds the soul by poisoning and infecting it: and in the other, it wounds
both soul and body, by destroying them, without the Antidote, or
counter-poyson of the meritorious blood of that true brazen serpent Christ
Jesus. Sin (as it were) out of two mouths spitteth forth her venime, whereby
she both hurts our hearts, and exposes us to the fire of Gods dreadful
indignation. Fourthly, sin is very subtle like a serpent, and all (like a
witch) to work our woe. It is like the Hyaena, Plin hist. not. hist. l. 8. cap.
30
which (as Pliny records) is said to vomit like a man, thereby to train dogs
to come unto him, and then will devour them. Sometimes it will weep with the
Crocodile, sometimes it will be musical with the Siren, but all to destroy. It
begins sometimes with a song like a Gnat, but it ends with biting. Pliny
says that the Hyaena will change his eyes into a thousand colors: Plin. ibid.
so sin will make many faces.

The Beiuers hair is softer then the down of feathers, yet is he dangerous
with his teeth. For (as Pliny writes) he will gnaw trees with his teeth, is if
they were cut with axes: and if he catch hold of any joint in a man, he will
not leave till he have knapped the bone asunder. So sin does oftentimes very
much delight the sinner, as being very soft to the touch, and pleasant to the
taste, and yet it is but a painted Iezabel, a disguised harlot, and a sweetened
poison; it gnawnes the conscience, and bites the soul to the bone. It is
green like the box tree, but the seed is poison.

Plin. ibid.
The hurtful serpents are ordinarily of the color of the harmles earth: so
sin sometimes does seem a virtue, and is so esteemed of some that are
bad-sighted, or grown to desperate impiety, Which speak good of evil, Is. 5.
20.
and evil of good: which put darkness for light, and light: for darkness:
that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sour. Sin has so distempered
their tastes, and bewitched their eyes. If sin were not exceeding subtle,
and the sinner made by sin exceeding simple, Solomon would not say, There is
a way that seems right unto man, Pro. 16. 25.
but the issue thereof are the ways of death. Neither would any hypocrites be
so impudent, as to say without blushing (if at all) with those in Isaih: Stand
apart, Is. 65. 5.
come not near unto me: for I am more holy th^n thou. If sin had not been
very deceitful, would the Valentinian heretics have condemned all others as
gross and earthly, and have called themselves only Ghostly? Would the Arrians
have called the true Christians, that profes^ed the faith of the holy Trinity,
sometime Ambrosians, sometimes Iohannites, and sometimes Homousians, allowing
themselves only (something like our Papists) to be called Catholics? Would
the Brownists which are sprung out of the ashes of the Donatists, condemn our
Ministry, our Churches, and assemblies, as Antichristian? Could widows houses
be devoured through the pretext of long prayers? Could vice wander in the habit
of virtue? or would any but a dog, return like a dog to his vomit, if
sin were not very deceitful, but did appear unto all men as it is in it
self? Considering therefore (beloved) the malicious subtlety, and the subtle
malice of sin unto mankind, let us not only bewise to discern it, but
careful also to fly from it, and eschew it. He that fostereth sin, favors
a false and perfidious enemy, and does as Ioash did, 2. Ki. 12. 20. Romans 6. 13
who entertained servants, which slew him. Let no man therefore (I say) be the
servant of sin. Give not your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto
sin. Listen not unto it, least by listening unto it, as Eve did unto the
serpent, ye make your selves, as she did her self, a pray to the devil.
Fifthly, unless a man do purpose, and with a constant determination of mind,
and resolution of spirit, do labor to leave his sins, and to stand against
the stream of his sinful affections, he does show himself destitute of the
fear of God, Pro. 8. 13
which is to hate evil: and altogether unlike to God, who is holy; yea even
holiness it self: and he does moreover, make himself unmeet to ask
forgiveness of his sins. For with what face dare he desire of God to forgive
him his sin, that makes no conscience of committing sin? How dare he desire
God to turn his judgments from him, seeing he does not seriously himself
purpose, and accordingly study to turn from his sins, which do not only
deserve the judgments of God, but are also a match to give fire unto his wrath,
or as bellows to blow it up? Yea, it is a very manifest argument, that he,
which will not turn from his sin, does not sincerely, and with an honest
heart desire the pardon of sin. For no man will think that he does heartily
desire the peace and pardon of his neighbor, who comes creeping to him for
it, and yet in the mean time, does either secretly practice against him, or
at the least does not purpose to forbear the practice of those things, which
makes the ^arre betwixt them. He does only dally with him, and abuse him.
Six^ly, let us remember that there is a day of death, and a day of judgment, in
which every man must an^were for his facts; Caine for his murder, Ismael for
his mocking, Nahal for his drunkenness, Absolon for his ambition, Achitophel
for his wicked counsel, Haman for his hautinesse, Herod for his pride, Iudw
for his treason, Julian for his blasphemies, and every sinner for his sins.
For the books, wherein all men's actions are (as it were) recorded, shall be
opened, Reu. 20. 12
and every man shall be judged of those things which are registered in the
books (of Gods knowledge, and man's conscience) according to their works. 2.
Cor. 5. 10.
And every man without exception shall receive the things which are done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. The riches
of Laban, the wealth of Nabal, the wisdom of Achitophel, the beauty of
Absolon, the crown of Saul, the strength of Lamech, the kingdoms of
Nebuchadnezar, the eloquence of Tertullus, the miter of Caiaphas will than
stand them in no stead at all. For the Lord is no accepter of persons: he has
prepared Tophet of old for wicked princes: Act. 10. 34 Isa. 30 33 Jude. 15.
and he will rebuke the ungodly of all their wicked deeds. Now, as death
does leave them, so the last judgment shall find them. If therefore we would
either fit our selves for death, or frame our selves to the last judgment, let
us abandon our sins, and judge our selves. If we will accuse and condemn
our sins, and execute them, as Josiah did the priests of the high places, 2
King. 22. 20. Heb. 9. 27 Mat. 25. 41.
we shall not need to fear the terror of death, which is appointed for all,
nor the sentence of the judge, which shall only be pronounced against the
wicked. Lastly, I say we must turn from all our sins, and not from some
only. For so is the will of God. Ezekiel. 11. 31.
Cast away from you all your transgression: for why will ye dis O house of
Israel? Every sin displeases God, Romans 6. 23
and deserves death: every sin does stain the soul and wound the conscience.
Prou 6. 27. 28.
It is not possible for a man to carry fire in his bosom, and his clothes not
be burnt: and impossible for him to go upon coals, and his feet not be
scorched: so is it impossible to favor any sin, and not to be infected. As
every enemy is dangerous, and as the least drop of poison is hurtful, and the
least plague sore infectious; so the smallest sin will smart: the least
offense is pernicious, pestilent and infectious. Secondly, we vowed to God in
our baptism, that we would turn from all our sins, and from all the works
of the devil. He that will not keep touch with God, must never look that God
will keep touch with him. For his promise of pardon belongs only unto penitent
persons. And therefore he says, If the wicked will return from all his sins,
Ezekiel. 18. 21.
he shall surely live, and shall not die. Thir^ly, the Lord in express
terms forbids not only greater, but also smaller sins. He does not
only condemn drunkenness, Isai. 5. 22.
but he does also pronounce a woe unto them, that are mighty to drink wine,
and are strong to power in strong drink. Saint Peter does not only r^quire us
to forbear drunkenness, 1. Pet. 4. 3
but also drinkings. Saint Paul does not only forbid us filthiness, Ephe 5. 4.
but foolish talking. The Lord commands the wicked to forsake their very
imaginations. Isai. 55. 7.
Christ tells us that we must give account of every idle word. 1. Pet. 2. 1.
Peter warns us to lay aside all malitiousnesse, and all guile, and all evil
speaking. Psalm. 101. 3, 4.
David says, I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: A froward heart
shall depart from me, I will know none evil. And according to this his
resolution he says again, Psalm. 119. 101, 128, 133.
I have refrained my feet from every evil way, and do hate all false ways.
And desires God to let none iniquity to have dominion over him. The Lord
hates all our sins, Christ has suffered for all our sins, therefore let us
abandon them all. If we entertain but one, we open a casemen^ for another, and
animate the devil to sally a fresh upon us: Plin. not. hist. li. 8. c. 25.
who like a Crocodile flies if he be resisted, but if we yield unto him in
the least sin, he will very falsely assault us, and seek to swallow us up.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Jude. 23.
Must we abstain from all appearance of evil? Must we hate the very
garment, which is spott^d by the flesh? Then good reason have we to abstain
from all things that are merely evil in themselves, and to detest the flesh,
Gal. 5. 17.
which defiles the man, and lusts against the Spirit. Shall kings fight
against their quarrellous and despit^ful enemies, which only seek to deprive
them of their earthly kingdoms, and shall not we contend and war against our
fleshly lusts, 1. Pet. 2. 11
which fight against our souls, and seek to defeat us of our heavenly
kingdom? Will every man by the virtue of his nature (like Chari^us in the
Comedy) prove every way before they will perish, Omnia exo periri cerium est
priu^, qua^ pereo. Ter. Anar.
or lose their lives in this world: and shall not we take any pains to escape
eternal pains, and to save our souls in the world to come? Shall Christ
lament, yea and die for our sins, and shall we make our selves merry with
them, as many do? Or rather shall we not mourn for them, and seek to be
delivered from them? Shall David's eyes gush out with rivers of water, Psalm.
119. 136.
because other men kept not Gods law? and does it beseem us to be dry
cheeked, and not lament for our own sins, whereby we have broken his law,
and battered the castles of our own consciences? Shall Jeremy wish that his
head were full of water, Ier. 9. 1.
and his eyes a fountain of tears, that he might weep day and night for the
slain of the daughter of his people? and shall we never lament and weep for
our sins, which displease our friend, and please our foe: which did once slay
our souls, and do daily wring them, and would consume them v^terly, Ephesians. 2. 5.
if the Lord, who has restored them to life in Christ, did not guard them by
his grace? Do we not see what an antipathy there is amongst the creatures? One
of them by a secret instinct of nature does hate and persecute another. Homo
hominilupus.
Nay, do we not see that many men are as wolves each to other? Wherefore then
should we not persecute and hate our sins, seeing that they be our mortal
enemies, and will neue^ become our friends? The fish called Lepus, is (as some
write) poiso^ to a man, and man to him. Pro. 1. 11, 12.
Sin is poison unto us, so let us be as poison unto it. Shall the wicked lay
wait for blood, and swallow the innocent up like a grave? and shall not we
seek to mortify our si^nes which are noxious unto us, and offensive unto God?
Col. 3. 5.
Mortify therefore your members which are on earth, fornication, uncleanness,
the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is
idolatry. If we will not mortify them, they will mortify us, If we will not
part from them, God will part from us. Surely (says Dauia) God will wound the
head of his enemies, Ps. 68. 21.
and the hairie pate of him that walks in his sins. Shall David hate the
desperate enemies of God, Ps. 139. 21
and earnestly contend with those that rise up against him: and shall not we
hate sin, which makes men hateful unto God, and haters of God? Shall not we
earnestly contend against our sins, which do both rise up against us, and make
us also take up arms against the Lord? Pro. 11. 15
H^^e that hates suert^^hippe (says Solomon) is sure: but he that hates
sin is surer. For if it be a a righ^ h^tred, it is an infallible
demonstration^ of our love to God, and of the g^atious operation of his Spirit
within us, and the ready way to escape the greatest evil. If it be the badge of
a man predestined to glory, to contemn a vile person, Psa. 15. 4,
then he which despises sin, which makes men vile and despiseable, may
assure himself of glory, if he do despise it for the vileness of it, and for
that it is derogatorie to the glory of God. Would thou therefore be sure of
the mercy of God to the salvation of thy soul! then turn from thy sins and
hate them. For he that confesses his sins and does forsake them, Pro. 28. 13
shall find mercy. What life more joyful can a man wish to lead, whilst he
lines in this world, then in this life to be assured of an everlasting joyful
li^e in the world to come? What greater pleasure can a man take and taste of in
a world of wo^, then to believe and know that unspeakable and perpetual
pleasures are prepared for him in a world of weal? What sweeter sweetness,
and more pleasing pleasure can a man in this life feel and enjoy upon the
earth below, then in being certainly persuaded in his conscience, that he
shall be partaker of the sweet and amiable communion of the Lord in the life
to come alo^t in the heavens? What greater comfort can comfortless wretches
(as all men are by nature) receive of the God of comfort, then by his word to
be surely certified of eternal comforts? What greater glory can a mortal
man be glad of, and more truly glory of in his inglorious vale of misery,
then that he is by the King of glory secured, and by the word of his own mouth
assured of immortal glory in his glorious kingdom upon his high and holy
mountain? With what sweeter mercy can a miserable sinner be refreshed in his
soul, then of the God of mercy to receive a promise of the everlasting mercy?
But God does promise life and liberty, Pro. 28. 13 Eze. 18. 21
health and happiness, to every man that will forsake his sins. Neither does
he only promise us (if we do turn from our sins) felicity in the heavens,
but also peace and prosperity upon the earth. Therefore David says: What man
is he that desires life, Psalm. 34. 12. 14.
and loves long days to see good? Let him eschew evil, and do good, etc. And
the Lord by Jeremy says, Amend your ways, Ier. 7. 3.
and your works, and I will let you dwell in this place. Whenever the
Israelites truly repented of their sins, then GOD changed his frowning
countenance and smiled upon them: but when they provoked him by their sins,
then he turned their estates, and oftentimes gave them up unto their enemies.
Isai. 59. 2. Ier. 5. 25.
So that our sins do make a diuorcement between us and Gods benefits. Let
us therefore like valiant princes labou^ to subdue them. When sins begin to
die, then the sinner begins to live. Let not sin reign within us: let it
not defile us. Mark. 12. 15.
But as our Savior overthrew the tables of the money changers, and cast out
those that profaned the temple by marchandizing in it: so let us his servants
scourge out our sins out of the temple of our hearts, Ez. 28. 26.
and let us labor to ouerturne and conquer them. The Lord says, that his
pleople shall dwell in safety, when he has executed his judgments upon all
their enemies: so we shall live in peace when our sins are executed* and put
unto the sword. And when we have ouermastered one sin, then we must set
upon another; like the Ichneumon, which (as Pliny writes) having overcome one
enemy, Hist. not. l. 8. c. 24.
prepares himself to combat with another. Let us never be content till we
have gotten the victory of them all; being like minded to Alexander th great,
Nil actum credens cum quid superesse^ agendum.
who (as Lucane records) thought nothing done, whiles any thing remained
undone. He that turns from all his sins, and labors to subdue them all,
does show himself a true convert, a prince of spirit, and an utter enemy to
the kingdom of Satan. We all desire to escape all outward dangers, and to
have our bodies free from worms, b^les, botches, and all other deformities of
body; wherefore should we not then be as careful to anoyd the dangers and
dangerous diseases, deformities and enormities of our souls? The least bodily
disease is shunned, why should we not then fear and prevent the least
spiritual disease? Many sands (though small) will sink a ship, as soon as
a few great milstones: so many sins (though little in comparison of other)
will destroy our souls as well as a few great ones. Foxes are enemies to
sheep as well as wolves, though not so dangerous: so smaller sins are
enemies unto our souls, as well as the greater Christ will have both the great
and the little Foxes taken, Gant. 2. 15
for (he says) both destroy the vines: so let us take and turn from all our
sins, little and great: for all are noisome to the vineyard of our hearts,
and hinder our spiritual growth. Kill them all, and the vines of Gods graces
shall flourish and abound within us. And though one sin be sometimes c^^^rary
to another, as covetousness and prodigality, and look diverse ways, as
Sampsons foxes, Judge. 15. 4. 5.
yet are they joined in their tails with a firebrand of vengeance in the
midst, wherewith (without special care) they will fire men's souls, as Sampsons
Foxes did the Philistines come. Would thou not offend thine heavenly Father
that did create thee, that does preserve thee, and that has bestowed his only
son upon thee? then forsake thy sins. A gracious child forbeareth all
things which are offensive to his father. Would thou escape the whirl-winde
of Gods wrath? then fly from sin. Would thou be delivered of an
intolerable burden? then cast away thy sins, which are a burden to thy
soul, and will otherwise press thee down to hell. Those which are vexed with
the Nightmare, Incubus.
feel, (as it were) a mountain upon them, and wish earnestly to have it
removed. But there is more odds between the weight of sin, and that weight
which they suppose they feel, then there is betwixt a mountain and a
molehill. Would thou not be judged of those in the end of this world,
whom now perhaps thou do contemn, yea and condemn? Would thou not have
thy religious wife to judge thee, that has lain in thy bosom, thy gracious
child that has come out of thy loins, thy servant which has been at thy
beck, would thou not (I say) be one day judged of these? then judge thy
self, and turn from thy sins. For the Saints shall judge the world, yea
and the wicked Angels. 1. Cor. 6. 2, 3.
Would thou have the holy Angels sing a song for thee in the heavens, Judge.
5. 24 Lu. 15. 10.
as Deborah did for Iael? then turn from thy sins: for there is joy in
heaven at the conversion of a sinner. And strike a nail (as it were) through
the temples of thy sins, as she did one indeed through her enemies.
Wherefore did John the Baptist begin his ministry, Math. 3. 2 Math. 4. 17.
with Repent: and our Savior, with Amend your lives? And why are the Apostles
so frequent and earnest in dehorting us from sin, if this duty of turning
from it were not of very great importance? Do thou think that God is not
able to be revenged of thee? Is he not the Lord of Hosts, Dominae^ exercituum.
Job. ^5. 6. Heb. 12. 29. Heb. 10. 31. Ezekiel. 3. 19.
and an Essence as well infinite in power as in time? And what is man but a
worm, an impotent and silly wretch? Do thou imagine, that he will not
punish thee? God is a consuming fire: and it is a fearful thing to fall into
his hands. The Lord has said, That if the wicked turn not (upon the Prophets
warning) from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his
inquitie. Do thou hope to hide thy sins from his sight? Pro. 5. 21
The ways of a man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondere^h all his
paths. Thou understand my thought a far off, Psalm. 139. 2, 4. Job. 42. 2.
(says David) and there is not a word in my tongue, but lo^ thou know it
wholly, O Lord. Do thou think with thy cunning and close behavior, either
to deceive him, or to shift him off? Job. 5. 13. Psalm 7. 9.
He tries the wise in their craftiness: he tries the heart and the reins.
His eyes are as a flame of fire which do pearce into all the corners of the
heart. He can tell when thou drawest near unto him with thy lips, but keep
thy love for an other. Yea, but thy birth or beauty, wealth or wisdom will
prevail with him. Be not deceived. For God sees not as man sees: 1. Sam. 16
7. Ier. 17. 10. Pro. 24. 12.
for man looks upon the outward appearance: but the Lord beholds the
heart. I the Lord search the heart, and try the reins: but why? even to give
every man according to his ways. He will (says Solomon) recompense every man
according to his works. Though hand join in hand, Pro. 11. 10. 27.
the wicked shall not be unpunished. And whosoever follows evil, seeks his
own death.

God respects neither strength nor stature, neither face nor fashion, nor any
other circumstance in the person of any man. Yea, rather these will aggrauate
thy punishments, and augment thy pains, if thou will not forsake thy sins,
because thou have not used them to the honor of God, that did honor thee with
them.

We see now (beloved) that there is no safety in continuing in our sins; let
us therefore turn from them. And as there is is irreconciliable hostility
between the Ichneumon, and the serpent Aspi^, between the Dolphin and the
Crocodile: Plin Hist. not lib. ca. 24. 25.
as God does has the devil, with an everlasting hatred: so let there be
perpetual combating between us and our sins: let us abhor them, and strive
against them, till God by death, as by a sword, strike off the head of sin,
and utterly demolish it, as Ezekiah did the brazen serpent. 2. Kin. 18. 4.
It is a godly flight, to take the wings of the mourning, and to fly from
sin: it is a good turning to turn from ungodliness: 2. Ki. 18. 7.
it is a lawful rebellion to rebel against the tyrant Sin, as the good king
Hezekiah did against the king of Ashur, and would not serve him. This is the
only tirant, which a man may lawfully stabbe, and kill. For For sin is a
mere usurper: We are bidden to kill sin.
all her laws are wr^tten in blood as Dracoes was, and she rewards all her
vassalls with death. Therefore howsoever we have in times past given our
selves unto sin, Re. 17. 13
as the ten kings were foretold to give their power to the beast, yet let us
now revolt and turn from it, as they should from the whore of Babylon: and
let us make it desolate and destroy it, as they shall do that purple whore. For
(as Peter says) It is sufficient for us that we have spent the time past of
our life after the lust of the Gentiles, 1. Pet. 4. 3
wal^ing in wantonness lusts, dr^nkenn^sse, in gluttony, drinkings, and in
abominable idolatries. To. 13. 12.
The night is past (says Paul) and the day is at hand: let us therefore cast
away the works of darkness, and let us put on the armou^ of light, so that we
wa^ke honestly as in the day: not in gluttony and drunkenne^^e, neither in
chambring and wantonness, nor in strife and envy.

Thus then we have seen from what we must turn. First, from Satan: for he
does either assaults us with violence to devour us, Vid. Pim. hist. not. li.
10. c. 73.
like a Lion: or else with subtlety, like a Leopard. And if at any time he
please our corrupt humors, or make fair as if he would do us good, it is but
in policy; like Herod* that pretended to worship Christ, but intended to kill
him: or like Dauus in the comedy, whom Simo says, Ter. Audr.
did study rather to cross him, then to please his son. So Satan by
satisfying our sinful lusts, does rather seek to displease God, and to
exasperate him against us, then indeed to please us. When he comes unto thee,
with I will give thee: it is only with a mind to get thee. When he does
transform himself into an Angel of light, it is but to dec^iue thee; as he
did sometime appear in the shape of Samuel to Saul the king, but not with any
purpose to do him good. 1. Sam. 28
When he does salute a man, it is only (as Judas dealt with his Master) to
betray him: or like Ioab, who spoke courteously to Amasa and took him by the
beard to kiss him, Sam. 20. 9, 10.
but suddenly slew him with a sword. Therefore we have good cause to take heed
of him, and to turn from him. Secondly, we must turn from the world: which
(like the whore of Babylon) is indeed arrayed in purple and skarlet, Reu. 17. 4.
and gilded with gold, and beset with pearls and precious stones, yet is she
with all, the sink of sin, and a notorious harlot, alluring all men to
commit fornication with her, and to go a whoring after her from God. Thirdly,
from the ways of the wicked: for they lead us to the house of woe, and bring
us to the pit o^ perdition, into which many fall, but out of which none do
come, none can come. Fourthly, from all our sins, both great and ^mall. For
al^ are the works and instruments of the devil. They are all deceitful, like a
broken too^h, and a sliding foot. They are all of an imperious disposition,
like the bramble, Iud 9. 15.
that delighted to be king: or like to Crocodiles, that take themselves to be
kings (as Pliny writes) in the river Nilus, Plin not. hist. l 8. c. 25.
as if it were their pecular Kingdom. Finally, they are all enemies to our
christian race; like stones in our shoes, thorns in our legs, moats in our
eyes, flints in our way, or not unlike to the fish called Remora: which, though
it be not very great, Plin. l. 9. c. 25.
yet cleaving to the keele of a ship under water, does (as some report)
cause her to go more slowly: and does oftentimes make her to stay, as Trebius
Niger affirms.

Thus much for the second point. 3. point. To whom we must turn.
The third follows now to be considered, namely to whom we must turn. The
Prophet exhorts us to turn unto Jehovah: who is by the Graecians termed (
Kurios:) by the Latins Dominus: and by us accordingly called Lord. First in
respect of creation: secondly, in regard of gubernation and preservation:
thirdly, in respect of redemption: fourthly, in regard of absolute possession.
For by him we are created and redeemed: by him we are daily governed and
conserved: and of him we are possessed: we are a part of his possessions, Act.
17. 28
a part of his goods, in him we live and move, and have our being: of him we
hold our lives and lands; himself being an absolute and eternal substance, or
nature, ha^ing life, and being only of himself, as the word Jehovah sh^weth.

Now, we are to turn from our sins to him The reasons are many. First* from
him we have wandered, and him we do by our sins principally offend. Let the
straying sheep return to their own shepherd. Let the servant that has
transgressed his mais^ers will, in running from him, retire to his own
master, and not to an other man. Paul sent ^^esimus to his own master
Philemon, Philem. 12
from whom he did vnlawfu^ly depart. The prodigal son returned to his own
father.

Secondly, God is the fountain both of our being, and well being: Luke 15. 20.
Luke 1. 16. 1. Cor. 4. 7 Iam. 1. 17
of our doing, and well doing? of our life and liberty. Yea; What have thou,
that thou have not received of him? Every good giving (says James) and every
perfect gift is from above, and and comes down from the Father of lights.
Thirdly, he is the only lawgiver, Iam. 4. 12
which is able to save and to destroy. He alone can pardon sin: therefore he
says, I, Mar. ^.7. Is. 43. 25.
even I am he that puts away thine iniquities. He alone can heal our
souls, and kill our sins: therefore he says, Hos. 13. 9 and 14. 5. Revel.
3. 18. Ezekiel. 36. 26.
In me is thine help: and again, I will heal their rebellion. He has
gold, and raiment, and eye-salue for the soul. He has a new heart to give
us, and clean water to purge us. He only can change our minds, and make us
to turn unto him. Therefore the Church prays in this wise: Cant. 1. 3.
Draw me: we will run after thee. Ephraim says, Convert thou me, Ier. 31. 18
and I shall be converted. And Jeremy prays in behalf of the people, L^^.
5. 21 Phil. 2. 13
Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned. It is he that works
in us, both the will and the deed. He is our only Ariadne, that can help us
out of the labyrinth of sin. It is he only that stretches forth his hand
to succor us, when we are ready to sink into the water of wickedness, and
to be drowned in the floods of iniquity, Mat. 14. 31.
as Christ did unto Peter, when walking upon the water, he began to sink into
it. Yea, he is so absolute able (being God omnipotent) to perform all these
things, as that we cannot at the least sort distrust his sufficiency, without
horrible injury done unto him.

As he was able to ouerwhelme the world with water, and to hinder the building
of Babel: so he is able to subvert the world of our vices, to drown them with
the water of his holy Spirit, and to stay the building of spiritual Babell,
made within us by Satan, the only Architect of all our enormious buildings.
As he was able to riue the rocks, and to preserve Daniel in the Lions Den:
so is he able to rend our stony hearts, and to defend us from that cruel
Lion, which seeks to prey upon our souls. As he was of power to open the
prison doors, and to fetch Peter with his fellows out, and at an other time,
to unloose the bands, wherewith Paul and Sila^ with their fellow prisoners,
were tied and bound: so he is as well able to fetch us out of the prison of
sin, and to break the bolts, and untie the bands of iniquity. As he was able
to drive out devils, and to cure all diseases: so he can (if he will) expel
all unclean spirits, that have taken up their lodging in our hearts, as the
spirit of pride, envy, contention, covetousness, drunkenness, d^zzinesse,
vncl^annesse; he is able to bind the strong man Satan, and to cast him out of
us, and to cure all the diseases of the soul. He has a salve for every sore,
and a medicine for every malady. There is neither sore nor sickness, but he
can remedy, if he please. Wherefore we have good reason to turn unto him,
to seek unto him. The Lizardes seek for Calaminth when they are wounded,
being an herb very excellent against the biting of serpents.

Plin. not. hist. l. 8. c. 27.
The Storke feeling himself amiss, goes to the herb Organ for a remedy. The
Raven perceiving himself poisoned with the Chameleon, flies to the Laurel,
and with it extinguisheth the venom: so when we are wounded or poisoned with
sin, and bitten by the serpent Satan, we ought to go to the Lord: he is
our Calaminth, our Organ, and our Laurel. Qui fecit, reficere potest: he that
made us, can renew us: he that formed us, can as well reform us: he that made
the soul, can as easily mend the soul. The waves of the Sea (says the
Psalmist) are mighty, Ps. 93. 4
but the Lord on high is more mighty: so indeed the waves of sin are loud
and mighty, Is. 1. 18.
but the Lord by his might can still them. It is good therefore to turn unto
him.

Fourthly, God is not only able to convert and cure us, but very ready to do
it, if we seek unto him, and willing to receive us if we return unto him. For
the Lord (says David) is full of compassion and mercy, Psalm. 103. 8. 9.
slow to anger, and of great kindness. He will not always chi^e, neither keep
his anger for ever. The father of the Prodigal son, seeing his son a far
off, re^urning home unto him, pitied him, and ran (not go) unto him, Luke 15.
20
and fell upon his neck and kissed him. David shows the admirable affection
of God, to a repentant sinner, when he says after this sort: I thought I will
confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, Ps. 32.^.
and ^hou forgauest the punishment of my sin. If the Lord be so ready to
receive a ^^^essing sinner, shall we think he will reject a converting
sinner, one that does not only confess his sin in truth, but in truth also
turn from it, and return to him?

This argument Joel uses to persuade the Israelites to repent. Joel 2. 13.
Turn (says he) unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious, and mercifu^l,
sl^w to anger, and of great kindness. So then the mercy of God should be so
far from making us carnally secure, as that indeed it should rather provoke
and incite us to rowze up our selves, and to turn again unto him.

Fifthly, he is not only by nature loving, but he has also made us of his
love very gracious promises. Hezekiah by the special motion of the holy Ghost,
2. Chro. 30 9 Is. ^5. 7. Zach. 1. 3. Is. ^4. 26.
says: The Lord your God will not turn his face from you, if ye convert unto
him. And Esaias says: Let the wicked forsake his ways, and return unto the
Lord, and he will have mercy upon him. Now God is constant in his word, and
faithful in his promises, and will perform the words of his Prophets. Ps.
86. 15.
The Lord (says David) is great in truth. Verbum eius ab intention non
dissentit, quia veritas est: nec factum a verbo, quia virius est: his word
dissenteth not from his intention, because he is Verity: Nor his works from
his word, because he is Virtue. Thou will believe thy faithful friend, and will thou not believe the God of Faith? he condemns breaking of promise in men,
therefore surely he will not break his promise made with man.

Sixthly, we are commanded to turn unto God. Is 55. 7.
Let the wicked return unto the Lord. Joel ^.12. Zach. 1.^. Job. ^5. 14 Pro.
1^. 16 Hos 12. 6.
Turn you unto me (says the Lord.) The commandments of God are not to be
neglected. Disobedience to them is death: but, He that keeps the
commandment, keeps his own soul. But this is one commandment of God,
that we turn unto him.

Lastly, we have the example of the Saints to direct us. David, Josiah, the
Ninevites, and Paul. The example of the Saints in good things, should be unto
us (as the cloud and pillar of fire was unto the Israelites) to go before us,
and to direct us into celestial Canaan. Imitation is the disease of the
English Nation; therefore if we will needs imitate and follow, let us follow
the best. We are forbidden to follow the fashions of the world, Romans 12. 2.
but not to follow the foote-steps of the Saints. Thus much concerning this
third point.

The third Sermon.
4. point. In what we must turn.
THe fourth is In what, and wherein we must turn. Which, because it has
affinity with the second, I will the more speedily dispatch. We must turn to
the Lord, in our hearts, minds, wills, works, and ways. As the Priests
cleansed all the house of the Lord, 2. Chr. ^9
and the altar of burnt offerings, with all the vessels thereof, and the
shewbread table with all the vessels thereof: so we must cleanse our hearts
and hands, and all our ways from the filthiness of our sins. As they went
into the inner parts of Gods house to cleanse it, and brought out all the
uncleanness that they found: so we must enter into the bottom of our hearts,
and seek into all the winding corners of our ways to dress them, and we
must sweep out all the dust of sin, and shouell away all the dirt of
wickedness. And as the Levites hurled that uncleanness into the river Kidron:
so ought we to cast and condemn all our sins into the pit of hell, from
whence they came. God requires an alteration in the whole man, Prou. 23. 17.
19.
O thou my son (says the Lord) hear, and he wise, guide thine heart in the
way. Again, Let not thine heart be envious against sinners. Ier. 4. 14.
O Jerusalem (says the Prophet) wash thine heart from wickedness. Here we
see that God requires a turning in the heart; and with good reason. For the
heart commands both the hand and the tongue. Of the abundance of the heart,
the tongue speaks. He that will have a clean stream, must purge the
fountain. He that will have good herbs, must weed his garden. Secondly, we
must turn to God in our heads. We must ^e wise, but the throne of wisdom is
the head. God will have a change in our heads: Pro. 12. 2.
for a man of wicked imaginations, he will condemn, says Solomon. Thirdly, he
will have an alteration in our words. Ephesians. 4. 29 Col 3. 8.
We must be full of blessing, and beware of cursing: our speech must be
seasoned with the words of grace. Fourthly, we must turn to God in respect of
our companions. Therefore Paul says, Eat not with any brother, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
Pro. 23. 20
that is a fornicatour a railer, or covetous. And Solomon says, Keep not
company with drunkards, nor glu^tons. B^rds of one feather will fly together.
If thy companions be vicious, it may justly be feared that thou art not
virtuous. Plin. not. hist. ^^ 10. c. ^4.
The Spider and the Serpent cannot agree: the Thoes and the Lions do ^ouly
jar: the bird Aeguthus does so much abhor another bird called Anchus, that
as some affi^me, their blood will not mingle together. As Salolomon says
accordingly, that A wicked man is an abomination (not abominable) unto the
just, Pro. 29. 27.
and he that is upright in his way, is an abh^mination to the wicked.
Therefore, he that delights himself with a wicked ma^s company, shows
himself either very wicked, or very weak. He that will turn unto GOD, must
change his companions, and hate with David the assembly of the evil: Ps. 26. 4,
5
he must, not company with the wicked, and haunt with vain persons, but must
be (as David was) a companion of a^l them, Psalm. 119. 63.
that fear God and keep hi^ precepts. Fifthly, we most turn to God in the
works of our hands, Ion 3. 8. Zach. 1. 4. Ps;a. ^6, 6. Iam. 4. 8. Pro. 4.^6,
27.
and in the ways of our feet. David s^ith; I will wash mine hands in
innocence O Lord. The wise man says, Let all thy ways be ordered aright,
remove thy foot from evil. Lastly, we must turn to the Lord here upon
earth. The earth must be the place of our turning. He that will come to heaven,
must begin his race upon the earth. He that will will not turn to God upon
the earth, must never look to be received into heaven. He that will not set
open the gates of his heart here upon earth for the King of glory to come in
the King of glory will not set open heauen-gates for him to enter in, when he
shall be taken from the earth. And thus much for this fourth point.

5. point. When we must turn.
The fifth is, when we must turn. He which turns, must turn in something:
and so he must turn in some time. We must turn to the Lord without delay.
Delay breeds danger. So soon as we have searched and tried our ways, we
must turn unto the Lord. We must in no wise defer our conversion. For first,
the Lord seems to be (as it were) in travel, till we relinquish our sins
and turn unto him. Prou. 1. 22, 23. Prou. 6 9.
O ye foolish (says Wisdom) how long will ye love foolishness: turn ye at
my correction How long (says God) wi^t thou sleep, O sluggard? When will thou
arise out of thy sleep? Ier. 4. 14.
O Jerusalem (says the Lord) how long shall thy wicked thoughts remain
within thee? Ier. 13. 27
Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when shall it once
be? How long will thou go astray, Ier. 31. 22
O thou rebellious daughter. Therefore to deliver the Lord out of his pains,
let us turn unto him, and repent with speed.

Secondly, the service of the Lord is perfect freedom. Job. 36. 11
And as Elihu says, If men will serve him, they shall end their days in
prosperity and their years in pleasures. Therefore the sooner we enter into
his service, the sooner we shall be free from men, yea free-denisons of new
Jerusalem. And this is not till we repent and turn unto him, and ^hen it is.

Thirdly, it is a very absurd and disorderly course, for any man to take a
noble man's livery, and to wear his recognisance, and yet in the mean time to
serve his enemy. Beloved, the profession of piety is (as it were) the Lords
cloth, and Baptism is his badge. Shall we wear his cloth, and bear his
badge? shall we enter into his house, and eat his meat, and in the mean
while, serve our lostes and fulfill the fancy of our flesh, which is an enemy
to God and godliness? If we account this course unreasonable, as in deed it
is, then having set our feet within the territories of the Church, 1. Tim. 3.
15.
which is the house of God, and having taken of him his liuerie and
recognisance, let us now cease to serve his enemies and truly turn unto him.
The longer we stay, the more unreasonable we show our selves to be, and the
more injurious we are to him.

Fourthly, God does often withdraw the outward sig^es of his favor from them
which wander from him ^^d forget to turn againe^ y^a though they be his dear
children. Therefor he says, Ps. 89. 31, 32.
that if they break his s^atues* he will then visit their transgression with
rods, and so he does usually. As we therefore fear Gods correction, and dread
his rods, let us beware of sinning against him: and if we be overtaken at
anytime, as who is not? let us without delay repent and recover our selves. A
good child having iniustly vexed his father, will not be quiet till they be
reconciled again.

Fifthly, when we live in sin, and hasten not to turn from it unto God, then
we distemper our consciences. Were it not then better to return with speed,
then either to dull or disquiet them? What is more intolerable then a
disturbed conscience? Pro. 18. 14
The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: but a wounded spirit who can
bear it? An evil conscience is a man's prison, his Iailer, his accuser, his
Judge, yea and executioner also. Though a man could dissemble his grief and
seem to laugh, Pro. 14. 13
yet even in that laughing the heart is sorrowful. And though the countenance
do not always bewray the anguish and agony of the mind perplexed, yet The
heart knows the bitterness of his soul. Pro. 14. 10


Now then, were it not better for a man with speed to turn, then by delay to
purchase and procure that to be his foe, which he ought to make his surest
friend, and deem a daily delight? Pro. 15. 15. 13.
For a good conscience is a continual feast, and a joyful heart (which is not
without the other) makes a cheerful countenance.

Sixthly, though God have pardoned all the sins of his children by his decree,
promise, and merits of his son: yet he does not actually apply this pardon to
their faith and feeling, till they do turn unto him. For though I do forgive
my brother, though he do not ask forgiveness, yet (I think) I need not
always tell him so, till he do ask: so, though God did indeed pardon our
sins in his decree, and in the purpose of his heart, yet does he never seal
the pardon actually unto us, till we turn unto him, and desire it. The father
of the Prodigal son did not go to meet his son, till his son had first
determined to return unto him.

Seventhly, there is a day of grace, a day of salvation, a time wherein God
will be found. Therefore Esaias counsels us to seek the Lord whiles he may
be found, Is. 55. 6.
and to call upon whilst he is near. And Wisdom says, Pro. 1. 28. 29.
They shall seek me early, but they shall not fin^e me, because they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. Beloved, this is the day of
salu^tion, this is the day of obt^ining present grace, and future glory, yet
the trumpet or the Gospel is sounded amongst us, yet the Lord like a Nurse,
holds out his naked breasts unto us, yet we hear his voice ^inging in our
ears, Awake, thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5. 14
and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Let us therefore
redeem the time, and serve the season. Take the tide which stays for no man,
and strike the Iron, whiles it is hot: it is yet summer, winter will come: it
is yet light, but night draws on, the Sun se^meth to descend, the shadows
are long. Iam. 4. 8.
Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Gal. 6. 10.
To day if ye hear his voice harden not your hearts. And as Paul says, While
we have time let us do good to all men. So I say, while we have time, let us
do this good unto our selves, let us leave our sins, and turn to God. He
that has a long iourny to go, and but a little time to finish it in (as we
have) will take the day before him, and set foot forward betimes.

Eighthly, let the ensample of the Saints be considered. David was no sooner
admonished by Nathan, but he presently repented, Peter no sooner considered
his heinous offense, but he did relent. The Prodigal son feeling his smart,
forthwith resolved to turn home unto his Father. The Ninevites hearing the
short, but sharp Sermon of P^ophet Jonah, believed God and repent^d: yea their
King did immediately upon his intelligence, by proclamation comm^nd every man
to turn from his evil way. And God saw their works, that they turned from
their evil waie^. Ion. 3. 5, 8, 10.
The good Jews, having heard their sins discovered by Peter, were presently
pricked in their hearts (as if his words had been swords) and cried out
unto Peter and the other Apostles, Act. 2.^7, 38, 41.
Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said, Amend your lives and be
baptized. And as the Scripture says, they received his words gladly. Here are
hearers indeed: happy teachers, happy bearers, worthy of our imitation. But
our hearers for the most part, are like brass and iron, their hearts are
made of marble, insomuch that we may (in some sort) say with the Prophet: The
bellows are burnt, Ier. 6. 29.
the lead is consumed in the fire, the Founder melts in vain: our oil is
wasted, our labor spent upon them is lost we light a candle to the walls,
and speak to the stones: for they will not forgo their dross, and part from
their sins. But the word of the Lord shall not return void, Is. 55. 11.
but shall accomplish that which he will, and shall prosper in the thing whereto
he sent it. It must be the savor of life unto life by his grace to some, and
the savor of death unto death, by their corruption to others. The sun does
whiten flax, but black the face: and fire will stiffen clay, but soften wax.
But I return from whence I have digressed.

To conclude this point; Samuel, and Timothy, and Joseph began to serve the
Lord in their tender years. Shall we give the strength of our days unto
Satan, and keeepe our rotten bones and withered age for God? Will any man
entertain a servant that seeks unto him in his old age, but refused his
service all his life before, though he was by many messengers desired?

Can a man be happy to soon? Can a man be holy too soon? Young devils
sildome make old Saints. Though sound repentance be never too late, yet late
repentance is s^ldome or never sound. He that hopes to find mercy, as the
thief did at the last gasp, though he live lewdly all his life time, may as
well by spurring of his Ass, look that he should speak, because Balaams
Ass did so on a time. Every man with Pamphilus desires to be rid of his fear
with as much speed as may be. Ter, And. quam primum hoc me ^ihera me^u.
What greater fear can any man be possessed with, then, the f^are of d^mnation,
from which no man can before his conversion assure himself to be freed? If a
thorn be in our foot, or a moate in our e^e, without delay we seek to pull
it out. Why then should we not be as diligent to have our sins plucked ou^ of
our hearts, seeing they are as thorns and moates unto our souls? If any thing
disquiet us, we do presently seek to remove it. There is no quietness in
sin, no peace in sinning. Therefore as Paul wishes the Gala^ians. Would to
God they were even cut off, Gal. 5. 12.
which do disquie^ you: so let us now wish and labor that our sins may be
destroyed, for they do distemper and disquiet us. The Elephant having swallowed
down a Lizard, Plin. not. hist. ^^. 8. c. ^.
goes straightway to a wild Olive for a remedy. The Hind feeling himself
poisoned with some venomous weed, goes without delay to the Artichoke for
cure. Men are very ready to send or to run to the Phisi^ian or the
Surgeon for the d^seases and wounds, which can only kill the body: why then
should we not be as ready to seek to God for the cure of the diseases and
wounds of the soul, which if they be not cured and repented of, will k^ll both
soul and body? We all desire that GOD should turn to us with speed, when he
frowneth upon us, and speaks roughly to us, as Joseph did to his brethren: we
would not that he should hide the light of the Sun, or hold up the water in
the clouds long from us: we would not have him unkind unto us a moment:
wherefore then should we be unkind unto him, why should we any time neglect
his service, or reject his word? Why should we prorogue the time of turning to
him? Can we be too soon in his court? too soon in his love? too soon in his
service? If we cannot (as indeed we cannot) then let us with speed make
haste unto him. The longer we tarry, the more unfit we make our selves to
turn. For Censuetudo peccand^ tollit sensum peccati, A custom in sinning,
takes away the sense of sin: and when men become senseless, they prove
sensual and sottish, feeling no misery, and therefore affecting no change.
And this shall suffice for the fifth point.

The sixth to be considered is, 6. point. How men must turn^
how we must turn to God. For, that any good work may be well done, and so
accepted of God, it must be done in due manner. Ahab and Judas repented after
a fashion, but it was not the right fashion. Many men make many turnings, but
they be not good and gracious. Bona non bone Splendida peccata.
The wicked do many good things, but none well: and therefore their goodly
works are but goodly sins. Lastly, the wicked do not only wi^ked things,
but they have withal a guise in doing them wickedly* Psalm. 59. 5. Pro. 2. 15.
David speaks of some that transgress maliciously. The wise man makes
mention of some that are Iewd in their paths. Pro. 10. 23
Solomon says; It is a pastime to a fool to do (not that only which is
wicked, but to do it also) wickedly. The sacrifice of the wicked (says he) is
an abomination to the Lord: Pro. 21. 27
how much more when he brings it with a Wicked Mind. Jude. 15. Isa. 32. 6.
The wicked as Enoch shows, do not only commit wicked actions, but they do
them wickedly.

Considering therefore that the wicked have a custom or fashion in their
working, Malum ma^e.
not only to do a sinful action, but sometimes also (if not always) to do it
sinfully, we on the contrary are taught, not only to see that all the works
we do be good, but that they be withal well, and not wickedly done, as many
use to do, and so mar that by the manner, which was good for the matter. To
come then to the point in hand. We must not only turn to the Lord, but we
must turn handsomely and holily. If Ahab had turned as he ought to have done,
he should never have been rejected. That we therefore turn aright from
every evil unto the Lord, we must observe these rules that follow. First, we
must turn in faith. For, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. To. 14. 23
We must believe that our turning is both good in it self, and good in us,
yea and for us; yet not for any merit in it, but by the mere mercy of God,
that does in love accept it, and of his mercy promise life and prosperity, if
we will turn. Secondly, we must turn in the name of Christ. Col. 3. 17.
Whatsoever y^ do (says Paul) whether in word or deed, do all in the name
of the Lord Jesus. If we would have God accept and approve our conversion, we
must convert in the name of Christ. If a man behold the Rainbow, or the Sun
being ready to set through a grove of trees, the trees will seem brighter then
otherwise they do: and if a man look through a blew glass, all that he
sees will seem blew; so if the Lord behold our converting to him, in or
through the righteousness of Christ, he will accept of it, nothing regarding
the weakness of it, as being hidden (is it were) from his eyes in the blood of
Christ. Hos. 12. 6.
Thirdly, we must turn to God in consciencence of his commandment, even
because he does command us to turn unto him. Fourthy, we must turn in
sincerity and vprighteousnesse of heart: for if we t^rne in show, and not in
truth, we make a mock of God: like those of whom God says, This people draw
near unto me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me. If we
condemn sin with our tongues, and take pleasure in it in our hearts, we
make our selves abominable to the Lord, Heb. 4. 13
before whose sight all things lie bare and naked. Therefore David says, Ps.
^6. 18.
If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Let us
therefore (beloved) turn with the heart, heartily and sincerely. Cast aside
(says Peter) all deceit and hypocrisies. 1. Pet. 2. 1 Pro. 1^. 22.
They that deal truly (says Solomon) are Gods delight: so they that turn
truly do please him at the heart. Josiah is s^id to have turned to the Lord, 2.
King. 23 25.
With all his heart, with all his soul and with all his might according to the
Law of Moses. W^e cannot deceive the Lord. Ier. 17. 9, 10.
For though the heart b^e deceitful and wick^d above all things, yet the Lord
does search it out and see it, and rewards every man according to the fruit
of his works. Now a man may know whether he turn ^^ncerely, or but in show
and superficially, by these three notes of true turning. First, if he turn to
God, because he loves him, and for his love fears to displease him, and not
so much for fear of punishment, as the reprobate use to do. Secondly, if he
turn, because he detesteth sin as an enemy to the glory of God, and to the
salvation of his own soul, and therefore labors with heart and hand
against all his sins without exception. Thirdly, if he turn not like the old
Israelites, of whom the Psalmist says, that when God slew them, they returned
and sought him early: but they flattered him with their mouth, Ps. ^8. 34, 36,
37.
for their heart was not upright with him, therefore (as many with us use to do
after their solemn protestations of their repentance in the extreamitie of
some sickness) they fell again to their old byas, and started aside like a
deceitful bow. Fifthly, we must turn to the Lord cheerfully, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
and willingly. David commands his son Solomon to serve his God with a perfect
heart, and with a willing mind. As we must turn sincerely without simulation,
so we must turn cheerfully, not heavily, willingly: not as by constraint. 2.
Cor. 9. 7. 1. Pet. 5. 2.
As God loves a cheerful giver, so he loves a cheerful convert. Feed the
flock of God (says Peter) caring for it not by constraint, but willingly, not
for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: so I say, turn to the Lord with care,
and willingness of mind, not as it were by compulsion or for fear: turn
readily, not being moved with hope of gain, or credit with men, as many do.
If there be a willing mind and a cheerful affection, it is accepted; 2. Cor.
8. 12.
yea a constant and settled will to turn, is of God accounted turning indeed.
Now this alacrious and willing turning is perceived two ways. First, by speedy
turning. For cheerefulnes will be quick, nimble, and speedy, not sluggish and
lither. Ps. 119. 60.
David says; I made haste and delaied not to keep thy commandments; so we to
show our selves alacrious conuerts, must turn without delay. Plin. l. 10. c.
74.
The Spider espying a Serpentlying under the shade of the tree where she
spinneth, makes presently unto her and poisoneth her: so we must deal with
our sins. For if they be but let alone awhile they will get shelter within us,
and will not very easily be removed; like the sea-Dragon, Plin. li. 9. c. 27.
which if he be let go upon the land, makes with his snowt a hollow trough
with admirable celeritie. Secondly, this cheereful turning is likewise very
laborious. A willing mind makes a man very painful. He that turns unto God
cheerfully, will strive exceedingly against his corruptions, and labor to
please God in all things. Pro. 26. 13. Prou. 6. 10. Pro. 26. 14.
He will not say with the sluggard, there is a Lion in the way, a Lion is in
the streets. He will not say, yet a little sleep, a little slumber. The
slothful man turns upon his bed as a door upon the hinges, but so does not
he. But he makes haste to his business, and is very diligent and painful in
his works. The wicked are active, lively, forward, and industrious in working
wickedness, wherefore then should not we be painful and ready to do that
which is good, as to turn from sin, and return unto God? Lastly, we must
turn to the Lord daily. We must renew our repentance every day. 1. These. 5.
16, 17
Rejoice evermore (says Paul) and pray continually. So I say, repent evermore,
and return continually. For we do sin daily, we transgress continually, we
offend evermore. So long as we live upon the earth, we shall not be free from
sin, we cannot be free from sinning. Therefore we had need to repent and
turn to God continually. Blessed are those, which do persevere in turning
unto the end. There is no shame in turning to God, all the shame is in turning
from him. And thus much concerning the sixth point. It remains now to speak
of the seventh, and the last, to wit:

Wherefore we must turn. 7. Point. Why we must turn.
For whosoever works, must in reason propound the end of his work unto
himself. And he that will do any good work well, must do it, not only in a
good manner, and by good means, but also to a good end. The end why we must
turn to the Lord, is double, supreme and subordinate, greater or lesser. The
maine and highest end of our turning, ought to be the glory of God. Therefore
Paul says: Whether y^ eat, 1. Cor. 10.
or drink, or whatsoever else ye do, ^oe all to the glory of God. The
subordinate and inferior end is manifold. First, that we may show our selves
of the number of Christ's sheep, which must all be gathered together into one
fold, and converted from their indirect and crooked ways. Secondly, that we
may gather assurance to our selves of our eternal predestination, to
perpetual blessedness, and that we are out of the rank of reprobates, whom God
has rejected, and prepared for the day of evil. Pro. 16. 4.
Thirdly, that we may adorn the profession of Christianity, which we have
taken upon us. Fourthly, that we may stop the mouths of Atheists, Papists,
and all dissolute and desperate catiues, that take upon them with open mouths,
to blaspheme and bark against our religion, for the sins and irregularities
of the multitude amongst us. Fifthly, that we may allure men to the liking both
of us, and of our contemned profession, and also to stir them to convert, and
glorify God. Therefore our Savior says, Math. 5. 16. 1. Pet. 2. 11, 12.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. And likewise Peter, Abstain from
fleshly lusts, and have your couersation honest among the Gentiles, that they
which speak evil of you, as of evil doers, may by your good works, which they
shall see, glorify God in the day of visitation. This shall suffice for these
seven points, and for this doctrine of turning to the Lord. Let us now see how
this doctrine may be applied for our use and benefit, and so we will conclude.
The use is either of reprehension or exhortation.

First, the consideration of these things, Use. 1.
serves to condemn al those which refuse to turn, but will (notwithstanding
al admonitions) run on without repentance, to the dishonor of God, the offense
of his people, the grief of their friends, and destruction of their own
souls. Is. 5. 18.
These men (to use the words of the Prophet) do draw iniquity with cords of
vanity, and sin as with ca^tropes. These me^ (as the Lord speaks of the
Israelites) are wise to the devil, Ier. 4. 22. Ier. 9. 5. Ps. 52. 3. Pro. 14 9.
but to do well, they have no knowledge. They take great pains to do
wickedly: and as David says of Doeg, they love evil more then good. These are
the fools that make but a mock of sin. These are they that esteem the
Prophets words as wind, and their m^nacies as mockes. These like those, of whom
the Prophet Jeremy speaks, Ier. 5. 3.
have made their faces harder then a stone, and have refused to return. A
stone will be battered with an hammer, and worn in the end with continual
dropping; but these men will neither be bruised with the hammer of the law, nor
mollified with the oily drops of the Gospel, which are daily falling upon them.
Men they are not, but monsters, of a prodigious, luxurious, and rebellious
disposition; to whom belongs eternal confusion of face, which they cannot
possibly escape without serious and sound repentance of sin, and turning unto
God, before it be too late. Use. 2.
Secondly, all those are here to be reprehended, which defer their conversion
from day to day, like many bad pay-ma^sters. As Foelix said to Paul, Go thy
way for this time, Act. 24. 25.
and when I have a convenient time, I will call for thee: so they will turn,
when they have a convenient time to turn in. They have oxen to p^oue, wives to
look too, or dead to bury, they cannot (nay they will not) come yet, they
have not leisure to turn as yet. They can turn their religion with the
weather-cocke, they can fit their profession (as Millers do their sails) for
every wind, how contrary soever it be, they can turn any whither, but to God.
These men may indeed be ashamed of their turning, and that with good cause: and
that they may shame their former turnings, let them fire the wheel of their
turning devises, and return to God. Otherwise they show themselves to be of
the nature of the Moon, Reu. 12. 2
whereon the Church does set her feet, and to be the natural children of the
world, which is made of turning metal, and is constant in nothing but in
inconstancy, changing her face as often as the Chamaeleon does her color.

Thirdly, all those are to be condemned, Use. 8.
which will leave some of their sins, but will not part from all. They will
needs entertain one at the least, Iam. 1. 21. Pro. 3. 31.
as their darling. But James says, Lay a part all filthiness. God forbids
us to choose any of the ways of the wicked. As there is no brook so small, no
river so little, but will bring a man to the sea, if he will follow it: so
there is no sin so small, nor yet any of the wicked ma^s ways whatsoever,
but if a man addict his heart unto them and follow them to the end, they will
lead ^ man to the pit of perdition, and to a wide and bottomless gulf of
everlasting horrors, and horrible tortures.

Use 4.
Fourthly, those are convinced of unorderly turning, which turn from one sin
unto an other, and not from their sins unto God, as we are here exhorted.
Some turn from their prodigality, to covetousness: some from foolish
humility, to humble pride: some from sottish ignorance, and leadennesse of
spirit, to captious curiosity, and to a spiritual lunacie, being ready to run
wild with their own light. What is this but with Aesops fish to leap out of
the frying pan into the fire, Ier 4 1.
to escape bushes, and fall among brambles? But the Lord will have us turn to
him. O Israel, if thou return, Isa 44. 22 1. These. 1. 9
return unto me, says the Lord. The Thessalonians turned to God from idols,
to serve the living and true God. When we relinquish one extreme, we must not
run to the other, but we must keep the mean.

To conclude this text: we all, Use. 5.
both old and young, rich and poor, high and low, we are all (I say) taught
and admonished to repent of all our sins, Zach. 1. 4. Hos. 10. 12
and with speed to turn unto the Lord. Break up your fallow ground for it is
time to seek the Lord. Ier. 4. 4.
Be circumcised to the Lord, an^ take away the fore-skins of your hearts, lest
my wrath come ^orth like fire, and burn, that none can quench it. Ps. 8^. 2, 3.
How long will ^ee judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Do
right to the poor and fatherless, do justice to the needy. Pro. 1. 22.
O^e skornfull, how long will ye take pleasure in skorning? O ye fools, Pro.
3.^7.
how long will ye have knowledge? Will not the Lord have us to with hold the
good from the owners thereof, and shall we dare to withdraw or withhold our
selves from him, whose goods we are in man^ respects? He that turns not unto
God, withholdeth himself from God, and locketh himself up in the devils
hold. May thou not say unto thy neighbor, Pro. 3. 28.
Go, and come again, and to morrow will I give thee, if thou now have it? And
will thou now deny the Lord, that comes unto thee for his own, which now
thou have in thine hands to give him, if thou list to part (if part) from it?
We are forbidden to wrong and to rob our neighbor, yea (says the Lord) the
work-man^ hire shall not abide with thee unto the morning; L^. 19. 13
meaning, without his consent or leave. And shall we presume to rob the Lord,
to wrong the Lord, or to deteine any thing from the Lord, though but for a
night, without his leave and license? Thou art the Lord, then turn unto him,
delay no time, withhold not thy self a moment from him. Thou have no leave,
therefore leave to loiter, and return with speed. Thou art happy thou have so
good an owner, so kind a Master. 1. Cor. 7. 5
Paul will not have man and wife depart asunder for a time, without mutual
consent. And dare thou depart from god without his leave? Dare thou tarry
away without his liking? Is there any safety, but under his wings? Was not Eve
made a prey to the serpent, when she was absent from her husband? Is there any
peace without Gods pardon, or is there any pardon without man's penitency? In
what a wretched condition is the malefactor apprehended and attached of high
treason without the kings pardon? Is not his life a death, and his death a
horror? Paul would not give place by subjection for an hour to the false
brethren. Gal. 2. 5. 14.
So we should not yield to the devil a jot. And as soon as he saw Peter play
a trick of simulation, he did incontinently rebuke him: so we ought presently
to reform our ways, so soon as ever we do perceive that we tread awry, or
wander out. Shall Paul travel in birth, Gal. 4. 19.
until Christ be formed in the Galatians, and they restored to him, and shall
we be careless of our selves? shall not we be (as it were) in travel and
continual torment till Christ be formed in us, 2. Cor. 13. 7.
and we formed to him? Shall Paul pray that the Corinthians may do none evil,
and shall not we labor for our selves against all evil? 2. Cor. 12. 21.
Shall Paul be ready to bewail those, which having sinned do not repent of
their uncleanness, fornication, and wantonness, and shall not we lament, relent,
and repent for our own sins? Do we not know that tribulation belongs unto
those, that will not turn unto God? Ashur shall be his king, because they
refused to convert. Hos 11. 5. Amos. 8. 4
Amos speaks of some that swallow up the poor, which are the creatures of
God as well as the rich. Pro. 30. 14
And Agur says; There is a generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their
jaws as knives, (horrible and bloody mo^sters) to eat up the afflicted out of
the earth, and the poor from among men. Shall any men, can any men be ^hus
brutish, barbarous, and cruel hearted to their brethren, to their own flesh?
and shall we do nothing unto our sins, which are the gangreues, and the
plague-sores of our souls, and utter enemies to our peace and safety? shall
we let them alone, shall we stand still, and suffer them to destroy us? Psalm.
137. 8, 9.
O daughter Babel, worthy to be destroyed! And is not sin the daughter of
the devil, and the Babel of the soul, as worthy to be destroyed? Blessed
(says the Psalmist) shall he be (not seem, nor called) that takes and
dasheth thy children against the stones: even so blessed shall that man be (I
say be) that dasheth his sins in pieces, and kills the killing corruption
of his heart, which like the fire says not, Pro. 30. 15 Plin. l. 8. c. 25.
It is enough: and like the Crocodile, will grow so long as it has any life,
unless it be both pressed and oppressed. If David cry out. Woe is unto me,
Ps. 120. 5.
that I remain in Meshek, and dwell in the tents of Kedar; have not we cause
to lament, that we remain in our sins, and for that not only sin dwells
in us, but we also in sin: as it is to be feared, many of us may truly say as
much, if we did search our selves narowly. David could say: My soul has too
long dwelt with him that hates peace. Ps. 120. 6.
Wherefore then should not we be weary of our sins, which are sworn enemies
to all true peace? Amos makes mention of some, that desire the Sabbath were
gone, Amos. 8. 5. 6.
that they might sell their corn dear, and falsify their weights: yea, that
they might buy the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes. Their delay was
as death unto them. Shall any man make so much haste for filthy lucre, and to
work heinous iniquity, and shall we linger the time, and defer to do good,
to turn from our sins unto God* David was grieved, Ps. 119. 158.
because he saw men that kept not the word of God: and shall not we be grieved
for our selves, when we break the commandments of God, and demonstrate our
grief by our true turning unto him? Must Jerusalem mourn, Ier. 7. 29. 30.
because the children of Judah have set their abominations in the house of
God, and shall we be joyful and careless, while our hearts, which are the
houses of the holy Ghost, are polluted with abominable corruptions, whereof we
have not all of us as yet truly repented, as our lives do testify? Yea,
rather let us repent, and turn again unto the Lord, and then we may indeed
rejoice. Was Jeremy sore vexed for the hurt of the daughter of his people?
Ier. 8. 21. Lam. 3. 48
Shall his eye cast out rivers of water for her destruction? And shall not we
lament for our own hurt, for defacing of Gods image within us, and for the
many grievous wounds of our souls? Must Christ be nailed to the Cross for thy
sins, and pierced with a spear to the heart for thy wickedness; and wilt
not thou turn from them, and forsake them? Shall he groan, and sigh, and sob,
shall he sweat water and blood for thy sins, and will thou yet delight in
them, will thou not forsake and leave them? know thou not that Christ bare
our sins upon the Cross, that we should die to sin, 1. Pet. 2. 24.
and live in righteousness? Paul says, that Christ gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people
unto himself, Zealous of good works. Therefore, Tit. 2. 14.
to show our selves to be the redeemed of Christ, we must turn from our
sins, and follow the works of piety and justice. As there is no agreement
between God and the Devil, between Christ and Beliall, Plin. not. hist. lib.
10. cap. 74.
between light, and darkness: as there is mortal enmity between the Eagle
and the Swan, between the Turtle and the Pyralis, between the Ichneumon and
Waspe, the Raven and the Leriot, one of them iarring and warring with an other:
so let there be no concord betwixt the^ and thy sins, but as they contend
against thy soul, so do thou wage war with them, and cease not till thou
have gotten conquest over them. 1 Pet. 2. 2^. Turning from evil, and turning
unto God, be the two Cardines, or celestial Poles of man's conversion.
And as Peter says of the faithful in his time; that they were as sheep
going astray, but are now returned vnthe Shepherd and Bishop of their souls:
even so, though ye have been in time past straglers from the Lord, and
transgressors of his law, yet now repent of your sins, and turn again
unto him; so shall Satan be grieved, his members silenced, the godly edified,
your selves comforted, and God glorified; unto whom be rendered all honor,
praise and glory, in the Church, and of the Church, ^or ever and ever. Amen.

Trin-vni Deo Gloria.

