Epitaphes, Epigrams, Songs and Sonets, with a Discourse of the Friendly
affections of Tymetes to Pyndara his Lady.

Newly corrected with additions, and set out by George Turbervile Gentleman.

Anno Domini. 1567.

IMPRINTED AT London, by Henry Denham.

To the Right Noble and his singular good Lady, Lady Anne, Countess Warwick.
etc. George Turberuile wishes increase of Honor with all good Happes.
AS AT WHAT time (Madame) I first published this fond and slender treatise of
Sonets, I made bold with you in dedication of so unworthy a book to so
worthy a Lady: so have I now also rubde my browe and wiped away all shame in
this respect, aduenturing not to cease, but to increase my former folly, in
adding more Sonets to those I wrote before. So much the more abusing in mine
own conceit your Ladishippes patience, in that I had pardon before of my rash
attempt. But see (Madame) what presumption reigns in retchlesse youth. You
accepted that my first offer of honorable and mere courtesy, and I thereby
encouraged, blush not to proceed in the like trade of folly, always hoping
for the like acceptance at your hands, which if should fail me (as I hope it
shall not fail) then should I hereafter not once so much as dare as to set pen
to paper for fear of controlment and check, which how grievous it is to a
young man now (as it were) but tasting with his lip the brim of learnings
fountain, and saluting the Muses at the door and thresholl, neither is your
Ladyship ignorant, and I myself presume to know. Wherefore as I have (Madame)
by a little enlarging this Book, enlarged not a little my folly: so is my
humble suit to you a little to enlarge your bounteous courtesy, J mean in well
accepting the increase of these my follies, proceeding not so much upon any
light affection, as desire to acknowledge a greater duty. It shall not be long
(I hope) but that my hand shall seek in some part the requital of your
bounty by some better devise, though not more learned treatise. But what
should I stand upon terms of skill? knowing that it is not the work that
your Ladyship does so much regard as the Writer, neither the worthiness of
the thing, as the good will and meaning of the Deviser thereof, offering his
duty in such wise as best aunsweres his ability and power. For as if
subjects should have respect more to the unworthiness of such things as they
give their Princes, than regard the worthy minds and good natures of their
Souereignes in well accepting such slender trifles at their vassels hands,
they should quyte be discouraged from ever offering the like and slender
gifts: so if I should cast an eye rather to the baseness of my Book, than
account of your Noble nature and accustomed courtesy in well receiving the
same: neither should I heretofore enboldned my self so far as to have offered
you this trifling treatise, nor now have the heart to adventure anew, although
somewhat purged of his former faults and scapes. I cannot leave to molest your
noble eyes with survey of my rash compiled toys. It may please your Ladyship
to wey my well meaning heart, at what time occasion ministers you the pervsing
of my book, and this to deem, that desire alone to manifest my duty to you,
was the only cause of this my enterprise. Which done, I have at this time no
more to trouble your Ladyship, but ending my Epistle, to crave the Gods your
happy preservation of present Honor, and luckie increase of blessed happes in
all your life.

Your Ladyships daily Orator George Turberuile.

To the Reader.
HERE HAVE I (Gentle Reader) according to promise in my Translation, given thee
a few Sonets, the unripe seeds of my barraine brain, to pleasure and
recreate thy wearye mind and troubled head withal. Trusting that thou will not
loath the bestowing thy time at vacant hours in pervsing the same. Waying that
for thy solace alone (the bounden duty which I owed the noble Cowntesse
reserved) I undertook this slender toil, and not for any pleasure I did my
self in penning thereof. As I deem thou can not, so do I hope thou will not
mislike it at all. But if there be any thing herein that may offend thee,
refuse it, read and pervse the reast with patience. Let not the misliking of
one member procure thee rashlye to condemn the whole. I stand to thy
judgment, I expect thy aequitie. Read the good, and reject the evil: yea
rather condemn it to perpetual silence. For so would I wyshe thee to deal
with unworthy Books: But assuredlye there is nothing in this whole slender
Volume that was meant amiss of me the Writer, howsoever the Letter go in thy
judgment that art the Reader.

Whatsoever I have penned, I write not to this purpose, that any youthlie head
should follow or pursue such frail affections, or taste of amorous bait: but
by mere fiction of these Fantasies, I would warn (if I might) all tender
age to flee that fond and filthy affection of poisoned and unlawful love. Let
this be a Glass and Myrror for them to gaze upon: the sooner may I (I trust)
prevail in my persuasion, for that my self am of their years and
disposition. And as I am not the first that in this sort has written and
imployde his time: so shall I not be the last, that without desarte (perhaps)
shall be misdeemed for attempting the same. But let those curious Knights cast
an eye to home, and look well about whether they them selves are blameless,
or as well worthy reproach as others. This done and my intent considered,
hoping of thy courtesy I end, always ready to pleasure thee by my pains,
wishing unto thee, that art the patient Reader, as to my self the Writer and
thy very Friend.

George Turberuile.

To the railing Route of Sycophants.
IF he that once encountered with his Foes
In open field at sound of blasted Trumpe,
Do dare to yield his hewed head to vides,
And go again to hear ye Canons thumpe:
With dreadlesse heart and unappalled breast
Not fearing till he be by Foes oppressed:
If such as erst in cutting of the Surge
By passing to the strange and foreign land
Bode bitter blast and scornful Neptunes scurge,
Dread not to take the like attempt in hand,
But rashly run like sturdie ventrous Wights
Not fearing wind nor wane when Borias fights:
If these (I say) do nothing doubt at all
But valiantly give fresh assault anew,
Not dreading danger that is like to fall,
As they long erst by proof and practice knew:
Then why should I of yore that have assayde
The force of Zoylls mouth be ought dismayde?
Then why should I, like one that fearde to fight
Or never crushed his head with Helmets heft,
Now show my self a weak and coward Wight
As long as life or lym uncut is left:
For (...) ^^^st and I attempt the like,
And (...) self now shall I ^^^ck is strike?
No, no, I martch against Momus once again,
My courage is not quailde by cruel Fo,
Though Zoyll did his best my Flag to gain,
It Was not his hap to have the Conquest so:
And since it was my luck to escape his might,
I here assail the Beast with novel fight.
Thou Sycophant, vnsheath thy shameful blade
Pluck out that bloody Fawchon (Dafrard thou)
Wherewith thou have full many a skirmish made
And scocht the brains of many a learned brow.
Now do thy woorst, I force not of thy stroke,
Thou shall not bring my neck to seruage yoke.
Though thou affirm with rash and railing jaws
That I inuita have Minerua made
My other Book, I gave thee no such cause
By any deed of mine to draw thy blade:
But since thou have shot out that shameless word,
I here against thee vncote my cruel sword.
I know thou will each word and sentence wrie
That in this slender Book of me is write,
And wilt the same unto thy sense apply
Hoping for love thereby to breed dispite:
And look what I amiss did never mean,
Thou will mistake and eke misconster clean.
Thou will the wily brain that ought is bent
To foul suspect and spot of fell distrust,
Persuade that here something of him was meant,
And Jealous Coals into his bosom thrust,
Thincking thereby thy purpose to as^
In setting of his boiling breast a fire.
But as thou art in all thy other deeds
Deserving no belief or trust at all:
Likewise what so from thy vile Jaws proceeds,
Is loathsome lie, foul ^itton, bitter Gall.
Believe him not but read the Treatise through,
He sowes debate with help of hateful Plough.
The modest mind that means but virtues trade
And shunnes the shameful shop of bawdie sect,
This spiteful Beast will (if he may) persuade
That these are Toys: for that he should reject
And not pervse the meaning of the same,
Thus Zoyll seeks but blot of black defame.
But thou that vewste this style with staid brow,
Mark cry word, vnioint each Verse of mine,
Thy judgment I and censure will allow,
Nor once will seem for rancour to repine:
Thou art the man whose sentence I expect,
I scorn the scoffs of Zoylls shameful sect.
FINIS.
The Table.
IN praise of the Renowned Lady Anne, Lady Cowntesse Warwick. fol. 1. The
Argument to the whole discourse and Treatise following. fol. 3. To a late
acquainted Friend. fol. 4. The Lover extolleth the singular beauty of his
Lady. 6 The Lover declares how first he was taken and enamoured by the sight
of his Lady. 7 Master Googe his Sonet of the pains of Love. 8 Turberuiles
Answer and Distich to the same. 8 An Epitaph on the death of Dame Elyzabeth
Arhundle. 9 To Piero of Pride. 9 Piero to Turberuile. 9 Verse in praise of
Lord Henry Howarde Earl of Surrey. 9 Of Ialousie. 10 To his Lady, that by hap
when he kissed her and made her lip bleed, controlde him and took disdain.
10 Master Googe his Sonet. 11 Turberuiles answer. 11 A Comparison of the
Lovers estate with the Souldiars painful life. 11 The Lover against one that
compared his Mistress with his Lady. 12 The Lover to a Gentlewoman, that
after great friendship without desert or cause of mislyking refused him. 14 The
Lover obtaining his wish by all likelyhode, yet not able to attain his desire,
compares himself to Tantalus. 16 The Lover to the Thems of London to favor
his Lady passing thereon. 18 To his Ring given to his Lady, wherein was graven
this Verse. My heart is yours. 18 The dispairing Lover craves either mercy in
time at his Ladies hands, or cruel death. 19 To his Friend to be constant
after choice made. 20 Counsel returned by Pyndara to Tymetes, of constancy.
21 The Lovers must not despair though their Ladies seem strange. 21 A Letter
sent by Tymetes to his Lady Pyndara at the time of his departure. 23 Pyndaras
Answer to the Letter which Tymetes sent her at the time of his departure. 24
To his absent Friend the Lover writes of his unquiet and restless state. 29
The answer of a Woman to her Lover, supposing his complaint to be but feigned.
31 The Lover exhorts his Lady to take time, while time is. 32 The Lover
wishes to be conjoined and fast linckt with his Lady never to sunder. 33 The
Lover hoping assuredly of attayning his purpose, after long suit, begins to joy
renouncing dolors. 35 The Lover to his careful Bed declaring his restless
state. 35 An Epitaph and woeful Verse of the death of Sir John Tregonwell
Knight, and learned Doctor of both laws. 36 The Lover confesses himself to
be in love and enamored of Mistress P. 39 That all things have release of
pain save the Lover, that hoping and dreading never takes ease. 39 A poor
Ploughman to a Gentleman, for whom he had taken a little pains. 41 To his
Friend: P: of courting, travailing, Dysing, and Tenys. 41 The lover declares
that unless he utter his sorrows by suit, of force he dies. 42 The Lover to
a Friend that wrote him this sentence. Yours assured to the death. 42 Of
certain Flowers sent by his Love upon suspicion of change. 42 The Answer to
the same. 43 Of a Fox that would eat no Grapes. 43 Of the strange
countenance of an aged Gentlewoman. 43 To the Rouing Pyrat. 44 Of one that had
little Wit. 44 In commendation of Wit. 44 An Answer in dispraise of Wit. 44
The Lover to Cupid for mercy, declaring how first he became his Thrall, with
the occasion of his defying love, and now at last what caused him to convert.
45 After misaduentures come good haps. 55 To his Love that controlde his Dog
for fawning on her. 55 Upon the death of the aforenamed Dame Elizabeth Arundle
of Cornwall. 56 Dispraise of Women that allure and love not. 59 Of a Physician
and a Soothsayer. 62 A controversy of a conquest in love twixt Fortune and
Venus. 62 The Lover voweth howsoever he be guendoned to love faithfully. 63 He
sorrows the long absence of his Lady P. 64 To his Love long absent, declaring
his torments. 65 To Brown of light belief. 67 That death is not so much to be
feared as daily diseases are. 68 The Epicures counsel, eat, drink, and
play. 68 The Answer to the vile and canckred counsel of the outrageous
Epicure. 69 Of Homer and his birth. 69 That time conquereth all things, save
the Lovers pain. 70 To his Friend ryding to Londonward. 71 Of the Rain and
cloudy weather at the time of his Friends departure from Troie. 71 Of a
covetous Niggarde, and a needy Mouse. 71 A pretty Epigram of a Scholar, that
having read Vergils Aeneidos, married a cursed Wife. 73 To a young Gentleman of
taking a wife. 73 The Answer for taking a Wife. 73 Of a deaf Plaintiff, a
deaf Defendant, and a deaf Judge. 74 A promise of old good will, to an old
friend at the beginning of New year. 75 A Vow to serve faithfully. 75 Funeral
Verse upon the death of Sir John Horsey Knight. 75 To his Friend T: having
been long studied and well experienced, and now at length loving a
Gentlewoman that forced him naught at all. 76 An Epitaph upon the death of the
worshipful Master Richard Edwards late Master of the Children in the
Queens Majesty's Chapel. 77 To his Love that sent him a Ring wherein was
graude, Let Reason rule. 79 To his Friend Francis Th: leading his life in the
Country at his desire. 79 To a Gentlewoma^ that always willed him to wear
Rosemarie, (a Tree that is always green,) for his sake, and in token of his
good will to her. 80 An Epitaph of the Lady Br. 81 Of the time he first began
to love and after how he forewent the same. 81 The assured promise of a
constaunt Lover. 82 The Pine to the Mariner. 82 Again otherwise. 83 To an old
Gentlewoman, that painted her face. 83 Of one that had a great Nose. 83 Of one
whose Nose was greater than his hand. 84 Of a Nightingale that flue to Colche
to sit abroode. 84 Again of the Nightingale. 84 Of a contrary marriage. 84 Of
Drunkenness. 85 Again of Drunkenness. 85 Of the picture of a vain
Rhetorician. 85 Of the fond discord of the two Theban brothers, Oeteocles and
Polynices. 85 Of a marvelous deformed man. 85 A Myrrour of the fall of Pride.
85 Of the Clock and the Cock. 89 Of a Tailor. 89 The Lover finding his Love
flitted from wonted troth leaves to write in praise of her. 90 He sorrows
other to have the fruits of his service. 91 The Lover seeing himself abusde,
renounceth love. 92 Against the Ielous heads that always have Lovers in
suspect. 94 That it is hurtful to conceal secrets from our Friends. 96 Of
the diverse and contrary passions and affections of his love. 97 Of Dido and
the truth of her death. 99 Of Venus in Armor. 99 Of a Hare complaining of the
hatred of Dogs. 99 To one that painted Echo. 99 To a Cruel Dame for Grace and
pyttie. 100 To a Gentlewoman from whom he took a Ring. 100 The Lover blames
his Tongue that failed to utter his suit in time of need. 101 That all things
are as they are used. 102 The Lover excuses himself for renowncing his love
and Lady, imputing the same to his fate and constellation. 103 Of Lady Venus,
that having lost her son Cupid God of love, and desirous to understand of him
again, declares by the way the nature of love and affections of the same, by
pretty description as follows. 105 Of the cruel hatred of Stepmothers. 106
Again. 106 To Cupid for revenge of his unkind and cruel love. Declaring his
faithful service and true heart both to the God of Love and his Lady. 106 An
Answer to his Lady, that willed him that absence should not breed
forgetfulness. 107 Of a Thracyan that was drownde by playing on the Ise. 109
The Lover hoping in May to have had redress of his woes, and yet fowly missing
his purpose, bewailes his cruel hap. 109 To a fickle and unconstant Dame, a
friendlye warning. 111 The Lover to his Lady that gased much up to the Skies.
111 The Penitent Lover utterly renowncing love, craves pardon of forepassed
follies. 111 To his Friend that refusde him without cause why but only upon
delight of change. 113 To one that upon surmise of adversity, forewent her
Friend. 114 To Master Googes fancy that begins give Money me take
friendship who so list. 115 The Lover abused renownceth love. 115 The
forsaken Lover laments that his Lady is matched with an other. 117 Of one that
was in reuersion. 117 That all hurtes and losses are to be recovered and
recured save the cruel wound of Love. 118 Of the choice of his Valentine. 119
Of an open Foe and a feigned Friend. 119 Again. 119 Of a Rich Miser. 119 Of a
Painter that painted Favor. 120 The Lover whose Lady dwelt fast by a Prison.
120 Complaint of the long absence of his love upon the first acquaintance. 121
The ventrous Lover after long absence craves his Lady to meet with him in
place to enterparle of her auentures. 122 To Master Googe his Sonet out of
sight out of thought. 124 The Lover whose Mistress feared a Mouse, declares
that he would become a Cat, if he might have his desire. 124 The Lover driven
to absent him from his lady, bewailes his estate. 125 That Lovers ought rather
at first acquaintance to show their meanings by Pen then by Mouth. 127 An
Epitaph of Master Win drowned in the Sea. 127 Again. 128 Praise of his Love.
129 The complaint of a Friend of his, having lost his Dove. 130 That Lovers
ought to shun no pains to attain their Love. 131 A request of Friendship to
Vulcans Wife made my Mars. 132 The Lover that had loved Long without requital
of good will. 132 To a Friend that wild him to beware of Envy. 133 Of
Misreporters. 133 That no man should write but such as do excel. 133 To his
Friend, declaring what virtue it is to stick to former plighted friendship.
134 Of two desperate Men. 134 Of the torments of Hell and the pains of love.
134 An Epitaph of the death of Master Tufton of Kent. 136 Again. 137 In
praise of Lady P. 137 The Lover in utter despair of his Ladies return, in
each respect compares his estate with Troylus. 139 The Lover declares what he
would have if he might obtain his wish. 141 Of a Gentlewoman that wild her
Lover to wear green Bays in token of her steadfast love toward him. 142 An
Epitaph of Master Edwards sometime Master of the children of the Chapel,
and Gentleman of Lyncolns June of Court* 142 An Epitaph on the death of Master
Arthur Brook drownde in passing to New Haven. 143 Of the renowned Lady, Lady
Anne Countess Warwick. 144
FINIS.


The Lion stout, whom never erst
could any beast subdue:
Here (Madame as you se) does yield
both to your Bear and you.
In praise of the Renowned Lady Anne, Lady Cowntesse Warwick.
WHen Nature first in hand did take
The Clay to frame this Cowntesse corse
The Earth a while she did forsake,
And was compelde of very force
With mowlde in hand to flee to Skies,
To end the work she did deuies.
The Gods that tho in counsel sat,
Were half amazde (against their kind)
To see so near the stool of state
Dame Nature stand, that was assignde
Among her worldly Impes to won,
As she until that day had done.
First Jove began: what (Daughter dear)
Has made thee scorn thy Fathers will?
Why do I see thee (Nature) here,
That oughtst of duty to fulfill
Thy under taken charge at home:
What makes thee thus abroad to rome?
Disdainefull Dame, how did thou dare
So retchlesse to depart the grownde,
That is allotted to thy share?
(And therewithal his Godhead frownde.)
I will (quoth Nature) out of hand
Declare the cause I fled the land.
I undertook of late a piece
Of Claye a featurde face to frame,
To match the courtly Dames of Greece
That for their beauty bear the name:
But (Oh good Father) now I so
This work of mine it will not be.
Vicegerent since you me assignde
Below in Earth, and gave me laws
On mortal Wightes, and willde that Kind
Should make and mar, as she saw cause:
Of right (I think) I may appeal
And crave your help in this to deal.
When Jove saw how the case did stand
And that the work was well begone,
He prayde to have the helping hand
Of other Gods till he had done:
With willing minds they all agreede
And set upon the Clay with speed.
First Jove each limme does well dispose
And makes a Creature of the Clay:
Next Lady Venus she bestows
Her gallant gifts as best she may,
From face to foot, from top to toe
She let no wait untouched to go.
When Venus had done what she could
In making of her (carcas) brave
Then Pallas thought she might be bold
Among the reast a share to have,
A passing wit she did conuaye
Into this passing piece of claye.
Of Bacchus she no member had
Save fingars fine and feate to see,
Her head with Hear Apollo clad
That Gods had thought it gold to be:
So glistring was the tresse in sight
Of this new formde and featurde Wight.
Diana held her peace a space
Until those other Gods had done:
At last (quoth she) in Dians chase
With Bow in hand this Nymph shall run,
And chief of all my Noble train
I will this Virgin entertain.
Then joyful Juno came and said
Since you to her so friendly are,
I do appoint this Noble Maid
To match with Mars his peer for war:
She shall the Cowntesse Warwick be,
And yield Dianas Bow to me.
When to so good effect it came
And every member had his grace,
There wanted nothing but a name:
By hap was Mercury then in place,
That said: pray you all agree
Pandora grant her name to be.
For since your Godheads forged have
With one assent this Noble Dame,
And each to her a virtue gave,
This term agrees to the same:
The Gods that heard Mercurius tell
This tale, did like it passing well.
Report was sommonde then in have
And willde to bring his Trumpe in hand
To blow therewith a sownding blast
That might be heard through Brutus land:
Pandora straight the Trumpet blewe
That each this Cowntesse Warwick knew.
O sielie Nature borne to pain,
O woeful wretched kind (I say)
That to forsake the soil were feign
To make this Cowntesse out of Claye:
But oh most friendly Gods that would
Vouchsafe to set your hands to mowlde.
The Argument to the whole discourse and Treatise following
BY sudden sight of unacquainted shape
Tymetes fell in love with Pyndara,
Whose beauty far excelde Sir Paris rape,
That Poets cleape the famous Helena.
His flame at first be durst not to displaye,
For fear be should offended Pyndara:
But covert kept his torments many a day,
As Paris did from worthy Helena.
At length the coal so fiery red became,
Of him that so did fancy Pyndara
That fuming smoke did wrie the hidden flame
To her that far exceeded Helena.
Which when she saw, she seemde with friendly eye
To like with him that lyked Pyndara:
And made as though she would eft soon apply
To him, as to her guest did Helena.
Tymetes (loouing man) then hoped well,
And moonde his suit to Lady Pyndara:
He plide his Pen and to his writing fell
And sude as did the man to Helena.
Within a while dispayring wretched Wight
He found his Love (the Lady Pyndara)
So strange and coye, as though she took delight
To pain her Friend, as did fair Helena.
Another time her cheer was such to see,
That poor Tymetes hoapte that Pyndara
Would yield him grace: But long it would not be,
She kept aloof as did Dame Helena.
Thus twixt despair and hope the doubtful man
Long space did live that loved Pyndara,
In woeful plight: At last the Nymph began
To quite his love as did fair Helena.
Then ioyed be, and cherefull ditties made
In praise of his atchiued Pyndara:
But sone (God wot) his pleasure went to glade,
Another took too wife this Helena.
Thus ever as Tymetes had the cause
Of joy or smart, of comfort or refuse:
He glad or griefull woxe, and ever draws
His present state with Pen as here ensues.
To a late acquainted Friend.
IF Vulcan durst presume
that was a Gnuffe to see,
And struck with Hammer on the Stiche
a cunning Smith to be,
Whose chief and whole delight
was aye to fry at Forge,
And listen to that melody
Smithes sorrows to disgorge:
If Vulcan durst (I say)
Dame Venus to assail
That was the worthyste Wight of all,
if witness may prevail:
Then may you muse the less,
though fancy force me wright
To you a second Venus (Friend)
and Helen in my sight.
For what he saw in her
a Goddess by her kind,
That I in you (my chosen Friend)
and somewhat else do find.
And as that sielie Smith
by Cupid was procurde
To fawn on her, to whom in fine
he firmly was assurde:
So by none other means
my Senses are in thrall,
But by procurement of the God
that conquers Gods and all.
It Is he that makes me bold,
it is he that wills me sue
To thee (my late acquainted Friend)
loves torment to eschew.
Not too this day was seen
that any durst rebel
Or kick at Cupid Prince of Love,
as learned Poets tell:
But rather would with free
and vncoacted mind
Apply to please in any case
what so the God assignde.
What need I here displaye
the spoils by Cupid won?
Not I, but you (my Friend) would faint
ere half the tale were done.
His Banner does declare
what hearts have been subdude:
Where they are all in Sabels set
with blood and gore imbrude.
Not mighty Mars alone,
nor Hercules the stout:
But other Gods of greater state,
there standing in a route.
There may you plainly see
how Jove was once a Swanne,
To lure fair Leda to his lust
when raging Love began.
Some other when a Bull,
some other time a shower
Of golden drops: as when he coyde
the closed Nun in tower.
Appollos Love appears
and ever will be known,
As long as Laurel leaves shall last,
and Daphnes brute be blown.
May brainsick Bacchus brag
or boast himself as free?
Not I, but Aryadnas Crown
shows him in love to be.
Since these and other mo
that Gods were made by kind
Might not avoid that guilefull God
that winged is and blind:
Should I have hope to escape
by force, or else by flight,
That in respect of those his thralls
am of so slender might?
As they did yield to Love
for fear of Cupids ire:
Even so am I become his thrall
by force of flaming fire.
What time I first displayde
mine eyes upon thy face,
(That does allure each lookers heart)
I did the P. embrace.
And since that time I feel
within my breast such joy,
As Paris never felt the like
when Helen was at Troy.
How could so barraine soil
bring forth so good a Graffe,
To whom the reast that seem good Corn
are in respect but Chafe?
(O God) that Cupid would
upon thy breast bestow
His golden shaft, that thou the force
of lyking love might know.
Then should I stand in hope
and well assured be,
That thou would be as friendly ( P.)
as I am now to thee.
Whom (till thy friendship fail,
and plighted Hest do swerue)
I vaunt and vow by mighty Jove
with heart and hand to serve.
My Senses all take heed,
and ye my wits beware
That you attentive be on her
and for none other care.
You eyes that woonted were
light loving looks to cast,
I give commaundment on her hue
that ye be ankred fast.
Mine ears admit no sound
ne Woman's words at all:
Be shut against such Sirens Songs
repleate with lurking gall.
Tongue see that thou be tide,
and use no wanton style:
By law of Love I thee conjure
such toys to exile.
Legs look that ye be lame
when you should reach a place
To take the vewe of Venus Nymphs
Pees beauty to deface.
For such a one is she
whom I would will you serve,
As to be plaste for Pallas peer
for wisdom may deserve.
So constant are her looks
and eake^ as chaste a face:
As if that Lucrece living were
she Lucrece would disgrace.
So modest is her mirth
in erie time and tide,
As they that prick most nearste of all
their shiuerde shafts are wide.
Pause Pen a while therefore,
and use thy woonted mean:
For Boccas brain, and Chaucers Quill
in this were foiled clean.
Of both might neither boast
if they did live again:
For P. would put them to their shifts
to Pen her virtues plain.
Yet one thing will I vaunt
and after make an end,
That Momus can not for his life
devise one jot to mende.
Thus to conclude at length,
see thou (my Friend) pervse
This slender Verse, till leisure serve
abroad to bring my Muse.
For then you shall perceive
by that which you shall see,
That you have made your choice as well
as I by choosing P.
The Lover extolleth the singular beauty of his Lady.
LEt Myron muse at Natures passing might,
And quite resign his pieuish Painters right:
For sure he can not frame her featurde shape
That for her face excels the Greekish rape.
Let Zeuxis Grapes not make him proud at all,
Though Fowls for them did skyr against a wall:
For if he should assay my Love to paint,
His Art would fail, his cunning fist would faint.
Let Praxitell presume with Pensill rude
Base things to blaze the people to delude:
Her featurde limbs to draw let him not dare
That with the fair Diana may compare.
Though Venus form Apelles made so well,
As Creece did judge the Painter to excel:
Yet let not that enbolde the Greek to grave
Her shape, that beauties praise deserves to have.
For Nature when she made her, did entende
To paint a piece that no man might amend:
A pattern for the reast that after should
Be made by hand, or cast in cunning moulde.
The Lover declares how first he was taken and enamoured by the sight of his
Lady.
I Having never erst
the craft of Cupid tried,
Ne yet the wily wanton ways
of Lady Venus spide,
But spent my time in sport
as youth is wont by kind,
Not forcing fancies pinching power
that other Wights did blind:
By fortune found a face
that lykte my heart so well,
As by the sudden vewe thereof
to fancies frame I fell.
No sooner had mine eyes
upon her beauty stayde,
But Wit and Will without respect
were altogether wayde.
Unawarely so was none
in such a snare before:
The more I gazde upon her face,
I lykte my Love the more.
Forthwith I thought my heart
out of his room was rapt:
And wits (that woonted were to wait
on Reason) were intrapt,
Down by mine eyes the stroke
descended to the heart:
Which Cupid never crazde before
by force of golden dart.
My blood that thought it bound
his Masters part to take,
No longer durst abide abroad,
but outward limbs forsake.
Which having been in breast
and frostie cold dismayde:
It hasted from the heart again
external parts to aid.
And brought with it such heat
as did inflame the face,
Distayning it with Scarlet read
by rashness of the race.
And since that time I feel
such pangues and inward fits,
As now with hope, and then with fear
encombred are my wits.
Thus must I Miser live
till she by friendly ruth
Do pity me her loving Thrall
whose deeds shall try his truth.
Thrice luckie was the day,
thrice happy cake the place,
And ye (mine eyes) thrice blessed were
that lighted on her face.
If I in fine may force
her pity by my plaint:
I shall in cunningst verse I may
her worthy praise depaint.
There is one thing makes me joy
and bids me think the best:
That cruel rigor can not lodge
where beauty is possessed.
And sure unless she salve
and beale this cankred wound
By yielding grace, it must in time
of force my corpse confound.
For long it may not last
that in such anguish lies:
Extremes in no case can endure
as Sages did devise.
No Tiger gave her Teate,
she is no Lions whelpe:
Ne was she bred of cruel rocks,
nor will renounce to help
Such as she pains with love,
and does procure to woe:
She is not of the Currish kind,
her nature is not so.
Master Googe his Sonet of the pains of Love.
Two lines shall tell the grief
that I by Love sustain:
I burn, I flame, I faint, I freeze,
of Hell I feel the pain.
Turberuiles answer and distick to the same.
Two lines shall teach you how
to purchase ease anewe:
Let Reason rule where Love did reign,
and idle thoughts eschew.
An Epitaphe on the death of Dame Elyzabeth Arhundle.
HEre graued is a good and Godly Wight,
That yielded has her cynders to the soil,
Who ran her race in virtues tylt aright
And never had at Fortunes hand the foil:
The guide was God whom she did aye ensue,
And Virtue was the mark whereat she thrue.
Descending of a house of worthy fame
She linckt at length with one of egall state,
Who though did change her first and former name,
Did not enforce her virtues to rebate:
For Dannat she Dame Arhundle was hight,
whose Feere was known to be a worthy Knight.
Her beauty I not blaze ne brute at all,
(Though with the best she might therein compare)
For that it was to age and fortune thrall:
Her thewes I touch which were so passing rare,
As being earthde and reaft her vital breath,
Her chiefest part does live and conquer death.
Let Spite not spare to speak of her the wurst,
Let Envy feed upon her godly life,
Let Rancour rage, let Hatreds belly burst,
Let Zoill now vnsheath his cutting knife:
For death has closde her corse in Marble grave,
Her soul is fled in Skies his seat to have.
Let Leyster laugh that such a Mirror bred:
Let Matrons mourn for loss of their renown,
Let Cornwall cry since Dannat now is ded,
Let Virtue eke do on her mourning gown:
For she is rest that was at Virtues beck
Whom Fortune had no power to give the check.
To Piero of Pride.
FRiend Piero, Pride infects a friendly mind,
The haughty are pursude with deadly hate:
Wherefore eschew the proud and Peacocks kind.
That greede are to sit on stool of state:
The lowly heart does win the love of all,
But Pride at last is sure of shameful fall.
Piero to Turberuile.
GOod is the counsel ( Turberuile) you give,
It is a virtue rare well to advise,
But if your self in Peacoks sort do live
Men deemen may you are not perfect wise:
Whose chiefest point in act consists aye,
Well doing far excels well to say.
Verse in praise of Lord Henrye Howarde Earl of Surrey.
WHat should I speak in praise of Surreys skill
Unless I had a thousand tongues at will?
No one is able to depaint at full,
The flowing fountain of his sacred Skull.
Whose Pen approoude what wit he had in mue
Where such a skill in making Sonets grue.
Each word in place with such a slight is coucht,
Each thing whereof he treates so firmly touched,
As Pallas seemde within his Noble breast
To have soiournde, and been a daily guest.
Our mother tongue by him has got such light,
As ruder speech thereby is banished quight:
Reprove him not for fancies that he wrought,
For Fame thereby and nothing else he sought.
What though his verse with pleasant toys are fright?
Yet was his honors life a Lamp of light.
A Mirror he the simple sort to train,
That ever beat his brain for Britans gain.
By him the Nobles had their virtues blazed,
When spiteful death their honors lives had razde.
Each that in life had well deserved aught,
By Surreys means an endless fame has caught.
To quite his boon and aye well meaning mind,
Whereby he did his Sequel seem to bind:
Though want of skill to silence me procures,
I write of him whose fame for aye endures,
A worthy Wight, a Noble for his race,
A learned Lord that had an Earls place.
Of Ialousie.
A Strange disease, a grief exceeding great,
A man to have his heart in flame inrolde,
In sort that he can never choose but sweat,
And feel his feet benumde with frosty cold.
No doubt if he continue in this heat,
He will become a Cook hereafter old,
Of such diseases such is the effect,
And this in him we may full well suspect.
To his Lady, that by hap when he kissed her and made her lip bleed, controld
him and took disdain.
DIscharge thy dole,
Thou subtle soul,
It stands in little steed
To curse the kiss
That causer is
Thy chirrie lip does bleed.
Thy blood ascends
To make amends
For damage thou have done:
For by the same
I felt a flame
More scorching than the Sun.
Thou reftst my heart
By secret Art,
My sprites were quite subdude:
My Senses fled
And I was ded,
Thy lips were scarce imbrude.
The kiss was thine,
The hurt was mine,
My heart felt all the pain:
It Was it that bled
And lookte so red,
I tell thee once again.
But if you long
To wreake your wrong
Upon your friendly fo:
Come kiss again
And put to pain
The man that hurt you so.
Master Googe his Sonet.
ACcuse not God if fancy fond
do move thy foolish brain
To wayle for love, for thou thy self
art cause of all the pain.
Turberuiles answer.
NOt God (friend Googe) ye Lover blames
as worker of his woes:
But Cupid that his fiery flames
so frantickly bestows.
A comparison of the Lovers estate with the Souldiars painful life.
JF Soldiers may for service done,
and labors long sustainde,
For weary watch, and perils past,
and arms with armor painde:
For push of Pike, for Holbers stroke,
for standing in the frunt,
If they expect reward (I say)
for byding battayles brunt:
Then what shall Cupids Captains crave,
what recompense desire,
That ward the day, and wake the night
consumde with fretting fire?
No room of rest, no time of truce,
no pleading for a peace:
When Cupid sounds his warlike Trumpe,
the fight will never cease.
First shall you see the shiuering shafts
and vewe the thirled darts
Which from their eyes they cast by course
to pierce their enmies hearts.
But if the Foe do stand aloof,
(as is the Lovers guise)
Then Canons with their cruel cracks
as thick as thunder flies.
Sweet words in place of powder stand
by force which think to win,
That loving looks of late had lost
when fight did first begin.
But on the breast to bear the brunt
and keep them from the heart,
A sure and privy cote is worn
repelling pellats smart.
They stop their ears against the sound,
which is the surest shield
Against the dreadful shot of words
that thousands had beguilde.
But when Cupidians flatly see
nor gunne, nor Bow prevail,
They then begin their friendly foes
with other fight tassaile.
Then set the daskardes dread aside,
and to the walls they run,
As though they would subdue the Forte
or ere the fight begun.
Forthwith the scaling Ladders come,
and to the walls are set,
Then sighs and sobs begin to clime,
but they are quickly met.
Thus Cupid and his Soldiers all
the sharp repulse sustain:
Whom Beauty batters from the walls
whose Captain is Disdain.
When all are gone and yield it lost,
comes Hope and whote Desire,
To see where they can have the hap
to set the Forte afire.
But naught preuailes their lingering fight,
they can not Beauty win:
Yet do they skirmish still behind
in hope to enter in.
At length when Beauty does perceive
those Soldiers are so true,
That they will never from the walls
till they the hold subdue:
She calls to Pity for the keys
and bids her let them in:
In hope they will be true to her
as they to Love had bin.
The gates no sooner are unlocked,
but soldiers all retire:
And enter into Beauties Forte
with Hope and hot Desire.
Now judge by this that I have said
of these two fightes aright,
Which is the greatest toil of both
when warlike Tents are pight.
For Mars his men sometime have ease,
and from their battle blin:
But Cupids soldiers ever serve
till they Dame Beauty win.
The Lover against one that compared his Mistress with his Lady.
A Madness to compare
the Pipler with the Pine,
Whereof the Mariner makes his Mast,
and hanges it all with line.
A folly to prefer
a Lamp before the Sun,
Or brag that Balams lumpish Ass
with Bucephall shall run.
Then cease for shame to vaunt,
and crow in craking wise
Of her that least deserves to have
her beauties fame arise.
Thou foolish Dame beware
of haughty Peacocks pride:
The fruit thereof in former age
has sundry times been tried.
Arachne can express
how angry Pallas was,
When she in needle work would seem
the Heavenly Wight to pass.
The Spider shows the spite
that she (good wench) abid,
In token of her pride she hanges
at roufe by rotten third.
No food she has allowde
less Fortune send the Fly:
The Cobwed is her costly Couch
appointed her to lie.
Which venim rank and vile
her womb is like to burst,
A token of her inward hate
and hawtie mind at furst.
And thou that surely think
thy Lady to excel,
Example take of others harm
for judgment that befell:
When Pan the Pastors prince,
and Rex of Rustic route,
To pass Apollo in his play
and Music went about:
Mount Tmolus was the Judge
that there the room possessed,
To give his verdite for them both
which uttered Music best.
First came the Rustic forth
with Pipe and puffed bag,
That made his eyes to run like streams,
and both his lips to wag.
The noise was somewhat rude
and ragged to the ear:
The simplest man alive would guess
that pieuish Pan was there.
Then Phoebus framde his frets,
and wrested all his pinnes,
And on his curious strings to strike
the skillful God begins.
So passing was his play
as made the trees to dance,
And stubborn Rocks in deepest vales
for gladsome joy to praunce.
Amphyon blushed as red
as any glowing flame:
And Orpheus durst not show his face,
but hide his head for shame.
Enough quoth Tmolus tho,
my judgment is that Pan
May pipe among the ruder sort
that little Music can.
Apollos play does pass
of all that ere I heard:
Wherefore (as reason is) of me
the Luter is preferde.
Meanewhile was Mydas pressed,
not pointed Judge in place:
But (like a dolt that went about
Apollo to deface)
Tushe Tmolus, tushe quoth he,
Pan has the better skill:
For he the empty bag with wind
and strouting blast does fill.
Apollo wagges his ioints
and makes a iarring sound:
Like pleasure is not in the Lute
as in the Bagpipe found.
No sooner had he spoke
those witless words and sed,
But Phoebus graft on Asses ears
upon his beastly head.
In proof of judgment wrong
that Mydas did maintain,
He had a pair of sowsing ears
to shilde him from the rain.
Wherefore (my Friend) take heed
of afterclaps that fall:
And deem not her a Dearling that
deserves no praise at all.
Your judgment is beguilde,
your Senses suffer shame:
That so do seek to blaze her arms,
and to advance her fame.
Let her go hide her head
in loathsome lurking mue,
For crabbed Crowfoote marres her face
and quite distaines her hue.
The Lover to a Centlewoman, that after great friendship without desert or
cause of mislyking refused him.
Have you not heard it long ago
of cunning Fawkners told,
That Hawks which love their keepers call
are worth their weight in Gold?
And such as know the luring voice
of him that feeds them still:
And never rangle far abroad
against the keepers will,
Do far exceed the haggarde Hawk
that stoopeth to no stale:
Nor forces on the Lure awhit,
but mounts with every gale?
Yes, yes, I know you know it well,
and I by proof have tried,
That wild and haggard Hawks are worse
than such as will abide.
Yet is there eke another kind,
far worser than the rest:
And those are they that fly at check,
and stoop to erie gest.
They leave the law that nature taught
and shun their woonted kind,
In fleeing after erie Foul
that mounteth with the wind.
You know what I do mean by this,
if not, give ear a while:
And I shall show you my conceyte
in plain and simple style.
You were sometime a gentle Hawke,
and wont to feed on fist:
And knew my luring voice right well
and would repair at list.
I could no sooner make a beck
or token with my hand,
But you would quickly judge my will
and how the case did stand.
But now you are become so wild
and rammage to be seen,
As though you were a haggard Hawke,
your manners altered cleene.
You now refuse to come to fist,
you shun my woonted call:
My luring lyketh not your ear,
you force me not at all.
You flee with wings of often change
at random where you please:
But that in time will breed in you
some foul and fell disease.
Live like a haggard still therefore,
and for no luring care:
For best (I see) contents thy mind
at wish and will to fare.
So some perhaps will live in hope
at length to light on thee,
That erst reclaimde so gentle werte
and loving bird to me,
But if thou chance to fall to check,
and force on erie foul,
Thou shall be worse detested then,
than is the nightish Owl.
This counsel take of him that once
did keep thee at his beck:
But now gives up in open field
for fear of filthy check.
The Lover obtaining his wish by all likelyhode, yet not able to attain his
desire, compares himself to Tantalus.
OF Tantalus plight
The Poets wright,
Complaining
And fayning
In sorrowful sownding songs:
Who feels (they say)
For Apples gaye
Such payning,
Not gayning
The fruit for which he longes:
For when he thinks to feed therone,
The fickle flattring Tree is gone:
And all in vain he hopes to have
his famine to expel
The flitting fruit that looks so brave
and likes his eye so well:
And thus his hunger does increase,
And he can never find release.
As want of Meat
Does make him freate
With raging,
And gaging,
To catch the fruit that flees:
Even so for drythe
The Miser crythe,
Not swaging,
But waging,
For licour that he sees:
For to his painful partched mouth
The long desired water flouth,
And when he gapes full greedily
unthrifty thirst to slake,
The river wastes speedily,
and away ward goes the Lake:
That all the licour from his lips
And dried chaps away it slips.
This kind of pain
Does he sustain,
Not ceasing,
Increasing,
His pitiful pining woe:
In plenties place,
Deuoide of grace,
Releasing,
Or ceassing
The pangs that pinch him so:
Of all the fretting fits of Hell
This Tantals torment is most fell:
For that the reast can have no hope
their freedom to attain,
And he has granted him such scope
as makes the Myser feign:
But all for naught in fine it serves,
For he with dryth and hunger sterues.
Even so fare I
That am as nie
My pleasure,
My treasure,
As I might wish to be:
And have at will
My Lady still
At le^^^ure,
In measure,
As well it likes me.
The amorous blincks flee to and fro,
With sugared words that make a show
That fancy is well pleased withal
and finds it self content:
Each other friendly friend does call
and each of us consent:
And thus we seem for to possess
Each others heart and have redress.
We coll, we clip,
We kiss with lip,
Delighted,
Requighted,
And merrily spend the day:
The tales I tell
Are fanside well,
Recited,
Not spited,
Thus wears the time away.
Look what I like she does embrace,
She gives good ear unto my case
And yeeldes me lawful liberty
to frame my dolorus plaint,
To quite her Friend from ieopardie
whom Cupid has attaint:
Respecting naught at all his wealth
But seeking mean to work his health.
I seem to have
The thing I crave,
She bars not,
She iarres not,
But with a very good will
She hears my suit,
And for the fruit
She wars not,
But dares not
To let me feed my fill.
She would (I know) with heart agree,
The fault is neither in her nor me,
I dare auowe full willingly
she would consent thereto,
And gladly would me remedy
too banish away my woe:
Lo thus my wish I do possess,
And am a Tantal naythelesse.
For though I stand
And touch with hand
Allured,
Procured,
The Saint I do desire:
And may be bold
For to enfolde,
Assured,
Endured,
The Corpse that I require:
Yet by no means may I attain
To have the fruit I would so feign
To rid me from extremity
and cruel oppressing care,
Even thus with Tantals penalty
my destnie may compare:
Who though endure excessive pain,
Yet mine is not the least of twain.
The Lover to the Thems of London to favor his Lady passing thereon.
THou stately Stream yt with the swelling Tide
Against London walls incessantly do beat,
Thou Thems (I say) where barge and bote does ride,
And snowhite Swans do fish for needful meat:
When so my Love of force, or pleasure shall
Flit on thy flood as custom is to do:
Seek not with dread her courage to appall,
But calm thy tide, and smoothly let it go:
As she may joy, arriude to siker shore
To pass the pleasant stream she did before.
To weltre up and furge in wrathful wise,
(As did the flood where Hell drenched was,)
Would but procure defame of thee to rise:
Wherefore let all such ruthlesse rigor pass,
So wish I that thou may with bending side
Have power for aye in woonted goulfe to glide.
To his Ring given to his Lady, wherein was graven this Verse. My heart is
yours.
THough thou (my King) be small,
and slender be thy price:
Yet have thou in thy compass coucht
a Lovers true device.
And though no Rubie red,
ne Turkesse trim thy top,
Nor other Iuell that commends
the golden Vulcans shop:
Yet may thou boldlye vaunt
and make a true report
For me that am thy Master yet
in such a semblant sort,
That aye ( my heart is hirs)
of thee I ask no more:
My Pen and I will show the reast,
which yet I keep in store.
Be mindful of thy charge,
and of thy Masters case:
Forget not that ( my heart is hirs)
though I be not in place.
When thou have told thy tale
which is but short and sweet:
Then let my Love coniect the reast
till she and I do meet.
For as ( my heart is hirs)
so shall it be for aye:
My heart, my hand, my life, my limbs
are hirs till dying day.
Yea when the spirit gives up
and body breathes his last,
Say naythelesse ( my heart is hirs)
when life and all is past.
Sit fast to her finger,
But do thou not wring her.
The dispairing Lover craves either mercy in time at his Ladies hands, or
cruel death.
LIke as the fearful Fouls
within the Fawcons foot
Does yield himself to die,
and sees none other boot:
Even so dread I ( my Dear)
least ruth in thee will want,
To me that am thy thrall,
who fearing death do pant.
So fast I am in Give
within your beauties Gayle,
As thence to make a breath
no engine may prevail.
The heart within my breast
with trembling fear does quake:
And save your love ( my Dear)
naught can my torment slake.
To slay a yielding pray
I judge it not your kind:
Your beauty bids me hope
more ruth in you to find.
Where Nature has yformde
such featurde shape to show,
There has she closde in breast
a heart for grace to grow.
Wherefore my lingering pains
redress with ruthful heart:
And do in time become
Physician to my smart.
Oh show thy self a friend
and Natures Impe to be,
As thou a Woman art by kind
to woman's kind agree.
But if you can not find
in heart my life to save,
But that you long to see
your thrall lie dead in grave:
Send me the fatal tool,
and cruel cutting knife:
And thou shall see me rid
my wretched limbs of life.
No less to like thy mind
than to abridge my smart:
Which were an ill reward
for such a good desert.
Of both I count it least
by cursed death to fall,
Than ruthlesse here to live
and aye to be a thrall.
To his Friend to be constant after choice made.
WHat made Ulysses Wife
to be renowned so?
What forced Fame her endless brute
in blasting trumpe to blow?
What Cleopatra causde
to have immortal praise?
What did procure Lucrecias land
to lasten to our days?
Cause they their plighted hestes
unbroken aye reserude:
And planted Constance in their hearts
from whom they never swerude.
What makes the Marble stone
and Diamond so dear?
Save that the longest last of all,
and always one appear?
What makes the waxen form
to be of slender price?
But cause with force of fire it melts
and wastes with a trice.
Then if thou long for praise
or blasted Fame to find,
(My Friend) thou must not change thy choice
or turn like Cock with wind.
Be constant in thy word
and stable in thy deed:
This is the readiest way to win
and purchase praise with speed.
Counsel returned by Pyndara to Tymetes, of constancy.
WHat made the Troyan Duke
that wandering Prince to have
Such ill report, and foul defame
as him Carthago gave?
What faythlesse Jason forcde
a Traitors name to gain?
When he to Colchos came, and did
the golden Fleese attain?
What Theseus causde to be
reported of so ill,
As yet record thereof remaynes
(I think) and ever will?
Cause they their faithful Friends
that saude their doubtful lives
Forsook at last, and did disdain
to take them to their wives,
They brake their vowed hestes,
by ship away they went:
And so betrayde those siely souls
that craft nor falsehood meant.
Wherefore if you (my Friend)
the like report will flee
Stand ever to the promise made,
and plighted troth to me.
Those Dames of whom you spoke
were constant (as you say)
But sure these Lovers I allege
unfaithful parts did play.
More cause have I to doubt
of you ( Tymetes) then,
For (as you see) we Women are
more trusty than you men.
The Lovers must not despair though their Ladies seem strange.
THough Neptune in his rage
the swelling Seas do toss,
And crack the Cables in dispite
to further shipmens loss:
Though Ancker hold do fail,
and Mysson go to wrack,
Though Sails with blustering blast be rent,
and Keale begin to crack:
Yet those that are a boorde
and guide the ship with steare,
Although they see such dangers pressed
and perils to appear:
Yet hope to light at last
upon some harbor hold,
And find a Port where they to cast
their Anckers may be bold.
Though Thieves be kept in Gayle
fast bound in surest Gyues,
They lay not all good hope aside
for saving of their lives.
They trust at length to see
such mercy in the Judge,
As they in open presence quit
may from the prison trudge,
And those for greedy gain
and hope of hidden Gold
In deepest Mines and Dungeon darck
that bide the bitter cold:
In fine do look to light
upon some Golden vain,
Which may be thought a recompense
for all their passed pain.
The Ploughman eke that toils
and turns the ground for grain,
And sowes his seed (perhaps to loss)
yet stands in hope of gain.
He will not once despair,
but hope till Harvest fall:
And then will look assuredly
to stuff his Barnes withal.
Since these in perils point
will never once despair,
Then why should Lovers stand in dread
of storms in weather fair?
Why should they have mistrust
some better hap to find,
Or think that Women will not change
as is their woonted kind?
Though strange they seem a while
and cruel for a space:
Yet see thou hope at length by hap
to find some better grace.
For Tigers will be tame,
and Lions that were wood,
In time their keepers learn to know
and come to them for food.
What though they scorn as now
to listen to thy suit?
Yet thou in time when fortune serves
shall reap some better fruit.
And though thy sighs they scorn
and mock thy welling tears:
Yet hope (I say) for after storms
the shining Sun appears.
And never cease to sue,
nor from lamenting stint:
For often drops of falling rain
in time do pierce the Flint.
Was never stone so strong
nor woman's heart so hard,
But the one with tool, and the other with tears
in process might be scarde.
A Letter sent by Tymetes to his Lady Pyndara at the time of his departure.
OF Pens I had good store,
ne Paper did I want
When I began to write to thee:
but Inck was somewhat scant.
Yet Love deuisde a fetch,
a friendly slight at need:
For I with pointed Pensill made
my middle finger bleed.
From whence the blood as from
a cloven Conduite flue,
And these few rude and skillesse lines
with quaking quill I drue.
Now Friend I must depart
and leave this lyked land:
Now canckred Hap does force me take
a new found toil in hand.
She spites that I should live,
or lead a quiet life:
Aye seeking how to breed my bale
and make my sorrows rife.
From whence I pass I know,
a place of pleasant bliss,
But wither I shall I wot not well,
I know not where it is.
Where she by Sea or Land
me (cruel) will compel
To pass, or by the desert Dales,
were very hard to tell.
But needs I must away,
the Western wind does blow
So full against my back that I
of force from hence do go.
Yet naythelesse in pawn
(O Friend) I leave with you
A faithful heart, that lasting life
will show it self as true,
As loouing erst it has:
and if me trust you dare,
Fill up the empty place with yours,
if you the same may spare.
Enclose it in my breast,
in safety shall it lie:
And thou shall have thy heart again,
if I do chance to die.
Thus dubble is your gain,
a dubble heart to have:
To purchase thee another heart,
and eke thine own to save.
Live mindful of thy Friend,
forget not promise past:
Be stout against the stubborn strokes
of froward Fortunes blast.
Penelope be true
to thy Ulysses still:
Let no new chosen Friend break off
th^^hreed of our good will.
Though I on seas do pass,
the surge will have no power
To quench the flame that in my breast
increases day and hour.
and thus ( the heart that is
your own) does wish thee well,
With good increase of blessed haps
sinister chance to quell.
Adue my chosen Friend,
if Fortune say Amen,
From hence I go thine own, and will
thine own return again.
Pyndaras answer to the Letter which Tymetes sent her at the time of his
departure.
WHen first thy Letters came
(O loving Friend) to me,
I leapt for joy, in hope to have
receyude good news of thee,
I never stayde upon
those lines that were without:
But rashl^ript the Seal, to rid
my mind from dreadful dout.
Which done (Oh cruel grief)
I saw a mournful sight:
This Verse ( of Pens I had good store)
with Purple blood ywright.
With floods of flowing tears
straight drowned were mine eyes,
On either Cheek they trickled fast
and ran in river wies.
My mind did ill abode,
it yrkt to read the rest:
For when I saw the Inck was such,
I thought I saw the best.
Long stood I in a dumpe,
my heart began to ache:
My Liver leapt within my bulck,
my trembling hands did shake.
My Senses were bereft,
my bowing knees did bend:
Out from my Nose the blood it brake,
much like the Letter pende.
Up start my staring Locks,
I lay for dead a space:
And what with blood and brine I all
bedewde the dreerie place.
From out my feeble fist
fell Needle, cloth and all,
I knew no Wight, I saw no Sun,
as deaf as stone in wall.
At last when standers by
had brought my Sense again,
And force of life had conquered grief
and banished deadly pain:
I thought the worst was past,
I deemde I could abide
No greater torment than I had,
unless I should have did.
To vewing then again
of bloody lines I go:
And ever as I read the words,
me thought I saw the blo.
Which pointed Pensell gave,
from whence that doleful Inck
As from a cloven Conduit flue:
remembrance make me shrinck.
Oh Friend Tymetes why
so cruel were thou than?
What did thou mean to hurt thy flesh
thou rash and retchlesse man?
What? did thou deem that I
could view that gorie scrole
Withouten anguish of the mind?
or think upon the hole
Of that thy friendly fist
and finger that did bleed?
No, no, I have a W(...) heart,
I am no Tigers see(...)
As great a grief it was
for me to think in heart
Of thy mishap, as if my self
had felt the present smart.
O cruel cursed want
of fitter Inck to write:
Good faith that lycour was unmeet
such loving lines tindite.
But yet in some respect
it fitted with the case:
For (out alas) I read therein
that thou have fled the place,
Where friendly we were wont
like faithful friends to be:
Where thou moughtst that with me thy fill
and I confer with thee.
Oh spiteful cruel Chance,
oh cursed canckred Fate:
Art thou a Goddess (Monster vile)
deserving stool of State?
O blind and muffled Dame,
could thou not see to spare
Two faithful hearts, but reauing the one
must breed the others care?
No wonder it is that thou
do stand on whirling wheel:
For by thy deeds thou do declare
thou can do naught but reele.
Art thou of Woman's kind
and ruthful Goddess race,
And have no more respect unto
a sielie woman's case?
Auaunt thou froward Fiend,
thou so my Friend do drive
From shore well known to foreign coast
our sugared joys to riue.
If so thy mind be bent
that my Tymetes shall
Depart the presence of his Friend:
Yet so do guide the ball
As he at land may live
not trying surge of seas:
Nor ship him from the Havens mouth
to breed him more uncase.
(Good Friend) adventure not
so rashly on the flood,
As erst thou did in writing of
this Letter with thy blood.
Seek not tincrease my cares
or dubble grief begoon:
Think of Leanders bold attempt
the like distress to shoon.
What surety is in ship?
what trust in Oken plancks?
What credit do the winds deserve
at land that play such prancks?
If houses strongly built,
and Towers battled hie,
By force of blast be overthrown
when Aeols Impes do fly:
In puffing winds the Pine
and aged Oak do tear,
And from the bodies rent the boughs
and lofty lugges they bear:
Then why should thou affie
in Keale or Cable so,
Or hazard thus thy self upon
the tossing Seas to go?
Have thou not heard of yore
how good Ulysses was
With stormy tempest chased sore
when he to Greece did pass?
A weary travail he
for ten years space abid.
And all the while this noble Greek
on waltring wallow slid.
Have thou not read in Books
of fell Charybdis Goulfe,
And Scyllas Dogs, whom ships do dread
as Lambs do fear the Woulfe?
Nor of the raggie Rocks
that vnderlurck the wave?
And rent the Barcks that Aeols blasts
into their bosom drove?
Not of the Monsters huge
that belch out frothie fleame,
And singing Sirens that do drown
both man and ship in stream?
Alas the thought of Seas,
and of thy passage pains
(If once thou gage thy self to surge)
my heart and members strains.
The present fits of fear
of afterclaps to cum.
Amaze my loving tender breast
and Senses do benum.
But needs thou must away,
(oh Friend) what hap is this
That ere thou fly this friendly coast
thy lips I can not kiss?
Nor with my folded arms
embrace that neck of thine:
Nor clap unto thy manly breast
these loving Dugs of mine?
Not shed my trilling tears
upon thy moisted face?
Nor say to thee ( Tymet adue)
when thou departst the place?
O that I had thy form
in waxen table now,
To represent thy lively looks
and friendly loving brow.
That might perhaps abridge
some part of pinching pain:
And comfort me till better chance
did send thee home again.
Both wind and wave atonce
conspire to work my woe,
Or esse thou should not so be forced
from me (thine own) to go.
O wayward Western blast
what did thou mean so full
Against Tymetes back to blow,
and him from hence to pull?
Have thou been counted erst
a gentle gale of wind,
And do thou now at length bewray
thy fierce and froward kind?
I thought the Northren blast
from frostie Pole that came
Had been the worst of all the winds
and most deserved blame.
But now I plainly see
that Poets did but feign:
When they of Borias spoke so ill
and of his cruel reign.
For thou of Aeols brats
thy self the worst do show:
And having no just cause to rage
to soon beginst to blow.
If needs thou would have used
thy force and fretting mood,
Thou should have broyld among the trees
that in the Mountains stood:
And let us friends alone
that liude in perfect bliss.
But to request the winds of ruth
but labor lost it is.
Well (Friend) though cruel hap
and winds did both agree,
That thou on sudden should forgo
both country coast and me:
Yet have I found the pawn
which thou did leave behind:
I mean thy loving faithful heart,
that never was unkind.
And for that firm behest
and plighted truth of your,
Wherein you vow that love begoon
shall to the death endure:
To yield thee thy demand
my written lines protest,
Enclose my heart within thy bulck
as I will thine in breast.
Shrine up that little lump
of friendly flesh (my Friend)
And I will lodge in loving wise
the guest that thou did send.
I joy at this exchange:
for I assured stand,
Thy tender heart that I do keep
shall safely lie at land.
Nor do I doubt at all
but thou will have regard
Of that thy charge, and woman's heart
committed to thy ward.
Why do thou write of death?
I trust thou shall not die,
As long as in thy manly breast
a woman's heart does lie.
To cruel were the case,
the Sisters eake were shroes:
If they would seek the death of us.
that are such friendly foes.
But if the worst should fall,
and that the cruel death
Do stop the spindles of our life,
and reaue us both of breath:
Yet this does make me joy,
that thou shall be the grave
Unto my heart, and in my breast
thy heart is Hierce shall have.
For sure a sunder shall
these members never go.
As long as life in lims does lodge
and breath in lungs bylow.
I mindful live of thee
and of my promise past:
I will not seek to change my choice,
my love is fixed fast.
To my Tymetes I
as faithful will be found:
As to Ulysses was his wife
whilst Troie was laid on ground.
As for new choice of Friends,
presume upon thy P.
Thou know I have thy heart in breast
and it will none but thee.
Abandon all distrust
and dread of mistie mind:
For to the heart ( that is mine own)
I will not be unkind.
Adue my chosen Friend,
Adue to thee again:
Remain my love, but pray the write
no more with bloody Pen.
Thine own in life, thine own in death,
Thine own whilst lungs shall lend me breath:
Thine own whilst I on earth do won
Thine own whilst eye shall see the Son.
To his absent Friend the Lover writes of his unquiet and restless state.
THough curious skill I want to well endite,
And I of sacred Nymphs and Muses nine
Was never taught with Poets pen to write,
Nor barrain brain to learning did incline
To purchase praise, or with the best to shine:
Yet cause my Friend shall find no want of will,
I write, let her accuse the lack of skill.
No less deserves the Lamb to be imbrast
Of lowering Jove at sacred Altar slain,
If with good zeal it offered be at last
By Irus, that do Craesus Bullocks twain:
For no respect is to be had of gain
In such affairs, but to the giuers heart
And his good will our Senses must conuart.
Wherefore to thee (my Friend) these lines I send
As perfect proof of no dissembling mind,
But of a heart that truly does intend
To show it self as loving and as kind,
As woman would her Lover wish to find:
And more than this my Paper can declare,
I love thee (Friend) and wish thee well to fare.
I would thou wist the torment I sustain
For lack of her that should my woe redress,
And that you knew some parcel of my pain,
Which none may well by deeming judgment guess,
Nor I with quill have cunning to express:
I know thou could but rue my woeful chance,
That by thy means was brought into this trance
The day does breed my doole, and ranckling rage
Of secret smart in wounded breast does boil,
No pleasant pangue my sorrows may assuage,
Nor give an end unto my woeful toil:
The golden Sun that glads the earthly soil,
And erie other thing that breeds delight
Of kind, to me are forgers of my spite.
I long for Phoebus glade and going down,
My drearie tears more covertly to shed:
But when the night with ugly face does frown,
And that I am yplaste in quiet bed,
In hope to be with wished pleasure fed:
A greater grief, a worser pain ensues.
My vaporde eyes their hoped sleep refues.
Then roll I in my deep dispayring breast
The ^weete disdaines, and pleasant anger past,
The lovely strifes: when Stars do counsel rest
Incroching cares renew my grief as fast,
And thus desired night in woe I waste:
And to express the hearts excessive pain,
Mine eyes their deawie tears distill amain.
And reason why they should be moysted so,
Is for they bred my heart this bitter bale:
They were the only cause of cruel woe
Unto the heart, they were the guilefull stale.
Thus day and night ytost with churlish Gale
Of sighs in Sea of surging brine I bide
Not knowing how to escape the scowring Tide.
At last the shining Rays of Hope to find
Your friendship firm, these cloudy thoughts repel*
And calmed Sky returns to mistie mind:
Which deep despair again eftsoone compels
Too fade, and ease by Dolours drift expels:
That Gods themselves (I judge) lament my fate,
And do repine to see my woeful state.
Wherefore to purchase praise, and glory gain.
Do ease your Friend that lives in wretched plight,
Do not to death a loving heart constrain,
But seek with love his service to requight,
Do not exchange a Fawcon for a Kite:
Refuse him not for any friendship nue
A worse may chance, but none more just and true
Let Cressed myrror he that did forgo
Her former faithful friend King Priams Son,
And Diomed the Greek embraced so,
And left the love so well that was begone:
But when her Cards were told and twist ysponne
She found her Trojan Friend the best of both
For he renounst her not, but kept his oath.
This don, my griping griefs will so^what swage
And sorrow cease to grow in pensive breast,
Which otherwise will never blin to rage
And crush the heart within his careful Cheast
Of both for you and me it were the best,
To save my life and win immortal fame,
And thus my Muse shall blase your noble name
For ruin on my woeful case.
The answer of a woman to her Lover, supposing his complaint to be but feigned.
YOu want no skill to paint
or show your pangues with Pen,
It is a world to see the craft
that is in subtle men.
You seem to write of woes
and wayle for deadly smart,
As though there were no grief, but that
which gripes your faythlesse heart.
Though we but Women are
and weak by law of kind,
Yet well we can discern a Friend,
we wink, but are not blind.
Not every thing that gives
a gleame and glittering show,
Is to be counted Gold in deed
this proverb well you know:
Nor every man that bears
a fair and fawning cheer,
Is to be taken for a Friend
or chosen for a Feere:
Not every tear declares
the troubles of the heart,
For some do weep that feel no woe
some cry that taste no smart.
The more you seem to me
in woeful wise to plain,
The sooner I persuade my self
that you do naught but feign.
The Crocodile by kind
a flood of tears does shed
Yet has no cause of cruel cry
by craft, this Fiend is led.
For when the siely soul
that meant no hurt at all
Approaches near, the slipper ground
does give the beast a fall,
Which is no sooner done
but straight the monster vile,
For sorrow that did weep so sore
for joy begins to smyle:
Even so you men are wont
by fraud your friends to train
And make in wise you could not sleep
in careful Couch for pain:
When you in deed do naught
but take your nightly nap,
Or having slept do set your snare
and tylle your guilefull trap.
Your brains as busy be
in thinking how to snare
Us women, as your pillowes soft
and bowlsters pleasant are.
As for your days delights
our selves can witness well
To sundry women sundry tales
of sundry iestes you tell:
And all to win their loves:
which when you do attain
Within a while you show your kinds
and give them up in plain.
A Fawcon is full hard
amongst you men to find,
For all your manners more agree
unto the Kytish kind:
For gentle is the one
and loves his keepers hand,
But the other Busserdlike does scorn
on Fawckners fist to stand.
For one good turn the one
a thousand will requite,
But use the other nere so well
he shewth himself a Kite.
If Cresyd did amiss
the Trojan to forsake
Then Dyom edes did not well
that did the Lady take.
Was never woman false,
but man as false as she
And commonly the men do make
that women slipper be.
Wherefore leave off your plaints
and take the sheet of shame
To shrowde your cloking hearts from cold
and fayning brows from blame.
If she that reads this rhyme,
be wise as I could wish,
She will avoid the bayted hook
that takes the biting fish.
And shoon the lymed twig
the flying Foul that ties
It Is good to fear of cry bush
where thread of thraldom lies.
The Lover exhorts his Lady to take time, while time is.
THough brave your Beauty be
and feature passing fair,
Such as Apelles to depaint
might utterly despair:
Yet drowsy drouping Age.
incroching on apace,
With pensive Plough will raze your hue
and Beauties beams deface.
Wherefore in tender years
how crooked Age does haste
Revoke to mind, so shall you not
your mind consume in waste.
Whilst that you may, and youth
in you is fresh and green,
Delight your self: for years to fit
as fickle floods are seen.
For water slipped by
may not be callde again:
And to revoke forepassed hours
were labor lost in vain.
Take time whilst time applies
with nimble foot it goes:
Nor to compare with passed Prime
thy after age suppoes.
The holtes that now are hoare,
both bud and bloume I saw:
I ware a Garlande of the Bryer
that puts me now in awe.
The time will be when thou
that doste thy Friends defy,
A cold and crooked Beldam shall
in loathsome Cabin lie:
Nor with such nightlie brawles
thy posterne Gate shall sound,
Nor Roses strawde afront thy door
in dawning shall be found.
How soon are Corpses (Lord)
with filthy furrows filled?
How quickly Beauty, brave of late,
and seemly shape is spild?
Even thou that from thy youth
to have been so, wilt swear:
With turn of hand in all thy head
shall have graye powdered hear.
The Snakes with shifted skins
their loathsome age dooway:
The Buck does hang is head on pale
to live a longer day.
Your good without recure
does pass, receive the flower:
Which if you pluck not from the stalk
will fall within this hour.
The Lover wishes to be conjoined and fast linckt with his Lady never to
sunder.
J Read how Salmacis sometime with sight
On sudden looude Cyllenus Son, and sought
Forthwith with all her power and forced might
Too bring to pass her close conceived thought:
Whom as by hap she saw in open mead
She sude unto, in hope to have been spead.
With sugared words she wood and sparde no speech,
But bourded him with many a pleasant tale,
Requesting him of, ruth to be her Leach
For whom she had abid such bitter bale:
But he repleate with pride and scornful cheer
Disdainde her earnest suit and songs to hear.
Away she went a woeful wretched Wight,
And shrouded her not far from thence a space:
When that at length the stripling law in sight
No creature there, but all were out of place,
He shifts his robes and to the river ran,
And there to bath him bare the Boy began.
The Nymph in hope as then to have attainde
Her long desired Love, retirde to flood
And in her arms the naked Noorie strainde:
Whereat the Boy began to strive a good,
But struggling naught auailed in that plight
For why the Nymph surpast the Boy in might.
O Gods (quoth tho the Girl) this gift I crave
This Boy and I may never part again,
But so our corpses may conjoined have
As one we may appear, not bodies twain:
The Gods agreed, the water so it wrought,
As both were one, thy self would so have thought.
As from a tree we sundry times epsy.
A twissell grow by Natures subtle might,
And being two, for cause they grow so nie
For one are taken, and so appear in sight.
So was the Nymph and Noorie ioynde yfere,
As two no more but one self thing they were.
O Lady mine, how might we seem ybest?
How friendly might we Gods account to be?
In semblant sort if they would breed my rest
By lincking of my carcass unto thee?
So that we might no more a sunder go,
But limbs to limbs, and corse to carcass grow?
O, where is now become that blessed Lake
Wherein those two did bath to both their joy?
How might we do, or such provision make
To have the hap as had the Maiden Boy?
To alter form and shape of either kind,
And yet in proof of both a share to find?
Then should our limbs with lovely linck be tide,
And hearts of hate no taste sustain at all,
But both for aye in perfect league abide
And each to other live as friendly thrall:
That the one might feel the pangues the other had
And partner be of ought that made him glad.
O blessed Nymph, O. Salmacys I say,
Would thy good luck unto her lot would light
Whom I embrace, and louen shall for aye,
By force of flood to change her nature quight:
And that I might have hap as had the Boy
To never part from her that is my Joy.
I would not strive, I would not stir a whit,
(As did Cyllenus Sun that stately Wight:)
But well content to be Hermaphrodit,
Would cling as close to thee as ere I might,
And laugh to think my hap so good to be,
As in such sort fast to be linckt with thee.
The Lover hoping assuredly of attaining his purpose, after long suit, begins
to joy renouncing dolors.
BE far from me you woeful woonted cries,
Adue Despair, that madste my heart agries:
Ye sobbing sighs farewell and pensive plaint,
Resign your rooms to joy, ye long restraint
Without desert endurde.
Reject those ruthful Rymes you (quaking Quill)
Which both declarde my woe and want of skill:
(Mine eyes) that long have had my Love in chase,
With tears no more imbrue your Mystresse face
But to your Springs retire.
And thou (my Heart) that long for lark of Grace
Forepinde have been and in a doolefull case,
Lament no more, let all such gripings go
As bred thy bale, and nursed thy cankred woe
With milk of mournful Dug.
To Venus do your due (you Senses all)
And to her Son to whom you are in thrall:
To Cupid bend thy knee and thanks repay
That after lingered suit, and long delay
Has brought thy ship to shore.
Let crabbed Fortune now express her might,
And do thy worst to me thou stinging spite:
My heart is well defenst against your force,
For she has vowde on me to have remorce
Whom I have looude so long.
Henceforth exchange thy cheer and woeful voice
That have yfounde such matter to rejoice:
With mirrie quill and pen of pleasant plight
Thy blisfull haps and fortune to endight
Enforce thy barraine Skull.
The Lover to his careful bed declaring his restless state.
THou that were erst a restfull place
do now renew my smart,
And woonted eake to salve my sore
that now increasest woe,
Unto my careful Corse an ease,
a torment to my heart,
Once quieter of mind perdie,
now an unquiet fo:
The place sometime of slumbring sleep
wherein I may but wake,
Drenched in Sea of saltish brine
(O bed) I thee forsake.
No Ise of Apenynus top
my flaming fire may quent,
Ne heat of brightest Phoebus beams
may bate my chillie cold,
Naught is of stately strength enough
my sorrows to relent,
But (such is hap) renewed cares
are added to the old:
Such furious fits and fond affects
in me my fancies make,
That bathed all in trickling tears
(O bed) I thee forsake.
The dreams that daunt my dazed head
are pleasant for a space,
Whilst yet I lie in slumbring sleep
my carcass feels no woe,
For cause I seem with clasped arms
my Lover to embrace:
But when I wake, and find away
that did delight me so,
Then in comes care to pleasures place
that makes my limbs to quake,
That all besprent with brackish bryne
(O bed) I thee forsake.
No sooner stirs Auroras Star,
the lightest Lamp of all,
But they that rousted were in rest
not fraught with fearful dreams,
Do pack apace to labors left
and to their task do fall:
When I awaking all inragde
do baine my breast with streams,
And make my smokie sighs to Skies
their upward way to take,
Thus with a surge of tears bedewde
(O bed) I thee forsake.
Thus hurlde from hungry Hope by Hap
I die, yet am alive,
From pangues of plaint to fits of fume
my restless mind does run,
With rage and fancy Reason fights,
they altogether strive,
Resistaunce vayleth naught at all,
for I am quickly wunne:
Thus seeking rest no ruth I find
that gladsome joy may make,
Wherefore consumde with flowing tears
(O bed) I thee forsake.
An Epitaph and woeful verse of the death of sir John Tregonwell Knight, and
learned Doctor of both Laws
ANd can you cease from plaint,
or keep your Conduits dry?
May saltish brine within your breasts
in such a tempest lie?
Where are your scalding sighs
the fittest food of pain?
And where are now thy welling tears
I ask thee once again?
Have thou not heard of late
The loss that has befell?
If not, my self (unhappy Wight)
will now begin to tell:
(Though grief perhaps will grutch,
and stay my foltring tongue)
From whence this ragged root of ruth
and mourning mood is sprung.
Was dwelling in this sheere
a man of worthy fame:
A Iusticer for his desert,
Tregonwell was his name.
A Doctor at the Laws,
a Knight among the mo:
A Cato for good counsel callde
as he in years did grow.
A Patron to the poor,
a Rampire to the rest:
As leefe unto the simple sort
as friendly to the best.
No blind affect his eye
in judgment blearde at all:
Whose rightous verdit and decree
was quite deuoyde of gall.
If he in hateful hearts
(where root of rancour grew)
Of faithful friendship seeds might sow,
no pains he would eschew.
Minerua thought of like
and Nature did consent,
To prove in him by skillful Art
what either could invent.
A plot of such a price
was never framde before:
To show their power the Heavens had
Tregonwell kept in store.
The Prince did him embrace,
and sought him to advance,
And better former state of birth
by furthering of his chance.
He still was ready bent
his service to bestow,
Thereby unto his native soil
if grateful gain might grow.
If sage advise were scarce
and wholesome counsel scant,
Then should you see Tregonwels help
ne wisdom would not want.
When Legates came from far
(as is there woonted guise)
To treat of truce, or talk of war
as matters did arise:
Tregonwell then was callde
his verdit to express:
Who for the most part in the case
of fruitful things could guess.
Or if himself were sent
(which hap Tregonwell had)
Into a far and foreign land,
then was Tregonwell glad.
For so he might procure
wealepublick by his pain:
It was no corsie to this Knight
long travail to sustain.
But what? undaunted death
that seeks to conquer all,
And Atropos that Goddess stern
at length have spit their gall:
And reft us such a one
as was a Phoenix true,
Save that now of his cindrie Corfe
there rises not a nue.
Where may you see his match?
where shall you find his leeke?
None, though you from the farthest East
unto the Ocean seek.
O house without thy head,
O ship without a steare:
Thy Palynurus now is dead
as shortly will appear.
In danger of distress
this Knight was ever wont
To yield himself to perils pressed,
and bide the greatest broont.
No tumults tempest could
subdue his constant heart:
Ne would the man by any means
once from his country start.
But (oh) it naught auailes,
for death does strike the stroke
In things human, no worldly wealth
his friendship may provoke.
Let Trojans now leave off
by mourning to lament
The loss of Priam and his town,
when ten years war was spent.
Ye Romans lay your Hoods
and black attire away:
Bewail no more your Fabians fall
nor that sinister day
That rest a Noble race
which might have florisht long:
For neither loss is like to this
our not deserved wrong.
Now Cornwall thou may crake,
and Dorset thou may erie:
For the one has bred, and the other lost
Tregonwell suddenly.
Whose corpse though earthed be
in loathsome lumps of soil,
His peerless praise by virtue won
shall never fear the foil.
Who so therefore shall see
this Marble where he lies:
Wish that Tregonwels soul may find
a place above the Skies,
And reach a rowme of rest
appointed for the nones:
For in this Tomb interred is
but flesh and bared bones.
The Lover confesses himself to be in Love and enamored of Mistress. P.
IF banished sleep, and watchful care,
If mind affright with dreadful dreams:
If torments rife, and pleasure rare,
If face besmearde with often streams:
If change of cheer from joy to smart,
If altered hue from pale to red:
If foltring tongue with trembling heart,
If sobbing sighs with fury fed:
If sudden hope by fear oppressed,
If fear by hope suppressed again,
Be proves that love within the breast
Has bound the heart with fancies chain:
Then I of force no longer may
In covert keep my piersing flame,
Which ever does it self bewray
But yield my self to fancies frame.
And now in fine to be a thrall
To her that has my heart in Give,
She may enforce me rise or fall
Till Death my limbs of life deprive.
P. with her beauty has bereft
My freedom from my thralled mind,
And with her loving looks ycleft
My reason through both Bark and Rind.
Yet well therewith I am content
In mind to take it patiently,
Since sure I am she will relent
And not enforce her Friend to die.
So I in recompense may have
Naught but a faithful heart again:
Then other friendship nill I crave,
But think my love ylent to gain.
That all things have release of pain save the Lover, that hoping and dreading
never takes ease.
WHat so the Golden Sun
beholdes with blazing light,
When pain is past has time to take
his comfort and delight.
The Ox with lumpish pace
and leisure that does draw,
Has respite after toil is past
to fill his empty mawe.
The lolearde Ass that bears
the burden on his back.
His duty done to stable plods,
and reaches to the rack.
The Dear has woonted soil
his fervent heat to swage:
When work has end to respite runs
the Peasant and the Page.
The Owl that hates the day
and loves to flee by night,
Has queachie bushes to defend
him from Apollos sight.
Each Cunnie has a Cave,
each little Foul a Nest
To shrowde them in at needful times
to take their needful rest.
Thus vewing course of kind
it is not on the ground,
That at some time does not resort
where is his comfort found:
Save me (O cursed man)
whom neither Sun ne shade
Does serve the burden of my breast
and sorrows to unlade.
Each sport porcures my smart,
each seemly sight annoy:
Each pleasant tune torments mine ease
and reaues my hoped joy.
No Music soundes so sweet
as does the doolefull Drum,
For somewhat near unto my smart
that mournful sound does cum.
A Gally slave I seem
unto my self to be:
The Master that does guide the ship
has near an eye to see.
You know where such a one
as Cupid is does steare,
Amid the Goulfe of deep despair
great peril must appear.
In stead of streaming sails
he Wisshes hanges aloft:
Which if in tempest chance to tear
the Barck will come to naught.
For wind are scalding sighs
and secret sobbings pressed:
Mixed with a cloud of stormy tears
to baine the Lovers breast.
Though Cupid near so well
his beaten Barck do guie,
By fleeing flats and sinking sands
that in the wallow lie:
Yet those that are a boorde
must ever stand in awe,
For cause a Bussard is their guide
not forcing any flawe:
That follows none advice,
but bluntly runs on head,
As proud as Peacock over those
that in his chain or led.
Thus may you plainly see
that each thing has release
Of pensive pain, save Cupids thralls
whose torments aye increase.
A poor Ploughman to a Gentleman, for whom he had taken a little pains.
YOur Culter cuts the soil that erst was sown
Your Harvest was forereaped long ago,
Your Sickle sheares the Medowe yt was mowne,
Ere you the toil of Tilmans trade did know:
Good faith you are beholding to the man
That so for you your husbandry began.
He craves of you no Silver for his Seed,
Ne does demand a penny for his Grain,
But if you stand at any time in need,
(Good Master) be as bold with him again.
You can not do a greater pleasure than
To choose you such a one to be your man.
To his Friend: P. of courting, travailing, Dysing, and Tenys.
TO live in Court among the Crew is care,
Is nothing there but daily diligence,
Nor Cap nor Knee, nor money must thou spare,
The Prince his Haule is place of great expense.
In rotten ribbed Barck to pass the Seas
The foreign lands and straungie sites to see,
Does danger dwell: the passage breeds unease,
Not safe the soil, the men unfriendly be.
Admit thou see the straungest things of all?
When eye is turnde the pleasant sight is gone:
The treasure then of travail is but small,
Wherefore (Friend P.) let all such toys alone.
To shake the bones, and cog the crafty Dice,
To Card in care of sudden loss of Pence,
Unseemly is, and taken for a vice:
Unlawful play can have no good pretense.
Too band the Ball does cause ye Coin to wast,
It melts as Butter does against the Sun,
Naught save thy pain, when play does cease, yt have:
Too study then is best when all is done.
For study stays and brings a pleasant gain,
When play does pass as glare with gushing rain.
The Lover declares that unless he utter his sorrows by suit, of force he
dies.
Like as the Gunne that has to great a charge,
And Pellet to the Powder ramde so sore,
As neither of both has power to go at large,
Till shiuerd flawes in sounding Skies do rore:
Even so my careful breast that fraughted is
With Cupids ware, and cloide with lurcking Love,
Unless I should disclose my drerinis,
And out of hand my troubled thoughts remove:
A sunder would my cumbred Carcass flee,
The heart would break the ouercharged Chase
Of pensive breast, and you (my Love) should see
Your faithful Friend in lamentable case.
Wherefore do what you may in gentle wyes
The Gunner to assist in time of need,
And when you see the Pellet pierce the Skies,
And Powder make a proof of hidden gleede:
Rue on his case, and seek to quite his woe,
Least in short time his Gunne too pieces go.
The Lover to a Friend that wrote him this sentence. Yours assured to the
death.
O Faithful Friend thrice happy was the fist
In so few words to such effect that wrought:
O friendly heart a thousand fold yblist
That has conceiude so just and joyful thought,
As not till death from pawned love to bend
But Friend at first and Frind to be at end.
Wherefore to counteruaile those words of thine,
And quit thy love with faithful heart again,
I vow that I will never once decline
A foot from that I am for loss or gain:
If thou be mine till death, I the assure
To be thy Friend as long as life shall dure.
Of certain Flowers sent him by his Love upon suspicion of change
YOur Flowers for their hue
were fresh and fair to see:
Yet was your meaning not so true
as you it thought to be.
In that you sent me Bame,
I judge you meant thereby,
That clean extinct was all my flame
from whence no sparckes did fly.
Your Fenell did declare
(as simple men can show)
That flattrie in my breast I bare
where friendship ought to grow.
A Daysie does express
great folly to remain,
I speak it not by roate or guess,
your meaning was so plain.
Rosemarie put in mind
that Bays wear out of thought:
And Loueinydle came behind
for Love that long was sought.
Your Cowslips did portende
that care was laid away:
And Eglantyne did make an end
where sweet with sower lay:
As though the leaves at furst
were sweet when Love began:
But now in proof the pricks were cursed,
and hurtful to the Man.
The Answer to the same.
PErdie I need no Bame
ne forced heat by charm,
To set my burning breast in flame
whom Cupids gleames do warm,
On Bays is my delight,
Remembrance is not past:
Though Daysie hit the nail aright,
my Friendship aye shall last.
Though Love in idle be,
yet will I not forgo
Ne cast off care as you shall see,
and time the troth shall show.
So I may taste the sweet,:
I force not on the sour
The more is joy when Friends do meet,
that Fortune erst did lowre.
Your Fenell failed quight
where such good faith is meant:
For Bays are only my delight
though I for Bays be shent.
Of a Fox that would eat no Grapes.
BY fortune came a Fox,
where grue a lofty Vine,
I will no Grapes (quoth he)
this yard is none of mine:
The Fox would none because that he
Perceiude the highness of the Tree.
So men that Forlie are,
and long their lust to have,
But cannot come thereby,
make wise they would not crave:
Those subtle Merchants will no Wine
Because they cannot reach the Vine.
Of the strange countenance of an aged Gentlewoman.
IT makes me laugh a good to see thee lowre,
and long to looken sad:
For when thy crabbed countnance is so sour,
thou art to seeming glad.
I blame not thee but nature in his case,
That might bestowde on thee a better grace.
To the Rouing Pyrat.
THou winste thy wealth by war
ungodly way to gain:
And in an hour thy ship is sunck
goods drownde, the Pirat slain.
The Gunne is all thy trust,
it serves thy cruel fo
Then brag not on thy Canon shot
As thought there were no mo.
Of one that had little Wit.
J Thee advise
If thou be wise
To keep thy wit
Though it be small:
It Is rare to get
And far to fet,
It Was ever yet
Dearste ware of all.
In commendation of Wit.
Wit far exceeds wealth,
Wit Princely pomp excels,
Wit better is than Beauties beams
Where Pride and Danger dwells.
Wit matcheth Kingly Crown,
Wit masters Witless rage:
Wit rules the fond affects of youth,
Wit guides the steps of Age.
Wit wants no Reasons skill
a faithful Friend to know:
Wit wotes full well the way to void
the smooth and fleering fo.
Wit knows what best becommes
and what unseemly shows:
Wit has a wile to ware the worst,
Wit all good fashion knows:
Since Wit by wisdom can
do this and all the rest,
That I employ my painful head
to come by Wit is best.
Whom if I might attain,
then Wit and I were one:
But till time Wit and I do cope,
I shall be post alone.
An answer in dispraise of Wi
THe Wit you so commend
with wealth cannot compare:
For wealth is able Wit to win
when Wit is waxen bare.
Wit has no Beauties beams,
to Kingly crown it yeeldes:
Wit subject is to wilful rage,
Rage Wit and Reason weeldes.
Wit rules not witless youth,
nor aged steps does guide:
Wit knows not how to win a friend,
Wit is so full of pride.
Wit wots not how to fly
the smooth and flattering gest:
Wit cannot well discern the thing
that does become it best.
Wit has no wyle to ware
mishap before it fall,
Wit knows not what good fashion means,
Wit can do naught at all.
Since Wit by wisdom can
do nothing as you ween,
If you do toil to come by Wit,
then are you over seen.
Whom when you do attain,
though Wit and you seem one:
Yet Wit will to another when
your back is turnde and gone.
The Lover to Cupid for mercy, declaring how first he became his thrall, with
the occasion of his defiyng Love, and now at last what caused him to convert.
O Mighty Lord of Love
Dame Venus only joy,
Whose Princely power does far surmount
all other heavenly Roy:
I that have swarude thy laws
and wandered far astray:
Have now retyrde to thee again
thy statutes to obey.
And so thou would vouchsafe
to let me plead for grace:
I would before thy Bar declare
a sielie Lovers case.
I would depaint at full
how first I was thy man:
And show to that what was the cause
that I from Cupid ran.
And how I have since that
yspent my weerie time:
As I shall tell, so thou shall here
declarde in doolefull rhyme.
In green and tender age
(my Lord) till.xvij. years,
I spent my time as fitted youth
in Schole among my Feeares
As then no Bearde at all
was grown upon my Chin,
Which well approoude that man's estate
I was not entered in.
I need not tell the names
of Authors which I read,
Of Proes and Verse we had enough
to fine the dullest head.
But I was chiefly bent
to Poets famous Art,
To them with all my deuor I
my study did convert.
Where when I had with joy
yspent my time a while:
The reast refusde, I gave me whole
to Nasos Noble style.
Whose volumes when I saw
with pleasant stories fright:
In him (I say) above the rest
I laid my whole delight.
What should I here rehearse
with base and barraine Pen,
The lincked tales and filed stuff
that I perused then?
In fine it was my loare
upon that part to light
Wherein he teaches youth to love,
and women win by slight
Which Treatise when I had
with judging eye suruayde:
At last I found thy Godly kind
and Princely power displayde.
Of Cupid all that Book
and of his reign did ring,
The Poet there of Venus did
in sugared Dittie sing.
There read I of thy shafts
and of thy golden Bow,
Thy shafts which by their diverse heads
their diverse kinds did show.
I saw how by thy force
thou made men to stoop:
And grisely Gods by secret slight
and Deuilish Imps to droope.
There were depainted plain
thy quick and quiver wings,
And what so else does touch thy power
there Ovid sweetly sings.
There I thy Conquests saw
and many a noble spoil:
With names annexed to the same
of such as had the foil.
There Matrones marched along
and Maidens in their Roe,
Both Faunes and Satyrs there I saw
with Neptuns troop also.
With other thousands else
which Naso there does write,
But not my Pen or barraine Skull
is able to recite.
O mighty Prince (quoth I)
of such a fearful force,
How blessed were I, so thou of me
would daine to take remorce?
And choose me for thy thrall
among the rest to be,
That live in hope and serve in trust
as waged men to thee?
With that (thy Godhead knows)
thou gauste a freindly look:
And (though unworthy such a place)
me to thy service took.
In token I was thine
I had a badge of Blue
With Sabels set, and charge withal
that I should aye be true.
Thou badste me follow Hope
who tho thy Ensign bare.
And so I might not do amiss,
thus did thy self declare.
Then who reioyst but I?
who thought himself yblist?
That was in Cupids service plaste
as bravely as the best?
And thus in lusty youth
I grue to be your thrall,
And was (I witness of thy Dame)
right well content withal.
But now I mind to show
(as promise was to do)
How first I fled thy Tents, and why
thy camp I did forgo.
When I had been retainde
well nigh a year or more,
And serude in place of wage and meede
as is the Souldiars lere:
I chaunst by hap to cast
my floting eyes awrie,
And so a Dame of passing shape
my fortune was to spy.
On whom Dame Nature thought
such beauty to bestow,
As she had never framde before
as proof did plainly show.
On her I gazde a while
till use of sense was fled:
And color Paper white before
was woxen Scarlet red.
I felt the kindled sparks
to flashing flames to grow:
And so on sudden I did love
the Wight I did not know.
Then to thy Palace I
with froward foot did run,
And what I said, I mind it yet,
for thus my tale begun.
O Noble Sir (quoth I)
is this your free assent
I should pursue a Game unknown
within your stately Tent?
If so (quoth I) thou will,
and giuste the same in charge:
I mind of all my brydled lust
to let the Raynes at large.
Then (Hope) did prick me forth
and bad me be of cheer:
Who said I should within a while
subdue my Noble Feere.
He counselde me to shun
no dreadful dangers place,
But follow him who Banner bore
unto your Noble grace.
He would maintain my right
and further aye my cause,
And bannish all despair that grew
by froward fortunes flawes.
It Is Cupids will (quoth he)
our Master and our Lord
That thou with manly heart and hand
should lay the Barck aborde.
She shall not choose but yield
the fruit for passed pains:
For she is one of Cupids thralls,
and bound in Venus Chains.
Think thou our master will
his servant live in woe?
No not for all his golden Darts
ne yet his crooked Bow.
Wherefore with luckie Mart
give charge unto the Wight:
Take Spear in hand, and Targe on arm,
and do with courage fight.
With that, I armde me well
as fits a warring man,
And to the place of friendly fight
with lusty foot I ran.
My Foe was there before
I came unto the field,
I thought Bellona had been there
or Pallas with her shield.
So well she was beset
with Plate and privy Maile,
As for my life my limber Lance
might not a whit prevail.
Yet naythelesse with Spear
and Shield, we fought a space:
But last of all we took our Bows
and Arrows from the case.
Then Darts we began to sling
in wide and weightlesse Skies:
And then the fiercest fight of all
and combat did arise.
In stead of shiuering shafts,
light loving looks we cast,
And there I found my self too weak
her Arrows went so fast.
But one above the reast
did cleave my breast so far,
As down it went, where lay my heart,
and there it gave a jar.
So cruel was the stroke,
so sudden eke the wound,
As by the fearful force I fell
into a senseless sound.
Thus having no refuge
to quite my self from death:
I made a vow to love her well
whilst Lungs should lend me breath.
And since that time I have
endeuorde with my might
To win her love, but naught preuailes
she ways it not a Mite.
She skornes my yielding heart,
not forcing on my Hest:
But by disdain of cloudy browe
does further my unrest.
Yet ruthlesse though she were,
and farsed full of ire:
I looude her well as heart could think,
or woman might desire.
I sought to frame my speech
and countnance in such sort,
As she my covert heart might see
by show of outward port.
To Troilus half so true
unto his Creside was
As I to her, who for her face
did Troiane Creside pass.
At length, when Reason saw
me sotted so in love
As I ne would, ne might at all
my fancy thence remove:
She causde her Trumpe be blown
to cite her servants all
Into the place, by whose advise
I might be rid from thrall.
Then Plato first appearde
with sage and solemn sawes:
And in his hand a golden book
of good and greekish laws
Whose honnie mouth such wise
and weighty words did tell:
Against thee and all thy troop at once
as Reason likte it well.
When Platoes tale was done,
then Tullie pressed in place:
Whose filed tongue with sugared talk
would good a simple case.
With open mouth I heard
and Jaws ystrecht a wide,
How he against Venus dearlings all
and Cupids captives cryde.
Then Plutarch began to preach
and by examples prove,
That thousand mischiefs were procurde
by mean of guilefull love.
Whole Cities brought to spoil,
and Realms to shameful sack:
Where Kings and Rulers good advice
by mean of Love did lack?
Next Plutarch, Senec came
severe in all his sawes:
Who clean defide your wanton tricks,
and scornde your childish laws.
I need not name the reast
that stood as then in place:
But thousands more there were that sought
your Godhead to deface.
When all the Hall was hushed,
and Sages all had done:
Then Reason that in judgment sat
her skillful talk begone.
Gramercie Friends (quoth she)
your counsel lykes me well:
But now lend ear to Reasons words
and listen what I tell.
What madness may be more
than such a Lord to have,
Who makes the chieftaine of his band
a ruke and rascal slave?
Who woonted is to yield
in recompense of pain,
A ragged recompense God w^te
that turns to mere disdain?
Who gladly would ensue
a Conduct that is blind?
Or thrall himself to such a one
as shows himself unkind?
What Ploughman would be glad
to sow his seed for gain,
And reap when Harvest time comes on
but travail for his pain?
What madman might endure
to watch and ward for naught?
To ride, to run, and last to loose
the recompense he sought?
To waste the day in woe,
and restless night in care,
And have in stead of better food
but sobbing for his fare?
To bleare his eyes with brine
and salted tears yshead:
To force his fainting flesh to fade,
his color pale and dead?
And to foredoe with carke
his wretched witherde heart?
And so to breed his bitter bale
and hatch his deadly smart?
I speak it to this fine,
that plainly might appear
Cupidos craft and guilefull guise
to him that stands here.
Whose eyes with fancies mist
and errors clouds are dim,
By mean that he in Venus Lake
and Cupids goulfe does swim.
And has by sudden sight
of unacquainted shape
So fixed his heart, as hope is past
for ever to escape.
Unless to these my words
a listening ear he lend:
Which often art wont the Lovers mind
and fancy to offend.
But he that would his health
sour Sirops must assay:
For erie grief has cure again
by clean repugnaunt way.
And who so minds to quite
and rid himself from woe,
Must seek in time for to remove
the thing that hurtes him so.
For longer that it lastes
it frets the farther in
Until it grow to curelesse maine
by passing fell and skin.
The Pyne that bears his head
up to the haughty Sky,
Would well have been remooude at first
as daily proof does try:
Which now no force of man
nor engine may subuart:
So wide the creeping roots are run
by Natures subtle Art:
So Love by slender slight
and little pain at furst
Would have been stopped, but hardly now
though thou would do thy wurst,
The woonted saw is true,
shun Love, and Love will flee,
But follow Love and spite thy nose
then Love will follow thee.
And though such graffed thoughts
on sudden may not die,
Ne be forgone: yet process shall
their farther grouth destrie.
No Giaunt for his life
can cleave a knarrie Oak,
Though he would seek to do his wurst
and utmost at a stroke:
But let the meanest man
have space to sell him down,
And he will make him bend his head
and bring his boughs to grownde.
No force of falling shower
can pierce the Marble stone,
As will the often drops of rain
that from the gutters gone.
Wherefore thou retchlesse man
my counsel with the mo
Is, that thou peecemeale do expel
the love that pains thee so.
Renounce the place where she
does make soiourne and stay:
Force not her trayning truthlesse eyes,
but turn thy face away.
Think that the hurtful hook
is couerde with such bait:
And that in such a pleasant plot
the Serpent lurcks in wait.
Way well her scornful cheer,
and think she seeks thy spoil:
And though thy conquest were atchiude
may not acquit thy toil:
Not idle see thou be,
take aye some charge in hand:
And quickly shall thou quench the flame
of careless Cupids brande.
For what (I pray you) bred
Aegisthus foul defame?
And made him spoken of so ill?
what put him to the shame?
What forcde the Fool to love.
his beastly idle life
Was cause that he besotted was
of Agamemnons Wife.
If he had fought in field
encountering with his Foe,
On stately steed, or else on foot
with glaue had given the bloe:
If he that Lecher lewd
had warlick walls assailde
With Cannon shot, or bownsing Ram
his fenced enmies quailde:
He had not felt such force
of vile and beastly sin,
Cupidos shafts had fallen short
if he had busy bin.
What Myrrha made to love,
or Byblos to desire
To quench the heat of hungry lust
and flames of filthy fire?
What Canace enforcde
to fry with frantic brands,
In sort as up to yield her self
unto her brothers hands?
And others thousand mo
of whom the Poets wright?
Naught else (good faith) but for they had
in idle thoughts delight.
They spent their youthful years
in foul and filthy trade,
They busied not their idle brains
but God of Pleasure made.
Wherefore if thou (I say)
do covet to avoid
That bedlam Boys deceitful Bow
that others has anoyde:
Eschew the idle life,
flee, flee from doing naught:
For never was there idle brain
but bred an idle thought.
And when those storms are past
and clouds remooude away:
I know thou will on (Reason) think
and mind the words I say.
Which are: Discomodities of Love.
that Love is root
and only crop of care,
The bodies foe, the hearts annoy,
and cause of pleasures rare.
The sickness of the mind,
the Fountain of unrest:
The goulfe of guile, the pit of pain,
of grief the hollow Chest.
A fiery frost, a flame
that frozen is with Ise,
A heavy burden light to bear,
a Virtue fraught with Vice.
It is a Warlike peace,
a safety set in dred,
A deep despair annexed to hope,
a famine that is fed.
Sweet poison for his taste,
a Port Charybdis leeke,
A Scylla for his safety thought,
a Lion that is meek.
And (by my Crown I swear)
the longer thou do love,
The longer shall thou live a Thrall
as tract of time will prove.
Wherefore retire in haste
and speed thee home again,
And pardned shall thy trespass be,
and thou exempt from pain.
Take Reason for thy guide
as thou have done of yore:
And spite of Love thou shall not love
ne be a thrall no more.
Repair to Platos school,
and Tullies true advice:
Let Plutarch be and Seneca
thy teachers to be wise.
This long and learned tale
had broosed so my brain:
As I forthwith to reason ran,
and gave thee up in plain.
Fie, fie on Love quoth I,
I now perceive his craft:
For Reason has declarde at large
how he my freedom raft,
I see his promise is
far fayrer than his pay:
I find how Cupid blearde mine eyes,
and made me run astraie.
I wot how hungry Hope
has led me by the lip,
And made me move an endless suit
well worth an Oken chip.
He trainde me all by trust,
I farde as Hounde at hatch:
The lesser fruit I found, the more
I was procurde to watch.
Thus (mighty Lord) I left
thy laws and statutes strong
For railing Reasons trifling talk,
and offered thee a wrong.
But now Dame Venus knows,
and thou her son can tell
That I within my covert heart
do love thee passing well.
Now fully bent to be
(so thou will clean put out
Of mind my passed injuries)
thy man and Soldier stout:
Pressed to obey thy will
and never swerve again,
As long as Venus is of force
and thou shall keep thy Reign.
I weigh not Tullies tale,
ne prating Platos talk:
Let Plutarch vouch what Plutarch can,
let skuruey Senec walk.
Old Ovid will I read,
whose pleasant wit does pass
The reast, as far as stubborn Steel
excells the brittle Glass.
In him thy deeds of Arms
and manly Marts appear,
In him thy stately spoils are seen
as in a Mirror clear.
Thy mothers praise and thine
in him are to be found,
For conquestes which you had in Heaven
and here bylow on ground.
Forgive my former guilt,
forget my passed toys:
And grant I may aspire again
unto my woonted joys.
If ever man did love
or serve in better stood,
Then shape my wagesse to the same
and do restrain my meede.
But so I fight in field
as fiercely as the best:
I hope that then your Godhead will
reward me with the rest.
After misaduentures come good haps.
J Never thought but this that luck in fine
Would to my will and fancy well incline.
For daily proof does make an open show
That commen course of things would have it so.
When stormy clouds from darkened skies are fled,
Then Phoebus shows his gay and golden head.
His princely pride appears when showers are past,
And after day the night ensues as fast.
When winter has his trembling carkas shown,
And with his frostie foot the spring down thrown,
Then in leapes Aestas gay with gladsome gleames
That Harvest brings and dries up winter streams.
The Barck that broylde in rough and churlish Seas
At length does reach a Port and place of ease.
The wailefull war in time does yield to peace,
The Larums loud and Tru^pets sound does cease:
Thus may we see that chance is full of change.
And Fortune feeds on food that is full strange,
Wherefore do not despair thou loving Wight,
For Seas do ebb and flow by Natures might:
From worse to good our haps are changed often,
And basest things sometimes are raysde aloft.
So Gods would have, and Fortune does agree,
Which proof appeeres and is expressed by me.
To his Love that controlde his Dog for fawning on her.
JN deed (my Dear) you wrong my Dog in this
And show your self to be of crabbed kind,
That will not let my fawning Whelp to kiss
Your fist, ye feign would show his Masters mind:
A Mastife were more fit for such a one,
That can not let her Lovers Dog alone.
He in his kind for me did seem to sue,
That erst did stand so highly in your grace,
His Masters mind the witty Spanell knew,
And thought his woonted Mistress was in place:
But now at last (good faith) I plainly see
That Dogs more wise than Women friendly be.
Wherefore since you so cruelly entreat
My Whelp, not forcing of his fawning cheer,
You show your self with pride to be repleate,
And to your Friend your Nature does appear:
The Proverb old is verifide in you,
Love me and love my Dog, and so adue,
Both I and he that siely Beast sustain
For loving well and bearing faithful hearts,
Despitous checks, and rigorous disdain,
Where both have well deserved for our parts,
For Friendship I, for offered service he,
And yet thou neither loouste the Dog nor me.
Upon the death of the aforenamed Dame Elizabeth Arhundle of Cornwall.
WHat Tongue can tell the woe?
what Pen express the plaint?
Unless the Muses help at need
I feel my wits to faint.
Ye that frequent the hills
and highest Holtes of all,
Assist me with your skillful Quilles
and listen when I call.
And Phoebus, thou that sitst
amidst the learned route,
Do way thy Bow, and reach thy Lute
and say to sound it out.
Help (learned Pallas) help
to write the fatal fall
Of her, whose life deserves to be
a Mirror to us all.
Whose Parents were of fame
as Leyster well can show:
Where they in worship long had liude,
with years did worship grow.
Of worship was the house
from whence she took her line:
And she a Dannat by descent
to worship did incline.
What need I pen the praise
of her that liude so well.
That of it self does yield a sound,
we need not ring the Bell.
Whilst Dannat did ensue
Diana in the race,
A truer Nymph than Dannat was
was never erst in place.
With Beauty so adrest
with Virtue so adornde:
Was none that more imbraste the good.
nor at the wicked scornde.
When fleeing Fame with Trumpe
and blasted brute had brought
This Dannats thewes to courtlike ears
(which Dannat never sought)
To Court she was procurde
on Princess to attend
A service fit for such a one
her flowring years to spend.
Where when she had remainde
and serude the Princess well,
Not rashly but with good advice
to Iunos yoke she fell.
A Woulfe by hap espide
this sielie Lamb in place,
And thought her fittest for his pray:
not ghastly was his face,
Not Woulflike were his eyes,
ne harrish was his voice:
Nor such as Lambs might fear to hear
but rather might rejoice.
A heart not bent to hate
or yielding pray to spill:
Unto Licaon far unlike
whose pleasure was to kill.
Arhundle was his name,
his stock of great descent:
Whose predecessors all their lives
in Virtues path had spent.
He not unlike the rest
behaude himself so well,
As he in fine became a Knight,
so to his share it fell.
Thus was this Lady fast
conioynde in sacred knot:
Whose prime and tender years were spent
deuoyde of slanders blot.
The match no sooner made,
when marriage rites were done;
But Dannat ran her race as right
as she her course begone.
And sooth it is, she liude
in wiuely bond so well,
As she from Collatinus wife
of Chastise bore the bell.
Ulysses wife did blush
to hear of Dannats praise:
Admetus Make (the good Alcest)
did yield up all her Kayes.
The Greeks might take in grief
of such a one to here,
Who for her well deserved fame
could have no Greekish Peer.
Thus many years were spent
with good and soothfast life,
Twixt Arhundle that worthy Knight
and his approved wife.
Of whom such Impes did spring,
such fruit began to grow.
Such issue did proceed as we
them by their branches know.
The Oak will yield no Grapes,
the Vine will bear no Hawes:
Each thing must follow kindly course
by Natures fixed laws.
Even so that worthy Tree
such fruit is seen to bear,
As yet commends the withred stocks
and them to Welkin rear.
Thus did they live in joy,
till chance and spiteful death
These loving Turtles did divide
and rest the Cock his breath.
Then first the bale began,
then black attire came on:
And Dannats dreerie doole was seen
with never stinting moan.
Naught might her sorrow swage,
but still she did bewail
The Cinders of her seuerd Make
with tears of none avail.
Seven years she spent in woe
refusing other Make:
For such is Turtles kind you know
they will none other take.
I doubt where Dido felt
the like tormenting rage,
When that the guilefull Guest was gone
that laid his faith to gage,
This Dannats virtues were
so rife and eke so rare,
As few with her for honest life.
and wisdom might compare.
Minerua did soiourne
within that wiuely breast:
Her deeds declarde that in her head
Dame Pallas was a guest.
But what we covet most
or chiefest hold in price,
With greedy gripe of darting death
is reaued with a trice.
The cruel Sisters three
were all in one agreede,
To let the spindle run no more
but shrid the fatal threede.
And fortune, (to express
what swing and sway she bare)
Allowde them leave to use their force
upon this Jewel rare.
Thus has the Welkin won,
and we a loss sustainde:
Thus has her Corse a Vante found out,
her Sprite the Heavens gainde.
Since sobbing will not serve,
ne shedding tears avail
To bring the soul to Corpse again
his old and woonted Gaile:
Leave off to bath her stone
with Niobs tears to long,
For thou shall aid her naught at all
but put thy self to wrong.
Wish that her soul may reach
the place from whence it came:
And she be guerdond for her life
with never dying fame.
For sure she well deserude
to have immortal praise,
And lawde more light than clearest Sun
or Phoebus golden rays.
If ought my slender skill
or writing were of power,
No process of ungrateful time.
her virtues should devour.
Disprayse of Women that allure and love not.
WHen so you view in Verse
and Poets rimes report,
Of Lucrece, and Ulysses wife
that lives in honest sort.
When Hippo commes by hap
or good Alcest yfeare,
And other some that by desert
with fame renowned were,
Then you with hasty doom
and rashfull sentence straight,
Will vaunt that women more and less
were all with virtue freight.
And, for those few that liude
in wiuely bond so well,
You will esteem the reast by those
that only bare the bell,
But follow sound advice,
let each receive her doom,
As each in virtue did surmount,
or sit in highest room.
So clean was never seed
ysifted, but among
For all their pains were weeds that grew
to put the grain to wrong.
That troop of honest Dames
those Grisels all are gone:
No Lucrece now is left alive,
ne Cleopatra none.
Those days are all ypast,
that date is fleeted by:
They myrrors were Dame Nature made
her skillful hand to try.
Now course of kind exchaungde
does yield a woorser grain,
And women in these latter years
those modest Matrones stain.
Deceit in their delight,
great fraud in friendly looks:
They spoil the Fish for friendships sake
that houer on their Hooks.
They buy the bait to dear
that so their freedom loze:
And they the more deceitful are
that so can craft and gloze.
With beauty to allure,
and murder with disdain:
What more may be against women's kind
where ruth of right should reign
So Memphite Crocodile
(as we in Poets fine)
Where Nylus with his seuenfold stream
to Seaward does incline
With ruthlesse trickling tears
and lamentable sound,
The siely Beast with pity mooude
does cruelly confound.
So Marmaydes in the flood
and Sirens sweetly sing,
Till they the musing Mariner
to speedy death do bring.
Now Helen for her train
with Dian may compare:
Such sundry Helens now are found,
and Dians Nymphs so rare.
Who if by craft epsy
thy Senses once to bend,
And bow by Cupids subtle breach
that burning gleames does send:
Then will they seek in haste
by force of friendly blinck,
And wrested look into thy breast
their beauties shape to sinck.
Which if be brought to pass,
then have they their desire:
And standing far do smile to see
the flaming of the fire.
Then look they on a loofe,
and never once repair
To end the strife that they have stirrde
twixt Lover and Despair.
As Shepherds when they see
the Ganders foe in snare
Rejoice, that from their foldes of late
their siely cattle bare:
Or Boy that knows the Foul
to be in pithole caught,
That woonted was to steal the stale
and set the snare at naught:
So wily Women wont
to laugh, when so they spy
The loving Wight ytraynde by trust
in point and pinch to die.
But if such chance do chance
(as often chance we see)
The fish that erst was hangde on Hook
by better chance be free,
If he by happy hap
do cast off Cupids yoke,
Not setting of their Love a Leeke
that gave the cruel stroke:
Then are remooude the clouds
of her disdainful brow:
And friendships flood that erst was dry
afresh begins to flow.
Then wresteth she her grace,
and makes a seeming show
As though she meant no change at all,
ne would her Hestes forgo.
Thus are they fright which wiles
whom Nature made so plain,
Thus Sinons shifts they put in ure
their purpose to attain.
Wherefore let be our care
Ulysses trade to try:
And stop our ears against the sound
of Sirens when they cry.
Think when thou see the bait
whereon is thy delight,
That hidden Hooks are hard at hand
to bane thee when thou bite.
Think well that poison lurckes
in shape of Sugar sweet:
And where the freshest flowers are seen
there most beware thy feet.
But chiefly Women shoonne
and follow mine advice,
If not, thou may perhaps in proof
of folly bear the price.
To trust to rotten boughs
the danger well is seen:
To tread the tylled trap unawares
has always peril been.
Have Medea still in mind,
let Circe be in thought:
And Helen that to utter sack,
both Greece and Troie brought
Let Creside be in coumpt
and number of the mo,
Who for her lightness may presume
with falsest on the row:
Else would she not have left
a Trojan for a Greek.
But what? by kind the Cat will hunt,
her Father did the like.
As wily are their wits,
so are their tongues untrue:
Unconstant and aye fleeting minds
that most embrace the nue.
When fixed is their faith
it restes on brittle sand:
And when thou deemste them surste of all
they bear thee but in hand.
Though Argus were alive
whose eyes in number were
As many as the Peacock proud
in painted plume does bear:
Yet Women by their wyles
and well acquainted drifts,
Would soon deceive his waking head,
and put his eyes to shifts.
Naught have they need at all
Cyllenus Pipe to blow
To forge their fraud, their tongues will serve
as learned writers show.
First try and then tell
Where I have said well
For without a trial
There vailes no denial.
Of a Physician and a Soothsayer.
MARCKE felt himself diseasde,
the Soothsayer said: There be
Six yet remainder days of life,
no mo (Friend Marcke) to thee
Then skillful Alcon came,
he felt the pulses beat:
And out of hand this Marcus did,
there Physic wrought his feate.
This shows Physician does
the Soothsayer far exceed:
For the one can make a short dispatch,
when the other makes no speed.
A controversy of a conquest in Love twixt Fortune and Venus.
WHilst Fissher kest his line
the houering fish to hook:
By hap a rich man's daughter on
the Fissher kest her look.
She fryde with frantic Love,
they maride eke at last:
Thus Fissher was from low estate
in top of Treasure plast.
Stood Fortune by and smylde:
how say you (Dame) quoth she
To Venus? was this conquest yours,
or is it due to me?
It Was I (quoth Vulcans Wife)
with help of Cupids Bow,
That made this wanton wench to rage,
and match her self so low.
Not so: it was Fortune I
that brought the Trull in place:
And Fortune was it that the man
stood so in Maidens grace.
By Fortune fell their love,
it was Fortune struck the stroke:
Then detter is this man to me
that did the match provoke.
The Lover voweth how so ever he be guerdoned to love faithfully.
VVthankfull though she were
and had disdainefull browe,
Regarding naught my constant heart,
ne forcing of her vow:
Since sown is the seed
of faithful friendships lore,
Unconstant will I never be
ne break my Hest therefore.
Let Fortune use her force
so Cupide stand mine aid,
And Cyprid laugh with loouely look,
I will not be afraid.
By me the Noble kind
of man shall not be shamde,
Record through me shall never force
our sequel be defamde.
Albe that I consume
my green and growing youth,
Yea age and all without reward
yet nill I swerve my truth.
Each that shall after come,
and live when I am dust,
This loving heart shall well descrie
the Key of perfect trust.
Her, while my vital breath
these fainting limbs shall move:
Yea, after death in hollow Vawte
ytombed, will I love.
Force she my service true
I force it not at all,
Rue she by ruth my dreerie life
or it to mercy call:
In stay my Love shall stand,
I will not false my faith,
Ne break my former plighted hest
or promise to the death.
Disdain shall never force
my friendship once awrie:
Ere that I crave immortal Gods
that ye will let me die.
Let Dido still complain
Aeneas broken Hest,
Of all that came to Carthage Coast
the most unfaithful guest.
Untrusty Theseus eke
let Ariadne cleepe,
Escaping from his friendly Feere
yled in slumbring sleep:
So let Medea blame
the Knight that won the Flise,
That forced naught at all in fine
her cleapings and her cries:
Have thou the faithful heart
of thine assured Friend,
Ere he be of that retchlesse race
the Sun awrie shall wend.
Where so thou yield him grace
or as an outcast shoon:
Expect his former plighted Hest
as thou tofore have done.
Love will he never blame
ne Venus laws forgo,
Life sooner shall than love decrease
his faith is fixed so.
He sorrows the long absence of his Lady. P.
NOw once again (my Muse) renew the woes
Which erst thou have in doolefull dittie soong,
For greater cause of sorrow not arose
To me at all, than now of late is sproong:
As you shall hear in sad and solemn Verse,
A woeful Wight his hapless hap rehearse,
Come ( Clio) come with pensive Pen in hand
And cause thy sisters change their cheereful voice,
Ye furies fell that lurcke in Plutos land,
Come skip to Skies, and raise a doolefull noice:
Help to lament the Lovers woeful chance,
And let Alecto lead the loathsome dance.
All ye that Ladies are of Lymbo Lake
With hissing hair, and Snakie bush bedect,
Your beds of steel and dankish Dens forsal
And Stix with stinking Sulpher all infect:
Do what you may to aid my careful Quill,
And help to ring a Lovers latter knill.
And time (I trow) since she from hence is fled
Who was the guide and giver of my breath,
By whom I was with wished pleasure fed
And have escapte the ruthlesse hand of death:
Who was the Key and Cable of my life,
That made me escape Charybdis careful clife.
A Star whereby to steare my bodies Bark,
And ship of soul to shore in safety bring,
To quite my Corse from painful pining cark,
And fiery force of crafty Cupids sting:
Even she that me from Syllas shelfe did shroude,
That light is lost, that Lodestarre under cloud.
Whose absence breeds the tempest I sustain,
And makes my thoughts so cloudie black to bae,
And brackish tears from swolen eyes to rain,
And churlish gale of surging sighs to flee:
That Ancor scarce ne harbor I may have
From deep despair my broken Ship to save.
The Rubie from the Ring is rest I find,
The foil appeeres that underneath was set:
The Saint is gone, the Shrine is left behind,
The Fish is scapte, and here remains the Net:
That other choice for me is none but this,
To wail the want of her that is my bliss.
I curse the Wight that causde her hence to go,
I hate the Horse that hence her Corse conuaide,
The Bit, the Saddle all I curse aroe,
And ought that else might this her journey staide:
I curse the place where she does now solourne,
And that whereto she minds to shape return.
My mouth, that kissed her not before she went,
Mine cies, that did not seek to see her face,
My head, that it no matter did invent,
My hand, that it in Paper did not place:
My feet, that they refusde to travel tho,
My legs I curse that were so loath to go.
My tongue, that it to parle did then procure
To utter all my close and covert mind,
To her who long has had my wounds in cure,
In whom such ruth and mercy I did find:
My heart I curse, that sought not to bewray
It self to her or ere she went her way.
And last my self and erie thing beside,
My life, my limbs, my carrion Corse I curse:
Save her for whom these torments I abide,
That of my life is only well and sourse:
Jove shroude her salfe, and keep her from annoy,
And send her soon to make return with joy.
To his Love long absent, declaring his torments.
O Lingering Love, O Friend
that absent art so long,
Where so thou be, the Gods thee guide
and quit thy Corse from wrong:
And send thee harmless health,
and safely to reuart,
How soon your self may deem full well
to save a dying heart.
For since your parture I
have lead a loathsome state:
And save the hope of your return
naught might my woes abate.
And will you know the time
how I have spent away?
And do you long in ruthful rhyme
my torments to suruay?
Though but with weeping eyes
I may the same recite:
Yet naythelesse the truth herein
to thee (my Friend) I write.
When flickring Fame at first
unto mine ears had brought
That you to travel were addressed,
and fixed was your thought
In London long to lodge,
and flee our friendly soil:
Then Dolor first in daunted Corpse
and wounded breast did boil.
I felt how grief did gi^^
the onset on my heart,
And sorrow swear that pensive pangues
should never thence depart.
With clinching claws there came,
and talents sharply set,
A flock of greedy griping woes
my grunting heart to fret.
The more I sought the mean
by pleasant thought to ease
My growing grief, the more I felt
increase my new disease.
When other laughed for joy,
it brought to mind my woe:
When Music slakte their sorrows, then
my secret sore did grow.
When they at meat were set
their dainty food to taste,
In stead of Viands, hearty sighs
I had for my repaste.
When Bacchus came to Boorde,
and each to other drincks:
My swolen flood of salted tears
did ouerflow his brincks,
And out did gushe amain
of drink to stand in steed
To me, that of such monstrous meat
as sorrow was did feed.
From boorde to bed I go*
in hope to find relief,
And by some pleasant nap to rid
my troubled Ghost from grief:
But slumbring sleep is fled.
and Morpheus shows his spite:
That will not yield on minutes reast
in all a Winters night.
O Lord, what sundry kinds
of care do then begin
Tassault my weary waking head,
and trembling heart within?
A thousand thoughts arise,
each thought his torment brings:
And thus the lothed night I spend
and feel how sorrow springs.
And if in dawning chance
some drouping sleep to light
Upon the careful Corse that thus
has spent the waking night:
It stands in little stead,
so dreadful are my dreams
As they by force of woe procure
mine eyes to run with streams.
Then bathe I bed with brine,
and cloy my Couch with tears:
And mid my sleep thy griefly Ghost
in straungie sort appears.
Not with such friendly face
and brow of gladsome cheer
As erst thou had: those lovely looks
and blincks are all areare.
More grimmer is your grace,
more coye your countnance eake:
More lowering looks than were of yore
and Brow more bent to wreake.
In hand me thinks I see
thee hold the hateful knife
To flea thy Friend, and for good will
to reaue deserved life.
Wherewith I wake afright
and strain my pillow fast,
To guard me from the cruel tool
until your wrath be past.
At length I see it plain
that fancy did enforce
Unto his ugly monstrous dream
my weak and slumbring Corse.
I vewe thy secret heart,
and how it longs to be
With him that for unfeigned love
impawnde his faith to thee.
For mercy then I call
of you that judge so ill,
Whose pleasure is to guard your Friend,
and not your Foe to kill.
Of dreams a thousand such
each night I have a share,
To bannish sleep from pining Corse
and nurse my canckred care.
Thus day and night I live,
thus night and day I die:
In death I feel no smart at all,
in life great woe I try.
Wherefore to rid my griefs
and bannish all annoie:
Retire from Creece, and do soiourne
here with thy Friend in Troie.
Who longs to see thy face
and witness of thy state:
nd partner be of thy delights
Ahis furious fits to bate.
To Brown of light belief.
BEware my Brown of light belief,
trust not before you try:
For under cloak of great good will
does fained friendship lie.
As wily Adder lurcks in leaves
and greenest grass of all,
And stings the stalking Wight that thought
no danger would befall.
So is the plain vnplayted man
by subtle dealing guilde
And soonest snarde by subtle shifts
of him that smoothly smilde.
We never see the frowning Friend
that frets to outward show,
Beguile or seek to false his Friend,
as does the fleering Foe:
The Mastife Dog is voyded well
that barcks or ere he bite:
But (oh) the Cur is cruel that
does never barck a whit.
Deal thou as Courtyers daily do,
in words be franck and free,
Speak fair and make the weather clear
to him that gybes with thee.
For so thou shall assured stand
from hurt to be as far,
As from the ground of true good will
those glosing marchaunts are.
A wisdom to beware of Woulfes,
and Foxes guilefull guise:
For tone is crafty by his kind,
the other passing wise.
So that it is a matter hard
their double drifts to flee:
But yet thou shall avoid the wurst
if thou be ruled by me.
(quod) G. T.

That Death is not so much to be feared as daily diseases are.
WHat? yst not folly for to dread
and stand of Death in fear,
That mother is of quiet reast,
and griefs away does wear?
That brings release to want of wealth,
and poor oppressed Wightes?
He comes but once to mortal men,
but once for all he smites.
Was never none that twice has felt
of cruel Death the knife:
But other griefs and pining pains
do linger on the life,
And oftentimes on self same Corse
with furious fits molest,
When Death by one dispatched of life
does bring the soul to rest.
The Epicures counsel, eat, drink, and play.
MY Friend, where as thou see thy self
to be a man in deed,
Eat, quaffe, and play, with present joys
thy greedy fancy feed.
For I (thou see) am dust become
that erst so welthie was:
I have that I alive did eat,
the reast away did pass.
What so I poorde in pampred paunch
and to my guts conuaide,
To gaping ground with me I bore,
the reast behind is staide.
My haughty buildings huge to see,
my Turrets and my train,
My Horse, my Hounds, my cofred Coin
for others do remain.
Wherefore a Myrrour make of me
and drown thee in delight:
For Death will sweep away thy wealth
and reaue thy pleasures quight.
The Answer to the vile and canckred counsel of the outrageous Epicure.
MY Friend, for that I see my self
to be a man in deed,
Thy quaffing counsel I refuse,
unless to serve my need.
I muse no whit that thou art dust,
thy beastly living here
Was mean to bring thee to thy bane,
the sooner for thy cheer.
Thou thoughts to pamper up thy paunch,
but thou did feed ywis
The greedy Worms that gnaw thy guts,
for them a dainty dish.
Good reason that thou should forgo
and leave thy goods behind,
For that a beast so like a beast
did live against thy kind.
A man in name, no man in deed
thou art that counselst me
To live as thou have liude, and die
a Monster like to thee.
For since thy life so loathsome was,
and shameful cake thy death:
I will beware, and make a Glass
of thee whilst I have breath,
To shun thy sluttish sinful Sect,
thy tippling and thy toys:
For after death those pleasures pass
as did thy fickle joys.
Of Homer and his birth.
THe Poet Homer Chius claims,
Colophon does the leeke:
And Smyrne swears that he is hirs
that was the learned Greek.
Of Salamine some say he was,
of Io other some:
And diverse make report that he
of Thessale line did come.
Thus sundred and divided are
the peoples minds of thee,
(Thou Princely Poet) but my thought
with neither does agree.
For I assuredly suppose
and deem the Heavenly Spear
Thy soil, and Pallas lap the womb
that did thy body bear.
Her breast (the Dug) that thou did suck
in Cradle when thou layst:
With haughty style so much (thou Greek)
thy mazed head dismayst.
That Time conquereth all things, save the Lovers pain.
WAs never Bull so fell
with wrinckle fronted face,
But Time would make him yield to yoke
and toil the ground apace.
The Horse ybred in Holte
and fed in lusty Lease
In Time will champe the fomie Bit
his Riders will to please.
The Lions that are wood
and raging in their kind,
By trackt of Time their keepers know
in whom they friendship find.
Those Beasts that come from Inde
and farthest parts of all,
In Time do swerue their savage sect
and to their duty fall.
Time makes the Grape to grow
and Vine to spread at large,
So that the skin scarce able is
to hold his inward charge:
So Ceres fruit does sproute
by force of growing Time,
Which makes the strength of hidden seed
into the stalk to clime.
Time makes the tender twig
to bousteous Tree to grow:
It makes the Oak to ouerlooke
the slender shrubs bylow.
It frets the Culter keen
that cuts the froting soil,
It forces hardest Flint of all
and Marble to recoyle.
Time wreakefull wrath subdues
it breaks angers gall,
And each disease in Time has help:
thus Time does conquer all.
Though these and other like
by process are procurde,
Yet naythelesse my festred wound
can not in Time be curde.
For that which sends salve
and comfort to the reast,
Does cause my ranckling sore to rage
and dubble in my breast.
As Springs that from a Mount
do take their down ward sourse,
To whom there may no bar be found
to stop their headlong course:
So Lordlike Love ystaulde
and ceazde in yielding mind
May not be dispossessed again,
such is his stately kind.
To his Friend riding to Londonwarde.
AS Troylus did rejoice
when Cresid yielded grace,
And dained him from service true
so near her heart to place:
So have I ioyde (my Dear)
for friendship which I found,
And love requited with the like
which curde my careful wound.
And he full shrilly shright
and doolde his woeful chance,
On Greekish Steed from Trojan town
when Cresid began to praunce
And leave the lyked soil
where did soiourne her joy,
I mean the worthy Troylus
and louingst youth in Troie:
Even so I wail at thy
departure, would thou wist,
And out I cry a wretched Wight
that thought himself yblist.
O London loathsome lodge
why do thou now procure
My Love to leave this pleasant soil
that has my heart in cure?
Since needs it must be so
gainsend her home in have:
Let her retire with harmless health
that sicklesse hence is past.
Yield me a good account
of her that is my joy,
And send her to her Troylus
that longs for her in Troie.
Of the Rain and cloudy weather at the time of his Friends departure from
Troie.
NO marvel though the Sun do hide his head
And under cloud do keep his lowering looks,
No wonder that the Sky his tears does shed
And with his streams increase the water brooks:
The cause is known, the proof is passing plain,
My Love and I be sundred to our pain.
Now she is gone that did sustain my breath
And saude my ship of body from the wrack,
By whom I scapte the cruel hand of Death
Which thought to bring my Corse to utter sack:
The Welkin weeps and helps me to bewail
With gushing showers the loss of mine avail.
Wherefore, O Heavenly states that Rulers be
Of starrie Skies from whence these tears discende
And flush so fast as mortal Wights do see:
Of ruth in needful time my woes to end,
Procure my Love to make return in post,
To guard from grief her Friends afflicted ghost.
If not, with flasshing flame and Thunder dint
By Vulcan forgde and hammerd for the nones,
Consume to dust my flesh my woe to stint,
And with thy Mace (O Jove) vnioint my bones:
That by such scath and loss of vital breath
I may avoid a worse and stranger death.
For like the teene that now my heart sustaines
Was never felt nor such oppressing care:
Of force my life must yield to pinching pains
Of hasting Death, the fits so furious are:
Which though be so, when I am wrapped in Clay,
(My soul) to her thou shall repair and say.
That whilst the life would suffer me to woonne
With mortal Wights, my heart was hirs at will,
And now my Spindle has his course yroonne
And twist is none yleft, thou will fulfill
The duty which thy Master ought of right,
And which he would accomplish if he might.
Of a covetous Niggard, and a needy Mouse.
ASclepiad that greedy Carle,
by fortune found a Mouse
(As he about his lodgings lookte)
within his niggish house.
The chiding Chuffe began to chaufe,
and (sparefull of his cheer)
Demanded of the siely Beast
and said what makste thou here?
You need not stand in fear (good Friend)
the smiling Mouse replide:
I come not to devour your Cates
but in your house to hide.
No man this Miser I account
that chid this hurtlesse Elfe:
No Mouse the Mouse, but wiser than
the Patch that owde the Pelf.
A pretty Epigram of a Scholar, that having read Vergils Aeneidos, married a
cursed Wife.
A Scholar skillde in Vergils Verse
and reading of his book
( Arma virumque) that begins,
was caught in Cupids book.
At length to marriage flat he fell,
when wedding day was done,
To play her prancks, and bob the Fool
the shrowish Wife begoon.
The Husband daily felt the fistes
and buffers of his Wife:
Until at last he thus began
to plain of painful life.
(Oh Caitiffe me) the Scholar cryde
well worthy of this woe,
For Arma I Virumque read
in Vergill long ago:
Yet could not see to escape the plague
whereof the Poet spoke.
No doubt that Noble Poet for
a Prophet I will take.
For Arma now Virumque I
both day and night sustain
At home, I need not run to School,
to read the Verse again.
Would ( Virum) were away, and then
let ( Arma) do their wurst:
But when I matched with such a shrew
I think I was accursed.
To a young Gentleman of taking a Wife.
LOng you with greedy mind to lead a life,
That pleasant is in deed, and void of care*
I never wish you then to take a Wife
Nor set your foot in crafty Cupids snare.
A filthy Trull is yrkesome too the eye,
A gallant girl allures the lookers mind:
A wanton wench will have the head too die,
An aged Trot to like is hard to find.
A bearing Wife with brats will cloy thee sore,
A greater carcke than childrens care is none,
A barraine beast will grieve thee ten times more,
No joy remains when hope of fruit is gone.
Wherefore let wyuing go, live single aye,
Apply the Book and band the Ball among:
A shrew (we see) is wedded in a day
But ere a man can shift his hands tys long.
The Answer for taking a Wife.
LOng you with greedy mind to bleare mine eye
And make me think of marige thus amiss?
I cannot deem so ill of wyuing I,
To love and wed for love is perfect bliss.
A filthy Trull (you say) is loathsome sight,
Put case she be not passing fair to vewe?
If she with virtue do the want requight
Of comely shape thou have no cause to rue.
A gallant girl allures the lookers mind,
What shall we say the woman's is the shame?
Because the cleerest eyes by course of kind
Can not abide the Sun, is he to blame?
A wanton wench to die will have the head,
Can thou not see before thou wade so far?
His be the hurt that looks not ere he wed,
The Husband may the woman make or ma^^e.
Put case an aged Trot be somewhat tough?
If coin she bring the care will be the less,
If she have store of muck and goods enough
Thou needste not force so much of handsomnesse.
A bearing Wife does make the husband glad,
A greater joy than Childrens may not be:
A barraine wench sometime must needs be had
There does not fruit spring out of every tree.
So that I find no reason, none at all
In that thou wilst a man to single life,
And quite to shun the comfort that may fall
And daily does to him that has a Wife.
For sure though some be shrewes as some there be,
(As of the sheep are some that bear no wull)
Yet must we praise the match whereby we see
The earth maintainde with men, and stored full.
But if you think so ill to take a Wife,
Let others wed, lead you the single life.
(quod) G. T.

Of a deaf Plaintiff, a deaf Defendant, and a deaf Judge.
BY hap a man that could not hear
but borne deaf by kind,
Another cited to the Court,
much like himself to find,
Whose bearing Sense was quight bereft:
the Judge that of the Case
Should give his verdit, was as deaf
as deafest in the place.
To Court they came: the Plaintiff praide
to have the unpaid rent.
Defendant said, in grinding I
this weary night have spent.
The Judge beheld them both a while,
is this at last (quoth he)
Of all your stirred strife the cause?
You both her children be:
Then Reason wills, and Law allows
your Mother should have aid
At both your hands that are her Sons.
When thus the Judge had said,
The People laughed a good to hear
this well discussed case
Twixt two deaf men, and thought him fit
to sit in Judges place
Upon so blind a matter that
was deaf as any rock:
And thus the simple men were shamde,
the Justice had a mock.
A promise of old good will, to an old friend at the beginning of New year.
THe Chuffes for greedy gain
and lucers love expende
Their New years gifts upon their Lords
as cry year has end:
But I in token that
the year his course has roon,
And proof that joyful Ianus has
a novel year begoon:
(As Love and Duty wills)
the Herald of my heart
Here send to you to make a show
that Friendship shall not start.
Though years do change by course
and alter by their kind:
My old good will and faith to slip
I trust you shall not find.
Timetes will be true,
his love shall never blin:
But gather strength and grow to more
than when it did begin.
A Vow to serve faithfully.
JN green and growing age, in luftie years,
In latter days when silver bush appeeres:
In good and gladsome hap when Fortune serves,
In lowering luck when good adventure swerues
By day when Phoebus shows his princely pride,
By night when golden Stars in Skies do glide,
In Winter when the groves have lost their green
In Summer when the longest days are seen,
In happy health when sicklesse limbs have life,
In griefull state, amids my dolors ryfe,
In pleasant peace when Trumpets are away,
In wreakfull war when Mars does bear ye sway,
In perilous goulfe amid the sinking sand,
In safer soil and in the stable land.
When so you laugh, or else with grimmer grace
You bear your faithful Friend unfriendly face,
In good report and time of woorser fame,
I will be yours, yea though I loose the game.
Funeral Verse upon the death of Sir John Horsey Knight.
THat wealth assigned is to waste away,
And stately pomp to vanish and decrease.
That worship wears and worldly wights decay,
And Fortunes gifts though nere so brave do cease
May well appear by Horseys hateful Hierce,
Whose Corse (alas) untimely Death did pierce.
Who thought thereby as Nature to subdue
By reauing breath and rowne in worldly stage:
So blasted brute to blot, and Fame that flue
Of him that well deserude in all his age
For worship and renown to have his share
Among the reast that praise for Virtue bare.
But seeking ways to wrong this worthy wight,
She fowly mist her purpose in the fine:
For Horsey gains by deaths outrageous spite,
And endless fame, whereat his Foes repine:
But each man else laments and cries alowde
That Horsey was to soon ywrapt in shrowde.
The rich report that ruth in him did reign,
And pity lodgde within his loouing breast,
The simple say that for no manner gain
He has at any time the poor oppreast:
Thus both estates his worthy life commend,
And both lament his ouerhasting end.
Then cease (I say) such flushing tears to shed,
Do way thy doole, repress thy ruthful moan,
For Horsey lives, his soul to Skies is fled,
The only Corse is closde in Marble stone.
So that thou have no cause to wail his chance,
Whom spiteful death by hatred did advance.
To his Friend T: having been long studied and well experienced, and now at
length loving a Gentlewoman that forced him naught at all.
J Thought good faith, and durst have gagde my hand
For you (Friend T.) ye beauty should now hight
Have rasde your heart, nor Cupid with his brand
Have brought thy learned breast to such a plight.
I thought Mineruas gift had been of power
By wholesome read to root this fancy out:
But now I see that Venus in an hour
Can bend the best, and dawnt the wise and stout.
Why should thou seek to make ye Tiger tame?
To win a Woulfe so cruel by his kind?
To suffer Aesops Snake thou art to blame
That stoong the man where he relief did find.
Is naught in her but Woman's name alone,
No Woman sure she is, but Monster fell,
That scorns her friend, and makes him die with moan.
Who makes an Idol of a Devil of Hell.
She was cut out of some Sea beaten rock,
Or taken from the cruel Lions Tet,
That feeds her Friend for friendship with a mock
And smiles to see him macht in Follies Net.
If thou were wise (as thou art full of love)
Thou would account her beauty but a Glass,
And from thy heart such fancies fond remove
I loath to see the Lion wex an Ass.
If so she were thy faithful Friend in deed,
And sought a salve to cure thy cruel sore,
(As now she seeks to make thy heart to bleed)
Good faith thou could account of her no more.
But waying now her great abuse to thee
A Friend to her, but to thy self a Foe:
Why should thou love, or so enamoured be?
Leave off be time, let all such dotage go.
Should I embrace the man that hates my life?
Should I account of him that settes me light?
Should I yield up my throat to murthring Knife?
Or seek for to reclaim a Haggard Kite?
Have thou not read how wise Ulysses did
Enstuffe his ears with Wax, and close them up,
Of Cyrces filthy love himself to rid,
That turned his Mates to Swine by Witches cup?
And how he did the like upon the Seas
The pleasant noisome Sirens songs tendure,
That otherwise had wrought him great unease
If once they might his mates and him allure?
Put thou the Greeks devise again in ure,
Stop up thine cares this Siren to beguile,
Seal up those wanton eyes of thine, be sure
To lend no ear unto her flattring style.
For all her talk but to deceit does tend,
A canckred heart is wrapped in friendly looks:
She all her wits to thy decay does bend,
Thou art the Fish, she bears the biting hooks.
No savage beast does force a man a whit
That loves him not: we see the dogged Curre
Fawnes not one him that with ye whip does smite
The Horse hates him yt pricks him with the spur.
And will thou love, or place within thy breast
The cruel Dame that weaues thy web of woe?
Will thou still fawn upon so false a guest:
In stead of Dove will thou retain a Crow?
Beware in time, ere Beauty pierce to far,
Let fancies go, love where is love again:
For doubtless now to much to blame you arre.
To sow good will and reap but foul disdain.
I counsel thus that may thee best advise,
For that my self did serve a cruel Dame:
The blind recurde can judge of bleared eyes,
The Criple healde knows how to heal the lame.
Shake thou betimes the yoke from off thy neck,
For fear the print thereof remain behind:
A happy man is he that fears no check,
But lives at freedom with contented mind.
An Epitaph upon the death of the worshipful Master Richard Edwardes late
Master of the Children in the Queens Majesty's Chapel.
IF tears could tell my thought,
or plaints could paint my pain,
If dubled sighs could show my smart,
if wayling were not vain:
If gripes that gnawe my breast
could well my grief express,
My tears, my plaints, my sighs, my wayling
never should surcesse.
By mean whereof I might,
unto the world disclose
The death of such a man (alas)
as chanced us to lose.
But what auayles to moan?
If life for life might be
Restorde again, I would exchange
my life for death with thee.
Or if I might some way,
to pay thy rawnsome know,
(O Edwards) then believe me sure
thou should not lie so low:
That O thou cruel Death,
so fierce with dint of dart
Due curses on my knees I yield
to thee with all my heart.
For that it list thee try
thy foul and cankred spite
On that so rare a piece, on that
so wise and worthy Wight.
Suffisde thee (since thou must
be mad) the simple sort
to flea, or on the brutish blood
of beasts to take thy sport,
And not in furious wise,
with haste and headlong rage
To kill the flower of all our Realm
and Phaenix of our age.
The fact does cry revenge,
the Gods repay thine hire,
Deep darckned Lake of Lymbo low,
and still consuming fire.
His death not I but all
good gentle hearts do moan:
O London, though thy grief be great,
thou do not mourn alone.
The seat of Muses nine
where fiftene Wells do flow,
Whose sprinckling springs and golden streams
ere this thou well did know.
Lament to loose this Plant
for they shall see no more
The branch that they so long had bred,
whereby they set such store.
O happy House, O Place
of Corpus Christi, thou
That plantedst first, and gauste the root
to that so brave a bow:
And Christ Church which enioydste
the fruit more ripe at fill,
Plunge up a thousand sighs, for grief
your trickling tears distill.
Whilst Child and Chapel dure,
whilst Court a Court shall be,
(Good Edwards) each estate shall much
both want and wish for thee.
Thy tender Tunes and Rimes
wherein thou woontst to play
Each princely Dame of Court and Town
shall bear in mind always.
Thy Damon and his Friend,
Arcyte and Palemon
With more full fit for Princes ears,
though thou from earth art gone,
Shall still remain in fame,
and like so long to hide
As earthly things shall live, and God
this mortal Globe shall guide.
For lo, thus Virtue list,
her Pupils to advance:
Yet for my part I would that God
had given thee better chance.
A longer time on earth,
thy hastened death before,
But Edwardes now farewell for tears
will let me write no more.
Well may thy bones be lodgde
thy fame abroad may fly,
Thy sacred soul possess a place
above the starrie Sky.
(quod) Tho. Twine.

To his Love that sent him a Ring wherein was graude, Let Reason rule.
SHall Reason rule where Reason has no right?
Nor never had? shall Cupid loose his lands?
His claim? his crown? his kingdom? name of might
And yield himself to be in Reasons bands?
No, (Friend) thy Ring does will me thus in baine,
Reason and Love have ever yet been twain.
They are by kind of such contrary mould
As one mislikes the others lewd devise,
What Reason wills Cupido never would,
Love never yet thought Reason to be wise.
To Cupid I my homage erst have done.
Let Reason rule the hearts that she has won.
To his Friend Francis Th: leading his life in the Country at his desire.
MY Francis, whilst you breath your foming steed
Athwart the fields in peace to practice war,
In Country whilst your keneld Hounds do feed,
Or in the wood for taken pray do jar:
Whilst you with Hawks the sielie Foul do slape,
And take delight a quick retriue to have,
To flee to mark, and hear the Spanels baye
Wasting your age in pleasure passing brave:
In City I my youthful years do spend,
At Book perhaps sometime to wear the day:
Where man to man not friend to friend does lend,
With us is naught but pitch (my Friend) and pay.
Great store of Coin, but few enjoy the same,
The owners hold it fast with lymed hands,
We live by loss, we play and practice game
We by and fell, the streate is all our lands.
Well storde we are of cry needful thing.
Wood, Water, Coal, Flesh, Fish we have ynow:
(What lack you) Wives and Maids do daily sing
The Horn is rife, it sticks on many a brow.
But yet (I say) the Country has no peer,
The Town is but a toil, and weary life:
We like your Country sportes (Friend Francis) here,
The City is a place of bate and strife.
Wherefore I think thee wise and full of thrift
That fledst the Town, and have that blessed gift.
To a Gentlewoman that always willed him to wear Rosemarie, (a Tree that is
always green,) for her sake, and in token of his good will to her.
THe green that you did wish me wear
aye for your love,
And on my helm a branch to bear
not to remove:
Was ever you to have in mind
Whom Cupid has my Feere assignde.
As I in this have done your will,
and mind to do:
So I request you to fulfill
my fancy too:
A green and loving heart to have,
And this is all that I do crave.
For if your flowring heart should change
his color green,
Or you at length a Lady strange
of me be seen:
Then will my branch against his use
His color change for your refuse.
As Winters force can not deface
this branch his hue:
So let no change of love disgrace
your friendship true:
You were mine own and so be still,
So shall we live and love our fill.
Then may I think my self to be
well recompenst,
For wearing of the Tree that is
so well defenst
Against all weather that does fall,
When waywarde Winter spits his gall.
And when we meet, to try me true,
look on my Head,
And I will crave an oath of you
where Faith be fled:
So shall we both assured be
Both I of you, and you of me.
An Epitaph of the Lady Br.
Stay (gentle Friend) that passest by
and learn this lore of me,
That mortal things do live to die,
and die again to be.
For daily proof has daily taught
and yet does teach it plain,
That all our substance comes to naught,
and worldly wealth is vain.
No rawnsome may redeem thy flesh
from loathsome lumpes of soil,
The Worms will soon thy Beauty fresh
with greedy gripe dispoyle.
I that was erst of gentle blood
that never sufferd stain,
Have nothing but a winding shrowds
in stead of all my gain.
I twice was bound by solemn oath
unto a loving Make:
Yet it was my luck to bury both,
and eke a third to take.
The joy that forty years had grown
by those two husbands days,
In two years space was overthrown
and altered sundry ways.
As luck would not allow my choice,
so Death mislikte the same:
Those two agreed with common voice
my bondage too vnframe.
The Lady ( Br) quoth Fortune tho
her worship shall not loose:
Then she (quoth Death) shall have no mo,
nor other husband choose.
Thus did they both contend at once
who might the friendlist be:
Thus Death and Fortune for the nones
did make my body free.
Pray gentle Friend therefore for me,
to Mighty Jove on hie:
For as I am so thou shall be
since thou do live to die.
Trust never Fortunes fickle fate,
but Virtue still retain:
Thou may in time exchange estate,
yet Virtue will remain.
Of the time he first began to love and after how he forewent the same.
How may it be that Snow and Ise
engender heat?
Or how may Glare and Frost intise
a fervent sweat?
Or how may Summer season make
of heat a cold?
How may the Spring the leaves down shake
and trees unfold?
Though these too others seem full rare,
To me no news at all they are.
For I my self in Winter tide
when cold was rife,
Whote gleames of Cupid did abide
and storms of strife.
In frostie weather I was warm
and burning whot,
But when the Bees and Birds did swarm,
full cold God wot:
In Winter time began my love,
Which I in Summer did remove.
The assured promise of a constant Lover.
WHen Phoenix shall have many Makes,
And Fishes shun the Silver Lakes:
When Woulfes and Lambs yfeare shall play,
And Phoebus cease to shine by day:
When Grass on Marble stone shall groe,
And every man embrace his foe:
When Moles shall leave to dig the ground,
And Hares accord with hateful Hounde:
When Laurel leaves shall loose their hur,
And men of Crete be counted true:
When Vulcan shall be cold as Ise,
Coraebus eake approved wise:
When Pan shall pass Appollos skill,
And Fools of fancies have their fill:
When Hawks shall dread the sielie Foul,
And men esteem the nightish Owl:
When Pearl shall be of little price,
And golden Virtue friend to Vice:
When Fortune has no change in store,
Then will I false and not before.
Till all these Monsters come to pass
I am Timetes as I was.
My Love as long as life shall last,
Not forcing any Fortunes blast.
No threat, nor thraldom shall prevail
To cause my faith one jot to fail,
But as I was, so will I be,
A Lover and a Friend to thee.
The Pine to the Mariner.
O Man of little Wit,
What means this frantic fit,
To make thy Ship of me
That am a slender Tree,
Whom erie blast that blows
Full lightly overthrows?
Does this not move thy mind
That rage of roaring wind
Did beat my boughs agood
When erst I grue in Wood?
How can I here avoid
The foe that there anoyde?
Think thou now I am made
A Vessel for thy trade,
I shall be more at ease
Amid the flasshing Seas?
I fear if Aeole frown,
Both thou and I shall drown.
Again otherwise.
A Vassell to the wind
when erst I grew in wood,
How shall I favor find
now fleeting in the flood?
For there whilst reaching roots did hold
I thought I might be somewhat bold.
But now that I am cut
and framde another way,
And to this practice put
in danger cry day.
I fear the force of cruel foe,
my ribs are thin, my sides be low
But if thou venture life,
then I will hazard lim,
For thee is all my grief,
for lightly I shall swim:
Though top and tackle all be torn,
yet I aloft the surge am borne.
To an old Gentlewoman, that painted her face.
Leave off good Beroe now
to sleeke thy shriuled skin,
For Hecubes face will never be,
as Helens hue has bin.
Let Beauty go with youth,
renownce the glosing Glass,
^^ake Book in hand: that seemly Rose
(...) woxen withred Grass.
^^^ooue thy Pecocks plumes
thou cranck and curious Dame:
(...) other Trulls of tender years
resign the flagge of Fame.
Of one that had a great Nose.
Stand with thy Nose against
the Sun with open chaps,
And by thy teeth we shall discern
what it is a clock perhaps.
Of one whose Nose was greater than his hand.
O Proclus, it is in vain
that thou about do stand,
For well I see thou mindste to wipe
thy Nares with thy hand.
Truth is that though thou be
foul fisted out of frame:
Yet does this tossing Nose of thine
in bigness pass the same.
When neezing thou on Jove
for succor seemste to cry
Thou can not hear, thy Nose debarres
the noise to Ear to fly.
It beats back the sound,
it stands in middle place
Twixt Ear and Mouth, but sure it castes
a shade to all the face.
Of a Nightingale that flue to Colche to sit abroode.
THou sielie foul what means this foolish pain,
to fly to Colche too hatch thy chickins there?
A Mother thou may hap return again,
Medaea will destroy thy brood I fear.
For she that spared not to spoil her own,
Will she stand friend to Fowls yt are unknown?
Again of the Nightingale.
WHat (Philomela) means this fond intent
To hatch thy brood in fell Medaeas lap?
What? doste thou hope her rigor will relent
Toward thy Babes, that gave her own no pap?
But slew them all at once, and at a clap?
I wot not what thou meanste: unless that she
Should kill thy Brats, too make the Mother free.
Of a contrary marriage.
AN aged Trot and tough
did marry with a Lad:
Again, a Gallant Girl to.
her Spouse, a Graybeard had,
A monstrous match (God wot)
for others she does wed:
And he bestows his seed on ground
that lets it take no head.
In faith, a foolish choice,
for neither has his wish:
For tone does lack his wife, and to.
there feeds on filthy fish.
Of Drunkenness.
AT night when Ale is in,
like friends we part to bed:
In mororw graye when Ale is out,
then hatred is in head.
Again of Drunkenness.
MEn having quaft
are friendly ouernight:
In dawning dry
a man too man a spright.
Of the picture of a vain Rhetorician.
THis Rufe his Table is,
can nothing be more true:
If Rufus hold his peace, this piece
and he are one to vewe.
Of the fond discord of the two Theban brothers, Octocles and Polynices.
IN death you part the fire,
you cut the cruel flame:
If so you had divided Thebes
you might enioyde the same.
Of a marvelous deformed man.
TO draw the mind in Table to the sight
Is hard: to paint the lims is counted light:
But now in thee these two are nothing so,
For Nature splayes thy mind to open show.
We see by proof of thy unthrifty deeds,
The covert kind from whence this filth proceeds.
But who can paint those shapelesse lims of thine,
When each to vewe thy Carcass does repine?
A Myrrour of the fall of Pride.
SOmetime the Giants did rebel
against the mighty Jove,
They thought in Olymp Mount to dwell
and long for that they strove.
A hundred hands each Monster had
by course of curssed kind:
A stock so stubborn and so mad
I no where else can find.
Dame Tellus was their Mother thought
of pleasant Poets all,
By whom they would have brought to naught
the seat Olympicall.
First Briareus began the broyle
who took a hill in hand,
And laid it on another soil
that thereabout did stand:
Stll calling on his monstrous Mates
exhorting them the same,
And with the reast the Gnuffe debates
how stately Gods to tame.
Ossa was laid on Pyndus back.
and Pelion on hie:
And thus they thought to bring to sack
in time the starrie Sky.
They did envy the Gods the place
by nature them assignde:
And thought it meeter for a race
which Tellus bred by kind.
They would have had the highest throne
that Jove had long possessed:
And down they would the Gods have thrown
and Princely power represt.
At length the route began to rore
in making dreadful sound,
The like was never heard before
to Heaven from the ground.
Then Jupiter began to gaze
and look about the Sky,
And all the Gods were in a maze
the Monsters were so nie.
They callde a counsel then in haste
the Gods assembled tho:
And common sentence was at last
that mighty Jove should throw
His thunderbolt that Vulcan lame
prepared for the nonce,
Whereby he might eftsoone make tame
the haughty Giants bones.
Then might you see the Mountains fall
and hill from hill depart,
And monsters in the valley crawle
whom Thunder did subuart.
The Mountains were not raysde so quick
but down they fell as fast:
And Giants in a cluster thick
to Tellus fell at last.
Such plagues had pride in former time,
the Gods abhorred so
That mortal men should dare to clime
the Heavens hie to know.
And not alone the heavenly route
the lofty looks correct
Of such as prowdly go about
their Empire to reject:
But other Gods of meaner state
(of whom the Poets write)
Such pieuish Pecocks pride do hate
and seek revenge by might.
The grisly God whom floods obey
and drenching Seas embrace,
Who in the waters bears the sway
where Nereus shows his face:
Whom forces he by surge of Seas
into Charybdis cliues?
Or whom does Neptune most disease?
or whom to Scylla drives?
Not him that bears his Sails allow,
nor him that keeps the shore:
Ne yet the Bargeman that does row
with long and limber Oar.
Not those that haunt the Haven sure
and port of peril void,
They cannot Neptunes wrath procure
the Channel that avoid:
But those that void of carck and care
and fear of Neptunes ire,
Do hoise their Sails and never spare
to further their desire,
And do receive whole Gales of wind
from mighty Aeole sent:
Those, those are they by course of kind
that Neptune makes repent.
He spoils the Sails, and tackle tears,
the Mast it goes to wrack:
The Ribs they rent, the Shipmen fears
when Gables gin to crack.
Then whereto serves the Pilats pride
that hoyst his Sails so hie?
And where is he that fearde no tide
nor threatening from the Sky?
His pride procurde his fearful fate
and fortune that befell.
Which Neptune most of all does hate
as Shipmen know right well.
Let Giants fall and Shipmens case
a myrrour be therefore
To such as seek to hie a place,
for like shall be their lore.
Narcissus may example be
and myrrour to the proud,
By whom they may most plainly see
how pride has been allowde.
His beauty brave such lofty cheer
in him did breed in time:
That Gods themselves agreeued were
with such a heinous crime.
No loouing Less might him allure,
nor Dians Nymphs at all
By ought his friendship might procure:
but note ye well his fall.
In Summer time as Fortune would
his Fortune was to be
In open field, where no man could
his blazing beauty see.
At length in raunging to and fro
his fortune was to find
A Fountain fresh that there did flow
as Gods (I think) assignde.
He thought forthwith his thirst to quent
by pleasant travail got,
But there he found or ere he went
a greater drougth God wot.
In stooping down to take the taste
of Crystal waters theare,
(Unhappy Boy) had spide at last
a little Boy appear.
Whose beauty brave, and liking look
his fancy pleased so well,
That there himself the Boy forsook
and to a frenzy fell.
He had that he so fondly looude:
and yet it was not so:
And from himself he was remooude
that thence did never go.
He was the Boy that took the vewe,
he was the Boy espide,
And being both he neither knew,
such was the end of pride.
Then began he shed his tears a down,
then began he make his plaint:
And then at length he fell to ground
sore feebled all with faint.
His spirit that erst so proud was seen
converted into wind:
But of his Corpse a flower green
still there abode behind.
Narcissus callde (as Poets tell)
as Narcisse was before,
In token that to Narcisse fell
this most unhappy lore.
I could recite the histories
of many other more,
Whom pieuish pride the miseries
of Fortune forced to know.
But I of purpose will let pass
Apollos Bastard Son,
Who Phaeton ycleped was
when first his fame begone.
I mind not to rehearse at all
the charge he took in hand,
I wittingly omit his fall
into Eridan sand.
But this I say assuredly
had it not been for pride,
The Charret had not gone awrie
though Phaeton were guide.
But glory vain and want of skill
enforste his haughty heart,
Of Phoebe to crave to work his will
in ruling Phoebus Cart.
The like attempt took Icarus
from Creta that did fly
By wings of War with Dedalus,
when Icar slew to hie.
His Fathers words prevailed not
nor lesson taught before,
Till fained feathers were so whot
as he could fly no more.
For want of wings then began he clap
his breast with open arms
Till down he fell: such was his hap,
whose pride procurde his harms.
When wrestling winds from Aeole sent
befight themselves so long
That East against the West is bent,
and North puts South to wrong:
Then may you hear the Pine to crack
that bears his head so hie,
And lofty lugs go then to wrack
which seem to touch the Sky.
When Jove flings down his thundering bolts
our vices to redress,
They batter down the highest holts
and touch not once the less.
The Cotte is surer then the Hall
in proof we daily see:
For highest things do soonest fall
from their felicitee.
What makes the Phaenix flame with fire
a Bird so rare in sight?
What causes him not to retire
from Phoebus burning light?
In faith if he would live below
as Birds Dame Nature tought,
The Esterlings should never know
their Phoenix burnt so often.
All ye therefore that surety love
and would not have a fall,
From you the Peacocks pride remove
and trust not Fortunes Ball.
Let Phaetons fate be fearde of you
and Icars lot also:
Remember that the Pine does rue
that he so high does grow.
Of the Clock and the Cock.
GOod reason thou allow
one letter more to me
Than to the Cock: For Cocks do sleept
when Clocks do wake for thee.
Of a Tailor.
THough Tailor cut thy garment out of frame,
And strie thy stuff by sowing it arms:
Yet must we say the Tailor makes the Iame,
To make and mar is one with themywis.
The Lover finding his Love flitted from wonted troth leaves to write in praise
of her.
THough clean contrary be my Verse
to those I wrote before,
Yet let not retchlesse doom accuse
my wandering wits the more.
As time does shape and show (they say)
so ought our style to frame,
In Summer, Sun, we need no fire,
yet winter asks flame:
So I that erst found cause of sport
and matter to rejoice,
Of force by fancy was procurde
to use a gladsome voice.
And now since deep despair has drencht
my hope, I will assay
To turn my tune and change my cheer
and leave my woonted lay.
Not far unlike the chirping Foul
in Summer that does sing,
And during Winter hides his head
till next return of Spring.
They say when altered is the cause
of force effect does sue:
As new repair of better blood
does cause a Hawke to mue.
Though Aetna burn by kindly course
and belke out fire with fume:
When Sulpher vain is clean extinct
the fire will consume.
Whereby I may conclude aright
that each Effect must be
As is his Cause: so fruit ensues
the nature of the Tree.
Then I of force must shape my style
as matter is I write:
Unless I would be thought to match
a Fawcon with a Kite.
When wind and wave at Sea do rore
that Barck is in distress,
Then time requires that shipmen should
their Tackles all address.
Then crooked Ancors must be cast
the shaken Ship to stay
From sincking Sands, and ruthlesse Rocks
that Shipmen often affray.
No sooner Triton blows his Trumpe
and swolen waters quails,
And Aeole makes his winds retire:
but hoyse they up the sails.
Then fleet they forward in the flood,
then cut they waves in twain:
Then launch they on (as erst they did)
with all their might and maine;
So I hereafter must assay
my woonted tune to change
As time requires, and I in love
shall find my Lady strange.
If she be one of Cresids crew
and swerve her former Hest,
No Lucrece must I term her then,
for that were but a jest.
Or if she false her fixed faith,
Ulysses wives renown
Unsitting is for her whose love
endures but a stowne.
Wherefore, I will as time shall shape
and she her love prolong,
Apply my Pen, and tell the troth
as best I may in Song.
He sorrows other to have the fruits of his service.
SOme men would look to have
a recompense of pain,
And Reason wills it so to be
unless we list to feign:
Some would expect for love
to have unfeigned heart,
And think it but a fit reward
for such a good defart.
But I (unhappy Wight)
that spend my love in vain,
Do seek for succor at her hands
while other get the gain.
As thirsty ground does gape
to swallow in the shoure:
Even so fare I poor Harpalus
whom Cupids pains devour.
I hold the Hiue in hand
and pain my self thereby,
While other eat the hidden foods
that are not half so dry.
I plough the soil with pain
and cast my seed thereon:
And other come that sheare the sheaues
and laugh when I am gone.
Mine is the Winters toil,
and theirs the Summers gain:
The Harvest falls out too their share
that felt no part of pain.
I bear the pinching yoke
and burden on my back,
And other drive when I must draw,
and thus I go to wrack.
I fast when other feed,
I thirst when other drinck:
I mourn when they triumph for joy,
they swim when I must sinck.
They have the hoped gain
whiles I the loss endure:
They whole at heart, whilst I my grief
by no means can recure.
They shroud themselves in shade,
I sit in open Sun:
They leap as Lambs in lusty Leaze,
I lie as one vndunne.
They taste their nightly rest,
my troubled head does wake:
I toss and turn from side to side
while they their pleasure take.
I would, but they enjoy,
I crave that is debard,
They have: what will you more I say?
their service is prefard.
Thus I procure my woe
by framing them their joy:
In seeking how to salve my sore
I breed my chief annoy.
So sheep with wool are clad
their Masters have the gain,
So Birds do build their Nests on Brakes
and put themselves to pain,
But other taste the fruit
when so their brood is hatched:
The Nest remains, the Birds are gone,
the Chickens are dispatched.
So Bees for Honnie toil
in fleeing too and fro,
And silly wretches take great pains
for whom they little know.
I think it is procurde
by griesly Gods above
That some should gape, and other gain
the fruit of others love.
But sure if Woman's will
be forger of my woe,
And not the mighty Gods ordain
my destnie to be so:
Then must I needs complain
and curse their cruel kind,
That in requital of good will
do show themselves unkind.
But whether be the cause,
hereafter I intend
To fawn on them that force on me,
and bow when other bend.
This one abuse shall make
me take the better heed
On whom I fix my fancy fast,
or make a friend in deed.
The Lover seeing himself abusde, renounceth Love.
THough men account it shame
and folly to repent,
Or grutcht good will that was bestowde
when naught save faith was meant:
Yet can they not deny
but if the knot be burst,
Then may we show our selves unkind
that friendly were at furst.
He runs an endless race
that never turns again,
And he a fonded Lover is
that wastes his love in vain.
Naught can he judge of hues,
that can not see when Guile
In place of friendship cloakes her self
in form of forged wile.
And he that plainly sees
the Trap before his eye
And will not shun from peril, it is
no matter though he die.
I tell my tale by proof
I speak it not by rot,
To love a subtle Less of late
was fallen to my lot.
On whom I set such store
such comfort and delight,
As life it was to see her face,
a death to want her sight.
So I might do the thing
that might abridge her smart,
And bannish all annoy that grue
by froward fortunes Art:
What danger would I dread?
or peril seem to shun?
None that is here bylow on earth
or subject to the Sun.
To show my self a Friend
to her, I was my Foe:
She was the only Idol whom
I honorde here below.
This is (thought I) the same
that was Ulysses wife:
Who in the absence of her Make
did lead a doleful life.
Or else it is she at least
whom Tarquyn did enforce
By beastly rape with piercing sword
so to for do her Corse.
But such is her abuse
so froward eke her grace,
As love it may no longer last
since friendship hides his face.
I did not well advise
I built on sincking Sand.
And when I thought she looude me best
she bore me but in hand.
Where I had thought a Port
and Haven sure to be:
There found I hap and dreadful death,
as gazers on may see.
As Mouse that treades the trap
in hope to find repast,
And bites the bread that breeds his bane
and is intrapped fast:
Like was my doleful case
that fed upon my woe,
Till now Repentance wills me all
such fancies to forgo.
And (thanked be good hap)
now once again I fleet
And swim aloft, that sanck of late
fast hampred by the feet.
Now is my fortune good
so Fortune grant it last:
And I as happy as the best
now stormy clouds are past,
I find the bottom firm
and stable where I pass,
There are no haughty Rocks at hand
ne yet no ground of Glass.
Good Ancor hold I have
so I may use it still,
I am no more a bounden Thrall
but free I live at will.
But that which most torments
my mind, and reaues my joy.
Is, for I serude a fickle Wench
that bred me this annoy,
But Gods forgive my guilt
and time misspent before
And I will be a silly Sot
of Cupids crew no more.
Against the Ielous heads that always have Lovers in suspect.
WHen Ielous Juno saw her mighty Make
Had Io turnde into a brutish kind
More covertly of her his lust to take:
To work her will and all his frawd to find
She craude the Cow in gift at Jove his hand,
Who could not well his Sisters suit withstand.
When yielded was her boon and Hest fulfillde
To Argus charge committed was the Cow,
For he could wake so well, him Juno willde
To watch the Beast with never sleeping browe:
With hundredth eyes that hateful Hierds head
Was decked, some watched when some to sleep were led.
So warded he by day, so wakte by night
And did Dame Iunos will accomplish so,
As neither Jove might once delude his sight,
Nor Io part her pointed pasture fro:
His staring eyes on Io still were bent,
He marked her march, and sude her as she went.
Till Jove at length to ruth and pity mooude
To see the spiteful hate that Argus bare
To her, whom he so fervently had looude
And who for him abode such endless care:
His fethred Son Cylenus sent from Skies
To reaue the careful Clown his watchful eyes.
Who to fulfill his Lord and Fathers Hest
Took charmed Rod in hand and Pipe to play,
And gyrt him with a sword as lykte him best
And to the field he flue where Argus lay
Disguised like a shepherd in his weed
That he his purpose might the better speed.
When each had other salued in his sort,
To brag upon his Pipe the Clown begoon,
And said, that for that noise and gallant sport
All other mirthes and maygames he would shoon,
His only joy was on his Pipe to play:
And then to blow the Rustic did assaye.
In fine when Argus had his cunning showde,
And each to other chatted had a space
Of this and that as was befalne abroad,
Mercurius took his Pipe from out his cafe
And thereon playde he so passing well,
As most of Argus eyes to slumber fell.
And as they slept with charmed Rod he stroke
The drowsy Dolt to keep him in that plight,
And playde so long till time he did provoke
All Argus eyes to bid the beast God night:
Whom when he saw in such a slumber led,
He stole the Cow, and swapt of Argus head.
Such was the fine of his dispitous hate,
Such was the boon and guerdon of his hire,
And all the good the careful Coward gate
For seeking to debar the Gods desire:
A fit reward for such a good desert,
The Cowarde might have playde a wiser part.
God send the like and worse to such as use
(As Argus did) with ever waking eye
The blameless sort of Lovers to abuse,
That always ready are and pressed to pry
The purpose to bewray and covert toys
Of faithful friends, and bar their blissful joys.
I trust there will be found in time of need
A Mercury with charmed Twig in hand
And pleasant Pipe, their waking eyes to feed
With drowste dumps, their purpose to withstand:
That jealous heads may learn to be wies
For fear they lose (as Argus did) their eyes
For Cupid takes disdain and scorn to see
His Thralls abusde in such unseemly sort,
Who seek no greedy gain nor filthy fee,
But pleasant play, and Venus sugared sport:
A slender hire (God wot) to quite the pain
That Lovers bide, or they their love attain.
That it is hurtful to conceal secrets from our Friends.
A Smart in silence kept
(as Ovid does express)
Does more torment the payned man
than him that seeks redress.
For then it respite takes,
and leisure to procure
Such mischief as for want of help
the longer does endure.
As if thou set no salve
where ranckleth swelling sore,
It will in further process pain,
and thee torment the more.
I sundry times have seen
a wound that erst was small,
In time for want of Surgions sight
to greater mischief fall:
And eke the balefull blow
so grievous that was thought,
Full quickly curde by Surgions slight
if he were quickly sought.
So fares it by man,
that keeps in covert breast
The pinching pain that breeds within,
increasing great vnreast;
That never will disclose
the secret of his heart,
But rather suffer fervent fits
and deeper piercing smart.
For why was friendship found
and quickly put in ure,
But that the one of thothers help
should think himself full sure?
Why are they like in mind
and one in erie part?
Why are they two in bodies twain
possessing but one heart?
And why does one mislike,
that so offendes his Feere,
But that they two are one in deed
it plainly might appear?
Did Tullie ever dread
his secrets to disclose
To Atticus his loving Friend,
in whom he did repose
Such credit and such trust
and in himself he might,
To whom full often with painful Pen
this Tullie did indight?
What ever Theseus thought
Perythous could tell,
With weary travel that pursude
his loving friend to Hell.
Was Damon dainty found
to Pythias at all,
For whom he would with Tyran staide
as pledge to live in thrall?
In Pylades was naught
but that Orestes knew,
Who privy was from time to time
how care or comfort grew.
Gysippus felt no grief
but Titus boade the same:
And where that Titus found relief
their Gysippe had his game.
When Laelius did laugh
then Scipio did joy:
And what Menetus Son mislikte
Achylles did annoy.
Aeurialus his thoughts
and secrets of his heart
To Nysus would declare at large,
were they of joy or smart.
All these conjoined were
in surest league of love,
Whom neither Fortune good or bad,
nor Death might once remove.
They would not think in mind
nor practice that at all:
But to that same their trusty Friends
they would in counsel call.
All those therefore that wish
their inward pains redress,
Must to their most assured Friend
it outwardly express.
So may they chance to find
a salve for secret sore,
Which otherwise in covert kept
will soon increase to more.
Of the diverse and contrary passions and affections of his Love.
TO Physic those that long have gone
and spent their time in grief,
Affirm that Pacients in their pains
will shun their best relief.
They will refuse the Tysants taste
and wholesome drinks despise,
Which to recure diseases fell
Phisttions did devise:
But when they be debard the same
which so they shunde before,
They cry and call for Tysants then
as sovereign for their sore.
Such is the wayward guise of those
with pangues that are oppressed,
They wish for that they never had,
and shun that they possessed.
I may to them right well compare
the Lovers diverse thought,
That likes, and then mislikes again
that they long erst had sought.
They will not, when they may, enjoy
their hearts desired choice:
They then defy, they then detest
with loud and loathsome voice.
They will refuse when time does serve,
but when such time is gone,
They sigh and schreach with mournful cry
and make a ruthful moan.
They little think that Time has wings
or knows how to fly:
They hope to have it still at hand
that swiftly passes bie.
They think that Time will tarry them
and for their fancy stay,
But Time in little time is gone
it fleeteth fast away.
So stands the fool by fleeting flood
and looks for a turn:
But River runs and still will run
and never shape return.
What? do they hope that beauties glass
will still continue bright?
Nay, when the day is gone and past
by course appeeres the night.
For crooked age his woonted trade
is for to plough the face
With wrinckled furrows, that before
was chief of Beauties grace.
Perhaps they think that men are mad,
and once intrapt in love
Will never strive to break the snare
nor never to remove.
No Fowler that had wily Wit
but will foresee such hap,
That Birds will always buske and bate
and escape the Fowlers Trap.
And if their fortune favor so,
then who does mount so hie
As those that guilefull Pitfall took
prepared for to die?
What Fi^^ does fleet so fast as that
which lately hangde on hook?
By happy hap if he escape,
he will not backwarde look.
Take time therefore thou foolish Feeme,
whilst Time does serve so well:
For Time away as fast does flee
as any sound of Bell.
And thou perhaps in after Time
when Time is past and gone,
Shall lie lamenting loss of Time
as cold as any stone.
Yet were thou better take thy time
whilst yet thy Beauty serves,
For Beauty as the Flower fades
whom lack of Phoebus sterues.
Of Dido and the truth of her death.
J Dido and the Queen of Carthage ground,
Whose lims thou see so lively set to sight:
Such one I was, but never to be found
So far in love as Vergill seems to wright,
I liude not so in lust and foul delight.
For neither he that wandering Duke of Troie
Knew me, nor yet at Lybie land ariude:
But to escape Iarbos that did noie
Me sore, of life my Carcass I depriude,
To keep my Hest that he would tho have riude.
No storm of love, or dolor made me die,
I slew my self to save my Sheet of shame
Wherein good Sycheus wrapped me perdie:
Then Vergill then the greater be thy blame,
That so by love do breed my foul defame.
Of Venus in Armor.
IN complete Pallas saw
the Lady Venus stand:
Who said, let Paris now be judge
encounter we with hand.
Replide the Goddess: what?
scornste thou in Armor me,
That naked erst in Ida Mount
so foylde and conquerde thee?
Of a Hare complaining of the hatred of Dogs.
THe scenting Hounds pursude
the hasty Hare of foot:
The silly Beast to escape the Dogs
did iumpe upon a root.
The rotten scrag it burst,
from Cliffe to Seas he fell:
Then cride the Hare: unhappy me,
for now perceive I well
Both land and Sea pursue
and hate the hurtlesse Hare:
And cake the dogged Skies aloft,
if so the Dog be their.
To one that painted Echo.
THou witles wight, what means this mad intent
To draw my face and form, unknown to thee?
What meanste thou so for to molesten me?
Whom never Cie beheld, nor man could see?
Daughter to talking tongue, and Air am I,
My Mother is nothing when things are waide:
I am a voice without the bodies aid.
When all the tale is told and sentence said,
Then I recite the latter word afreshe
In mocking sort and counterfayting wies:
Within your ears my chiefest harbor lies,
There do I woonne, not seen with mortal eyes.
And more to tell and farther to proceed,
I Echo height of men below in ground:
If thou will draw my Counterfeit in deed,
Then must thou paint (O Painter) but a sound.
To a cruel Dame for grace and pity.
AS I do lack the skill
to show my faithful heart:
So do you want good will
too rue your Lovers smart.
The greater is my fire
the lesser is your heat:
The more that I desire
the less you seem to sweat.
O quench not so the Coal
of this my faithful flame,
With nayes thou froward soul,
let yeas increase the same.
Let us at length agree
whom Cupid made by law
Each others friend to be
in fancies yoke to draw.
If I do play my part
at any time amiss,
Then do bestow thy heart
where greater Friendship is.
But if in true good will
I bear my self upright,
Let me enjoy thee still
my service too requight.
Go thou my fiery Dart
of scalding whote desire
To pierre her ysie heart
and set her breast on fire.
That I may both prolong
my painful pyning days,
And eke auendge her wrong
that pain for pleasure pays.
I never saw the stone
but often drops would wast:
Nor Dame but daily moan
would make her yield at last.
To a Gentlewoman from whom he took a Ring.
WHat needs this frowning face?
what means your look so coye?
Is all this for a Ring,
a trifle and a toye?
What though I rest your Ring?
I took it not to keep:
Therefore you need the less
in such dispite to weep.
For Cupid shall be judge
and Vmpire in this case,
Or who by hap shall next
approach into this place.
You took from me my heart,
I caught from you a Ring:
Whose is the greatest loss?
where ought the grief to spring?
Keep you as well my heart,
as I will keep your Ring,
And you shall judge at last
that you have lost nothing.
For if a Friendly heart
so stuffed with staide love,
In value do not pass
the Ring you may reprove
The reauing of the same,
and I of force must say
That I deserude the blame
who took your Ring away.
But what if you do wreake
your malice on my heart?
Then give me leave to think
you guilty for your part.
And when so ere I yield
to you your Ring again,
Restore me up my heart
that now you put to pain.
For so we both be pleased,
to say we may be bold
That neither to the loss
of us has bought or sold.
The Lover blames his Tongue that failed to utter his suit in time of need.
FOrcause I still preferde the truth before
Shameless untruth, and loathsome leesings lore,
I find my self ill recompenst therefore
Off thee my Tongue.
For good desert and guiding thee aright,
That thou for aye might live deuoide of spite,
I reap but shame, and lack my chief delight
For silence kept.
When happy hap by hap aduaunst my case,
And brought me to my Lady face to face,
Where I her Corpse in safety might embrace,
Thou heldst thy peace.
Thou madste my voice to cleave amids my throat,
And suit to cease vnluckylie (God wot)
Thou would not speak, tho you had quite forgote
My hearts behest.
My heart by thee suspected was of guile,
For cause thou ceast to use a loving style,
And words to forge and frame with finest file
As Lovers wont.
Thou madste my blood fro paled face to start,
And fly to seek some succor of the heart,
That wounded was long erst with dreadful dart
Off Cupids Bow.
And thou as cold as any Marble stone
When from my face the chillie blood was gone,
Could not devise the way to make my moan
By words appear.
And (ye my tears) that woonted were to flow
And stream adowne as fast as thawed Snow,
Were stopped, as then ye had no power to show
A Lovers suit.
My sighs that erst were wont to dim the Sky,
And cause a fume by force of flame to fly,
Were tho as slack, as Wells of weeping dry
Too show my Love.
The heart that lay incombred all within
Had fainted quite had not by looks ybin:
For they declarde the case my heart was in
By tongues untroth.
That all things are as they are used.
WAs never ought by Natures Art
Or cunning skill so wisely wrought,
But Man by practice might conuart
Too worser use then Nature thought.
Ne yet was ever thing so ill
Or may be of so small a prise,
But man may better it by skill
And change his sort by sound advise.
So that by proof it may be seen
That all things are as is their use,
And man may alter Nature cleene,
And things corrupt by his abuse.
What better may be found than flame,
Too Nature that does succor pay?
Yet we do often abuse the same
In bringing buildings to decaie.
For those that mind to put in ure
Their malice, mooude to wrath and ire:
To wreake their mischief, will be sure
Too spill and spoil thy house with fire.
So Physic that does serve for ease
And to recure the grieved soul,
The painful Patient may disease,
And make him sick that erst was whole.
The true Man and the Thief are leeke
For sword does serve them both at need,
Save one by it does safety seek
And the other of the spoil to speed.
As Law and learning does redress
That otherwise would go to wrack:
Even so does it often times oppress
And bring the true man to the rack.
Though Poison pain the drinker sore
By boiling in his fainting breast,
Yet is it not refusde therefore,
For cause sometime it breeds reast:
And mixed with Medicines of proof
According to Machaons Art,
Does serve right well for our behoof
And succor sends to dying heart.
Yet these and other things were made
By Nature for the better use,
But we of custom take a trade
By wilful will them to abuse.
So nothing is by kind so void
Of vice, and with such virtue fraught,
But it by us may be anoide,
And brought in trackt of time too naught
Again there is not that so ill
Bylowe the Lamp of Phoebus light,
But man may better if he will
Apply his wit to make it right.
The Lover excuses himself for renowncing his Love and Lady, imputing the
same to his fate and constellation.
THough Dydo blamde Aeneas truth
for leaving Carthage shore,
Where he well entertainde had been,
and like a Prince before:
Though Theseus were unthrifty thought
and of a cruel race,
That in reward of death escapte
by Aryadnas Lace,
Amid the desert woods so wild
his loouing Less forsook,
Whom by good hap and luckie lore
the drowsy Bacchus took.
Yet if the Judges in this case
their verdit yield aright,
Nor Theseus nor Aeneas fact
deserve such endless spite,
As waywarde Women stirde to wrath
bear fixed fast in mind,
Still seeking ways to wreake their ire
upon Aeneas kind.
For neither lack of liking love,
nor hope of greater gain,
Nor fickle fancies force us men
to break off friendships chain.
They loath not that they looude before,
they hate not things possessed:
Some other weighty cause they have
of change, as may be gest.
And waying with my self each one,
I can none fitter find,
Than that to men such blessed hap
is by the Gods assignde.
The golden Stars that guide their age,
and Planets will them so:
And Gods (the Rulers of their race)
procure them to forgo
Their forged faith and plighted truth,
with promise made so sure,
That is too seeming strong as Steel,
and likely to endure.
For did not mighty Jove himself
the swift Cyllenus send
To will the Troyan Prince in haste
into Italia bend
And leave the lyked land so well,
and Carthage Queen forsake,
That made him owner of her heart,
and all that she could make?
And such was Theseus lot perdie,
so hard the Maidens hap,
That she in desert should be left
and caught in Bacchus trap.
Should Jason be proclaimde and cride
a Traitor to the Skies
For that he Medea left at last
by whom he wan the Flise?
No, such was Oetes Daughters chance
in Cradle her assignde,
And Iasans Birthstarre forced the Greek
to show himself unkind:
For if rewards might bind so fast,
and knit the knot so sure,
Their faith (no doubt) and lincked love
should then of force endure.
For Dido gave him Carthage Kayes,
the wealth, and soil withal:
Those other two preserude their lives
that else had liude in thrall.
Then since streaming Stars procure,
and fatal powers agree,
And stawled Gods do condescend
that I my friendship flee:
And reaue your Bells and cast you off
to live in haggards wies,
That for no private stale do care,
but love to range the Skies:
I must not seem then to rebel
nor secret Treason forge,
But change my choice, and leave my love
and fancies fond disgorge.
I crave of Cupid Lord of love
a pardon for the same,
For that I now reject his laws
and quite renownce his game.
Of Lady Venus, that having lost her Son Cupid God of Love, and desirous to
understand of him again, declares by the way the nature of Love and affections
of the same, by pretty description as follows.
WHat time the Lady Venus sought her little Son
That Cupid hight, and found him not, she thus begone
My friends (quoth she) if any chance in open street
Or crossing paths, yt wandering amorous Elfe to meet,
That Runnagate (I say) is mine: who so by hap
Shall first bring tidings of the Boy, in Venus lap
Is sure to sit, and have in price of taken pain.
A sugared kiss. But he that brings him home again,
A busse? yea not a busse alone doubtless shall have
But like a Friend I will entreat him passing brave.
I tell you it is a proper youth. Mark every Lun
And member of my straid Son that is so trim.
Not sallow white his body is, but like to flame,
A fierce and fiery roling eye sets out the same.
A mischievous wily heart in Breast the Boy does bear,
But yet his words are Honnie like and sweet to ear.
His talking tongue and meaning mind asunder go.
Smooth filed style for little cost he will bestow.
But being once inflamde with ire and raging wrath,
A cruel canckred dogged heart the Vrchin has.
False Foxely subtle Boy, and glosing lying Lad,
He sports to outward sight, but inward chafes like mad.
A curled Sconce he has, with angry frowning browe.
A little hand, yet Dart a cruel way can throw.
To shadie A cheron sometime he flings the same,
And deepest damp of hollow Hell those Impes to tame.
Upon his Carcass not a cloth, but naked he
Of garments goes, his mind is wrapped, and not to see.
Much like a fethred Foul he flies, and wags his wings
Now here now there: ye man sometime this Miser wrings
Sometimes again the Less to love he does enforce,
Of neither kind, nor man nor maid, he has remorce:
A little Bow the Boy does bear in tender hand,
And in the same an Arrow nockt to string does stand.
A slender Shaft, yet such a one as far will fly,
And being shot from Cupids Bow will reach the Sky.
A pretty golden Quiver hangs there albehinde
Upon his back, wherein who so does look, shall find
A sort of sharp and lurching shafts, unhappy Boy
Wherewith his Lady Mother eke he does annoy
Sometimes: but most of all the foolish fretting Elfe
In cruel wife does cruelly torment and vex himself.
Do beat the Boy and spare him not at all, if thou
On him do chance to light: although from childish brow
And moysted eyes the trickling tears like floods distill,
Believe him not, for chiefly then beguile he will.
Not if he smile unloose his pyniond arms take heed,
With pleasant home words though he thine ears dos feed
And crave a kiss, beware thou kiss him not at all:
For in his lips vile venom lurcks, and bitter Gall.
Or if with friendly face he seem to yield his Bow
And shafts to thee, his proferde gifts (my Friend) forgo
Touch not with tender hand the subtle flattring Dart
Of Love, for fear the fire thereof do make thee smart.
Where this that I have said be true,
Ye Lovers I appeal to you.
For ye do know Cupidos toys,
Ye feel his smarts, ye taste his joys.
A fickle foolish God to serve,
I term him as he does deserve.
Of the cruel hatred of Stepmothers.
THe Son in law his Stepdame being dead,
Began her Hierce with Garlands to commend:
Mean while there fell a stone upon his head
From out the Tomb that brought the Boy abed,
A proof that Stepdames hate has never end.
Again.
GLad was ye son of frowning Beldams death,
To witness joy to deck her Tomb began trudge:
A piece of Marbell fell and reft his breath
As he (good Lad) stood strewing flowers beneath,
A sign ye Death dawnts not the mothers grudge.
To Cupid for revenge of his unkind and cruel Love. Declaring his faithful
service and true heart both to the God of Love and his Lady.
IF I had been in Troyan ground
When Lady Venus took her wound:
IF I in Greekish camp had been,
Or clad in armor had been seen:
If Hector had by me been slain,
Or Prince Aeneas put to pain:
If I the Machin huge had brought,
By Grecian guile so falsely wrought,
Or raised it above the wall,
Of Troie that procurde the fall:
Then could I not thee ( Cupid) blame,
If thou did put me to this shame.
But I have always been as true
To thee and thine in order due,
As ever was there any Wight,
That faith and truth to Cupid plight.
I never yet despise thy law,
But aye of thee did stand in awe:
I never callde thee Bussard blind,
I no such fault in thee did find,
But thought my time well spent to be
That I imploide in serving thee.
I wiste thou were of force and power
To conquer Princes in an hour
When thou retaindst me as thy man
I thought my self most happy than.
Since this is true that I have said,
Good Cupid let me have thy aid,
Help me to wreake my wrath aright
And succor me to work my spite.
To thee it appertains of due
Him to assist that is so true:
And thou of reason should torment
Such as by wilful will are bent
To triumph over those that serve
Thee in the field, and never swerue,
Go bend thy Bow with hasty speed,
And make her Tigers heart to bleed.
Cause her that little sets by me,
Yet still to stand in awe of thee.
Let her perceive thy fervent fire,
And what thou art in raging ire,
Now show thy self no man to be,
Let her a God both feel and see.
She forces not my cutting pain,
Her vowed oaths she ways as vain.
She sits in peace at quiet rest,
And scorns at me so dispossessed.
She laughes at thee, and mocks thy might,
Thou art not Cupid in her sight.
She spites at me without cause why,
She forces not although I die.
I am her captive bound in Give
And dare not once for life to strive.
The more to thee I call and cry,
To rid me from this cruelty,
The more she seeks to work her ire,
The more she burns with scalding fire.
And all for Cupids sake I bide,
From whose decrees I do not glide.
Wherefore (I say) go bend thy Bow,
And to her heart an Arrow throw:
That Dart which breaks hearts of flint
And gives the cruel crasing dint,
Upon her crabbed breast bestow,
That she thy force and power may know:
That she a Myrrour may be known
To such as be thy deadly fone,
So shall they good example take,
How to abuse men for thy sake.
Let her (good Cupid) understand,
That I am thine both heart and hand.
And to play quittance force a fire,
That she may fry with whote desire
Of me, whom erst she put to pain,
And this is all that I would gain.
An Answer to his Lady, that willed him that absence should not breed
forgetfulness.
THough Noble Surrey said
that absence woonders frame,
And makes things out of sight forgot,
and thereof takes his name:
Though some there are that force
but on their pleasures pressed,
Unmindful of their plighted truth
and falsely forged hest:
Yet will I not approve
me guilty of this crime,
Ne break the friendship late begoon
as you shall try in time.
No distance of the place
shall reaue thee from my breast:
Not fawning chance, nor frowning hap
shall make me swerve my Hest.
As soon may Phoebus frame
his fiery Steades to roon
Their race from path they woonted were,
and end where they begoon:
As soon shall Saturn cease
his bended broowes to show,
And frowning face to friendly Stars
that in their Circles go:
As soon the Tiger tame
and Lion shall you find:
And brutish beasts that savage were
shall swerve their bedlam kind:
As soon the frost shall flame,
and Aetna cease to burn,
And restless Rivers to their springs
and Fountains shall return;
As absence breed debate,
or want of sight procure
Our faithful friendships writh awrie
whilst lively breath endure.
As soon I will commit
my self to Lethes lake
As the (sweet friend) whom I a Friend
have chose for virtues sake.
How may a man forget
the coal that burns within?
Augmenting still his secret sore
by piercing fell and skin?
May Martirs cease to mourn
or think of torments pressed,
Whilst pain to pain is added aie
to further their unrest?
May Shipmen in distress
at pleasure of the wind
Tossed too and fro by surge of Seas
that they in tempest find,
Forget Neptunus rage
or blustering Borias blast,
When Cables are in sunder cracked,
and tackle rent from Mast?
Ne may I (Friend) forget
(unless I would but feign)
The salve that does recure my sore
and heales the scarre again.
I send thee by the wind
ten thousand sighs a day,
Which dim the Skies with clowdie smoke
as they do pass away.
Often gazing on the Sun
I count Apollo blessed,
For that he vewes thee once aday
in passing to the West.
Oh that I had his power
and blasing Lamp of light
Then thou my Friend should stand asurde
to never see the night.
But since it is not so,
content thy self a while:
And with remembrance of thy Friend
the loathsome time begile.
Till Fortune do agree
that we shall meet again:
For then shall presence breed our joys
whom absence put to pain.
And of my old good will
(good Friend) thy self assure
Have no distrust, my love shall last
as long as life shall dure.
Of a Thracyan that was drownde by playing on the Ise.
A Thracyan Boy well tipled all the day
Upon a frozen Spring did sport and play,
The slipper Ise with hieft of bodies sway
On sudden brake, and swapt his head away:
It swam aloft, bylowe the Carcas lay.
The Mother came and bore the head away:
When she did bury it thus began she say.
This brought I forth in flame his Hierce to have,
The rest amids the flood to find a grave.
The Lover hoping in May to have had redress of his woes, and yet fowly
missing his purpose, bewailes his cruel hap.
MOu that in May have bathde in blis
And found a salve to ease your sore:
Do May obseruaunce, Reason is
That May should honored be therefore.
Awake out of your drowsy sleep
And leave your tender Beds of Down,
Of Cupids Laws that taken keep
With Summer flowers deck your Crown.
As soon as Venus Star does show
That brings the dawning on his back
And cheerful light begins to grow
By putting of his Foe to wrack:
Repair to hear the wedded Makes
And late ycoupled in a knote,
The Nightingale that sits in Brakes
And tells of Tereus truth by note:
The Thrussell, with the Turtle Dove,
The little Robin eke yfeare
That make rehearsal of their love,
Make haste (I say) that ye were theare.
Into the fields where Dian dwells
With Nymphs enuirond round about,
Haste ye to dance about the Wels,
A fit pastime for such a rout.
Let them do this that have receiude
In May the hire of hoped grace:
But I as one that am bereaude
Of blissful state, will hide my face,
And doole my days with ruthful voice
As fits a retchlesse Wight to do:
Since now it lies not in my choice
To quite me from this cursed woe.
I harbor in my breast a thought
Which now is turnde another way,
That pleasant May would me ybrought
From Scylla to a better bay.
Since all (quoth I) that Nature made,
And placed here in earth bylowe,
When Spring returns, of woonted trade
Do banish grief that erst did grow,
And changes eke the churlish cheer
And frowning face of Tellus hew,
With vernant flowers that appear
To clad the soil with mantell new:
Since Snakes do cast their shriueled skins,
And Bucks hang up their heads on pale,
Since frisking Fishes lose their finnes,
And glide with new repaired scale:
Then I of force with greedy eye
Must hope to find to ease my smart,
Since each anoy in Spring does die,
And cares to comfort do conuart.
Then I (quoth I) shall reach the port
And fast mine Aucker on the ground,
Where lies my pleasure and disport
Where is my surety to be found:
There shall my beaten Bark have rode,
And I for service done be paid,
My sorrows quite shall be unload,
Even thus unto my self I said.
But (out alas) it falls not so,
May is to me a Month of moan,
In May though others comfort gro,
My seeds of grief are surely sown.
My bitter Tears for water serve
Wherewith the Garden of my breast
I moist, for fear the seeds should sterue,
And thus I frame mine own unrest.
Let others then that feelen joy
Extole the merry Month of May,
And I that tasted have annoy,
In praise thereof will nothing say.
But wish return of winters war
And blustering force of Borias force again.
These sower seeds of woe to mar
By force of wind and wisking rain.
And so perhaps by better fate
At next return of Spring, I may
By changing of my former state
Cast off my care, and change my lay.
To a fickle and unconstant Dame, a friendly warning.
WHat may I think of you (my Fawlcon free)
That having hood, lines, buets, bells of me,
And woonted erst when I my game did spring
To fly so well and make such nimble wing,
As might no Foul for weightnesse well compare
With thee, thou were a Bird so passing rare:
What may I deem of thee (fair Fawlcon) now,
That neither to my lure nor train wilt bow.
But this that when my back is turnde and gone,
Another gives thee rumpes to tire upon.
Well wanton well, if you were wise in deed
You would regard the fist whereon you feed.
You would the Horse devouring Crow refuse,
And gorge your self with flesh more fine to choose.
I wish thee this for woonted old good will
To fly more high, for fear the stowping will
Breed him, that now does keep thee, out of love
And think his Fawlcon will a Bussard prove.
Which if he deem, or do suspect at all,
He will abate thy flesh, and make thee fall.
So that of force thou shall enforced be
Too do by him as now thou do by me:
That is to leave the Keeper, and away,
Fawlcon take heed, for this is true I say.
The Lover to his Lady that gafed much up to the Skies.
MY Girl, thou gazest much
upon the golden Skies:
Would I were Heaven, I would behold
thee then with all mine eyes.
The Penitent Lover utterly renouncing love, craves pardon of forefassed
follies.
IF such as did amiss
and ran their race awrie,
May boldly crave at Judges hand
some mercy ere they die,
And pardon for their gilt
that wilfully transgrest,
And saw the bownds before their eyes
that virtue had addressed:
Then I that brake the bancks
which Reason had assignde
To such as would pursue her train,
may stand in hope to find
Some favor at her hand:
since blind forecast was cause,
And not my wilful will in fault
that I have swerude her laws.
Misguided have I been
and trained all by trust,
And Love was forger of the fraud,
and furtherer of my lust.
Whose vele did daze mine eyes,
and darckned so my sight
With errors foggie mist at first,
that Reason gave no light.
And as those woeful Wightes
that sail on swelling Seas,
When winds and wrathful waves conspire
to banish all their ease,
When heavenly Lamps are hid
from Shipmens hungry eyes,
And Lodestarres are in covert kept
within the cloudie Skies:
As they without respect
do follow Fortunes lore,
And run at random in the flood
where Aeols Impes do rore,
Till golden crested Phebe,
or else his Sisters light,
Have chasde away those noisome clouds,
and put the same to flight:
So I (unhappy man)
have followde Love a space,
And felt the whottest of his flame,
and flashing fiery blase.
In darkness have I dwelt,
and Errors ugly shade,
Unwitting how to raise a Star
from peril to cuade.
Few days came on my head
wherein was cause of joy,
But day and night were ready both
to hasten mine anoy.
Short were my sleeps (God wot)
most dreadful were my dreams,
Mine eyes (as Conduits of the heart)
did gush out saltish streams.
Tormented was my Corse,
my mind was never free,
But both repleate with anguish aye
disseuerde sought to be.
No place might like me long,
no pleasure could endure,
In stead of sport was smart at hand,
for pastime pain in ure.
A Bondsman to my self,
yet free in others sight,
Not able to resist the rage
of winged Archers might.
Thus have I spent my time
in seruage as a Thrall,
Till Reason of her bounty list
me to her mercy call.
Now have I made return,
and by good hap retirde
From Cupids Camp and deep Despair:
and once again aspirde
To Lady Reasons stawle
where wisdom throned is,
On promise of amends releast
is all that was amiss.
To Plato now I fly,
and Senecs sound advice:
A Fatch for Love, I force not now
what Chance fall on the Dice.
To his Friend that refusde him without cause why but only upon delight of
change.
YOu show your self to be
a Woman right by kind:
You like and then mislyke again
where you no cause do find.
I can not think that love
was planted in your breast,
As did your flattring looks declare,
and periurde tongue protest.
Thou swarste alone that I
thy fancy did subdue,
Then why should frenzy force thee now
to show thy self untrue?
Fie faithless woman fie,
will thou condemn the kind
Because of just report of ill
and blot of wavering mind?
Too plain it now appears
that lust procurde thy love,
Or else it would not so decay
and causeless thus remove.
I thought that I at first
a Lucrece had subdude,
But now I find that fancy fond
my senses did delude
I deemde that I had got
a Fawlcon to the fist,
Whom I might quickly have reclaimde,
but I my purpose mist.
For (oh) the worser hap
my Fawlcon is so free,
As down she stoupes to strangers lure
and forces least of me.
Good shape was ill bestowde
upon so vile a Kite,
That Haggard wise does love to live
and does in change delight.
Yield me thy flanting Hood,
shake off those Belles of thine,
Such checking Bussards ill deserve
or Bell or Hood so fine.
With Fowls of baser sort
how can you brook too fly,
That erst your Nature did to Hawks
of stately kind apply?
If want of pray enforste
this change thou art too blame:
For I had ever trains in store
to make my Fawlcon game.
I had a Tassell eke
full gentle by his kind,
Too fly with thee in use of wing
the greater joy to find.
No, doubtless wanton lust
and fleshly foul desire
Did make thee loath my friendly lure,
and set thy heart on fire
Too try what metal was
in Bussards to be found
This, this was it that made thee stowpe
from lofty gate to ground.
Wherefore if ever luck
do let me light on thee,
And Fortune grant me once again
thy keeper for to be:
Thy diet shall be such,
thy tyring rumpes so bare,
As thou shall know thy keeper well,
and for none other care.
Meanewhile on carren feed,
thy hungry gorge to glut:
That all thy lust in daily change
and diet new do put.
Diseases must of force
such feeding foul ensue:
No force to me, thou were my Bird,
But (Fawlcon) now adue.
To one that upon surmise of adversity, forewent her Friend.
AS too the white, and lately lymed house
The Doves do flock in hope of better fare,
And leave their home of Culuers clean and bare:
As to the Kitchen posts the peeping Mouse
Where Vittailes fine and curious Cates are dressed,
And shoons the shop where liuelyhood waxes thin,
Where he before had fillde his empty skin,
And where he chose him first to be a guest:
As Lyse unto the living Carcass clean,
But balke the same made ready to the Bear,
So you that erst my Friend to seeming wear,
In happy state: your needy Friend do leave.
Unfriendly are those other, Dove and Mouse
That do refuse old harbor for a new
And make exchange for lodge they never knew,
Unfriendly eke the slow and lumpish Lowse.
But more uncivil you that witty arre
To judge a Friend, your Friendship to forgo,
Without a cause and make exchaunges so:
For friends are needed most in time of war.
Put case that Chance withdrew her old good will
And frownde on me to whom she was a friend?
Is that a reason why your love should end?
No, no, you should a friend continue still.
For true good will in misery is tried,
For then will none but faithful friends abide.
To Master Googes fancy that begins Give Money me take friendship who so
list.
FRiend Googe, give me ye faithful friend to trust,
And take the fickle Coin for me that lust.
For Friends in time of trouble and distress
With help and sound advise will soon redress
Each growing grief that gripes the pensive breast,
When Money lies locked up in covert Chest.
Thy Coin will cause a thousand cares to grow,
Which if thou had no Coin you could not know,
Thy Friend no care but comfort will procure,
Of him thou may at need thy self assure.
Thy Money makes the Thief in wait to lie,
Whose fraud thy Friend and falsehood will descrie.
Thou can not keep unlocked thy careful Coin,
But some from thee thy Money will purloine:
Thy faithful Friend will never start aside,
But take his share of all that shall beride.
When thou art dead thy Money is bereft
But after life thy trusty Friend is left:
Thy Money serves another Master than,
Thy faithful Friend lincks with none other man.
So that (Friend Googe) I deem it better I,
To choose the Friend and let the Money lie.
The Lover abused renownceth Love.
FOr to revoke to pensive thought
And troubled head my former plight,
How I by earnest suit have sought
And griefull pains a loving Wight
For to accoy, accoy,
And breed my joy
Without anoy, makes saltish bryne
To flush out of my vapord eyne.
To think upon the sundry snares
And privy Panthers that were led
To forge my daily doleful cares,
Whereby my hoped pleasures fled,
Does plague my heart, my heart,
With deadly smart,
Without desert, that have indurde
Such woes, and am not yet recurde,
Was never day came on my head
Wherein I did not sue for grace,
Was never night but I in bed
Unto my Pillow told my case,
Bayning my breast, my breast,
For want of rest,
With tears oppressed, yet remedy none
Was to be found for all my moan.
If she had dained my good will
And recompenst me with her Love,
I would have been her Vassell still,
And never once my heart remove:
I did pretend, pretend,
To be her Friend
Unto the end, but she refusde
My loving heart, and me abusde.
I did not force upon the spite
And venomous stings of hissing Snakes,
I wayed not their words a Mite,
That such a do at Lovers makes:
I did rejoice, rejoice,
To have the voice
Of such a choice, and smild to see
That they reported so of me.
Oh me most luckie Wight (quoth I)
At whom the people so repine,
I trust the rumor that does fly
Will force her to my will incline,
And like well me, well me
Whom she does see,
Her love to be, unfeignedly,
In whom she may full well affie.
But now at length I plainly view
That woman never gave her breast,
For they by kindly course will rue
On such as seem to love them best:
And will relent, relent
And be content,
When naught is meant, save friendly heart
And love for never to depart.
Some cruel Tiger lent her Te^
And fostred her with savage Pap,
That can not find in heart to let
A man to love her, since his hap
Has so assignde, assignde
To have his mind
To love inclinde, in honest wise
Whom she should not of right despise.
But since I see her stony heart
Cannot be pierst with pitties Lance,
Since naught is gainde but woeful smart,
I do intend to break the dance,
And quite forgo, forgo
My pleasant Fo,
That pains me so, and thinks in fine
To make me like to Circes Swine:
I clean defy her flattering face,
I quite abhor her luring looks:
As long as Jove shall give me grace
She never comes within my books,
I do detest, detest
So false a Guest
That breeds unrest, where she should plant
Her love, if pity did not want.
Let her go seek some other Fool,
Let her inrage some other Dolt:
I have been taught in Platos School
From Cupids Banner to revolt:
And to forsake, forsake
As fearful Snake,
Such as do make, a man but smart
For bearing them a faithful heart.
The forsaken Lover laments that his Lady is matched with an other.
AS Menelaus did lament
When Helena to Troie went,
And to the Teucrian Guest applide
And all her Country Friends defide:
Even so I feel tormenting pain
To lurck in erie little vain,
And ransack all my Corse, to see
That she has now forsaken me,
The faithful Friend that she could find:
But fickle Dames will to their kind.
A simple change in faith it was
To leave the Lion for the Ass,
Such chopping will but make you bare
And spend your life in carek and care,
You might have taken better heed
Then left the Grain, and chose the weed:
Your Harvest would the better been
If you had to your Bargin seen,
But to recant it is to late,
Go too, a Gods name to your Mate,
It Is Muck that makes the Pot to play
As men of old were wont to say,
And women marry for the gain
Though often it fall out to their pain:
And as I guess thou have ydoon
When all thy twist is thoroughly spoon,
It will appear unto thy foes,
Thou pluckst a Nettle for a Rose:
In faith thy Friend would loath to see
Thy curssed luck so ill to be.
Of one that was in reuersion.
ANother has that I did bie,
and I enjoy that he imbraste:
I reap the Grain, and pluck the Pear,
but he had Pear and Corn at last.
Which fithens Fortune has allowde,
let either well contented be:
I hate him not for his delights,
then let him do the like too me.
For sow both be pleased, I say,
this bargain was devised well:
Let him with present good delight
as I what time to me it fell.
If ever he by hap forgo,
I trust my hope is not in vain,
I hope the thing I once enioyde
will to his owner come again.
Which if be so, then happy I
that had the first, and have the last:
What better fortune may there be
than in Reuersion to be plaste.
That all hurts and losses are to be recovered and recured save the cruel
wound of Love.
THe Surgion may devise
a Salve for erie sore,
And to recure all inward griefs
Physicians have in store
Their Simples to compownde
and match in mixture so,
As each disease from sickly Corse
they can enforce to go.
The wastfull wrack of wealth
that Merchants do sustain,
By happy vent of gotten wares
may be supplide again.
A Town by treason lost,
a Forte by falsehood won,
By manly fight is got again
and help of hurtful Goon.
Thus each thing has redress
and sweet recure again:
Save only Love, that farther frets,
and feeds on inward pain.
No Galen may this grief
by Phisicks force expel:
No Reasons rule may ought prevail
where lurcking Love does dwell.
The Patient has no power
of wholesome things to taste:
No Drench, no Drug, nor Sirop sweet
his hidden harm may waste.
No comfort comes by day,
no pleasant sleep by night:
No needful nap at Noone may ease
the Lovers painful plight.
In deep despair he dwells
till in comes hope of ease,
Which somewhat lessens pains of Love,
and calmes the surge of Seas.
His head is fraught with thoughts,
his heart with throws repleate:
His eyes amazde, his quaking hand,
his stomach lothing meat.
This bale the Lover bides
and hateful Hagge of Hell,
And yet himself does deem that he
in Paradyce does dwell.
Of the choice of his Valentine.
WIth others I to choose a Valentine
Addressed my self: Each had his dearest friend
In Scrole ywrit, among the reast was mine.
See now the luck by lot that Chance does send
To Cupids crewe, mark Fortune how it falls,
And mark how Venus Imps are Fortu^s thralls.
The Papers were in covert kept from sight,
In hope I went to note what hap would fall:
I choze, but on my Friend I could not light,
(Such was the Goddess will that wilds the Ball)
But see good luck, although I mist the same,
I hapt on one that bare my Ladies name.
Unequal though their beauties were to look,
Remembrance yet of her well feauturde fare
So often seen, thereby my Senses took,
Unhappy though she were not then in place:
Long you to learn what name my Lady hight?
Account from V. to. A. and spell aright.
Of an open Foe and a feigned Friend.
NOt he so much anoies
that says: I am thy Fo,
As he that bears a hateful heart,
and is a Friend to sho.
Of tone we may beware,
and fly his open hate,
But the other bites before he barck,
a hard avoided Mate.
Again.
OF both give me the man
that says, I hate in deed:
Than him that has a Knife to kill,
yet wears a friendly weed.
Of a Rich Miser.
A Misers mind thou have,
thou have a Princes pelf:
Which makes thee welthy to thine Heir,
a Beggar to thy self.
Of a Painter that painted Favor.
THou (Painter fond) what means this mad devise
Favor to draw? since uncouth is the head
From whence it comes, and first of all was bred?
Some deem that it of Beauty does arise,
Dame Fortunes Babie and undoubted Son,
Some other do furmise this Favor was:
Again, some think by Chance it came to pass,
Another says of Virtue it begone.
What Mate is he that daily is at hand? Quest

Fair speaking he and glosing Flattrie hight. Auns.

What he that slowly comes behind? Auns. Despite. Quest

What they (I pray) that him inuiron stand? Ques^

Wealth, Honor, Pride, and Noble needful Laws. Auns.

And leading Lust that drives to thousand ills.
What mean those wings, and painted quiuering Quills? Ques^

Cause upward aie Dame Fortune Favor draws. Auns.

Why blind is Favor made? Ques^
(Auns.) for cause that he
That is unthrifty once yplast amownt
From baser step not had in any cownt
Can not discerue his Friends, or who they be.
Why treades he on the tickle turning wheel? Ques^

He follows Fortunes steps and giddie Gate Auns.

Unstaid Chances aie unsteadfast Mate:
And when that things are well, can never feel.
Then tell me one thing else to pease my mind
My last demand. what means his swelling so? Quest

How chaunst that Favor does so prowdly go? Auns.

Good haps by course us Men do maken blind.
The Lover whose Lady dwelt fast by a Prison.
ONe day I hide me fast unto the place
where lodgde my Love, a passing propre dame
For head, hand, leg, lim, wealth, wit, comely grace:
And being there my suit I began to frame,
The smokie sighs bewrayde my fiery flame.
But cruel she, disdainefull, coy and cursed,
Forced not my words, but quaild her Friend at furst.
Whereat I lookte me up a woeful Wight,
And threw mine eyes up to the painted Sky,
In mind to wail my hap: And saw in sight
Not far from thence a place where Prisners lie,
For crimes forepast the after pains to try:
A Laberinth, a loathsome Lodge to dwell,
A Dungeon deep, a Dampe as dark as Hell.
Oh happy you (quoth I) that feel the force
Of girding Give, thirst, cold and stony bed,
Respect of me, whose love has no remorce:
In death you live, but I in life and ded,
Your joy is yet to come, my pleasure fled.
In prison you have minds at freedom aye,
I free am thrall, whose love seeks his decay.
Unworthy you to live in such distress
Whose former faults repentance did bewail:
More fitter were this Lady merciless
At grate to stand, with whom no tears prevail:
More worthy she to live in loathsome Gaile
That murders such as sue to her for life,
And spoils her faithful Friends with spiteful knyfe.
Complaint of the long absence of his Love upon the first acquaintance.
O Cursed, cruel, canckred Chance,
O Fortune full of spite,
Why have thou so on sudden rest
from me my chief delight?
What glory shall thou gain perdie
or purchase by the rage?
This is no Conquest to be callde,
wherefore thy wrath assuage.
To soon eclipsed was my joy,
my dolors grow to fast:
For want of her that is my life,
my life it can not last.
Is this thy fickle kind so soon
to hoise a man to joy,
And ere he touch the top of bliss
to breed him such anoy?
Now do I plain perceive and see
that Poets feign not all,
For churlish Chance is counted blind
and full of filthy Gall.
I thought there had been no such Dame
ne Goddess on a wheel:
But now too well I know her kind,
too soon her force I feel.
And that which does augment my smart
and makes more my woe,
Is, for I felt a sudden joy
where now this grief does grow.
If thou had meant (unhappy Hap)
thus to have nipt my joy,
Why did thou show a smyling cheer
that should have lookte acoy?
For griefs do nothing grudge at all
but where was bliss before:
None wailes the want of wealth so much
as he that had the store.
Not he that never saw the Sun
complains for lack of light,
But such as saw his golden gleames
and knew his cheerful might.
Too late I learn through spiteful chance
that joy is mixed with woe,
And each good hap has hate in hoorde,
the course of things is so.
So Poison lurcks in Sugar sweet,
the Hook so hides the bayte:
Even so in green and pleasant grass
the Serpent lies in wait.
Ulysses wife I learn at last
thy sorrow and distress,
In absence of thy lingering Love,
that should thy woes redress.
Great was your grief (ye Greekish Girlles)
whilste stately Troie stood,
And kept your husbands from your laps
in peril of their blood.
All ye therefore that have assayde
what torments lack procures
Of that you love, lament my lack
which ouerlong endures.
Ye Winds transport my soking sighs
to my new chosen Friend,
So may my sorrow swage perhaps
and dreerie state have end.
Ye Sighs make true report of tears,
that so beraine my breast,
As Helens husbands never were
for treason of his Guest.
If thou (my Letter) may attain
the place of her abode,
Do thou, as Herald of the heart,
my sorrows quite unload.
In thee as in a Myrronr clear
or Crystal may she vewe
My pangues, my pains, my sighs and tears
which Tigers could but rewe.
There shall she see my secret parts
encombred all with moan,
My fainting lims, my vapord eien
with heart as cold as stone.
I know she can but rue my case
when thou presents my suit,
Wherefore play thou thy part so well
that I may reap the fruit.
And if (when she has read thee through)
she place thee in her lap,
Then change thy cheer thy Master has
his long desired hap.
The ventrous Lover after long absence craves his Lady to meet with him in
place to enterparle of her auentures.
IF so Leander durst
from Abydon to Sest
To swim to Hero whom he chose
his Friend above the rest,
And gage his comely corse
unto the sowsing Tide
To lay his water beaten lims
fast by her tender side:
Then I (my Dear) whose gleames
and ardor does surpass
The scorching flame and blasing heat
that in Leander was,
May well presume to take
the greatest toil in hand,
To reach the place where thou do lodge
the chief of Venus band.
For not Leanders love
my friendship does excel,
Nor Hero may compare with her
that bears Dame Beauties Bell.
There rests naught for thee
but to assign the place,
The mirrie day, the joyful hour
when I may see thy face:
Appoint the certain Tide
and fixed stem of stay,
And thou shall see thy faithful Friend
will quickly come his way
Not dreeding any doubt:
but ventrously will go
Through thick and thin to gain a glimse
of thee his sugared fo.
Where when by hap we meet,
our long endured woes
Shall stint by force of friendly thoughts
which we shall then discloes.
Then either may unfold
the secrets of the heart,
And show how long dislodge has bred
our cruel cutting smart.
Then may we freely chat
of all forepassed toys,
And put those pensive pangues to flight
with new recourse of joys.
Then pleasure shall possess
the lodge were Dolor lay,
And mirrie blincks put clouds of care
and lowering looks away.
Then kissing may be plide
and clipping put in ure,
And lingered sores by Cupids salues
aspire to quick recure.
Oh dreede thou not at all,
set woman's fear a part
And take the courage of a man,
that have a manly heart
In hostage aie with thee
to use at thy devise.
In all affairs and needful hours
as matter shall arise.
Revoke to loving mind
how ventrous Thisbe met
In fearful night with Pyramus
where Nynus Tomb was set.
So hazard thou to come
unto the pointed place,
To thwart thy Friend, and meet with him
that longs to see thy face.
Who better will attend
thy friendly coming there,
Than Pyramus of Thysbe did
his disappointed Feere.
For (oh) their meeting was
the reauer of their breath,
The crop of endless care, and cause
of either Lovers death.
But we so warely will
our fixed time attend,
As no mishap shall grow thereby.
And thus I make an end
With wishing well to thee,
and hope to meet in place
To enterparle with thee (my Friend)
and tell my doleful case.
To Master Googe his Sonet out of sight out of thought.
THe less I see, the more my teene,
The more my teene the greater grief
The greater grief, the lesser seen,
The lesser seen, the less relief:
The less relief the heuier spright,
When P. is farthest out of sight.
The rarer seen, the rifer sobs,
The rifer sobbes, the sadder heart,
The sadder heart, the greater throbs,
The greater throbs, the worser smart,
The worser smart proceeds of this
That I my P. so often miss.
The nearer too, the more I smile,
The more I smile, the merier mind:
The mirrie mind does thought exile,
And thought exilde recourse I find
Of heavenly joys: all this delight
Have I when P. is once in fight.
The Lover whose Mistress feared a Mouse, declares that he would become a
Cat, if he might have his desire.
IF I might alter kind,
what think you I would be,
Nor Fish, nor Foul, nor Fle, nor Frog,
nor Squirrell on the Tree.
The Fish the hook, the Foul
the lymed twig does catch,
The Fle the Finger, and the Frog
the Buffard does dipatch.
The Squirrell thincking naught
that feately cracks the Nut,
The greedy Gashauke wanting pray
in dread of death does put.
But scorning all these kinds
I would become a Cat,
To combat with the creeping Mouse
and scratch the screeking Rat.
I would be present aye
and at my Ladies call,
To guard her from the fearful Mouse
in Parlour and in Hall.
In Kitching for his life
he should not show his head,
The Pear in Poke should lie untouched
when she were gone to bed.
The Mouse should stand in fear,
so should the squeaking Rat:
All this would I do if I were
converted to a Cat.
The Lover driven to absent him from his Lady, bawayles his estate.
WHen angry Greeks with Trojans fought
In mind to sack their welthie Town,
King Agamemnon needful thought
To beat the neighbor Cities down,
And by his Princely power to quell
Such as by Priams Realm did dwell.
Thus forth he trauailde with his train
Till he unto Lyrnesus came,
Where cruel fight he did maintain,
And five such Wights as were of fame:
Down went the walls and all to wrack
And so was Lyrnes brought to sack.
Two Noble Dames of passing shape
Unto the Prince were brought in fine
That might compare with Paris rape,
Their glimring beauties so did shine:
The Prince chose fairest of the twain,
And Achyll the other for his pain.
And thus the warlike Chiefetaines liude
Each with his Lady in delight:
Till Agamemnon was depriude
Of her that golden Chryses hight.
For Gods did will as (Poets feign)
That he should yield her up again.
Which done, he reft Achylles Mate
To serve in Chrysis place at need,
Not forcing on the foul debate
That followde of that cruel deed:
For why Achylles grutged fore
To lose the Less he wan before.
And what for grief and great disdain
The Greek his Helmet hoong aside,
And Sword that many a Knight had slain,
And Shield that Trojan Darts had tried:
Refusing to approach the place
Where he was wont his foes to chase.
His manly courage was appallde
His valiant heart began to yield,
His brawned arms that erst were gallde
With clattering Armor in the field
Had lost their force, his fist did faint,
His gladsome songs were grown to plaint.
His mouth refusde his woonted food,
His tongue could feel no taste of meat,
His hanging cheeks declarde his mood,
His feltred beard with hair unset,
Bewraid his sudden change of cheer
For loosing of his loving Feere.
His ears but sorrows sound could hear,
The Trumpets tune was quite forgot,
His eyes were fraught with many a tear,
Whom carcking care permitted not
The pleasant slumber to retain
To quite the sielie Misers pain.
The thousand part of pensive care
The Noble Greek endured than
In Bryseis absence, to declare
It far surmounts the Wit of man:
But sure a Martyr right he liude
Of Bryseis beauty once beriude.
If thus Achylles valiant heart
Were wrapped in web of wailefull woe,
That was invrde too dint of Dart
His loving Bryseis to forgo.
If thus the sturdie Greek (I say)
Bewaild the night and wept the day:
Then blame not me a loving Wight
Whom Nature made to Cupids Bow
To live in such a piteous plight,
Bewasht with waves of woorser woe
Than ever was the Greekish Peer
Dispoiled of his Darling dear.
For I of force am feign to flee
The press, the presence and the place
Of you my Love a brauer B
Than Bryseis was for foot and face,
For Head, for Hand, for Carcass eeke
Not to be matched of any Greek.
Whose troth you have full often tried,
Whose heart has been unfolded quight
Whose faith by friendship was descride
Whose joy consisted in your sight,
Whose pain was pleasure if in place
He might but gaze upon thy face.
O doleful Greek I would I might
Exchange my trouble for thy pain,
For then I hope I should acquit
My grief with gladsome joys again:
For Bryseis made return to thee,
Would B. might do the like to me.
But to exchange my Love for thine,
Or B. for Bryseis I ne would:
To labor in the Leaden Mine.
And leave the ground where grows the Gold
I mind it not, it folly were
To choose the pare, and leave the Pear.
That Lovers ought rather at first acquaintance to show their meanings by Pen
then by Mouth.
IF all that feel the fits of love
And flanckring sparks of Cupids fire,
By tatling tongues should say to move
Their Ladies to their fond desire:
No doubt a number would but gain
A badge of Folly for their pain.
For Ladies either would suspect
Those sugared words so sweet to ear
With secret poisons bait infect:
Or else would wisely stand in fear,
That all such flame as so did burn
To dustie Cinders soon would turn.
For he that bluntly does presume
On small acquaintance to display
His hidden fire by casting fume
Of wanton words, does miss the way
To win the Wight he honors so,
For of a Friend he makes a Fo.
For who is she that may endure
The dapper terms that Lovers use?
And painted Proems to procure
The Modest Matrons mind to muse?
No, first let writings go to tell
Your Ladies that you love them well.
And when that time has trial made
Of perfect love and faithful breast,
Then boldly may you further wade
This counsel I account the best:
And this (my Dear) procurde my Quill
To write, and tongue to be so still.
Which now at first shall flatly show
(As faithful Herald of the heart
The perfect love to thee I owe
That breedst my joy, and wilt my smart,
Unless at last ( Remembrance) rue
Upon her ( Thought) that will be true.
Wherefore I say, go slender scrole
To her the sielie Mouse that shonnes,
Salute in friendly sort the soul
Among those pretty beasts that wonnes,
That bit the Pocat for the Pear,
And bred the soul to such a fear.
An Epitaph of Master Win drowned in the Sea.
WHo so thou art that passest by this place
And runst at random on the slipper way,
Recline thy listening ear to me a space
Do stay thy ship and hearken what I say:
Cast Ankor here until my tale be done,
So may thou chance the like mishaps to shonne.
Learn this of me, that men do live to die
And Death decays the worthiest Wightes of all,
No worldly wealth or kingdoms can supply
Or guard their Princes from the fatal fall:
One way to come unto this life we see,
But to be rid thereof a thousand be.
My gallant youth and frolic years behight
Me longer age, and silver hairs to have,
I thought my day would never come to night,
My prime provoked me to forget my grave:
I thought by water to have scapte the death
That now amid the Seas do lose my breath.
Now, now the churlish channel me does check
Now surging Seas conspire to breed my carke
Now fighting floods enforce me to the rock,
Charybdis Whelps and Scyllas Dogs do bark
Now hope of life is past, now, now I see
That W. can no more a lives man be.
Yet I do well affie for my desert
(When cruel death has done the worst it may)
Of well renowned Fame to have a part
To save my name from ruin and decay:
And that is all that thou or I may gain,
And so adue, I thank thee for thy pain.
Again.
O Neptune churlish Chuff, O wayward Woolfe
O God of Seas by name, no God in deed,
O Tyran, Ruler of the gravel Goolfe
Where greater Fish on lesser Spawne does feed
Why did you drench with deadly Mace a Wight
That well deserude to run his course aright?
O cruel cursed Tide, O weltring Wave
That W. wrought this detestable care,
O wrathful surge, why would y^ not vouchsafe
A mid thy rage so good a youth to spare,
And suffer him in luckie Bark to reach
The pleasant port of ease and blisfull beach?
But what though surging Seas and tossing Tide
Have done their worst and uttered all their force
In working W. wrack, that so has tried
The cruelst rage that might befall his Corse:
Yet naythelesse his ever during name
Is fast ingraude within the house of Fame.
Let Fishes feed upon his flesh apace,
Let crawling Cungers creep about his bones,
Let Worms awake and W: Carcass race
For why it was appointed for the nones:
But when they have done all the spite they can
His good report shall live in mouth of man.
Instead of stony Tomb and Marble Grave
In lieu of a lamentable Verse,
Let W. on the sandy Cheasell have
This doleful rhyme in stead of better Hierse:
Lo, here among the Worms does W. won
That well deserude a farther race to roon.
But since his fate allotted him to fall
Amid the sowsing Seas and troublous Tide,
Let not his death his faithful Friends appall
For he is not the first that so has did,
Nor shall be seen the last: As nie away
To Heaven by waters as by Land they say.
Praise of his Love.
APpelles lay the Pensill down
and shun thy woonted skill,
Let brute no more with flattring Trumpe
the Greekish ears fulfill:
Claim not to thee such Painters praise
as thou have done of yore,
Least thou in fine be foiled flat
and gained glory lore.
So seek not to disgrace the Greeks
thy loving Native land,
But rather from depainting forms
withdraw thy skillest hand.
For so thou stiffely stand and vaunt
that thou will frame her like
Whom I extol above the Stars,
thou art a stately Greek.
As soon with might thou may remove
the Rock from whence it grows,
As frame her featurde form in whom
such floods of graces flows.
If I might speak unhurt of hate,
I would auaunt that kind
In spite of Rose and Lilly both
had her in earth assignde
To dwell among the dainty Dames
that she has placed here:
Cause, by her passing feature might
Dame Natures skill appear.
Her Hair surmounts Apollos pride
in it such beauty raines
Her glistring eyes the Cristall far
and finest Sapphire stains
A little Mouth with decent Chin,
a Coral Lip of hue,
With Teeth as white as Whale his bone
each one in order due.
A body blameless to be found,
Arms rated to the same:
Such Hands with Azure decked, as all
that war with her do shame.
As for the parts in covert kept
and what is not in sight,
I do esteem them by the reast
not forcing on dispight.
If I were foreman of the Quest
my verdit to express,
Forgive me ( Phoebus,) of thy place
she should thee dispossess.
P: should be raised to the clouds
and Phoebus brought allow,
For that there should live none in earth
but might her virtue know.
Thus to conclude and make an end,
to vouch I dare behold:
As soon as Nature her had made
all Natures ware was sold.
The complaint of a Friend of his having lost his Dove.
WHat should I shed my tears to show mine inward pain
Since yt the Jewel I have lost may not be had again.
Yet bootelesse though it be to utter covert smart
It is a mean to cure the grief, and make a joyful heart.
Wherefore I say to you that have enioyde your Love,
Lament with me in woeful wise for loosing of my Dove.
You Turtle Cocks that are your loving Honnes bereft,
And do bewail your cruel chance that you alive are left:
Come hither, come I say, come hie in haste to me,
Let either make his doleful plaint amid this drearie tree.
A fitter place than this may no where else be found
For friendly Echo here will cause each cry to yield a sound.
In youth it was my luck on such a Dove to light,
As by good nature wan my love, she was my whole delight
A fresher foul than mine for shape and beauties hue,
Was never any man on earth that had the hap to vewe.
Dame Nature her had framde so perfect in her kind
As not the spiteful man himself one fault in her could find.
Her eye so passing pure, her beak so brave and fit,
The stature of her lims so small, her head so full of wit,
Her neck of so good fyse, her plume of color white,
Her legs and feet so finely made, though seldom seen in sight:
Each part so fitly pight as none might change his place.
Nor any Bird could lightly have so good and brave a grace.
But most of all that I did fancy, was her voice,
For sweet it was unto mine care, and made the heart rejoice.
No sooner could I come in place where she was set,
But up she rose, and joyful would her Make and lover met.
About my tender neck she would have clasped tho,
And laid her beak betwixt my lips, sweet kisses to besto.
And ought besides that might have pleasurde me at all,
was never man that had a bird so fit to play withal.
when I for joy did sing, she would have song with me,
when I was woe, my grief was hirs, she would not plesa^t be
But (oh) amid my joys came cruel canckred Death.
And spiting at my pleasures rest my loving bird her breath
who finding me alack, and absent on a day,
Caught bow in hand, and strak her down, a breding as she lay
Since I have cause to wail the death of such a Dove.
(Good Turtles) help me to lament ye loss of my true love.
The Tree whereon she sat shall be the place where I
will sing my last, and end my life: for (Turtles) I must die.
you know it is our kind, we can not live alone,
More pleasant is ye death to us then life when love is gone
To tell a farther tale my famting breath denies,
And self same death ye slew my Dove, begins to close mine eyes.
That Lovers ought to shun no pains to attain their Love.
IF Marchaunts in their warped Keales
commit themselves to Wave,
And dreadful danger of the Goulfe
in tempest that does rave,
To set from far and Foreign lands
such ware as is to sell,
And is not in their Native soil
where they themselves do dwell:
If Souldiars serve in perils place
and dread of Cannon shot,
Each day in danger of their lives
and Country loss God wot,
Whose Music is the dreadful Drum
and doleful Trumpets sound,
Who have in stead of better bed
the cold and stony ground,
And all tattaine the spoil with speed
of such as do withstand,
Which slender is sometime we see
when so it comes to hand:
If they for Lucre light sustain
such peril as ensues,
Then those that serve the Lord of Love
no travail ought refuse:
But lavish of their lively breath
all tempest to abide,
To maintain Love and all his laws
what Fortune so betide.
And not to shrink at erie shoure
or stormy flaw that lights,
Ne yet to yield themselves as thrall
to such as with them fights.
Such are not fit for Cupids Camp,
they ought no wages win
Which faint before the clang of Trump
or Battles broile begin.
They must not make account of hurt,
for Cupid has in store
Continually within his Camp
a salve for erie sore.
Their Ensign bearer is so stout
ecleaped Hope by name,
As if they follow his advise
each thing shall be in frame.
But if for want of courage stout
the Banner be bereft,
If Hope by hap be stricken down,
and no good hope yleft:
It Is time with Trump to blow retreat,
the Field must needs be won:
So Cupid once be Captive taken
his Souldiars are undone.
Wherefore, what so they are that Love
as waged men do serve:
Must shun no danger drift at all
ne from no peril swerue.
Keep watch and ward the wakefull night
and never yield to rest.
For fear least thou a waiting naught
on sudden be oppressed.
Though hunger gripe thy empty Maw
endure it for a while,
Till time do serve with good repast
such famine to beguile.
Be not with chilly cold dismaide,
let Snow nor Ise procure
Thy lustful lims from painful plight
thy Lady to allure.
That is the spoil that Cupid gives
that is the only wight
Where at his Thralls are wont to roue
with Arrows from their sight.
My self as one among the more,
shall never spare to spend
My life, my lims, yea heart and all
Loves quarrel to defend.
And so in recompense of pains
and toil of perils past,
He yield me but my Ladies love:
I will not be aghast,
Of Fortune, nor her frowning face,
I naught shall force her cheer,
But tend on erie turn on her
that is my loving Feere.
A request of Friendship to Vulcans Wife made my Mars.
THough froward Fortune would yt you who are
So brave a Dame, wc Vulcan shoulden linck:
Yet may you love the lusty God of war,
And bleare his eyes that no such fraud will thinck.
It Is Cupids charge, and all the Gods agree,
That you be Feere to him, and Friend to me.
The Lover that had loved Long without requitald of good will.
LOng did I love, and likte her passing well
Whose beauty bred ye thraldom of my thought,
Long did I sue to her for to expel
The foul disdain yt beauties beams had wrought:
Long did I serve, and Long I would have done,
My mind was bent a through race to roon.
Long when I had looude, sude, and served so.
As might have likte as brave a Dame as she,
Her Friend she forced not but let him go,
She looude at least besides him two or three:
Her common cheer to erie one that sude,
Bred me to deem she did her Friend delude.
Great was my grief at first to be refusde
That Long had looude with true unfeigned heart,
But when I saw I had been long abusde
I forcde the less from such a Friend to part:
Yet ere I gave her up I gainde a thing
That grief to her, and ease to me did bring.
To a Friend that wild him to beware of Envy.
THis sound advise and counsel sent from you
With friendly heart yt you (my friend) do give,
With willing mind I purpose to ensue,
And to beware of Envy whilst I live.
For spiteful it does naught but malice brue
Aie seeking Love from faithful hearts to riue,
And plant in place where perfect Friendship grue
A mortal hate, good Nature to deprive:
And those that nip me by the back behind,
I trust you shall untrue reporters find.
Of Misreporters.
J Hope (mine Own) this fixed Love of thine
Is so well staid and rooted deep in breast
That not, unless thou see it with thine eine
That I from thee my love and Friendship wrest,
Thou will untie the knot of thy behest.
I trust your self of Envy will beware
That wild your friend take heed of Enuies snare.
That no man should write but such as do excel.
SHould no man write (say you,)
but such as do excel?
This fond devise of yours deserves
a Babble and a Bell.
Then one alone should do
or very few in deed:
For that in erie Art there can
but one alone exceed.
Should others idle be
and waste their age in vain,
That might perhaps in after time
the prick and price attain?
By practice skill is got
by practice Wit is won.
At games you see how many do
to win the wager roon,
Yet one among the more
does bear away the Bell:
Is that a cause to say the rest
in running did not well?
If none in Physic should
but only Galene deal,
No doubt a thousand perish would
whom Physic now does heal.
Each one his Talent has,
to use at his devise:
Which makes that many men as well
as one are counted wise.
For if that Wit alone
in one should rest and rain
Then God the skulles of other men
did make but all in vain.
Let each one try his force,
and do the best he can
For thereunto appointed were
the hand and head of man.
The Poet Horace speaks
against thy Reason plain,
Who says it is, somewhat to attempt
although thou not attain
The scope in erie thing:
to touch the highst degree
Is passing hard, too do the best
sufficing is for thee.
To his Friend, declaring what virtue it is to stick to former plighted
friendship.
THe sage and Silver haired Wights do think
A virtue rare not to be proud of mind
When Fortune smiles: nor cowardly to shrink
Though changed Chance do show her self unkind.
But chiefest praise is to embrace the man
In wealth and woe with whom your love began.
Of two desperate Men.
A Man in deep despair with Hemp in hand
Went out in haste to end his wretched days:
And where he thought the Gallo tree should stand
He found a Pot of Gold: he goes his ways
Therewith eftsoone, and in exchange he left
The Rope wherewith he would his breath bereft.
The greedy Carle came within a space
That owde the good, and saw the Pot behind
Where Ruddocks lay, and in the Ruddocks place
A knottie Cord, but Ruddocks could not find:
He caught the Hemp and hoong himself on tree,
For grief that he is Treasure could not see.
Of the torments of Hell and the pains of Love.
THough they that wanted graee
and whilome lived here,
Sustain such pangues and pains in Hell
as does by Books appear,
Though restless be the rage
of that infernal route,
That void of fear and Pitties plaint
do fling the fire about,
And toss the blasing Brands
that never shall consume,
And breath on sielie Souls that fit
and suffer furious fume:
Though Tantall, Pelops Son,
abide the Dropsy dry,
And sterue with hunger where he has
both Food and Water by:
Though Tytius do endure
his Liver to be rent
Of Vultures tyring on the same
unto his spoil ybent:
And Sysiphe though with pain
and never stinting drift
Do role the stone from Mountains top
and it to Mountain lift:
Though Belydes do broile
and suffer endless pain,
In drawing water from the deep
that falls down again:
Though Agamemnons Son
such retchlesse rage endure,
By mean of furies that with flame
his griefull smart procure:
Though Mynos has assignde
Prometheus to the rack,
With hand and foot ystretch awide
till all his lims do crack;
To lead a loathsome life
and die a living death,
Amid his pains to waste his wind
and yet to want no breath:
Though other stand in Stix
with Sulpher that does flame,
And other plunge in Phlegiton
so ghastly for the name:
Though Cerberus, the Kaie
of Plutos Den that bears,
With hungry throat and greedy gripe
the newcome Stranger tears:
Though these condemned Ghostes
such dreadful pain indures,
Yet may they not compare at all
with pangues that Love procures.
His tiring far exceedes
the gnawing of the Gripes,
And with his Whip such lashes gives
that pass Megeras stripes.
He lets the Liver lie,
tormenting aie the Heart:
He strikes and wounds his bounden thrall
with dubble hedded Dart.
His fire exceedes the flame
of deep Auernus Lakes:
And where he once pretendes a plague
a spiteful spoil he makes.
His foes do wake by day
they dread to sleep the night:
They ban the Sun, they curse the Moon,
and all that else gives light.
They pass their loathsome lives
with not contented mind:
Their doleful days draw slow to date
as Cupid has assignde.
To Tantall like, but yet
their case is worse than his:
They have that they embrace, but straight
are quite bereft of blis.
They waste their wind in sighs
they bleare their eyes with brine:
They break their bulcks with bowncing grief,
their hearts with lingering pine.
Though Orpheus were alive
with Music that appeasde
The ugly God of Lymbo Lake,
and souls so sore diseasde,
By Art he might not ease
the Lovers fervent fits,
Ne purchase him his hearts desire
so troubled are his wits.
No place of quiet rest,
no room deuoide of ruth:
No swaging of his endless pain
whose death does try his truth.
His Chamber serves for naught
but witness of his plaint,
His Bed and Bolster to bewail
their Lord with Love attaint.
The man for murder caught
and clodgde with iron cold
To swear that he more happy is
than Lovers may be bold.
For he in little space
his dreadful day shall see,
But Cupids thralls in daily griefs
tormented daily be.
A thousand deaths they bide
whilst they in life remain,
And only plaints and stormy thoughts
they are the Lovers gain.
An Epitaph of the death of Master Tufton of Kent.
HEre may we see the force of spiteful death
And what a swaye it bears in worldly things,
It neither spares the one nor others breath,
He slayes the Keasers and the crowned Kings.
Nothing preuailes against his hateful hand
He hears no suitors when they plead for life,
The richmans purse cannot Deaths power wtstand,
Nor Souldiars sword compare with fatal Knyfe.
He recketh not of well renowned fame
He forces not awhit of golden Fee,
His greatest joy is to obscure the name
Of such as seek immortal aie to be.
For if that wealth, blood, lynage, or desert
Love, pity, zeal, or friendship might preuaild,
If life well led, if true unfeigned heart
Might purchase life: then Death had not assaild.
This Tuftons life with cursed and cruel blade
Breaking the course of him that ran so right
A race as he no stop at all had made
Had Death not tript this Tufton for despite.
The poor have lost the rich have nothing gaind,
The good have cause to mourn, the ill to plain:
For Tufton was to all a Friend vnfaind.
Let Kent cry out that Death has Tufton slain,
Yet this there is whereof they may rejoice
That his good life has won the peoples voice.
Again.
LEt never man presume on worldly wealth,
Let riches never breed a lofty mind,
Let no man boast to much of perfect health
Let Natures gifts make no man over blind
For these are all but Bladders full of wind.
Let friendship not enforce a retchlesse thought,
Let no desert or life well led before,
Let no renown or glory greatly sought
Make man forget his present state the more:
For death is he that keeps and rids the store.
If either health, or goods had been of power,
If Natures gifts, or friendship and good will,
If life forepast, if glories Golden Bower
Might have preuaild, or stopped the doleful Knill
Of Tufton, then had Tufton lived still.
But now you see that Death has quight undone
His last of life, and put him to the foil,
Yet lives the virtue that alive he won,
The times alone are shrouded in the soil:
Thus Death is end of all this worldlesse toil.
In praise of Lady P.
P. Seems of Venus stock to be
for beauties comely grace,
A Grysell for her gravity,
a Helen for her face:
A second Pallas for her Wit,
a Goddess rare in sight:
A Dian for her daintiness,
she is so chaste a Wight.
Do view her Corse with curious eye,
each lim from top to toe,
And you shall say I tell but truth
that do extol her so.
The Head as chief that stands aloft
and over looks all,
With wisdom is so fully fraught
as Pallas there did ^all.
Two Ears th^^ ^ust no trifling tales
nor credit b(...)rute:
Yet such again as ready are
to hear the humbles suit.
Her Eyes are such as will not gaze
on things not worthy sight,
And where she ought to cast a look
she will not wink in spite.
The golden grains that greedy guestes
from foreign Countries bring,
Ne shining Phoebus glittring beams
that on his Godhead spring:
No ancient Amber had in price
of Roman Matrons old,
May be comparde with splendant hatres
that pass the Venys Gold.
Her Nose adorns her countnance so
in middle justly plaste,
As it at no time will permit
her beauty be defaste.
Her Mouth so small her Teeth so white
as any Whale his bone,
Her lips without so lively red
that pass the Coral stone.
What need I to describe her Cheeks?
her Chin? or else her Pap?
For they are all as though the ^ose
lodge in the Lillies lap
What should I stand upon the rest
or other parts depaint:
As little Hand with Fingers long?
my wits are all to faint.
Yet this I say in her behalf
if Helen were her leeke,
Sir Paris need not to disdain
her through the Seas to seek:
Nor Menelaus was unwise
or Troop of Trojans mad,
When he with them, and they with him,
for her such combat had.
Leanders labor was not lost
that swam the surging Seas,
If Hero were of such a hue
whom so he sought to please.
And if Admetus Darling dear
were of so fresh a face,
Though Phoebus kept Admetus flock
it may not him disgrace.
Nor mighty Mauors way the floutes
and laughing of the rest,
If such a one were she with whom
he lay in Vulcans Nest.
If Bryseis beauty were so brave,
Achylles needs no blame
Who left the Camp and fled the field
for loosing such a Dame.
If she in Ida had been seen
with Pallas and the rest,
I doubt where Paris would have chose
Dame Venus for the best,
Or if Pygmalion had but taken
a glimse of such a face,
He would not then his Idol dumme
so fervently embrace.
But what shall need so many words
in things that are so plain?
I say but that I doubt where Kind
can make the like again.
The Lover in utter despair of his Ladies return, in each respect compares
his estate with Troylus.
MY case with Troylus may compare,
For as he felt both sorrow and care:
Even so do I most Miser Wight,
That am a Troylus outright.
As ere he could atchieue his wish,
He fed of many a doleful dish,
And day and night unto the Skies
The sielie Trojan kest his eyes,
Requesting ruth at Cresids hand
In whom his life and death did stand:
So night and day I spent in woe,
Ere she her pity would bestow
To quight me from the painful plight
That made me be a Martyr right.
As when at last he favor sound,
And was recured of his wound,
His grutching griefs to comfort grue,
And torments from the Trojan flue:
So when my Lady did remove
Her rigor, and began to love
Her Vassell in such friendly sort,
As might appear by outward port:
Then who began to joy but I
That stood my Mistress heart so nie?
Then (as the Trojan did) I soong,
And out my Ladies virtues roong
So loud, as all the world could tell
What was the meaning of the Bell.
And as that pleasant taste of joy
That he endured had in Troy,
From sweet to sower did conuart,
When Cresida did thence depart:
So my forepassed pleasures arre
By spiteful Fortune put a far
By her departure from this place,
Where I was wont to view her face.
So Angelike that shone in sight
Surpassing Phoebes golden light.
As when that Diomed the Greek
Had given the Trojan Foe the gleeke.
And rest him Cresids comely hue
Which often made his heart to rue,
The woeful Troylus did lament,
And doleful days in mourning spent:
So I bereft my loouing Make,
To sighs and sobbings me betake,
Repining that my fortune is
Of my desired Friend to miss,
And that a guilefull Greek should be
Esteemde of her in such degree.
But though my fortune frame awrie,
And I dispoylde her company
Must waste the day and night in woe,
For that the Gods appointed so:
I naythelesse will wish her well
And better than to Cresid fell.
I pray she may have better hap
Than beg her bread with Dish and Clap,
As she the sielie Miser did
When Troylus by the Spittle rid.
God shield her from the Lazars lore
And loathsome Leapers stinking sore,
And for the love I erst her bare
I wish her as my self to fare:
My self that am a Trojan true
As she full well by trial knue.
And as King Priams worthy Son
All other Ladies seemde to shonne
For love of Cresid: so do I
All Venus Dearlings quight defy,
In mind to love them all alee^e,
That leave a Trojan for a Greek.
The Lover declares what he would have if he might obtain his wish.
IF Gods would daine to lend
a listening ear to me
And yield me my demand at full,
what think you it to be?
Not to excel in seat
or wield the Regal Mace,
Or Scepter in such stately sort
as might commend the place.
For as their Hawle is hie,
so is their ruin rough,
As those that erst has felt the fall
declare it well enough.
Ne would I wish by war
and bloody blade in fist,
To gore the ground with giltlesse blood
of such as would resist.
For Tirants though a while
do lead their lives in joy,
Yet Tirants try in trackt of time
how bloodshed does annoy.
I would none office crave,
ne Consulship request:
For that such rule is full of rage,
and fraught with all unrest.
Ne would I wish for wealth
in great excess to flow,
Which keeps the Keys of discords Den
as all the world does know.
But my desire should far
such base requests excel,
That I might her enjoy at will
whom I do love so well.
O mighty God of Gods
I were assured than
In happy hap him to surpass
that were the happiest man.
Then might I martch in mirth
with well contented mind,
And joy to think that I in love
such blissful hap did find.
What friendly words would we
together then recite?
More than my tongue is able tell
or this poor Pen to write.
Then should my heart rejoice
and thereby comfort take,
As they have felt that erst have had
the use of such a Make.
If Fortune then would frown,
or sought me to disgrace:
The touching of her cherrie lip
such sorrows would displace.
Or if such grief did grow
as might procure my smart,
Her long and limber arms to me
might soon reduce my heart.
For as by foming floods
the fleating Fishes lives:
To Salamanders as the ^^me
their only comfort gives:
So does thy beauty ( P)
my sorrows quite expel:
And makes me fare where I should faint
unless thou loo^^ste me well.
And as by Waters want,
Fish falls to decay,
And Salamander can not live
when flame is taken away:
So absence from her sight
whole Seas of sorrows makes,
Which presence of that Paragon
by secret virtue slakes.
Would Death would spare to spoil
and crooked age to raze
(As they are wont by course of kind)
Pees beauty in this case.
Yet though their rigor rage,
and power by proof be plain:
If P. should die to morrow next,
yet P. should live again.
For Phaenix by his kind
to Phaenix will return,
When he by force of Phoebus flame
in scalding Skies do burn.
Then P. must needs revive
that is a Phaenix plain:
And P. by lack of lively breath
shall be a P. again.
Of a Gentlewoman that wild her Lover to wear green Bays in token of her
steadfast love toward him.
B: Told me that the Bay would aye be green,
And never change his hue for winters thret:
Wherefore (quoth she) that plainly may be seen
What love thy Lady bears, the Laurel get.
A branch aloft upon the Helmet wear,
Presuming that until the Laurel die
And loze his native color, I will bear
A faithful heart, and never swerue awrie.
I (siely soul) did smile with joyful brow
Hoping that Daphnis would retainde her hue
And not have chaungde: and likewise that the vow
My Lady made would make my Lady true.
O Gods, behold the chance, I wore the Tree,
And honored it as stay of steadfast Love:
But suddenly the Laurel might I see
To look as brown as does the brownest Dove.
I marueld much at this unwonted sight:
Within a day or two came news to me
That she had chaungde, and swarude her friendship quight
Wherefore affie in neither trull nor tree.
For I perceive that colors lightly change,
And Ladies love on sudden waxes strange.
An Epitaph of Master Edwards sometime Master of the Children of the
Chapel, and Gentleman of Lyncolns Inn of Court.
YE Learned Muses nine
and sacred Sisters all,
Now lay your cheerful Cithrons down
and to lamenting fall.
Rent off those Garlands green,
do Laurel Leaves away,
Remove the Myrtell from your brows
and stint on strings to play.
For he that led the dance
the chiefest of your train,
(I mean the man that Edwards height)
by cruel death is slain.
Ye Courtyers change your cheer,
lament in wailefull wise,
For now your Orpheus has resignde,
in clay his Carcas lies.
O ruth, he is bereft
that whilst he lived here
For Poets Pen and passing Wit
could have no English Peer.
His vain in Verse was such,
so stately eke his style
His feate in forging sugared Songs
with clean and curious file,
As all the learned Greeks
and Romans would repine
If they did live again, to vewe
his Verse with scornful eine.
From Plautus he the Palm
and learned Terence wan,
His writings well declarde the Wit
that lurcked in the man.
O Death thou stoodste in dread
that Edwards by his Art
And Wisdom would have scapte thy shaft
and fled thy furious Dart.
This fear enforste thy fist
thy cursed Bow to bend,
And let the fatal Arrow fly
that Edwards life did end.
But spite of all thy spite
when all thy hate is tried,
(Thou cursed Death) his earned praise
in Mouth of Man shall bide.
Wherefore (O Fame) I say
to trumpe thy lips apply,
And blow a blast that Edwards brute
may pierce the golden Sky.
For here bylow in earth
his name is so well known:
As each that knew his life, laments
that he so soon is gone.
An Epitaph on the death of Master Arthur Brook drownde in passing to New
Haven.
AT point to end and finishe this my Book,
Came good report to me, and wild me write
A doleful Verse, in praise of Authur Brook
That age to come lament his fortune might.
Agreede (quoth I) for sure his Virtues were
As many as his years in number few:
The Muses him in learned laps did bear,
And Pallas Dug this dainty Bab did chew.
Apollo lent him Lute for solace sake
To sound his Verse by touch of stately string,
And of the never fading Baye did make
A Laurel Crown, about his brows to cling,
In proof that he for Myter did excel
As may be judge by Iulyet and her Mate:
For there he shewde his cunning passing well
When he the Tale to English did translate.
But what? as he to foreign Realm was bownd
With others more his sovereign Queen to serve,
Amid the Seas unlucky youth was drowned,
More speedy death than such one did deserve.
Aye me, that time (thou crooked Delphin) where
Wast thou, Aryons help and only stay,
That safely him from Sea to shore did bear?
when Brook was drowned why wast you the^ away?
If sound of Harp thine ear delighted so
And causer was that he best^id thy back,
Then doubtless you moughst well on Brook bestow
As good a turn to save him from the wrack.
For sure his hand Aryons Harp excelled,
His pleasant Pen did pass the others skill,
Who so his Book with judging eye beheld
Gave thanks to him, and praisde his learned quill.
Thou cruel Goulf what meanst thou to deuowre
With supping Seas a Jewel of such fame?
Why did thou so with water mar the Flower
That Pallas thought so curiously to frame?
Unhappy was the Haven which he sought,
Cruel the Seas whereon his Ship did glide,
The winds to rough that Brook to ruin brought,
Unskillful he that undertook to glide.
But since tears can not revoke the ded,
Nor cries recall a drowned man to land:
Let this suffice textall the life he led
And print his praise in house of Fame to stand
That they that after us shall be and live
Deserved praise to Arthur Brook may give.
(quod) G. T.

Of the renowned Lady, Lady Anne Countess Warwick.
AN Earl was your Sire a worthy Wight,
A Cowntesse gave you Tet, a Noble Dame,
An Earl is your Feere, a Mars outright,
A Cowntesse eke your self of bruted fame*
A Brother Lord, your Father Earls Son,
Thus does your line in Lords and Earls run.
You were well known of Russels race a child,
Of Bedfords blood that now does live an Earl,
Now Warwicks wife, a warlike man in field,
A Venus Peer, a rich and Orient Pearl,
Wherefore to you that Sister, Child, and Wife
To Lord and Earls are, I wish long life.
You Alpha were when I this Book begoonne
And foremost, as became your state, did stand,
To be Omega now you will not shoonne,
(O Noble Dame) I trust: but take with hand
This ragged rhyme, and with a courteous look
And Cowntesse eye pervse this tryfling Book.
The Authors Epiloge to his Book
THe countnance of this Noble Cowntesse marck
When she thy Verse with eye that Sapphire like
Does shine suruayes, let be thy only carck
To note her Looks: and if she ought mislike
Say that thou should have hid it from her sight,
Thy Author made the best for her delight,
The woorst he willde in covert scrole to lurk
Until the Bear were ouerlickt afresh,
For why in deep this hasty hatched wurke
Resembles much the shapelesse lump of flesh
That Bears bring forth: So when I lick thee over
Thou shall (I trust) thy perfect shape recover.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Paternoster Row, at the
sign of the Star.

OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT.


Anno Domini 1567.

Cum Priuilegio.


