THE VSVRERS PLEA ANSWERED.

In a Sermon preached at Southampton the 18. day of July, being Thursday, and
their Lecture day, 1633.

By ROGER TVRNER Mr. of Arts, and Minister of Gods Word near SOUTHAMPTON.

AVG. in Psalm. 36. Sermon. 3. Qui prohibit te esse foeneratorum ille jubet te
esse foeneratorem.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Robert Bostocke, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Kings head, 1634.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful the Mayor, Aldermen, Burgesses, and the rest of that
ancient and famous Corporation of Southampton, the Author wishes the blessings
of this life and of a better.
GENTLEMEN, here is that presented to your eyes, which not long since sounded
in your ears; that common Apology for being men in print, (the importunity of
friends) cannot be altogether mine, for some whom this may most concern, will
least desire it; but when I remember that ancient saying of Lucian, Encomien
petriae.
(...), that the smoke of a man's own country is better than the fire of
another; I doubt not but that these my tender labors (which are but smoaky
vapors of ignorance, compared to the enlightening fire of others knowledge,
such as daily you hear) shall find an easier passage into your acceptance,
because here I had my first being where you all have your happy dwelling. 'Twas
once far from my meaning to have exposed my self to the paraphrase of this
censorious age, but rather to have hid this weak conception, never to have come
to the birth: but when it would no longer endure to be imprisoned in the womb,
but violently break forth; I thought (being my first borne) to deal
cautelously with it, though not with the Egyptians cruelly to murder it; yet
with Moses his parents charitably to hide it for my own private use, it might
have had the hap to have been still-borne, but it has cried, and some that
then heard it, have since desired to hear it speak, thinking it may live and
do some good, and although it speak somewhat bitterly, and bite so close
(which perhaps some may not relish) yet it bites nothing but sin, I see no
reason why we should spare the least sin, since for it the world was drowned
to punish it, the Law given to prevent it, the Son of the most high dyed to
satisfy for it, and the world shall again be destroyed to finish it, much
less a sin of this nature, so heinous, so detestable. For the matter hereof
I have imitated, not the spider, but the Be, the spiders web is not the more
commendable because it is woven out of its own bowels, nor the Bees honey
less useful and pleasant because it is gathered from several flowers, what
ever it be 'twas yours first in the intention and occasion; now in the
protection and nourishment: it is not so far put forth to nurse, but that the
parents shall quickly see the good usage of it, if it thrive in your keeping,
you have crowned the desires and endeavors of him who is at

Your service in Christ, and for his truth, ROGER TVRNER.

THE VSVRERS PLEA ANSWERED.
MATH. 25.27. Thou ought therefore to have put my money to the Exchangers,
that when J had come, J might have had my own with Usury.


THese words at the first view may seem to countenance a sin, too frequently
practiced in these gold-thirsty days; I mean that biting sin of Usury,
grown now to a profession; but the Text being parabolicall, cannot be a
sufficient foundation, whereon to raise an argument to prove the lawfulness
thereof: for it is an ancient saying in the Schools, that Scriptura parabolica
non est argumentativa: and besides, 22. q. 78. art. 1.1. m.
this Usury here in the Text is taken metaphorically (as Aquinas observes) for
spiritual thriftinesse, and the increase of those spiritual gifts and graces
which God bestows upon us, willing us to profit, gain, and go forward in
them; which tends to our advantage, not unto his; this will more easily appear
if we observe but the scope and drift of this parable, which I will but touch,
that so it may appear how far they are mistaken, who make this Text a
foundation whereon to ground the lawfulness of Usury.

The Parable begins thus; The Kingdom of heaven is like unto a man who going
into a far Country called his servants and delivered them his goods, to one
he gave five tallents, to another two, to a third one, to each man according to
his ability, prudence, and faculty to gain thereby, the first that had
received five tallents by his industry doubled them and gained five more; Verse
16.
so he that had received two, gained likewise other two; but he that received
one, fearing that if he should have employed his tallent, instead of gain he
might reap some detriment or loss, he therefore digs and hides his talent in
the earth, thinking that he had done sufficiently if he restored his money
whole to his Master as he received it.

After a long season, the Master of these servants returns to call them to
account; the first that by the well employment of his five tallents had gained
five more, is entertained by his Master both with praise and reward; so
likewise the second; but the third, when he came to give an account, confesses
that he had hid his tallent in the earth, and begins by laying an accusation on
his Master to excuse himself for so doing: I knew (says he to his Master)
that thou were an hard man, Verse 24.
reaping where thou sowedst not, and gathering where thou strowedst not; I was
therefore afraid, and went and hid my talent in the earth, behold thou have
thine own; but his Master by way of increpation retorts his own words, calling
him evil and slothful servant; seeing, says he, thou knew me to be such a
one as thou say, reaping where I sowed not, and gathering where I strowed
not, thou ought therefore to have given my money to the Exchangers, etc.

Now for the explication hereof, by a certain man here is meant our blessed
Savior, by going into a far country is meant his departure from earth to
heaven, where he now sits at the right hand of his Father, till he shall
return unto judgment, he called his servants, that is, us Christians into his
Church, to us be has delivered his goods i. e. gifts and blessings both
corporal and spiritual, for all are the gifts of God, now because God gives
not to every man alike, but on some he bestows greater gifts, on other lesser:
therefore the Master is here said to give to one servant five tallents, to
another two, to a third one, yet all these tallents, i. e. these gifts and
blessings are bestowed on us, not that they should be idle, but employed to
advantage and profit; now they are said to gain by their tallent who
religiously employ those gifts of God, as the understanding, will, memory, the
faculties of soul and body, arts, sciences, and all virtues, and so are every
day made richer in good works, and they are compared to the evil and
slothful servant, who having received many great and singular gifts from God,
do as it were fold them up in a Napkin, bury them in the earth, and suffer
them to rust for want of employment, neither benefiting themselves nor
profitting their neighbors; for in the interpretation of S. Hierome, he is
said to hide and bury his tallent in the earth, who savouring of nothing but
earthly things, gives himself over to the pleasures of this life, neglects the
Commandments of God, and choaks the good feed of faith by the thorny cares of
this world. This part of the parable then is interpreted of all those gifts in
general, which man receives from God, whether natural or supernatural, all
being bestowed that they may be improved in spiritual thriftinesse, in the
works of piety and holiness, and it agrees to all Christians in general, but
more especially (in the opinion of Marlorat and others) to the Ministers and
Pastors of the Church.

Concerning the tallent, there are diverse interpretations thereof, some by the
five tallents, understand the gift of the five senses, by the two tallents
knowledge and memory; by one, reason whereby men are distinguished from beasts;
others by the tallent understand the Word of God heard and taught; others the
gift of faith; others the gift of teaching; or any other gift or faculty
whatsoever, whereby a man may do good unto his Neighbor, whether by authority
to protect him, or by riches to help him, or by learning and wisdom to
instruct him, or by any other means whereby thou may help or profit thy
brother. But I hasten to the Text.

Which is nothing else but an Exprobration of the slothful servant, for not
employing his tallent as the two former had done: and this rebuke or check is
drawn from the custom of men in these days who were wont to let out their
money upon Usury; the word in the original is (...), Tablemates, they were
called Campsores or Foeneratores Exchangers, men that did either exchange great
sums of money and so gained thereby, or else they were such as were wont to
borrow money upon Usury; for such kind of men, wanting oftentimes great sums
of money (as Merchants are wont to do) were wont to take upon use, and
afterward pay it again with some profit to the lender; now this kind of gain
was without danger in respect of the principal. Therefore the Master says to
the evil and slothful servant, thou ought to have given my money to the
Exchangers, where there might have been gain without danger. Now because our
Savior by drawing a similitude, frames a comparison from the custom of those
times. Shall any man therefore make this Text a plea to justify him in the
practice of Usury? Math. 16.10.
as well may we prove the lawfulness of injustice from that Parable of the
theevish Steward; or of theft, because it is said, that Christ shall come like
a thief in the night; 1 These. 5.2.
or of heathenish Olympicke-games, in comparing the practice of Christians to
those rates; 1 Cor. 9.24. Math. 11.17.
or of dancing from that parabolicall speech, We have piped unto you, and ye
have not danced: But because this Text has been urged by some to prove the
lawfulness thereof, and that I have so oportunely met with this sin so
frequently practiced, so seldom preached against; nay, some that should tell
Judah of this fault, and Israel of this transgression, are such as the Prophet
Esaiah speaks of, Esa. 56.11.
where the Prophet is very bitter, men looking after their own ways, every
one for his own advantage, and for his own purpose, practisers hereof
themselves. I shall not go far beyond the limits of my Text, if I a little
prosecute this sin, and yet I must prevent a prejudicate opinion, I come not
like Aesops Fox, that having no tail, would needs persuade all the rest to
cut off theirs: or had I been bitten, I would not have come hither to snarle,
the sin is all I aim at, which I intend to pursue.

'Twas the saying of a merry man, that in Christendom, Heysin Geogr. p. 222.
there were neither Scholars enough, Gentlemen enough, nor Jews enough, and
when answer was made that of all these there were rather too great a plenty
than any scarcity at all, he replied, that if there were Scholars enough,
there would not be so many double and treble beneficed men as there are; if
Gentlemen enough, so many peasants would not be ranked amongst the Gentry; and
if Jews enough, so many Christians would not profess Usury, a sin which the
Christians first learned of the Jews; and what a shame is it that they should
now be thought to equal, if not exceed their teachers. But before we censure
this sin, let us first know what it is: the description of it is this, Pastum
ex mutuo lucrum; Wills. Did.
a gain exacted by covenant, above the principal only, in lieu and
recompense of the lending. There are five things belonging to Usury as
necessary: First, a principal, as wares, or sums of money; Secondly,
lending; thirdly, gain; fourthly, a chief purpose by lending to increase the
stock; and lastly, a covenant for that end, as the very desire and expectation
of gain, for lending only is mental and intentionall Usury, so the imposing,
or by covenant aforehand agreeing for increase above the principal is actual
Usury, which is clean opposite unto Gods Word, and may very fitly be termed
biting lucre, so the Hebrews terms it (...), which comes from the root (...),
which signifies to bite, and it is no ordinary biting, but it is usually taken
for the biting of Serpents, so the word is used Numb. 21.9.
(...) when the Serpent had bitten a man, then he looked to the Serpent of
brass and lived; now this kind of Usury, positive Laws do not only
restrain but not allow, and the Law of God does every where condeme, in the 22
of Exodus 25. Levit. 25.36, 37. the words are perspicuous and plain to every
man's capacity. Jf thou lend money to my people that is the poor amongst you,
thou shall not be as a Usurer unto him, thou shall not oppress him with Usury;
yet covetousness here Nodum in hoc scirpo quaesivit has found out a twofold
evasion to shun this precept, the first exception is verbal drawn from the
etymology of the word; the other is personal from the express mention of the
poor, here (say some) Usury is forbidden, but the word there used is (...)
which (as you now heard) is derived from a word which signifies to bite, so
that if it be not uncivil Usury, if it be toothlesse, if it be not biting
Usury, it is no breach of this precept, but first it is to be observed, that it is
a true and an ancient saying in the Schools, Bishop Andr. de Vsura theolog.
determ.
(...), the derivation of words is but a false witness, and not always to be
trusted; and again, this answer will not suffice, for there is no Usury but
bites more or less, some like the morning Wolf greedy of his prey, fastens
the teeth more deeply, and that which is but moderated or qualified (as men
think) perhaps, five, six, or seven in the hundred; yet what is this, but as
it is in the Greek proverb, (...), to shave to the very skin; and like the
Dog, flee to draw some blood: so that although all kind of Usury bite not
alike, yet there is no Usury at all that is toothlesse: Again, this answer
overthrowes the very ground of the Law which bids us to love our Neighbor as
our selves; it is but pharisaicall to say, so it be not biting Usury it matters
not, this is spoken like a goood Christian, Let me lend to my brother, so I
may profit him, so I may do him good thereby.

Again, in Exodus 22. and Leviticus 25. there is express mention made of the
poor; therefore (say some) so long as we put not our money to use to poor men
the matter is safe enough, but this is easily answered, that although these two
places make mention of the poor, yet in the 23. of Deuteronomy. 19. there is an
absolute law without any relation at all to the poor man, thou shall not give
to Usury to thy Brother, usury of money, usury of meal, usury of any thing
that is put to usury; and whereas it is said in the verse following, unto a
stranger thou may lend upon Usury; this was permitted for a time, not as
lawful, but for avoiding of a greater mischief, and for the hardness of
their hearts, as our Savior speaks of their other practices Math. 19.8.
but we that live in the glorious Sunshine of the Gospel, ought to account
every man our Neighbor and our Brother.

But to proceed, because the Law forbids taking Usury of the poor man, does it
therefore permit taking Usury of the rich? this can neither be good
consequence nor good Divinity, let me parallel this place with some other
places of Scripture; Exodus 22.22.
it said ye shall not trouble any widow or fatherless child, does it
therefore follow that it is lawful to wrong him that has a father, or her
that has a husband? Deuteronomy. 27.18.
The Law says, Cursed is he that makes the blind go out of his way, does it
therefore permit not to show the way to him that can see? Deuteronomy. 24.14.
The Law provides that the hired servant if he be needy and poor shall not
be oppressed, but have his wages paid him; shall we therefore conclude, that
if he be not needy and poor, he shall be deprived thereof? But to come a
little nearer I would gladly know the reason, seeing it is unlawful to lend
money upon usury to the poor, why should it be lawful to the rich? is it
because his bags are fuller, he may better spare it without prejudice or
detriment? and is not this to plead the case of the Thief, may not the same
reason serve for the Thief as for the Usurer, the Thief may say thus with
himself, this is a poor man and to be pitied, but that is a rich, a well
monyed-man, I will rob him, because he can spare it, he can want it without
detriment or wrong unto his estate; but we all know that be a man poor or be
he rich, theft is utterly unlawful; so that here Usury is made no less than a
kind of robberry, and as one terms it, Terrestris piratica, a kind of
land-pyracy: So then you see that neither the word, neither in the Text, nor
yet the express mention of the poor hinders, but that this precept is
universal, and that all kind of Usury, whether civil or uncivil, whether
exacted from those of the lowest condition, or from the richer sort of men, but
is here condemned as unlawful.

I will urge this precept a little further. In the Law there are three things
the thing forbidden, the censure, and the penalty; the thing forbidden you have
already heard, the censure follows; that is, how this sin of Usury has
been thought on, and amongst what sins it has been ranked in former ages,
and if you read the Scriptures (which is always wont to admire Saul amongst
the Prophets) you shall find a very severe and heavy taxation of this sin,
read but Ezekiel. 18.8. Basil.
where you shall find this sin to use the words of a Father (...), the holy
Prophet reckons it in the very midst of most abominable sins, upon the
committing of one of which, death follows, as verse. 13. or has given forth
upon usury, or has taken increase shall he live? and it is answered in the very
next words, He shall not live, he shall dye the death, and his blood shall
be upon him. The penalty is next, and that is twofold, in this life, and that
which is to come: First, in this life read Prove 28.8.
He that increases his riches by Usury and interest, gathers them for him
that will be mereifull to the poor; where this transferring of such riches to
uncertain heirs is an argument of an unjust possession, and therefore
unjustly possessed, because unjustly gained: Secondly, in the life to come, and
that is the curse of God. Out of the Psalm. 15.5.
Saint Ambrose frames this Argument, if he be blessed that has not given his
money upon Usury, then doubtless he is cursed that has. Now from the Law it
self I proceed to the intent and purpose of it: Saint Paul does very aptly
explain that general rule and true meaning of all lawful contracts (...), 2
Cor. 8.14.
that there may be equality (says he) which was by the very heathens
themselves called the fountain of Justice; this equality is of two sorts,
either internal of the mind, or else in things themselves externally
covenanted for: That equality or proportion of mind our Savior (the best
interpreter of his Fathers will) has placed in this that whatsoever we would
that men should do unto us, even so also should we do unto them Mat. 7.12.
. Now mark, there is none (I presume) that desires to have the yoke of Usury
laid on his neck, no not so much as toothlesse Usury (as they term it) but
rather none than any at all. Let a man then deal thus with his Brother, let
our Saviors rule flourish, let Usury perish; and as for things themselves, if
we look to the covenant for loan, there is no equity or equality at all,
Exodus 22.15.
but the equity of Gods own Law, the borrower shall not make it good, for if
it be a hired thing it came for the hire, it is added, if the owner thereof
stand by (to wit) that it appear to perish, or by hurt, not by any default of
the borower, so admit that money could by Usurers be made a hired thing, yet
the equity of Gods Law binds that if it appear to miscarry without the fault
of the owner, the borrower shall not make it good, because it came for hire. So
you see here is no equity, the Usurer receives great gain without labor,
clear gain without cost, certain gain without peril, out of the industry,
the charges, the mere uncertainties of the borrower, a cleanely Alchymist that
can extract much silver and wast nothing in smoke, these are the Kine of
Bashan, that feed upon the Commons. Amos 4.1.


As Nature teaches men to do that which is seemly, kind, and natural, so
Religion teaches Christians in all their affairs, to depend upon Gods
providence, and expect a blessing from heaven; so it ought to be, and so it is
in all professions except Usury, Nullum de Deo hominum genus pejus sentiunt
quam Danistarum, of all sort of men, the Usurer thinks worst of God, and will
least trust him, be it fair or foul, he will be sure of his money. The
Husbandman looks up to the clouds, and prays for seasonable weather; the
Merchant observes the wind, and prays God to deliver him from tempest and
wrack; the Tradesman wishes the people may have money that he may vent his
wares at a reasonable rate, and live in some good fashion; the laboring man
prays for work and health, that he may be able to get a poor living by the
sweat of his brows; only the Mony-monger has least need of all other men to
say his prayers, be it wet or dry, be it tempest or calm, let the wind blow
East, West, North, or South; be he well, or be he sick, be he gowty or lame,
or sound of body, let him be what he will, or do what he list, he shall be
sure of his money, for time only works for him; all the days in the Almanacke
are set aworke to work out his gain; nay the Sabbath shall not be omitted,
the red letter is as good for his purpose as the black, to help make up the
number of days, of weeks, of months, so the time goes out, and his money
comes in, and he seems not to stand in that need of Gods providence as other
honest men do, and can we think in conscience, that God is pleased with such
a life?

And thus you see in the first place, that Usury is absolutely condemned from
the authority of sacred Scriptures; and where this oracle vouchsafes to speak,
we need no farther authority for confirmation; but unto this may be added a
cloud of witnesses, as first the consent of Churches East and West, and if we
reverence the judgment of reverend men both for their learning and sanctimony
of life, they ought to be a great motive to sway our judgments herein; all
which were so far from moderating or qualifying this practice of Usury, that
whenever they met with it, they sharpened their pens, as if their spirits were
moved and stirred in them more than ordinarily.

So likewise the Church assembled in Counsels, have flatly decreed against it;
Clergymen for this sin to be degraded; the Laity to be excommunicated: all
this (I suppose) is enough to prove Usury a sin. But yet if the light of
nature be able to discover the same, 'twill aggravate the matter much more;
there are Moats which are not discerned but in the Sunshine; Saint Paul faith
Romans 7.7.
that he had not known that concupiscence had been a sin, except the law
had manifested the same; and suppose that Usury were but as a moat in the eye,
yet that were troublesome, because the eye is tender, as the conscience of
every Christian ought to be, but if the inhabitants of the Regions of
darkness that never saw the sunshine of revealed truth, shall
notwithstanding discern Usury to be inordinate and vicious, doubtless then
it is no Moat; beams may be discovered by the twilight of nature, and so has
Usury ever been held even amongst the heathens themselves for a gross
inormity.

Plato in his Laws, and his Scholar Aristotle in his Politics, have forbidden
it as unlawful, 1 Lib. cap. 7. polit. Cic. de Off. lib. 2. Seneca lib. 7. de
Benef.
and condemned it as unnatural; Cato makes it twice as bad as theft, and
equals it with murder^ Quid foenerari? quid hominem occidere? ( Seneca in his
7. book De Benef.) Quid foenus and Kalendarium and Vsura nisi humanae
cupiditates extra naturam quaesita nomina; he finds a place for it in the
Kallender, but not in nature. Plutarch. (...).
Plutarch writes that Usurers mock the Philosophers for that old Principle, Ex
nihilo nihil fit, because they can make something of nothing; and hence happily
it is that the Latins proper term for Usury is Foenus quasi foetus pecuniae,
the brood of money; and in the same sense did the Greeks call it (...), which
signifies to breed or bring forth, though some would derive (...) from the
Hebrew word (...) which signifies deceit or oppression; as if Usury were not to
be misliked for its own sake, unless it were convicted of some sensible
oppression, but the consent of the Grammarians fetches it nearer hand, taking
the Nowne from the Verb, and the primitive signification of (...) is birth,
next it signifies the issue it self, as the firstborn is called (...) and
according to these two significations, some have given a double reason of this
name, Ambrose lib. de Tobia cap. 12.
Graeci appellarunt Vsuras (...) eo quod dolores partus animae debitoris
excitare videantur, the Grecians call Usury by a name which signifies birth,
because it brings the pangs of travel upon the soul of the Debtor; a woman in
travel does not sweat and labor to bring forth with greater anguish of mind,
than a Debtor compelled to bring home the principal with increase. Another
^asi^.
makes Month (...) the only fathers; and borrowers, the only mothers to bring
forth this unnatural brood of Usury, unnatural even as the brood of Vipers,
which eat through the entralls of their mother; so does the borrower bring
forth to the Usurer, to the destruction oftentimes of himself and family. And
Saint Chrysostom says that money thus lent, In quintum Mathei.
is like the biting of the Serpent, called Aspis, for he that is stung by that
Serpent feels a kind of pleasant itch, whereby he falls asleep, Pliny makes
mention of a worm called Teredos that breeds in Timber, Plin. lib. 7. Not.
Hist.
which being touched or handled, seems very soft, and yet has such hard
teeth, that it destroys all manner of wood, the Bark, and out side remaining
entire. Many men now adays make a fair show with other men's money thus
borrowed, but if every Bird should fetch his feather, would be as naked as
Aesops Crow, for when death hewes them down, their estates prove like a hollow
tree, no sound Timber for posterity to build withal; for this worm of Usury
has gnawed away their substance: Money thus taken up is like a new piece put
into an old garment, which being taken away the rent is made worse.

Now he that is a Usurer, if you ask what he is, Aristotle, to call money
barren, which yields a double harvest, at the least, every year, and the
former crop makes seed-Corne for the next.

Nature has established to all things under the Sun, a certain term, and
pitch, when they shall make stay of increase, and multiplying; the land if it
want a jubilee, will in time grow heartlesse; houses if they be not re-edified,
will decay; trees will leave bearing; cattle breeding, when they grow old;
men's labors and skill will fail with years, only the Usurers money does
multiply infinitely, the longer the lustier, if he can but live he may see his
moneys moneys money; even to an hundred generations; and is not this unnatural?
Surely it has but small resemblance to that natural increase, which the God
of nature has established, as most innocent amongst men; is it not strange,
that men of all ages should inveigh so bitterly against this sin, it seems
it is of a most devouring nature, as the Poet says Lucan.
Hinc Vsura vorax avidumque in pectore foenus, and brings men to strange
extremities, Aristoph. comaed. de nubibus.
as it did poor Strepsiades (whose estate was ship-wrackt by fraighting with
Usury) that could devise no better shift than to a hire a Witch to pull the
Moon out of Heaven, that the Usurers months might never come about.

If this sin then can find no footing, either in Divinity or Nature, how
shall it stand? Divines have excommunicated it out of the Church; Philosophers
have proved it a Monster in Nature; yet for all this it has taken deep root
in Commonwealths, both Heathenish and Christian; the ancient Romans, seeing
the mischief of Usury, would tolerate but their Foenus unciarium, Tacitus
lib. 5. ^^nalium.
one in the hundred (as Cornelius Tacitus relates) and whosoever exceeded that,
should be punished fourfold; whereas by the Law of their twelve Tables,
theft was to he punished but twofold; it seems in those days if thieves had
been scarce, Foeneratores bis fures, a Usurer was to go for two: Mahomet
himself has condemned it amongst the Turks, Alcoran Azoar 4.6.11.
as is to be seen in their Alcoran, and ascribes the miseries of the Jews to
this sin of Usury. So careful have Governors ever been amongst Heathen and
Barbarians to suppress this Monster; for what Country has Usury ever been
suffered in, which in time has not rued the same? Cicily was in great bondage
by it, till Cato set it at liberty; Sparta in no less calamity, till Licurgus
redeemed it; all Egypt so plagued with it, that they were glad to make a Law,
that none should borrow, unless he laid his Fathers corpse to pawn; Athens
infected with it, till Agis his bone-fire of Usurers bonds had purged that City.

Meditating upon that plague of Flies, which was the fourth plague which God
sent upon the Egyptians Exodus 8.24.
. Considering the nature of these, we may not unfitly compare Usurers unto
them, for as these flies did suck out the Egyptians blood, by biting and
stinging, and causing of smart, so these men with their, Noverint Vniversi,
make a universal ruin of many a man's estate, and so fetch him in still with
the condition of the obligation, that at length his condition is woeful, and
his very heart breaks with the bitter thought of, Be it known unto all men:
these are cursed flies, the suckers of men's sap, the drinkers of their blood,
the Egyptian Fly was nothing like these, but it was a great plague of God,
sent to punish the sins of men, but withal let us remember that these flies
of Egypt had but a time, God sent them in wrath, and took them away in mercy:
upon entreaty, some Moses or other, may in time stand up, and God may send a
strong West-wind to sweep these canker worms away; if England were as well
cleared of these, as it is of Wolves, it would be so much the happier.

What then must be the conclusion of all the premises, Charity, Justice,
Piety; Nature her self, the Laws of God and of men, all authority, ancient
and modern, joining their forces against the Usurer, how can be stand
environed with such a cloud of witnesses, or justify himself against the day
of trial? Yet few men there are in these days that have any remorse or touch
of conscience for this sin, their consciences are caute rized as with a hot
iron, there is such a thick skin grown over their hearts, that they will
hardly be circumcized in this point, and this senseless stupidity seems to
proceed originally from three principal causes; first, the general practice
of Usury makes every one in particular to think that he shall shift as well as
others; now custom and example though it would not be admitted in Schools for
an argument, yet it works much upon vulgar understandings, for the people
being as Labans sheep, led by the eye, conceive as they fee; seeing therefore
Usury so much practiced of all sorts, men are thereby without farther
consideration much moved to think it lawful. If it be so heinous a sin to
take Usury as you make it (say some) what shall become of such and such, who (I
am sure) have as good souls to God as I? pray God I have no greater sin to
answer for than this, and then I hope I shall do well enough. See the power and
efficacy of example, but let none be so simple as to think that the custom of
any thing should make it lawful; this is a fearful temptation to be drawn
into sin by imitation; 'twas that which turned so many legions of Angels into
Devils, to see the brighter and more glorious Spirits leave their station by
disobedience; but did that mitigate Gods wrath toward them of inferior rank?
no, Divine justice required that they who were drawn into the same fault,
should be enwrapped in the same condemnation: when there were but two in all
the world to transgress, concerning that only forbidden fruit, the example of
the one enticed the other, but did that extenuate the fault? Nothing less: if
any man therefore through ignorance has been drawn to the practise^ ^f this
sin? (and I persuade my self did some know how dangerous a practice Usury
is, they would never venture their souls upon it) let such as they tender their
own souls, take notice how this of ignorance will not excuse, but rather
condemn them that have so good means of better resolution, if God would move
their hearts to seek after it: be well resolved then before your practice,
trust not your own resolution in this case; Mammon is subtle to beguile you,
therefore be as diligent to take counsel for your souls in Religion, as you
are for your bodies in Physic, or your goods in law; and desire no less
security of conscience in this question of Usury, than you do for your
principal in the practice of it: Let not the practice of some one minister
amongst you encourage any to the like practice, or because it is a question,
therefore because it is a question, let it not arm any against remorse or
touch of conscience. Calvin, who is the supposed Patron of Usury, does no way
countenance it, as it is practiced in these days: If any man therefore shall
take you aside, as Peter did Christ, Mat. 26.23.
to favor your dealing herein, suspect that whispering to savor not the
things which be of God, but the things that be of men.

From example, let us come in the second place to affection, which is as
perverse in judgment, as the former is powerful, to lead into error; this
seems to arise out of Charity, but Charity is no Charity if it oppose Justice:
it is a cruel pity that tenders the outward estate of any to the hurt and
prejudice of the soul. If Usury (say some) be not lawful for any to practice:
Alas! What shall become of the poor Orphants and Widows, in these unjust
days, that have Stocks of Money left them, and want skill to employ the same?
By Gods help they shall do well: Our greater care should be, what shall
become of poor Orphans and Widows, in these uncharitable days, that have no
Stocks at all left them: though (I confess) both the one and the other are
alike in this, that they are not so able to help themselves as others be;
therefore there be no two estates among men, over whom God has a more
provident and tender care, than over Widows and fatherless children; Exodus
22. v. 22.
he has provided for them by a special Law, Thou shall not trouble any Widow
or fatherless child: No one Law more iterated by Moses, and frequently urged
by the Prophets, than this, for the safeguard of Orphants and Widows: Whom, if
mortal men shall neglect, God himself (in his fatherly providence) will be
their protector: Psalm. 68. v. 5.
He is a Father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the Widow; even God in his
holy habitation (as the Prophet David speaks.) Yea, God would work a Miracle,
rather than the poor Widow of the son of the Prophets, with her two
fatherless children, 2. Kings 4.1.
should want. The Son of God shows the like tender affection, in denouncing
a Woe against such as devoured Widows houses: And his Apostle James measures
true Religion, Matthew. 23.14. Iam. 1.
and undefiled before God, even the Father, by charity toward the fatherless
and Widows. Has God then so many ways bound himself by promise to provide
for Widows and Orphants; and shall these, by Usury, withdraw themselves out
of his fatherly providence? Shall these be secured by Usurious Contracts,
against the Act of God himself? Certainly, God will take it more unkindly at
their hands than at any other. Observe but the difference in this point,
betwixt the wisdom of God and the World: The World thinks Usury the best and
safest way for Orphants and Widows, because it does secure them most from all
casualties which may fall upon their estates by any act, either of God or man:
the wisdom of God contrariwise is, That these persons should most of all cast
their care upon him, because he cares most for them. But of all practices,
Usury does most withdraw them from dependence upon Gods fatherly providence;
which best beseemes their condition. If Usury then be unlawful in case of
Orphants, it is most unlawful: And doubtless, if Almighty God had thought it
fit to have tolerated Usury in these persons, he might as easily have
mentioned the same, Deuteronomy. 23.19.
as he does the toleration of lending to strangers. But it was so far from
his meaning, that in the very same place where he makes a Law for the safeguard
of Orphants and Widows, presently upon it is annexed the Law against Usury.
Exodus 22.22. etc.
Shall these then, who are so well provided for by a special Law of God, be
transgressors of the very next Law unto it? God forbid! Orphants are coming
into the World, Widows (who intend to continue so) are going out of the World.
And shall these two Ages (which of all other ought to be most heavenly, the one
for innocence, the other for devotion) be stained with Usury? Christ is Alpha
and Omega unto us, the first and the last, the beginning and the end: And shall
the Alpha of our Nonage, and the Omega of our Dotage, be dedicated to Usury?
Christ calls himself by the name of a Letter, the first Letter in the
Alphabet,

And as for Widows that profess themselves now in their latter age, to leave
the World, to betake themselves to God, to be so married unto their only
Husband, Christ, as that they may quietly say their Prayers, hear Sermons, and
live upon Usury: Alas! Who ever taught them thus to join God and Mammon
together? Let such look into their own estate and condition: God has made
them Stewards of their own Stock of Money; it is they that stand answerable
before God, for the use or abuse of such Sums put forth into the hands of
others: and when they gain eight in the Hundred, the Borrowers must gain a
great deal more clear, besides many Charges and Duties to be paid out of
their Gain: And how do these Widows know who is oppressed or bitten by this
Gain? Let such then be troubled in Conscience for this sin; Bernard.
Mordeat hic ut moriatur illic: Let the Worm bite here, that it may dye
elsewhere.

As for old men, who decaying in the faculties of mind and body, are forced to
leave their Trade; and then they ask what they shall do, having gotten some
Money together in a lawful Calling, and are not able to follow it any longer?
For my part, I can tell them what they must not do. Is there no Fruit in the
Garden, but the forbidden Fruit? Have they spent their strength, and worn
their senses, to live at ease (without labor) when they are old; and have they
not taken some care for the ease of conscience, how to live without sin, when
they are aged? Will they entangle their souls in the practice of Usury, when
they have one foot in the grave? Has God blessed their labors in youth, and
will they forsake him in age? What a shame is it, that they should pollute
themselves with filthy Lucre, when they should be most dedicated to Devotion?
The unjust Steward when he was to give over his Stewardship, Luke 16.
(and so must old men shortly do) he consults with himself what to do;
Fodere nescio mendicare erubesco; take pains he cannot, those days are past;
spend upon the Principal, would soon bring him to beggerie: at last he
concludes; I know what I will do, I will turn a hundred into a hundred and
eight. I commend these men, as our Savior did the unjust Steward, for doing
wisely: wise, in that they make choice of so easy, so secure a gain: (For
Pliny calls Usury, Quaestuosa segnitius; and another as wittily, Chimiani
Satanae, the Devils Alchimie) I say so great and certain gain, fit for such
Seniors: for they are attentiores ad rem, quo minus viae eo plus viatici; most
studious of provision in age, when the way is shortest. The children of this
World (says our Savior in the same Chapter) are wiser in their generations
than the children of Light; wiser than the Patriarchs and Prophets of the Old
Testament; wiser than the Apostles and Evangelists of the New; wiser than the
Fathers and Councels of succeeding ages; wiser than any of the Saints of God
that lived in former times; for we read of none of them that had the wit
either to practice Usury themselves, or by any distinction to approve of it,
find it lawful in others: nay, the Schoolmen with their most acute and
subtle wits, who did set themselves to coin distinctions, and to find out the
most exact difference of things, that were able to dart an argument, as the men
of Gibeon did stones at a hairs breadth; Judge. 20.16.
yet were never so quicke-sighted as some in these days are, to find out a
distinction to salve a Usurers conscience.

Others again, urge a supposed necessity of Usury, pretending that the state
of a Corporation cannot stand, traffic cannot be maintained, Tradesmen
cannot live without it; I confess my ignorance in matters of policy, but I am
sure that rule of the Apostle holds true in Divinity, Romans 3.
We must not do evil that good may come thereof. Besides, I would ask these
men, that pretend they cannot live without taking up money at interest; is their
meaning that they cannot live in that pomp they do, maintain their wives in
those fashions that they do, drive their Trades to that height which they do?
if this be all, the answer is easy? perhaps God would not have them bear so
great a sail as they do, but to drink of the waters of their own Well,
Prove. 5.15.
to be content with such blessings as Gods fatherly providence does offer them;
there is no necessity for a man to enrich himself by such practices as are
forbidden, or unlawful: Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, Prove.
15.16.
than great treasure with trouble. Gods Law did ever intend that men should
lend one another in charity, to the poor in friendship, to their equals to
receive the like courtesy again; which duty, if men would but practice, there
were no necessity of Usury. A Drunkard has brought his body to such a habit,
that unless he drink liberally, even to the turning of his brains, he will
be sick again; is not drunkenness in that man sinful, because so necessary?
A proud woman has been wedded so long to her will, that if she be crossed in
it, she will grow mad for pride, like Nabuchadnezzar, or else dye with
fretfulnesse (like a Weezill in a Cage) shall her wilfulness be excused,
because her devilish stomach is grown too strong for her wit? So then you
may take notice of the weakness of this argument, that Usury must therefore
needs be lawful, because some men's ambition or covetousness has made it
necessary. And here may be touched that question moved by Aquinas, 2.2.73.
quest. art. 4.
whether a man may lawfully borrow money upon Usury? for the Apostle says; that
they are worthy of death, not only they that do the same, Romans 1.31.
but they that favor them that do them. It Is answered that no man ought to
induce another to sin, yet a man may make use of another man's sin to some
good end, so God oftentimes makes use of some men's wickedness to good purposes;
so a man may lawfully give Usury where inevitable occasions shall enforce an
invincible necessity, either for the preservation of his credit and estate, or
for supply of present wants, either of nature or person, as it is lawful for a
man (falling amongst Thieves) to tell how much money he has, to the end, he
may have his life: According to the example of those ten men, Ier. 41.8.
who said to Ismael, Slay us not, for we have Treasure in the Field. If these
occasions be imposed and not drawn upon a man by some former negligence or
default, if he attempt to borrow no more than he shall be able to pay at the
time, if upon such occasions he cannot borrow freely, then is he no agent in
the sin, but a mere patient in the opression of Usury.

To conclude then, let not those poor evasions of biting and toothlesse Usury
deceive us, they are but as fig leaves, shapen by some indulgent wits to
cover the nakedness of that which the Law of God, of nature, and equity have
discovered to be deformed and naked in it self, as if there were some Usury
without the meaning of Gods Law, or as if God had never meant to condemn
Usurers, but only to muzzle them for biting: some are content to moderate
themselves in this kind of gain, and then if it be a sin, it is but a little
one (as Lot said of Zoar) and my soul shall live; Genesis 19.20.
Modicae s^^ quae perdunt nos, they are little ones that und^e us; a meat in
the eye, if it be not gotten forth in time, may grow to a pin and a web:
And a man's conscience may suffer shippe-wracke as well on a sand as upon a
rock; he that heaps up moderate sins wrackes his soul upon a sand, and so
sinking by little and little, his conscience is at length swallowed without any
sense or feeling at all.

And as for that personal exception, let not that deceive us, because some
will not oppress the poor; therefore they will lend their money to a rich
Merchant. Does the Ass bray, Job 6.5.
when he has Provender; or loweth the Oxe^, when he has Fodder? To what end
does be borrow, being of sufficient wealth already? but only that he may
compass greater matters than his own stock will reach unto; what warrant is
there in equity and conscience, either for him to borrow, or such to lend? let
him plow with his own Heifer, and drink of the Waters of his own Well; Heb.
13.5.
let him follow the Apostles rule, to be content with what he has: If this
were practiced, then would not the greater Merchants, like the great Fishes,
swallow the lesser Fry, but all might live comfortably one by another.

Lastly, let Charity, Justice, Piety, Nature her self, the Laws of God and
man, all authority ancient and modern, (joining their forces against this
sin) at last prevail against it. For my own part, I have endeavored to
satisfy my self in this point; for I had rather find my self at home in my
own conscience, than seek my self abroad, in other men's practices. 1 King.
18.
And in the next place, I have presumed a little to trouble Israel in this
sin: I know I shall incur variety of censure; so that being thought too
busy, perhaps I shall be constrained to take up that Text of Scripture, Zach.
13.6.
* Lo thus am I wounded in the house of my friends. But be they friends, or be
they strangers; let them strike with their tongue, and wound at their pleasure;
if I have awakened but any one man's conscience, to see the wounds that this
sin has made in it, I have my reward. Let me crave your attention to one
observation upon the Text, and so I will conclude: Thou ought to have given
my money to the Exchangers, etc. that when I had come, I might have had my own
(...), with advantage, it is in some Translations; the Vulgar, cum Vsura; Beza,
cum foenore: the word is properly, with Usury. Here we see God is the Usurer,
lending Talents unto men to lay out, that he may have his own again with
interest. Qui prohibet te esse foeneratorem ille jubet te esse foeneratorem
(says Saint Augustine. In Psalm. 36. Sermon. 3.
) He that forbids thee to be an Usurer, commands thee to be an Usurer, (viz.)
in the dispensation of those spiritual gifts which God bestows upon us. Exodus
25.25.
* In the Tabernacle there were small and great Vessels; some smaller Cups,
some greater Goblets: yet all these Vessels, both small and great, did serve
for the use of the Tabernacle. So should it be in the Church: every one should
employ the Talent which he has received, to the best advantage that he can;
to the glory of God, and the salvation of his own soul. Nolite quiescere
lucrari Christo quia lucrati estis a Christo (says Saint Augustine.) Let us
not cease to be gayners unto Christ, because we our selves were gained by
him. The Ministers must give their Money to the Exchangers, (i.) they must
preach the Word of God unto the people, (so venerable Bede upon Luke 19.) Qui
verbi pecuniam a Doctore percipit emitque credendo necesse est eam cum Vsuris
solvat operando, ut quod auditu didicit exequatur and actu; He that has
received that heavenly Money of Gods blessed Word from the mouth of the
Preacher, (...) must ^ay it again with interest, (i.) He must (...) has
heard with his ear, to express in his life and conversation; laboring to say
with Saint Paul: 1. Cor. 15.10.
The grace that was in me, was not in vain. Where God sows, he expects his
Harvest: and no Grain so mean in our estimation, out of which in proportion
he expects not a timely Croppe.

This is that spiritual Usury which God requires at our hands: Which if we
strive to pay him here, we shall hereafter, both Pastor and people, hear that
happy Welcome which our Savior himself pronounces to those two faithful
Servants in the 23. Verse of this Chapter, Enter into the joy of your Master.
Into which joy, thou O Father, bring us all, for thy dear Sons sake, Christ
Jesus: to whom, with thy self and blessed Spirit, be ascribed all honor, etc.

FINIS.

