AN EXPOSITION UPON THE CANONICAL EPISTLE OF SAINT JAMES: WITH THE Tables,
Analysis, and resolution, both of the whole Epistle, and every Chapter
thereof: with the particular resolution of every singular place.

DIVIDED INTO 28. LECTVRES OR SERmons, made by Richard Turnbull, sometimes
fellow of Corpus Christie College in Oxford: now preacher and minister of the
word of God and the holy Sacraments, in the city of London.

JESUS CHRISTVS
CONTERET CAPVT TVV^ GEN: 3 ERO MORSVS INFERN TVVS OSE 18 CONFIDITE VICI MV^DV^
IOA 10 VBI TVA MORS VICTORIA 1 COR: 15

Imprinted at London by John Windet. 1591.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, my Lord his grace, Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England: Richard Turnbull wishes
grace, peace with faith, from God the father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ,
to be multiplied.
WHEN I call to mind (right reverend father) that worthy saying and sentence
of the divine Philosopher Plato, repeated by Marcus Cicero, the famous Orator
of the Romans, in that his work which is written of duties; that we are not
born for our selves alone: but our Country chalengeth one part of us; our
parents another; our children another; and often recounting and recording in
memory, the place of the blessed Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, Saint
Peter, wherein he protests, to give al diligence, not only to stir up the
Saints of God, to virtue and knowledge, so long as he remained in the earthly
tabernacle of his flesh, and lived among them; but also to endeavor, that they
might make mention of those things which he had taught the^, even after his
death and departure out of this life: I think with my self, and am persuaded
in mind, that it is my bounden duty in like manner; (and the duty of all the
learned brethren) according to the measure of grace, and gift of knowledge
given, and received from God, to bend al my study, to employ al my labor, to
give all my diligence, and do al my endeavor, not only with lively voice
through preaching, but also by writing, to profit the Saints, and benefit
(wherein I may) the Church of God, and the holy congregation of Jesus Christ.

And not ignorant how greatly it avails, and how singularly it profits
every manner of way; in so great diversity, and as it were confusion, and
laberinth of opinions to hold fast, and retain immouably, undoubted, and sure
arguments of the certain and infallible truth of the sacred word of God, and
most glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ: and knowing no place in all the whole
book of the new testament, either more violently wroung, or more forceably
stretched, or more straungely wrested from the mind, purpose, and meaning of
the writer, by our adversaries the papists, the enemies of the Gospel, to the
defense of false opinions and assertions of faith and religion, the^ the
treatise of S. James touching the necessity of good works, in the freely
justified Saints by faith in Christ, and borne again by the word of truth: I
determined at length, and became resolute in my self, by the aid and
assisting grace of God, to read and expound that epistle of James, to my
parishioners of S. Mari-Colechurch in Chepeside: to the end that the
co^trouersy betwixt us and the papists, might the better be debated: that the
place of S. James might the more thoroughly be examined: that the truth of
heavenly knowledge might more manifestly be apparent; that simple and unlearned
men by the plain delivery of wholesome doctrine might the better be edified;
that all occasion of surmised difference, and all likelihood of contrariety
betwixt S. James, and S. Paul, might be removed.

Which epistle I having finished, and run over, in a plain method, in an
easy order, in such a manner, as might best serve for the instruction of the
simple; and by occasion intimating and signifying so much unto certain learned
preachers of the city; they forthwith persuaded me to bestow some labor to put
in writing that, which by word of mouth I had preached; and to set forth
publicly, what privately I had uttered to my special charge and people:
assuring me, that there would therehence redound and rise profit to the
commonwealth and church of Christ.

Whereunto at the first I could not be persuaded to agree; neither might I be
brought to condescend unto their honest request, fearing the sharp censure and
hard judgment of those men, whom nothing pleases but that, which is excellent
for wit, singular for learning, rare for knowledge, perfect and pollished with
all variety of things, and ornaments of eloquence: taught in like manner,
through practice of time, use of things, trial of long experience, that in
these latter and perilous days, whereinto we are fallen by the will of God:
men flow, swarm, and every where abound; which either spending their own
time in idleness, vanity and slothfulness; either studious of learning; yet
envying as it were, common utility and profit; will neither set forth any
thing themselves to do good to others: neither like of the labors, studies,
endeavors, and travels of other men. Wherefore they either tear them with the
sharp teeth of bitter backbiting: or stinge them with the venomous tongue of
reprochful slander: or strike them with the heavy rod of undeserved
reprehension: or finally wound the^ with the bloody sword of malicious
defamation.

Notwithstanding all this; at length, partly moved by Christian duty; partly
drawn on by brotherly entreatie; partly allured with hope, that by this labor
it may please God, that I may win at the least, some one silly soul unto
the sheepfolde of Jesus Christ: (a labor no doubt more excellent, then to
subdue kingdoms by dinte of sword, and nations by force of arms: and a thing
without controversy, not only counteruayling all the travels of any one man,
but also counterpeazing the pains of many:) I consented and agreed to the
propounded motion.

Laying therefore aside the greater part of former fear, and setting at light
the curious reprehensions of those Momi, and malicious persons, who^ nothing
pleases, but what is picked out of their own fingers ends; framed by their
own brains; imagined of their own heads, and conceived by themselves: whose
reproachful censure, who so regards, shall never bring to light any thing,
though it be most excellent, without quarrell-picking, fault-finding, sharp
reproving, utter condemning: having the public profit of many, and the
eternal glory of God (as the propounded scope and end of all my labors)
always before my eyes, I bente my self to publish this travel in writing:
not as a thing singular above all other things: for alas, how far is it from
that? but as a thing (I doubt not) profitable to the purpose; a light to the
argument handled, a way to provoke others of greater talents to the
enterprising of greater matters: and a thing I hope helpful to those that
shall thoroughly peruse it.

Which (right reverend Father) I thought good to offer and dedicate to your
good Lordship: beseeching your honor for your accustomable courtesy, to take
well in worth this testimony of my mind (to speak the least) not evil
affected toward you: and heartily desiring you, for your usual humanity, to
let these first fruits of my travel, pass under your protection, patronage
and pasport. Whom I have chosen one of many, for this purpose, because at two
several times, not known by face unto your Lordship, I have tried and tasted
of your worthy courtesy, your fatherly gravity, tempered with no less
gentleness and facility.

Since which times, I have thought (by what means I could) to leave with you
some testimony of my well willing affection toward you. That you might the
better know, both in what estimation I always have had you for your learning,
wisdom and gravity; for your gentleness, courtesy, and humanity: and how
much I do, and will reverence you for your godliness.

Wherefore if with what my labor, with such profit to the church of Christ,
this work shall be published: and if I know that it is both favorably allowed
of you, and courteously accepted of the brethren: I will not only greatly
rejoice; but do promise also and protest, if God will, and if I live; that
this thankful accepting hereof, shall stir me up, and prick me forward, to
the publishing hereafter of other things, in like manner and method, with more
time, with better advise, with exacter diligence, with sounder judgment,
through the grace of God.

God for his mercy sake give and grant, that these my labors may bring that
profit which I heartily desire: that all glory thereby may redounde to God,
and all profit arise to the brethren. And the God of all grace, even the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, preserve and keep you, in pure religion, in perfect
peace, in fervent love, in unfeigned faith, in acceptable righteousness, in
reverend fear, in true holiness, all the days of this your mortal life; that
this race and course of miserable wretchedness finished, you may receive the
happy fruit of the glorious gospel, with all the Saints: and be partaker of
the undefiled crown of immortal glory, in the purchased kingdom of Jesus
Christ. Amen.

May. 10. An. Dom. 1591. Your Lordships at commandment in Christ Jesus,
Richard Turnbull.

TO THE CHRIStian Reader Richard Turnbull wishes grace, peace, with faith and
zeal from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
I Am not ignorant (right dear and christian Reader) how many men, sound of
judgment, ripe in years, profounde in learning: have written upon every part
and par cell of holy Scripture: Whose authority might terrify, and fear me
from adding any thing thereunto. Notwithstanding, seeing what one man has
omitted, another may remember: and what one has shortened, another may enlarge
and amplify: what one has uttered obscurelie, another may speak and write
perspicuouslie: And in as much as the later may add to the former, though
otherwise most exellent. These and the like considerations moving me
thereunto, I have adventured, and undertaken after so many, to write something
upon the Apostle Saint James his canonical Epistle.

Wherein, if I can promise nothing else: yet this one thing may I assure thee,
that thou have it now both more amply, and also more orderly then by any
heretofore: and that in such a method, as (to my knowledge) none has
labored, eitber in this, or other like places of the holy Scripture: having
drawn first the general Analysis, or resolution of the whole Epistle: then
the particular of every chapter, with the like prefixed before every Lecture
or sermon, in this exposition. So that who so is but of simple capacity, by
the very tables, may see and search out, the very meaning of the holy Apostle.

And to the end that greater profit might redound to the ignorant; I have
affected no curious terms: I have not hindered the course of my speech by
sentences or sayings in unknown languages: But I have set down all things in
our native, natural, and mother tongue, (some three or four words only
excepted:) whether they be testimonies of holy Scriptures, or sentences of
heathen Philosophers, or authorities of learned Fathers, that in no wise the
Reader might be interrupted.

Take (gentle Reader) this my first travel in good part, give it the reading
to the end, and I doubt not but thy labor shall reap and receive answearable
profit. And if every place do not satisfy or content thee, (as all that are
learned know does never come to pass alike) yet pass through, and there
shall be some thing found, (I trust) to quit thy travel. But as for such as have
a kind of felicity and happiness, in carping at other men's doings: whom
nothing pleases, but chickens of their own hatching: I charge them before the
Lord, and in the name of Jesus Christ that they slanderously backbite me not,
but brotherly admonish me, if there shall herein appear any thing displeasant
unto them: that so the profit of the church, and the glory of God in all things
may be sought, and not men's persons un charitablic condemned.

And in so curious reproving, and sharp censuring, as whereunto I know
beforehand I shall be subject; this is my only comfort, that no man pleases
alparties, and those in all faculties, which have been most excellent, have by
some been also condemned. Seeking therefore the profit of many, I contemn the
carping reproof of some: and applying my self to please the godly, I am not
much afraid of the censure of the wicked. Wherefore (Christian Reader) I
desire thee to read with patience, accept with favor; and judge with
charity: So shall thou stir and prick forward, not me alone, but other
also, to undertake greater matters for thy comfort, benefit, and profit.

Now gentle Reader, I heartely desire thee, to bear with such faults, as in
the printing here of are committed: as with setting down one place for
another; one Epistle for another; with the pointing, and such like: Wherein,
albeit I have labored to my power, in delivering all things according to
truth: yet some faults are committed, which thou thy self shall both easily
epsy, and readily amend by thy own diligence. And as for matters of greater
observation, thou shall find them corrected by themselves; the leaf, page,
section, and line of the section being set down: whereby, if any error shall
cause any doubt, thou may in the noting the errata, be resolved. Thus fare
thou most heartily well in the Lord.

May the 10.
The Epistle of S. James with the Analysis or resolution thereof, both
generally, and particularly.
The general Analysis or resolution of the whole Epistle.

The epistle of S. James is almost wholly spent in common places: and contains
five Chapters. 1. Contains 4. places chiefly. 1. Bearing the cross and
suffering outward afflictions patiently in 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. verses contained after
9. 10. 11. 12. 2 Wavering and doubtful prayer which profits nothing. In 6.
7. 8. verses. 3 Internal temptations proceeding from our own concupiscence.
13. 14. 15. 16. 17. verses. 4 The excellency, effect, and use of the word of
God. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. etc.
2. Contains only two chief places. 1 Respect of persons in religion and in
profession of the gospel it to be removed. 1. 2. to 14. verse. 2 Good works,
as testimonies and fruits of faith, must be embraced and practiced of the
Saints. 14. 15. etc. to the end.
3. Contains 3. common places. 1 Not to usurp authority rashly to judge, or
censure the brethren. 1. ver. and part of the 2. 2 To govern and moderate the
tongue. part of 2. ver. 3. 4. 5. to 13. verse. 3 Touching gentleness and
peaceable living, whereunto co^tentions and envy are opposed. 13. 14. etc.
4. Contains 4. general things. 1 Contention condemned. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
verses. 2 Humility must be showed toward God 7. 8. 9. 10. verses. 3 Evil
speech and slander forbidden. 11. 12. 4 Vain confidence and presumption
condemned 13. 14. 15. etc. to the end.
5. Contains also 4. general places. 1 The condemning of profane, covetous,
and wicked rich men. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. ver. 2 The discourse of patience,
whereunto he exhorts. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. verses. 3 Forbidding rash oaths and
swearing. 12. verse. 4 Remedies against infirmities of the brethren. 13. 14.
etc. to the end.


Saint James Epistle generally resolved.
THe Epistle of Saint James contains five chapters: and every chapter
contains certain common places, and general instructions for all the Saints
of God.

1 Contains four general and chief common places. The first is concerning
the bearing of the cross, and suffering external afflictions with patience. 1.
2. 3. 4. 5. 9. 10. 11. 12. v. The second is against wavering prayers of men,
which profit them nothing which make them. 6. 7. 8. verses. The third is of
internal temptation, whereof the proper cause is our own concupiscence. 13. 14.
15. 16. 17. verses. The fourth in this first Chapter, is the excellency,
efficacy, and proper effect of the word of God. 18. 19. 20. verses, to the
end.

2 Chapter contains two only places. The first is against respect of
persons, which ought to be far from religion, and the profession of the
Gospel. 1. verse to 14. The second place in this Chapter, is touching good
works, which as testimonies and effects of faith, ought to be embraced and
practiced of the Saints. from the 14. verse to the end.

3 Chapter contains three things or common places. 1 Is of not rash judging
and censuring our brethren. 1. v. and part of the 2. The second is of
moderating our tongs. From part of the second verse, to the 13. verse. The
third is of meekness and gentleness of mind, desiring peace among men;
whereunto envy and contention is opposed. verse 13. unto the end.

4 Contains four things. 1 The reproving of contentiousnesse before begone.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. verses. 2 The humbling of our selves before God 7. 8. 9. 10.
verses. 3 Is against evil speech and slander. 11. 12. verses. 4 And last, in
this fourth chapter, is against vain confidence and presumption. 13. 14. 15.
etc. to the end.

5 Chapter contains four places. 1 Is against profane, covetous, wicked
rich men, whose misery he foretells, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. verses. 2 Is of
patience, whereunto he earnestly exhorts. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. verses. 3 Or rash
and vain oaths and swearing, which he condemns. 12. verse. 4 Is of the
remedies which against infirmities must be used, whether they be outward in the
body, or inward in the mind. 13. 14. 15. to the end. And thus in the whole
Epistle there are chiefly handled seventeen common places, as in their
several places shall appear.

THE ANALYSIS OF THE FIRST CHAPTER OF S. JAMES.
James. 2. his calling; the servant of Christ. The persons to whom he writes,
were the twelve tribes of Israel dispersed: the greeting or salutation; he
wishes them to rejoice.





James sets down four things: 1. the proposition, wherein he discharges God
from being author of evil temptations: partly, because the nature of God is
such, as he can neither tempt, nor be tempted to evil: partly, because there
are other true causes of such like temptations; even our own lusts and
concupiscence: partly from contrary effects: God is author of all good,
therefore cannot be author of evil temptations: 2. the putting down of the
true cause of temptations, our own concucupiscence: 3. What effects that
works, after it conceaueth once, it brings forth sin and death: 4. In
this place the last thing is the conclusion, admonishing us that we err not,
neither commit so great sin, as to ascribe unto God our evil temptations.

are reproved: 3 finally, he sets down exhortations to the regenerate. 1.
That they should peaceably hear the word: 2. that they should not hear it
only, but do it also: 3. that such as will be religious, must moderate their
tongues: 4. that the Saints embrace true religion, which consists in two
things: 1. in charity toward the poor and needy: 2. in innocence, and true
holiness.

The Analysis or resolution of the first chapter of S. James.
Chapter ^^ the A^^stle S. ^^mes ^^th as we ^^e, two ^^r^s. ^amely 1. Title of
the Epistle, wherein 3. things are to be noted. v. 1. 1. The person which
writes and sends the epistle. In whom two things are noted. 1. His name, who
he was: Saint James. 2. His calling, what he was: the servant of Christ.
2. The persons to whom he writes and sends his Epistle: the twelve tribes
of Israel dispersed. 3. The greeting or salutation.
2. The handling of the places therein contained: the places are four, 2. verse.
to the end. 1. The bearing of the cross, and outward afflictions patiently:
herein four things must be noted. 1. The proposition: the saints must rejoice
under afflictions: verse 2. 2. The confirmation and reasons why they should so
do. Which are three. 1. From honesty and comelines. 3. v. 2. From profit, the
cross causes patience, that excellent virtue. 3. v. 3. From event or end, it
makes men perfect. v. 4.
3. A distinguishing of persons, thereby showing that the cross is profitable
to all men. v. 9. 10. 11. 4. Conclusion. v. 12.
2. Conde^ning wavering prayer, which he does three ways. 1. By a similitude,
comparing it to the wanes of the sea evermore tossed. v. 6. 2. From
disadvantage, such a prayer profits not. 7. verse. 3. By a sentence general,
a wavering man is troublesome in all his ways. verse 8.
3. Concerning internal temptations, therein are four things to be observed;
13. to 18. verse. namely 1. The proposition, denying God to be cause of evil
temptations. 2. The confirmation. 1. From his nature, who te^pteth not so,
nether is tempted. 13. v. 2. From the true cause. 14. v. 3. From contrary
effects. 17. v.
3. The effects of lust, which are two. v. 15. 1. Sin. 2. Death.
4. The conclusion. v. 16.
4. The excellency and effect of the word of God, herein three things are to
be marked, 18. v. to the end. 1. What the word of God is, and what is the
excellency thereof. v. 18. 2. The removing of things hindering the hearing of
this word: which are two. 1. Loquacitie and talketiuenesse, when we should
hear rather. 2. Anger when we are reproved.
3. Exhortations to the regenerate persons: which are four. 1. To hear
patiently. v. 21. 2. To do the word which we hear. 22. 23. 24. 25. 3. To
moderate our tongues. 26. 4 To embrace true religion; in two things consisting,
Namely 1. charity. 2. innocence. 27. v.





THE EPISTLE OF SAINT JAMES, THE FIRST VERSE, THE FIRST SERMON.
Verse 1 James, a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve
tribes which are scattered abroad, Salutation.


Herein is contey^ed the title of he epistle, being be first part of his chap.
Thereof are 3. parts. 1. The person writing; in whom two things are considered:
Namely 2. The persons to whom he writes: The twelve Tribes dispersed. 3. The
salutation and greeting which he sends unto them. 1. His name, which was
lames. 2. His calling and profession, a servant of GOD, and of Christ.


IN this title the first thing is the First the person writing
person which wrote this Epistle: In whose circumsta^ce two things are to be
considered. 1. His name, who, or what he was. 2. His calling and profession;
that he was a servant of God, and of Christ.

First touching his name, who he was, He was James, called James the just, or
James the less, brother ^o Jude the apostle, called also the brother of the
Lord. Among the Apostles there were two of this name, the one was the son of
Zebedee, and brother of John; the other the son of ^^t. 10.
Alphee, and brother of Jude. This was also called the brother of the Lord, as
Paul terms him, who writing to the Galathians, says; That he came to
Jerusalem to visit and see Peter, ^lat. 1.
with whom he stayed fifteen days. But of the Apostles he says he saw none,
but James the brother of the Lord. Not that he was the natural brother of
Christ, as Heluidius gathered, but because he was son of Mary Cleopha, sister
to the blessed Virgin, and so his cosen germane, called his brother after the
manner of the Hebrews, who call them brethren and sisters, who are of the same
kindred, as Saint Hierom Hier. against luid. ^ne. 13, ^^e. 29. ^^t. 12. ^^t. 13.
shows. According to which speech Abraham calls his nephue Lot, brother;
and Jacob, Laban his uncle; Laban, Jacob his cosen, brother. Thus Matthew
speaks, who reports that while Christ was preaching, his mother and
brethren came and desired to speak with him. And who these his brethren were,
a little after he notes by the confession of the people, who hearing his
wonderful wisdom, and seeing the strange miracles which he wrought among the
people, as amazed thereat, cried out, Is not this the Carpenters son? is not
his mother called Mary, and his brethren James and Ioses, Simon and Jude? and
are not his sisters with us? Whence then has he these things? Thus the
Hebrews called them brethren which were of kindred: and so was James called the
Lords brother, in that respect only that he was his kinsman, and cosen german,
his mothers sisters son.

James the^ son of Alphee, cosen to Christ, and one of the 12. Apostles, (...).
4. and. 10.
as in the gospel it appears, was the writer of this Epistle. For which cause
both the Greeks and the Syrians give him the name of an apostle, affirming that
James the Apostle wrote this. Notwithstanding there were in former times, and
are now also some, whith doubt of the authority of this Epistle: Into which
doubt they have been brought by these reasons specially. First, he calls
himself a servant of Christ, but not an Apostle: therefore say they, it
appears that it was not James the Apostle. This reason is most weak, and by
the like may be refuted. Saint John in his first Epistle calls himself
neither the servant of Christ, neither an Apostle, should we therefore
conclude, that John was neither the servant, nor the Apostle of Christ? Were
not this absurd? In the other two Epistles he calls himself Elder, but not
Apostle: Therefore was he not an Apostle which wrote them? Saint Jude in his
general Epistle calls himself the servant of Jesus Christ, Jude ver.
and brother of this James, shall we therefore infer and conclude, because he
calls not himself an Apostle, therefore he was none? If a king in his title
should omit the name of his kingdom, should it therefore follow he is no
king? If because he calls not himself an Apostle, the reason should follow
therefore he were not an Apostle, then should the like follow in the other two
Apostles, which may not be.

Another reason is, This Writer makes not mention so oftentimes of the merits
of Christ, as other Apostles do, therefore Mat. 28. Mar. 16. Luke 24.
it seems he was not an Apostle. For all the Apostles were sent to preach
Christ, and remission of sins by his death The answer hereunto is not hard.
He makes memorable mention of Chtist, and his profession calling him our
glorious Cap. 2.
Lord, whose faith and religion he counsels to be without respect of
persons. And for his part, his endeavor was in this place, to root out
security and hypocrisy out of the hearts of men, who with a bare name of
faith deceived and flattered them selves; against which fond persuasion, and
vain ostentation of faith, the Apostle bending himself, could not so often
mention the merits of Christ, as others did, who having to do with others
which professed not Christ, altogether almost entreat of his death, merits,
and redemption, as having more matter ministered to labor in doctrine, then S.
James had, who against carnal professors, and counterfetting hypocrites,
frames his style, and spends his labor to that purpose.

A third reason moves them hereof to doubt, This Author Chap. 2. 3
cyteth (say they) the story of Abraham to prove justification by works, which
S. Paul to the Romans and Galathians cites for justification by faith. Thus
seems this Author to preach contrary to Paul, whose doctrine is plain, that
we are justified by grace freely, without the works of the law, even by faith
in Christ Jesus. This may thus be repelled. These Apostles spoke not in the same
sense of faith and justification, but S. Paul of true faith, S. James of
cou^terfet faith: S. Paul of justification by faith before God, Saint James of
being known to be justified, which is, before men by good works, therefore they
are not contrary. Neither this only, but they dealt with diverse persons: S.
Paul with them which ascribing too much to their works, derogated from faith in
Jesus Christ. Against whom Paul disputing proves that justification before God
is by faith only in Christ, unto which purpose works avail nothing. Saint
James dealt with men quite contrary affected, even such as boasting to much of
their bare faith, neglected the study of good works, and so slept in the cradle
of security: wherefore S. James, to rouse and raise them, affirms that bare
faith, neglecting and not regarding good works, is dead, and profits nothing,
because works are as testimonies and fruits of our faith, whereby it is known
to be either dead or lively, as the tree is manifest by the fruits thereof.
Even as Abraham being before God justified, yet by his works showed his faith,
whereby he was known to be righteous, and thereby so reputed of men, and thereto
cites he faithfully the story of Abraham, not to prove that by his works he
was justified before god, but to show that his faith was fruitful in all good
works to the glory of God: and that by his works he was known to men to be
righteous, and so the Scripture fulfilled, Abraham believed, and it was imputed
unto him for righteousness. So that there is sweet melody, and a joyful
harmony betwixt these Apostles, in that, that S. James in the second chapter
teaches that, which almost in every Epistle Paul preached, that men must not
profess religion in word only, as hypocrites do, but by good works beautify
their calling, that their co^uersatio^ may be answerable and corresponde^t to
their profession, and so God in all things glorified, through Jesus Christ. S.
James then saw the pestilent hypocrisy of men, who like the old Philosophers,
could speak welof virtue, but would not perform that themselves, which they
gave in precept ^culans ^tions.
unto others, as Tully co^plaineth: so these could talk much of faith, but
would do never a whit thereafter, and therefore bends himself wholly against
the^, as in the discourse appears, agreeable to the scripture. So then if al
things be truly weyed, and circumstances duly considered, it may appear that
this epistle is most catholic, so that neither of the author, neither of the
authority ought men to dout: but as commonly, so generally it is to be received
under the name of James the Apostle of Jesus Christ.

2 The writer being James the holy Apostle, it follows that we consider his
profession and calling; whereof the place it self teaches us, in that he is
called a servant of God, and of Jesus Christ.

Servants (as Saint Augustine shows) in the Latin tongue were so called,
because such as by right of war might have been slain, were reserved, and
kept Lib. 19 c. 15. ciuitate Dei.
alive, and so called, and named servants, a seruando, from saving: The kinds
whereof if we will consider, as may serve to this purpose, I suppose they be
two. One kind of servants which are so by condition, as borne by nature;
caught in war; bought with money: of which there were not a few in the days
of Christ and his Apostles: of such John 8.
our savior might seem to have spoken, when making difference betwixt the
son of a man and his servant, which he applies to the cursed Jews, which
were the servants of sin: He says, the servant abides not in the house for
ever, but the son abides for ever. Saint Paul of this servitude speaks,
both exhorting him that was by condition 1. Cor. 7. 1. Tim. 6. Tit. 2. Col. 3.
Ephesians. 6. 1. Pet. 2.
a servant, in that condition to continue without grudging: and also exhorting
servants to be obedient to them which were their bodily masters. Whereunto
Saint Peter also exhorts. When the Apostles speak of servants by condition,
even such as were borne in captivity, or such as were taken in wars, or
finally, such as were bought with money, and were their slaves and servants to
who^ they belonged, but of such S. James speaks nothing here.

2 There is another kind of servants, which are servants by profession and
calling, who offer their service unto God, and his son Jesus Christ our Lord,
which are also of two sorts. Men are the servants of God, either generally,
either particularly. Generally they are all the servants of Jesus Christ,
whosoever profess his religion, and promise their service unto him in the
general calling of a Christian. Thus bond and free, male and female, young and
old, rich and poor, prince and people, wise and foolish, learned and
ignorant, base borne and honorable, one and another: even all such as profess
the religion of God, and of Christ, are his servants. Samuel being a child,
before 1. Kings 3.
fore he served in the place of a Prophet, being called by God, was taught to
say by Ely the priest, Speak Lord, thy servant hears.

Job in sincerity professing the religion of God, is called Job. 1 and. 2. and
42.
the Lords servant. David not yet adua^ced unto the kingdom, but persecuted by
Saul, and in danger in the desert of Maon, perceiving the inestimable love of
God toward Psalm. 116. Psalm. 143. 12. 144. 10.
him, protests that he will therefore be thankful, and do God service:
Behold Lord, for I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy
handmaide. In this sense infinitely is setuant taken in holy Scripture, meaning
all such as serve God in profession of religion.

Specially they are called the servants of God, and of Christ, who in some
several and chief calling do homage unto God, and promote his kingdom. So
Princes in common wealths, Preachers and Ministers in the Church of Christ, are
servants of God and of Christ, in special service. Our savior Christ in some
sense is also a servant, in that in the office of a mediator he served the will
and pleasure of his father, whereof the prophet Ezechiel speaks, Ezech. 34.
I will set up a shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant
David, he shall feed them, and be their Shepherd. By David, not meaning David
the king, the son of Ishai, but Jesus Christ, of whom David was a lively type
and figure. Isai also speaks of Christ in the Isai. 52. 53 v. 11. 42. 1.
person of God, Behold my servant, he shall prosper, he shall be extolled, and
exalted very high, speaking of our savior Christ, in whose hands the work of
our spiritual deliverance prospered. Serving therefore as the head, and great
Shepherd of the church, he is called in a special respect, the servant of God.
David and other Princes serving God in the chief place of the common wealth,
in handling the scepter of government, are called Gods servants. Magistrates
seeking by setting forth Gods glory and true religion, by giving precepts, and
making laws for the advancement of godliness and virtue, are called the
servants of God in that special service, as Augustine Epist. 50.
to Boniface the Earl at large shows. So the Apostles and Ministers of Gods
word, specially called to the ministry of the word and sacraments* are called
in respect of that special service, specially the servants of God and of
Christ, as Saint Paul in sundry his Epistles, Saint Peter, and this Apostle of
himself speaks, calling themselves the servants of the Lord.

Princes themselves have no greater honor then to 1. James 1.
become servant unto Christ, and to lick dust under the feet of his Church,
as the Prophet speaks: which is, that earthly Princes should not fear to set
out the gospel, Psalm. 72.
and give all their strength to the enlarging of Christ his kingdom, though it
be with hazard of their crowns. Yea this is by the Apostle to the Hebrews 1.
chap. verse 7. attributed to the angels of God, as their hiest honor to be
ministering spirits to Christ, and to be subject unto him. How many times does
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, David, Ezechiah, and all the zealous
kings of Judah entitle themselves the servants of God? How often does God show
forth his great love, favor and goodness to Israel, yea and many other under
this name, that they are his servants? Who ever of the Princes of the earth,
but Pharao, and Senacherib, and the like, exalted themselves against him in
this wise, Who is the Lord that I should hear his voice? I know not the Lord,
neither will I let the people go, Exodus 5. Exodus 5.


If thou were as mighty as David the King and Prophet, yet this is thy
greatest honor, with him to say; Behold Lord, for I am thy servant, I am thy
servant, and the son of thy handmaid, Psalm. 116. If thou excellest al kings
in vvisdome, riches, honor, as Solomon did, yet this is thy Psalm. 116.
glory, to rejoice in the service of Jesus Christ. If thou were vviser then
Daniel, more righteous then Noah, more perfect then the Prophets, this is thy
glory, the service of Christ. If we were Princes on earth, Prelates in the
Church, Angels in heaven, yet this is the height of all glory, to rejoice in
the service of Christ. Who are we and what are our fathers houses, who can
imagine and frame unto our selves greater glory, then to be servants unto
Christ? This the Apostles did not, who alvvais held it their greatest glory to
be indeed the servants of Christ,

1 Now this name of servant must teach us humility, that we submit our
selves to Christ, whose servants we are, and for his sake, and by his example
to serve one another, whereunto he exhorts, You know that the Lords of the
Gentiles have rule over them, and they that are Matt. 20.
exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you, but who so
will be great among you, let him be your servant, and who so will be chief
among you, let him be your minister, even as the son of man came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give himself John 13.
for a ransom for many. Whereunto his example in washing his Disciples feet
serves. Whereupon he concludes; You call me master and Lord, and ye say well,
for so I am: if I then your Lord and master have washed your feet, ye ought
also to wash one another feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should
do even as I have done unto you. Verily, verily I say unto you, the servant is
not greater then the master, neither the Ambassador greater then he that sent
him. So by their calling unto his service, he by his example teaches them
humility, both to serve him, and to serve one another also. The holy Apostle
teaching the Saints that their freedom and liberty Gal. 5.
consists in mutual serving one another in the humility of their hearts,
thereunto exhorts. Brethren, you have been called unto liberty, only use
not your liberty as an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another.
Elsewhere about to entreat of the particular duties of Ephesians. 5.
special persons, as a sentence general he premiseth this, Submit your
selves one to another in the fear of God. Unto whom Saint Peter subscribeth;
Submit your selves 1. Pet. 5
one to another, deck your selves inwardly in lowlines of mind, for God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Hereof our profession and
calling puts us in remembrance who are servants by calling to serve God in
spirit and truth, and to serve one another in the fear of God. Let
disdainful contempt, let ambitious honor, let insolent pride, let peevish
arrogancy be abandoned and abolished from the hearts of the Saints, who are
therefore servants to serve God and his son Jesus Christ, in all pure and holy
obedience, and for his sake to serve one another in love.

2 By our servitude we are furthermore taught, what we owe unto Christ Jesus
our Lord and master: even all Luke 1.
service, which is the end of our redemption and cleansing by Christ from our
sins. Zachary the father of Saint John Baptist therefore says, we are
redeemed and delivered from all our enemies, that we should serve him (that is
Christ our redeemer) in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.
Saint Paul affirms that Heb. 9.
we are washed and purged in conscience from dead works to serve the living
God. We are Christ's both in life and Romans 14.
death, none of us lives unto himself, neither does any die unto himself:
for whether we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die unto the
Lord, whether we live therefore or we die, we are the Lords. In all things
therefore, and at all times we ought to serve him, being not our own, but
bought with a price, that we might glorify God in spirit and in body, which
are both his. We are all that we are to serve Christ and his Church, 1. Cor. 6.
our power, our ability, our strength, our wit, our riches, our knowledge:
the parts of our bodies, the powers of our minds, our limbs, our livings,
our lives, yea even our own selves are the Lords, to whom we owe whatsoever
is in us. Let us then in the fcare of God, confess him with our mouths,
praise him with our tongues, believe him with our hearts, glorify him in our
works, and Psalm. 100.
in all things serve him as it becomes us. 1 For he has made us and not we
our selves. 2 He has redeemed us, not with corruptible things, as silver, and
gold, but by 1. Pet. 1.
his own blood, as of a lamb immaculate and undefiled. 3 He saves us from
death, and delivers us from peril and trouble 4 He aduaunceth us to glory:
shall we not serve him then, our Savior, and our God? If the creature owe all
service to the creator: if they which are redeemed, owe him service by whom
they are redeemed and delivered: if such as are saved owe service to their
savior and preserver: if they which are glorified, owe service to him by whom
they are advanced to glorious dignity, shall not we serve Christ, our
creator, redeemer, savior, and by whom only we are partakers of immortal
glory? What great disloialtie, what great impiety, what great ingratitude,
what great iniquity is then committed against Christ Jesus, when we serving
our selves, our pleasures, our affections, our bellies, our backs, and our
inordinate desires, we cast off the yoke of his service from us?

3 Servant ought to imitate such virtues and good Mat. 11. 13. John. 1. Pet.
2. Ephesians. 5. Ephesians. 4. 2. Cor. 8.
qualities as they find to shine and flourish in their masters, as we see
often in the servants of men: we are the servants of Christ, we are bound
therefore to imitate those virtues, which he, and the Apostles in him have
commanded to be followed, his meekness, patience, humility, love, long
sufferance, liberality, kindness, forgiveness of offenses, and the like
virtues, which shone in the face, as it were, and whole life of Jesus Christ.

4 Finally, servants must attend upon their masters will, wait their
leasures, rely and rest upon their care for them, seek all necessaries at
their hands: so we the servants of Christ, must do his will in all things,
wait his leisure patiently for our deliverance, depend upon his provident
care, who cares for us, and in all our needs and necessities have our
recourse to him by prayer. These and the like dutiful considerations ought
this our spiritual service to raise up in our hearts, that as in name, so in
deed we might in all things show our selves the unfeigned servants of the Lord
Jesus, as no doubt this Apostle was, who not excluding nor shutting out other
respects, having consideration specially of his calling and office of an
Apostle, calls himself the servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus.

James being the writer and sender of this Epistle, sends 2. Persons to whom
he writes.
it to the dispersed tribes of Israel, so the twelve tribes of Israel were the
persons to whom he writes and sends his Epistle. These tribes had their
names from the twelve sons of Jacob, which were the twelve Patriarks, who had
the land of Canaan divided into twelve several parts for the twelve tribes of
Israel. Of these tribes and their heads, we may read in the books of Genesis,
Numbers, Joshua, the Revelation of Saint John, and such like Genesis 49. Number. 1.
and 32 Joshua. 9. and 13 Revel. 7.
^laces, whereunto for this matter we may be referred. These tribes taking
their names from the holy Patriarks, ^n the time of the Apostle were driven out
of their pos^essions, which for many years they retained in the land ^f
Canaan, and were now dispersed, whereof the Apostle ^ere certifieth us, when he
says, To the twelve tribes dis^ersed, salutation. These being removed from
their own and old seats, which in Canaan they enjoyed many ^eares, were now
dispersed and scattered among the Gen^iles in many places of the world.

And this dispersing and scattering of these tribes was not at once, and
together, but at diverse times, and upon sundry occasions: partly they were
dispersed and scattered when Salmanaser king of the Assirians carried them 4.
Kings 17.
captive into Assiria, and held them in cruel bondage: partly when they were
subdued by Nabuchodonosor, and 4. Kings 24
carried into Babylon into captivity, for the rebellion of ^ehoiakim against
the king of Babylon, to whom he was subject: partly they were dispersed by
reason of the tumults and stir that was in Asia and Egypt: partly when
immediately after the death of Saint Stephen, the cruel Acts 8.
Pharisees moved persecution against the Church at Jerusalem, insomuch as
thereby such as believed, were scattered throughout the regions of Judea and
Samaria. The jews being thus miserably dispersed and scattered into every
coast and country, place and province of the world, so that in person, and by
his presence, he could not teach them by lively voice, and word of mouth,
the Apostle by his letters which might better be brought unto them, informs
them in their duties, and thus writes unto them dispersed. Of which scattering
there was manifest token, in that Saint Paul being the Apostle of the Gentiles,
and sent to preach unto them, into what place so ever he came almost, he found
a Sinagogue of the 1. Romans 1. Gal. Acts 9. Acts 13.
Jews, and assemblies of them, dispersed and scattered among the Gentiles, as
in Damascus, in Siria immediately after his conversion, and in Asia the less,
in Antiochia a town of Pisidia, in Thessalonica a City of Macedonia, at
Corinth, Ephesus, at Rome also, and sundry other Acts 17. 18. 28. chap.
places of the Gentiles, whereby it manifestly appears, that they were
dispersed, as here S. James writes unto the twelve tribes dispersed.

And this dispersing of the believing Jews among the Gentiles, puts plain
difference between the Kingdom of Christ, and the kingdoms of this world.
The kingdoms of this world be they never so ample, large, and great, yet are
they contained within certain bounds, circuits, and limits of the earth. The
kingdom of the Persians and Medes, a mighty kingdom, having besides Sidrach,
Misach, and Abednego, 120. princes and governors, yet it was measured by it
limits and bounds: it reached not through the whole world. The Grecians, the
Romans, the Babylonians, and other people had mighty Monarchs, Dominions, and
Empires, yet none of them but had their bounds on earth, which they did not
pass: but the kingdom of Christ is infinitely spread upon the face of the
earth, and runs through the whole world: Psalm. 72.
for his dominion is from sea to sea, and from the rivers unto the end of the
land. They that dwell in the wilderness shall kneel before him, and his
enemies shall lick the dust* the kings of Tharsis, and of the Isles, shall
bring him presents, the kings of Sheba and Saba shall bring him gifts. Yea all
kings shall worship him, all nations shall serve him. This kingdom reaches
from East to West, from whence men shall arise to increase this kingdom: for
which cause our Savior says to the unthankful Mat. 8.
Jews, that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in his heavenly kingdom: which kingdom Saint John
describing, and showing who were as heirs sealed up thereunto, says: After
these things I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no man could number, of
all nations and kinreds, people Revel. 7.
and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with long
white robes, and palms in their hands, and so after the 144. thousand of the
Jews, he refers an innumerable multitude also of the Gentiles to the
kingdom of Christ, whereby it appears it is infinite and universally
diffused and scattered upon the whole earth, whereunto all the elect of God
wheresoever dispersed, appertain, as in the writing of James to the twelve
tribes dispersed, appears.

2 Besides this, in that Saint James writes unto the twelve tribes dispersed,
it teaches us that the Church of Christ is tied or bound to no place. neither
so fastened to Jerusalem, but it may be removed: but is always there where
the true saints of god are. The church was sometime in paradise, when our prime
parents were there resident in their righteousness, but not so immoueably, but
that it was afterward else where in Abell. The Church was in Mesopotamia in
Abraham, but not there tied: but afterward it was here and there with him, now
in Egypt, now in Caldea, now in Canaan, now here, now there, with Isaac,
Jacob, and Joseph, with David, the Princes, the Prophets, Christ, the holy
Apostles, as the stories witness. Now in the countries of the Gentiles in the
dispersed Jews, to whom S. James here writes. Absurdly therefore do our
adversaries the Papists tie the Church of Christ to the Chair of Peter in
Rome* Seeing in all times it has removed with the faithful, and is there
where the word is professed, Sacraments duly administered, discipline in some
measure practiced and exercised.

3 Now that Saint James mencioneth only the twelve tribes of Israel, as the
persons to whom he writes, we may not gather, that this doctrine appertains
not to us, nor to other Churches, as well as to the Jews and scattered tribes,
to whom it was chiefly and first sent. For such is the nature of God, that when
he speaks to one man, or one people, yet then must all men, and all people
hear him. Wherefore when he gave his law to Israel only, yet it concerns
all men, and condemns all that are guilty Exodus 20
thereof. Saint Paul rehearsing the punishments which God inflicted upon the
Jews for their horrible sins, 1. Cor. 10
showing that the same appertain unto all, concludes, that such things came
upon them for examples, but were written to admonish us, upon whom the ends of
the world are come. And generally speaking of the whole scripture, that it is
not written to any one people, but that Romans 15.
it concerns others in like manner, says: Whatsoever things are written
aforetime, are written for our learning, that we through patience and
consolation of the holy scripture might have hope. Whatsoever then in
scripture, tends either to doctrine, or to instruction, reprehension,
correction, or consolation, it after some manner also pertains unto all.
Whether then the Saints write to whole Congregations and Churches, as Paul to
the Romans, Corinthians, Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Collossians,
Thessalonians, and other Churches, or else to special persons, as Paul to
Timothy, Titus, Philemon: John to the elect Lady: and to Gaius beloved in the
Lord: or other persons, they in some manner concern all men: and something
therhence may be gathered which concerns not those places and persons only,
but all in general, Though therefore Saint Peter write, to the Saints being 1.
Pet. 1. 1.
strangers, which dwelt here and there throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithinia: and S. James here sends this Epistle to the twelve tribes
of Israel dispersed and scattered: yet may we not think that it concerns
them only, but all men also, albeit for the circumstance of time, place and
person, they wrote unto certain.

Neither is this marvelous or strange. The Philosophers and profane writers,
as Plato, Cicero, Aristotle, Xenophon, Seneca, and others, have written to
several and certain persons chiefly, yet their precepts concerned all the
Gentiles, who thought themselves bound to obey them. Shall humane Philosophy
dedicated to certain persons, bind all to obey it: and shall not the heavenly
and divine Philosophy of Gods word, though it thiefly be sent to some one,
yet bind all men to obedience? This Epistle was sent to the twelve tribes
dispersed, yet it concerns all men: Wherefore of the Grecians it is called
Catholic: of the Latins, Canonical: of us and others, General, because it
concerns all people in general. Neither does it follow, it was writ first to
the Jews, therefore it appertains not to us Gentiles: for the whole law of
God, and the whole doctrine of the Gospel, was Exodus 20. Mat. 10. Act. 13.
Matt. 28.
first delivered unto the Jews, and then afterward unto the Gentiles. Thus
much is necessary herehence to know for us, Who easily will turn the Jews
unto obedience to the scriptures, and live as we lust our selves: as if these
things concerned not us, but them only. The persons to whom this Epistle was
written, were the 12. tribes dispersed. and after them, the doctrine binds us
all to holy obedience.

In the title the third and last thing is the greeting he 3. Salutation.
sends. Touching greetings and salutations, which among all men have at all
times been usual, we need not curiously to consider, seeing it cannot be
denied, but that both godly and profane persons have used it, and both profane
writings, and the holy Scripture also deliver and set down sundry forms
thereof. Plato disputes of the salutations and gteetings of the Gretians,
whose common salutatio^s 3. Epist. Dionisio.
were three, To wish joy, this form was common to the people. To wish
prosperity, which was used of the philosophers. To wish health, which was
proper to the physicions. The Romans commonly used one form of greeting, to
wish health, as Marcus Cicero wishes, or sends health to Publius Lentulus,
and so others. Other have used other forms. The enemies of Benjamin sending
Esd. 5.
their letters to king Darius, against Judah, in their salutatio^ Dan. 3.
wish him peace. To Darius the King, peace. Nabuchodonosor making a decree,
that all Nations should worship and serve the God of Sidrach, Misach, and
Abednego, in his letters to that purpose tending, he uses the like
salutations, Nabuchodonosor king, to all people, nations and languages that
dwell in all the world, Peace be multiplied unto you. Saint Paul in every of his
Epistles sends greeting under this form, Grace and peace from God the
father, etc. Or, Grace, mercy and peace, as to Timothy. Saint Peter imitating
Paul, uses the like form. Saint 1. Pet. 1. 1. 1. John. 1. 1.
Jude wishes mercy, peace and love to be multiplied. Saint John in his first
Epistle seems to omit both the name to whom he writes, and his salutation.
In the other two he contenteth himself with the name of the writer, and the
party to whom he writes, but altogether he suppresseth his salutation. The
church of Christ in their first general Acts 23
counsel held at Jerusalem, writing to the Antiochians, salute them in manner
following, The Apostles, Elders, and brethren, to the brethren which are of the
Gentiles in Antiochia, Siria, and Silicia, send greeting. And Acts 15.
Claudius Lysias the chief captain, sending Paul to Felix, in his letter
saluteth him in this manner, Claudius Lysias unto the most noble Governor
Felix, sends greeting.

In which places they used the form of Saint James in this place mentioned,
which being translated word for word, is, To rejoice, to be merry. Which joy and
rejoicing is not bodily, but spiritual, the joy of the Spirit in the Lord,
whereby we rejoice in him, not only in our prosperity, and in his benefits
favorably and mercifully poured upon us, but also in our troubles justly by
him inflicted, and in the misery and adversity of this world, which we
accept and receive from him as a testimony of his love toward us, in that we
are thereby made conformable Romans 8.
to the image of his son Jesus Christ, that as we are like him in
affliction, so we may be like him in glory. John 16.
This rejoicing, and this joy our Savior Christ promises his, Ye shall weep
and lament, and the world shall rejoice: ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be
turned into joy. To which Saint Paul exhorts; Rejoice in the Lord always,
Phil. 4.
and again I say rejoice. This is the joy whereby God reigns over his,
whereof the Apostle speaks; The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
peace, and righteousness, and joy in the holy Ghost. And this is that Romans 14.
which in his salutation he wishes them. And thus much may serve for the title
of the Epistle, James the servant of God and of Jesus Christ, to the twelve
Tribes which are scattered abroad, Salutation, joy and rejoicing. Now the God
of comfort and consolation pour into our hearts this joy of the Spirit, that
our hearts and minds replenished with gladness, we may in all things rejoice in
him, through Jesus Christ our Lord, To whom with the holy Ghost, three persons
in trinity, one everliving, and everlasting God in unity, be all praise,
dominion, and majesty now and for ever. Amen.

James Chapter 1. verses 2. 3. 4. 5. 6 Sermon. 2.
2 My brethren, count it exeeeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations.

3 Knowing that the trial of your faith brings forth patience.

4 And let patience have her perfect work, that you may be perfect and entire,
lacking nothing.

5 If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him.

6 But let him ask in faith, and waver not.


1. Place of bearing outward afflictions.
THe title of the Epistle being set down, in these words and the rest, he
comes to the handling of the matter and common places which herein are
contained. Of which the first is of bearing outward afflictions, wherein we
ought not to be cast down, but rather to be glad; not to be faint hearted, but
to rejoice. With which he does wisely to begin, in as much as in that their
scattering their case was most miserable, and therefore were they first of all
to be armed and comforted against afflictions. Which in these verses, and in
the 9. 10 11. 12. he performs. In which discourse there are four things to
be noted. 1 The proposition, 2. verse. 2 The reasons of confirmation, 3. and 4.
verses. 3 The distinguishing of persons to whom the cross is profitable, 9 10.
11. verses. 4 The conclusion, 12. verse.

Now this Treatise is a little inuerted, and troubled by a digression which is
necessarily made, 6. 7. 8. verses wherein the second place is contained. This
being thus observed and noted by the way, let us consider the words read.

In these verses are three things to be noted. 1. The proposition of the place.
2. The confirmation, or rendering of reasons of his proposition: And they are
three. 1. From honest comelines. 3. 2. From profit, because it causes
patience, that excellent virtue. 3. From event and effect, it makes perfect.
3. The preventing of an objection. In which are two things. 1. The objection
proposed, How shall we bear the cross as we are taught? 2. The answer. In
which are four things noted, namely 1. What that wisdom is. 2. Who gives it.
3. What hope we have to obtain it. 4. How we may ask it.



1 The first herein is the proposition of the place, which is, That the Saints
of God must bear afflictions: Under the heavy burden whereof they may not
faint, fall down, nor quail, but be patient, triumph, and rejoice. Hereof he
carefully admonishes, because in their scattering and dispersing their
condition could not be but miserable: and therefore in these external
afflictions, they had need to be comforted, which Saint James does
faithfully in this place; My brethren, count it exceeding joy when ye fall into
diverse temptations. Saint Peter in like case writing to those strangers which
were in like manner 1. Pet. 4.
scattered here and there, in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia,
exhorts them to bear afflictions without fainting. Dearly beloved, think
it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is among you, to prove you, as
though some strange thing were come unto you, but rejoice, in as much as you
are partakers of the sufferings of Christ, that when his glory shall appear,
ye may be glad, and rejoice. Our Savior Christ foretelling his Disciples the
condition whereunto they should be Mat. 10
subject, even to be as sheep among wolves: and for his sake and the Gospels
to be brought before Judges, scourged in Sinagogues, expelled and
excommunicated their assemblies, and every where evil entreated, and
spitefully handled: by his own example exhorts he the^ to bear all these
things, and wills them with invincible courage John 16.
and patience, to take up their cross and follow him. And elsewhere forewarning
them of their oppressions, therein he wills them to be of good cheer, and
bear their afflictions with patience. In the world (says he) you shall have
trouble, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. The holy Apostle
Saint Paul to like purpose persuades Romans 12.
men not to faint in heart, not to cast down their heads as discomfited, but
in the midst of their afflictions and miseries to rejoice: Rejoice in hope, be
patient in tribulation, continue in prayer. Which condition inseperably joined
with the profession of the faith, ought not to seem strange unto the Saints,
neither to move them. Which S. Paul considering, councelleth them to stand fast
1. These. 3.
in the faith, and not to be moved with these afflictions, because they were
thereunto appointed of God. The proposition therefore of this place is, that
the Saints of God must arm themselves against all manner afflictions, and
therein rejoice exceedingly: Come there life, or come there death; come
prosperity, or come miserable adversity; come there sickness, or come there
health; come there wealth, or come there woe; come there persecution, or come
there pestilence; come there sword, or come there famine; come there
captivity, or come there any other misery, we must be prepared and armed
thereunto, and hold fast the proposition of the Apostle, Brethren, count it
exceeding joy when you shall fall into diverse temptations.

In this proposition many things may be observed worthy our consideration. 1
That the Saints must count it great joy when they fall into temptations, and do
suffer afflictions in the world. Wherein the joys of Gods saints, and the joys
of the wicked are distinguished. The wicked rejoice, some in one vain thing of
this world, some in an other: accounting sickness, poverty, imprisonment,
ignominy, misery, persecution, famine, nakedness, sword, death and such like
afflictions, as evils, wherefore they shun them by all means, they abhor
the^, as infallible tokens of the heavy wrath of God, and his just hatred
against them which suffer them, as appeared by the sentence of Eliphas Job. 4.
against holy Job, who condemned him for wicked, because he was afflicted: and
by the censure of the wicked, who Isai 53.
judged Christ as rejected of God, because he was plagued and smitten by him.
And the Jews in like manner so judged of them upon whom the tower of Silo fell,
and whose Luke 13,
blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifice, slaying them when they were
offering: esteeming them for wicked, because of their punishment. Finally, by
the sentence of the Barbarians in Melita, who seeing a Viper springing out of
the fire, to rest upon the hand of the Apostle S. Paul, Acts 28.
accounted him for a murderer, and a wicked person. But so do not the Saints,
for they know that these afflictions by the blessing and grace of God, tend to
their furtherance, and salvation in Jesus Christ. Wherefore they therein
rejoice exceedingly, and prefer this joy before all worldly joy whatsoever.
Insomuch as in the midst of their misery, and in their tortures and torments
they have triumphed: as, the holy Apostles being afflicted, beaten, and smitten
for the testimony of Gods truth* departed. and went out of the council
rejoicing, of whom S. Chrysostom Act^ 5.
says, The Apostles were scourged, and they rejoiced: they were bound and
imprisoned, and they thanked: they Homil. pop. Antioch. 54. Romans 5.
were stoned, and they preached. The blessed Apostle Paul of himself and the
rest bears the like record, that, in their troubles they reioiced. We
rejoice, says he, in trouble, knowing that trouble brings forth patience,
patience, experience: experience, hope: hope makes not ashamed, because the
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given unto
us.

The holy and blessed martyrs have in like manner counted it exceeding joy, when
they fell into temptations, wherein they being by the will of God, above the
strength and course of nature, have triumphed: whereas then the wicked shun
these as simply evil, the saints embrace them as testimonies of love: whereas
the wicked in their miseries, frette; fume, and foam at mouth for rage and
anger, stamp, stare, murmr, and mutter against God, yea and blaspheme him in
extreme desperation, as Saint Revel, 16. c ver. 11. and 21.
John in his Revelation avouches, the Saints rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious, as in wholesome documents of their life, corrections of their
infirmities, prouocations to prayer, inuitements to GOD, repressors of natural
corruption, encreasers of zeal, and means whereby they are made conformable
to the image of the son of Romans 8.
God. Whereas the wicked herein faint and fall into despair, and rejoice in
other things only: the Saints and holy men of God, make affliction the
greatest matter of their mirth, and to suffer for Christ and his Gospel, their
soundest joy, remembering the proposition of the Apostle here set down:
Brethren count it exceeding joy when you fall into sundry temptations. Let
worldlings then rejoice in their riches, and glory in their wealth, let them
rejoice in their pleasures, and delight themselves in ambition and honor: let
them make their bankets, belly cheer, and riotousnesse their joy: let them
count for their greatest happiness and felicity, worldly security, and
vacation from all trouble: yet this is the joy, the mirth, the delight, the
pleasure, the felicity and happiness of the the Saints, wrongfully to suffer
affliction, and this they count upon earth their exceeding joy, and therein they
have their rejoicing. Let the wicked in their miseries Exodus 7.
grow from worse to worse, as Pharao by his afflictions waxed worser, and more
impacient: let them use violent 1. King. 31.
hands upon themselves, as Saul in danger of the uncircumcised Philistines,
fell upon his own sword, and perished: and many other at the loss of their
riches, the spoil of their goods, the departure of their friends, and other
afflictions, murmured against God: yet the Saints hold up their heads, rely
upon God, humbling themselves before him under the cross, and count it
exceeding joy when they fall into manifold temptations.

2 The word, Fall into, is not without signification: whereby the Saints of
God are taught that they may neither procure, neither haste^ their own cross,
nor deserve at the hands of the world thus to be afflicted. The Papists which
in many places, and at sundry times lay heavy crosses upon themselves: as
beating their own flesh, scourging their own bodies, wearying and wasting
themselves with long, tedious, and troublesome pilgrimages, fall not by the
will of God hereinto, but by their own choice, therefore have no cause therein
to rejoice: thieves, robbers, pirates, murderers, man quellers, evil doers,
busy bodies, who by their own desert procure their own misery, ought not
therein to rejoice. Let no man, says Saint Peter, suffer as a thief,
murderer, evil doer, 1. Pet* 4.
or as a busy body in other men's matters: but if any suffer as a Christian,
let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in that behalf. When men are
causes of their own crosses, and procure by their wickedness their own
punishments and afflictions, they must not therein rejoice, but rather lament
and be sorry: but when we fall into temptations by the will of God, then must
we count it exceeding joy. Foolish men punished for their wickedness,
malefactors chastined for their ungodliness: wicked ones afflicted for their
ungraciousness, have cause of sorrow, not of joy: of mourning, not of mirth: of
lamentation, not of laughter, in that they fall not hereinto by Gods will, but
by their own wickedness: though secretly they do that which from everlasting
God has determined. Under the word, Falling into, is insinuated unto men,
under what affliction and cross they must rejoice: under that cross which God
imposes and lays upon us: under those afflictions whereinto we fall by the
pleasure and purpose of God to try us: therein when we suffer, we must count
it exceeding joy.

3 The circumstance of time may not be lightly passed over: My brethren, count
it exceeding joy when you fall, that is, whenever you fall into temptations.
This teaches the children of God, that once or twice to rejoice under the
cross, is not enough to the perfect duty of a Christian, but whenever, as
often soever, at what time soever we are assaulted and assailed with
temptations: so often to show our selves pacient therein and joyous, because
Heb. 10.
our crown is only given in the end of all our combats, which the author to
the Hebrews recounting, teaches us that we have always need of patience,
that in fine and at length we may obtain the promise. For which cause the
Angel requires patience in the Smyrnians, Revel. 2.
and constancy under the cross to the end. Be thou constant unto death, and
I will give unto thee the crown of life: It is not enough to begin to run in
the race of patience, but we must run out our race with patience, if we will
be crowned. Therefore Saint Paul admonishes, that we run on with patience
the race that Heb. 12.
is set before us. Wherefore as he that has borne the brunt of many
bickerings, and has quit himself valiantly and like a man in sundry assaults
and skirmishes: If before the end of the battle he faint and give over,
loses all his former labor: and as he that plaieth on a stage, though he
behave himself excellently in sundry acts: yet if in the last act he quail,
he bears away neither prime nor price in that action: and as he that runs
a long time, but falls or sits down before he come to the goal, has not
the crown or garland: so if men in many miseries, in sundry temptations, in
diverse afflictions, have rejoiced: unless whenever they fall thereunto they
still rejoice, they loose their praise and commendation of patience, whereof
the Apostle to foretell and foreteach us, would have us count it exceedtng joy,
whenever we fall into temptations.

4 Finally, he would men to count it exceeding joy, when they fall into diverse
or manifold temptations. Wherein we must learn, that the afflictions of the
saints are manifold, diverse and sundry, and that specially in three respects.

1 These afflictions are manifold in respect of the diversity of instruments,
which God uses in inflicting them upon the Saints. For some times he uses
the Devil, sometimes the means of men, some times other his creatures as
instruments and means by afflictions to tempt the Saints. He used Satan in
the temptation of Job. 1. and. 2. ca.
Job, to whom he gave license in his goods, and in his body to afflict him.
Men, almighty God used to afflict Israel his people, wherefore in the Prophets
the Assirians, the Babilonians, the Philistines, and Egyptians, with other,
are both plainly called, and manifestly discribed as the instuments of God to
afflict his people. In which sense Assure is called the rod of the Lords
fury, and the staff Esai. 10. Iere. 27. Ezec. 17. and 26
of his wrath and indignation. Thus the Lord calls Nabuchodonosor, that
cruel tyrant and shameful idolater, his servant, because he used him as a
mean to afflict his people. Thus used also God the Caldeans and Sabians as
Job. 1.
his instruments to afflict Job the Patriarch and servant of God. Thus he used
Sennecharib to afflict Hezekiah: the Scribes and Pharisees to afflict our
Savior, and to use all means of persecution against the Apostles and
disciples. Thus he uses men to rob, spoil, slaie, murder, and every way to
afflict his saints and servants.

God uses in like manner other creatures in afflicting of his Saints. Sometimes
the heavens give abundance of rain, whereby the corn and grain of the earth
is destroyed, and the Saints and others brought to extremity: some times the
air is infected, wherehence, sickness, plagues and pestilence grows, and
the people are destroyed. Some times brute beasts rise up against men, and
destroy them, as the Lion did the Prophet. The Lions which destroyed 3. Kings
13.
those whom Salmanaser sent to inhabit Samaria, whereof that none were good
were hard to affirm. By infinite 4. Kings 17.
other his creatures, the saints themselves are oftentimes afflicted: wherefore
if we respect but the diversity of instruments which almighty God uses in
these external afflictions, we shall easily be forced to confess that in that
regard even our afflictions and temptations are sundry.

2 As in respect of the diverse instruments thereunto by God used, the
temptations of men are diverse and manifold, so if we look into the nature of
temptations, they Psalm. 34.
are no less manifold and diverse. Hereunto the holy prophet having regard
cries out: Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers
out of all. As many in number, so diverse in nature are our afflictions. Some
are afflicted by exile and banishment: some by captivity and imprisonment:
some by famine and nakedness: some by peril and persecution: some by slander
and reproachful contumely: some by rackings and tearings in pieces: some by
slaughter and sword: some by fire and fagots: some by sores of body and
sundry diseases: some suffer in themselves: some are afflicted in their
friends, in their wives in their children: some in their goods: some in their
bodies: some in their credits: some by sea: some by land: some at home: some
abroad: some by open enemies: some by counterfeit friends: some by cruel
oppression: some by manifest injuries: some by force: some by fraud: some
afflicted and tempted by one means, some by another: and so many kinds of
temptations there be that the Apostle may worthily call them manifold and
diverse.

3 Finally, the ends wherefore they are infflicted are diverse, therefore in that
respect also they may not amiss be counted diverse. Some times we are afflicted
to the end we should be humbled: some times we are afflicted to the end we
should be tried: some times we are afflicted, that in the nature of Gods
blessings we may better be instructed: some times we are afflicted, that God
may be glorified: some times we are afflicted, that our sins thereby may be
remitted: sometimes we are afflicted, that the pride of our hearts may be
repressed, and sinful desires mortified: some times we are afflicted, that his
love toward us may the more lively be expressed: some times we are afflicted,
that thereby the world may be hated of us: sometimes we are afflicted, that we
may be more zealous in prayer for deliverance: some times we are afflicted,
that we in afflictions made conformable and like the image of the son of God,
together with him, may be partakers Romans 8.
of his glory. As therefore every thing serves not for one purpose, neither
is every medicine ordained for every malady: so neither has every temptation
one end wherefore it is inflicted, but many ends there are of many afflictions:
so that in respect of their sundry ends, they are also diverse and manifold:
partly then in respect of the manifold instruments whereby God afflicts men:
partly in respect of the sundry kinds of temptations: partly in respect of the
manifold ends which in afflictions god respects, they may well be called and
termed diverse and manifold. And these are the things in this proposition, the
first branch of the division to be observed: Brethren count it exceeding joy
when you fall into diverse temptations.

2 The proposition ended, the confirmation which is 2. Confirmation.
the second thing here follows, which contains the reasons and arguments
which the Apostle uses, why the Saints should be comforted under the cross,
and count it exceeding joy when they fall into diverse temptations, The reasons
are three.

1 From honest comelines in the Saints. It is comely and honest, and a thing
dece^t in the Saints patiently to have their faith tried: by afflictions of
this life, the faith of Gods Saints and servants is tried: the Saints therefore
in afflictions must rejoice and be pacient. No man doubts but it is a comely
and honest thing for Gods children patiently to suffer the trial of their
says. And that afflictions make manifest trial and proof of our faith, the
holy Gene. 22.
Scriptures of God abundantly teach us. When Almighty God would have the
faith of Abraham to shine and appear glorious unto the world, he tempted him
by willing him to sacrifice his only son Isaac, in whom only was the hope
of all the promises. Hereby his faith was tried. Moses vvriteth that the
manifold troubles which Deuteronomy. 8.
the Israelites for forty years suffered in the wilderness, were to try
them. To which end God is said to send false Deuteronomy. 13.
Prophets among the people, thereby to try their faith, whether they would
cleave steadfastly to God, Saint Paul 1. Cor. 11.
thereunto subscribing, affirms that there must be heresies among them, that
they which are approved may be known. David the princely Prophet speaking of
the Psalm. 105.
afflictions of Joseph in Egypt, confesses the end thereof to have been the
trial of his faith. When he writes that God tried him until the appointed
time was come for his deliverance, Zachary prophesying of the blessings Zach.
13.
which should be upon the true servants of God after their clensing and
clearing from all idolatry: and showing that al such as should enjoy those
excellent blessings, notwithstanding should be tried with manifold
afflictions, says: that God would bring thar third part reserved to himself,
through the fire, and would fine them as silver is fined, and try them as gold
is tried. Saint Peter tells 1. Pet. 1.
the Saints, that they were under manifold temptations, that the trial of
their faith, being much more precious then gold that perishes, though it be
tried in the fire, might be found to their praise, honor and glory, at the
coming of Jesus Christ. And thus seeing the end to be the trial of the faith
of the Saints, he calls affliction 1. Pet. 4.
the fiery trial. Think it not strange, dearly beloved, concerning the
fiery trial which is among you. Wherein having an eye to the comparison so
usual in scripture, whereby the Saints are compared to gold and silver, who are
tried by affliction, as these mettels are by fire, calls affliction fiery
trial. The Angel willed John to write to Revel. 2.
the Church of Smyrna, to exhort them not to fear any of the things which the
devil should lay upon them, to try them: whereby it is more clear then the
Sun in his brightness at noone day. That afflictions are for the trial of
the faith of men, they are as the touchstone to try gold from copper, as the
furnace to discern silver from dross, as the sieue or fan to sift the chafe
from the wheat. Wherefore as that is counterfeit, not true gold which bears
and abides not the touchstone, that dross and dregs which carries not the
fining: that dust and chafe which suffers not the sifting: so that faith
which will not abide trial by affliction, is weak, imperfect, wavering, and
unseemly in any Christian.

Whereas then civil and moral virtues are then soonest tried when their
object is present, whereon they may work, as fortitude in danger: chastity
in pleasure: temperance in present dainties and delicates: anger when we are
provoked: so the faith of Gods children is then most manifest, when affliction
are present to try them. And as the stars and moon shine not at noone day,
when the Sun shines in his glorious beauty: so neither do the virtues of
Christians then appear, when men are in prosperity, but in the night and mist
of affliction. Seeing then it is a comely and honest thing in the Saints of God
to have proof and trial of their faith, and other virtues, to be made: and
this trial is made specially by afflictions and troubles of this life: then no
doubt ought the Saints patiently to suffer affliction, and to count it
exceeding joy when they fall into diverse temptations, in as much as the trial
of their faith brings forth their inward virtues: and afflictions are
therefore sent to make trial of the faith of Gods children, and this is the
first reason or argument of the confirmation, lying secretly in the word trial.

2 Another reason set down manifestly, is drawn from the utility and profit
which comes by bearing afflictions: by bearing patiently the miseries and
afflictions of this life, the most singular virtue of patience is wrought in
us. If affliction and trial of our faith bring unto us the worthy virtue of
patience, who would not then count it exceeding joy when they fall into diverse
temptations?

Troubles in the wicked, are causes, or rather occasions in them to fret and
fume; to grudge and groan; mutter and murmr against God; But in Gods Saints
they are the instruments whereby God works patience in their hearts,
therefore to be rejoiced in, count it therefore my brethren, exceeding joy when
you fall into temptations, because the trial of your faith brings forth
patience. Romans 5.


But it may be objected, that this place and doctrine is against Saint Paul,
who entreating of the like argument, says contrary to this. For Saint James
says, That the trial or proof of our faith brings forth patience: But S.
Paul says, That patience brings forth trial or proof. These are contrary
and how can they then hang together?

The reconciliation of these places may be this. 1 The words by James and Paul
used, are not the same, therefore neither is the thing the same: Speaking then
of diverse (...)
things, they speak not contrarily one to the other. In this place proof is
taken actiuely, as it signifies those things whereby we are tried, as
afflictions themselves, whereby occasion is ministered of trying and proouing
the faithful. Thus temptations and afflictions try us, and this trial or
proof, (that is, the things whereby we are tried and proved, which are
afflictions) brings forth patience. that is, ministers matter of our
patience. And thus trial with James here, is as cause of that trial with
Paul, which after this manner is as an effect. With Paul (...)
trial is taken passiuely, as, it signifies that proof and trial which is
made of us, by which we are made known. This knowledge comes through our
patience: for patience makes us to be known whether we mutter and murmr, or
whether we be quiet in our sufferings. And thus patience causes and brings
forth that experience, proof or trial, which is made of us. And thus is
patience cause (as it were) of trial.

2 We may not look so straightly and narrowly into causes and effects, but that
we may grant the same to be cause and effect also in sundry kinds of causes,
or in diverse respects. For trial, proof, experience of most prosperous
success, and happy issue in many troubles, increases our patience, and
confirms our constancy: so that the more trial we have of good success,
the more patient, and more constant are we made in affliction: and thus trial
causes parience as Saint James says. On the other side, patience, and
suffering of the cross, causes great experience, and proof of Gods presence
to deliver us, and also makes us known of what behavior we be in our
troubles. And thus patience causes trial, as Saint Paul faith: and so trial
and patience are mutual helpers, and nourishers one to another, and both cause
and effect one of the other. Thus S. James saying that trial of our faith
brings forth patience; and Saint Paul, that patience brings forth trial
or proof, speaks truth also. For the trial of our faith makes perfect our
patience, that the more we are tried, the more patient we are. And patience
causes trial, because he whose faith fails not, and whose patience is
invincible, is thereby proved and known to be of excellent constancy.

These things thus premised and set down before, the meaning of the Apostle
is not doubtful. The trial of your faith brings forth patience, that is,
the afflictions and temptations themselves (whereby your faith is tried)
brings forth patience. And this is one and the same which Saint Paul
preaches to the Romans, We rejoice in tribulation, knowing that tribulation
brings forth Romans 5.
patience. Our trials and tribulations, our afflictions and miseries which here
we suffer, inure and accustom us to the cross; and men accustomed to a
thing, grow therein to be patient. What we are daily used unto, that we finally
bear quietly: daily afflictions make us so accustomed and acquainted with
sufferings, that thereby we grow to be patient. Wherefore, as Milo Crotoniales
by bearing a calf when it was young, was made able by daily exercise, to bear
it also when it was an old ox: So men by daily bearing the cross, shall be
enhabled to bear it patiently. Lament. 3.
Therefore the prophet said wisely, that it was good to bear the cross from a
child, that as the affliction grows greater, so our patience might grow
greater also: and so affliction, and the trial of our faith make us patient.
Thus afflictions and the trial of our faith thereby, bring forth patience,
not as the efficient cause of patience, and the geuer of patience, which is God
only; Therefore Paul 1. Philip.
says to the Philippians, that it was given to them both to believe in Christ,
and also to suffer for him. But as the isntrumental cause, as the occasion
ministered, whereon our patience may work. Seeing therefore afflictions do thus
bring forth patience, so excelient a virtue, as whereby Luke 21. Heb. 10.
we possess our souls, and obtain the promises, as both our Savior
witnesses, and the Apostle protests, this is reason enough to move us in
afflictions to rejoice. And this is the second reason why the Saints should
count it exceeding joy when they fall into diverse temptations, because the
trial of their faith brings forth patience.

3 From event or effect the Apostle finally reasons. The Saints must count it
exceeding joy when they fall into temptations, because patience in affliction,
makes men entire and perfect. Affliction, and the cross of Christ are the
instruments whereby God does pollish us, and refine us, till we grow to be
perfect in Christ, and become like and conformable unto the son of God him
self, the perfect pattern of all patience. Seeing then by patience we be made
perfect, and patience is caused and gendred of affliction, we therefore ought
in affliction to rejoice.

Here the word perfect signifies stable, constant, abiding and perseuering,
continuing and enduring unto the end, in the most holy profession of the
Gospel, with courage inuinsible, as absolute, entire, and lacking nothing, to
this perfection we attain by patience.

Patience in affliction is the school and nurture-house of Christ and of the
holy Ghost, and the effectual mean which the Lord our God uses to make us
perfect: wherein if we be continually trained, we shall grow to full measure
and perfection of virtue. Thus Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, thus Joseph and holy
Job, mighty Patriarchs, thus Moises, Isai, Jeremie, thus Michai and Zachary,
holy Prophets: thus David, Hezechia, and the rest of the zealous Princes: thus
Paul, Peter, John, and others, true Apostles: thus Steven, Polycarpe, and
infinite the like faithful Martyrs, have by patience in afflictions grown to
such measure of perfection, as in the weakness of nature, and infirmity of
man, may be attained unto. Saint Cyprian in his De bono patientiae.
book entitled, Of the profit and good of patience, in a large discourse
shows, that by patience we are commended and presented to God, that anger is
repressed, the tongue refrayned, the mind governed, and man thereby on every
side perfect. True then is the Apostles saying, auouching that patience makes
us perfect and entire, lacking nothing.

But now that the Apostle here says, that by patience we are made perfect, we
may note that perfection is double. One perfection there is of the substance of
things, as, he that believes constantly upon Christ without wavering, is
perfect in faith: for he has the perfection of the substance of faith. Who so
holds the doctrine of Christ as the infallible word of truth, and thereunto
cleaves immoueably, as to the anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, he
has the word of God perfectly concerning the substance. Who so constantly
continues in the Heb. 6.
profession of his religion, that neither with blast of vain persuasion,
neither with storm of cruel persecution he be removed, is perfect. Thus men in
this world may be perfect in virtues, when they have the true substance of the
virtues for which they are commended.

There is another perfection, which is of degrees, which is such as cannot be
increased in any degree* as, to have such faith, as that we need not to pray,
Lord increase Luke 17.
our faith: to have such knowledge, as we need not with David desire further
to be enstructed in the ways of the Psalm 25. 119. 86.
Lord, to have such patience, as that cannot be augmented, such perfection, as
in nothing canbe increased; thus no man is perfect in this infirmity and
weakness of nature: by patience we grow to perfection of the substance of
sundry virtues, but not to perfection in degrees: but to such a measure as of
men in this life may be attained, whereunto the name of perfection is given.
Thus both men in holy Scripture, and things are sometimes called perfect, as
Job, Zachary, and Elizabeth, and others: yet not absolutely, but either in
comparison of the wicked and ungodly, then whom the Saints are more holy, and
in comparison perfect: either because the Saints excel in the greater part of
their life in excellent virtues, as S. Augustine avouches, and another father
to like purpose, Men 2. De meritis and remis. c. 2.
are called perfect, not that there is no imperfection in the^, but because
they are commended with a great heap of virtues: Or finally, because that
measure whereunto we grow, and those virtues whereunto we aspire and clime,
are reputed in the Saints for perfect, by the imputation of the perfection of
Jesus Christ, whereby all the virtues of the Saints are accepted with God.

Seeing then by patience under the manifold afflictions of this life, we
increase in virtue, and grow to be entire, perfect, and as lacking nothing,
shall we not thereby be moved to hold fast the exhortation and proposition of
the Apostle, Brethren, count it exceeding joy when you fall into diverse
temptations, knowing that your trial of faith brings forth patience, and
let patience have her perfect work, that you may be perfect and entire, and
lack nothing? And these are the three reasons wherefore we ought to count it
exceeding joy when we fall into diverse temptations.

These things thus set down, the Saints might have objected 3. A preoccupation.
against his doctrine, It were good thus to do we deny not; but it is not so
soon done as easily spoken, as though we were able of our selves thus in our
afflictions to moderate our selves, that whenever we be afflicted, to account
it exceeding joy. This objection the Apostle answers, I know this is not a
quality in the power and strength of nature, but it is a special grace and
gift of God, in our affliction to comfort our selves, that we be not cast
down, nor faint hearted, but rather be glad and rejoice. Therefore it is to be
asked of him which only gives this heavenly wisdom. In which place there may
two things be observed. 1. The objection which might have been made. 2. Then
the answer thereunto.

1 The objection is, We cannot of our selves thus bear the cross, we have no
such strength in nature, there is nothing more unpleasant or unsavory to the
flesh, then is the cross. We know that in us, that is, in our flesh, Romans 7.
dwells no good thing: of our selves, as of our selves we cannot so much as
think a good thought. How unequal 2. Cor. 13.
are we then to the bearing of so heavy a burden? We must needs sink under
the cross, wherefore in vain, O holy and blessed apostle, in vain assuredly
is this doctrine preached unto us.

2 The answer hereunto is this, I know that this is a hard doctrine to the
flesh: I confess we are unable of our selves to perform it: this is the
special grace and gift of God, to account our afflictions exceeding joy unto
us. Therefore is it not to be hoped for in our selves, but from him to be
prayed for: wherefore if any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, which
gives to all men liberally, and reproacheth none, and it shall be given him, but
let him ask it in faith and waver not. In which answer four things are to be
considered.

1 What this wisdom is. It is the doctrine of the cross here specified,
namely, to endure patiently whatsoever God lays upon us, and to know that God
in singular love corrects all those with the rod of affliction, whom he
purposes to make heirs of his eternal glory. This to know is wisdom far
greater then the wisdom of men.

This wisdom stands in two things. 1. In knowledge, that we wisely
understand the causes for which we are thus afflicted of God, as that partly
for the punishment of our sins, as the princely Prophet records, For
iniquity Psalm.
have thou chastened man; partly for the more manifestation and plainer trial
of our faith, as Abraham, Job, Israel the servant and people of God; partly for
the advancement of Gods greater glory, that thereby in the deliverance of men
from their calamities, he might be more glorified. Finally, that hereby we
being touched, 1. Cor. 11.
might repent, lest that we perish with the world. Hereof to have true
understanding and knowledge, is a great point of wisdom, even of this wisdom
whereof the Apostle speaks.

As the wisdom how to bear the cross, consists in knowledge and
understanding of the ends wherefore it is inflicted and laid upon us: so also
it consists in an inward feeling and judgment, when in our hearts, souls
and consciences, we have sense and feeling of the comfort of the spirit, which
in afflictions of this life, and in the cross whereunto we are subject,
vpholdeth and supporteth us, and with assured hope of safe deliverance in due
season, vnderproppeth us,

This point of wisdom to feel inwardly the comfort of the spirit, was in
holy Job, who therefore in the Job. 19.
midst of all his miseries, and in the greatest brunt of his afflictions, in
lively hope, in assured faith, in wonderful confidence, in inward feeling of
rare comfort of the holy Ghost, breaks out and says, I know that my redeemer
lives, and that I shall rise again in the latter day, and shall see God in my
flesh, and not with other, but with these same eyes. This point of wisdom had
David learned, when Psalm. 23.
in great confidence and trust, and singular consolation of the spirit, he
brake out and cried; Though I should walk through the shadow of death yet
will I fear no evil: for thou Lord art with me, thy rod and thy staff
comfort me. This wiseome was in the Prophets, Apostles, holy Martyrs, whereby
their torments and sufferings being in themselves extreme, yet became to them
tolerable. To know therefore the end and use of the cross and outward
afflictions, to feel the presence of the spirit of God in midst of our
miseries comforting us, whereby the burden of the cross is lightened. This is
surely the wisdom mentioned by the Apostle, If any man lack wisdom.

2 This wisdom is not a quality in nature, but grace, and an excellent grace
and gift of God, therefore of him only is this wisdom to be sought, which the
Apostle to intimate, wills that if any man lack this wisdom, he should ask
it of God, to bear the cross patiently, to know the use of affliction truly,
to feel the comfort of the spirit inwardly, this is wisdom not of man, but
of God; not of our selves, but from his heavenly goodness; from whom all
wisdom flows, as from a fountain: truly therefore Solomon, The Lord gives
wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding. And Pro. 2. 6.
the holy Patriarch Job searching and seeking out the fountain of wisdom, and
the wel-head from whence all heavenly Job. 28.
knowledge comes, and confessing that there is no natural mean, by which
men might attain thereunto, concludes finally, that it is the special gift
of God, who only knows the way of wisdom, and understands the place
thereof. When the dream of Nabuchodonosor was revealed unto Daniel the
prophet, the Prophet Dan. 2.
referring all wisdom unto him as unto a fountain, gives thanks and praise to
God, the name of God be praised for ever and ever, for all wisdom and strength
are his, he changes times and seasons, he takes away kings, and sets up
kings he gives wisdom to the wise, and understanding to those that
understand. This Solomon the king rightly considering, prays for wisdom unto
the Lord, 3. Kings 3. 4. 29.
who gave him wisdom in wonderful manner above all kings and princes. To this
infallible truth wise Sirach subscribing, in the entrance of his treatise and
book of Ecclus. 1 Esd. 3. 4. 60.
wisdom confesses, All wisdom (says he) comes of the Lord, and has been
with him for ever, and is with him for evermore: and as a I wisdom generally
is from him, so is this special grace and gift to bear the cross patiently,
and not to faint under the yoke and burden of afflictions: Which when Paul
perceived, confesses to Philip. 1.
the Church of Philippi, that it was given them, not only to believe in
Christ, but also to suffer for him. To this purpose it serves that almighty
God is called the God of Romans 15.
patience and consolation, because he gives both patience and consolation
under the afflictions of this life. Can flesh and blood bear the heavy yoke
of Christ, unless it be strengthened by Christ, through whom we can do all
things? Could man endure infinite and intolerable torments, Philip. 4.
and so manifold afflictions, as whereunto we are subject, unless it were
given him from God? Could any suffer the spoil of their goods, the loss of
their children, the slandering of their names, the restraint of their liberty,
the beating of their bodies, the departure from their country, the sicknesses
and diseases wherewith they are compassed, the diverse temptations whereinto
they fall daily, were it not that they had received this wisdom from God? The
holy and blessed Apostle therefore acknowledging this to be the gift of God,
wisely to behave our selves under the cross, affirms that it is a gift from
God, of whom only we must look to crave it: if any man, says he, lack
wisdom, let him ask it of God.

3 Patiently to bear the cross, and wisely and well to behave our selves in
our afflictions, being a gift from God; what hope have we to obtain it by
asking of h^^: Three ways are we here to conceive hope of obteining this
wisdom from God.

1 From the promise we have from God that he will hear when we call, open
when we knock, give when we ask it of him: almighty God assures us of this
hope by his Prophet, by whom he wills us in the days of tribulation Psalm 50.
Luke 15. 30.
to call upon him, with promise that he will hear us, In fine he protests,
that he is more ready to hear us, then we to call upon him, and more willing
to supply Isai. 65.
our need, then we desirous to ask it at his hands, therefore says he,
before they call I will answer, while they Mat. 7.
speak I will hear them. Our blessed savior inuiteth us to pray by this hope
of obtaining: ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you: therefore in another place he assures his, that John
14.
whatsoever they shall ask in his name, he would do it, that the father might
be glorified in the son. And again, in that day shall you ask me nothing:
verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask the father John 16.
in my name, he will give it you: hitherto have you asked nothing in my name,
ask and you shall receive, that your joy may be full. And the Apostle in this
place promises that if we ask, we shall receive the wisdom we pray for.
Seeing then we have promise to obtain whatsoever we ask at the hands of our
heavenly father, if we ask it according to his will: And particularly Saint
James here 1. John 5.
promises that wisdom shall be given us, when we ask it of God: then is
there great hope we shall obtain it, let us therefore ask it.

2 As from the promise is made us that we shall obtain, so from the liberality
of God we must conceive hope of obteining the thing we pray for. God gives to
every man liberally: shall he not give us wisdom, who is liberal to all men?
Shall we distrust his goodness, who is rich to all Rom, 10.
that call upon him? Shall we suspect his bountifulness, which powers out
plentifully his blessings upon al flesh? Romans 8.
So liberal is our God, that he has not spared his own son, but has given
him for us all unto death: how shall he not together with him give us all
things also? Such is the bounty and liberality of our God, that he does not
lade man only, but all living creatures with his goodness, Psalm. 104.
who daily wait upon him, that he may give them meat in due season. God
gives it them, and they gather it: he opens his hands, and they are filled
with goodness, says the holy Prophet. Such is his goodness toward all
flesh, as that he gives food to the beasts, and meat to the young ravens which
call upon him. Shall he carry a continual Psalm. 147.
and provident care over all his creatures; and shall he not hear the
supplications of men, whom he has made a little lower then the angels, to
crown them with Psalm. 8.
glory and worship above other creatures? Shall he hear the beasts of the
field, and the birds of the air when they cry to him for sustenance; and
shall he not hear men, who under the cross call upon him for wisdom to
bear it to his glory? Shall he give liberally to all men, and shall he not
give us wisdom when we pray therefore unto his heavenly majesty? he is
liberal toward all, and why should we any of us all doubt of his goodness?
wherefore if God give liberally unto all men, there is great cause that we
should conceive hope of obteining this wisdom at the hands of God, who is so
liberal to all men.

3 Thirdly, we have hope to obtain this wisdom at the hands of God, from
the goodness of his nature: he gives his gifts liberally to all men, and he
vpbraideth none, neither casts any man in the teeth, either with his
benefits so plentifully powered upon us, or with our beggerlinesse and
miserable want whereunto we are subject; therefore is there great hope of
obtaining the wisdom we pray for.

Men when they have done any good turn to any, if they be never so little
offended, they cast men in the teeth with the benefits they have done them,
and vpbraid them with the good turn they have showed; wherefore men are loath
to make request to such for any thing, neither can they be persuaded they
shall obtain, when they meet with such dispositions and natures. But such a
one is not God, for he gives to all men liberally, and vpbraideth none, but
such as are more ungrateful and forgetful of his benefits then brute beasts
themselves. Seeing God then is bountiful of nature, and gives to all men
liberally, and without vpbraiding, envy, malignitie, bestows his blessings
upon us: then is there great hope of obtaining this wisdom at his merciful
hands, whereof the Apostle here assures us: If any man lack wisdom, let him
ask it of God, who gives to every man liberally, and vpbraideth no man, and
it shall be given him.

4 But how shall we ask this wisdom? how shall we pray for the gift of
patience, that we may obtain it? in the last and fourth place, the Apostle
teaches us, if we ask it in faith and waver not. Faith therefore in all the
prayers of Gods Saints is necessary, neither is there any thing which more
hinders the graunts of God toward man, then when they doubt or waver in
their prayers, distrusting either the power of god, as not able: or his
goodness, as not willing to hear us in the days of our necessities: which
distrustfulnesse and wavering, is no small evil in the sight of God: neither
is it a light matter to doubt of obtaining that thou desire, whereby thy
double heart and wavering mind is descried, who in asking pretendest hope, in
wuering a distrustest either the power, or promptness or readiness of God to
give thee the desire of thy heart and to doubt either of his power, or
promptness and readiness of mind, is great impiety, disloialtie, and
ungodliness, Saint Augustine therefore writing to Vitalis, most christianly
remooueth all doubfulnesse and wavering Epist. 107.
from our prayers, to which purpose he says, God forbid, and be it far from
us, that what we desire God to do for us with our mouths and voices, we should
deny him to be able to do in our hearts and cogitations. Men not fully
persuaded of the power and readiness of God, to hear them and grant the
things they pray for, turn many reasons, and dispute for and against in
themselves, whether it were good or no, to ask such and such things at the
hands of God: by which means their minds being distracted into diverse
opinions, and carried thereby hither and thither, obtain not those things they
thus doubtfully desire, but rather thereby teach God to deny them. Wherefore
Seneca in his Tragedies says truly, he that asks fearfully In Hippolito.
and doubtfully, teaches him to deny of whom he asks: and men doubting
they shall not obtain, make God unwilling to hear them. Saint Hierome to like
purpose Sup. 7. Mat.
says: If he that asks obtains, and he that seeks finds: and he that
knocks, has the door opened unto him: then is it apparent that he has not
asked, sought, knocked as he should, to whom is not given: who finds not, to
whom it is not opened when he knocks, and why? because of unbelief,
doubtfulnesse, and wavering, the greatest enemy to the efficacy of our
prayers. The Apostle therefore, in the obtaining of this heavenly wisdom, to
bear the cross of Christ as is convenient, and best serves for his glory,
remoouing all doubtful wavering from the Saints, wills that they ask this
wisdom in assured hope, and unfeigned faith, that it might be obtained:
wherefore he says, If any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God, who
gives to every man liberally, and vpbraideth none, and it shall be given
him: but let him ask it in faith, and waver not.

By faith our prayers are strengthened and made effectual with God, wherein
approaching to God by prayer, we are heard. The princely Prophet teaches us,
that God is near to such as call upon him: yet only such as call Psalm. 14.
upon him faithfully. Our blessed Savior in the holy Gospel assures us of
obteining what we ask, believing Mark 11.
and not doubting to obtain it. The holy Apostle and servant of Christ S.
John, protests that whatsoever we ask 1. John. 5.
of God, according to his will, he would give us and when do we ask according
to the will of God, rather then when in assurance of faith, and in undoubted
hope of obteining, we draw near to the throne of his grace and mercy by
prayer? Wherefore as when men persuade themselves of the goodness and
liberality of men, and nothing doubt but they shall obtain, they are then
carried hastily to make suite unto them: So when we are persuaded to obtain, we
then soonest pray unto God. And as we must be thus persuaded of men, if we
look to obtain: so must we persuade our selves of God, that he is both able
and willing to grant our prayers, if we look to obtain any thing at the
hands of the Lord: whereof the Apostle to persuade us, wills that if we
will obtain this wisdom from God, we must ask it in faith without wavering,
otherwise our prayers are turned into sin: for whatsoever Romans 14. Against 2.
epist. Pelag.
is not of faith is sin, as avouches the Apostle. And S. Augustine thereunto
subscribeth: Our righteousness is discerned from unrighteousness, not by the
law of works, but of faith, without which faith, whatsoever seem good works,
are sins, and turned into sins, neither is it likely such prayers should be
heard and obtained, because they please not God, whom to please without faith
is impossible, as affirms the Apostle. Let us therefore when we ask Heb.
11.
vvisdome patiently to bear the cross imposed and laid upon us; when we
ask faith to be confirmed and strengthened in Gods promises; when we ask
forgiveness of sin, and with God to be reconciled: when we ask release
of pain, relief of body, comfort in distress, health in sickness, ease in
misery, or whatsoever other thing, either touching the soul, or concerning
the necessity of this present world, pray evermore in faith, and hold fast
the counsel which in this particular the Apostle gives: If any man lack
vvisdome, let him ask it of God, who gives to every man liberally, and
vpbraideth none, and it shall be given him: but let him ask in faith and
waver not. And thus the Apostle by preventing, turns away and answers
that objection which might have been made against him by the Saints: We
would feign count it exceeding joy when we fall into temptations, but this
passes our power and strength, neither are we able to do this of our selves.
Hereunto the Apostle answers: that patiently to bear the cross is the
special gift of GOD: and therefore the gift of patience is to be desired from
him, whereunto these words in the fifth, and part of the sixth verses pertain,
If any man lack wisdom, etc. Let us therefore pray unto God, from whom as
all other graces, so all wisdom proceeds, that he would vouchsafe us his
holy spirit in all our temptations and afflictions, to guide us, and to power
this heavenly wisdom into our hearts, that in all things we being subject to
his will, may in our afflictions and calamities glorify him here, and be
glorified of him in the life to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom
with the father and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, now and for
evermore. Amen.

James Chapter 1. verses 6. 7. 8. Sermon 3.
6 He that wauereth is like a wave of the Sea, tossed of the wind and carried
away.

7 Neither let him think that he shall receive any thing from the Lord.

8 A double minded man is unstable in all his ways.


2. Part or place of the Chapter.
IN these words, the Apostle comes and slideth as it were, to the second
place in this first Chapter contained, which is of doubtful and wavering
prayers: whereunto he discendeth by the way of digression: for in these words
and verses, leaving the matter in hand and in question, touching the pacient
bearing of the cross, he falls into a discourse against wavering and
doubtful prayers: whereof the occasion was ministered him necessarily, as it
were by the words of the text before expounded: for in the preventing of their
objection which might have been made against him, concerning patience under
affliction, whence we have it, even from God: the Apostle exhorting the Saints
to ask it in faith without wavering: he has just occasion to speak of
doubtful and wavering prayers of men: and so he does 6. 7. 8. verses, and 9.
10. 11. 12. returns again to his purpose. In this place he speaks against
unfaithful prayers of men: When they with doubting and double minds come to
crave things at the hands of God.

This sin and evil is condemned here by three ways. 1 By a similitude:
doubtful prayers are as the waves of the sea which never are stable nor stand
still: therefore such prayers can not please God. 2 By a reason from
discommoditie and disadvantage: he that is wavering in prayer, can obtain
nothing at the hands of God: therefore he labors in vain. 3 By a general
and common sentence, received as true of all men: a wavering minded man is
unstable in all his ways.

Touching the wavering prayers of men conceived from a double and doubtful
mind, distract and drawn partly into hope, partly into fear, partly into
belief, partly into mistrust of obtaining: The Apostle condemns it, first
from a comparison or similitude, wherein the doubtful and wavering person in
prayer is compared to a wave of the sea: he that doubts, says James, either
of the power, or willing readiness of God, is like a wave of the sea, tossed of
the wind and carried away. For as a wave or surge of the sea, swells by the
rising and hoisting of the wind, and by the strength thereof is carried hither
and thither, and never remains steddie, but always is troubled: So a
wavering minded man, is like a wave or surge of the sea rolled up and down,
and tossed of the wind, never stable, but always troubled: for his manifold
imaginations, his sundry cogitations, his diverse thoughts of heart, so toss
him and carry him up and down, that his mind can never rest, but is always
vexed and disquieted, never surely fixed or settled upon one thing: for now he
thinks God will hear him, and by and by he misdoubteth: now he persuades
himself God can give him his hearts desire, and forthwith he mistrusteth: now
he conceiueth hope, and immediately he faints: now he says with himself, I
will make my suite to God, but straightvvay he fears. Thus is he tossed and
troubled by his own cogitations, and carried away with the vvinde of his own
vanity, and never rests: Wherefore he is well compared to a vvaue, of the
vvinde and moved aier tossed and tumbled.

For men thus to be carried away in prayer is a great evil; in our suites to
God to propose no certainty; in our supplications to God to rest upon nothing;
in our petitions always to shake and waver, and never aim stedelie at any
particulars; in these our necessities to be betwixt hope and fear, and always
wavering; now to think this thing, now that; now to believe, now to distrust;
now to be of courage, now to faint in heart; now to assure our selves, now to
despair of his mercy; now to rest and rely upon his power and ptomise, now
to fall away through infidelity; is no doubt like to the waves of the sea,
which are now here, now there; tossed and carried away of the winds. This in
constancy the Apostle condemns; this instabilitie Saint James reproves in
this place by this similytude and comparison; he that wauereth is like a wave
of the sea, toste of the wind and carried a way. This is a great evil and
sin, worthily to be reproved. As almighty God in all other things condemns
inconstancy and wavering of the mind of men, so especially in our prayers and
supplications of him in any part or point to dowte or waver, either touching
his power, or concerning his promptnes and readiness to hear and help us, is
no small sin, neither lightly by him regarded, whereof the Apostle to put us
in mind, condemns it as great vanity; he that wauereth is as a wave of the
sea tossed of the wind and carried away.

2 As by this plain comparison and similitude this dowtefullnes and
inconstancy is condemned; So in like manner by a reason from discomoditie and
disadvantage which follows this wavering: the reason is this: That which
brings no good unto men, but procures hurt rather, ought not to be used
among the Saints of God; but our wavering in prayer, brings no benefit unto
us, but this hurt; that it makes us unfit to receue any thing at the hands of
God; therefore all dowting and wavering in prayer must be left and removed
from us.

That it makes us unfit to receive any thing at the hands of God, who is so
blind that sees not, so wayward that confesses not? If a man should come to
his neighbor and say: Sir I have a suite unto you, but I doubt I shall not
obtain it, for I fear either you cannot, or at least you will not perform my
desire: Does he not stop and stay the hand of the geuer, does he not make
himself unworthy to receive any thing, that is so doubtful? Shall it not be
replied, shall I do for him that has me in jealousy and suspicion that I
will not help him, and doubts of my good nature and frank heart toward
him? Thus man doubting to obtain of man, gets nothing: even likewise, if in
our hearts we say to God, I doubt thou will not give me, I fear thou will not
hear me; we obtain by prayer nothing at the hands of God, because we doubt
either of his power, or else of his liberality and bounty toward us. For as a
constant persuasion and good assurance of Gods favor, highly commends our
prayers to him, so the doubting of our minds, the wavering of our hearts,
estrangeth and alienateth his affection from us, that we obtain nothing.

Wherence is it then that many praying, obtain not the things they pray for?
Is it not herence, that they pray with wavering minds, and doubting? Who so
then comes before God with a doubtful and distrustful mind, wavering in
heart hither and thither, must not think to obtain any thing at the hands of
God: much less then must he hope to obtain this excellent gift of wisdom,
whereby we patiently bear all the afflictions of this world without
murmuring. Yea so far are such from obteining their desire of God, as that by
their distrustfulnes they provoke him to anger. As then the infidelity of the
Jews shut (as it were) the doare of heaven from them, so that it was not
opened unto them; that as they entered not (through their vnbeleese) into
Canaan, a type Heb. 3.
of heavenly Jerusalem, so much less into heaven it self; even such as were
disobedient and unfaithful of the people, and as the incredulity and want of
faith restrained Christ from doing miracles in sundry places, as the
Evangelists Mat. 13. 58. Luke 4. 24.
record; so in like manner, the infidelity and doubting of our minds hides
the face of God from our prayers, that he will not hear us; when our selves
cannot be accepted, neither our prayers welcome unto him, unless we come before
him in assurance of obteining without wavering. For this is a true position,
and principle of the Apostle, that he which doubts and wauereth, shall
receive nothing at the hands of God. If then this doubting and wavering bring
with it this discommoditie, that thereby we are made incapable of the benefits
and graces of God, it stands us then upon by all means possible to beware of
doubting and wavering in prayer. And this is his second reason whereby this
wavering is condemned.

3 The last reason whereby he condemns this, is from a sentence generally
received of all men; which he proposes (as it were) prouerbially. A double
minded man is unstable in all his ways, therefore wavering in prayer is
condemned.

A double minded man here is he, which is carried away with sundry cogitations
about the same matter; neither knows he what way to take to, and what
certainly to follow. This man is inconstant and unstable in all his ways.
Unstable, which is deducted and derived from the Commonwealth, which having
laws and orders whereby (...).
it may be governed, and they carefully observed. The Commonwealth thereby has
her quietness and stabilitie, whatsoever hinders and lets the prosperous
quietness of the commonwealth, whatsoever is against good laws and orders;
as, sedition, tumults, vprores, tyrannical empire and bearing rule, and the
like; is called unstable: so in like manner in the mind of man, whilst reason
rules and executes her office, the affections of man continue in their place,
and man's mind rests in her quiet constitution: but if the affections break
the bounds which (...).
reason prefixeth, there rises disordernes and instabilitie.

He therefore which doubting and wavering prays, has a disturbed and
disordered mind, and has in him an uproar and tumult of affections, which
follow another thing then faith prescribes, therefore is here said to be
unstable in all his ways, disquieted, disordered, disturbed in all his
actions, all his thoughts, all his enterprises whatsoever he endeavors: So
that this wavering, doubting, and doublenes of mind, whereby we stand in a
quandarie, and mammaring, whether we be beloved of God or no; whether he
will hear us or not; whether he will accept of us, and grant our prayers*
or otherwise; peruerteth, vveakneth, disordereth, and turns up side down
all Christian duty and piety, and the whole life of man. Which the Apostle
does signify more significatiuely in the tongue wherein he vvrote, by the
word unstable. A double minded man is unstable in all his vvayes. Whereence
we may learn, that the foundation and stablenes of all godly actions, and
specially of all holy and acceptable prayers, stands in doctrine, in Gods
will, in faith, without which our whole life is disordered, confused,
disturbed. And thus these three vvayes the Apostle condemns the unstableness,
doubting, and wavering of men in prayer.

These things being more plain then that they need any further enlarging, let
us now see what doctrine may out of the former place and this, be gathered.
1. That the Apostle in this place so earnestly inueigheth against dowting and
wavering in prayer, whereby we distrust either the power or the goodness and
favor of God toward us, me think it may well refute the doctrine of the
Romish Church who in all things would have us dovvtefull of the favor of
God, thinking it presumption worthy to be condemned, to assure our selves
certainly of his good will and favor toward us.

2 That the Apostle makes prayer the mean and way to attain unto wisdom,
wherein he vvoulde men to remove all wavering and doubting; it easily
refuteth those fantastical spirits which condemn prayer as superfluous, God
(say they) knows our need, and sees our want before we ask, he will for his
fatherly goodness supply this want without asking: he hears the inward
sighings and sobs of the spirit, and knows what the spirit means,
therefore is prayer in Gods children superfluous. Indeed, if God, because he
knows our need, and hears the sorrowful sighings of the Saints, Would
therefore supply our want without asking, then were prayer superfluous: but to
be therefore superfluous, because he knows our needs and necessities, is a
reason carnal, sensual and deuilish.

For were this carnal reason sufficient, God knows our needs before we pray,
therefore prayer is superfluous; why does the Apostle here will us, If any man
lack wisdom, to ask it of God? God knows our infirmities, he sees our
impatie^cy, he beholds the unableness of man's nature, he sees whether in
afflictions we behaueour selves as is convenient: notwithstanding the apostle
wills us to ask this point of wisdom from God. Neither Saint James here
only commends prayer as needful, but the whole course of the Scriptures of
God require it in the necessities of men, as an instrument most necessary.
Almighty God though he knew our troubles, whereinto by his will we should be
plunged, yet commands he us in our troubles to call upon him for
deliverance. The Lord Psalm. 50.
foresaw the miserable captivity of Israel his people in the land of Babylon:
yet does the Prophet will them to Lament. 2.
pour out their hearts before God, both for their present misery, and also
for their future calamity. Our Savior Mat. 6.
Christ auouching to the Saints, that God their heavenly Father knew their
necessities, and therefore they should not be distrustful, as the heathen and
Gentiles; yet, for all necessities both bodily and ghostly, he set down
prayer, as a help and remedy, the form whereof he left unto alposteritie,
and commanded also that men should ask, seek, knock for, at the gates of
Gods mercies, the things Mat. 7.
that were needful. It were horrible blasphemy to say that Mat. 26. Luke 22.
God did not know the distress and agony of our Savior in the garden and
impiety without comparison most detestable, to think that the Father was not
ready to help him: yet does our Savior thrice on a row pray to the Father
that that cup might pass from him. The hearts of the Apostles were known,
and it was needful for the accomplishing of their ministry, that to the
eleven, a twelfth Apostle in Judas his place might be substitute: yet in that
so heavenly a business they pray to God for direction. Acts 1.
God knew that Anna the mother of Samuel was 1. Kings 1.
barren, and despised therefore of her enemy: he saw her affliction, and
considered her tears: yet was it not given her what she desired, but after her
prayer unto God Prayer is not therefore superfluous because God knows our
needs and necessities before we ask.

What: have not the holy Patriarchs, have not the blessed Apostles, have not
the Saints of God in all times used prayer? May it then be judged as
superfluous?

What: have we either to supply our bodily necessities, or to minister to our
spiritual wants, as of our selves, and may we not truly of both say, We have
nothing but what we have received? And whereby do we receive 1. Cor. 4.
these things from the hands of God? Is it not by prayer? Is it not necessary
then in all? The Poet says well therefore, that prayer profits both poor
and rich alike, when it is used; and hurts both children and old men, being
neglected.

Men pray therefore to God, Saint Augustine affirms, Epist. 121.
to Proba the widow, not to teach him their necessity, (for who knovveth
the mind of the Lord, to instruct him?) but to exercise themselves in prayer,
and make them capable of those things which willingly he does give them.
Therefore men pray to God, that thereby it may appear that he is the geuer of
all good things, that the effects and events of things depend wholy upon him,
that increase of his graces is to be looked for only from his heavenly
majesty, and thereby we taught to behave our selves more thankfully and
duetifully unto him.

Seeing then no man can be so blind (unless he vvilfully stop his eyes
against the light of the truth) but needs confesses prayer to be a thing
most necessary in the life of man; which neither man nor woman, rich nor
poor, learned nor ignorant, Prince nor people, one nor other can want
altogether; but is the only mean and instrument vvherby all the treasures of
God, reposed and laid up in store for his Saints in Jesus Christ, are
plentifully poured out upon men: then notvvithstanding this, to hold it as
superfluous in the Saints, is not only like Giants to fight against God and
his truth, but as having put off the whole nature of men, and transformed
into the shape of brute beasts, to strive and contend against the course of
nature it self: which who so do, are not only worthy to be secluded the
society of the Saints, but also to be sequestered and put out from the
company of men.

Were there then no other place in all holy scripture to commend prayer as a
thing most necessary unto men, yet were this one all-sufficient, that the
Apostle S. James here makes it the mean to attain unto vvisdome. If any man
lack vvisdome, let him ask it of God.

3 Besides this, whereas Saint James promises that if we lack wisdom we
should ask it, and it should be given us: does he not most highly commend
prayer unto men, whose virtue, force and excellency is such, as whereby the
most excellent gift and virtue of patience (a singular point of heavenly
wisdom) is obtained? the virtue and efficacy whereof is set down far and
wide in the scriptures of God: whereof if we will consider a little, it
commends prayer not a little. 1 That almighty God has made so large and
liberal promises thereunto, as that we shall obtain that from him by prayer,
which we ask: to which ^^rpose almighty God by his Prophet says; Call upon me
^n the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee, Psalm. 50.
and thou shall glorify me: call upon me, and I will deliver thee. By another
Prophet to like purpose is it said, Thou shall call, and the Lord shall answer
thee, thou shall cry, Isai 58.
and he will hear thee. The wiseman Solomon commending Pro. 15.
unto men the excellency of prayer, by the promise thereunto made, that God
would hear it, says, God is far from the wicked, but he hears the
prayers of the righteous. David by great experience and long trial having felt
the truth hereof, cries out; The eyes of the Psalm. 34.
Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears open to their prayers. And in
another place subscribing thereunto, he Psalm. 145.
affirms, that the Lord is near to them that call upon him, even all such as
call upon him faithfully. Our blessed Savior in the Gospel, to allure all men
earnestly to pray, commends prayer and the force thereof, from the Mat. 7.
promise thereof made of obteyning, therefore (says he) 2 Seek and you shall
find, ask and you shall have, John 14. and 16. Mat. 21. 22
knock and it shall be opened unto you. And again, What soever you ask the
Father in my name, he will give it you.

Seeing then to prayer so liberal and large promises are made by God and by
Christ, does it not greatly advance and set forth the excellency and virtue
of prayer? The Apostle Saint John to commend prayer unto me^, from the largenes
and certainty of this promise witnesses 1. John 5.
unto us, that whatsoever we ask of God according to his will, it should be
given us. And finally, our Apostle thererence to show the excellency and rare
virtue of prayer, willed if any man want wisdom, he should ask it, and it
should be given him. Herence then is prayer commended, James 1.
that thereunto are so large promises made, that what we ask in prayer, shall be
given us.

2 As the promises made of obteining do greatly commend the excellent virtue
and force of prayer, so do the testimonies and witnesses in Scripture,
touching the worthiness thereof, not a little commend it unto us. For what
virtue is there whose praise in more places, whose force in better manner,
whose excellent virtue by more Ecclus. 35.
testimonies is commended? Sirach extolling the great virtue, and enlarging the
singular excellency of prayer, etc. writes, that who so serves the Lord,
should be accepted with favor, and his prayer should reach unto the clouds.
Matt. 21.
Our savior Christ expressing the rare force and virtue of prayer, avouches
that men shall be able to make mou^tains remone out of their places, and to cast
themselves into the sea. Saint John in the Reuclation, calls the prayers of
the Revel. 5. and. 8.
Saints, that sweet odor which came out of the golden vials and censers, and
ascended up to God. S. James expressing James 5.
the great virtue of prayer, says that the prayer of the righteous is of great
force, if it be fervent. Many like are the testimonies of holy scripture,
wherein great force is attributed to prayer, which were tedious to set down in
particular. Finally our apostle attributes this force and power unto James 1.
it, that it obtains the virtue of patience, a singular point of divine
wisdom. To all which S. Augustine subscribing in Sermon 226. de tempo.
advancing the worthiness of prayer, affirms that it is the key which opens
heaven, and brings us to the presence of God: our prayer ascends, and Gods
mercy discendeth upon us. Prayers therefore proceeding from faith, easily mount
up and pearce even unto God. S. Chrisost. in Upon 22. Mat. opus imperf. and de
prefect. euangelij.
like manner both upon the Gospel, and in other places of his writings setting
down the great praise of prayer, and the excellency thereof, concludes that
there is nothing of greater force and power, then sincere and earnest prayer.
Whether then we respect the promises made unto the prayers of the Saints; or
whether we look unto the lively testimonies of the holy scriptures, and the
reverend fathers, whereby the force of prayer is witnessed, both ways prayer
for the excellent virtue is commanded unto us.

3 Finally, the virtue and force of prayer by sundry effects, and diverse
examples of men, by prayer working great matters and miracles also, is manifest
and apparent. Herein leaving the effects of the prayers of the holy Patriarchs
before the time and law of Moses, wherein the great power and force of prayer
appeared: let us come to Moses, and Exad. chap, ^4. and 17.
such as succeeded, in their times and places. What shall we here say of the
prayers of Moses? were they not of great force, when thereby he both removed
the plagues of God from Pharao, and also obtained passage by the red sea:
Pharao and his army therein destroyed? Were they not of great virtue, when at
the prayer of Moses, the people overcame Exodus 17.
the Amalakites their enemies, when he ceased they were overcome of them? The
prayer of Joshua was of great virtue, when thereby the Sun stayed in the
heaven, Joshua 10.
until he had subdued the five kings his enemies. Great was the prayer of the
man of God, when at his prayer the hand of king Jeroboam, which was dried up
for 3. Kin. 13.
that he stretched it out against the Prophet, was restored. Great were the
prayers of David, who in infinite places witnesses, that he cried unto the
Lord, and his prayers were Psalm.
effectual. Great was the force of Elias his prayer, who prayed to God, and it
rained not for three years and six 3. King 17. 18. chap.
months: and he prayed again, and it rained, and the land was fruitful, as
the Apostle out of the story gathers. Great were the prayers of the same
Prophet and Elizeus James 5. 3. King. 17. 4 chap. 4. Job 24.
also, by whose prayers the dead were restored. Great was the prayer of Job,
when God accepted it for his three friends, which had in the matter of Job so
shamefully offended, in handling so evil a matter so cunningly? What should I
rehearse unto you, the prayers of Peter and John, Acts 3.
whereby the begging cripple was healed? The prayers of Peter alone, whereby
both Eneas was healed of the palsy, and Tabitha restored to life also? The
prayer of Paul and Asts 9. Acts 16. Acts 4.
Sylas, whereby the foundation of the prison was shaken? They shake then both
earth and heaven to make way and passage unto God. As also the place was shaken
wherein the Apostles were praying, being persecuted of the Jews. By prayer
Iehosaphat was delivered from the danger, when with Ahab he fought against the
Aramites in Ramoth Gilead: By prayer he obtained victory against the Moabites
3. King 22. 2. Chron. 20, 2. Chron. 32.
and Ammonites, which came out against him. By prayer Hezekiah escaped the huge
host of Sennacherib king of the Assirians, whose princes, captains and people,
were mightily by the Angel of God destroyed, and Hezekiah delivered. By prayer
Anna obtained a son. By prayer Daniel was delivered from the rage of cruel
Lions: What shall (...). 1.
^e say of the rest of gods Saints, who through prayer have wrought miracles,
raised the dead, vanquished their enemies, subdued the rage of cruel tyrants,
obtained victory over Satan: got strength against temptations, wisdom to
bear afflictions: and finally have seen wonderful effects of their prayers,
so that the virtue and force of prayer herehence is worthily commended unto us:
which in this place the Apostle by all these means intimating, wills if any
man lack wisdom, to ask it of God, and it shall be given them.

4 Lastly, out of this place of S. James, who wills us to pray without
doubting and wavering, it takes away the multiude of mediators: for when men
in need and necessity are sent and posted over to many means and mediators,
and rest not upon one only, they doubt to which they should run unto,
whether to men Saints, or women Saints, whether to Angels, or to the spirits of
men, for succor: whether to this Angel, or that: this Saint of God, or that,
in the days of their afflictions. The establishing of many mediators is the
cause of the distracting of men's minds, and cause of wavering, which this place
remoueth from the prayers of men, especially which profess godliness, and the
Gospel of Christ: Whereof thus the Apostle: he that wauereth is like the
waves of the sea, tossed with the wind, and carried away: neither let him think
to obtain any thing of God. A double minded man is unstable in all his ways,
and this is that which I have to note out of this place, and to add to the
former place of the Apostle, and contains the second place by the Apostle
handled, concerning the just reproof and condemning of doubting and wavering
prayers. Let us pray unto Almighty God to establish our hearts in the
infallible truth of his heavenly promises, that in all things we may rest upon
his power and promptness in all our petitions, that in all our needs we may
call upon him without wavering, and obtain the things we pray for according
to his will, through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with the father, and the
holy Spiirite, be all praise and honor, all glory and majesty, for ever and
ever. Amen.

James Chapter 1. verses 9. 10. 11. 12. Sermon 4.
9 Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted.

10 Again, he that is rich, in that he is made low: for as the flower of
the grass shall he vanish away.

11 For as when the Sun rises with heat, then the grass withers, and his
flower falls away, and the goodly shape of it perishes: even so shall the
rich man wither in all his ways.

12 Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he is tried he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.


IN which words the Apostle returns and comes again to the matter
proposed, which is of patience and comfort in afflictions, which was the
first place of the Chapter, and consists of four things: 1. Of the proposing
of the matter: 2. Of the confirming thereof: 3. Of the distinguishing of the
persons to who^ the cross is profitable: 4. Of the conclusion. Of these, two
of them are gone before, the other two in these words are contained.

Two things in these words and verses are to be observed Namely 1. The
distinguishing of men to whom the cross is profitable, and whereunder they
must rejoice, and all men are 1. Either low of degree, and they must rejoice
under afflictions, remembering that they are exalted to the profession of
Christ. 2. Either rich and mighty: and they must rejoice under it, because
thereby they are profitably humbled.
2. The conclusion: which is drawn from the reward of patience, wherein may
be noted five things. 1. The reward it self, blessedness promised to the
Saints. 2. When it shall be given: when they are tried. 3. Whereunto it is
compared: to a crown of life. 4. How shall it be given: by promise, not by
desert. 5. To whom: to such as love God.


Touching the first of these, which is the third thing in the treatise of the
cross, it is the distinguishing of persons, 3. Things in the treatise of the
cross.
to whom the cross is profitable, and this doctrine to rejoice in affliction
necessary. There are two sorts of men, poor and rich: to both, the cross
and doctrine of patience therein is necessary, so that it is profitable then
to all. First to the poor brother, whereof thus says James: The poor.
Let the brother of lovv degree rejoice in that he is exalted. The cross and
doctrine of afflictions and patience is profitable for the poor brother: for
if he be afflicted with poverty, contempt, ignominy, or any other
calamity, he must not be pressed down with sorrow, grief, fear and
fainting of heart: but rejoice rather under his cross and calamity, because
he by the cross is exalted. For by affliction the poor brethren humbled, are
thereby exalted, either to the true profession of the cross and Gospel of
Christ, either to be like Christ and his Saints, who have all in this world
drunk of the cup of afflictions, or else to the glorious company of Christ
and his holy Angels: unto whom the way is persecution and suffering. For even
as Christ himself by manifold persecutions and troubles, and by daily cross,
and sufferings in Luke 24.
his life, entered into the glory of his father, as he protested unto his
disciples betwixt Jerusalem and Emaus: so in Acts 14.
like manner must all the Saints by many tribulations enter into the kingdom of
God: as the Apostle Paul avouches to the brethren of Lystra, Iconium and
Antiochia, in the Scriptures: for which cause he assures us no otherwise to
be heirs with Christ of glory, then condicionally Romans 8.
that we suffer with him: If we be sons, then also heirs, and heirs
annexed with Jesus Christ: so that we suffer with him, that we also may be
glorified with him: neither otherwise to be crowned with him, then that
first here with him we be crossed also: for if we be 2. Tim. 2.
dead with Christ, then shall we live with him also: and if we suffer with him,
we shall also reign with him: if the cross advance us to the crown; if the
suffering of calamity and misery here, bring us to glory: if our humbling by
afflictions, exalt the brethren of low degree to the profession of the Gospel
in this life, and in the life to come to immortality, and glory with Christ:
then must the brethren humbled by the cross, and by any afflicted, rejoice
therein: let the brother of low degree rejoice, when by the cross he is
exalted. The humbling of us by affliction in this world, is the exalting of us
to glory before God: the casting down of us here by the cross, is the
lifting of us up to heaven before the Lord: the abasing of our selves under
the diverse temptations of this life, is the aduanncing of us in the kingdom of
Christ. Seeing then by patience under the cross, the brother of low degree is
exalted, he ought therein not to be faint hearted, 2. Phil.
but joyous and glad. As then our Savior Christ being by affliction and death
it self humbled by the father, was therefore, and thereby exalted unto great
glory: even so if patiently we suffer the trial of our faith by afflictions,
Philip. 2.
and suffer our selves thereby by God to be humbled, whether it be by poverty,
whether by contempt; whether by calamity whatsoever: if we fix and fasten not
our eyes upon the present miseries, but lift up our hearts, and cast our
cogitations upon the glory whereof we shall be partakers, we shall also be
exalted: so that we have great and just cause to rejoice under the cross,
whereunto the Apostle exhorts: Let the brother of low degree rejoice when he
is exalted.

Now as the cross and afflictions are profitable to the poor brother, and
brother of low degree, who thereby is exalted: so also is this doctrine
needful and profitable to the rich. Again, says he, He that is rich, let him
rejoice in that he is made low: wherein is taught how men which have al things
at will, should behave themselves in wealth, that they wax not proud of their
abundance and plenty, neither trust too much to the frailty of their
condition, but always to look to the cross which follows them, which if it
be laid on them, therein they ought to rejoice also, When God then takes
away, and remoueth the flattering and deceitful baits of this world from rich
men, and so they become contemptible unto others; if he turn their wealth into
woe, their mirth into mourning, their plenty into poverty, their abundance
into want, their worldly happiness into misery: in this their humbling are
they exhorted by the Apostle to rejoice, for thereby many occasions of many
sins are removed; and therefore rich men, by spoil of goods, loss of
wealth, decrease of riches, or what other way soever tried, in that they are
humbled, must rejoice. Seeing then in the state of this life there is great
occasion ministered of impacience both in the poor and low degree of men, and
also in the rich and plenteous estate of men, the only salve of both their
sores, is in all changes and chances of this life, to behave themselves
pacient under the cross: and thus is the doctrine here delivered, profitable
for poor and rich, as the Apostle teaches: Let the brother of low degree
rejoice in that he is exalted: and again, the rich, in that he is humbled.

If any object here, that Saint James wills the brother of low degree to
rejoice when he is exalted: and the rich man when he is made low, and humbled,
which seems contrary to other Scriptures, where we are exhorted Iere. 9.
to rejoice only in God, as by the Prophet Jeremy, men are commanded neither
to rejoice in their wisdom, riches, strength, nor any other thing, but in that
they know God which executes judgment, equity and justice on earth. And by
Saint Paul, who advises men to rejoice in Philp. 4.
the Lord only: Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice.

Hereunto the answer is easy: 1. If we acknowledge whatsoever happens unto
us, to be from God, who both wounds and heals; casts down and lifts up;
humbles, and exalts: then either in our low degree being 1. Kings 2.
exalted, or in our riches and plenty being humbled: to rejoice, is to rejoice
in that God sends, and so to rejoice in the Lord. 2. If again we look into
our own wretched co^ditio^, who of our selves have nothing, but whatsoever we
have, we have received it: the^ in the things which we have received from the
hands of God moderately to 1. Cor. 4.
rejoice, is also to rejoice in the Lord, who is the fountain and wellhead of
all graces and blessings. 3. Finally, if we hold this as a ground and
foundation, that all good 1. Per. 5.
gifts flowing unto man, grow of his mere favor and mercy, and not from any
merit or desert of ours, then in the good blessings of God, of exaltation,
advancement, glory, or other whatsoever to rejoice, is godly, christian, and
dutiful: and thus men rejoicing, rejoice in the Lord. The Apostle Saint James
then in exhorting the brother of low degree to rejoice when he is exalted, and
the rich in like manner when he is made low and humbled, is in all points
answerable unto other Scriptures: wherein we are required to rejoice in the
Lord, for thus for Gods sake and in the obedience of his commandments to
rejoice, is to rejoice in the Lord also.

These things thus set down, the Apostle gives a A reason.
reason of the later doctrine, that the rich must rejoice when he is made low*
Which reason is drawn from the nature of the things themselves: for, wealth,
riches, and worldly pomp are most vain, uncertain, transitory, and frail,
so that when we enjoy them, and they flow, we must not be Psalm. 62. 1. Tim. 6.
proud of them, nor set our minds upon them: and if we be bereft of them, we
must not cast down the head and heart, but rather rejoice, as the Apostle
exhorts. For what should men put confidence in vain and transitory riches, or
why should they faint in heart for the loss of that, which most easily
pearisheth.

Touching the vanity and uncertainty of worldly wealth, pomp and glory,
how often, and how carefully thereof are we admonished in holy scripture?
Solomon the wiseman dissuading men from settling their eyes and affections Pro.
23.
upon worldly wealth and riches, reasons from their vncertainenes and
vanity: will thou cast thy eye upon that which is nothing? riches takes her
to her wings as an egle, and flies away into the heaven. David his father
through long experience seeing that there was nothing Psalm. 37.
more vain then the riches and goods of this world, Acknowledges that albeit
the rich be strong and shoot up like the green bay tree, yet are they cut
down from the earth like Grass which withers; They pass away and are not,
if thou seek their place, thou shall not find it. Solomon brings in the
rich, proud and covetous men of Wisd. 5.
the earth, whose whole delight and happiness was worldly pomp and glory even
from the bottom of hell it self, to confess the uncertainty and vanity of
their condition, wherein, in their times they so greatly gloried: What (say
they) has pride profited us, or what profit has the pomp of riches purchased
us? all these paste away as a shadow, and as a post that passes by; As a shipp
in the water, an arrow in the air; a bird in the heaven and element, our
Savior Christ dissuading men from heaping and hurding Mat. 6.
up such uncertain treasures, wills that men should not lay up for them
sealues treasure on earth, where ruste and moath corrupts, and thieves break
through and steal. To which purpose the Apostle gives them epithites or
additions, and calls them uncertain; charge them that are rich in this
world, that they be not high minded, and 1. Timo. 6.
that they trust not in uncertain riches; therefore our Savior terms him a
fool, that in the vanity of his mind Lu. 12.
through confidence in uncertain wealth, plucked down his barnes and enlarged
them, and then said to his Soul; Soul eat and drink, for thou have much
goods laid up for thee: Seeing his state was so uncertain, as that night it
should be changed. The Apostle John, disputing of the vanity of worldly wealth
and pomp what so ever, concludes, 1. John. 2.
the world vanishes and the things therein. Finally the preacher concluding all
worldly things under a most uncertain, frail and brittle condition, censureth
them all 1. Eccles.
with one judgment; Vanity of vanity, all is vanity.

See we not by daily experience the miserable vanity of this worldly
condition? came not Craesus the rich Prince (of whom it became a proverb,
richer then Craesus) to misery for all his wealth? was not Xerxes the King of
Persia, for all his pomp and glory discomfited? did not Dionisius the King of
Siracuse fall from a King, to be a scholemaster? came not holy Job from great
riches to miserable poverty for a season? do not many now flourish in wealth,
and to morrow come to extreme penury? Seeing these things are of frail,
uncertain, and dowtefull condition, shall men thereof by the will of God
bereft, mourn and not rather rejoice as the Apostle exhorts? Saint James
therefore to persuade men to rejoice when God turns their condition by
affliction, and so humbles them, draws his reason from the vncertainnes and
vanity of their nature, whereby being humbled, we ought to rejoice.

The vanity and uncertainty of worldly wealth and riches the apostle
describing, thereunto uses a similitude and comparison: resembling the
glorious state of this li^e unto a flower: There is nothing for the time more
beautiful, flourishing and excellent then the flower, yet the flower and the
beauty thereof, vanishes away, and withers speedely: for though it now
flourish, sprout and spring up, though the beauty appear wonderful and
excellent that Solomon in all his royalty was not to be compared to the lilly
of the field for bravery of beauty: yet if the sun Mat. 6.
appear in heat, it dries it up, it scorcheth it, it burns it: and so it
withers, falls away, and the goodly shape thereof perishes. So that the
lilly, the rose, the violet, and other flowers of account, which in the
morning were beutifull in sight, fragrant and sweet in smell, moist in hand,
are in the evening consumed and pearished: So when the sun and burning heat
of persecution and trouble shall arise upon the riches of this world, they are
easily removed, and pearish quickly.

This comparison, wherein man's pomp and worldly glory is compared to a
flower, is in sundry places, and not altogether in diverse things, used in holy
Scripture. The Prophet of God speaking not only of worldly riches, Isai 40.
but of man's life also, with all the pomp and glory he can here attain unto,
and whatsoever is in him, uses the same comparison in a thing not altogether
diverse, and therefore says, I heard a voice saying, Cry. And I said, What
shall I cry? He said, that all flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof as
the flower of the field, the grass withers, and the flower fades away,
because the spirit of the Lord blewe upon it. Whereby it appears, that not
only worldly wealth and riches, but also all man's wisdom and natural powers
are as the flower that withers.

The Prophet David describing the miserable, weak, Psalm. 103.
and frail condition of man, hereunto compares him also, The days of man are
as grass, as a flower of the field so flourishes he. For the wind goes
over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more. As ^hen
the flower which in the morning florisheth, through the burning heat of the
sun withers and pearisheth: Even so they which now wallowe in wealth, and
have all things at their wills, which are now clothed in fine silk and
purple, who now glitter and glister with gold and Luke 16
pearls, which are now attended on with great trains and troops of men, who
lead mighty armies, and are carried in coaches like princes, who for
abundance of all things, and perfect beauty and glory in worldly respects,
are as mortal Gods upon earth, oftentimes are bereft of all their riches and
glory, and pearish as the grass. And thus all their pomp, glory, wealth,
earthly felicity, is uncertain. What foolishnes then has wrapped up our
understanding, what blindness has possessed our hearts, what vanity has
bewitched us, and ravished our minds, what miste of error has compassed and
ouershadowed the light of our knowledge, that we see not the frailty of our
own state and condition, to learn a better profession of the holy Apostle,
that being humbled by afflictions, we may rejoice as we are exhorted: let the
brother of low degree rejoice when he is exalted, and again, the rich man
when he is made low, for as the flower of the grass shall he vanish away, for
as when the sun rises with heat, then the grass withers, and his flower
fades away, and the goodly shape thereof pearisheth: even so shall the rich
man wither away in all his ways. And thus the Apostle proves by the
distinguishing of the persons of men, that the doctrine of the cross, and the
patient bearing of the same, is profitable to all men, both to poor and rich,
and so to all.

The persons thus distinguished; the next and second thing in these verses,
which is the fourth and last thing in the Fourth thing in the treatise of the
cross.
whole treaty of the cross, and comfort taking therein, is the conclusion.
Seeing therefore the case thus stands, that we must count it exceeding joy when
we fall into diverse temptations, seeing the bearing of affliction is the trial
of our faith, which to suffer, to be tried, is comely and honest for a
Christian: seeing by trial of our faith we attain to that worthy virtue of
patience, seeing patience attained unto, makes us perfect, seeing the cross
and the doctrine thereof is necessary and profitable for poor and rich,
therefore blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried he
shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him. In which conclusion five things may be observed.

1 The reward it self promised to such as patiently endure the cross, which
the Apostle notes under the word blessed: Blessed is that man that endures
temptations. Blessedness is the greatest of all rewards given unto men, wherein
whatsoever is good, is contained: the Apostle therefore to prick them forward,
and to stir them on to patience, promises happiness and blessedness to those
that endure te^ptatio^. Our Savior Christ entreating of the reward which the
poor in spirit; that is, such as by Mat. 5.
sundry miseries and calamities (which are joined with poverty) were
afflicted, promises them happiness and felicity: Blessed are the poor in
spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And a little after unfolding this
poverty by her kind and particulars, as persecution, reproach and v. 10.
slander, he promises like reward unto that affliction also; Blessed are they
which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven: blessed shall you be when men revile you, and persequute you, and say
all manner of evil saying against you for my sake, falsely; rejoice and be
glad, for great is your reward in heaven.

Thus then if we endure poverty, and miseries thereunto annexed, if we endure
temptation of persecution, slander, reproach, and such like, we are pronounced
blessed. Hereunto Saint Peter subscribeth, who exhorting men patiently 1. Pet.
3.
to bear persecution and affliction for righteousness sake, reasons from the
reward, which with James he calls blessedness, Who will harm you if you
follow that which is good? notwithstanding, blessed are you if you suffer for
righteousness sake: Yea fear not their fear, neither 1. Pet. 4.
be troubled. And a little after touching the reward of our patient abiding and
suffering for Christ, he calls it happiness and blessedness, if you be rayled
on for the name of Christ, blessed are you: for the spirit of God and of
Christ rests on you. Who then is spoiled of his goods for Christ's
profession, who suffers persecution for Christian religion, who endures
imprisonment for the testimony of his conscience, who abides patiently the
trial of his faith by sundry temptations, is both by Christ and his holy
Apostles, accounted blessed: The reward of our patience then is happiness and
felicity.

Wherein the Apostles defend a paradoxe, and an opinion contrary unto the
judgment of men of this world, for the world holds them only for happy,
who abound in wealth, who have all things at their pleasures and wills, who
never come into any misfortune, neither are vexed or afflicted with any misery
or calamity. But such as are pressed with poverty, distressed with grief,
tempted by afflictions, assaulted with misery, subject to calamity; these
they count for cursed miserable, and of all men most wretched, as they in the
Prophet counted our Savior to be Isai 53.
in woeful plight, because he was under the rod of his father, and thereby
plagued; and the wicked condemned the Wisd. 3.
Saints, and censured them miserable, and their end grievous, because they
suffered pain, and were tried in afflictions among men. From whose judgment
and opinion Saint James dissenting, calls and counts them which endure
temptations happy. Let worldlings then count prosperity their felicity: let
Epicures count plenteousnes of bread their happiness: let green and flourishing
youth make the desiers of their hearts their bliss: let other men count
worldly delights, carnal pleasure, wicked mammo^, vain pomp, quiet rest, and
continual security, their cheerest good and only joy in this world, yet with
James must all the Saints count the trial of their faith, the exeresse of
their patience, the bearing of the cross, the suffering of affliction, the
enduring of temptations, their happiness and felicity, and hold the sentence
of the Apostle for sure, Blessed is the man that endures temptations.

If happiness and felicity be the reward of our patience, and all men by
instinct of nature desire happiness, as the very heathen philosophers have in
their learned writings plentifully discoursed; shall there be any man or woman
so careless of himself, so void of reason, so far from knowledge, so great
an enemy to his souls health, which shall refuse the burden of the cross,
seeing patient endurance purchases our happiness? Let us in the fear of God,
address our selves to the bearing of the cross; let us arm our selves
against the day of affliction; let us in full assurance of hope, endure the
temptations which are laid upon us: that thus enduring, we may receive our full
reward, even eternal blessedness for ever.

2 This reward of our endura^ce shall then be given when we are tried: the
crown is promised after our contentions: the hire is rendered after our labor:
If then we will enjoy the reward, and have our blessedness in the king dome of
God, then must we in this world be tried by affliction. The doctrine of this
place is, that we must first suffer before we be rewarded; first be tried,
before we be recompensed. Which thing Saint Paul preaches unto Timothy,
setting down the labor before the hire; and the contending before the crown.
No man (says he) is crowned, 2. Tim. 2. 2. Tim. 4.
except he strive lawfully. The same Apostle sets down his travel before
his reward, and his labor before his recompense, when he says; I have fought
a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, from
henceforth therefore is the crown of righteousness laid up for me, which the
righteous judge shall give me at that day, and not me only, but all those
that love his appearing. There is no price where there is no striving; there is
no garland where there is no goal to run to; there is no crown where there
is no trial of masteries; there is no victory where there is no enemy; there
is no hire where there is no labor; there is no happiness where there is no
trial by temptation.

Now the full trial of man is not at once or twice, but in the whole course of
his life, so that the whole life of man is nothing else but a continual trial
and warfare upon earth, striving and struggling against all afflictions,
miseries, calamities, and troubles of this world In which contention and
conflict, if we acquit our selves like men, and in invincible constancy endure
temptations, to the end, we shall be blessed: whereof our Savior Christ
assures Mat. 10. and 24. Revel. 2.
us: He that continues (says he) unto the end shall be saved. And the Angel
to the Church of Smyrna: Be thou constant and faithful unto death, and I will
give thee the crown of life. When therefore to the end of our life, and in
the whole course thereof, we be pacient: when to the full measure of our trial
which is in the end of this mortal condition, we endure temptations; then
shall we be blessed: for blessed is the man which endures temptations, for
when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life.

If our trial then must go before our happiness which is given us in reward;
and our labor before our hire; then do those Christians flatter and deceue
them selves, who think to be pertakers of this reward without affliction in
this life; Seeing the trial of our faith by troubles must go before our
happiness. Vain therefore and slothful, too dainty and too delicate are they,
who refusing the burden of the cross, and the enduring temptations; hope to
attain to this happiness by wallowing in wealth, by stretching the^ selves upon
their beds of down, by pampering and puffing up of their flesh with riotous
life, by pricking and prankinge up them selves in intolerable pride, by
weariing and wasting their bodies with carnal pleasures, with living at hearts
ease and in all security in this world: for the Apostle promises reward of
happiness only unto them that endure temptations, and then too only to be given,
when they are fully tried by affliction. Wherefore as this blessing is promised
only if we endure temptation, so is it given also then when our trial is
finished, and in the mean time to be looked for in a sound hope.

3 To show the excellency and greatness of this reward and of our heavenly
happiness in the kingdom of God, the sacred scripture diversely compares it, but
most specially to a kingdom or to a crown, which is annexed either to Luke 22.
excellent virtue, either else to princely dignity. Our Savior Christ compares
the happy estate of the Saints to a kingdom, when to his disciples and apostles
who had abode with him in his afflictions, and had been partakers with him of
suffering, and therefore should also be partakers of his glorious kingdom, he
says: you have continued with me in my temptations, therefore I appointe unto
you a kingdom, as my father has appointed unto me, that you may eat and
drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit and judge the twelve tribes of
Israel. And in another Euangeliste speakinge of the blessed reward of the
Saints which should be given them at the general judgment, he calls it by
the name of a kingdom, Come ye blessed of Matt. 25.
my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. Wherefore as upon earth there seems nothing to be compared unto a
kingdom, wherein are all things whereby worldly happiness is made perfect: so
in the kingdom of Christ, all things appertaining to happiness and true
felicity being included, and therefore above al things to be desired, the holy
Scriptures describing the most blessed and glorious estate of the saints, and
the reward wherewith their patience and other virtues shall be crowned,
compares it sometimes unto a kingdom.

And as to a kingdom, so also to the crown, which is the reward of virtue,
or the ensign or toke^ of princely dignity. The holy scripture therefore
teaching men both what shall be the reward of their virtue, and also how
excellent and singular shall be their dignity, who by Christ 1. and 5. Revel.
are made both Priests and Kings unto God, compares their happy and blessed
estate to come, to a crown, which is borrowed from victorious conquerours, who
either in wars, or bodily masteries ouercomming, were crowned, some with
laurel, some with roses, some with bays, some with olives, some with gold,
some with one thing, some with another: thereto the scriptures alluding, give
the name of crown to such as excel in virtue, overcome their affections, and
in the afflictions and miseries of this life, are more then conquerours through
Christ. Saint Paul therefore disputing of the reward which shall be given us
if we run out our race with patience, and fight 1. Cor. 9.
constantly under the displaied banner of the cross, promises an
incorruptible crown to our labors and afflictions: and entreating of the
reward of his own travail, constancy, and endurance, protests that since
he had fought a good fight, run forth and finished his race, 2. Tim. 4.
kept the faith in great constancy and invincible patience, there was
therehence laid up for him a crown of righteousness. Saint John is commanded
to exhort the Church 2. Revel.
of Smyrna to be pacient under the afflictions which should be laid upon them,
and promises a crown of life to their patience: be thou faithful unto death,
and I will give thee the crown of life. The holy Apostle according to the use
and manner of other Scriptures, does here also compare James 1.
the happy reward of the Saints patience to crowns: Blessed is the man that
endures temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life.

There is old heauing and shouing among men in the world for crowns, and great
strife and cruel wars among princes, who shall wear each others crown: and
their labor, travel, shouing, is commonly unlawful, from their ambicious and
covetous desires of their hearts: and when all is done, their crowns are
corruptible and mortal. Shall not the Saints strive with all Christian
fortitude and courage against the miseries and calamities of this life, that
when they are tried, they may receive an immortal crown of glory?

All men naturally are desirous of life, and they often seek evil and
unlawful means and ways to prolong their life, which yet is but momentanie:
And shall not the children of God, in much affliction, in manifold miseries, in
sundry temptations, in all the chaunges and chances of this world, acquit
themselves like men, that patiently bearing the trial of their faith, they may
in fine receive the crown of eternal life.

4 To which crown men attain not unto for their work of patience, as if our
patience deserved this reward: but they enjoy and receive it by the promise of
God. The crown of life is not then a due and deserved hire, but a free reward
of our labor from the bounty of God, who regards not so much what we
deserve, as what of his liberality he has promised. Wherein he does as a
natural father, who promises his son, that if he will do this or that, he
will make him lord and heir of all his lands and living, which far passes
that which the child has deserved, yet that done, the father perfourmeth that
he promises, not looking so much to the obedience of his son, as to his own
promise: even so does God, wherefore the Apostle here so much to note unto us,
says, that such as are tried shall receive the crown of life by promise.
Saint Paul in like manner speaks, I have 2. Cor. 4.
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henchforth is there laid up for me a crown of righteousness: which least he
might seem arrogantly to have challenged for his work, he refers the gift
thereof unto God: which God (says he) shall give me: if it were given of God,
then not deserved of Paul. So that the reward of our obedience and virtue is
given us, not for the desert and merit of our works, but for the truth of
Gods promise, who as he truly promises, so he faithfully performs rewards
of righteousness to his saints and servants, and gives eternal life to men
of his free mercy, Romans 6.
according to the doctrine of the Apostle: eternal life is the gift of God
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

If the crown of life be not purchased and deserved by our works, but only be
given by promise, and of grace: why do so many scriptures promise happiness,
life, immortality, and glory, so often rather mencioning works then faith
unto men? It seems therefore that happiness and eternal life are the hire
and due reward of our works of righteousness.

For answer whereof it is worthy the observation: 1. That the holy Ghost in
all the Scripture speaks according to the capacity of man, applying it self
to the weakness of our wits: and so in the doctrine of works he does so
also, oftener mencioning works then faith, because works are more familiar then
faith, being an inward virtue. 2. Seeing God has made us capable of reason,
and has given us desire, will, and judgment, whereby we are carried sometimes
to that is good, sometimes to that is evil: therefore it pleased the holy
Ghost oftentimes to mention works, and to use sundry exhortations,
admonitions, reprehensions, and reproves, thereby to stir our desir^s, will
and judgment to that which is good, and to shun and decline the contrary.
3. Works are trials and tokens, signs and testimonies of men's faith, which
being an internal quality and habit of mind, is known in it self only
unto God: whereof that men might have knowledge, and might also follow it in
us, therefore by works it must be made manifest. Therefore are we willed to
make our inward man known too by good works. 4. Moreover men naturally given
to hyprocrisie, would easily deceive, not themselves only, but others also in
a vain ostentation and name of faith, careless of the fruits of
righteousness, without which our faith is dead, which to show, the Scriptures
require works as fruits, in all such as were once justified by faith in Christ
Jesus. 5. We are easily stirred up to the doing of things by rewards, and
deterred by punishments. That we might by rewards be stirred up to the fruits
of righteousness, therefore does almighty God promise great rewards unto the
works of men, thereby to allure us to righteousness and holiness. Which
works he also does work in us, for he works in man both the will and the
deed, according to his pleasure: Wherefore when he crowns our Philip. 2.
virtues and good works in us, which he himself only works in us, he
crowns not our merits, but his own gifts: as notably avouches Saint
Angustine: So then by Tract. 3. upon S. John. Luke 17.
working we deserve nothing, yea rather if we look into our own deseruings,
we shall be forced to cry that we are altogether unprofitable servants. The
Scriptures then mention works, not thereby to merit, but by promise of reward
to allure to virtue. 6. The Scriptures mention works so often to teach us our
duty, to be fruitful in all works of righteousness, and in all goodness
to imitate Christ our example and pattern in all virtue, that we might be
such unto christians our brethren, as Jesus Christ was to us, loving, gentle,
pacient, bountiful, righteous, easily entreated, ready to forgive, and
plentiful in good works, and in the fruits of righteousness, to the glory
of God. 7 Finally, they mention works, and thereof the rewards are promised,
to show what shall follow our works of obedience, even eternal life, not for
desert of works, but by the grace of God, and according to his merciful
promise: as in this place the Apostle promises the crown of life to the
patience of Gods Saints, not for the work of patience, but for the promise of
God, who has promised to reward therewith the patience of his Saints: whose
patience is the way and mean, but not the cause of their happiness. For as
the high way is not cause of our coming into the City, but the mean whereby
we come thereunto: and as the race or place of running, is not the cause of the
goal or garland there given, but the way and mean thereunto: so are not our
works, neither is our patience the cause of our crown, but the way and mean
whereby we come unto it.

And that our works can not cause our crown and eternal blessedness, it is
manifest. 1 If man might deserve eternal life, then the works of men might
bind God: but God cannot be bound by us, because he receives Psalm. 16. Job. 53
nothing by our works of righteousness, as both David and Job avouch:
therefore we can not deserve life. 2 If men could deserve life, then were not
life the gift of God through Jesus Christ, therefore man can not deserve it. 3
If man could deserve eternal life, then must there be a proportion betwixt
that which deserves, which is temporal righteousness, and that which is
deserved, eternal happiness: and what proposition is there betwixt things
temporal, and things eternal? Insomuch as Paul says thar our sufferings are
not to be compared with our Romans 8. 2. Cor. 4.
future glory, and that momentanie afflictions cause a far more excellent
and an eternal weight of glory, 4 Such as will deserve, must have in
themselves whereby they deserve: but all our virtues whereby in the vanity of
our minds we hope to gain heaven, are from God, not of our selves: we have
nothing that we have not 1. Cor, 4. 1. James. 2. Cor. 3.
received, of our selves we can do nothing, not so much as think that is good,
whose wills are framed by God to every virtue practiced of us: therefore can
not we deserve eternal life: let us hold then with this Apostle, that this
crown is due to patience, not by our deserts, but by the promise of God.

5 Now to conclude this place, this is given to such as love God. to them which
love, God in many places 2. Tim. 4, 8 Rom, 5. 28.
many promises are made: so in this place the crown of life is promised to
them that love God: Why? Because we can express our love by no way better,
then by suffering for him, and by bearing such things as he lays upon us.
Thus then such as show themselves to love God, in pacient bearing afflictions
from him, are they to whom the crown of life shall be given. Now let us pray,
etc.

James Chap. 1. ver. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. Sermon 5.
13 Let no man say when he is tempted, I 3. Place of the Chapter.
am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he
any man.

14 But every man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence,
and is intised.

15 Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it
is finished brings forth death.

16 Err not my dear brethren.

17 Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning.


In these verses are four things to be observed. Namely, 1. The proposition,
that men may not count God the cause of their temptations. 2. The reasons and
arguments for confirmation of the proposition: they are three. 1. From the
nature of God, who neither is tempted, nor tempts. 2. From the true and
natural cause, which is concupiscense. 3. From contrary effects.
3. The effects of lust and concupiscense, which is cause of evil temptations:
and they are. 2 1. Sin. 2. Death.
4. The conclusion: seeing then God cannot be counted the cause of our
temptations, we must beware that we err not, in making him cause thereof

THe Apostle having ended the treatise touching outward temptations, he now
proceeds to the third place in this first Chapter handled, which is
concerning internal and inward temptations of the mind, whereby men are
pricked forward and moved to evil, proceeding from Satan, who by our own
concupiscense and carnal desires, solliciteth us to mischief and wickedness.
The sum whereof is this: men may not impute their evil temptations to God,
neither make him the author thereof, seeing our own desires do tempt us, and
carry us away to wickedness, and we bear about in our own bosoms natural
corruption, which snatcheth and catches every occasion of comitting evil,
wherehence all sin grows and buddeth as from a stock and root, and death
ensues and follows sin at the heels, as the reward and wages Romans 6.
thereof.

1 The first thing in these words and this discourse, is the proposition of
the place, whereby their error is confuted and condemned, who hold and
affirm, that when they are provoked and pricked to evil, they are thereunto
provoked and tempted by God: which lay the cause of evil concupiscense,
corrupt affections, wicked temptations, yea and of sin it self, upon God,
and say: God provoked and stirred me up to this evil: God seduced and led me
into this temptation: God moved and solicited me to this sin. This the
Apostle removing as an horrible error from the hearts and minds of men,
gives them this advice in this present proposition: Let no man say when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God. When pleasure provoke, when pride pricketh,
when malice boileth, when covetousness assaulteth, when revenge kindles, when
fear discourageth, or any other thing tempts us to evil, we may not impute
this to God, and thereby think our selves excused. Let no man say when he is
tempted. I am tempted of God, for God is not the cause of this temptation,
neither may our sins be referred unto him.

The truth of this proposition shall the better be understood and known, if
we consider that there are specially three kinds of temptations in holy
Scripture mentioned, thus distinguished in the regard of the ends of every one
of them.

1 One temptation is called the temptation of proof, because the end thereof
is the proof of men, that thereby there may be had a trial of our faith,
patience, and constancy, with other virtues in us whatsoever. And it is the^,
when either some work is commanded us of God, which is hard and grievous unto
the flesh, as was that temptation of Abraham, who from God was willed to offer
and sacrifice Genesis 22.
up his only and dear son Isaac, whom he had begotten in his old age, in
whom only was the hope of the accomplishment of all Gods promises unto him,
the heir of his goods, the seed of his posterity, the very joy of his heart:
which thing was commanded for the trial of his faith, patience, and obedience,
that he thus tried, might be known and manifested to the world, and his virtue
and obedience an example and pattern to all posterity to imitate and follow
for ever. Or else when some heavy cross, great misery, strange affliction is
laid upon us, for the trial of our hearts, whether from an unfeigned faith we
love God or no, as was the temptation of Job, Job. 1. 2. and ^*
whose cross was heavy, whose misery was great, whose afflictions strange,
that thereby his patience being tried, he might be thereof an example to all
the Saints: Thus was he tempted, his children destroyed suddenly, his goods
taken from him violently, his body diseased strangely, his wife vpbrayding him
wickedly, his friends rebuking him sharply; What greater cross could be laid
upon man, bereft of children, spoiled of goods, abused by his wife, condemned
by his friends, sore in body, sick in mind, what misery herewith is to be
compared? yet al to prove him. Like temptation was that of Tobias, who
sleeping under Tob. 2.
the wall of his house, his face uncovered, the dongue of Swallows fell into
his eyes, and he lost his sight, therewith tempted for trial. God (says
Moses) tempted his people forty years, leading them up and down the
wilderness, Deuteronomy. 8.
to humble their hearts, to try their faith, to prove their patience, and so
make trial of them, whether they loved the Lord their God or no. Or finally,
this temptation is, when God sends heresies, false doctrines, errors among
men, thereby to try the true Saints of God, and the unfeigned servants of Jesus
Christ. This end almighty God respected in the temptation of Israel, unto whom
he sent false Prophets, working miracles, and showing also wonders among men,
thereby to try his people. To which Deuteronomy. 13.
purpose the holy Apostle affirms, that therefore heresies 1. Cor. 11.
must needs be among men, that they which are proved, might be known.

Thus the Church of Christ has always been tempted: In the time of the
Apostles many false teachers, and sundry damnable heresies were sproong up
among them, as both Paul in sundry his Epistles, and Peter in like manner 1.
Cor. 15. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 2.
abundantly do testify. After the time of the Apostles, in the succeeding
ages, how many heresies sproong up, whereby the Church was tempted and tried,
who is conversant in the writings of the ancient Fathers, who is occupied in
the turning over of Ecclesiastical stories, who is seen in the Chronicles of
all times, which knows not? Our time not void of like temptations, for now
the Libertines are revived, the Anabaptists are raked out of hell again, the
family of love, a mass of all mischief, a world of all wickedness, a
confusion of heresies is fresh in our days. Papists, Seminaries, Jesuits,
new sects of popish heresy, swarm in every corner of our Country, even
among our selves, and as it were out of the bosom of the churchmen arise,
speaking perverse things, drawing Acts. 20.
(under color of religion and godliness) many Disciples after them, whereby the
peace of Jerusalem is disturbed, which to us also, as to other, comes to
pass for the trial of the Saints, and the proof of the godly. God then
se^ding these or like things unto men, does it not to solicit stir, or move
them to any evil, defectio^ or falling from the faith, but to try them, to
make them know them selves, to exercise their virtues, to cause them more
immouably to cleave unto him, that they being constant and patient under all
manner temptations, may finally attain to eternal salvation. In which
temptations how so ever the instruments thereunto used by God, be wickedly
affected, yet in all things respects he that which tends most unto his
own glory, and the benefit of his Church, and so is he never to be charged
as the cause of wickedness among men.

2 Beside the temptation to prove, there is a temptation also of presumption,
whereby men are moved to Romans 2.
tempt God, too much presuming of his goodness: abusing his patience, despising
the mercy and long suffering of God: flattering finally, and deceauing
themselves in the power and providence of God toward the sons of me^. Such a
temptation is it when men continue in sin, wallow Ephesians. 4.
and welter in iniquity, committing wickedness with greedines, presuming upon
the mercy of God, and say with themselves, Have not I sinned? and what evil
has come unto me? The greater my sin is, the greater shall Ecclus. 5.
his mercy be in forgeuing me, the Lord has mercy in store for us all, be we
never so wicked. In the last hour I will return unto him, and I shall be
received. This is a temptation tending to presumption, abusing the mercy and
goodness of the Lord.

Such is that temptation whereby we are solicited to say; I know the
goodness of the Lord is great over all his creatures; I know he has a
fatherly and provident care over me, and he will not see the work of his own
hand to perish, for lack of sustinance: God that gives clothing Mat. 6.
Psalm. 147.
to the flowers and lillies of the field; and feeds the young ravens that
call upon him, will cloth me and feed me also: what need I to weary or waste
my self with toilesome and troublesome labor? I will rest upon his
providence, such is the temptation of witless persons and very harebraines;
who say; I know there shall not one hair of my head fall away without the
knowledge of God; I know that he is always at hand and present to help and
succor at time of need; I will fear nothing therefore, I will run through
fire and water, I will not be terrified by the glittering and glistring
svvorde or shield; I will pass through the pikes, by svvord and famine, cold
and nakedness; peril and pestilence, come on it what will: those are
solicited by satan to presume of Gods mercy, power, providence and goodness.
Satan assailed Christ himself in this kind; soliciting him to cast himself
Mat. 4.
down from the pinnacle of the temple; because God had given his Angels charge
over him that he should not hurt his foot against a stone. To sin then,
because God is merciful; to loyter and be idle because God is liberal; to
cast our selves into present danger rashly, because he is able to deliver us;
to lie still in the ditch and not to help Psalm. 91.
our selves, because he is of power and can raise us; is a temptation and
suggestion of satan, whereby he moves us to presumption.

3 There is finally a temptation which is to deceive and seduce men, drawing
them into error, moving them to evil, stirring them forward to iniquity and
ungodliness, aduenturing and enterprising any thing repugnant to the law and
will of God. Of this there are two kinds also. 1 Temptation to deceive,
external, 2 Temptation to deceive, internal. External temptation, whereby
we are drawn into any sin, is that temptation whose cause is external and
outward, and the beginning thereof without us; as when by Satan, by the world,
and the things which here compass us about, though in some sense they are
inward, because they move our hearts and inward parts, yet in as much as the
causes are without, and the beginning of these temptations from others then our
selves, they may be called outward. Satan tempts us by false doctrine which
he moves, by offense which he causes, by occasions and allurements to evil,
which he ministers, and otherwise. The cause of which temptations, and the
instrument also being without, the temptation is called external. The world to
deceive us, tempts by vanity thereof, by improbitie therein: the vain pomp
of the world tickleth us, the corruptions therein invade and assault us, with
the examples of wickedness daily seen of us: these things often seduce and
deceive, and the temptation is outward. The things wherewith we be compassed,
tempt men manifoldly: power, honor, ambition, pleasure on the one side: fear,
danger and peril, famine, nakedness, poverty, death on the other: thus are
men also outwardly tempted, and drawn into the errors and corruptions of our
common life, and thereby deceived and led into evil.

The temptations which seduce men, and are internal, are such, whose immediate
and next cause is in our selves: as man is tempted to commit evil by his own
corruption and concupiscense, moved by his own disordered appetite to commit
sin. Thus have we in our bosoms a domestical tyrant, original sin and
natural corruption from Adam, pulling, haling, and drawing us daily to evil,
that sin in all things might exercise power over us. Hereunto though Satan
help, yet the cause is in our selves, in as much as by him we are not
constrained, but come and follow freely, deceived and seduced by our own
concupiscense. And of this kind of temptation the Apostle chiefly speaks,
when he says: If any man be tempted, let him not say, I am tempted of God. God
to prove men, tempts his servants: but to cause them to presume, or to
deceive and draw them to evil, he does not. So that he is not the cause of such
temptations, neither may we refer these evil temptations unto him. And this
the proposition of this place teaches us: Let no man say when he is tempted, I
am tempted of God.

If God tempt no man to evil, why says the Scripture, that he hardens the
heart of Pharao, that he blinds Exodus 4. 7. 10. 11. Esai. 14. Psalm. 81.
man, and gives him over into a reprobate mind? As of Pharao in the book of
Exodus, in many places and chapters is recorded: of Israel the people of God:
as in Isai, in David, and other Prophets is mentioned: of the Gentiles thrice
in the first chapter to the Romans is confessed: of others in other places in
like manner.

Hereunto it may be answered: first, that God in his judgments, which are
sometimes open, sometimes secret, but always just, moves and inclines men's
wills whither him lusts: wherein, he either with the latter sin of man
punishes the former: or else he takes away his grace from men: whereof
destitute, they run headlong into their own destruction, by committing sin
with greediness: or finally, he brings to pass Ephesians. 4.
his purpose by the wickedness, either of Satan, or men, as able to work out
that which is good by the iniquity of men: and thus he is always just. So
that we may say with the Apostle, that he is not the cause of our evil
temptations. Let no man say that when he is tempted, he is tempted of God. God
moves not men to evil: he drives not men to evil affections: he
instilleth wickedness into no man's heart: but partly in taking away his
spirit from them, partly in punishing one sin with another, partly by
bringing to light the sins of men, which before were covered, partly in
accomplishing his own will, and bringing to pass his determinate counsels
and purposes, even by evil means and instruments, as ruling all things after
his will: he is said to indurate and harden the hearts of men, and to give
them up to reprobate minds, as the scripture speaks.

The proposition of the holy Apostle stands still for true: Let no man say
when he is tempted, I am tempted of God. Of this matter more may be seen upon
the first Epistle of Peter, 3. Chap. v. 17. Romans 9. 18. v.

Thus their error is refuted, who hold that as good motions are inspired us
from God, so evil suggestions are suggested by him also: so that when men
steal, take away by violence, commit adultery, do injury to their brethren,
or any such like, they must not say, we are moved, solicited and stirred up
thereunto by God. Wherefore the Apostle here in his proposition gives them
admonition: Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God.



The first reason is drawn from the nature of God. God is by nature and of
himself, pure, simple, holy, righteous, good: neither does he admit the
darkness of error or deceit, neither moves or solliciteth he any to error
or evil: he falls not himself, neither casts he any into wickedness. For
he being in nature good, pure, holy, cannot be moved to commit evil, neither
moves he any thereunto: wherefore he is not author of evil temptations in
men.

2 That God is good, holy, pure, innocent, righteous, and one that hates
sin, the Scriptures in sundry places teach us. For first in the book of
Leuiticus, not once but often it is said, that the Lord is holy, and therefore
the people by like example ought in like manner to be holy. Leuit. 11. 20. 2.
Chron. 19.
Iehosaphat the King exhorted his princes, rulers, officers, magistrates and
judges, to execute judgment and justice without partiality or respect had of
men's persons: rendering this reason, because they executed the judgment of
God, with whom there is no respect of persons, nor any iniquity.

David the princely prophet tells men, that the wicked shall not stand in
Gods sight, because Psalm. 5.
GOD hates all those that commit iniquity. In an other place he bears
this record of God, that Psalm. 145.
he is true in all his sayings, and holy in all his works. Siracides the son
of Sirach, would not men to impute Ecclus. 15.
the cause of their sins unto GOD: because he hates all sin and
wickedness of man, wherefore he thus exhorts: Say not thou, it is through
the Lord that I turn back: for thou ought not to do the thing that he
hates: and say not thou, he has caused me to err: for he has no need of
the sinful man: for the Lord hates all abomination of error, and they
which fear him, love it not. Many mo the like places are in scripture set
down, which affirm of God, that he is holy, righteous. just, and a hater of
iniquity, which all confirm this place of the Apostle, who disputing of the
nature of God, shows that he neither is tempted to evil, neither tempts
any: for which cause men ought not to say when they are tempted, they were
tempted to evil by God. Satan being a liar from the beginning, and not
continuing in the truth, John 8. Ephesians. 6.
moves men to falshoode and error, and not God: the Devil being the prince
of the wickedness and darkness of this world, stirs and soliciteth men
therein, to wickedness, and tempts many ways to evil and mischief: for
which cause he is called the tempter, because he always tempts men to commit
iniquity and sin. Matthew. 4.
So does not God: who is of a pure, perfect, holy, righteous disposition, and
neither himself is tempted, neither tempts he any to evil. Whereupon the
Apostle, as by his first reason, here shows, that when men are tempted, they
must not lay the evil upon God: neither say they were tempted of God, because
he neither can be tempted of any to evil, neither tempts he any.

2 Another reason, why, when men are tempted to evil, they may not say they are
tempted of god, is drawn from the setting down of the very true and perfect
cause of temptations. The true, natural and proper immediate cause of
temptations, is our own concupiscense, therefore not God. For there cannot be
two or many true, natural, immediate, proper, efficient causes of one thing.
Therefore seeing of temptations to evil, we have the true, natural and proper
cause in our selves, even concupiscence, and carnal corruption, which dwells
in us by original deprauation, we may not make God, but that, the cause of our
temptations to evil, Saint Hierome therefore against Jouinian says, that as
in good things God is the Contra Jouinian. Romans 9.
doer and perfecter: for it is neither in the willer, neither in the runner,
but in GOD which shows mercy, and helps, that we may come unto the end:
so evil things and sins, the seed that is in us, is the provocation and
pricker forward: but the devil the perfecter of all evil. The chief and
immediate cause of evil temptations is our own corruption and concupiscense,
which drawing us away from the rule of reason, and the right path of the
commandments of God, entiseth us: whereof Saint James here says: every man
is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscense, and is enticed.

The similitude of entising is taken either from beasts, which hunting after
their pray, are oftentimes entangled by the bait of the taker, and pursuit of
the hunter: or from birds which seeking for meat, spying corn, or bread
crummes, or worms, or the like bait in the snare or pitfolde, or among lime
tvvigges, or under the net which shall ouervvhelme them, are taken, entised,
and entrapped: or from the fish, which greedily gaping and running after the
bait of the angler, svvallovveth down both bait and hook, and so is
deceived. Even so men through their concupiscence are drawn away, either the
sweetness and pleasure, either the gain and profit, either the easiness and
facility of a thing proposed: and so are entised. Our own concupiscense
therefore drawing us away, and intising to evil, being the natural and proper
cause of evil temptations, we may not ascribe our temptations unto God, but
unto our selves: and this is the second reason, why, when we are tempted, we
may not say that we are tempted of GOD, because, our own concupiscense, not
God, is cause of these temptations.

3 By occasion of this place, before he come to the The effests of lust and
concupiscense.
third reason, he sets down the effects of this concupiscense, the cause of
evil temptations, which I noted for the third thing in this discourse. This he
does by a kind of gradation, or slipping from one thing to another: whereof
thus says Saint James: Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth
sin, and sin when it is finished, brings forth death. In which place he
notes first the conception of concupiscense, then the birth: the first and the
second.

Touching the conception of concupiscense, it is the assent and agreeing of the
will, when it possesses the affection and will of man: so that the assenting
and agreeing of our wills to the inticement of concupiscense: is the
conception of concupiscense, even the first thing that it works in us. When
the lust and concupiscense of man seazeth and rests upon any object: whether
it be by desiring: as glory, riches, pleasure, or the like: or by avoiding it:
as Gods word, holy life, virtue and godliness, which lust naturally cares not
for: either by hating, as injuries, oppressions, wrongs, rebukes, violence of
men, and such like: then is man's lust said to conceive. Concupiscense had her
conception in Euah, when she seeing the fruit of the forbidden tree to be fair
and pleasant to the Gene. 3.
eye, her lust rising thereupon, and giving consent to that iniquity, lust in
her conceived. When the Israelites saw Number. 25.
the daughters of Moab, their lust seazing and resting about their beauty,
lust conceived in them. When the children of God saw the daughters of men that
they were fair, Gene. 6.
their lust resting about that matter, and they yielding consent to the
inticement, concupiscense conceived adultery in them. When Sichem his lust
rested upon Dinah: Putiphars wife, upon Joseph: David, his lust upon the
beauty of Barseba: they yielding the consent of their wills Gene. 34. Gine.
39. 2. Reg. 11. 3 King. 21
thereunto, lust conceived in them. When Ahab the king set his affection upon
Naboth his vineyard, and thereabout his lust resting, yielding thereunto the
consent of his will, desire and lust conceived in him. Generally, in all sin:
specially in every sin, whether it be in desire to covetousness, or in
pleasure to adultery, or in revenge to murder, or in ambition to honor:
either in disdain to contempt, or finally in mislike to reproach and slander:
when our lust rests thereabout, and we give consent of will to the inticement
of concupiscense, then does concupiscense conceive in us. Wherefore as in
natural procreation, first there is conception, then afterward birth: so, in
inward temptations to evil, lust first conceyueth, then is it delivered, and
brings forth.

After conception, in it time, birth and bringing forth follows: so by
obtaining consent of will, lust conceyuing, at it time brings forth also.
Therefore the Apostle says: Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth,
first sin, then death.

Here is the former and the latter birth of lust: first it brings forth
sin, as the immediate thing which after conception once had, follows: where
by sin, actual sin is understood: such a sin as is brought into act,
and done in deed, as in the examples before cited, is manifest: Euah giving
consent to concupiscense Gene. 3.
intising, concupiscense conceived: and having conceived, it brought forth
sin in her: even the very tasting and eating of the fruit it self, which
was forbidden. Numb. 25.
When the Israelites gave their consent of will to the intising lust toward
the daughters of Moab: their lust conceived by consent: and brought forth
sin, even the committing of adultery with them. Lust conceived in the men of
the first world, when their Genesis 6.
consent of will was to the daughters of men: but their lust brought forth the
first birth, sin, when it caused them to commit fornication in deed, with
them. Lust conceived in Sichem the son of Emor. when he gave consent Gene. 34.
to his desire toward Dinah, the daughter of Jacob: but when he ravished her,
and lay with her, the lust brought forth sin in him.

When David yielded to the temptation of his lust, by the beauty of Barseba,
lust conceived: but when 2. Kings 11.
he sent for her, and had the use of her body: then lust brought forth sin
in him. When Ahab desired the Vineyarde of Naboth, lust conceived: but when he
knew 3, Kings 21.
he was wrongfully put to death, and went to take possession of the Vineyarde:
concupiscense brought forth sin. Finally, when in any thing, lust so
ouermastreth, and ouerruleth us, as that thereby we put in action that whereunto
lust enticeth and tempts, the^ lust in us brings forth sin. The first
fruits and birth of lust in men is sin: for when lust and concupiscense has
conceived, when time, place opportunity serves: it also brings forth sin.

That the Apostle here says: Lust when it has conceived, brings forth
sin: thereupon our adversaries the Papists take an occasion to broch this
their opinion concerning concupiscense, that it is no sin: for thus they
conclude, lust brings forth sin, therefore lust is not finne. One thing can
not be cause and effect too: the effect it self, and the cause of it self:
lust therefore cannot be sin, if it bring forth sin. For then should it be
cause of it self, and bring forth it self, which is a speech most improper.

To this be it answered: that one thing may be cause and effect also, but not
cause and effect in the same respect. One thing may be cause of sin, and yet
sin: for one sin is oftentimes cause of another sin. Concupiscense and
lust therefore is not only cause of sin, but sin it self: yet not the
same sin whereof it is cause. Lust conceiueth and brings forth sin, that
is, an actual sin, a sin done in deed, seen of men, manifestly apparent to
the view. Such a sin is not lust, but the cause of this sin: but lust is a
conceived evil, an inward consenting to evil, and therefore sin. Thus lust
is not only the cause of actual sin, but sin it self: not only before
baptism, but even after also. Lust is sin.


Which may appear by reasons of invincible strength. Whatsoever GOD in his
law, Christ in his Gospel, the Apostles in their Epistles and canonized
writings, have forbidden, that is sin. God, Christ, the Apostles, have
forbidden and condemned lust, therefore it is sin.

That nothing is in Scripture condemned but that which is evil and sin, no
man of wit, capacity, or reason can deny. That concupiscense and lust, that
desire it self is in the Scriptures condemned, it appears evidently.
Almighty God in the law, having forbidden theft, and adultery, and such like
sins, when they come into act: least any should think, If theft and
adultery Exodus 20.
only be accounted for sins the^, when they come into an open action: then
peradventure, to lust and desire my neighbors goods, is nothing, so that I
abstain from theft: to desire and lust after my neighbors wife, is no sin, so
that I keep my self from the act of adultery. To prevent this, God tells
us that we must not only not use our neighbors wife in fleshly manner, but
not lust after her: We must not only not rob or steal, but not so much as
desire the goods of our neighbor: wherefore in the last commandment he
utterly forbids desire or lust: Thou shall not lust after thy neighbors
wife, his house, his manseruant, his maidseruant, his ox, his ass, or any
thing that is his. Thereupon our blessed Savior in the Mat. 5.
Gospel condemns not only for adultery the using of other women besides
our own wives, but also the very desiring and lusting after them in our
hearts: therefore as the true expositor of the law of God, corrupted most
shamefully, and horribly depraved by the Scribes and Pharisees, who condemned
outward actions only for sin: he says, I say unto you, whosoever looks
upon a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery already with her in
his heart. The holy Apostle Saint Paul disputing of the effects of the law,
he reckons this one, among others, that thereby we come to the knowledge
Romans 7.
of sin: and condemning there concupiscense for sin, says, I knew not that
to lust had been sin, if the law had not said, thou shall not lust. Wherein
the Apostle not only confesses lust to be sin, but to be sin in the law
forbidden. Now least we should think that the Apostle had spoken it
unawares, or that that speech had slipped out of his mouth before he wist, it is
usual with him to condemn lust, and that fountain of al other sin, for
sin. wherefore in the sixth Chapter at the least five times he calls that
corruption which is in man (albeit it reign not in the Saints by actually
committing any thing) by the name Romans 6. Romans 7.
of sin: lust which is the fountain of all actual evil, is in like manner
in the next Chapter at the least six times Romans 8.
called sin. In the eight Chapter about thrice, the lust and concupiscence,
the inward affection and inclination Heb. 13.
to sin indeed, is called sin. The Author to the Hebrews calls it
sin, which hangs on, and compasses about.

Finally, Saint Peter reputeth lust for sin, when he 1. Pet. 2.
exhorts men to abstain from fleshly lust, not only from gross sins
actually committed, but even from corrupt affections, and evil motions of the
heart, from whence all actual sin springs. Seeing then concupiscence and
Mat. 16.
lust is forbidden and condemned, both in the law, and also in the Gospel: how
may any man deny it to be finne?

2 Again, Whatsoever is repugnant to the law of God, and his will, is sin:
Lust and concupiscence is repugnant to the law and will of God: it is sin
therefore. Sin is a rebellion and repugnancie to the will of God, and a
transgressing of his commandments: wherefore Saint John the Apostle defining
sin, says: Sin is the transgression of the law: but lust and
concupiscence, not 1. John 3.
only in the wicked, but in the regenerate, opposes it self to the law of
God, and draws men into the transgression of his will: which Saint Paul
affirms, when he cries out, that he saw a law in his members, repugning
Romans 7.
and withstanding the law of his mind, and leading him captive unto sin. And
that by the law of his mind, against which, lust being the law of his members
fights: the law of God is understood, he shows in his co^clutio^: The^ I my
self in my mind serve the law of God, but in my flesh the law of sin.

In which place, what before he called the law of his mind, here he calls
the law of God: and what before the law of his members, here he calls the
law of sin.

If the^ lust and concupiscence, even in the regenerate, be contrary, and
rebellious unto the law of God, then must it needs be evil, and sin: For
whatsoever is contrary to Gods law, is sin.

3 Moreover, concupiscence is from the flesh, and not from the spirit. That
which comes from the flesh is altogether evil, not good: therefore lust
proceeding from the fleshly part of man, is evil and sin, not pure and good.
The flesh, and whatsoever is thereof, is nothing else but evil and sin, ever
striving, ever struggling against the Spirit. Wherefore Saint Paul says, I
know that in Romans 7. Gal. 5.
me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good. Who setting down the conflict and
striving of the flesh and Spirit, affirms that the flesh coueteth and
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: so that the
very Saints of God cannot do the things which they would do.

In the same place a little after, discovering and describing Verse 9.
the works of the flesh, he reckons up nothing that thereof comes, but
sin and wickedness: The works (says he) of the flesh are manifest: which are
whordome, envy, idolatry, wantonness, uncleanness, craft, debate, emulation,
etc. There is then in the flesh nothing but sin: nothing but rebelling against
the Spirit: nothing but evil and iniquity. Lust therefore being from the
flesh, cannot be but fleshly. For all that is borne of the flesh, is fleshly,
as says our Savior Christ in the Gospel. Hereupon then it John 3.
must needs follow, as a resolute conclusion, that seeing lust is from the
flesh, therefore it is sin.

4 Finally, even this place conuinceth lust and concupiscence to be evil. For
whatsoever is the proper cause and prouoker unto sin, that same is evil and
wicked: But every sin proceeds from the lust and concupiscence of the
heart, from the evil motions, and corrupt affections in men: which if they be
not stayed, even in the Saints of God, but let reign in our mortal members:
then forthwith, as time, place, and other circumstances will suffer, they bring
forth the very sin in act, whereof the Apostle here speaks: Lust when it
has conceived, brings forth sin. Seeing all sin and wickedness among
men, proceeds from lust, it cannot be but it must be evil: for an evil tree
cannot bring forth good fruit, nor a good tree evil fruit; but as is the
fruit, Mat. 7.
such is the tree: as is the effect, such is the cause: as is the birth, such
is the conception: as sin is in nature, such is lust and concupiscence from
which it proceeds. For it is the evil motion and affection of the heart, it
is the wicked thought that rises in our minds, it is concupisce^ce and lust
in our members, which kindles the flaming fire of all ungodliness, and pricketh
and tickleth the hearts of men, to entise them to sin.

Concupiscence and lust therefore is not only the cause of sin, but evil and
sin it self. The fathers hereunto subscribe. Saint Ambrose calls it
iniquity, and affirms that there is a certain delectation, pleasure, or
desire in man, repugnant to the will of God, of which says he, Saint Paul
speaks, I see a law in my members resisting Romans 7.
the law of my mind. Saint Hillarie calls the evils which are in us,
maliciousnes, by reason of the condition of original sin. Saint Hierome
says, that those first motions whereby men are solicited and moved, be such as
Upon Mat. chap. 7.
want not fault. Saint Augustine in many places calls the natural lust which
is in men, which I call concupiscence, remaining even in the regenerate, by the
name of evil; and how it is evil he expounds against Julian. In the same
work he says, that lust is not only the evil of Contra Iul. lib. 6. c. 2.
lib. 5. c. 4. c. 5.
punishment, but of fault also.

Finally he says, it is a vice, against which we must strive by virtue.
Wherefore, if either in holy Scripture, (as we never do directly, but by
consequent as here) we hear concupiscence is cause of sin, therefore not
sin; or in the fathers, as in Saint Augustine, who in some places calls not
this natural corruption remaining in the Saints, by the name of sin, but
disputes the contrary, 13.
that it is not sin in them: We must distinguish of sin, there is sin
reigning, there is sin dwelling in men, it is not sin reigning, but it is
sin dwelling in our mortal bodies. There is sin mortal, and sin
venial; it is not sin mortal, but venial, because in the Saints it is not
imputed. There is sin actual, there is finne in heart and will not effected
nor done: it is not sin actual, but it is sin in heart conceived and
consented unto, which before God is sin.

When Saint James here says, Lust when it has conceived brings forth
sin, he speaks of sin after the phrase of Scripture commonly used, taking
sin for sin committed, sin actual: not denying, either the co^senting
unto sin, which is the conception of lust, neither lust it self, which is
(as it were) the seed, the sountain, the matter of mischief, to be sins in
their kinds: albeit not actual and committed, being as yet suppressed and
kept down in the heart and will of man.

Neither does James here curiously dispute when sin is in it self and before
God: when it first springs and begins in the account and judgment of God:
but he speaks of sin, as it is known to be sin before men. Sin
conceived in heart, before God is sin: All evil motions, cogitations,
affections of the mind, by God are condemned as sins: but actions and deeds
done, are known only to men, who pearce not into the heart or cogitation.
Wherefore when a thing is in act, then only with men it is accounted. Seeing
then that sin is not seen and known for sin with men, but then when it is
in act, and done, or doing, which is actual sin: The Apostle in this sense
speaking of sin, says: Lust, when it has conceived, brings forth sin.
Wherence it follows not, that because lust brings forth sin, therefore
it is not sin: For albeit it be not seen for sin with men (who judge only
by the action of men) yet is it sin 1 Kings. 16.
with God, who knows the very heart, and first motions. Albeit it be not
reigning sin, yet is it sin dwelling; albeit it be not mortal sin in the
Saints, yet is it venial sin in them also, washed away, and cleansed by
baptism.

The first birth, and first fruit of lust, to our knowledge, and brought into
act, is sin: whereof S. James says, Lust when it has conceived, brings
forth sin.

The second and latter birth of lust is death: For lust brings forth sin,
and sin brings forth death: death rises and grows out of sin, being
perfected Romans 6. and 8. 1. Peter. 2.
and committed: sin being finished, brings forth death.

Sin is then said to be finished or made perfect, when we give consent to it,
when we yealde our selves thereunto, when we suffer it to rule and reign over
us, as bearing chief sway and swindge in our life. Sin being Romans 6. Romans 8.
thus perfected, brings forth death. Wherein he shows what effect
follows the carnal life of man, agreeable unto that of Saint Paul, The wages
or recompense of sin is death: but eternal life is the gift of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. And not long after, If ye walk after the flesh, ye
shall die: in as much as sin brings forth, and purchases death unto men.
This may appear manifest by one only example, Judas the traitor was first
tempted by covetous motions: this temptation Mat. 26. John. 18.
he withstoode not, but consented, and followed the motion, and so was drawn
away from duty to Christ by his desire: so lust conceived: lust having now
consent of his will, broake forth into treason, and so sin was brought
forth, even the sin of treason, whereby Christ was sold and betrayed to the
people, and priests of the Jews. This treason committed, and sin perfected,
purchased death: for thereby he procured, and purchased unto himself, eternal
destruction, which follows sin, as the hire, the labor: the wages, the
travel: the crown, the 1. Acts 18.
works of men. Men therefore being tempted and entised by their own lust to
commit sin, by committing of sin procure death, because sin being done
indeed, brings forth death.

Death is due to every sin which men commit, so that no sin committed,
considered in it self, is so little, but deserves death. But seeing the
sins of the Saints are washed away by the fountain of regeneration through
faith in Christ, therefore their sins which through infirmity they commit,
to them procure not death, as they do to the wicked. But the sinful lives of
men, who tempted to evil by their own lust and desires, and carried away
thereby to commit sin; procure to them death, according to the doctrine of the
Apostle, sin when it is finished brings forth death. This did almighty God
intimate, nay rather plainly protest to Adam, telling Gane. 2.
him that at what time so ever he eat of the forbidden fruit: he should die:
he finished sin, he eat of the apple, by him therefore sin came upon him
self and upon all his posterity. The prophet Moses teaches Israel Ron. 5.
1. Cor. 15. Deuteronomy. 30. Ezeciel. 18. Pro. 11. 13. 1. Pet. 2. 1. Cor. 6. 3. Col
Ephesians. 5. Revel. 21.
that their sins and breaches of the law of God should bring unto them death:
the prophet Ezechiell from the mouth of God him self protests, that every
soul that sins, should die: hereunto Saint Peter subscribeth, dissuading
men from walking after the lust of their flesh, because they fight against the
soul, they procure the death and destruction thereof, which is that which
Saint Paul in soundrie places threatens to sundry, that they thruste us out
and disinherite us of the kingdom of God: and this death is not the death of
the body, which is natural and common to all men: but the death of body and
soul for ever, which is the second death. this is due to the committing and
finishing of sin in all men, unless there come betwixt our sin and death,
the remedy which God for the Saints has prepared by Jesus Christ, even his
^eath, passion, intercession, to die for ever. To be under ^ondemnatio^: to be
thrust out from the presence and face ^f God: to be in perperuall darkness, to
have a worm ^n our conscience which dies not, to burn continually Esaias. 66.
Mark. 9.
^ith fire which cannot be quenched: to be cast into the ^^ke which burns
with fire and brimstone: to be tormen^ed in body, to be afflicted in
conscience for evermore ^his is the thing which sin committed: brings forth
unto men: whereof all they shall taste, who are not cleansed ^^om all iniquity
by the blood of Jesus Christ. 1. John. 1.


Let men therefore which delight in their sins and have their pleasure in
committing iniquity, whose hand are given to spoil and robbery; whose feet
are swift to shed innocent blood; whose toungs are instruments of blasphemy,
falsshod, deceate, and whose lives are filled with oppression, extortion and
cruelty; whose bodies are weried and wasted with fornication, adultery and
uncleanness of the flesh; whose manners are full of all iniquity, impiety and
ungodliness: always record and recount with them selves this saying of the
Apostle; sin when it is finished brings forth death. for howsoever we
flatter and deceue our selves in the vanity of our own mind; and hope we
shall find shifts enough to avoid this judgment: Esaias. 28. Gal. 6.
yet let us remember that God will not be mocked: but look what we sow, the
same shall we reap; if we sow to the flesh, we shall reap of the flesh
corruption; and this of the Apostle stands sure; Sin when it is finished
brings forth: death: for if through original sin enclosed in our breasts,
al men by nature deserve death; and if God shall in the day of his wrath judge
even the secret thoughts and cogitations of the wicked, and therefore Romans 5.
Romans 2. Eccles. 12
condemn them, shall men think that when lust breaks out into open sin,
actually committing of evil: they shall not be punished, seeing especially the
Apostle here affirms, that sin being finished brings forth death?

This doctrine carefully considered, should put a bit into our jaws; and be a
bridle to our mouths, and strong reigns in our whole lives to withdraw and
keep us back from yealding to evil temptations: seeing the end thereof is death
and destruction. If intemperate persons, drunkerds and surfiters; if thieves,
spoylers, and robbers: if slaunderers, liers, and blasphemers; if adulterers,
fornicators and unclean livers; if ambitious men, proud and vain glorious; if
al workers of wickedness would consider, that if they commit and finish sin in
their mortal bodies, their sins thus finished should bring forth death,
vexation in soul, torments and tortour in body in hell fire for evermore;
were not their hearts morehard then Adamants; were not themselves more
senselesle then beasts: had they either care of salvation, or dread of
destruction: love of God, or hatred toward Satan: desire of heaven, or mislike
of hell: hope of life, or fear of death: assurance of joy, or persuasion of
punishment in the life to come: they would herehence be restrained, holding
fast this place of the Apostle as a stop against sin: Lust when it has
conceived, brings forth sin, and sin being finished, brings forth
death.

These things thus set down, and the fruits of Conclusion.
lust thus disciphered, the conclusion follows, which is interlaced and
intermingled among the reasons: whereof thus says Saint James: Err not my
dear brethren: Seeing GOD can not be tempted, neither yet tempts any to
evil: Seeing the true and natural cause of these temptations, is our own
concupiscense and lust, which both conceyueth, and brings also forth, first
sin, then death in us: then can not God be the cause thereof: so that no man
when he is tempted, must say, I am tempted of GOD. Do not so grossly and
grievously err, my brethren: as to impute the cause of these things to GOD:
this error is great, blasphemous, and wicked: beware therefore you think not
so of God, as that he soliciteth or moves any to evil: Err not my dear
brethren.

The conclusion thus interlaced with the reasons: 3. Reason.
the third and last reason why men may not say when they are tempted, they are
tempted of God, is from contrary effects, and things repugnant: to be author
of good and evil, are things repugnant: God is author of good, therefore he
can not be author of evil temptations: every good gift, and every perfect
gift is from above, and comes down from the father of lights, with whom is
no variableness, neither shadow of turning. If God therefore be the cause of
all good things, then can he not be cause of evil things also: not of evil
temptations therefore, whereby we are solicited to wickedness. Nothing can be
cause truly and properly, of contrary effects: therefore God, the cause,
author and worker of all good gifts in men, may not be said to be cause of
evil temptations.

Of this reason the former part or antecedent is only set down: Every good
giving, and every perfect gift comes from above, from the father of lights,
etc. whereby the Apostle teaches us, that god is the fountain of all
goodness, the giver of all good gifts, the author of all good things in men:
he is the bottomless pit of all grace, that cannot be emptied or drawn dry
of us: he works whatsoever is good in the whole world: Herehence Saint Peter
calls him the God of all grace, because all 1. Pet. 5.
grace and all good gifts come only from him, as from a well head and
fountain. The God of all grace, who has called us unto his eternal glory by
Jesus Christ, after that you have suffered a little, make you perfect,
strengthen and stablish you. S. John Baptist, being told of the Jews, that
Christ baptized, and all men came unto him, acknowledging John 3.
the graces which were in Christ to come from heaven, from God, as a fountain
of al goodness: answered and said unto them: a man can do nothing except it be
given him from above: this is answerable to this Apostles doctrine: Every good
giving, and every perfect gift is from above, from the father of lights. All
the effects of Gods will are only good: and whatsoever virtue, grace, good
gift is, it is from God. Seeing therefore all good things come from him, he
being the only author of all goodness and graces in the children of men: we
ought not to make him the cause of our temptations, whereby we are moved to
evil: for then should he be cause, not only of diverse, but of contrary
effects, which he properly cannot be. And thus is his reason plain and evident.

In this place almighty God is adorned and beautified with three ornaments,
wherein his excellent goodness more appears.

1 He is called the father of lights, the fountain and wellspring, the
author and cause from whence all good gifts flow and spring unto men. For
this cause is God called, not only the father of lights, but (as pure,
innocent, holy, righteous, good, and the author of all goodness) he is also
called light. So is God called the Isai. 60.
everlasting light of his Church, because all graces and gifts wherewith the
Church is beautified, come from God, as from a fountain and father of virtues.
The Apostle Saint John records of God, that he is light, 1. John 1.
and in him is no darkness: the fountain of all virtue, the giver of all
grace, a nature most perfect and just: far from all contagion or mixture of
sin: the author of good, but not of any evil: this the Apostle in these
words expressing, calls GOD the father of lights. By lights he
understands virtues, graces, good things: as by darkness the contrary is
understood, by the phraise of the Hebrews. If then God be the father,
fountain, and author of lights, virtues, graces and good things in men: then
may it not be said that he is cause of evil temptations, for that agrees not
to light, but to darkness.

2 Moreover, it is attributed unto God, that he is not variable, mutable,
chaungeable, with whom there is, says James: no variableness. This is added
to prevent that which otherwise might have been objected: they might say, God
in deed is sometimes the cause of good things among men: it follows not
therefore, but that he may be sometimes in like manner the cause of evil. Men
excelling in virtue, and causes of good things in common wealths, may
sometimes change their good into evil: and sometimes do one thing, and
sometimes the other: and why may not God so do? the Apostle shows; God is not
variable, there is no changing with him: he is constant, always alike, ever
cause of good, never author of evil. Whereof even Balaam the covetous prophet
has Number. 23.
truly prophesied to Balac the King of Moab: GOD is not as man, that he
should lie, nor as the son of man, that he should repent: Seeing then he had
once blessed his people Israel: he being always like himself, will not
vary or change his purpose. The Psalm. 102. Psalm. 89. 34.
princely Prophet David, removing all variableness from God, and making him
constant, and ever like himself, affirms, that albeit heaven and earth
perish, and be changed like a garment, yet he remains the same, and his
years fail not. This Samuel told Saul the king of Israel, 1. Kings 15.
that seeing he had given the kingdom from him to David, therefore that
purpose should stand, because the strength of Israel will not lie, nor
repent: for he is not a man that he should repent. God is like himself in all
things, with whom there is no variableness. When God alters things at his
own pleasure, says Saint Gregory, the things alter, but he remains the
same, and changes Lib. 20. 25. on Job.
not. Therefore by his Prophet Malachie he cries, I am the Lord, I change
not: and your sons of Jacob Malac. 3.
are not consumed. When then in Scripture it is said often, it repented God,
the Scripture speaks to the capacity of men, but in no wise attributes
inconstancy and variableness to God. This do those manifold places teach,
which witness that GOD is sure, immutable, and constant in all his ways. If
therefore GOD vary not, then he being once the author of good things, he
always does good, not evil, and is the fountain of good gifts, not cause
of evil temptations to any.

3 As God changes not, so there is no shadow of turning with him. He is not
like the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, which appear and shine sometimes, but
at other times are covered with darkness, which have their chaunges and their
courses: the day now, within ten, eleven, or twelve hours, the night: the
Sun glorious now in beauty: but anon in an Eclipse: the Moon now in the
full, now in the waine, now new, now a quarter old, and so forth. The
Planets now in this place of heaven, now in that, shining. There is no such
turning with God. He is not now good, and now turned to the contrary: for he
is always light, and with him is no 1. Jhon 1.
darkness at all. For his goodness is always clear, bright, and
continually shining: his light changes not with Sun, Moon, or Stars in
the Firmament: he gives not good things at one time, and at another draws us
to evil by any temptation: but as himself is immutable, so are his graces and
gifts always good, and not chaungeable into evil: wherefore he is not to
be counted author of evil in any wise, as by the wicked he is wrongfully
charged: neither sends he evil at any time to men, whereof they themselves
are not the first causes: he excels not now in virtue, and anon falls into
infirmity: he is not now the author of good things, and anon turns to the
contrary: but he is in deed that God of grace and goodness, that fountain
and father of lights, with whom there is no variableness, nor shadow of
changing: wherefore the worker of good things, but not the prouoker of man
unto wickedness by any evil temptation: which is the third thing here
attributed unto God, that with him there is no shadow of turning: and this is
the third reason why men being tempted, ought not to say, they are tempted of
God, because he is the author of good, and therefore cannot be author of
evil, for that he cannot be cause of contrary effects: And thus entreating of
the goodness of God, as the fountain of al grace in man, and showing by these
reasons that God cannot be counted the author of our evil: or the cause of
evil temptations in us, he discendeth to the work of regeneration, as the
most manifest token and testimony of his goodness.

For the greatness therefore of his goodness toward the children of men,
and for his manifold graces, let us daily pray unto him, that he may shrowde us
under his merciful shield of protection and defense, that thereby we being
armed, may be able to withstand all assaults and temptations of Satan, the
world, and our own concupiscence; that we may stand fast in the day of our
trial, and with invincible fortitude and patience, may finish our wearifull
pilgrimage in his fear, religion and service, to the glory of his name, the
profit of our brethren, the comfort of our own conscience, the strengthening
of our faith through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with the father, and the
holy ghost, be praise for ever and ever, Amen.

James Chap. 1. verses 18. 19. 20. Sermon 6.
18 Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be as
the first fruits of his creatures.

19 Wherefore, my brethren, let every man be swift to hear, and slow to
speak, slow to wrath.

20 For the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God.


IN these words, and so to the 4. Part of this Chapter.
end of the Chapter, the Apostle handles the fourth and last part of the
chapter, which is touching the excellency of the word of God. In which three
things must be observed. 1 The excellency it self, and the singular effect of
the word, what it works in the children of men. 2 The removing of certain
faults which hinder our attending to this word so excellent. 3 Against these
faults he sets down certain exhortations and admonitions, flowing out of
the word: and they are four, as shall appear from the 21. verse to the end.
Now touching these verses, they are of this fourth and last part.

Wherein are two things set down by the Apostle, and to be considered of us.
1 The excellency of the word of God i^ self. 2 The remoouing of hindrances
to the attending thereunto, and they are two: 1 Babbling and talking when we
should hear. 2 Wrath and anger, when we are taught and reproved.


Touching the former of these, the excellency of the word of God it self in
special, thereunto he discendeth by the former treatise. Wherein disputing of
the goodness of God, he here shows, that his goodness especially appears in
the work of our regeneration: the isntrumental cause whereof is the word of
God, whereof in this place he speaks. So then in this 18. verse, the Apostle
gives us, as it were, a taste of that which in general he had spoken, that
God is the fountain of all goodness: which as in sundry other things
appears: so especially in the work of our regeneration, the most express
testimony of his goodness toward us: which being apparent and manifest, we
must needs confess, that all good giuings, and all good gifts come from him:
so that we can not say, without blasphemy, nor think without impiety, that
GOD is author or cause of our evil temptations: and in as much as GOD both
first created man in perfect innocence, and afterward regenerated him to be
like the image of his own son in excellent virtue: his great goodness does
so appear to all men, that it were incomparable iniquity in any wise to make
him cause of our wickedness.

To come therefore to the excellency of the word, which is the mean of our
regeneration, the Apostle sets down the other causes thereof also: so that
in this 18. verse, there are three causes of our regeneration, the most
apparent testimony of the goodness of God toward man: 1. the efficient: 2. the
isntrumental. 3. the final cause.

2 The efficient cause of our regeneration, is the free will of God: Of his
own will, says James, begat he us. The good will of God, the gracious favor
and free purpose of God, is the first and efficient cause of salvation and
regeneration in men: to the truth whereof, all the Scriptures of GOD bear
witness. The electing, preferring and aduauncing the Jews above all other
people, being as it were a figure and resemblaunce of the eternal election,
and regeneration of the Saints: was not for any merit of man, but of the only
mercy, and love of GOD toward them, as Moises witnessed. But Saint Paul
speaking (not of a temporal Deuteronomy. 7. and 9.
calling, as was that of the Jews, but of an eternal calling of Gods Saints,
to regenerate them to eternal Ephesians. 1. 1. John. 12. 13.
life) makes the only true and efficient cause thereof, the free will and
goodness of God, whereof he says: God has predestinate us, to be adopted
through Jesus Christ, in himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.
Whereunto that is agreeable in another place: all have sinned, and are deprived
of the glory of God: and are justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption Romans 3.
that is in Christ Jesus. Thus of his own will, and freely he electeth: thus
of his own goodness he justifies: thus of his mere mercy he regenerateth
us unto life.

The holy Apostle noting this cause of all these wonderful works of God in
man, affirms that God works Philip. 2.
in us, both to will and to do according to his own good pleasure. To like
sense sounds that to his scholar and son Timothy. God (says he) has
saved us, and called 2. Tim. 1.
us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace, which was given unto us in Jesus Christ before the world
was. Finally, to Titus: when the bountifulness and love of God Tit. 3.
our Savior toward man appeared, not according to our works, but according
to his mercy he saved us. Thus in this place of regeneration, he makes the
good will and free mercy of God, the cause of our regeneration. As God
therefore freely, and of his own will, works in all things: So in the
election, justification, and regeneration Ose. 14.
of the Saints it is apparent. Herence is it that God says by his Prophet, I
will love thee freely, and of mine own will. The Prophet David says therefore
unto God, Thou have saved us for naught: what is that for naught, says Saint
Augustine, but this? Thou foundest nothing in us wherefore Psalm. De verbis
Apost. 15. John 15.
thou should save us, yet have thou saved us: Freely do thou give, freely
do thou save. This our blessed Savior to express, tells his Disciples
that he chose them, not they him, because there was nothing in them wherefore
he should choose them, yet of his own free will he chose them.

Saint John subscribeth hereunto, in that he says, 1. John 4.
Herein is love, not that we loved him, but that he loved us first, and gave
his son to be a reconciliation for our sins. Saint Paul to overthrow all
foreseen works and Romans 11.
merits in man, and to show that in election, justification, predestination,
and sanctification, God works all after his own will freely, he thus
concludes: Who has given him first, and he shall be recompensed? for of him,
and through him, and for him are all things, to him be glory for ever, Amen.

Thus his free will and favor toward man, is the only efficiencie, as of al
other his unspeakable graces, so of regeneration in his children. That
therefore (says Beda) which he said before, that every good giving, and ouery
perfect gift comes from above from the father S. Bid.
of light: that does he consequently confirm, by adding, that not for our
merits, but by the benefit of his own will, through the water of
regeneration, he has changed us from the children of darcknesse, to be the
children of light.

In this place therefore, not only plainly Saint James, but agreeably to the
Scripture, reverend Beda condemns the doctrine of done or foreseen works,
held by the Papists, and out of this Epistle (as they dream) most specially
concluded. For if regeneration be through the free will of God, if
predestination, election, justification and sanctification, be from the mercy
and favor of God, as from the first and efficient cause, then are none of all
these by-workes or deserts of men: for there is a plain contrariety betwixt
favor and merit, grace and deserving: so that Paul reasons from the
opposition thereof, against works, in the matter of justification: To him that
works, the wages is not counted of favor, but of debt. Romans 4 Romans 11.
And again in the question of election; If it be of grace, it is no more of
works, else were grace no grace: if of works, it is no more of grace, for then
were works no more works.

This contrariety Saint Augustine confessing, shows that grace, favor, and
free gift, cannot be mingled Epist. 120.
with works, and therefore concludes and defines what grace or free gift is:
Haec est gratia, This is favor, free gift, grace: which is given freely, not
for the merits of the worker, but by the mercy of the geuer. Seeing therefore
that we which were all by nature the children of wrath, the sons of Adam,
subject to eternal death and Ephesians. 2.
damnation, replenished in mind, heart and will, with iniquity and sin,
compassed about with thick, dark, and mistie clouds of error and wickedness;
loathing heaven, and loving earth, carried away of our own desires to work
wickedness with greedines, are now, not for our merits, but of Gods mere
mercy; not by our works, but by his Ephesians. 4.
grace; not of our deserts, but of his own will, begotten again and
regenerate: We must refer this whole work to his good will, and account his
goodness for the only efficie^t cause of our regeneration. Whereby it appears
that he is the fountain of all goodness, and that our wickedness must not be
imputed unto him. The regeneration then of Gods Saints (a most manifest
testimony of his goodness) shows that he is only author of good, and not of
evil, which the apostle here proving, adds, of his own will begat he us.

2 The good will and favor of God, being the first and efficient cause of
regeneration: The second cause, which is the isntrumental cause and mean
whereby we are regenerate, is the word of God, which Saint James expresses in
this place in this manner: of his own will he has begotten us with the word
of truth. In which place he slideth and falls into the commendation of the
word of God, the chief thing in this last part to be observed. Which words
are (as it were) the circumscribing and setting forth of the word of God, and
the gospel of Christ, whereunto is attributed specially above all other
words, that it is the word of truth. Which addition the Prophet David gives
to Gods word, because therein only is the Psalm. 86.
sound truth to be found and in no other. In which word, (as in many other
places) he desirous to be instructed, gives that addition to the word, that it
is truth: Teach me thy ways O Lord, says the Prophet, and I will walk in thy
truth. And in another place calling the word of God by Psalm. 119.
the name of truth, says; Thy word endures for ever in heaven, thy truth is
from generation to generation. Our Savior Christ in his most holy prayer to
God, hereunto subscribeth, who desiring that the Disciples might be sanctified
John 17.
with the truth, shows that by the truth he means the word and gospel;
Sanctify them (says he) with thy truth, thy word is truth. This name of
excellency, this mark of difference S. Paul gives unto the gospel 2. Cor.
13. 3. Gal. C. 5. 7. 2. Cor. 6. 7. 1. Col. 5. Ephesians. 1. 13. Heb. 10. 16. Ephesians.
4.
above other words, when he affirms he could do nothing against the truth,
but for the truth. Who vpbraiding the Galathians for reuolting and sliding
away fro^the gospel, cries out; O you foolish Galathians, who has bewitched
you, that ye should not believe the truth. To like purpose exhorting the
Ephesians to be constant in the profession of the gospel, calls that the
profession of truth: where fore he thus exhorts; Let us follow the truth in
love; the gospel, the profession of the truth, it is therefore an excellent
ornament, and an honorable addition in this place given to the word of God,
that it is the word of truth.

And this addition to be called the word of truth, most fitly agrees unto the
holy word and Gospel of Jesus Christ: and that in four respects, and for
four chief considerations. 1. in respect of God. 2. in respect of Christ. 3
in respect of the holy Ghost; and spirit of God. 4 in respect of the
particular things them selves in the word contained.

1 In respect of God, the word and Gospel, is the word of truth; because it is
Gods word and Gospel; who is true and cannot lie; therefore this his word, is
then the word of truth.

That this word is Gods word and Gospel; it is evident: 1. Romans 1. Cor. 1. 1.
Romans
Saint Paul calls it therefore the power of God to salvation, to all that
believe: and in another place: the preaching of the cross, is to them which
perish; foolishnes: but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God; he
says in the beginning of his Epistle to the Romans: that he was separated to
preach the Gospel of God: and clearing him self from the surmised suspicious
of his adversaries, 2. Cor. 11.
he thus writes: have I therefore offended, because I abased my self, that
you might be exalted; and that I preached freely the Gospel of God unto you.
Saint Peter subscribeth thereunto: the time is come, that judgment begin
first at the house of God: if judgment begin first at us, what shall be the
end of those, that believe not 1. Pet. 4.
the Gospel of God? And this God, who is the author of this word and Gospel,
is true and cannot lie: Balam the Numb. 23.
prophet could say of God: that he is not a man, that he should lie: neither
as the son of man that he should repent. Moses in his song bears record
to the truth of God: perfect says he, is the work of the mighty God: for
Deuteronomy. 32.
all his ways are judgments: God is true, and without wickedness: just and
righteous is he. Samuel tells King Saul; that indeed the strength of Israel
will not lie; nor repent, 1. Kings. 15. John. 8. Romans 3.
for he is not a man that he should repent: Our blessed Savior Christ speaks
of his father, and says: I have many things to say and judge of you; but he
that sent me, is true: and the things that I have hard of him, those spoake I
unto the world, Saint Paul defending Gods truth, says, Romans 3.
Let God be true, and every man a lier: as it is written: that thou may be
justified in thy words; and overcome when thou art judged. And for this cause
holy David calls god Psalm. 31.
the God of truth: into thy hands I commend my spirit, thou God of truth.
Seeing the Gospel is the word and Gospel of God; and God the God of trut, hand
cannot lie: the^ must needs this word be true, and the word of truth.

2 As in respect of God, the author thereof, the Gospel may rightly be called
the word of truth: so in respect of Christ, who is the matter, the very
substance and subject, whereof the Gospel entreats, it is the word of truth:
for it entreteth of Christ; and Christ is truth it self: therefore the Gospel
the word of truth. That it entreats of Christ, it appears by all the
Evangelists; who entitle John. 14.
their writings, the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ: of whom therein they entreat
by the Apostles, which call their preachings and writings, the Gospel, the
testimony of Christ; of whom therein they speak; and to whom they give and
bear witness. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, 1. Romans
for it is the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes. Else
where, if our Gospel be hid to any, it is hid to those that are lost: in whom
the God of this world has 2. Cor. 4.
blinded their minds: that is, the infidels; that the glorious Gospel of
Christ, which is the image of God, should not shine unto them. Paul says, he
has sent Timothy the minister of God, and his labour-fellow in the Gospel of
Christ, unto the Thessalonians: and for this cause is it also 1. These. 3.
called the testimony of Christ: because it bears witness and record of him.
To which sense sounds that of Saint Paul: who gives thanks to God for the
riches of the 1. Cor. 1.
grace of God upon the Corinthians, who abounded in all knowledge, even as the
testimony of Jesus Christ (that is, his Gospel) was confirmed in them. And a
little after he 1. Cor. 2.
says, that when he came unto them, he came not in excellency of words and
wisdom, preaching unto them the testimony of Jesus Christ; and finally he
exhorts his 2. Tim. 1.
scholar Timothy; not to be ashamed of the testimony of Christ (that is, the
gospel) neither of him the Lords prisoner. Seeing then the Gospel speaks
wholly of Christ, or at least tends wholly unto him: and he truth, as himself
affirms, I am the way, the truth and the life: Ioh. 14.
the gospel in that respect also is the word of truth.

3 Moreover, this word is inspired from the spirit: For all Scripture (says
Paul) is inspired from above. And Saint Peter says, that Prophecy came not in
former times by 2. Tim. 2. Pet. 1.
the will of man, but holy men spoke and uttered the word, as they were moved
and inspired by the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost is the spirit of truth, as
our savior affirms: I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
comforter, John 14. John 16.
that he may abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth. And again,
when the comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from my father, even
the spirit of truth which proceeds from the father, he shall testify of me.
16. Ioh. 13. 1. Ioh. 5. 6. The word and gospel being inspired by that spirit,
which is the spirit of truth, is in that respect John. 15. 26.
also the word of truth.

4 In respect that every particular thing in the gospel contained, is true;
therefore is it also the word of truth. Whatsoever Christ spoke and preached,
it is truly in effect there delivered: whatsoever he did, it is truly
reported: whatsoever he promised, it is truly, and shall truly be performed:
what punishment is therein threatened to the wicked, it shall assuredly be
inflicted. Finally, whatsoever is there mentioned, is most true. This word
containing nothing but the sound truth, and having therein no lie, no
untruth, no falsehood, no errors, as the words of me^ have: (for all men are
liers, and their words oftentimes are full of Pasl. 116. 11. Romans 3. 4.
untruths) therefore may the gospel rightly be called the word of truth.
Wherefore, whether we respect God the author, or Christ the subject or matter,
or the holy Ghost, the inspirer, or the things themselves in this word
contained: it is the word of truth. For God is God of truth: Christ is Lord
of truth: the holy Ghost, the spirit of truth: the things in this word,
things of truth: Therefore the Gospel the word of truth.

By which word of truth we are begotten adn regenerate, we are new framed, and
as it were, new fashioned unto a holy birth: to our new birth, whereby we are
borne, not of flesh and blood, but by the word of truth to eternal life. This
is the seed of the new birth, from hence 1. Cor. 4.
our new birth and regeneration arises, whereof S. Paul speaking, testifies
to the Corinthians, that he had begot them through the gospel. For this cause
speaking of the spiritual begetting, and of the regeneration of Timothy Tim.
1. Tit. 1.
and Titus, whom he had begotten by the gospel, and by his mean through the
word of truth regenerate: he calls them his natural sons through faith,
because they coming by his ministering to the knowledge of the faith of Christ,
were regenerate by the word of truth by him preached.

Saint Peter speaking of the causes of our regeneration, 1. Pet. 1.
makes the gospel, and word of God, the mean and instrument of our new
birth: Being borne anew (says he) not of mortal, but of immortal seed, by the
word of God, which endures for ever. Therefore attributing our new birth, and
growing up by regeneration, unto the word, as 1. Pet. 2.
the mean and instrument, in the next Chapter he prosecuteth his former
purpose, and adds thereunto exhortation: Therefore (says he) as newborn
babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby: and as
the word of truth is the instrument whereby our new birth is caused: so is it
the mean also, whereby therein we are continued, and therefore a thing of
singular excellency.

Finally, our Savior Christ (acknowledging the word John 17.
of truth to be the mean and instrument of our regeneration, to that end
prays unto his father, that his Disciples might not only be consecrate to
his service, and by him made fit for the office of the Apostleship, whereunto
they were called: but also might be purged, and regenerate, and born anew)
says, Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is truth.

If the gospel of Christ be the word of truth, why do we not believe it? if
it be the instrument of our regeneration, why do we not honorably embrace it?
if thereby God has begotten us again, why are we in any wise so careless of
it, that (only such times excepted as for fear of law, or shame of the world,
they must come) they come not to the hearing of this word of truth? but either
they talk our at table, or walk out abroad, or sleep out at home, or play
out with company, or spend out in vain exercise, or contriue out with
dalliance, or pass out by evil means, that time which is appointed for the
preaching and hearing of the word. These are carnal men, and have not the
spirit, lumpish and earthly, whose affections reach not to this heavenly
doctrine.

If the gospel be the word of truth, whereby we are regenerate, and borne
again, why are men and women so dainty and coy, why are they so choice
hereof, that they will hear it only, when, where, and of whom they lust? as
if the men make it the word of truth, and the instrument of our regeneration?
Let not men and women pretend that they are sanctified men and women: let them
not vaunte themselves to be purer then their brethren, and hear this word with
this partiality. For I protest unto every such, in the fear of God, that
unless this word of truth, and instrument of regeneration, be sweeter unto
them then the honey, and the honey comb: by what messenger soever the Lord does
send it: that they flatter and deceive them selves in a vain shadow of
holiness, and are not truly sanctified unto the Lord, neither have effectually
tasted of the doctrine of regeneration, whereof this word is the mean and
instrument.

As then our regeneration is attributed unto the word of truth, as unto the
mean and instrument: so is salvation also (as afterward is added) to the
Sacraments in like manner, as Saint Paul says, that Christ washes and
sanctifies Ephesians. 5.
his Church, by the washing of water through the word. And again, when the
bountifulnes of God our Savior Tit. 3.
appeared, not by works, but according to his mercy has he saved us, by the
washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost: The holy
Sacraments are means: the word of truth the instrument and mean whereby we
are begotten again, and newborn, which greatly commends the excellency of
the word: which this Apostle expressing, says, Of his own will begat he us,
with the word of truth.

3 The final cause of our regeneration is, that we should be the first
fruits of his creatures: that is, that out of the whole lump and mass of
mankind, out of all people, tongues, nations, and kinreds of the earth, we
might be select, culled and chosen out, to be a peculiar, proper, and special
people unto him, who had called us, even unto God, whose chief treasure, whose
portion and lot, whose inheritance and peculiar people the Saints are. In which
place he alludeth chiefly unto the law: wherein the first fruits, and first
increase were the Lords, as things picked out, set a part, chosen out for God
himself. Whereof thus says God in the law: Thou shall not Exodus 22.
linger, nor defer to render thy tithes, and thy first fruits: and thou shall
give me thy first borne of thy children. In the same book of Moises, it is
commanded the people, that they offer the first fruits of their ground in the
house Exodus 34. 35. ^ Leuit. 2. 14. Deuteronomy. 12.
of the Lord their God. In the repeating of the law by Moises, thus was it
said to Israel: Thou may not eat in the towns, the tithes of thy corn,
wine or oil, neither the first fruits of thy cattle, or sheep, nor the
fruits of thy hands. The first fruits therefore, as appears, were dedicate to
God: neither was it (...) for men to eat or touch them, as things reserved for
the use of the Lord only. As then the first fruits were the Lords portion of
the people, and things dedicated and consecrate as holy unto him: so the Saints
of God, regenerate by his word, are holy, peculiar, proper, sanctified to the
use of the Lord: the chief treasure he has: the thing he has commanded to
be received for himself: which the Apostle insinuates in this place, when
setting down the end of our regeneration, affirms it to be, that we might
be the first fruits of his creatures: of his own will begat he us, with the
word of truth, that we might be the first fruits of his creatures. The
Israelites Iere. 2
were called sometimes the first fruits of God, because they were chosen of
God above all other people, to serve the Lord only: and the first offered unto
the Lord of al nations: whereof the prophet Jeremy says: Israel was as a
thing hallowed unto the Lord, and his first fruits: all that eat it shall
offend: evil shall come upon them, says the Lord. This is most true of the
true Israel, which is of God: of the Saints, of the Church, whom God has
separated from all people, hallowed and sanctified unto him self, chosen to be
a special possession, inheritance, and treasure unto himself: for which cause
we by him are regenerate. Of his own will has he begoten us, with the word of
truth, that we might be the first fruits of his creatures. S. Paul disputing
to like purpose, of the causes Tit. 3.
of our regeneration and salvation: teaches us the end thereof to be the
inheritance of life: we are saved by his mercy, through the washing of the
new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed upon us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Lord: that we being justified by his
grace: should be made heirs according to the hope of eterna^l life. The like
end shall we find of our redemption, predestination, and the like: all which
tend to one end, to show that we are redeemed, called, justified, regenerated
to be partakers of immortal glory, that therefore we should be dedicate and
consecrate to God, to be a special treasure unto him: to serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. We are begotten by the
will of God, with the word of truth, according to the Luke. 1.
Apostles doctrine. Being now to this end regenerate, we must endeavor our
selves to shine in virtue, to excel in holiness, to abound in all
righteousness, and be chiefly careful, that we bereave not our selves of so
holy an end of regeneration, by contagion of sins, and the works of
wickedness.

The excellency therefore of the word of God is here apparent, partly in that
it is called the word of truth: partly in that it is here the mean and
instrument of regeneration, the most manifest token of Gods goodness toward
us.

Sundry are the commendations of the word of God, Psalm. 19.
and the Gospel of Christ. David the holy Prophet falling into the praise
thereof, says: the law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the
testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives light or wisdom to the simple: the
statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart: the commandment of god
is pure, and gives light unto the eyes: the fear of the lord is clear, and
endures for ever: the judgments of the lord are true, and righteous
altogether: more to be desired then gold, yea then much fine gold, sweeter also
then the honey and the honey comb. Moreover, by them is thy servant made
circumspect, and in keeping of them there is great reward. In another place to
like praise is it Psalm. 12.
spoken. The words of the Lord are pure words, as the silver tried in a furnace
of earth, fined seven fold. It is no small commendation of the word, that it
is the direction Psalm. 119.
of our youth, a lantern to our feet, and a light unto our paths. Which holy
Job feeling, counted it more precious Job. 23.
and dear unto him, then his daily food. Yet is there no praise greater, nor
any thing that more extolleth the incomparable glory thereof, the^ that it is
here called the word of truth: whereby we are begotten again to be the first
fruits of the creatures of God. Seeing therefore the word of God conuerteth
men's souls: seeing it is pure as the gold and silver, which seven times is
tried: seeing it is the direction of unbridled youth, the guide of our sliding
feet, and the sure light to the wandering paths of man: seeing it is more
precious then daily food to Gods children: seeing it is the word of salvation,
the immortal seed of our regeneration, the word of truth, the instrument
whereby we are borne a new, to be the first fruits of the creatures of God: who
is then so blind, which sees not: so wilfully ignorant, which knows not: so
maliciously wicked, which confesses not, the incomparable and singular
excellency of the word and heavenly doctrine of the Gospel? Whereof the
Apostle to assure us, says, of his own will has he begotten us with the
word of truth, that we should be the first fruits of his creatures.

2 The word of God being then so excellent, and the Removing hindrances.
excellency it self thereof set forth in that it is the word of truth, and
the mean of our regeneration: in the second place of this treatise, the
Apostle remooueth such things as hinder the attending thereunto: and the things
which greatly hinder the word, are two: 1 Babbling and talking, when we
should hear with attentive and deep silence: 2 and anger, when we are taught
and reformed by the word.

1 Concerning the first, thus says Saint James: therefore my brethren, let
every man be swift to hear, but flow to speak. Wherein our vain babbling, and
foolish talking when we should hear, is condemned: and attention and audience
to the word commanded unto the saints: that we show our selves prompt and
ready to learn, and not hasty to teach others, when we should hear and
learn our selves rather. Thus is our rashness which are unlearned, reproved,
when we talk of high and heavenly matters, too excellent and deep for our
slender capacity: As of the nature and secret wisdom of God, of his
inscrutible judgment in calling and choosing some: and condemning other at his
free pleasure, and such like: wherein we must stay our selves, contented
therein to be informed with patience and silence of such as are learned.

The heathen Philosophers, would not men rashly to Pythagoras.
speak, but rather to hear with silence: for which cause noble Pythagoras
enjoined his hearers vij. years silence, that that while they might learn,
but not rashly talk of the precepts of philosophy. Was that needful in
humain philosophy, and is it not much more needful in the heavenly
philosophy of God, that we be swift to hear, and slow to speak, of the
divine mysteries of his word? And Cleobulus taught, that me^ should be more
careful to hear Cleobulus.
then to speak: because audience and attentive hearing* more becomes most
men, then to speak. When Zeno heard a young man prating, and speaking much,
mocking Zeno.
him, he told him that his ears were grown in to his tongue, because he
heard little, and spoke much: where he should have heard much, and spoken
little. Nature it self would have us swift to hear, but slow to speak, for
which cause we have two ears given us, to hear much, and but one tongue, to
speak little.

When men therefore have not the sufficient knowledge of things, they ought
rather to hear in silence, and learn with patience, then rashly to speak of
the things they know not. A thing no doubt, not only needful in worldly
wisdom, but necessary also in heavenly philosophy. Sirach wishes men to
be swift to hear good things, and to be of pure life; but to give answer
Ecclus. 5.
with advised patience. And if they have understanding, to shape an answer
unto their neighbor: if not, to lay their hands upon their mouths, least
they be trapped in an indiscreet word, and so be blamed. The Apostle Saint
James, seeing rash babbling to be a disturbance unto the attention of men,
which they ought to perform to the word, exhorts men to be swift to hear,
but slow to speak.

That we are willed to be swift, quick, ready and prompt to hear and
learn, but slow to speak: it forbids not men to speak at all; but not to
speak rashly: but to observe time, place, person, and other circumstaunces in
their speech, as shall be most convenient.

And the circumstaunces in our talk and speaking to be observed, are specially
these. 1 The person to whom, 2 The place where. 3 The time when. 4 The manner
how. 5 The things whereof we speak. 6 The end wherefore: which carefully
observed, greatly beautify and adorn the talk and speech of men.

1 The person to whom we speak: whether our equal, our better, our inferior:
whether a prince or subject, honorable, or of mean birth: learned ignorant,
wise, or foolish: this ought in talk to be considered, that, regard had of the
person, our talk may be accordingly.

2 The place is to be noted: for in some place it is better Prou. 25. 11.
to speak, then to be silent: in another place, better to be silent then
speak.

3 Time also makes much to the fitness of our speech. There is a time to
speak, and a time to be silent, faith (...) Preacher: The son of Sirach
accounts it a great point Ecclus. 3.
of wisdom, to seek opportunity to speak in: therefore he says: A wise man
will hold his tongue till he see opportunity, Ecclus. 20.
but a trifler and fool will regard no time. And again: a tale out of time,
is as music in mourning: but wisdom knows the seasons of correction and
doctrine. Ecclus. 22.
The Prophet counted it a great gift to speak in time wherefore he says, The
Lord has given me a Isai. 50.
tongue of the learned, to know how to minister a word in time, to him that is
weary. Solomon teaching men how Pro. 15.
to make their talk comfortable and profitable unto men, wills them to wait
for time and season: A joy comes to man by the answer of his mouth, and how
good is a word in due season? When Abigail saw the drunkenness of Nabal, she
said nothing unto him touching David, 1. Kings 25.
whom he had bitterly reviled, and abused shamefully: but in the morning she
told him of the matter. Thus sought opportunity Archesilaus the Philosopher
therefore being at a banquet, and among the pots, being desired to dispute and
reason of a certain matter, refused: and answered, that it was a chief thing
and proper, especially to philosophy, to know the time of every thing If the
light of nature teach men this, how much more ought the light of Scripture to
teach us this wisdom?

4 As the time so the manner how, must not be neglected. Sometimes we speak
familiarly, sometimes reuerendly, sometimes meekly, sometimes sharply,
sometimes gentlely, sometimes hastily: respect had to the disposition of men
with whom we have to talk.

5 The things we speak of, must be weighed: they must be honest, seemly,
good, profitable, necessary for time and person, such as we our selves know,
and therefore can the better talk of them to others.

6 Finally, our talk must be to advance the glory of God, whereof it ought
to be the instrument: it must tend to the benefit of our brethren: to peace,
godliness, justice, equity, love, and all manner of virtue. These things being
diligently observed, we may speak, and offend not, against this place of the
Apostle: wherefore my dear brethren, let every man be swift to hear, but slow
to speak.

But we observing neither person, place, nor time: regarding neither manner,
matter, nor end, babble out we know not what, and oppose our selves to the
Apostle here: being swift to speak, but slow to hear. Every one will now
speak: all men will become teachers. The Artificer, the shoemaker, hosier,
tinker, and tailer: the vintener, the clothier, the weauer, and the cobbler: the
merchant, the mariner, the carpenter, and the painter: the master, the servant,
the fathers, the children,: the mistress, the maiden, the mother, and the
daughter: the young men, the old folk, the simple, and the ignorant: will now
take upon them, not to speak only, but to teach also: and not other, but
their teachers: of whom we should learn with patience, hear with silence,
take counsel with reverence, and be informed with humbleness. Therefore our
Savior in the song of Solomon, bids his Church being ignorant, to go to the
pastor to learn knowledge: 1. Can^ic*
if thou know not, says he, O thou fairest of women, get thee forth by the
sheep folds, and feed thy kiddes by the tents of the shepherds. And
almighty God persuades the people to take the law of the Lord at the Mal. 2.
mouth of the priest, who should be as the treasure house of Gods word, and of
who^ the people ought to be instructed.

David being a prophet, in the humility of his mind, with grateful memory,
and great thankfulness to God Psalm. 11
of whom he was instructed, says unto the Lord: thou have made me wiser then
my teachers. He truly, humbly, thankefully: but men and women now, in
arrogancy of their spirit, in pride of their hearts, in vanity of their
minds, in presumption of their own knowledge, think themselves wiser then
their teachers, and take upon them to alter and change: to order and set down,
what in the Church ought to be done, observed and retained. These falsely,
proudly, unthankfully, disorderly, contentiously, preposterously deal,
wherefore let them learn here a better lesson, and hold fast the counsel of
the Apost^e: that they be swift to hear, but flow to speak, as they are
exhorted: let them hearken with reverence to the word preached by the
faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ: and be not new fangled, nor carried away
with every Ephesians. 4.
wind of vanity, that they may follow the truth in love, and in all
quietness, humility, peace, and godly unity, grow up unto him that is the
head, even Jesus Christ: and hear his word with reverence, and not rashly
prate and prattle thereof with insolency, that thereby they may prevent this
first inconvenience, and remove the first hinderance of our attention. Whereof
the Apostle speaks: wherefore brethren, let every man be swift to hear,
but slow to speak.

This place then remooueth loquacitie, and rash speaking, when we should give
attentive ear to the word of God taught us: this is an enemy to knowledge, to
heavenly doctrine: this hinders the course of the word of God in out hearts:
wherefore it ought to be far from the Saints of God: which to abolish, the
Apostle here exhorts: Let every one be swift to hear, and slow to speak.

2 The other evil which hinders the word of God in man, is wrath and
anger, choler and snuffing when we are taught and informed in the word. For
we cannot profitably hear, unless we be peaceable, quiet, and modest both
toward all men, and specially toward our teachers.

Many kinds there are of wrath and anger, many things wherefore, and wherein
men are angry: but to pass that over as appertaining to another place: the
Apostle speaks of that wrath and anger, which rises from desire of
contending, and of intractablenes of way-wardnes, 2. Chro. 16. 7. Acts 54. 2.
Chro. 26. 18. 19. Luke 4 28.
whereby we suffer not our selves to be taught or reproved, no not by the word
of God it self.

Thus by the affections and perturbations of our minds, we oftentimes make the
word of God frustrate and fruitless in us, and so to lose, not only the
blessed effect it would work in us, but also in a manner, the credit and
estimation which it should have among men: Whereunto (were we the servants and
true Disciples of Christ) we would yeald all attentive audience.

This anger grows partly from selfeloue, and preiudicate Cyrilin John. lib.
4. c. 34.
opinion of our selves, standing wise in our own conceits, we disdain to be
checked, controlled, informed or reproved of any. Partly herence, that
naturally we more esteem darcknes then light: falsehood then truth: error then
verity: superstition then religion. From which if men draw us, then are we
angry. Herence in all times have risen perfecution, imprisonment, calamity,
affliction, with all manner of violence and villainy, against the reprouers of
wickedness, teachers of true religion, reformers of corruption and superstition:
by the wicked of this present evil, and corrupt world.

Herence the anger, fury, and madness of the princes and people, against Isai,
Jeremy, Michat, Amos, and the rest of the Prophets, arose, sprung and flowed.
Herence the outrage of the Scribes and Pharisees against Christ Jesus our
Savior, and his most holy Apostles: the cruel persecution by the bloody
tyrants, and Emperors of Rome, against the Saints and blessed Martyrs, was
raised. Herence the unquenchable wrath, and malice never reconciled, of the
Romish Clergy, against the faithful preachers of Christian religion: who
carried away, partly with selfeloue and preiudicate opinion of themselves, as
the only learned, and wise men in the whole world: and partly being naturally
blinded in superstition, whereunto they have sworn their allegiance, curse
with bell, book and candle: persecute with fire, sword and faggot, whosoever
speaks against them: whereby the course of the word of God is hindered.
Herence mislike, rebuke, disgrace, reproach, disdain, and all manner evil
dealing toward the ministers grows, for that men cannot, ne will not, hear
of their faults, be reclaymed from their sin, and informed in their duties
roundly and sharply, without offense and anger: who seem they never so wise in
them selves, yet are they both testie fools, and wayward, which refuse to be
informed these are they of whom Solomon speaks in his preacher; be not of an
hasty spirit to anger, for anger rests Eccles. 7.
in the bosom of fools: these know nothing, and nothing will they learn. If
they be reproved, they are offended; if they do know any thing, they know not
as they should, whereof admonished, they fall into anger. Salomo^ says, the
scorner will not love him which rebukes him, neither go Pro. 15. Ose. 4.
to the wise; Osei condemns it in Israel, that they spoke against the
prophets and priests for rebuking them. It was reckned for great sin in the
people for hating the prophets which reptoued them openly in their assemblies;
Sirach condemns it with Solomon among the follies and fooleries of men, to
hate instruction, and disdain to be Amos. 5. Ecclus. 21.
taught and informed; therefore he says: He that is not wise, will not suffer
him self to be taught. And the Apostle here forbids anger and wrath to be
wreaked against them, which inform and teach us wisdom. Thus then to hate the
instructor: to speak against the teacher and prophet; to persecute them which
rebuke sin and iniquity among men; to disdain to be taught and instructed;
to be angry with those by whom our sins are condemned, our enormities
reformed, our erours reclaimed; is not only great infirmity; but malicious
wickedness, and deuelish folly which thing (as an hinderance unto knowledge in
the word of truth, an impediment to our new birth and regeneration in Christ;
rebellious and wickedly opposed unto God himself, who by the word calls us
to repentance) the Apostl here condemns and remoueth; wherefore my dear
brethren, Let every man be swifte to hear, but slow to speak and slow to
wrath.

Of this latter, there is a reason here rendered, why men should not be angry
when they are reproved, and taught in the word: because that that anger works
not the righteousness of God. A reason from disprofit, from disadvantage: This
wrath and anger herence conceived, works not the righteousness of God, yea it
hinders Gods work in us: in that the audience and hearing of the word is
hindered. It works not that which is righteous before god, and which of his
servants he requires, namely, to hear his word with reverence, to do his will
with carefulnes, and be fruitful in all good works to his glory. This anger,
wrath, and giving place to disordered affections, and tumults of our minds,
works not the righteousness of God. Yea, where this is, there godly
righteousness, christian dutifulnes and holy obedience to the word, is exiled,
abandoned, abolished, and clean estranged from among us: there the righteousness
of God rules not, neither is that moderation and godly atte^tio^, which before
was co^me^ded that we should be swift to hear, but slow to speak, in any
measure performed: yea rather sin is suffered to have his souerainty in us:
for as patient and godly reverence has all other virtues tied as in an
indissoluble and inseparable chain: so al impiety al ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, rules and reigns, when impatience and wrath
disquieteth us. This reason ought to move men to put away al swelling, al anger
and wrath from the^, and without choler, snuffing, or disdain: to hear gods
word instructing them, that they may be begotten again by god, with the word
of truth, to be the first fruits of his creatures. Now let us pray unto God,
who of his own will has begotten us with the word of truth, that we should be
the first fruits of his creatures: that we may be stre^gthned with the grace
of his holy spirit in the inward man, to hear with redines, to speak of his
word with sobernes, and to keep it with carefulnes: that in happy issue of our
ways, we may be blessed with spiritual blessings in Christ our Savior: To
whom, with the father and the Spirit, the most heavenly comforter, be praise,
glory, honor, and majesty, now and for ever, Amen.

James Chapter 1. verses 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. Sermon 7.
Verse 21 Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of maliciousnes,
and receive with meekenes the word that is graffed in you, which is able to
save your souls.

22 And be you doers of the word, not hearers only, deceiving their own
selves.

23 For if any hear the word, and do it not, he is like unto a man that
beholds his natural face in a glass.

24 For when he has considered himself, he goes his way, immediately
forgetting what manner of one he was.

25 But who so looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein,
he not being a forgetful hearer, but a doer of of the work, shall be blessed in
his deed.


3. part of the last member of this chapter.
THe third branch of this last and fourth thing in this first Chapter
contained, is touching certain admonitions which follow this doctrine of
regeneration: and they are as exhortations to the regenerate. In setting down
whereof he descends to the fruits of regeneration, and effects of the word
of truth in the Saints, least they hiding this inestimable treasure in the
ground, and shutting it up (as it were) in the secret closet of their own
bosoms, might in their lives be found fruitless and unprofitable. And the
admonitions here are four.

Whereof two in these words and verses are contained. Namely. 1. To hear the
word of God. In which exhortation there are three things. 1. What he
admonishes of: To hear the word. 2. How it must be heard. 1. Laying aside
filthiness and malice. 2. With meeknes.
3. Why. The reason. It is able to save our souls.
2. Not to hear only, but to do also. In which two things are handled. 1.
The admonition or exhortation it self given. 2. The reasons rendered. 1. From
hurt to themselves. 2. From the loss of the use of Gods word, by similitude.



Now to come to the first admonition, and the first 1. Admonition.
thing therein contained: The thing whereof he admonishes, it is to hear the
word of God, the word of truth. Whereof he gives just admonition here,
because he has before told us, that thereby we are begotten to be the first
fruits of Gods creatures. Seeing then the word of God is that word of truth,
wherewith almighty God begets us again, to be the first fruits of his
creatures: it stands us in hand, with all peaceablenes, and quietness of
mind, without filthiness, and superfluity of maliciousnes, to hear it, to
receive it, to embrace it.

Concerning hearing this word of tructh, (which here is called receiving the
word) what one thing is there, wherein the holy Prophets, and other the
Saints of God, have more labored, then often to admonish the people to hear
the word of the Lord? Moses in the repeating of Deuteronomy. 4. Deuteronomy. 5.
the law, calls Israel to the hearing of the law of God, wherefore in
sundry Chapters he thus exhorts and admonishes Deuteronomy. 6. etc.
the people; Hear (O Israel,) the ordinances, laws and statutes which I teach
you to do, that you may live, and go in, and possess the land, which the
God of your fathers gives you.

The princely Prophet David exhorts the people Psalm 78.
to the hearing of those laws, which from god he would give unto them, as a
thing of greatest weight: therefore, says he, hear my law O my people,
incline your ears to the words of my mouth: for I will open my mouth in a
parable, and utter heard sentences of old. The holy Prophet Isai, calling all
men to Christ, and exhorting them to hear Esaias 55.
his law, and attend thereunto, cries out; Incline your ears, come unto me,
hear, and your soul shall live: and I will make an everlasting covenant with
you, even the sure mercies of David.

Hearing and attending to Gods word, is the way whereby we come unto heavenly
wisdom, wherefore the son of Sirach calls all those, who would learn
divine Verse. 34.
wisdom, to the hearing of his doctrine; My son, hear thou my doctrine, and
despise not my counsel. And a little after in the same place; If thou love to
hear, thou shall receive doctrine, and if thou delight in hearing, thou shall
be wise. The wise man Solomon commending hearing as the 1. par. c. 8. v. 6. 7.
c. 22. v. 17. 18. 19. 23. 19. Romans 10.
way to attain wisdom and knowledge, says; The wise man shall attain unto
wisdom by hearing. And S. Paul making it the mean whereby we come to faith,
which is the greatest point of heavenly wisdom in men, thereof says; Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And our Savior Christ
being the chief Scholemaster, and only teacher from God, of this wisdom, is
Mat. 3. 17.
by God himself, commended unto us, to be hearkened unto.

Wherefore the Disciples, and John Baptist, the one in the days of Christ's
baptism by John, the other as the Disciples, Peter, James and John: in the
days of Christ's transfiguration: 1. John 1.
were from heaven commanded to hear him, This is my well-beloved son, hear
him. Saint John confesses this to have been one way whereby they believed John
8.
in Christ, the word of life: That (says he) which was from the beginning,
which we have heard, which we have seen and our hands have handled, the word of
life. this the true saints of god know, for which cause they hear the word of
John 10.
god; as of the^ our savior witnesses: They that are of god, hear Gods word.
And again, My sheep hear my voice. Luke 10.
Therefore when Marie saw that she by hearing might attain unto faith in Christ,
and the true wisdom of God: she sat down at the feet of Christ, and heard
him preaching: for which attention she is by Christ commended, Marie has
chosen the better part, and it shall not be taken from her. Finally, the Angel
of God in the Revelation, teaching Revel. 2. and 3.
John what he should write to every one of the seven Churches of Asia: to that
which he had spoken to each one of the^, he adds as a thing most necessary,
Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says to the 7. churches.

And to conclude: our Savior comme^ding hearing as a most necessary thing in
all those that would be pertakers of the word of truth, and his heavenly
doctrine: so often in the Gospel urges this: he that has ears to hear, let
him hear. If the^ the prophets hereunto have so often moved the people; If it
be the way and mean whereby we attain to heanenly wisdom; if by this we be
made partakers of faith and heavenly mysteries; if it be the property of the
Saints of God; and sheep of Christ; if Marie were therefore so highly
commended by Christ himself; if as a necesarie addition, to the several
charge of every Church, it was added by the angel; if our Savior so often
repeat it, he that has ears to hear, let him hear; who is so wilfully
blinded, so malitiousl^ obstinate; so peeuishly perverse, that sees not how
necessary a thing it is to hear the word of truth? whereof our Apostle here
not ignorante, gives the Saints this first admoniton, to here the word.

But because in all ages and times, many do hear, yet never the nearer* we
are not only taught to hear, 2 The manner.
but how we should hear, that we might hear with profit. For if it be to some
the savor of life, unto life; but to others the savor of death, unto death;
if the word sound in the ears of many, to their iuster condemnation; then is
it not enough to know we must hear, but also to learn how to hear, is
necesarie: for which cause the Apostle 2. Cor. 2. Ezech. 2. and 3.
teaches us how we ought to hear and receive this word of truth, whereby God
of his own good will, has begotten us again to be the first fruits of his
creatures.

In the manner of our hearing and receiving this word, the Apostle first
remoueth certain evils from us, which hinder our profitable hearing: then he
shows positiuely and affirmatively, how we must hear.

Touching the former, he wills in hearing to put away all filthiness and
superfluity of maliciousnes: all iniquity, all carnal affection, all losenes
of life; all pride and insolency of mind; all arrogancy and disdainefulnes
of spirit: wherence, wrath, anger, debate, contention often arises, and the
fructifieng of the word is always hindered: all which must be abandoned, and
abolished utterly from them, which will profitably hear the word of truth.
Filthiness, and corruption of hear or affection, is, whereby our minds do
wander, and we are occupied about other matters, thinking of our pride,
pleasures, vanity, and such like, when our minds should be stayed and fixed
in the hearing of the word. Superfluity of maliciousnes is, whereby we grow
into contempt of the word, speaking evil and disdainfully of the divine
doctrine, and heavenly wisdom of God, which two must first be removed. For
whereas men's minds are a wool-gathering, and carried away with filthy
cogitations and desires: there men cannot hear the word with profit: and when
men grow in dislike of the word, hate of the truth, speak evil of the
mystery of godliness, what commodity can it then bring to such, and what hope
is there, that in them it shall fructify? This Saint James very well
perceived, therefore he remooueth these evils from godly hearers: This shall
all men by their own experience most easily learn, and therefore must
carefully remove them. Whereof to speak no more but this: how is it that
many men often hear, and learn nothing: yea, being asked what has been
said, remember nothing: but that, when they should hear, their minds are
either set upon covetous desires, or occupied about fleshly imaginations, or
carried away with proud conceytes, or ravished with filthy cogitations: or
else alienated by mislike, hatred and contempt, from the word preached: so
that sounded in the ear, it pearceth not our hearts, and so is fruitless in
us? The first hereof, is in carnal professors, who in word and show pretend
religion, 1. Tit. 2. Tim. 3.
but in deed deny it, as did some even in the time of the Apostles. The other
is true in malicious and obstinate Papists, who coming with a preiudicate
opinion, and conceived hatred and dislike of the word: and in parciall
hearers, who therein have respect of persons, and are not indifferent: so that
by hearing, neither is profited. Seeing then filthy cogitations, and carnal
affections spoil men: and superfluity of maliciousness bereave men of the
fruit of the word: Who so will, to the comfort of his soul, the discharge
of a good conscience, with reverence to God, and benefit to himself here,
must first remove all filthiness, and superfluity of maliciousness far
from him: as by the Apostle he is exhorted.

Filthiness and superfluity of maliciousness, put and laid apart, we must
hear and receive with meekness, the word that is graffed in us, which is
the second thing in the manner of our hearing prescribed.

This meekness, is the promptness and ready desire of our minds to learn:
that Christian docilitie and tractablenesse, whereby we are content without
pride, arrogancy, contempt or obstinacy, to yield themselves to be informed
and taught by God, and his ministers, in the word. A virtue most excellent: a
grace most singular: an ornament most beautiful in the lives of Gods Saints:
so highly accounted of with almighty God, that by his Prophet he protests,
that he will look unto, and Isai. 66.
have regard to those that are of a meek and contrite heart, and such as
tremble at his word. These are the meek spirited commended of God, who in
humility and pureness of heart, receive with readiness and reverence the
word of God, and the doctrine of the Gospel when it is preached. The people of
Israel herein were Exodus 19. 8. 24. 3. and 7.
worthy their due praise, who hearing Moises proposing unto them, all the
things the Lord had commanded him: answered al together with great readiness,
promptness, and meekness of their minds: all that the Lord has commanded,
that will we do. For their like meekness in hearing the word, after their
return from captivity, by Nehemiah, they are commended, for that from morning
Nehem. 8.
to night, they hearkened to the word read and expounded unto them. Josiah was
in this point of singular meekness toward the word: who hearing the law
read, humbled himself, and his heart thereat melted: wherefore the plagues
therein threatened, fell 2. Chron. 24.
not upon the people in his days, but after he was gathered to his fathers.
Far otherwise was it in the days of Jeremie the Prophet, in Zedekiah the
King: Ierem. 36.
who received not the word by the Prophet sent, with meekness: but
contemptuously, rebelliously, obstinately refused it, and caused the roll
wherein it was written, in the fire to be consumed.

This meekenes shined in perfect beauty in the Saints Acts 13.
of God in the City of Antioch, in Pisidia, who hearing Paul preaching the
word, with all readiness received it: beseeching him to preach the same unto
them the next Sabbath: whereunto the whole city at the time appointed, Acts 17.
was assembled. No less meekness was in the Athenians, who hearing Paul
willingly, disputing of the resurrection of the dead: howsoever some mocked,
yet with all Acts 20.
humility and meekness to the word, desired they to hear him again of that
matter. What should we rehearse and report unto you, the meek hearing of those
of Troas, who with all meekness and promptness of mind, heard the Apostle
preach till midnight? O zeal of Gods saints? O meekness of hearing? Unlike
whereunto, are our people in this flourishing time of the Gospel: who are
wearied with one hours exercising in preaching: which time seems so long to
their heavy and dull ears: that they spend most part thereof, either like
drowsy heads, in sleeping: or like careless persons, in talking: or like
disdainful men, in reading other things in the mean time: as if the word
preached, pertained not to them: or occupy themselves in other matters,
because they seem wise enough already, and will not be thought to learn of
any other. Or like proud persons, we disdain and think scorn to be
informed: or we will hear whom we list: and whom we list, we will not: or we
will hear to carpe, to catch, to cavil, to find fault both with the doctor,
and with his doctrine. Is this the meeknes of our hearing in the bright shining
light of the Gospel? Does such pride of heart, does such corruption of
affections, does such superfluity of maliciousnes so mightily reign in us:
that after so many years learning, so long time of preaching, so great travel
and labor, upon us in teaching consumed: we have not learned with meeknes to
hear the word preached? Ecclus. 9.
Let us now at length hear the son of Sirach, who wills men to be humble
to hear the word of God, that they may understand it: let us embrace the
admonition of the Apostle James in this place: wherefore lay apart all
filthiness, and superfluity of maliciousness, and receive with meekness,
the word that is graffed in us.

With which manner affection, if we come not to the 1. Cor. 3.
preaching of the word, in vain may Paul plant, or Apollo water: in vain
shall the preacher preach unto us, as we see daily: for albeit men and women
are sharply reproved for their evil and cursed covetousness, their fleshly
filthiness, their known adulteries, their extreme oppressions, their
blasphemous swearing, their slanderous reproaches, their pestilent vsuries,
their long retained malice, their intolerable pride, their new invented, and
new fangled strange devises, and pride of apparel, their corruptions in their
dealings, their falsehood in their promises, their deceit in their speeches, and
other innumerable, not only enormities, but iniquities, among men: yet it
profits not, because they lay not aside filthiness, and superfluity of
maliciousness, neither hear the word of God with meekness, as here they are
commanded.

This word which we ought to receive with meekness, is said to be ingraffed
in us: because by Gods spirit moving and inclining our hearts, and by the
painful and daily labor of his workmen in his heavenly harvest, which are
his ministers, it is, as it were, inserted, and takes root in our hearts. For
as slippes and twigges of other trees being ingraffed, bound together, wrapped
about with clay, and moss, or some other thing, by long continuance grow and
cleave inseparably to the stocks whereinto they are graffed: so the word of
God by the sap of his spirit, and by the labor of the ministers, being, as
it were, ingraffed in our hearts: therein oftentimes takes it such root in
that fruitful ground, that it is said to be graffed in us.

And as slippes or twigges, if either they be set in dry ground, of men, or by
them planted upon rotten roots and stocks, become fruitless and perish, and
never take root, but this away, and die by little and little: so if the word
of God be cast in the stony ground of our hearts, or planted upon the rotten
roots of our carnal affections: it never takes root, but decays, dies,
and withers. Wherefore, to the end it may bring forth fruit in us: in some
thirty, in some sixty, in some an hundredth: we must endeavor to have it
first ingraffed in us: which in the regenerate is assuredly true, whereof the
Apostle here admonishes: Lay aside all filthiness and superfluity of
maliciousness, and receive with meeekenesse, the word ingraffed in you.

Now why we should so do, in the third place the 3. The reason.
reason is rendered, because it is able to save our souls. The word of God
is the only medicine for all our inward maladies: it is that sovereign
salve, which saves our souls: it is the plaster to lay to the wounds of
of our sins, yea and has in store a salve for every sore of the mind.
Seeing therefore it brings so great profit with it, we ought with
meekness to receive it: Which Saint James intimates and shows, when he
says, receive with meekness the word engraffed in you, which is able to
save your souls.

The word of God received by faith, saves our souls: because it is the mean
to bring us to God, and his son John. 17.
Christ, whom to know and believe is eternal life. This word assures our
hearts in the promises of mercy, which we taking sure hold of, are thereby
spared. Hereby do we attain unto faith, by which we do live: the just shall
live by faith: and faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of GOD.
Being therefore Abac. 2. Gal. 2. John 20. 31. Romans 10.
the mean and instrument whereby we apprehend Christ, in whom only there is
life: being the way whereby we come to true faith, whereby our souls do
live: thererefore is it said to save our souls. To which purpose Saint Paul
calls it the word of salvation: Acts 30. c. 11. 14 Romans 1. 1. Cor. 15. 2.
Ephesians. 13. 1. Tim. 4.
and the power of GOD to salvation, to every one that believes. This word
being the word of reconciliation, preached by the Minister: received of the
hearer, is salvation to both: Wherefore Paul exhorts Timothy to take heed
to himself, and to learning. and therein to continue: because in so doing he
should save both himself, and those that hear him. This virtue and power of
the word in another place expressing, he affirms, that it pleased God by the
foolishness of 1. Cor. 1.
preaching, to save those that believe. In which he laboring, became all
things to all men, that by all means he might save some through his preaching.

Notvvithstanding this force is not in the bare and outvvard hearing of the
word: but in believing the word preached to us, and heard of us: otherwise
it profits nothing. For as the word profited not the Jews, because it
was not mixed with faith in those that heard Heb. 4.
it: so neither profits it us, or any other to salvation, unless it be
joined with belief: wherefore that it may save our souls, it must be
received with faith, of all the Saints of God.

This word heals the vvounded heart and conscience: this is wine to
scour, and oil to supple our festring Luke 1^.
sores: herein is there remedy against every sin, least through the
heaviness of the burden, we should fall into desperation. Against presumption
it terrifieth us: against distrust it comfort us: in ignorance it teaches
us: in error it informs us: in falshoode it corrects us: in manners it
instructs us: in wandering paths, it directs us: in dangerous ways, it
guides us: being a lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths: that we
perish not: a present remedy for every sickness Psalm. 119.
of the mind: an approved help at all assayes and needs: a sovereign salve
for every sore of heart: and therefore rightly and worthily said by Jamer, to
be able to save the soul.

If then this word be of power able to save the soul, if all filthiness laid
apart, and superfluity of maliciousness removed, it be received with
meekness: then the contempt hereof is pernicious, dangerous, and damnable.
For if the Israelites escaped not, when they refused to hear Moises, which by
Gods commandment spoke unto them on earth: how much less shall men under the
Heb. 12.
Gospel escape, if they turn from him, which by his ministers speaks from
heaven unto them?

Now this word is not contemned only by open rebellion and resistance
thereunto: as by the Jews, by Turks, persecuting tyrants, Romish prelates,
and their adherents: but also when in word it is professed, but in
conversation of life it is not expressed: a thing most heinous and horrible in
the sight of God: of which contempt most professors are now guilty. Hereby
then let them be admonished, and so effectually reclaymed. And this is the
first admonition of the Apostle: wherefore lay aside all filthiness, and
superfluity of maliciousness, and receive with meekness the word that is
graffed in you, which is able to save your souls.

Some men, too much given to please themselves in 2 Admonition.
their foolish imaginations and conceits, hereupon think it enough to hear
the word of God, albeit they do not thereafter. Which fond persuasion to
root out of men's minds, the Apostle sets down this second admonition:
wherein is showed, that it becomes all the Saints of God, so to hear the
word preached, as that they frame their lives thereafter, and live according as
therein they are taught from God: that their conversation be answerable to
their profession, and their deeds correspondent to the doctrine wherein they
are informed.

In which admonition, two things come to be considered. 1 What it is that they
are admonished of: namely, to be doers of the word, not herers only. 2 The
reasons why they should so do: which are two, as in the discourse shall be
evidently apparent.

1 The admonition: be ye doers of the word, not hearers only. S. James having
not in vain learned in the Mat. 13.
parable of Christ, that the seed being cast into the four several
grounds, yet fructifieth but in one only: and seeing by daily experience,
that many men make shevve of religion, but yet live careless in their
conversation: who turning the ears of their bodies to the word, and in their
mouths professing themselves to know GOD, yet in their deeds deny him,
Titus. 1.
being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate: and in
show make profession, but in life are nothing answerable thereunto: in this
place inueighing against that hypocrisy of men, and condemning that outward
hearing as unprofitable to themselves, and odious unto God, shows most
notably, what manner hearers the Gospel requires, even such as hear not only,
but do also: therefore he admonishes them to be doers of the word, not
hearers only.

To do the word is double. 1 To do it absolutely, and perfectly, so that both
the heart consent, and the outward A double doing of the word.
life answer fully to the law of God in perfect measure. To which doing God in
the law did promise life: for in the law it is said, I have given thee laws,
statutes, and ordinances, which if thou do, thou shall live in Leuit. 18.
them. Our Savior in the Gospel, thereunto respecting, tells the foolish
lawyer, who by doing would obtain Luke 10.
life, that if he would love God with all his heart, with all his soul, with
all his strength, with all his thought; Romans 2.
and his neighbor as himself, he should live. The Apostle showing the Jews,
which so much boasted of doing the law, that they must perfecty fulfill the
law, if thereby they would look to be saved, says: That not the hearers
thereof, but the doers of the law shall be justified before God. This perfect
fulfilling and doing all that the law requires, is that doing which the law
and Gospel mencioneth, and requires in them, which by their works hope to
attain life.

This no man can possibly perform: for what man ever could love God with a
perfect heart, with all his soul, with his whole affection, strength and
power? What man ever loved his neighbor as himself? Where is he, and who is
he, that continues in all things that ^eue. 17.
are written in the law to do them? Where is that, either man or woman, that
neither in thought, word nor work, has broken the commandments of God: this
is the obedience: this is the fulfilling: this is the doing, which the law
requires, which no man perfourmeth.

Saint Peter the Apostle therefore, calls it a yoke intolerable, which
neither they, neither their fathers could Acts 15.
bear. And Saint Paul a little before to the Antiochians Acts 13.
in Pisidia, protests, that by the law we could not be saved from our
sins, because we could not perform it: which was so weakened through the
infirmity of the flesh, that it could not possibly deliver man from sin, and
from death. Which defect is not by nature of the law, but through the natural
impotency and weakness of man, which cannot do that in perfect measure, which
the law with great exactnes requires. Saint Augustine therefore in his book
of the Spirit and letter, says very well and wisely; De spiritu and lit. c. 19.
The law is not therefore not accomplished, for any fault in the law, but by
the fault of the wisdom of the flesh: Which fault is to be showed and made
manifest by the law, but to be healed through grace.

The holy men of God therefore, seeing themselves to come short of the doing of
the word and law, in this matter and manner of doing, have in the humility of
their minds, accounted themselves as sinners, and therefore have confessed
their iniquities and transgressions, their sins and unrighteousness before the
Lord: as the Patriarchs, as Job, David, Daniel, the Apostles, and all the
Saints of God, as it appears.

Seeing the^ that no man is able thus to do the word, there must some other
kind of doing the word be by Saint James here required. Therefore there is a
doing of the word and law under the Gospel, when Christ, for us and our
salvation, fulfilleth the law in perfect measure, and therefore Romans 10.
is called the fulfilling of the law, to all that believe: and therewith also
gives unto his Saints, as members of his body, the holy Ghost, the spirit of
sanctification, that thereby they after some measure, may truly do his will,
earnestly cleave unto his word, faithfully believe his promises, unfeignedly
love him for his goodness, and fear him with reverence for his mighty power.
And finally, love their neighbor, though in great infirmity, great
imperfection, great weakness. This our doing of the word, and fulfilling the law
of God, almighty God accepts and takes in good part, for his sons sake,
who has in all points and parts perfectly fulfilled the law, for all those
that believe. And this our doing of Gods word, is not thereby to attain to
righteousness with God, which thing before we have received by faith in Christ
only: but partly to testify that by Christ we are made righteous before God:
and partly to show our obedience to God therefore, whose workmanship we are,
prepared unto good works, that we should walk therein.

Such then (as knowing themselves to be justified by Ephesians. 2.
faith in Christ before God: to testify their righteousness to men, and their
obedience to God, endeavor to express in their deeds, the hope they have in
Christ: and labor in their whole life to walk worthy the calling whereunto
they are called: that in their conversation they may beautify their
profession, and God may in all things through them be glorified in Jesus
Christ) are said to be doers of Ephesians. 4.
the word and these are the doers whom the Apostle here mentions; Be ye doers
of the word, not hearers only. And hereunto serve so many exhortations in
holy Scripture, whereby we are stirred, and pricked forward to the practice of
good works, and study of virtue, whereof the Epistles of the Apostles are
full, and the whole body (as it were) of the holy Scripture, therewith
replenished.

This godly endeavor (according to the measure we have received:) this study
and practice of good works and virtue prescribed: this performance of
obedience offered to God, must shine in the Saints, which as necessary in all
professorus of gods word, is joined with the hearing thereof. Our Savior Christ
joining the hearing and doing of Mat. 7.
the word together, says; That he that hears the word and does it, is like
to a wise man, which builds his house on a rock. And showing whom he
accounts for his brethren, and his mother, he says; That they are his
brethern Luke 8.
and mother, not which hear only, but which hear and do the will of God.
And to the woman which said unto Mat. 12. Luke 11.
him, Happy is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes which gave thee suck,
he replieth; Yea rather happy are they which hear the word of God, and do it.

Finally, when he had washed his Disciples feet, moving them to the imitation
and following of his own example: in conclusion of the exhortation he shuts
up the John 13.
matter in this wise; If you know these things, happy are you if you do them.
To hear or know then the will of God, and not to do his word, preuayleth
nothing. This knew the holy Prophets, who therefore joined practice of the
will, with the hearing of the word and law of God, as in Deuteronomy. 4. v. 1. 5. c.
v. 1. Ierem. 11. 6. This the holy Angel Revel. 1.
in the Revelation weighing, and pronouncing them blessed only which join
practice with hearing of the word, breaks out, and cries; Blessed is he
that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those
things which are written therein. Agreeable to which doctrine, the Apostle in
this place admonishes the Saints in these words; Be you doers of the word,
not hearers only.



Men think themselves highly in the favor of God, and persuade themselves that
they do GOD good and sufficient service, and have performed the duties of
christians in convenient measure, when they are content to hearken and listen
to the word of God, albeit they never endeavor thereby to lead their lives,
neither to reform their manners thereunto. But this being nothing so, they
greatly deceive themselves, and procure iuster condemnation against themselves
from God. For how much more me^ know by hearing, so much more do they
enhaunce their judgments, and increase their punishment, if they walk not
according to their knowledge. Our Savior Christ protests, that that servant
which knovveth Luke 12.
the will of his master, and does it not, should be beaten with many stripes.

This Apostle witnesses, that it is a double sin to a man to know what to
do aright, and not to do it, he that knows how to do aright, and does it
not: to him it is sin; not sin simply, but sin with advantage. Whereunto
James. 4.
Saint Augustine, writing to Athanasius, subscribeth, Epist. 144.
By Gods word and law man sins so much the more, how much the more by the
word he knows that to be sin which he commits. Saint Chrysostom
thereunto Homil. 12. Popes Anty.
agrees, who to the people of Antioch writes in this manner against their
usual swearing, whereof they had often heard, yet were not amended: the oftener
men hear, the more they offend, and the more they increase their punishment,
if they reform not that whereof they have heard so often.

Theophilact to the like sense sounds upon the words upon Luke 12. Cap.
of our Savior, How much the more he knows which sins, so much the
greater punishment he procures to himself. Saint Ambrose in like manner
(citing the words of Christ, in the seventh Chapter of Saint Matthew his
gospel, 1. Offic. c. 26.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the things which I say) concludes thereupon, For I
know not whether the study of knowledge without practice and deeds, do not
more inwrap us: no doubt then our know ledge, without obedience, does inwrap
and entangle us in her judgments.

The more often the Israelites heard the voice of their Jerome. 5. and 6. Esaias.
42. etc.
Prophets, the more inexcusable were they when they did not obey them: the more
our Savior and his Disciples preached to Cities and people, the more they
denounce John. 15. Mat. 11.
punishment; when they hearing, would not do thereafter. The more knowledge
men have, the more they deceive themselves, if they do not thereafter. The
more men and women know, (as many very carefully in show hear such as they
lust, and to whom they in the vanity of their humors are addicted) the more
just condemnation they procure to themselves, and the heavier wrath of god they
heap and treasure up against themselves, and they do not that which they
know by hearing. Whereof to advise men, the Apostle gives us this worthy
admonition; Be ye doers of the word, not hearers only, deceiving your selves.

This lesson must we hear, this counsel must we follow; this doctrine must
we embrace; who bosting that we have hard two or three sermons this day, or
that day, for all that, we neither diminish ought of our pride in flau^ting
ruffs; in curious cuffes; in colored starche, or other our vanities: Nether
have we left our boiling malice, our swelling hatred, our cursed covetousness,
our fleshly pleasure; neither abate we any thing of our vvanton banquets, our
riotuous feasts, our sumptuous tables: neither stay we our bribed hands, our
slaunderons mouths, our blasphemous tongues, our lying lips: neither withhold
we our selves from pestilent usury, cruel oppression, violent extortion,
fraudulent dealing with our brethren: neither finally, do we amend those
enormities, iniquities, sins, and blemishes of our lives, whereof we have
been admonished: and thus to our iuster condemnation, flattering our selves
with bare hearing, we deceive our selves.

Seeing then the knowledge we have by hearing the word, without practice of
virtue, and study of good works, increases our judgments; and in contenting
our selves with hearing only, without the doing of Gods will reveled, we
deceive our selves to our greater condemnation. Let this reason move us to be
doers of the word, and stir us up to embrace the doctrine of the Apostle, be
you doers of the word not hearers only, deceauing yourselues.

The hearing of our time is in many marvelous, the knoledge of the common
people is great, and has not been the like in any former generation in this
our Country and Nation: their understanding in the Scriptures is such, as that
many of the Laity and people, can talk with glory; reason with feruencie;
dispute with a grace of the Scriptures of God: whose hearts notwithstanding,
are puffed up with pride, whose minds are set on mischief, whose feet are swift
to shed innocent blood: whose hands are full of briberies: whose heads are
occupied about covetous desires: whose lives are stained with usury and
oppressions, whose bodies are wearied and wasted with pleasures, choked with
the cares, enticed with the delights, carried away with the vanities, ravished
with the inordinate desires of this wicked world: hearing the sound of the word
in their ears, but admitting not the sense in their hearts: are greatly and
grossly deceived, like the Athenians, who could talk much of virtue, but
practiced nothing thereof, whom Pantolidas the Ambassador hearing dispute
Partolidas.
of virtue, and being demanded how their speeches pleased him, answered; Their
talk was good, and deserved praise: but this was to be lamented, that speaking
so well, they would not reform their lives according to virtue. So our
knowledge, and talking of the Scriptures, of vices to be removed, and virtue to
be embraced, is worthy praise: but this is greatly to be lamented, that we,
talking so well, do walk so wickedly. Herein if we run on still, and so
continue, we enhaunce our punishment, increase our judgment, enlarge our
condemnation: Wherefore we must not be hearers only, but doers also, of the
word of God, as the Apostle here admonishes.

The next and second reason why we must be doers 2. Reason.
of the law, not heaers only: is drawn from the use of Gods word; which
is to reform in us those things that are amiss: this profit and use we
loose, when we hear the word only and do not thereafter: this use of Gods
law and word Moises commends unto princes and people: Deuteronomy. 7
who exhorting the King continually to read and meditate in the law:
shows him for what end he should so do, to learn to fear the Lord, and
not to hear and know alone, but to keep his commandments. This use was
respected when he willed the Levites to teach the law unto the people, that
they might learn to do Deuteronomy. 31. Psalm. 119.
and keep the ordinances and the words of the law of God prescribed. David
disputing of the use and end of the law, makes it the reformer of our
manners, the directer of our paths, the line and level of our life, and the
guide of our ways to godliness. Saint Paul affirms that all scripture is
inspired from above: and is profitable to teach 2. Tim. 3.
such as are ignorant to convince such as are repugnant: to correct such as
err and wander in conversation: to instruct in righteousness, wherefore? to
what end: to what use? to what purpose? even that thereby the man of God may be
absolute and perfect to every good work. Perfection in righteousness, holy
conversation in life, is the use of the law and word of God.

As therefore the chief end of sciences, and human arts, is not knowledge,
but action; that when a thing is learned, it may be put in ure and practice:
And as the use and end of moral philosophy, is not to know only, but to
practice also: whereunto they are unfit which lack experience to practice (as
Aristotle teaches) so the 1. lib. Ethic. c. 3.
use of Gods word, which is the art of all arts, and that divine philosophy,
which neither Thalis, nor Pythagoras, Socratet, nor Plato, Zeno nor Aristotle,
neither any other of the learned heathen have devised and inverted: but which
we have received from God himself, is not mere knowledge, to wot what to
do, but practice of obedience, that we may so do in action, as by hearing the
word we have learned. This use and end men then lose, when they content
themselves with hearing only.

Which thing the Apostle here proves by a fit similitude, wherein he compares
the word of God to a glass. As the chief use of the glass is not to see our
faces only, but to correct our faults, that there be no blemish or deformity
therein: so the word of God has this use, not to show our selves only, but to
reform our enormities, that there remain no iniquity in us.

The word of God may well be compared to a glass, The word like a glass.
Three special properties are in a glass, whereby the word is resembled unto
it.

1 A glass shows the perfect form of our faces, with all the deformities
and blemishes therein, to correct them if they may be corrected: So the law
and word of God, shows the perfect face and fashion of sin in us; that so
far forth as natural infimitie permits, all blemishes may be amended; for
which cause Saint Paul says, that thereby we come to see sin: and by the
law have knowledge thereof: because by the law is the knowledge of sin,
that then being known, we might by grace reform Romans 3. and
it.

2 The glass shows their own faces which look thereinto, and not the faces
of others, that they might be careful to wipe away their own blemish and
dyrty spots, and not be curious in clearing of others: So the law shows
every one that looks thereinto, his own sins cheifely, not the sins of
his brethren: so much that every one should be careful of his own life, and
not be too curious in the lives of others. Wherefore holy David so often
desired to be informed in the law and statutes of Psalm. 14. Psalm. 25. Psalm.
86 and
God, that he him self might walk therein, and be reformed: as in his psalms
many ways it appears: and the Apostle exhorting all men to make trial of
themselves by the word, not only at the receiving of Sacraments, but otherwise
1. Cor. 11*
by the ministry of the word, for the proof of their faith, would not have
them as busy in the lives of others, but as careful of their own; to mend
themselves; Let every one examine him self, and so let him eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup: And again: prove your 2. Cor. 13.
selves whether you are in faith, examine your selves: know you not that Christ
dwells in you, except ye be reprobates? the word must teach us to see our
selves, and our own infirmities, and endeavor to reform our own blemishes of
sin, and not to be curious in them, searching into the lives of others,
before our own be thoroughly reformed.

3 The glass shows us our blemishes, which seen, we hate, and with mislike,
wipe them away: so the word of God shows us the deformity of sin: which
sin must be hated of us: thus Gods word taught David to hate his own ways:
and Marie Magdalen to loath here former life. This makes the Saints of God to
hare the very garments defiled with the flesh, and conceive mislike against
those sins, whereunto in times past, they were given. These things being so,
the Apostle compares the word of God to a glass.

Of which comparison there are two parts or members. 1 They which look into
the word of God without endeavor, or yet desire to reform their lives
thereby: are like such as look into a glass to see themselves, but not to
reform their faults, or blemishes of life: as soon as they are gone, they
forget what fashion they were of: thus their peering, pooring, and peeping into
the glass, profits nothing: as good never a whit, as never the better. The
looking or hearing of hypocrites, is like the vain looking into glasses of
fools. Fools look into glasses to see themselves, but not to correct any
thing amiss in them: so hypocrites hear the word of God, and look into his
will to see it, but not to correct their manners thereby. Fools looking into
glasses, with persuasion of themselves that they are fair, when they are
deformed: come therehence as wise as they went: and hypocrites thinking
themselves righteous, when they are wicked, come as wise from a Sermon, as they
went thither. As fools looking into glasses, see not that therein, that which
is indeed the right side, is the left, and the left the right: and so think
all is well: So hypocrites, seeing not by the word their disordered lives,
that all things are topsie turuie in them: persuade themselves all is well
enough, and so are not profited. As fools looking into glasses, think they
see a face in deed, when they see but the reflexe or turning back of a face:
therefore they coll, they kiss, they fall in love oftentimes with the face
seen in the glass, as Nareissus did with his own face, when he beheld
himself in the water: so hypocrites think their counterfeite ho^ynesse to be
true holiness: wherefore they embrace it, they brook it, they delight
therein: they love it, as if it were sincere and perfect integrity. And thus
they may be compared unto fools looking into glasses, who hear the word,
awd look into the law, being careless to obey it.

The other part of this similitude is: who so looks into the perfect law of
liberty, he not being a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the word, shall be
blessed in his deed.

In which member we see the law is called perfect, and a perfect law of
liberty,

1 Perfect, which addition David also gives unto the law: The law of the Lord
is perfect, converting the soul: Psalm. 19.
therefore so called, because whatsoever appertains to faith and godliness,
is therein abundantly set down and delivered: so that neither in doctrine,
neither in manners, we ought to seek for any other thing whatsoever. S, John
entreating of the perfection of the new law which is the Gospel, confesses
that therein all things which John 20.
our Savior did, were not written: yet sufficient things to be written, which
men believing, might thereby live: wherefore he says, Many other signs and
tokens did Jesus in the presence of his Disciples, which are not written in
this book: but these things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is
Christ, the son of God: and that in believing, ye might have life through his
name. Saint Paul writes that he kept not back any thing from the Church of
Ephesus, but has showed them all the Acts 20.
counsels of God. Tertulian cries out, that that Church is happy, to which
the Apostles have powered out all the Tertulian.
doctrine of God, even with their own blood. Our Savior promises the Church
a Comforter, which should John 16.
bring them into all truth. What truth is it, that the holy Ghost did not teach
the Church? But yet, least we should think there were other truths, beside
such as were preached by Christ, and penned by the Evangelists; it is added,
that that Comforter should teach them whatsoever Christ had taught them before.
Wherein was enough to salvation, as John witnesses. Saint Paul shows the
excellency of the word of God, and how perfect it is in all points, affirms
that all Scripture is inspired 1. Tim. 3.
from above, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, to instruct in
righteousness: that the man of God might be perfect, instructed to every good
work. Unto this truth the fathers reuerendly subscribe. Saint Tract. 49. upon
John.
Augustine says, that where as Christ had done many things, which were not
written, yet such things were chosen to be written, which the writers thought
sufficient for the salvation of them which believed. Saint Cirill Lib. 12. upon
John.
has almost the same words: All things that were done by Christ, were not
written, but those things only which seemed sufficient both to manners and to
doctrine: that men shining through true faith, and good works, might come to
the heavenly kingdom by Jesus Christ our Lord. Chrysostom upon Matthew, not
once: and Upon Mat. 22. and 4. hom.
upon the Epistle to Titus in like manner, shows, that all things necessary,
are in Scripture revealed: therefore concludes he that they are perfect.
Athanasius finally affirms, that the Scriptures inspired from above, is
sufficient for instruction in all virtue. And this is true in the whole law of
God: but most manifest in the doctrine of the Gospel.

The law which by Moises ministry was given the people, was so perfect, that
almighty God forewarned them, that they should neither add nor diminish
therefrom: end how severely he punished that malapert and Deuteronomy. 4. and 12.
Prou. 30.
sawsie boldness in the Israelites, which adventured to add any thing, either
to the doctrine, or the ceremonies, so many sermons of the Prophets, the
interpreters of the laws, so many testimonies of holy Scripture: the holy
sacred and divine histories: our Savior Christ himself witnesses most
plainly. Shall we think more basely now of the Gospel, which is a doctrine
more excellent then the ^awe? Shall we think God had less careful
conside^ation of his church in the days of his son being on earth, and
afterward: then he had in the time of Moises? Or shall ^e dare to imagine the
Prophets to have left a more per^ect doctrine, then the apostles, taught by the
very mouth ^f Christ, and led into all truth by the holy Ghost, according to
the promise. Wherefore if the law were perfect, so that the people durst add
thereto, or detract therefro, nothing: which who tempted, were punished: shall
not the Gospel contain a most perfect doctrine, whereunto nothing may be
added, from which nothing may be detracted? This the Angel acknowledged, when
in Revel. 22.
the shutting up and concluding of the Gospel, he protests that if any man
add to the words of that book, God should add the plagues in that book
written unto him: and if any should diminish any thing therein, God would
diminish and take away his name from out of the book of life. Thereby
therefore, is the perfection of the Gospel concluded. Which thing the holy
Apostle here to express unto us: calls the word of God the perfect law.

For this cause the Scripture has the name of a Canon given it, and is called
Canonical, because it is the only perfect rule, line, level, and square,
whereby all doctrines, and all manners must be meet, measured, examined and
proved: as by that which is most sufficient and perfect, which suffers no
addition nor detraction, for then the rule and measure fails. This being
true, as most true it is, not only by the infallible word of God, but by the
manifest testimonies of the reverend fathers: then Ambrose 3. de virgini.
all inventions, dreams, doctrines, traditions, unwritten verities, must fall
to the ground, and be condemned, as counterfeit, adultery, and sacriligious,
which are not warranted out of the perfect law of the Gospel: as Saint Ambros
affirms. The Gospel here hence then is proved to be perfect.

2 As it is perfect, so is it a law of liberty: not that it brings men into
carnal freedom, to do what they lust, 1. Pet. 2.
whereunto the wicked abuse it, for a cloak of wickedness, but because it
sets us at liberty in our consciences, from Satan, sin, and death, which
we obtainie by Christ, John 8.
who freeing us, we are free in deed. He therefore calling us to the glorious
liberty of the sons of God: and the Gospel preaching this liberty of
conscience unto men, is called the law of liberty.

3 In this law must we continue: herein must we look continually: herein must
we meditate day and night: herein must we spend our days. Some think it
enough Psalm. 1.
to look into this law once in their lives: Some think it much to look into
it once in a year, two, three, or seven: Some persuade themselves that they do
God good service, if now and then only, they have a spirt, a crash, a fit at
the word, and leave off: but our Apostle wills us to continue therein:
often, yea always to be looking in the perfect law of liberty.

4 Therein we must not be idle hearers, but doers of the word: the promise of
happiness is not made to the hearing, but to the doing of the word: we
hearing, must do that therein we are taught: and so as good ground bring forth
fruits with patience.

5 This if we do, we shall be blessed in our deed: not that our deeds do make
us blessed; but because study and endeavor to do well, is a quality of such
as shall be blessed. And this blessedness is given as a free gift and reward
from God, to such as walk in holiness of life: which life, is not the cause
of our reigning with God in eternal blessedness: but the way to the kingdom,
says Saint Bernard: neither are our good works efficient and Bernard. upon 1.
Psalm.
proper causes of salvation and happiness: but ornaments of our faith, as
Saint Ambrose writes. But of this more was spoken. 1. James 12.

Here it may be objected, that in as much as happiness is promised to our
works in Scripture: therefore our works purchase this happiness. David
pronounces Psalm. 1. Psalm. 41. 119. 8. Luke 11. Revel. 1.
him blessed, which walks not in the connsaile, neither stands in the way
of sinners: him blessed also, who considers the poor and needy: those that
are undefiled in the way: such as fear God and walk in his ways. Our Savior
counts them blessed, which hear the word, and do it: the Angel, those which
hear the words of that prophecy, and fulfill them. The Apostle here, those
which look into the law of liberty, and continue therein, being not idle
hearers, but doers of the word.

I answer that herehence if follows not, that men deserve by their works
this happiness: but first, these places entreat not of the cause why men are
blessed, but of their quality who shall be blessed: even such as do these
things. Secondly, such things are understood of their works, who by faith are
justified, accepted, and blessed: in whom the blessedness of their works does
follow the blessedness of their faith: as the effect, the cause: even as
civil righteousness, or righteousness by works, whereby the fairh of our
heart is known to men: does follow righteousness by faith, which is before
God. Thirdly, rewards are promised to works, of grace, and not of duty: so
that no man by works can challenge happiness unto himself: which, as also
eternal life, is the mere gift of God, through Jesus Christ. Romans 6.


This part of the Apostles comparison is, that who so looks into the law of
God with carfulness to live thereafter, shall be blessed in his deed.
Wherefore as Socrates the great Philosopher exhorted all men, but specially
young men, always to look into their glasses: that if they were beautiful,
they should behave themselves accordingly: if deformed, they should then hide
and cover their deformities, by virtue and learning: so ought all Christians,
men and women, to look continually into this glass of Gods word: that if
they be already beautified by the graces of God, they may walk worthy their
Ephesians. 4. Philip. 1. 2. Tim. 1.
glorious calling, in true holiness and righteousness: if they be deformed
through sin: they may learn thereby to cover and correct their deformities
of sin, by true obedience unto the Gospel: that they continuing in virtue,
may be blessed in their deeds, not for their own merits, but of the mercy of
God: to whom with the son, and the holy ghost, be all praises, dominion, and
maie^tie, now and for evermore. Amen.

James Chap. 1. verses 26. 27. Sermon 8.
26 If any man among you seems religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but
deceyueth his own heart: this man's religion is in vain.

27 Pure religion and undefiled before God, is this, to visit the fatherless,
and widows, in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world.


IN which words are the other two exhortations, or admonitions, namely, the
third, and the fourth, contained: the third, that Gods word gives, and
sets down the rule, not only to do well, but to speak well also. The
fourth, that pure and perfect religion, holy and acceptable service to God,
stands in charity toward the needy, and in purity of our lives.

These two verses contain the other two admonitions. 3 To refrain the tongue,
wherein are two things. 1 admonition it self. 2 The reasons. 1 It causes
error and hurt. 2 It defiles religion.

4 Wherein pure Religion before God consists, namely, in 1 Charity toward
the needy. 2 Purity and innocence in our own lives.


The third admonition of the Apostle, is touching 3. Admonition
the restraint and moderation of the tongue: wherein he teaches us, that the
word of truth whereby we are regenerate and begotten through the will of God:
prescribes unto us, not only a rule of doing well, but of speaking well also.
Wherefore the holy and unfeigned professors of this word, must endeavor
thereby, not only to reform their actions, but also to restrain their
speeches, and moderate their tongues, that they fall not into those vices
whereunto the godless tongue is given: therefore, says he, if any man among
you seem religious, and refrayneth not his tongue, but deceyueth his own
heart: this man's religion is in vain.

This admonition teaches, that the law of God being Psalm. 119.
a lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths: and a thing divinely
inspired from above, to make a man perfect in righteousness, and absolute to
every good work: does not only restrain the unbridled actions of men, but
also refraineth and holds back the 2. Tim. 3;
disordered speeches of their mouths: that both in action and communication,
they may be holy unto the Lord. For this cause have we many exhortations in
the sacred Scriptures of God, to moderate our tongues, and to restrain them.
In stead of many, it may suffice, which the holy Prophet and Prince of Israel
teaches us: If any Psalm. 34.
man love long life, and would see happy days, let him refrain his tongue
from evil, and his lips they speak no guile. Hereof we have heard more,
verse 19. before, and shall hear more 3. chapter, from 2. verse, to 13. verse
thereof.

Solomon setting down the inconvenience of not refraining the tongue,
affirms that life Prou. 18.
and death are therein, and they that love, it should eat the fruit thereof:
showing how dangerous a thing it is to be loose: which who is, is subject to
great danger. Therefore Aristotle the Philosopher, and heathen, sending
Calisthenes the Philosopher to Alexander the great, king of Macedonia:
Aristotle.
oftentimes admonished and commanded him to speak more rarely, and most
pleasantly to the King, because he carried life and death in his tongue. The
which the wiseman foreseeing, says; He that keeps his mouth Pro. 21.
and his tongue, keeps his soul from trouble. And in another place,
comparing a man (whose tongue is unbridled) to a City unwalled, affirms; As
a city lying open, Pro. 25.
and vncompassed with walls: even so is a man that cannot refrain his tongue.

Which when holy David rightly weyed, and advisedly Psalm. 141.
considered, he prays the Lord to set a watch before his mouth, and to keep
the door of his lips. And the son of Sirach to the like purpose cries out;
Who shall Ecclus. 22.
set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom before my lips, that I
fall not suddenly by them, and that my tongue destroy me not. Thus men thinking
themselves to have an absolute liberty to prate and prattle what they lust,
without hurt or danger: by their saucie prattling and brabling, by the evil of
their tongues, they greatly endanger themselves, and so deceive their own
hearts. Neither that only, but by much talk they think to attain to the
opinion of wisdom with men, who only speaking, would be thought to have all
knowledge: but hereby they show their greater folly, and so deceive their
own hearts.

The wise man showing that it is great folly not to bridle and moderate the
tongue, says; That the voice of a fool is in the multitude of words: and
elsewhere to like Eccles. 5.
purpose, A wise man concealeth knowledge, but the hearts of fools publish
foolishnes. The same writes, that wise Pro. 12.
men use few words: then it follows, that such as use many words are fools:
Wherefore, when by much talking Pro. 17.
we think to obtain opinion of wisdom, then most of all we descrie our own
folly, and thereby we deceive our own hearts, and therefore we ought to
refrain our tongues.

Finally, we think our tongues to be given us to prattle at our own
pleasures, but they are given as instruments to set forth the mighty and
manifold power of God, his miracles and wondrous works which he does toward
the children of men: abusing then our toungs at our own pleasure, we deceue our
own hearts. Seeing therefore, by not moderating our tongues, we thus deceive our
selves, and our own hearts: we ought with all carefulnes to bridle and
moderate our tongues by the word of truth.

As not moderating our tongues, we deceive our own hearts, so we descrie our
hypoctisie, we corrupt and defile our religion, and make it vain before God:
therefore ought we to moderate, and refrain our tongues: whose speech is not
good, their religion cannot be acceptable. Wherefore unless we refrain our
tongues, our religion is frustrate, and in vain.

Now the evils and faults of our tongues, from which they not refrained,
deceive our hearts, and make our religion vain, are sundry.

1 Vain talk, idle, frivolous, serving to no profit, to no purpose, prating
and prattling where there is no need: Mat. 12.
for which we shall give account to God, as Christ witnesses; protesting, that
we shall give accounts unto GOD Ephesians. 5.
for every vain and idle word proceeding from us. Saint Paul exhorts the
Saints to put from them all vain and foolish talk, as a thing not becoming
them. From this evil if we refrain not our tongues, our religion is in vain.
For if any man among you seem religious, and refraineth not from this: this
man's religion is in vain.

2 Another evil to be restrained in men, is, when we talk of god, of his word,
of his law and religion: not desirous to reform our lives according unto his
commandments. This is a great evil, and point of halting hypocrifie, whereby
our religion is frustrate and in vain. For to talk of Gods word, and not to
walk in his will, profits or preuayleth nothing to religion: therefore
almighty GOD showing their religion to be but in vain, which talked of him in
their mouths, but followed him not in their hearts, cries out; This people
draws near unto me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me,
worshipping me in vain, teaching doctrines, precepts of men,

David in Gods person, telling the hypocrites that their talking of his
covenants was in vain, in as much as Psalm. 50.
they would not be reformed in their conuersations, says; What have thou to
do to declare my ordinances, and to take my covenants in thy mouth: seeing
thou hate to be reformed, and castest my words behind thee. Our blessed
Savior intimates and witnesses unto men, that to Mat. 7.
call upon him in their words, makes them but hypocrites: and shows their
religion to be vain, when they do not that which he commands: therefore he
says; that not every one that says unto him, Lord, Lord, shall therefore
enter into his kingdom, but such as did the will of his father.

Finally, Saint Paul accounting their religion as 1. Tit.
vain, which talk of God in their mouths, but obey him not in their deeds,
condemns them as hypocrites, who say they know God in word, but deny him in
deeds: being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. From
this vanity and foolish prating if we refrain not our tongues, though we
seem never so religious, yet deceive we our selves, and our religion is in
vain. And yet this is our religion in these days, consisting in lip-labor,
and talking of God and his commandments: but not living according as in his
laws he charge us: and therefore are we not better then very hypocrites. For
if any man among us seem religious, and refraineth not his tongue from this
vanity also, surely this man's religion is in vain.

3 As from these evils our tongues must be refrayned: so from rash judgment of
our brethren, when upon surmised suspicions we condemn them: for this also
makes Mat. 9.
our religion vain. Therefore our Savior, to remove it far from the Saints,
his Church, forewarneth them not to judge, least they be judged: not to
condemn least they be condemned. To whom the Apostle agrees; Judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come, who 1. Cor. 4.
shall lighten things that are in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart
manifest.

In which kind they sin, which by euentes judge and condemn their brethren:
accounting them for most wicked, upon whom the hand of the Lords chastisement
lights. The wicked judged Christ condemned of God, Isai 53. Wisd. 3, and 5.
chap. Job. 4. Psalm. 41. 8.
because he was chastened of the Father. The ungodly condemned the Saints for
despised, because they were subject to affliction in the world. The friends of
Job judged Job wicked, because he was so many ways plagued of God. The people
condemned the Galileans, and those upon whom the tower of Siloe fell, for great
sinners: because of Luke 13. Acts 28.
the heavy hand of God upon them: whose judgment our Savior conde^neth. The
Barbarians at Melta, now called Malta, seeing a viper spring out of the fire,
and light and hang on Paul's hand, judged him a murderer, because of the sight
of the viper, which they thought to have been sent of God, as against a
murderer of men: or some most wicked person.

Of this evil they are also guilty, who with their mouth^^ condemn, and
judge others upon external show, and outward tokens. Such as condemn those for
hypocrites, who stoop in their going: those for arrogant and proud, which go
upright: those for solemn, which are addicted to silence: those for wanton,
and light of life: which are pleasant in talk: those that are spary in their
lives, for misers: such as are comely apparrelled, for lascivious: as his
adversaries did judge Gneus Pompeius for effeminate, because he scratched his
head with one finger: and the Romans judged Fabius for slothful, because in all things he lingered and delaied on, till by his lingering he had preserved
the weal public. Such as familiarly apply themselves to men, they judge as
flatterers: whom they see grave, they condemn for Stoicall: those that bear
injuries, they hold as malicious disse^blers: they which in case resist,
authors of sedition, raisers of tragical disturbance in commonweals: whom
they see religious above others, the^ they have as superstitious: such as are
not come on so far as themselves, they judge as temporizers and carnal
professors. This evil of tongue must be restrained, otherwise, we judging
after outward appearance, which Christ forbids, challenge that to our selves,
which is John 7. John 5. 2. Cor. 5. James 4.
proper to Christ, to whom all judgment is committed: Finally condemning and
judging the law, which we do when we judge our brethren, and in so doing are
not doers of the law but judges: we make our religion vain; so if any man
seem religious, and refraineth not his tongue from rashly judging the
brethren, this man's religion is in vain.

4 Another evil is flattery, a speech and report of false and vain praise
given to a man: when we speak things that are false, to please men, and feed
their humors: when we say what they say, and deny what they deny: when to sooth
men up, we call day, night; light, darkness: sweet, sower: good, evil: And
contrariwise, I say whether in manners or in doctrine: this is an evil of the
tongue, from which who so refraineth not, his religion is vain. Such are
Parasites and flatterers, whose mouths are instruments of false praise. Such
are false Prophets, false teachers, false pastors, which for fear of men, or
for their favor, either suppress the truth, and speak it not: or else
conceive lies, and utter them. This is pernicious in the Church, and in the
Commonweal: in societies and in private families: in all states and degrees of
men: into whose hands it is more dangerous to fall, then into the hands of
Ravens, as Diogenes affirms. For Ravens eat men's bodies dead, but flatterers
devour them, and feed on them living. Wherefore, as of wild beasts tyrants
are worst: so of tame beasts, flatterers. Which thing is so odious unto God,
who is the God of truth, as that they which flatter in their lips, make
their religion vain before him. Wherefore if any man among you seem religious,
and refraineth not his tongue from flattering also, this man's religion is in
vain.

5 Dissimulatio^, when we pretend one thing in our words and speeches, and have
another thing in our hearts: whether it be to God, as hypocrites: or to men,
as counterfets, makes also our religion vain. Vain therefore was the
religion of the Israelites, who promised their Exodus 19 Psalm. 8 Joshua 24 Psalm.
12 Mat. 22
faithful service unto God, yet their hearts were turned after wicked ways,
starting aside like a broaken bow: the religion of Saul, and those wicked ones
which dissembled with David: the religion of the Pharisees and Herodians, which
glosed with Christ in the gospel, the religion of every man and woman, which
has one thing ready in mouth, another covered in their hearts, and so
dissemble in their false tongues, is in vain, and odious before GOD: for if
any man seem religious, and refrayneth not his tongue from this evil also,
this man's religion is in vain.

6 The sixth evil from which we must refrain, is lyeng: which is a false
signification of speech or voice, with intention to deceive. This God to
abandon from his people, willed them they should not lie one to another. Which
the Prophet expounding, exhorts the people Leuit. 25 Zach. 8. Ephesians. 4.
to speak the truth one unto another, and not to lie. The Apostle removing
all the works of the old man, corrupted with deceaueable lusts of the flesh,
from the true professors of religion, and such as were regenerate by the
gospel, whose religion it marreth, exhorts in this wife: Wherefore put away
all lying from you, and speak the truth one to another, for you are members
one of another.

This evil reigns in the tongues of many, even professing religion, and the
Gospel: whose houses are vpholden, whose riches are increased, whose families
are mainteyned, whose children are advanced, whose sons are made Gentlemen
by the lies their fathers and their servants, in their shoppes, in their
warehouses, and in other places have made for advantage. But have we thus
learned Christ? Is not all our profession and religion in vain, by the
falsehood of our tongues? that we may also with the Apostle conclude, that if
any man or woman among us seem religious, devout and holy, yet refraineth not
his tongue from lies, but uses deceit in his lips, even this man's religion is
in vain, as the Apostle avouches.

7 The next evil which corrupts our religion, and makes it vain before
God, is filthy speech, whereby not only our lives are descried to be evil:
but our hearts to be wicked, and our religion counterfette. This I would men
professing godliness, would remember, whose mouths are open oftentimes to great
filthiness, as if thereby their religion were not defiled.

But as Diogenes seeing a fair young man speaking filthily: said, art thou not
ashamed to dravve a leaden svvorde out of an yuiry scabberd: so may we say to
such as whose profession is fair, but their communication filthy: are you not
ashamed to dravve such filthiness ou^ of so holy and precious a calling? and
against them also conclude with this Apostle: if any man among you seem
religious, and here from refraineth not his tongue, this man's religion is vain.

8 Another is slander: whereof chapt. 4. verse 11.

9 Another cursing and execration: chapt. 3. v. 9. and 1. Pet. 3. v. 9.

10 A tenth evil is blasphemy and swearing spoken of chapt. 5. verse 12. Of
all these and every one of them, with such like may we vvorthily say with
the Apostle: if any man among you seem religious, and refraineth not his
tongue from these, but deceives his own heart this man's religion is in vain.

Which thing being true, how many men and women's religion is now in vain,
seeing so many have their tongues bent, and their mouths prepared to al
vanity of speech, all counterfetting with God, all rashness of judgment, al
flattery of words, all dissimulation with men, all lying to their brethren,
all filthiness of talk, all slanderous reproach, all cursed execration, all
blasphemy and vain swearing: But let us which fear God, know, that the word
of God prescribes rules unto our tongues, and teaches to refrain our lips
from all those evils, whereby our religion may be defiled: and let us evermore
hold fast this exhortation of Saint James, If any man among you seem
religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this
man's religion is in vain.

Which place forbids not telling of a truth, reproving of sin, reforming
of the wickedness, confession of faith, defense of justice, admonishing our
brethren, counselling our neighbors, instructing the ignorant, comforting the
feeble minded, or such like duties of love, performed by speech and talk in
men: But those and like vices mentioned before, are here reproved, whereunto
who is addicted, is an hypocrite, and his religion is vain and unprofitable
before God. And this is the sum of this exhortation.

The fourth and last admonition, is touching the true service of God, and pure
religion: Wherein he describes 4. Admonition.
certain effects or properties of that part of religion which most condemns
hypocrites. For many bearing a countenance of religion: yet neither show
forth the fruits of love unto others, neither are they pure and holy in the^
selves, wherefore worthily to be condemned as hypocrites.

Which thing the Apostle here concludes: Pure religion, and undefiled before
God the Father, is this: To visit the fatherless and widows in their
adversity, and to keep our selves unspotted of the world: as if he would say;
Many make fare as they were religious: many set a face on it as if they were
devout: many prerend that they perform service unto God, yet do they neither
walk in charity to the poor-ward, neither in innocency toward themselves,
therefore they are but halting hypocrites, and counterfette Christians: for this
is only true religion before God, to visit the fatherles, and widows, in
their adversity, and to keep a man's self unspotted of the world.

If we will describe religion by her properties and effects, how it is judged
of men, it consists in two things. 1 Charity to the poor, 2 Innocence and
purity of our own lives: so that all that, is but superstition, and
dissimulation, hypocrisy: which is not testified by these two. For which cause
the holy Prophets, the blessed Apostles, our Savior Christ him self, has
condemned that Religion for vain and counterfeite, which has been void of
charity and innocence,

Now that the Apostle says pure Religion, and undefiled before God the
Father, is this: it plainly argues that there is a Religion of hypocrites
allowed and approved with themselves, and with others in the world, but not
with GOD: and a Religion allowed and appooued with GOD, though not with the
world: and this Religion is the Religion which the Saints must profess: and
the true Religion of God: 1. Voca^. Genesis c. 3.
without which all other Religion is superstition, idolatry and hypocrisy.
For without the service of the true God, (the Religion wherein he delights)
even that which seems virtuous and good, is sin: neither can any man please
God, without God himself, says saint Ambrose. For which cause our Savior
Christ condemned Luke 16.
the glorious appearaunce of Religion, because it was not accepted before GOD,
neither agreeing thereunto, but in hypocrisy in the Pharisees: you are they
which justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts: for that
which is highly esteemed among men, is abominable before GOD. Let therefore
hypocrites please themselves as much as they will: yet is not their Religion
the true Religion of God: Wherefore to put a difference betwixt Gods true
Religion, and the Religion which pleases our selves, and others, the Apostle
says: Pure Religion and undefiled before God, even the father, is this.

Of this pure religion there are two properties, Charity, 1. property or
effect of religion.
1 Charity: therein he makes mention but of one effect, or work of mercy,
visiting: understanding notwithstanding, every work, effect, or duty of
love or mercy, by the figure most usual in Scripture, whereby a part is taken
for the wholly: as visiting for all the works of mercy. Senechdoche.


In like manner, he specifieth and mencioneth two persons, the fatherless and
widows: meaning thereby all those our brethren and sisters, which stand in
need of our help, and are to be succored. Specially the fatherless, and
widows, of whom God seems to have the greater care: because they are most
oppressed, despised, wroong, and thrust to the walls: trodden down, and kept
under, as most destitute of aid and help of men in the world: therefore by
name commended in sundry paths and duties by almighty God in the Scripture.
As in the law, Deuteronomy. 10. 18. In the Prophets. Isai 1. 17. Zach. 7. 9. and 10.
verse. Ierem. 22. 3, the Apostle in this place.

Of whom not only himself takes special care, as the princely Prophet
records: He (that is God) is the father of the fatherless, and judge of the
widows, Psalm. 68.
even GOD in his holy Temple: and elsewhere: the Lord keeps the strangers,
he releeueth the fatherless Psalm. 146.
and widows: but he overthrows the way of the wicked: but also commends
the care and defense of them to men, says Lactantius: least any man should
be stayed and holden back with the love of his wife and children, from
sustayning death for righteousness, Lib. 6. insti. ca. 12.
and for the faith of Christ: but with willingness should suffer it, knowing
that he leaves his (dear) unto God, from whom there shall never aid and
succor be wanting, to them. So then this place commends unto us Meaning
wife and children.
the works of mercy and love, to all that need, but specially toward the
fatherless and widows.

Charity is so necessary a property in religion, as that where it is
wanting, there is not only no true service of God, but neither any love of God
at all abiding: For the Apostle says, that who so has this worldly goods,
and sees his brother have need, and shuts 1. John. 3.
up the bowels of compassion against him, the love of God abides not in him.

Saint Paul exhorts thereunto, as to a most necessary 2. Cor. 8.
effect of faith, and fruit of religion, willing the Corinthians, that as they
abounded in every good work, in faith, in word, in knowledge, in diligence,
in love: Romans 15.
so also they should abound in charity. Whereof writing to the Church of
Rome, he calls it the fruit of the faith of the Saints: Which who so ever
performs not, bereaueth himself not only of the name of a Christian, but of
the very nature of man, says Lactantius: Lib. 6. c. 11.
because it is a duty of humanity, to help in the necessity and peril of
man. To the excellent praise whereof it pertains, that the supply of the
Saints need, and the ministering to their want, is called a sacrifice. As Saint
Paul calls the benevolence of the Philippians sent unto Philip. 4.
him, by Epaphroditus their minister, a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
unto GOD: and the author to the Hebrews stirring the people thereunto, wills
Heb. 13.
them to be mindful of ministering to the necessity of the Saints, because
with such sacrifices GOD is pleased.

To the offering whereof, upon the altar of the needy brethren, many things
might move Christians, and true professors of pure and undefiled religion.

1 That in his law and Gospel, the Lord requires this duty of love, and
service to be done: to whom seeing we are infinitely indetted, we herein must be
obedient. Touching which duty what commandments have we Leuit. 19.
in the holy Scripture? Did not Almighty God charge Israel, that they should
leave the gleaning of their harvest, and the remainder of their vintage, that
the poor might thereby be relieved? Gave he not to the same Deuteronomy. 15.
people commandment, that when they came into the land of their inheritance,
if any of their brethren fell into poverty, they should give unto him, and not
be grieved Isai. 58.
therewith, that so they might be blessed from God? Does not God call the
hypocrites, who pretended religion, to this point and property of service, and
holy worship, to break their bread to the hungry: to call again the
wanderer: to cloth the naked, and not to despise their own flesh? Does not
our blessed Savior Luke 6.
exhort men to this effect of religion, and therein to imitate the example of
God? Does not Saint Paul persuade men to distribute to the necessity of the
brethren? Romans 12.
Does he not desire the Church of Galatia to Gal. 6.
do good unto all men, but specially to the household of faith? Does he not
will Timothy his scholar, to 1. Tim 6.
charge the rich men of the world, to be rich in good works, and ready to
distribute? Exhorts not the Heb. 13.
Apostle to the Hebrews, to communicate and distribute to the poor and needy,
because thereby God is well pleased? Do not sundry other Scriptures sound to
the same sense and purpose? Seeing Almighty God in his law: the Prophets in
their writings: our holy Savior in the Gospel: the blessed Apostles in their
Epistles, have hereunto moved: then no doubt the very view and recording of
this commandment, might move all such as profess pure Religion, and
undefiled before God, to this duty of charity.

2 Neither this only, but also the remembrance of our frailty and fickleness
of our worldly condition must move to charity. For such as are rich to day,
may be poor to morrow: our riches are uncertain, our state miserable, our
condition variable: our selves may need to morrow, who to day wallow in all
wealth: we may come to poverty, which now abound in plenty: we may be
pinched with penury, which now enjoy prosperity. To the end therefore, that
we may find mercy in misery, let us show pity in our prosperity: knowing
this, that who so shuts his ears to the cry of the poor, shall cry
himself and not be heard. Our Savior avouches, that with what measure we
Prou. 21. Matt. 7.
meet unto other, other should meet with the same unto as also: if we meet
in a plentiful measure of mercy, we shall have plenteous mercy showed us
again: if we meet in a hard measure of senslesnesse, and want of feeling
our brethrens want: we our selves shall be vnpityed in the time of our
anguish.

This Apostle affirms that there should be condemnation James 2.
merciless, to him that shows no mercy. For assuredly, whosoever in
censuring and rashly condemning his brother: or not in relieuing and helping
him in destresse, shows himself cruel, currish, hard hearted, and
merciless: shall find Almighty God, and men also, hard, severe, merciless,
and rough against him. It is good therefore men should think of themselves in
their brethrens persons: and recount that we our selves in peril deserve not
to be delivered, if in danger we stretch not out our helping hand to
others: neither in necessity to be pitied: if we succor not in need such as
are destressed. This frailty and changeableness, who so weighs and
considers a right: shall easily be moved to this property of religion, and
duty of love, which Saint James commends.

3 That we are members each of each other, and all members of one body: might
it not move us to mutual succor? In the natural body, if one part be
grieved, the 1. Cor. 12.
others are all disquieted: if the heel be pricked, the head stowpeth: the
back boweth: the eyes look: the fingers feel: the hands hold, and every
part endeavors to remove the grief: and when our Christian brethren and
sisters suffer, shall we be senseless? When we are full, shall we think no
man empty? When we are housed, shall we think no man to be harbourlesse? When
we are clothed, shall we persuade our selves that no man then is naked? If we
be whole, is no man sick? If we be sound, is no man sore? If we be free, is no
man bond? If we be vvarme, is no man cold? If we abound, does no man
lack? Shall nature teach our members, mutually to help one another: and shall
not the bond of spiritual incorporation, teach us one to suffer with another,
one to succor another? The Pelican, when hers are sick, with her own blood
succoureth them: and shall we not help in their need our needy brethren,
redeemed and raunsomed with the blood of Christ? Whom assuredly we have not
for our head, neither yet are we his Saints, nor fellow members of this his
mystical body, unless we be careful to succor them in the time of their
need.

4 If we require example: God is rich in mercy and goodness, he gives
abundantly to all men, and reprocheth none: whose example our Savior
commends unto us, to move us thereby to the works of mercy: Be ye
merciful, even as your heavenly father Luke 6.
is merciful.

5 If we look for a president, our Savior Christ is our pattern: who laid
down his life for us, that we should lay down our lives: (much more our
goods) for the brethren. 1. John 3. 16.


6 If reward may allure us, we have not only therefore promise of increase,
and multiplying our store here: as we see was performed to the widow of
Sarepta, whose meal in tubbe, and oil in cruse, though there of daily were
spent, decreased not: because in destresse she relieved 3. Kings 17. Pro. 10.
24. 2 Cor. 9. 6. 8. 9. 10. Phil. 4. 19.
Elias the Prophet: but also of eternal blessing, yea to be received to the
eternal kingdom of Jesus Christ, if we show mercy. For earthly things to
reap heavenly: for temporal, eternal: for transitory, perpetual: how great
a change, how singular a mercy, how incomparable a reward? Of all arts
therefore, says Chrysostom, the Homil. 33. ad pop. Anti. Basil. fol. 109. 2.
page Prou. 19.
most gainefull: and of all usury the only commendable: when by giving to the
poor* we lend to usury unto the Lord, as the wise man writes.

7 If punishment may terrify us: then let us recount, that as God promises
exceeding great reward, both temporal and eternal to the merciful: so he
threatens grievous punishment, both in this life, and in the life to come, to
the merciless, which thing should move us.

8 Finally, if we consider, that by the Apostle it is set down as a property
and effect of true religion, without which our religion is but counterfetting:
our holiness, but halting: our devotion but dissimulation before God: thereby
shall we be stirred up to this duty. Wherefore, if either the care of Gods
commandments, or regard of frail condition, either remembrance of
inseparable conjunction in the mystical bodies: or example of the father,
either president of Christ, or promise of reward: either threatening of
punishment, or respect of true religion, can do any thing with us then let us
be removed to the relieuing the brethren, and to the performance of this duty
of love: whereunto by the Apostle we are exhorted.

The second effect wherein religion appears, is innocence Innocence 2,
property or effect of religion
of our lives, that we keep our selves unspotted of the world: which in all
those which profess his name, in all times, in all places, in all people, God
required as the true mark of religion. Wherefore, when he called Gene. 17.
Abraham from the idolatry of Mesopotamia, to the true service, religion, and
worship of himself, God required this as an effect of his unfeigned religion:
Walk before me, and be perfect. When he had established a government among
his people, and taught them his true Leuit. 11, and 20. etc.
religion, he requires holiness, innocence, integrity in them, as the
effect of their religion: Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy. Our
Savior Christ, the author Mat. 10. and 18.
of Christian religion, calling his from the impuritie of the world, wills
them to be innocent as doves, and to be as babes without maliciousness, and so
to testify their religion. S. Paul prescribing a religious sacrifice Romans 12.
unto the new people of God, forewarneth them to take heed of worldly
corruptions, and not to fashion themselves thereunto: to which purpose that
counsel to Timothy serves singularly, let every one which calls upon
Jesus Christ, depart from 1. Tim. 2.
iniquity. Saint John exhorting men to show their 1. John 2
unfeigned religion by renouncing all worldly wickedness, requires them not
to love the world, nor the things therein. Finally, Saint James here
describing religion by certain inseparable properties and effects, against
hypocrites who pretended religion, yet were careless of charity, and
innocence of life, thereof says in manner following: Pure religion, and
undefiled even before God the father is this: to visit the fatherless and
widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world.

To be clear from the sins and works of worldlings, and wicked persons: to
refrain from fleshly lusts and carnal desires wherinto men are naturally
cast headlong: is to keep our selves unspotted of the world: which the Saints
of God must do, that they may be pure and holy in body and mind: in soul
and spirit: in thought and work: that as chaste virgins they may be presented
2. Cor. 11.
blameless before Jesus Christ.

Now the spots wherewith men are stained, as they are all manner iniquity and
sin, whereunto worldlings are given: so are they these, especially: 1
covetousness: 2 Usury. 3 Extortion, and oppression. 4 Drunkenness and
surfeiting. 5 Adultery, and fleshly uncleanness. 6 Pride, and arrogancy. 7
Ambition, and vaineglorie. 8 Contention, and envy. 9 Maliciousnes, and hatred:
with the like, vvherewithall, as men's lives are defiled, so their religion is
corrupted: herewith who so is stained, their religion is not pure and undefiled
before God: for this is pure religion before God the Father, to visit the
fatherless and vviddovves in their adversities, and to keep himself
unspotted in the world.

The spiritual man therefore, who will have his religion to be pure and
undefiled before God, must abstain from all the works of the flesh: must be
clean from adultery, fornication, uncleanness: void of riot, vvantonnes,
excess, luxuriousnes: far from covetousness, which is worshipping of images:
guiltless of murder, envy, sedition, brawling: contentions: not given to
pride, ambition, vain confidence: but studious of chastity, temperance,
meeknes, gentleness, courtesy, mercy, modesty, patience, long suffering,
goodness, and all manner of virtue, wherein true and undefiled religion
consists. Which thing God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God of all
grace and goodness grant unto us, that we walking in faith unfeigned, in love
not counterfeit, in innocence unspotted: may in all righteousness, and holiness
of life, glorify him in this present world, and after this life ended, may
live with Christ for ever in his eternal kingdom. To whom, with the holy
Ghost, be all power, dominion, and majesty, both now, and for ever. Amen.

The Analysis, or resolution of the second chapter of Saint James.
This second Chap. conteyneth two places: Whereof 1. is of not contemning the
poor in respect of the rich, christian religion not admitting this respect of
persons, from ver. 1. to 14. where there are two things noted. 1. The
proposition, and state of this place, that the religion and faith of Christ
must not be with respect of persons. v. 1. 2. the proof of the proposition,
contening 2 arguments Whereof, 1. From example of such as do the like: therein
3. things. 1. The example it self. 2. 3. 4, 2. The evil therein condemned. 5.
6. 7. 3. The conclusion. 8. 9.
2. From the nature of the law, which they tra^sgresse: therein also ar 3.
things 1. Proposition. v. 10. 2. Confirmation. v. 11. 3. Conclusion. v. 12. 13.


2. Is of good works, to be joined with faith Wherein there are 3. things
noted: Namely, 1. The proposition and state of the place: That faith is vain
and dead, wherewith good works are not joined. v. 14. 2. The proof of the
place, containing 4. reasons, or arguments, From 1. A similitude. 15. 16. 17.
18. 2. An absurdity. 19. 3. A^rahams example. 20 21. 22. 23. Rahabs example.
v. 25.
3. The conclusion. 1. Made. verse. 24. 2. Repeated. ver. 26.



THE SECOND CHAP. OF S. JAMES, THE FIRST VERSE, THE NINTH SERMON.
Verse 1 My brethren, have not the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ, in
respect of persons.


BEfore we come to the particular discourse of these words, it may seem
convenient that we both rippe up the whole Chapter, and also see the cohere^ce
and dependence thereof, with the former. This Chapter, as in the table
appears, may be divided into two places. The first is against respect of
persons, when the poor, being honest and godly, are neglected, contemned and
disdained, in respect of the rich and wealthy of the world: which is against
charity, proceeding from a true faith, which admits no such respect of
persons in the faith and religion of Christ. The second is concerning good
works, which in the saints of god, are joined with faith in Jesus Christ:
Whereof faith void altogether, is vain, dead, and fruitless.

The first place is from the first verse to the fourteenth: and consists of
two particular and special branches. The first is the proposition, contained in
the first verse. The second, the proof and confirmation of the proposition.
This proof conteyneth two reasons: the first from the example of such as do
thus respect men's persons: wherein three things are noted. 1 The example it
self, 2. 3. 4. verses. 2 Is the noting of the evils which are condemned in
those which thus have the faith of Christ in respect of persons, 5. 6. 7.
verses. 3 The conclusion, 8. 9. verses.

The second reason and argument of proof, is from the nature of the law: which
law they transgress, which have the faith of Jesus Christ in respect of
persons. And in this second reason there are also three things to be observed.
1 The proposition, verse 10. 2 The confirmation, verse 11. 3 The conclusion,
verses 12. 13. And this is the sum of the first part of this Chapter.

The second part of the Chapter is touching good works, which as signs,
testimonies, fruits and effects of our faith* are thereunto to be joined in the
Saints of God. In which part there are three things set down. 1 The
proposition, and state of the treatise, verse 14. 2 The proof, containing
four reasons and arguments. The one from a similitude, 15. 16. 17. 18. Another
from an absurdity which might grow, verse 19. 3. From Abraham's example, 20.
21. 22. 23. 4. From Rahabs example, verse 25. 3 The conclusion: which is first
made, verse 24. the^ again repeated, verse 26. And this is the sum of this
second part: And in these two the whole Chapter is consumed and spent.

This being the resolution of the Chapter, we must also see how it hangs
with the former. The dependence and coherence with the former chapter then is
this. Saint James in the first Chapter, from the 21. verse to the end, gave
out certain admonitions, and (as it were) exhortations: which (as fruits or
effects) flowed and rose out of the word of God, whereby we are regenerate: as,
that we ought to receive the word with meeknes: that we must be doers of the
word, not hearers only: that the word of God reformeth and brideleth our
tongues and speech: that true religion, and pure serving of God, consists in
charity and innocence of life: These four proposed in the first Chapter, in
this place the Apostle adds the fifth, which is concerning respect of
persons, which must not be in the religion and profession of the faith of
Christ: Which is from the first, to the fourteenth verse. And 6. admonition,
which is touching good works to be joined with faith: from 14. to the end. And
these hang very well with the former treatise: For if true religion, and
undefiled before God, consist of two things, as in ver. 27. of the former
Chapter appears, in charity and innocence: and respect of persons, being
against charity: and carelesnes of doing well against innocence: the Apostle
very conveniently falls into the discourse of these things. And thus this
Chapter hangs very well together with the other, and has a necessary
dependence therewith.

And as religion consists in charity first, then in innocence of life: so
the apostle first forewarneth of that which is contrary to charity and love;
namely, respect of persons. Secondly, of that which is contrary unto
innocence: carelesnes of good works, and virtue, the fruits of faith and
religion.

These things being thus premised, the first place or part of this Chapter, is
concerning respect of persons, which cannot stand with Christian religion, nor
charity: 5. Admonition,
And it is the fifth admonition given by the Apostle. In 1. part of this
Chapter.
which I have noted two things. 1 The proposition. 2 The confirmation. The
former of these two; that is, the proposition, is contained in the first verse,
set down unto you: Wherein I observe

Two things. Namely, 1. The persons whom he admonishes: the Saints, or the
brethren. 2. The thing whereof he admonishes: that they have not the faith of
Christ in respect of persons.

1 The persons whom Saint James admonishes here, are the brethren, to whom he
gives this attribute, and calls them by the name of brethren: which thing
he does very conuemently, in as much as in the discourse he is to admonish
them of a duty of love: whereunto they ought to be the more prompt, in that
they are brethren: therefore says he; My brethren.

1 Brethren in holy Scriptures are sundry ways taken. 1 They are termed
brethren which are of the stock of Adam: of whom, as of one stock and blood,
the whole world, and all mankind was made: therefore in a general acception
and taking of brethren, all men in the Acts 17.
whole world are brethren. Thus the poor and the rich, the noble and the base
botne, the wise and the foolish, the learned and the ignorant, the master and
his servant, the Sovereign and the Subject, the teacher and the scholar, the
Prince and the people, are brethren.

2 More narrowly and properly they are called brethren, who come of the same
patents, who have the same father and mother, or at the least one of them; as
Cain and Abell were brethren, properly and fully: to whom Seth Genesis 4.
after the death of Abell, was also brother: for they were the sons of Adam
and Euah, the same parents. Ismael and Genesis 25. Genesis 30. and 35.
Isaac having Abraham for their father, were brethren, though the children of
diverse mothers. Jacob and Esau, being the sons of Isaac and Rebecca, were
brethren. Joseph and Benjamin, the two sons of Jacob by Rachel, were properly
brethren, in as much as they had both the same father, and same mother also.
And they which have the same parents, either both, or one at the least, are
called Genesis 13.
natural brethren, because they draw their beginning, and natural birth from
one fountain, and from the same parents.

3 Besides these, after the manner of the Hebrews, they are called brethren
who come of one line and race, albeit in diverse degrees: So the Hebrews called
their cousins and kinsmen, brethren: as Abraham, to appease and stay the debate
and strife betwixt his heardmen and Lots, his nephew, calls Lot (his brothers
son) brother: Let there be no strife between us and our heardmen, for we are
brethren.

Thus the cousins of Christ, after this phrase of the Hebrews, are called his
brethren. When our Savior Luke 8. Mat. 12.
Christ was preaching within the house to the people, there came news to him,
that his mother and brethren stood without, desirous to speak with him: and
they which were there called his brethren, were James, Ioses, Simon, and Judas
the cousins of Christ, and the sons of Marie Cleopha, sister to the blessed
virgin: as in the next place and Chapter of the Evangelist is recorded, who
reports, Mat. 13.
that the Jews seeing the wonderful works and miracles which he did, in
murmuring and disdainful manner spoke of him and his kindred, and said; Is not
this the Carpenters son? is not his mother, Mary? are not his brethren, James
and Ioses, Simon and Judas? These were not his natural brethren, neither the
sons of Mary the virgin, but his cousins germane, and the sons of Alpheus,
the husband of Mary Cleopha, the sister of the blessed virgin. S. John calls
Christ's kinsmen, who in reproachful John 7
manner willed him to depart from them, and to go into Judea, to show
himself unto his Disciples, by the name of brethren: wherefore he said; that
in the feast of Tabernacles his brethren said unto him; Depart hence, and go
into Judea, that thy Disciples may see the works thou do: calling his
kinsfolk by the name of brethren, according to the speech of the Hebrews.
Jacob coming Genesis 29.
to Rachell the daughter of Laban, tells her that he was her fathers brother,
and the son of Rebecca. Rebecca was sister to Laban, and Laban uncle to
Jacob, yet when he properly speaking, should have said; I am thy fathers
nephewe, he says; I am his brother: which was common to the Hebrews. And
Laban himself, beating a price with verse 15.
Jacob what he would take to serve him, calls Jacob brother, after the same
manner; though thou be my brother, yer shall thou not serve me for naught.

Thus both in the old, and also in the new testament, the holy Ghost using the
phrase of the Hebrews, calls such as are but kinsfolk, and of kind, as
cousins, by the name of brethren, using the word Brother, much more largely.

4 To come nearer unto the Apostle, in the whole book of God, both the old,
and also the new testament, they are often called brethren, which were of the
same religion; which served the same true and living God; which were of the
same profession. After which acception of brethren, the Hebrews in the old
law, and the Christians under the Gospel, are brethren. Moses therefore,
seeing Exodus 2. Acts 7.
two Hebrews contend and strive together, to reconcile them, and to stay the
contention, asks them why they strove together seeing they were brethren: yet
brethren only in respect of their religion, wherein they agreeing, were called
brethren. Which is also the meaning of the law, which willed the Israelites,
when they came Deuteronomy. 15.
into the land of Canaan, if therein any of their brethren fell into poverty and
decay, they should help him, relieve him, succor him: whereunto almighty God
respected, Deuteronomy. 25.
when for a time, for the hardness of their hearts, he forbidding the people to
take of their brethren: suffered them to take upon usury of strangers:
accounting all the Jews as brethren, because they served the true and living
god; but the Nations and people of other Countries, as strangers: because they
agreed not with them in their religion. In which sense the law speaks, when
it either forbids, or permits this or that to be done unto the brethren.

The new testament following the old herein, and the Apostles and holy men of
God in the primitive church, imitating the examples of the Saints in the time
of the law and Prophets, call in like manner those brethren, which are of the
same religion and profession of the Gospel. Wherefore Saint Peter (immediately
after Christ's ascension) speaking to the Disciples and professors of the Acts
1.
Gospel, made this oration unto them; Men and brethren, this Scripture must
needs have been fulfilled, which the holy Ghost by the mouth of David, had
spoken before of Judas, which was guide to those which took Jesus. Acts ^.
Men and brethren. Not long after speaking unto the people, after the
discension of the holy Ghost, wherewith they being replenished, were thought to
have been drunk with new wine: in his sermon then made, he cries out: Men and
brethren. I may boldly speak unto you of the Patriarch David, etc. The twelve
Apostles ordayning Acts 6.
Deacons in the Church, speaking to those which professed the Gospel, say in
this manner: wherefore brethren, look you out among you, seven men of honest
report, and full of the holy Ghost, and of wisdom, whom we may appoint to
this business. Saint Paul in his Sermon Acts 13.
at Antiochia in Pisidia, gives this appellation to the professors: Men and
brethren, children of the generation of Abraham, and whosoever among you
fears God: to you is the word of this salvation sent: and a little after: Be
it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, Verse 38.
that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. Thus
must we take brethren, when in their Epistles the Apostles call the Saints
brethren: as Paul almost in every Epistle: S. Peter, and S. John, happily, not
rarely, use it: reputing them for brethren, who profess the same faith and
religion of Christ. In which sense our Apostle is to be taken also, who in
this proposition noting the persons whom he admonishes, calls them his
brethren: My brethren.

And this is the holy and spiritual brotherhoode, whereinto we are knit in
Christ, in whom, and by whom, we are the sons of God, and an heavenly and
holy brotherhood among our selves.

The Saints of God may well here be called brethren: 1 Because they have one
spiritual, ghostly, and heavenly father, which is God: who is father of us
all: of whom 1. Cor. 8.
are all things, and we in him. Which Paul uses as an argument, to prick and
provoke us unto love: there is one Ephesians. 4.
God and father of all, which is above all, and through you all, and in you
all: therefore our Savior makes God his father, and the father of all the
Saints: I ascend to my father, John 20.
and your father: my God, and your God.

2 As because we have one spiritual father, we are brethren: so because we
have one spiritual mother, we are brethren: now as God is our ghostly Father:
so is the Church our mystical mother: that most chaste spouse of Christ, which
has brought us forth by a new birth: in whose sweet bosom we are noursed:
into whose happy lap we are gathered* with whose fruitful breasts we are
fed: who daily cherishes us for her own, with the sincere milk of the word:
with the exceeding comfort of the Sacraments: and brings us up under the most
wholesome discipline of Jesus Christ: that we might be holy and blameles before
him through love. Who^ if we agnize not, and recount as our mother, neither may
we presume Ephe. 1.
to think God to be our father: for such mutual conjunction there is betwixt
God and his Church, as who so has not her for his mother, cannot have God for
his father, as S. Cyprian very well writes. Christians therefore, De simpli
praelato.
and the unfeigned professors of true religion, having the Church for their
common and mystical mother, are a mystical and spiritual brotherhood among
themselves.

3 Neither that only, but they are also begotten with one seed of their new
birth and regeneration: which is James 1.
the immortal seed of the word. This the Apostle Saint James has foretold,
and foretaught us: when disputing of the causes of our new birth, he says: of
his own will begat he us, with the word of truth, that we should be the
first fruits of his creatures. Saint Peter thereunto subscribeth: 1. Pet. 1.
being borne again, not of mortal, but of immortal seed of the word of
God. Saint Paul thereunto agrees, protesting to the Church of Corinth, that he
1. Cor. 4.
had begotten the^ through the Gospel. Wherefore as men springing from the same
seed of the same parents, are brethren in nature: so Christians in having the
same seed of the word of God: whereby they are mistically begotten again and
regenerate, are spiritually brethren, and so reputed: so that the saints of God
are to be counted brethren, because they are all begotten with the immortal
seed of the word of God, the instrument of their regeneration.

4 If Christ vouchsafe us the name of brethren, and so we have him as a common
brother: then are we therefore also brethren by right among our selves. For as
those men, which have one third for their brother, are brethren among
themselves in nature: as James and Ioses having Jude Matt. 13.
for their brother: so that he being one third, and brother to both, they must
therefore be brethren betwixt themselves: so all Christians having Jesus Christ
as their elder brother, are brethren by grace among themselves also. Now that
Christ is our brother, and so vouchsafes us, it is apparent: John 20.
thereof assuring us, he tells Mary, that she must go to his brethren, the
apostles: and tell the^ that he was ascended to his father, and their father:
to his God, and their God. Now Matt. 22.
that which in special was spoken unto them, our Savior applies generally to
all the Saints: who so shall do my fathers will which is in heaven, the same
is my brother, sister and mother. The author to the Hebrews avouches the same,
out of David: I will declare thy name to my Psalm. 22. Heb. 1. 2.
brethren in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee. And a little
after, inferring this as granted, he says: It became him in all things to
be like his brethren, that he might be merciful, and a faithful high
Priest in things appertayning to God. Finally, Saint Paul: those whom he
knew before, has he also predestinate, to be like the image of his son,
Romans 8.
that he might be the first borne among many brethren. Christians then
having Christ as their elder brother, are therefore called brethren by right,
among themselves.

5 Finally, inasmuch as the Saints divide the same inheritance among them,
therefore are they called brethren. For brethren they are, as Aristotle writes,
among who^ the Ethico. 9.
same inheritance is divided: yea they which divide the same lands, living,
patrimony, possession, goods or riches are commonly reputed brethren: the sons
and saints of god, communicate the same inheritance, divide the same kingdom
of their heavenly father among them: are coheires, and iointheires of the
heavenly patrimony, eternal life, therefore brethren. S. Paul exhorting
Christians to unity and love, draws his reason from the inheritance of the
Saints: we Ephe. 4.
have all one hope of calling: we all communicate the same inheritance of
eternal life: we all look for the same kingdom: therefore must we live in
concord and unity. Saint Peter shows in like manner, that there is one
inheritance, one common kingdom, the same promises of life 2. Pet. 1.
to all the Saints of God: wherefore he says, that they all are by the same
promises made partakers of the same heavenly nature. In regard therefore of
their inheritance, which is one to all the Saints, they are also brethren.

And this divine and heavenly brotherhoode is violate and broken, when either
by erroneous doctrine, or corruption in religion, or dissension in opinion, or
disdainful contempt, the poor and true Saints, are disquieted and troubled.
Frater fere alter: almost another* equal, of like condition.


The diligent consideration of this holy brotherhood greatly nourishes amity,
and cherishes love among the Saints, whereunto respect of persons is opposed:
and therefore, the more effectually to move them to love, whereof he
afterward speaks: the Apostle in the first place noting the persons, calls
them brethren: which brotherhood carefully remembered, shall both remove respect
of persons from them, and cherish love in their hearts and bosoms, whose
condition and calling is like and equal.

The Saints whom he calls brethren, being the persons 2. The thing it self.
whom he admonishes, in the next place comes the thing it self whereof they
are admonished: that they have not the faith of Christ in respect of persons:
wherewith, true love, true charity, true religion cannot stand nor consist:
wherein the Saints are given to understand, that they must not profess
Christian religion in respect of persons: as reuerencing, regarding, respecting
the rich and wealthy men of the world: and neglecting, disdaining contemning
the poor: but rather in their public meetings and assemblies, brotherly and
lovingly to embrace one another, without disdainig the poor brethren, who
being of the same heavenly and holy brotherhood, whereby they are of equal
condition before God: ought not then to be contemned or neglected of men: have
not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons.

1 What is here meant by faith? Christian religion, the true service of Christ:
the profession of the Gospel: whereunto respect of persons is contrary. For if
pure religion and undefiled before God, be this, to visit the fatherless and
widows in their adversities, and to regard the poor in their miseries, as
before was taught us: then contrary hereunto is the contempt of the poor, and
preferring of the rich, which respect of persons is here condemned.

2 Christ is called the glorious Lord in this place: sometime to like purpose
is he called the Lord of glory, by S. Paul to the Corinthians, when he says,
that none 1. Cor. 2.
of the Princes of this world did know Christ: for had they known him, they
would never have crucified the Lord of glory.

Christ may be called the Lord of glory, 1 Because he is full of majesty,
power and glory, at the right hand Philip. 2.
of God. Which glory Saint Paul noting unto men, affirms that God his father
had highly exalted him, and given him a name above all names, that at the name
of Jesus, every knee should bow, of things in heaven, things on earth, and
things under the earth: and every tongue should confess Jesus Christ to be
Lord, to the glory of God. And in another place to like purpose, entreating of
the same glory of Christ at the right hand of God, avouches, Ephesians, 1.
that God had raised up his son Christ, and set him at his right hand in
heavenly places, far above all principalities, and might, and power, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in the
world to come. Which the author to the Hebrews calls, the right hand of
majesty in highest places. Which glorious Heb. 1.
exaltation, S. Peter expressing, writes that Christ is at the right hand of
GOD, gone into heaven, to whom 1. Pet. 1.
the powers and angels, and might are subject: this being Heb. 1.
a glory far above the glorious and most excellent condition of Angels, to
whom the Lord never said, Sit at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
footstool: and this glory being proper unto Christ our Lord: he may be
called our glorious Lord, or the Lord of glory. 2 Christ Isai. 53. Zach. 9.
is the Lord of glory, because howsoever he first came in baseness and great
humility: yet at his second appeaing and coming, he shall come in
unspeakable glory: as the Scriptures have avouched. The holy Evangelists with
one mouth, as it were, describing the coming of our Lord Matt. 24. Luke 21.
Mark 13.
Jesus Christ to judgment: affirm that he should come in the clouds, with
great power and glory. S. Matthew setting down the manner of the general
judgment, the summoning and citing of all creatures before Christ, and the
sentence of Mat. 25.
judgment which should be pronounced to al: writes that when the son of man
should come in his glory, and all his holy angels with him: the^ should he sit
upon the throne of his glory, and all nations should be gathered before him:
and that he should divide the one from the other, as a shedheard divides the
sheep from the goats, and set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on
his left: and say to the sheep, Come ye blessed of my father, receive the
kingdom prepared for you: but to the goats: depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. Saint Jude the
Apostle entreating of this glory of Christ, which he proves out of Enoch,
writes thereof in this wise: Behold the Lord comes with Jude v. 14.
thousands of his saints, to give judgment against al men. Accompanied with so
glorious a troop and train of his saints: his coming is glorious. S. Paul
painting out the same matter unto us, and showing the glorious coming of our
Savior Christ: avouches, that the Lord Jesus should descend from heaven with
a shoute, and with the voice of 1. These. 4.
the archa^gel, and with the trumpet of God. The archangel being the harminger,
or the proclaimer of Christ's coming: the trumpet of God sou^ding out the same
to all the world, does not a little show the glory of Christ's coming. His
coming therefore being so glorious he is the glorious Lord, or the Lord of
glory, as the Apostle calls him.

3 Christ, to conclude, is a glorious Lord, because he brings and aduanceth
his servants to immortal glory after his appearing in judgment. For he
exalts and lifts John 12
them to his eternal kingdom of glory, as himself of himself witnesses to the
Jews: whom he tells, that when by death upon the cross, he should be lifted
up, and so exalted to his kingdom: he would draw all men, (all that believe)
unto him, to the same glory. To which purpose, he prays John 17.
unto his father: father I will, that they whom thou have given me, be with me
even where I am, that they may behold, that my glory, which thou have given me.
Whereof he assures his Church in the person of the disciples: as my Luke 22.
father has appointed unto me a kingdom: even so I appoint unto you, that you
may eat and drink in my kingdom, and sit and judge the twelve tribes of Israel.
Unto the real possession whereof, he calls all his saints, in the sentence
Mat. 25.
of the general judgment to them, by him pronounced: when with most comforable
voice he cries now unto them: Come ye blessed of my father, possess the
kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. S. Paul Col. 3.
subscribeth hereunto: We are dead, and our life is hid with Christ in God:
when Christ which is our life shall appear, the^ shall we also appear with him
in glory. Wherein the apostle assures us, that howsoever our glorious condition
by reason of worldly miseries, calamities and afflictions whereunto wear here
subject, is, as it were, hid: yet shall wehaue the accomplishme^t of our glory
at Christ's coming: when we shall be exalted to our glory, which we have in
Christ Jesus. Saint John disputing of the glory 1. John 3.
which we shall enjoy by Christ, and the excellent dignity and calling to that
immortal glory, whereunto at his coming, by him, the Saints shall be exalted,
says* dearly beloved, we are the sons of God: but it is not manifest what we
shall be: and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him. So that
albeit in this life we receive not the perfect measure of our glory: yet when
he comes to judge the world, our glory shall be revealed, and we made like
him, partakers of the like and same, Romans 8.
though not of equal glory with the son of God, Christ Jesus. This is that
glorious liberty of the sons of God, whereunto the saints are brought by
Jesus christ our Lord: not only himself full of majesty and glory, but
appearing to the world in the last day, in excellent glory; and then making
all his servants partakers of the like glory: is for these and like respects
in Scripture, called the glorious Lord, or the Lord of glory. This glory of
Christ, yea this glory of his poor saints, if we would esteem as we ought:
there would not be such respect of persons as there is among men: to esteem of
the rich and wealthy, though profane and wicked: and to contemn and
disdainfully account of the poor, albeit virtuous and godly.

3 To have this faith of Christ our glorious Lord in respect of persons, is to
esteem the faith, religion, and profession of Christ, by the outward
appearance of men. Which this Apostle here condemning, says: My brethren,
have not the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons.
Which place gives us occasion to consider these four things. 1 What respect
of persons is. 2 That respect of persons in all things, and all men, by the
scriptures of God is coudemned. 3 How many ways respect of persons is had, and
offense thereby committed. 4 That respect of persons cannot stand with the
faith, religion, and profession of the gospel, neither with christian charity,
and love: of all those which call upon Jesus Christ, especially to be nourished
and cherished.

1 What is respect of persons? it is to respect any thing, besides the cause
and matter it self, which only ought of us to be considered: whereby we
decline from the matter, to the man: from the thing, to the person: and swerve
from equity, righteous judgment, and true estimation of things. Which thing
may appear more evident, by examples one or two set down and considered. If
then for example sake, two men labor in the Church or common wealth, for one
and the same office, upon a worthy man only to be conferred: the one very
worthy, and fit for the place, but neither kinsman, friend, familiar, nor of
acquaintance: the other, not worthy, yet near unto us by birth, linked with us
in league of love, of our familiar and best acquaintance: to look unto kindred,
familiarity, and acquaintance: and not to the worthiness of the man, and
necessity of the place, whereunto we ought to have regard: this is respect of
persons: for we regard not so much the worthiness which ought to be in him, whom
we should thereunto promote, as we do to his person whom we have promoted. In
like manner, if two men have committed like trespass, thereby deserving either
Bridewell, Newgate, or Tiburne, or any such like punishment: yet the one our
friend, rich, honorable: the other a stranger, poor, miserable: to spare the
one for his riches, honor, friendship: and to punish the other, is respect of
persons, and falling from justice. If two stand in need of our help, the one
lewd, yet near unto us: the other honest, yet further of: to have regard to
kindred, familiarity or any such respect, and not to the commandments of
Christ, Give to every one that asks, and to him Luke 6. Gal. 6.
that would borow, turn not away: and to the rule of S. Paul, while we have
time, let us do good to all men: but especially to those of the household of
faith: is respect of persons. in the assemblies and meetings of Christians, to
regard one for his riches, another for his glory, a third for his nobility,
or for like respects: and to disdain others for their poverty, baseness, and
meannes of condition: is respect of persons here condemned: have not the faith
of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons.

Thus then to look unto, or respect any thing, beside the matter and cause it
self only to be regarded: is respect of persons. To which evil it
apperteineth to have consideration of kith or kin; of sex or kind;
affinity or consanguinite; nobility or auncientrie; friendship or
familiarity; condition or country; birth or parentage; pomp or riches; power
or might, or such like: To fix our affections upon external things; to
esteem according to the outward appearance of men; and in regard thereof,
either to favor, or to contemn them: to account of the^, or to disdain them:
and in regard of like consideration, either to do for favor, or not to do
for fear, any thing against equity, justice, charity, is respect of persons.
When we see rich, mighty, honorable men, adorned with costly array, decked with
gold and precious pearls, atte^ded upon with great trains of men: to judge
according to this outward appearance, and to have them in account and
admiration, with the contempt of the poor, which are religious, zealous,
virtuous and honest: is to have the faith of Christ in respect of persons:
whereof to beware, the Apostle admonishes the Saints.

2 Which sin, as pernicious and perilous in all causes, in all persons, at
all times, the sacred Scripture condemns as a thing most repugnant to
equity, justice and charity. God almighty ordeyning laws whereby the
commonwealth Leuit. 19.
of Israel might most happily be governed: commands that they should
respect neither poor nor rich: but have a sound and simple eye to justice.
Moses Deuteronomy. 1.
in his informations to the Judges and Magistrates of the people, charge them
not to regard either Jew or stranger: but to judge equally betwixt man and
man, the small and the great, neither to fear the face of man: which who so
does, respects men's persons. And exhorting the officers not to wrest
judgment, requires them to respect Deuteronomy. 16.
no man's person: for thereby no doubt, the law, whose tenor is love, is
wroong and wrested of men.

The princely prophet, seeing how men swerve away Psalm. 82.
from true judgment, by partiality and respecting the persons of men: cries
out against the Judges and magistrates o^ his time therefore; How long will you
judge unjustly, and respect the persons of the wicked? whom Solomon his son
following in that opinion, condemns the same as Pro. 18.
hurtful and dangerous among men: It is not good to accept the person of the
wicked in judgment: and again, Pro. 24.
it is not good to have respect of any man's person in judge meant. If god forbid
respect of men's persons in civil judge ments: shall it not much more be
condemned in matters of religion? Our Savior therefore, to remove al sinister
John 7.
judgment and respect of persons from the professors of religion: wills that
men judge not according to the out ward appearance, but according to righteous
judgment: giving a most divine and heavenly admonition to al me^, to judge
according to the truth of things, not to regard men's persons, least thereby
they were turned away from righteousness in judgment: as were the foolish
Jews, who Mat. 13.
seeing his baseness, accounted him for an abject of Galile, the son of a
poor Carpe^ter, whose kindred was of mean condition: and in respect of his
person they condemned him, not looking to the matter and truth which he
preached among them. S. Paul seeing this respect of men's persons, and esteeming
by the outward appearance of men: 1. Tim. 5.
wisely and well forewarneth his Scholar Timothy to do the duty of a
Minister, without preferring one to another: neither to do any thing
partially. Finally, our Apostle in this place agreeably to the Scriptures,
admonishes the brethren not to have the faith of Christ in respect of persons.
Thus then both in the old and in the new testament: is this evil condemned as
repugnant to justice, contrary to charity, dissonant and disagreeing to the
gospel of Christ.

3 This evil is diversely committed, both generally and particularly of men. 1.
When in our meetings and Christian assemblies, we account of men not for their
virtue* religion, honesty: but for their countenance they bear, the pomp
they show, their riches wherewith they are endued. This seems to have been
committed by me^ in their public meetings in S. James his time: wherein they
measured and esteemed Christian religion and the faith of Christ, James 2.
according to the outward appearance of men: reputing those that carried
greatest pomp and show, the most religious: By which mean the poor which were
religious in deed, became vile, contemptible and disdained. Which evil has
overwhelmed our church and country: for now in these times, wherein Lady money
and Queen riches reign over men, as it never did more in the world: every man
is so much esteemed and regarded, how much he is worth and as he is great in
honor, and so according to his riches and honor, so is his estimation: be they
otherwise murderers, extortioners, oppressors, caterpillars, usurers,
covetous, adulterers, epicures, blasphemers, dru^kerds, or what soever. Thus
the wicked for riches and worldly pomp are regarded: the poor for their
baseness are contemned, thrust to wall, ouerruled, be they never so honest.
Whereby it comes to pass, that seeing all things now are measured and
esteemed by riches, glory and worldly pomp: and no regard of honesty, no
reward for virtue, no place for religion: therefore all men give themselves to
heaping and hoording up of riches, to bravery of apparel, to hunting after
honor and worldly preferment: that for the one, or the other, they may be
esteemed among men. Thus covetousness, pride, ambition, and vainglorie is
fostered, nourished, and chearished greatly: virtue, religion, true honesty,
is depressed and cast down. Thus to measure and esteem the religion and faith
of Christ, by outward appearance, and in Christian assemblies and public
meetings, to prefer the rich, wealthy, honorable, and pompous persons, with
the contempt and disdain of the poor brethren, is one way whereby the faith of
Christ is had in respect of persons.

2 Moreover, men have the faith of Christ in respect persons, when in the
Sacraments of the Church we have respect to men's persons: as, by ministering the
Sacraments with greater reverence and care, to the rich, then to the poor:
when at the Lords table we disdain to join the the poor and the rich
together. The Sacraments equally belong to all: like reverence ought to be used
in ministering them to the poor, as to the rich: the Lords table is common to
all, whereat (says Saint Chrysostom) the subject differs not from the
Souetaigne and Prince: neither 2. Cor. hom 18.
the Priest from the people. To part them therefore in the administration of
Sacraments, and to prefer the rich with the contempt of the poor, is also to
have the faith of Christ in respect of persons: which is here condemned. Thus
the rich, mighty, and honorable, who disdain herein their poor Christian
brethren, sin: thus such ministers, as herein please and delight the humors
of the wealthy, with discountenancing of the godly brethren, offend also.

3 Professors and hearers have the faith of Christ in respect of persons, when
they hear the word of God only for the man's sake, not for the words sake: or
when they hear it of this man, and not of another, because of his person.
Wherein many grievously offend in our days. Such as will hear none but those
that have taken degrees of school. Which thing though it be worthily accounted
of among all wise men, yet therefore contemning others which have not like
degrees, yet happily equal talents: is respect of persons. Such as will hear
this man because he is formal, and not another because he refuses some
ceremonies in the Church: or this man, because he refuses, and not another
because he admits these indifferent things: they also have the faith of
Jesus Christ in respect of persons. Such as hear this man because he is ever
inueying against Bishops, pluralities: two liuinges, Albeit they scarce make
one.
and contemn such as have the liuinges, and therein labor as learnedly, as
painfully, as fruitfully, as others: they in like manner have the faith of
Christ in respect of persons.

Thus they hear the word now, not for the words sake, but for the man's sake:
thus they decline from the thing to the person, and so are partial in their
hearing. For the word is the word, whether a Doctot of divinity preach it, or
a man learned, yet not graduat: whether one subscribing to ceremonies, or not
subscribing, whether one with one living or with two livings, whether this man
As they term small charges or benefices.
or that man preach it. Wherefore, not indifferently to hear it of al, but for
this or that respect to hear it of one not of another: is to have the faith of
Christ in respect of persons, and a sin worthily condemned, even in them,
which in outward show pretend greatest holiness, perfitest religion, most
fervent zeal to the word: which unless they leave, and thereof unfeignedly
repent, I protest unto the^, in the fear of God, that they do against duty,
that they flatter themselves in their own folly: that their religion is not
pure and undefiled before God: that they have the faith of Jesus Christ in
respect of persons, and therefore are guilty of great iniquity and ungodliness,
before the Lord: even of peevish curiosity. The Paschall Lamb was commanded
to be eaten, the quarters, the head, the feet, the purtenance: it had been
great peeuishnes, and vain Exodus 12.
curiosity for the people to have said; We will choose this piece, and we
that: we the quarters, and we the head: we the feet, and so every one what
him lusted: where all were commanded to eat all: Even so is it peevishness
for us to choose what we will hear, or of whom: when we must hear all the will
of God, and that of all Preachers.

Finally, in this kind they sin before God most horribly, who therefore will
not hear their own, or other Prechers, because they inueigh sharply against
their pride, their bravery, their flaunting ruffes, their colored hair,
their diversity of starches, their borrowed frilles, and such like vanities:
against their vsuries, extortions, covetousness, blasphemies, and all manner
iniquity. This is also a great point of ungodliness, a manifest token of
counterfeit religion, a plain argument of halting hypocrisy, and the having of
the faith of Christ in respect of persons by the Apostle no doubt, as other
kinds, condemned. To Heb. 13.
hear one with disgrace of another: to hear strangers with disdainful
contempt of our own Preachers: to run Acts 20. 28. 1. Pet. 5. 2.
and hurrie after new men, and let our ordinary Pastors, (whom the holy ghost
has placed over us) to preach and speak to the walls: is not only
discredit to them, and great discouragement, so that they labor not with
joy, but with great grief, which is a thing unprofitable to the Heb. 13.
people, but also disobedience to the laws, rebellion against God, neglect of
duty, a point of resistance unto the holy Ghost, by whom they are placed over
us.

4 Again, we have the faith and religion of Christ in respect of persons, when
we hold that only for true religion, which has succession of many
Bishops, confirmation of diverse Councels, defense from sundry Princes,
continuance of many years, regard had to these circumstances, not to the
truth it self, whereunto they must have respect: Thus might and did the jews
defend their idolatry against the Prophet Jeremy, from succession Ierem. 44.
of Priests, authority of Princes, continuance of time: thus our adversaries
the Papists, by the like means measure the religion of Christ, and therefore
have it in respect of persons: when they rather respect the succession of their
Romish Bishops, the consent of Councels, called by themselves: defense of
Princes, either bewitched with the entising strumpet of Babylon, or ouerruled
by the authority of the Pope himself: Continuance of time, which serves for
defense of all idolatry and iniquity of the heathen: then the word it self,
grounded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Ephesians. 2.
Christ himself being the head corner stone. Thus have they also the faith of
Jesus Christ in respect of persons.

5 What, when for gain and advantage, we can make the Gospel to serve men's
pleasures, and do apply it to men's humors, which is making marchaundise of the
gospel, reproved by Paul, have we not the faith of Christ 2. Cor. 2.
in respect of persons?

6 What, when either for fear or favor we spare some, and bitterly inueigh
against others: not once touching some, and for the same or some less fault,
condemn others to the bottomless pit of destruction: are we not partial in
our selves? and have we not the faith of Christ in respect of persons? The
Apostle condemning all these, but specially the first kind, exhorts the
brethren not to have the faith of our glorious Lord in respect of persons.

4 This evil cannot stand with Christian profession: the Gospel teaches
that with God is no respect of Acts 10.
persons: but that they all which fear God, and work righteousness, are accepted
through the joyful tidings of salvation Gal. 3.
by Jesus Christ, in whom there is neither male nor female, bond nor free,
neither rich nor poor: but they are all alike unto him, The sound of this
Gospel went not to the rich, noble, honorable, and mighty men of the world
alone; but it was preached to the poor also. Hereby are we united into an holy
brotherhood: and this brother hood implies equality in this case, so that the
rich may not be regarded, and the poor neglected, but the Spiritual
brotherhoode is violate and broaken. Through the Gospel we become all of us
members of one body: each of us 1. Cor. 12.
members of each other: and all members of Christ our head. If then for riches,
honor, worldly pomp, we esteem and count of men, and not for their union with
Christ, and their incorporation with him: we fall away from Christian religion.
Thus the respect of men's persons, and esteming religion by outward appearance
of men, cannot stand with the faith of Christ: which teaches us to embrace
Christians with brotherly love, and not to regard one with the contempt of
another: which as a thing unseemly our calling, repugnant to love, contrary to
our profession, S. James in his proposition condemning, exhorts the brethren
not to have the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons.
And these are the two things in the first place, and in the proposition or
state of this Treatise observed: the persons whom he admonishes: and the thing
whereof he admonishes. My brethren have not the faith of our glorious Lord
Jesus Christ in respect of persons.

Now this glorious Lord, even our Savior Jesus Christ, who has loved us, and
given himself for us, to Ephesians. 5. Tit. 2.
be a sacrifice of a sweet smell unto God: give us grace so to esteem of our
Christian brethren, as that we prefer not one to the disgrace and contempt
of another: but that we equally esteeming them all, as bought with the blood of
the same Lamb immaculate and undefiled; may have a right estimation and
judgment of Christian profession: and that men without respect of persons
walking sincerely, may glorify God, and of him be glorified in the life to
come; through our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the father etc.

James Chap. 2. verses 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 Sermon 10.
2 For if there come into your company a man with a gold ring, and in goodly
apparel, and there come also a poor man in vile apparel.

3 And ye have a respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say unto
him, sit thou here in a goodly place, and say unto the poor, Stand thou
there, or sit here under my footstool:

4 Are you not partial in your selves, and become judges of evil thoughts?

5 Hearken my dear brethren: has not God chosen the poor of this world, that
they should be rich in faith? and heirs of the kingdom, promised to them that
love him?

6 But ye have despised the poor. Do not the rich oppress you by tyranny,
and do they not draw you before the judgment seats?

7 Do they not blaspheme the worthy name, after which ye be named?

8 But if ye fulfill the royal law, according to the scripture, which says,
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well.

9 But if ye regard the persons, ye commit sin, and are rebuked of the law,
as transgressors.


IN these words, and the rest to 14. verse, the Apostle confirms that which
he before proposed, and proves by two arguments, that to have the faith of
Jesus Christ in respect of persons is evil. The first reason is, from the
example of such as thus accept the persons of men: the other is from the nature
of the law of God, which by this mean is transgressed. The first argument is
handled in these words, and verses set down.

In which reason from their example which respect men's persons, there are three
things to be considered. 1 the example it self, verses 2. 3. 4. 2 The evils in
that example condemned. which are two. 1 Perverseness of judgment. ver. 5.
part 6. 2 Madness. part 6 and 7 verse.
3 The conclusion v. 8. 9. In which there are four things. 1 What this law is.
2 Why called royal. 3 What it wills. 4 How it is fulfilled.


The example of such as have the says of christ in respect of persons.
1 Concerning the first: the example of men thus respecting the rich, with the
contempt of the poor christian brethren, thereof thus says S. James: For if
there come into your company, a man with a gold ring, and in goodly apparel,
and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment: and ye have respect to him
that wears the gay clothing, and say unto him: Sit here in a goodly place:
but say to the poor: Stand there, or sit here under my footestoole: are you
not partial in your doings, and become judges of evil thoughts? The force of
which place is, that such as in public assemblies and general meetings of
men, prefer the rich and great men of the world, but disdain and
reprochfully despise the poor, offend, and are judges of evil thoughts, do
amiss, judge and that corruptly: such therefore as respect men's persons do
evil: respect of persons is therefore evil. To prefer a rich man for his
gold rings sake, or for his apparels sake: and to contemn the poor for his
vile raiment and pouerties sake, is sin. To place the rich in worshipful
place, albeit unworthy: and to disdain the poor, never so virtuous, never so
honest, never so godly: is iniquity be fore God, and a thing by the Apostle
condemned. Wherein the rule of equity is broken, the law of justice is
violate, which requires that that be given to every one, which appertains
to every one. Which Saint Paul also expressing, wills that we give every one
their duty: tribute to whom tribute: custom to whom custom: fear Romans 13.
to whom fear: honor to whom honor belongs. Now to whom belongs
greater honor, then to such as are unfeigned professors of Jesus Christ?
Honor and glory, says Aristotle, is given in token of virtue: and what
virtue is greater then religion, the true faith in Jesus 1. Rethori^o.
Christ? Such therefore as are religious, and profess the faith of Christ
unfeignedly, albeit they be pooe: are they, to whom honor belongs. To have
the rich in account for their wealth and bravery: and the poor in contempt
for their bafenesse and beggerie: is contrary to equity and justice. Which
thing who so does, is partial, and a iudger of evil thoughts: in following a
false rule of difference, making riches the rule of difference, and deseruer of
honor: when riches are not, but faith and religion: all such are worthily
condemned, for that they are more moved with outward pomp, then true pity;
worldly countenance, then Christian calling; thinking (says Baeda) and Upon
thi^ place.
judging within themselves, that a man is so much the better, how much the
richer: which to think is great partiality, and worthy to be condemned.

This place takes not away degrees of honor from men: neither denies it
honor or worship to be given to men of honor or worship, albeit wicked and
unworthy: neither preaches the apostle disordered confusion, as the
Libertines and Anabaptists in former times have, and now phantastica land
unbridled spirits do: who would remove degreles of honor and calling, not
only out of the Church, but I fear out of the common wealth also. For the
Scriptures have taught us: the Prophets have confirmed by examples: our Savior
Christ has willed: and the Apostles have enjoined honor to be given, even to
the idolatrous, unworthy and wicked persons. S. Iamet here only teaches, not
to esteem or judge of the faith and religion of Christ in men, by their
outward appearance: neither in the public meetings of Christians, to
reverence, honor, prefer the wealthy and rich men of the world, being
profane and wicked, with the disgracing, discountenancing, and disdaining of
the poor which are religious, as the words themselves import: when to the
rich, men say, sit here in a good and worshipful place: and to the poor, sit
there: or sit under my foote-stoole: which argues disdainful contempt of the
poor brethren. For if in spectacles, and theatrical sights, in election of
officers, in parliaments: in assizes and sessions, and in all well ordered
assemblies and meetings of men, there is difference of men, and comeliness of
persons obseured: how much more in ecclesiastical meetings, and christian
conuenticles, ought there an order to be observed? whereof the primitive church
was careful: appointing their place for the ministers: theirs for the laity:
theirs for the^ which were to be catechized: theirs for them which were to do
penance, and make open acknowledgement of their offenses. The same was
ratified by counsels: confirmed by fathers: and for the business of the
Churches, or the reproving of men's vices, and correcting of them which fell:
both Tertulian, and S. Ambrose writes, that there Apolog. 39. upon 1. Tim. 5.
1.
were several places for certain persons assigned the shadow whereof, and as
it were the print and token in our Churches remain, in the seats of Bishops,
in consistories, and such like. So then all difference and degrees of men are
not here forbidden: but in Christian assemblies to respect the rich, with the
contempt and disdain of the poor, is condemned in this example. As such then
as prefer a man for his gold ring, or gay garments: but contemn the poor
for his vile and miserable condition: making outward pomp, riches and glory:
when they should make, soundness of faith, the zeal of religion, the
sincerity of the heart, and care of Gods glory, the difference of men,
therein greatly offended. So when we have the faith of Christ in estimation for
the persons sake: and judge of religion, by riches, wealth, honor: we offend
in like manner, in having the faith of Christ in respect of persons; and by this
example are here condemned.

By which it comes to pass, that rich men, wealthy men, honorable men,
oftentimes puffed up, and swelling with pride, that every were they are regarded,
disdain and contemn all other: thus often times vile men, unworthy, profane
and ungodly, are exalted: and those in whom virtue flourishes, faith shines,
wisdom appears: are suppressed and not regarded: which is a thing
intolerable in Christian profession. Hereby men are partial in themselves,
and become judges of evil thoughts, being evil affected in so great a matter.

2 In which example the Apostle condemns two The evils in such as respect
men's persons.
evils. 1 The perverseness of their judgments, which thus respect the persons
of men. 2 Their madness. And for the first evil, whch is the perverseness of
their judgment, thus says the Apostle: hearken my beloved brethren, has not
God chosen the poor of this world, that they should be rich in faith, and
heirs of the kingdom? But you have despised the poor. Their judgment is
naught and perverse, who judge contrary unto God: this men do which honor the
rich which are profane and wicked, and contemn the poor which are godly. For
God contemns the proud and wicked, be they never so rich, never so wealthy,
never so noble, never so honorable: and Psalm. 18. 1. Pet. 5.
regards the humble and godly, be they never so poor, never so miserable,
never so base of condition. Thus god accounts not of men for riches, wealth,
honor, nobility: but for godliness, faith, religion, and virtue: then men
judging contrariwise hereunto, are perverse in judgment.

That God honors the poor, whom men contemn and despise, the Apostle
teaches: in that he calls them to be rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom promised unto those which love him. To contemn the poor whom God
accounts of, and to disdain them whom God honors, is great perverseness
in judgment. Our Savior Christ showing whom Almighty God has called Matt. 5.
to eternal happiness in his everlasting kingdom: pronou^ceth the poor in
spirit to be heirs thereof, wherefore he says; Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. So then such as by the miserable
condition and poverty of this life, have their minds and spirits brought
under, and tamed to obey God: are they whom God has chosen to be rich in
faith, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven. This thing the blessed virgin
acknowledging, affirms such as of whom no account Luke 1.
is made in the world, and are altogether vile in the eyes of men, by God to be
advanced even to heavenly dignity: and therefore says, that God had put
down the mighty from their seat, and exalted them of low degree. Saint Paul
disputing of the calling of men to eternal salvation by the preaching of the
Gospel, showing that the poor of this world have the chief rowme and place
in the eternal election of the Saints: writes thereof in this wise to the
Church of Corinth: brethren, you see your calling, how that not many wise ^.
Cor. 1.
after the flesh: not many mighty: not many noble, are called: but GOD has
chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise: God has chosen
the weak things, to confound the mighty: vile things and things which are
despised in the world, has God chosen, and things which are not, to confound
the things which are: that no flesh should rejoice in his sight. Such Leuit.
26. Jere. 31. 1. Cor. 6.
as were vile, weak miserable, poor, base, has God called to be heirs of
his kingdom. To these has God made promise of good things, even that he would
be their God, and they should be his people. These are the Lords inheritance,
Exodus 19. 1. Pet. 2.
and his portion for ever: these are a chosen genetion, a holy nation, a royal
priesthood, a peculiar people unto the Lord. Though then their condition be
miserable in the world, albeit they be implicate and inwrapped in baseness
and poverty: yet are they replenished with spiritual treasure, and chosen of
God to be rich in faith, and heirs of his kingdom. Seeing God so regards,
esteems, and honors the poor of this world, that in the inheritance of
his heavenly kingdom, he prefers the^ before the rich and proud of the
people: then is it great perverseness of judgment to prefer the rich, whom
he rejects, and contemn those whom he honors with the glory of his
heavenly kingdom.

Which place, as it worthily condemns the vanity and perverseness of their
judgment which prefer the profane rich men of the world, to the poor which
are godly and religious: so is it also full of singular consolation and comfort
for the poor thus despised of men. For if they have an eye to the heavenly
kingdom whereunto they are called by God: what is more excellent? If they regard
eternal life, whereof they are heirs by Jesus Christ, what is more glorious?
If they look unto the immortal, and incorruptible inheritance, which is laid
up and reserved for them 1. Pet. 1.
in heaven: what is more singular? If they record and recount with themselves,
that they are chosen of God to be rich in faith: what is more comfortable?
Which dutiful consideration swaloweth up, and as a bottomless gulf deuoureth
Romans 8.
all the miseries, afflictions, calamities, of this world: while we hold fast
the principle of the Apostle: that all the afflictions and suffering of this
life, are not to be compared unto the glory which shall be revealed to the
children 2. Cor. 4.
of God: whose momentanie and light afflictions, cause unto them a far more
excellent weight of glory: while they look not to the things which are
present, but to the things which are to come: neither to those which are seen,
but to those that are not seen: for the things which are seen, are te^porall:
but the things which are not seen, are eternal. This consolation and
encouragement patiently to endure the poverty and baseness of their life, is
herehence ministered by the apostle, when to condemn such as have the faith of
Christ in respect of persons, of peruersenes, of judgment, he says: Hearken
my dear brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this world to be rich in
faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he has promised unto those that love
him?

That the Apostle says: has not God chosen the poor of this world, that
they should be rich in faith, etc. it follows not, that therefore he casts
off all rich men. But here is mention made of the choosing of the poor: partly
for their comfort, partly to bear down the intolerable pride and insolency
of the profane rich men: partly to teach that God chooses not men to his
eternal inheritance, for any thing whereof the world accounts. Otherwise it
is true, that God our of all estates of men, chooses certain whom he will
make rich in faith, and heirs of his kingdom: which consists of all
estates, degrees, and conditions of men: servants, and masters: princes and
people: rich, and poor: base and honorable: for God would all men to be
saved, 1. Tim. 2. 2. Pet. 3.
and to come to the knowledge of the truth.

God has chosen the poor to be heirs of his kingdom, but you have despised
them: to despise them whom God has chosen: to contemn them whom he accou^teth
of, is in judgment to swa^ue from God, which is perverseness: for to oppose our
selves to God in our judgment, and therein to be contrary unto him: to
prefer those whom he refuses and to refuse them whom god prefers: to
honor the^ whom God rejects to reject those whom God honoreth is wa^wardnes
and perverseness in judgment: whereof they are guilty, which honor rich profane
persons, and despise the poor which are godly: which is the first evil in
these respecters of persons, by the apostle here condemned.

2 The second evil in them is madness it is a kind of frantikenes and madness
for men to reverence, honor and prefer those before the godly brethren, who^
they for many causes ought rather to account execrable and cursed. The profane
rich men for sundry causes ought to be held as execrable and cursed; the^ to
honor, prefer and exalt these, is a kind of madness. This do the respecters of
persons, who seeing a man come in with a gold ring on his finger, and in good
^y apparel, say; Sit thou down in a good place: but to the poor in vile
raiment, say with contempt; Sit there, ^or here under my footstool. The
respecters of persons therefore, are not only perverse in judgment, but mad
after a manner also.

That the rich ought rather to be counted and held ^s cursed, then to be
honored and preferred before the ^oore brethren, the Apostle shows: and that
for 3 great ^uils and sins which commonly reign in the profane ^ich men of
this world.

1 The first evil for the which the profane rich Tyranny.
^en are to be held as execrable, is their tyranny: they ^ppresse the poor by
tyranny. Men are oppressed by tyannie diverse ways. 1. When they are
imprisoned, afflic^ed, persecuted cruelly by the rich and mighty men of the
^orld: then are they oppressed by tyranny. The poor ^rethren, the holy men,
and Saints of God, for the profes^on of the faith, for the religion of Christ,
for the defense ^f the word of truth: by the mighty men of the world, a^y wise
afflicted: are oppressed by tyranny. Thus were ^e Apostles of Christ by the
cruel Scribes, Pharisees, and ^rinces of the people, by tyranny oppressed:
when for the ^ospels sake they were imprisoned scourged, excommu^icate and
persecuted. Pylat and Herod conspired together Mat. 27.
^o oppress our Savior Christ by tyranny. Thus was Acts 7.
^aint Steven the blessed Martyr oppressed by the tyranny ^f the Jews, and
for the religion of Christ persecuted unto death. Thus the Prophets by the
tyranny of their ^rinces, as Isai, Jeremie, Amos, and the rest: have been
op^ressed. Thus the holy men of God, the poor Saints and ^rethren, in France,
in Flaunders, in Italy, in Spain, are ^ppressed by tyranny. Thus the
renowned Martyrs in ^ur own country and nation, not long since: have in like
^anner by tyranny been oppressed. After like manner, ^^ the time of the
Apostle, the poor brethren were oppressed by the tyranny of rich men:
wherefore the rich ought rather to be accounted execrable and cursed, then
with disdainefull contempt of the poor brethren to be preferred, and honored
of men.

2 The rich oppress the poor by tyranny, when in the trades of this life
they deal hardly, deceitfully, vnco^scionably, extremely. This oppression God
expressly forbade his people the Israelites in the law: When thou sellest Leuit.
25.
ought to thy neighbor, or byest ought of him, you shall not oppress one
another. Saint Paul forewarneth 1. These. 4.
of this oppression; Let no man oppress or defraude his brother in bargaining,
for the Lord is an auenger of such things. When the rich men have gotten
commodities into their hands, and make the poor pay therefore what themselves
lust: when they make the poor pay dear when they might afford it cheaper:
when rich men give mean wares to the poor for the best; evil for good;
putrified and corrupt, for sound and curra^t, the^ they oppress the poor by
tyranny. This oppression in all times, and in all commonwealths, in all coasts
and countries of the world, is used: whereby the poor (through the tyranny
of the rich) are oppressed. For which the rich ought to be accounted accursed.

3 The poor are oppressed also by tyranny of the rich and wealthy, when they
wring them by usury, forfeitures, exactions, impositions, and vll manner
extortio^. As the rich oppressed the poor by tyranny, in the time of the
Prophet Isai; where against he cries out and complayneth: Isai 3.
What have ye to do, that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces
of the poor, says the Lord, even the Lord of hosts? Almighty God in the
Princely Prophet David cries out against this tyrannous oppression: Do not
all workers of wickedness know, that they Psalm. 14.
eat up my people as they eat bread? Thus were the people oppressed by the
tyranny of the rich, in the time of Micheas the Prophet, whereof he spoke in
this wise: They hate the good, and love the evil: they pluck their skins
from them, and the flesh from their bones: and they eat Miche. 3.
up the flesh of my people, and flay off their skins from them: they break
their bones, and choppe them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within
the cauldron.

Thus the Prophet condemns their Judges, officers, rulers, and rich men of
the land, for their cruel extortio^s, exactions, oppressions: whereby they
might be very well compared to Wolves, Bears, Lions, and savage Beasts: which
rent and tear the flesh from the bones, the skin from the backs, the parts
from the body: so outrageous is their cruelty. These cruel persons, for their
tyrannous persecution and oppression, may be compared to the fish Sargus, which
haunting the Egyptian sea, oppresses the little fishes, catching al their
meat and relief from them. They are not unlike the fish Scarus, which some
take to be the Gilthead, or Goldenie. Which fish chaweth cud like a beast, and
deuoureth all the little fishes which meet him.

Such are the rich men of this world against the poor: for like Sargus, they
devour the meat, sustenance and living of the poor, and eat up the labors
of their hands, and the sweat of their brows; licking and wiping the fat
from the beard of the poor. Like Scarus, they devour the poor of the land,
and eat up the people as it were bread. These grow rich of the poverty, wax
fat of the need, feed full of the emptines, cloth themselves of the nakedness,
house themselves by the vnharbouring, prank up themselves by the penury, make
themselves merry by the misery of the poor: and so oppress them by tyranny:
for which they should be held accursed.

4 Finally, rich men oppress the poor, when they weary and waste the bodies
of the poor with toilesome labor unrewarded: as the Landlord uses the poor
Tenant: the rich the poor, without hire: to whom they do service, for whom
they labor, toil and moile, for fear: afflicted and oppressed by their
tyranny. Here^ce is it, that in sundry places of the land, the poor Farmer
is compelled, to carte, to carry, to plowe, to sow, to fetch, to bear, to
do all manner business for the tyrannous oppression of the Gentleman. Thus and
by like means, the rich oppressing the poor by tyranny, ought rather to be
accounted accursed: then with the contempt and disdain of the poor, to be
preferred. Seeing therefore the rich by sundry ways afflict the poor, for
the which we should hold the^ as execrable: it is a point of madness for men
through partial respect had to their persons, to honor them with contempt of
the poor which are godly.

2 Another and second evil for which they ought to be held accursed, is
their cruelty and unmercifulness. Unmercifulness.
For they draw the poor before judgment seats: either for their profession
and religion, as in the time of the Apostle was usual. For, for the profession
of Christian religion, the holy Apostles, the blessed Martyrs, the faithful
servants of Christ, were drawn before seats of judgment: as in the whole
book of the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 5. etc
in the stories Ecclesiastical, by Eusebius, Nicephorus, Socrates, and others
written, is apparently evident. Or else for their debts they cruelly handle
them: and other for matters of no great weight: or when love would forgive
all, bring them before seats of judgment, sue them in the law: wearye them
with this Court or that, and show all unmercifulness against them.

Thus it is with men in our age: let a poor man owe ought to the rich, he
shall forfette his band, he shall pay for the time, he shall be sued for the
debt with all unmercifulness and cruelty: he shall be forced to satisfy to the
uttermost farthing: which is a sin for which the profane rich men are to be
accounted accursed. Or finally, when rich men pretend title to the right of
the poor: and so wrongfully sue him, to take from him his right, patrimony,
purchase, or inheritance: partly by his own countenance, partly by his riches:
calling the poor before judgments for his own.

Not that it is now not lawful for any rich man to sue the poor for his
right: or that all rich men do bring the poor before judgment seats
always: for as it is lawful for the rich to get his own in some respects:
So neither does every rich man sue every poor man which is endangered unto
him: but because the profane, covetous, and wicked rich men commonly so do:
and that then when they should forgive for Christ's sake: as when the poor is
unable to pay; when he is godly, and desirous to live by his labor, and
endeavors to live out of debt and danger, and yet cannot. Now to call such
before judgment seats: to sue them for extremities: to solicit and trouble
such, and with cruelty to seek the uttermost of them: is mercilesnes and
cruelty, for which the profane rich men are to be accounted execrable and
accursed. These wicked, profane, ungodly rich men, care not for wife nor
children household nor family of their poor distressed brethren: they regard
neither virtue, religion, godliness, nor honesty: they turn their eyes from
their poverty, unableness, careful endeavor: they will be satisfied, they will
cast them in prison, bring them to seats of judgment, keep them in durance:
they will make dice of their bones, but they will have the extremity of them:
and the more godly men be, the more these tirannes rage against them: forgeuing
rather great sums to the voluptuous, prodigal, lascivious, wicked, and
wanton persons: then to release small matters to the godly. Seeing then the
rich use such unmercifulness toward the poor, (for which we should rather
account them cursed) it seems great madness in men so partially to honor
them, which are thus wicked.

3 The third sin and evil in the rich men of the Blasphemy.
world, wherefore they are to be held accursed: is their blasphemy against
the religion of Christ: they blaspheme the worthy name whereby ye are named.
You are named after Christ, Christians; this worthy name is by profane rich
men blasphemed: they blaspheme the worthy name which is called upon you: that
is, where after you are called or named. The Apostle according to the phrase of
the Hebrews speaks; As the name of the father is called upon by the child,
that is, the child is named after the name of the father. Which phrase Jacob
used when he blessed the two sons of Joseph: the Angel which has Genesis 48.
delivered me from all evil, bless the children, and let my name be called
upon them, and the name of my Fathers: that is, let them be named by the name
of my Fathers, and by my name. The name of the husband is also called upon by
the wife: that is the wife is named after her husband, as the Prophet Isai
speaks; In that day shall seven women take hold of one man, and say; We
will Isai 4.
eat our own bread, and wear our own garments: that is, we will find our
selves: but let thy name he called upon us; let us be called by thy name. In
religion, and the true worship and service of God, the name of God is called
upon the professors of Gods service. Moses speaking of Deuteronomy. 28.
the preferment of Israel above all other people, that God was their God, and
they his people, says: Then all people of the earth shall see, that the name
of the Lord is called upon over thee. Daniel the Prophet of God, in his prayer
and confession of his sins, and the sinnesnnes of the people, Dan. 9.
says in this wise; O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider, and do it:
defer not for thine own sake, O my God, for thy name is called upon thy
City, and upon thy people: thy City and people are called after thy name, the
city of God, the people of God. Amos prophesying of Amos 9.
uniting the Edomits and other enemies of the Jews, with them in the mystical
body of Christ, in like manner speaks in the person of God; I will raise up
in that day the Tabernacle of David which is fallen down: and I will raise up
his ruins, and build it, as in the days of old: that they may possess the
remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen, because my name is called upon them,
says the Lord, that does this.

Under the Gospel. Christian religion and the name of Christ, is called upon
Christians: that is, Christians are named after the name of Christ, as here the
Apostle speaks. The worthy name of Christ which was called upon the Saints:
that is, whereby the Saints were named: being Christians, of Christ: by the
wicked worldlings, and profane men of the earth, is blasphemed, and evil
spoaken of. For rich men commonly are enemies unto religion: and either openly
they blaspheme it, or secreatly scorn at it. So that as not many wise
(according to the flesh) nor many noble, nor many mighty, are called
thereunto: so neither many rich men, because their happiness, trust, and
confidence, is in their wealth, which withholdeth from coming to the kingdom
of GOD. For the which cause our Savior pronounces it easier for a Camel to
Mat. 19.
pass through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God. Seeing then these profane rich men dishonor God and his
Gospel: it were madness for you his children to give honor unto them.

The worthy name of Christ and his Gospel, as generally of all men, so
specially of profane rich men, may two ways be blasphemed, dishonored, and
evil spoken of.

1 When they deride, jest, scorn, and scoff at Christian religion: speaking
maliciously, disdainfully, against Christ and his profession. Thus the Scribes
and Pharisees, with the Jews, blasphemed the worthy name of our profession,
when they called Christ Samaritan: when they said he cast out devils by the
power of Beelzebub, the John 8. Mat. 12.
prince of the devils: when they called and counted his doctrine, deceit,
heresy, new and strange doctrine, not to be suffered. Thus Julian the
Apostata blasphemed this worthy name, when in contempt he called Christ
Galilean, Carpenters son, the man crucified. Thus Porphirius Tripert hist.
lib. 6. c. 6. Cyril contra Jul. etc.
the Philosopher, Lucian the scorner, blasphemed the worthy name whereby we
are called, when they reviled, reproached, spoke evil of, and scorned the
Gospel. The Heathen Philosophers, and Galen the famous Physicion, calling and
counting it folly, blasphemed it. All men which by vile speeches, disgrace,
discredit, reproach, or speak evil and maliciously of Christian religion, as
diverse and sundry wise profane rich men offend, blaspheme the worthy name
whereupon we are called: and whereby we are called.

2 As by their speech, so by their lives men blaspheme and dishonor the
Gospel, when they which profess religion: walk not, neither live thereafter:
by which means the Gospel is flaundered, dishonored, blasphemed. 2. Kings 12.
Thus David blasphemed the worthy name whereby he was called, when by his
adultery he caused the name of God to be evil spoken of, and blasphemed by
the wicked, the rulers over the people of Israel, causing them to houle,
blasphemed the name of God in like manner, as is Isai 52.
witnessed by the Prophet. The Jews, which professed the selves the people of
GOD, by breaking the law of God (whereof they boasted) and living in all
uncleanness, mischief Romans 2.
and wickedness, caused also the name of God to be blasphemed among the
brethren, as Saint Paul writes. All men professing godliness, yet living
disorderly, dishonestly, and otherwise far then their calling requires,
blaspheme the worthy name whereby they are called: as, adulterers, fornicators,
unclean persons, covetous men, extortioners, oppressors, drunkards, usurers,
liers, deceauers, the malicious and envious, the slanderous and reproachful
persons, with such like, professing godliness, but practicing wickedness in their
whole conversation: blaspheme the name whereby they are called. And thus the
rich men oftentimes blaspheme the Gospel in like manner.

Albeit both ways the worthy name whereby Christians are called, be blasphemed
by the wicked rich men of the world: yet the Apostle seems to have spoken of
the former kind, whereby the Gospel is evil spoken of, and blasphemed; as by
the spiteful, malicious, and vile slanders, mockings, and reproaches of
Christ and his religion. Which thing while the rich men of the world do, they
ought to be held as cursed and execrable. To honor such as these are, what
madness is it?

And as in the Apostles time there were such hare-braines and frantike fools;
so this madness also remains among us in these days. For we cappe, we
crouche, we bow, we bend, we prefer, we honor, we esteem, we respect, and
that with disdaining of the poor brethren: ungodly men, mockers and scorners
of religion: arrand papists: known adulterers: open blasphemers: daily liers:
luxurious and riotous persons: carnal professors: yea and professed enemies
unto the Gospel, and worthy name whereby we are called: whose whole force is
bent: whose whole labor is employed: whose study tends by all possible
means, not only in part to corrupt, but in whole to subvert Christian
religion: to bring in idolatry, restore superstition, and sow the seed of
scisme in the Church of Jesus Christ. What madness is this in our brains:
what frenzy has possessed us: what lack of sense and reason, what doting
folly has bewitched us? These are then the two evils which in accepters of
men's persons, are here condemned: perverseness of judgment in preferring the
profane rich, who^ God abhors: and contemning the poor godly, whom he has
called: and their doting madness, in that they honor and prefer those, who
for their tyranny, unmercifulness, and extreme cruelty toward the Saints,
and their horrible blasphemy, whereby they blaspheeme and speak evil of the
worthy name whereby we are called: are to be counted execrable and cursed. And
this is the second thing in this first reason to be considered: the evils which
in respecters of persons, in the professing of the Gospel of Christ, are here
condemned.

3 The third thing in this first argument, is the conclusion, The conclusion.
whereof thus says the Apostle: but if ye fulfill the royal law, according to
the Scripture, you do well: but if you regard persons, ye commit finne, and
are reproved of the law as transgressors. In which words the Apostle
concludes, that charity which by the law of God is prescribed: can not
stand with this respect of persons: for the law requires, that men should
love their neighbors as themselves: without exception, counting all men our
neighbors: therefore in the duties of love men must not regard men's persons,
but generally do their duty to all, And this conclusion seems to be
inferred by the way of preventing an objection which might have been made by
them which honor the rich with the contempt of the poor: for they might say:
to honor is a point of love: love is the fulfilling of the law: therefore in
honoring the rich, we fulfill the will and the law of God, and so do well,
Matt. 22. Romans 13. Gal. 5. 1. Tim. 1.
and offend not.

Thereunto Saint James answers: if in deed you love according to the true
meaning and tenor of the law, which wills us to love our neighbor as our
selves, and counts all men our neighbor: and therefore inioyneth love
generally toward all to be extended: you do well. But if you regard in
your love, the persons of men, and love, honor, and prefer men, because of
their riches, pomp, glory, and outward appearance; you sin, and become
transgressors of the law. If you love even the rich also as men, you do well;
but if you love and honor them because of their riches, you do sin, and
transgress the law.

This conclusion in these two verses contained, ministers unto us the
consideration of four things. 1 What the royal law is, here mentioned. 2
Why this law is called a royal law. 3 What this royal law commands
men. 4 How this law is fulfilled.

1 The law which here is called royal, is the law of love and
righteousness: prescribing what duty to every one pertains: and it
contains that part of the law, which in the second table is delivered:
teaching us to love one without hating of another: to honor one, without
contemning of another: to prefer one, without disdain of another: to regard
the rich, without neglect of the poor brethren. The law of love therefore,
which prescribes what duty is to be performed to every one: is the royal
law, by Saint James here mentioned. But if you fulfill the royal law, which
says, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, you do well.

2 This law of love here called the royal law, is therefore called the
royal law: 1 Because it is from a King: not mortal but immortal: even the
king of kings and Lord of Lords, even from God. This law then proceeding from
this King, is called the kings law the royal 1. Tim. 6. 15. Revel. 5.
law: the princely law. And that this law concerning love, is from GOD, it
is manifest: for God in the reforming of his people, among other things
prescribes Leuit. 19.
this law unto them: love thy neighbor as thy self. Saint Paul agreeable
thereunto says: Concerning brotherly love. I need not to write unto you: for
1. These. 4. 1. John. 4.
you are taught of God to love one another. The law of love therefore coming
and proceeding from God the king of all kings and kingdoms of the earth, is
therefore called royal, kingly, princely. 2 Because it is the chief of all
laws, which concern our duties toward our brethren, persuading men, and
drawing them to the o-obedience of the second table, which in perfourming of
love, is fulfilled. Therefore is love so often called the fulfilling of the
law. Saint Paul says, that the whole Romans 13.
law is briefly contained in this: love the neighbor as thy self. To like
effect in another place, to another Church he says: All the law is fulfilled
in one word, Gal. 5.
which is this: love thy neighbor as thy self: And to his scholar Timothy,
the end of the commandment is love: 1. Tim. 1.
out of a pure heart, and good conscience, and faith unfeigned. Seeing then the
law of love is as the chief, head, and as it were, the Queen, over other
virtues and duties, and the only thing wherein all the law of the second
Table is contained, complete, and fulfilled: it may therefore not amiss be
called royal or princely.

3 This law furthermore is called royal: because it is like the kings high
way: for as the kings high way is open for every man to pass therein, and
brings men from place to place forth out right, without turnings: So the
law of GOD, which is the law of love, is open, plain, without turnings, of
all men to be gone in, travailed, past through, not turning either to the
right hand, or to the left, through respect of persons: whereunto who so
respects, declineth, turns out of the high way, and wandereth:

3 The law of love being this royal law, and for these causes so called:
enioyneth men to love their neighbors as themselves. In which, three things
may here briefly be observed. 1 What this law requires: love. 2 To whom: to
our neighbor. 3 How? as to our selves.

That Gods law requires love, who reads the Scriptures, and sees not? who
peruseth the word of god, and is ignorant? God himself in the very law,
expressly Leuit. 19.
commands, that men should love one another. Our Savior Christ, the very
expounder of his fathers will unto men: exhorts all the Saints thereunto, as
to the cognizance and liuerie, whereby they should be known to be his
servants. The Apostles the interpreters of this John. 13.
law, enfourmed and taught by the holy Ghost, the spirit whereby they were
led into all truth: have thereof been careful. Therefore Saint Paul: owe
nothing Romans 13. Ephesians. 5.
to any, but that ye love one another. And again: be ye followers of God as
dear children, and walk in love, even as you have Christ for example. And
again: And Col. 3.
above all things put on love, which is the bond of perfectness. To whom
Saint Peter subscribeth: above all 1. Pet. 4.
things, have fervent love among your selves, for love covers the multitude
of sins. Saint John in his three Epistles, therein labors especially to
persuade the Saints to follow love. Of which in the time of his preaching he
was so careful, that as Saint Jerome records, Upon 6. to Galath.
being very aged, and not able without help to ascend into the Pulpet*
preached still of love, until his auditors were weary of the same: to whom
he answered, it was the thing that the whole law required, and enjoined of
God: which who so has, has all things. Wherefore if we look, either into
the old Testament, or the new: we shall find that the royal law of God
enioyneth love. Whereof we are forgetful, when envy and malice: hatred, and
rancour: debate, and contention: covetousness and usury: slaundering and
backebiting: lying, and deceit: separating our selves from the brethren:
respect of riches, honor, glory, worldly pomp: not of religion, piety and
godliness, reigns in our hearts.

The persons whom we must love, are our neighbors: thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. But who is Leuit. 19.
our neighbor? Our Savior Christ by the parable of the man falling into the
hands of the thieves, betwixt Luke 10.
Hierico and Jerusalem: tells the lawier who questioned with Christ to tempt
him: that all men which need our help, or to whom any duty belongs: are our
neighbors, whether near at hand, or far of: whether friends or enemies,
rich or poor, one or another. Wherehence Saint Augustine concludes, that all
men are our neighbors, to whom either duty should be showed, if it be Lib.
1. doctrine Christ. c. 30.
needful: either remains due, if it be required. And citing that place of
Saint Paul, thou shall not commit adultery: thou shall not kill: thou shall
not steal: thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor: and if
there be any other commandment, it is briefly contained in this: thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self: by neighbor (says he) must we understand
all men, unless we will say: it is lawful to commit adultery with the wife,
or some: or to kill some: or to rob some, or bear false witness against some.
But seeing these cannot lawfully be done against any, therefore under
neighbor, every man is comprised. In his work of true religion, reproving
men, for loving men, not because they were men, and the creatures of God: but
because they De vera religione.
were allianced, or affianced unto them, says: it were discourtesie: not to
love in respect they are men: and to love in respect they are fathers, or
children, etc. Thereby teaching us to love all men, because all men in that
they are men, are our neighbors. The law teaching us to love all men, and to
do duty unto them, as unto neighbors: for to respect the persons of the
rich, and prefer them, with neglect of the poor: is against this law,
whereof in so doing, we are transgressors.

The manner how we must love, is, as our selves. And every man unfeignedly,
fervently, continually, loves himself: so must we also love our neighbors:
albeit strangers, albeit enemies, who are all our neighbors,

4 This then being the sum and substance of this royal law, to love our
neighbors as our selves: who finally may be said to fulfill this law? They
fulfill the royal law of love: who through faith, working by love, ^al. 5.
obey this law of God. And this faith of Gods Saints looks not to the
outward appearance of men's persons: but to the unfeigned profession of
Christian religion. Of this fulfilling of the law, the Apostle may seem to
speak: if ye fulfill the royal law, according to the Scripture, which says:
Love thy neighbor as thy self, you do well. The obedience of Gods children is
accepted, albeit imperfect, for Christ's sake: whose righteousness imputed unto
us, we are by faith through imputation, said to fulfill the law. As before
upon the 1. Chap. ver. 22. has been said.

The obedience and fulfilling of Gods law, is accepted according to the measure
of faith, distributed to every Ephe. 4. Romans 12. ^. Cor. 12.
one severally, according to the purpose and pleasure of God. In this wise if
you do fulfill the royal law says James, you do well: but if you accept
persons, you sin, and are become transgressors of the law: for that law
commands to love all and disdain none. If men therefore regard the persons
of men, they sin, and transgress the law of God. And this is the first
argument why we should not have the faith of Christ in respect of persons: and
the things therein contained: the example of them which so do: the evils in
which men in so doing commit, and the conclusion. Let us beseech almighty God,
for his sons sake, to remove all partiality of Judgment far from us:
that neither for favor nor for fear, we honor the profane men of the
world, to the disdain of the brethren: but that we having special care of
holiness and righteousness, of faith and religion in our esteeming and
judging of men, may so nourish and foster love in our hearts: that thereby God
may be glorified, who is our only Lord and God, to be blessed for evermore.
Amen.

James Chap. 2. verses 10. 11. 12. 13. Sermon 11.
10 For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet fails in one point, he
is guilty of all.

11 For he that said, thou shall not commit adultery: said also, thou shall
not kill. Now though thou committest none adultery: yet if thou killest, thou
art a transgressour of the law.

12 So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty.

13 For there shall be condemnation merciless, to him that shows no mercy:
and mercy rejoices against condemnation.


THe second reason and argument, why men preferring the rich to the poor, with
contempt, do sin, and offend: is drawn from the nature of the law of God:
flowing and following out of the former conclusion: and it is this. They
greatly offend the law of god, who honor some ambiciously, and disdain other
co^temptuously: this they do, which honor the rich which are vile, profane,
and wicked: and disdain those poor which are honest, virtuous, and godly:
therefore such as respect the persons of me^, esteeming faith and religion
according to the outward appearaunce: sin and do against the law of God.
Of which law, every part, member, branch, and point, is so united and knit
together: as that if we keep all the rest, and yet fail in any one: as that
we observe all other parts of the law: yet regard the outward appearance of
men, and so have the faith of Jesus Christ in respect of persons, we are
guilty of the whole: and so transgress the law of God. Which reason in these
verses is contained.

In the which words and verses, containing the second argument why respecters
of men's persons do sin: three things are to be noted. namely: 1 The
proposition: he that keeps the whole law, yet fails in one point, is
guilty of the whole. ver. 10. 2 The confirmation of the proposition: he that
said, thou shall not commit adultery, said also, thou shall not kill. etc. 3
The conclusion, in which are to be noted 2. things 1 The conclusion it self.
v. 12. 2 The reason of the conclusion. v. 13


1 Of these three, the first is the proposition, the state of the matter, the
setting down of the thing which is in handling: and it is this: Whosoever
keeps the whole law, yet offends or fails in one point thereof: he is
guilty of all. Therefore that man which keeps all the rest of the law, and
yet respects the person of the prophaine rich man, and coptemneth the
poor, godly, religious, and honest: is guilty of all the whole law. Men
cutting off from the law what seems them good, and keeping not the whole
law indifferently: transgress the law, and offend against it. Such are they,
which being by Gods law charged indifferently to love all men, and count the^
their neighbors: and in token of love, honor some with contempt of others: as
men reuerencing the wealthy though they be wicked, and disdaining the poor
Saints and brethren. These men therefore are guilty of the whole law.

But how is this true? Surely in as much as the law is so united and knitte
together in every part, as that who soever offends in one jot, is guilty of
all in the sight of God.

How is he guilty of the whole law, that fails but in one point or part
thereof? Two ways, 1 Who so observes all the whole law, yet by respecting the
persons of me^, offends against love, he is guilty of the whole law: For
love is the fulfilling of the law. Who so offends against that which
contains all the rest, and is the acco^plishment of the whole, is guilty of
the whole. Now the Scripture teaches, that love is the fulfilling of the law.
Romans 13.
For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall
not steal, thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor: or if
there be any other law, it is briefly contained in this; Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Our Savior Christ teaches the saucie and malapert
Lawier, which asked him a question, not to learn of him, but to tempt him;
That on those two precepts of love, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
Mar. 22.
thine heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind: and thy neighbor as thy
self, the whole law and the Prophets depends Albeit then one observe all
other parts of the law, yet offend against the law of love, wherein the whole
law is comprised, he is become guilty of all, sinning against that which
contains all, which is love.

2 A man observing the whole law, yet offending against one point or part
thereof, is guilty of the whole: because no man can perfectly keep any part
of the law, as it should be kept, which keeps not the whole: therefore in
failing in one jot of the law, men fail (as it were) in all, and are guilty
of all. For all the parts and precepts of the law are so knitte and united
together in an inseparable conjunction: as that who so keeps any one
perfectly, keeps all: who so offends against any one, offends against
all, and is guilty of all.

And is not this agreeable to Moses doctrine, who holds all men under a
bitter curse, which observe not Deuteronomy. 27.
all the whole law of God? denouncing that curse against every particular
offense, which is denounced against the breach of the whole law: and holding
them under the same condemnation, that offended against any jot of the law:
whereunto they are subject which are guilty of many transgressions. To show
that men are counted guilty before God of the whole law, which are found
faulrie in any part thereof? Wherefore denouncing a curse against many
particular sins, he concludes his terrible curse with these words; Cursed is
every one that perseuereth not in all the words of this law, to do them.
Wherefore, how so ever men observe many parts of the law, yet if they observe
not the whole: they are guilty of the whole: and under the curse and
malediction which to the general breach of the law is threatened.

Does not our Savior teach, that unless we observe his whole doctrine, when
we profess him, and are baptized in his name: that it prevails little to
observe some? Mat. 28.
when he binds all his servants to the obedience of all that which he
commanded the Disciples? Would not almighty God give us so much to
understand, when in his law he binds us so often to the observation of the
whole? Which thing to intimate unto us, the Apostle affirms, that whosoever
observes the whole law, yet fails in any point, is guilty of all. A man
therefore keeping all the whole law, beside that one thing wherein he
offends: is guilty of the whole: and that no less in respect of the breach
of the law it self before God: then if he had offended in many points thereof:
albeit he more grievously (no doubt) offends, that offends in more precepts.

Wherefore, as when a Prince enioyneth his Subjects the observing of all his
laws and ordinances which he gives them: if any one observe all the rest,
save only one, wherein he offends: the same is a breaker of the kings
commandment, and has transgressed the law of his Prince, and is subject to
the penalty which is threatened the transgression of the whole law: Even so,
God enioyning us sundry precepts, and willing us to observe them all: If any
man observe nine of the commandments, yet offend in the tenth: he is a
transgressor of the law, and is guilty of the whole law: Whereunto full and
perfect obedience is enjoined.

Thus they which observe all the rest of the law, and yet offend in any one
point: are held as transgressors of the whole law, whereof they are guilty:
for the law is as well broaken in one, as in many offenses: though not so
greeuouslie in one, as in many. And as a judge, having twelve malefactors
deserving like sentence, to be punished in like manner, all whom the law
requires to be executed: if he hang eleven, and let the twelfe escape for
favor: he is an unjust, a wicked and corrupt judge in that action, even as if
he saved four, six, or more: even so, when men offend in one point of the
law, though they observe all the rest: they are guilty of the whole: in as
much as in one, as well as in many, it is broaken. Whereof the Apostle Saint
James admonishing such as will be counted just, and obseruers of the law, and
yet have the faith of our Savior Jesus Christ in respect of persons:
protests unto them, that if they keep all the rest of the law of God, yet in
this one thing, which is against love, they fall away from duty: they are
guilty of all.

If he that keeps the whole law, beside that one thing wherein he offends:
and in that one offending, be guilty of the whole law: then it may seem, that
it is all one to offend in one, and in many precepts of the law: that it is
like sin to transgress in any one tittle or jot, and in the whole law:
equal sin to break one, and all the precepts and commandments of the law
of God: and so all sins may seem alike and equal, as the Stoicall
Philosophers were of opinion.

Hereunto be it answered, that the Apostle says not; he that keeps the whole
law, and offends in one point thereof, is guilty of the whole, in like
manner, or alike, as if he had offended in the whole, and every point thereof:
but he is guilty of the whole. Guilty he is of the whole, who offends in
one: but not so guilty, nor so grievously offending, as if he offended in
every point of the law. So that the Stoicall equality of sins (that all
sins are like) may not herence be gathered, nor avouched.

Which opinion of those blockish, not Philosophers in deed, but mere fools
rather, is hissed out of the School of Christ. And as it may not herence be
gathered: so may it diversely be confuted,

1 All sins not to be equal it appears manifestly, if that we look into
the causes, the beginnings, and the affections from whence sins rise in men.
These considered, one sin shall be seen greater or less then another. For who
sees not, that sins proceeding of malicious wickedness, are greater then such
as be committed of infirmity, weakness ignorance? This the holy Prophet David
that man of God knew, who looking into the causes Psalm. 59.
of sins, reputeth the sin of maliciousnes much greater then other sins:
therefore he prays to GOD 1. Joh. 5.
not to forgive such. Saint John measuring sins by their causes, beginnings,
and affections, accounting that sin which is from wilfulnes, whereby we
sin unto death, far beyond all comparison the worst: wills that the
Saints should pray for such brethren as sin, but not unto death: As for such
as sin unto death, by universally, and wilfully falling away from the known
truth, he would no prayers to be made for them. Our Savior Mat. 11. Mat. 12.
Christ judging and estimating sins: from their causes, promises mercy,
favor, grace, and pardon, to such as ignorantly received him not; if at length
they would come unto him: but such as maliciously resisted the truth;
wilfully fought against the gospel; obstinately opposed them selves against
the holy Ghost, who offered them grace, and they refused: and so blasphemed the
spirit of Christ, he protests should never be forgeuen. Saint Jude
distinguishing of sins, whereof some are done of infirmity, Jude 22. 23
and simple ignorance: some of stubbernes and peeuishnes: measuring them by
their causes, willed that such as sin in the former kind, should be pitied:
but such as sin in the second, should severely be corrected and chastened.

Saint Paul in two most worthy places to the Hebrews, Heb. 6. and 10
disputing of Apostasy, and sliding away from the known truth, which comes
of a malicious obstinacy, and wilfulnes of mind, measuring that sin from the
cause: the maliciousnes and wilfulnes of their hearts: denies all pardon
thereunto, as to a sin irremissible, and which cannot be pardoned, as other
sins are. Saint Paul writing of himself and his own sins, in afflicting
1. Tim. 1.
and persecuting the Church of Christ, measuring sins according to their
causes: reputeth sins done of ignorance less then sins of wilfulnes:
Wherefore he offending ignorantly, obtained mercy; whereas the Scribes and
Pharisees, and other Jews opposing themselves to the Gospel, were subject to
the eternal judgment of God. In another place pronounces he the greater
judgment to them which wilfully and impenitently despised the long Romans 2.
sufferance and patience of God.

Finally, Saint James this our Apostle, in this his Epistle, James 4.
esteeming sins from the affections and fountains from whence they come,
judging that sin which is of knowledge, greater then the sin of ignorance,
concludes thus; Wherefore he that knows to do aright, and does it not, to
him it is sin: that is, the greater finne. Our Savior in like manner
condemns the Jews of John 15.
greater sin, because he came in person to them, and spoke unto them, yet
they utterly refused him and his doctrine: which had they not done, their sin
had been the less. Thus their sin of wilfulnes by Christ is judged the
greater: their sin of ignorance the lesser. If men therefore weigh the
causes, beginnings, affections of me^, from whence sins spring: that some are
of wilfulnes, others of ignorance; some of malice, others of infirmity.
Therence may we easily see the inequality of sin.

2 As of their causes sins are judged: so also they are judged of their
events, sins of malicious wickedness, thrust out and expel the holy Ghost,
and Spirit of God: so do not sins of infirmity. Therefore sins of
malicious wilfulnes, are greater then sins of infirmity. Sins of wilfulnes
abolish all faith from the hearts; and all repentance from the lives of men:
and so consequently all Heb. 6. 16. Heb. 10. 26. Heb. 12. 17
hope of pardon and forgeuenes. So do not sins of infirmity or ignorance.
This was and is manifest in Cain, in Saul, in the Pharisees, in Judas, in
Julian the Apostata, and backslidar, in Lucian the mocker, and such like.
Whereby it appeared that their sins were greater then the sins of other
men. And thus also may we judge the inequality of sins.

3 If we look into the inequality of punishments, they also argue inequality
of sins: for it were against equity and right to punish like sins, in one
more sharply, in another more slenderly. Wherefore seeing almighty God, (the
righteous and just judge of the whole earth,) Genesis 18.
does punish some sins with greater, some with lighter punishments: it
argues undoubtedly, a manifest difference Genesis 3.
of sins. When Adam and Euah had sinned, God lays unlike punishments upon
them; less upon Adam, greater upon Euah: whereby it may appear, that the
sin of Euah 1. Tim. 2. 14.
was greater then the sin of Adam. Solomon in his book of wisdom, in the
difference of punishment, intimates Wisdom 6
the difference of sins. Wherefore, to show that the sins of Princes are
greater then the sins of the people he says; They which are most low, are
worthy mercy, but the mighty shall be mightily tormented. Our Savior Christ,
the eternal wisdom of God, by inequality of punishments witnesses
inequality of sins unto Luke 12.
men. To which purpose that serves in the Gospel; That servant which knows
the will of his master, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes: but
he that knows not the will of his master, yet committed things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. That sin therefore which is punished
with many stripes, is the greater: that which with fewer, is the less sin.
In another place he sets down degrees of punishments, wherence degrees of
sins may be gathered. He (says Christ) which is angry with his brother
unadvisedly, is worthy of judgment; Mat. 5.
he that calls him Racha, is worthy of a council; who so calls him fool,
is worthy to be punished with hell fire. As then a council is greater then
judgment, and hell fire then a council: so is contempt (signified by Racha)
greater sin then unadvised anger: and slanderous and reproachful speech (by
fool signified) greater Mat. 10.
then the signs of contempt. Herence may it appear, that the sin of Sodom
was less then the contempt of the Gospel, because our Savior avouches, that
it should be easier in the day of judgment for the men of Sodom and Gomorrha,
then for that City which received not the Gospel.

Thus he shewetb, that the sins of Corazin and Mat. 11.
Bethsaida are greater then the sins of Tyrus and Sydon: the sins of
Capernaum greater then of Sodom, by the punishments which should be greater
and heavier upon Corazin and Bethsaida: then upon Tyrus and Sydon: upon
Capernaum, then upon Sodom. Wherefore he vpbraideth them, and denounces
horrible vengeance against them. Woe to thee Corazin, woe to thee Bethsaida:
for if the miracles done in thee, had been done in Tyrus and Sydon, they had
long ago repented in sackcloth and ashes. Verily I say unto you, it shall be
easier for Tyrus and Sidon in the day of judgment, then for you. And thou
Capernaum, which art lifted up to heaven, thou shall be brought down unto
hell: for if the great works which have been done in thee, had been done
among them of Sodom, they had remained unto this day: But I say unto you; it
sh^lbe easier for the^ of Sodom in the day of judgment, then for thee.

In that he therefore denounces heavier judgment against these Cities, then
against Tyrus, Sydon, and Sodoma: it appears that their sins were the
greater; and so they were indeed, in respect of their knowledge of Gods will,
and the manifold miracles they had showed them, to provoke them, which were
not done unto Tyrus, Sidon, or Sodoma, the famous Cities. To like purpose, Mat.
12.
the threatening of greater punishment to the blaspheming of the holy ghost,
then to the blaspheming of the son of man, intimates greater to be the sin
of blasphemy against the holy ghost, in wilfully and maliciously resisting the
truth, then the sin of blasphemy against the son of man, in taking offense
at his baseness and humility. And in reproving the great hypocrisy of the
Scribes and Mat. 23.
Pharisees, for devouring poor widows houses under pretense of long prayer:
Christ shows that their sin is greater then the other sins of men, in
that thereunto he denounces heavier condemnation.

Saint Paul makes difference of men's sins by the difference of the
punishments thereunto threatened or inflicted: Romans 2.
wherefore in that men by contemning the long patience of God, heap and
treasure up unto themselves the greater punishment. Therence it appears, that
the contempt of Gods great mercy and patience, is a sin greater then the
common sins of men. Saint James, to James 3. Heb. 10. 28.
signify that usurping authority over our brethren, in curiously and
rigorously condemning them, when we our selves are likewise guilty and
faulty, is a greater sin then other sins among men: declares that by the
punishment, because it provoke God to punish us therefore more severely:
therefore he disswadeth the Saints therefro; My brethren, be not many
masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation. The law it
Deuteronomy. 25.
self (to teach an inequality of sins by the inequality of punishments)
wills that punishments should be according to the hainousnes of the sins:
implying inequality of sins, by inequality of punishments.

Solomon the wise man, showing that theft is not so Pro. 6.
abominable in the sight of God, as whordome is; by the punishment of both
(for theft might be redeemed; but adultery was a perpetual infamy, and death
by the law of God) faith: men do not despise a thief when he steals, to
satisfy his soul when he is hungry: but if he be found, he shall restore
seven fold, or he shall give all the substance of his house: but he that
commits adultery with a woman, he is destitute of understanding, and he
that does it destroys his own soul. S. Augustine no doubt therefore,
measuring sins according to their Lib. 21. c. 16. ciuit. Dei.
punishments, and seeing that inequality of pains, do grow of the
inequality of offenses and sins: writes, that hell fire shall be greater
or lesser, according to the wickedness of men. Whose sins therefore are
greater, their punishment shall be sharper: whose sins, are lighter, their
pains shall be easier. So that inequality of punishments, does rightly argue
inequality of offenses. God almighty, in his word and law, partly inflicting,
partly threatening greater punishment to one sin then to an other: does
thereby sufficiently teach us the inequality of sins, by men against him
committed.

4 Neither this only, but even man's own conscience, when he has committed
sin, shows and testifies inequality of sin: in that he is more vexed
and troubled in mind, for some one, then for another sin: more inwardly
tormented for committing adultery, in breaking the promise, which he made
before God and his holy Congregation: then for theft: more in mind disquieted
for the committing of murder: then for oppressing his neighbor in bargaining:
more burdened in conscience for slaying his own father and mother, then any
other man or woman: more grieved in spirit for horrible blasphemy against
GOD, and his Son Christ, whose soul men slay, as it were: whose body they
rent: whose sides they pierse: whose flesh they tear: whose heart they wound:
whose blood they shed: whose name they profane by cursed, execrable, cruel,
and ungodly oaths: then for slander or backebiting of their brethren. Having
this testimony of our conscience, which by the instinct and light of nature is
imprinted, and impressed in men's hearts: it is evident that there is great
difference and inequality of sins. Which thing we may see in Cain, whose
sins were Gene. 4.
many: yet no one so much touched his conscience, as the shedding of the
innocent blood of his brother. Esau had many sins, for which he was worthily
condemned for a profane person: yet none of his sins Gene. 27. Heb. 12. 27.
troubled him so much, as that for one portion of meat, he had sold his
birthright: wherefore afterward when he would have inherited the blessing,
he was rejected, and found no place of repentance, though he sought that
blessing with tears, as the Scripture records Judas the traitor, was an
evil man every way: covetous, merciless, and guilty of great wickedness:
yet none Mat. 27.
of these, troubled and disquieted his mind so much: as his treason and
shedding of innocent blood: wherewith he was so touched, as that through
conscience thereof, he brought the money back again to the rulers, which for
his betraying Christ he had received, and went out and hanged himself.

This we find and know to be most true, both in hystories sacred, and also
profane: in common use and practice of our times: that some one sin so much
more then others, have disquieted men's minds: as that some therefore have
fallen phrentike: others become desperate: some have been daily disquieted,
and have languished away: others have been the butchers of their own bodies:
whereby appears evidently inequality of sin.

5 Moreover, not only Gods laws, but civil Jaws acknowledge inequality of
sins: in that they do not only set down greater punishment to one sin,
then to another: but also give more sharp charge for the avoiding of one
sin, then of another. As Gods law chiefly forbids idolatry, which is
spiritual fornication: man's law chiefly forewarneth to beware of disloyalty,
rebellion, and rising up against their princes: whereby it appears that these
are greatest sins, both before God and men: and so an equality of sins.

6 The very Scriptures of GOD, the word of truth witnesses, that one sin
is greater then an other: therefore undoubtedly sins are unequal. Almighty
GOD comparing the sins of Jerusalem Ezech. 16. Psalm. 1. 1.
with the sins of Samaria and Sodom: avouches that Jerusalem had done
worse then they both: and had corrupted her ways, more then either Samaria or
Sodom: and had far exceeded them, and justified them, in the abomination
which she above them, had committed. Our Savior avouches in plain manner,
inequality John 19.
of sin, when he told Pilate, that Judas in betraying him, had the greater
sin. Saint John plainly avouches 1. John 5.
inequality of sin, in that he says: There is a sin not unto death, for
which we must pray in the brethren: Another; unto death, for the which he
would not have prayer made. Saint Paul preferring adultery and fornication
before other sins: puts a plain 1. Cor. 6.
mark of difference betwixt sins: therefore he says, Fly fornication:
every sin that a man does, is without the body: but he that commits
fornication, sins against his own body. Finally, S. Peter makes an
evident difference and inequality of sins, when he speaking 2. Pet. 2.
of backesliding: affirms, that it had been better for men, never to have
known the word of righteousness, then after they have known it: to turn
from the holy commandment given unto them.

7 As one virtue is more excellent then another: so is one sin and vice worse
then another: but S. Paul makes 1. Cor. 13. 13.
charity more excellent then either hope or faith: therefore it must so fall
out in sins, that one be woorsse then another. Seeing therefore that all
sins came not from the same root and original: seeing the like events,
follow not all sins alike: seeing some sins are punished more sharply,
others more slightly: Seeing some sins more trouble the consciences of men
then others do: seeing not only Gods law, but man's also, forwarneth of one
more then of another: seeing the very Scripture of God affirms one to be
greater then an other: then is the Stoicall opinion false, which holds an
equality of all sins. Neither is it the meaning here of the Apostle, to make
all transgressions alike: as if it were al one to sin in one, and in many
precepts: but to show that the whole law is so united in every point, that
who so breaks one jot, breaks all: and that no man can perfectly fulfill
any one commandment, which fulfilleth not all. And finally that the Majesty
of God the lawmaker is offended in the breach of every commandment, whose
will and pleasure is unaccomplished, as well in one part of the law, as in
many: therefore says he, who so ever keeps the whole law, and yet fails
in one point, he is guilty of all: and this is the proposition.

2 This proposition of the Apostle, is in the second place confirmed: that he
that transgresses in any one point of the law, is guilty of the whole. And
his reason or proof is fetched from God, the author and maker of the law:
who, as he is alvvayes like himself, and one; so has he united every part
of the law in so narrow and straight conjunction: as that he that offends
in any one point, breaks all, and is guilty of the whole. For one and the
same God, which forbids committing of adultery, forbids also the
committing of murder: So that if we commit not adultery, yet if we commit
murder, we have transgressed the law. He that forbids theft, forbids
also false witness. If we steal not, yet bear false witness against our
brethren, we have transgressed the law. The same God forbids drunkenness,
which also forbids wantonness: If therefore we be not wanton, yet be
drunken, we are transgressors of the whole law. To be short, the same God
which commands one thing, commands also another: he that forbids one
sin, forbids also another: So that if a man seem to keep the whole law,
that only part wherein he offends excepted, and therein fails: he is
guilty of all.

Wherehence then it follows, that if men keep all the rest of the law,
besides this one thing: that he respects the persons of men, and so offend
against the law of love: he sins against the law, and is guilty of all
the whole law: because he that commanded the other parts of the law,
commands this also: so that his will is broken in one, as well as in many
points of the law. Thus the Apostle reasons from the author of the law,
who wills that every part thereof be observed.

What says some man: is he that prefers the profane rich man, before
the poor godly person, and therein offending, guilty of the sin of
adultery, murder, blasphemy, unlawful lust, concupiscense, covetousness
and the rest? Or commits he all the sins in the law forbidden, which
commits one only sin, and therein offends?

No assuredly. But because the breach of one title of the law, is the turning
away from the will of GOD, the law maker: whose will is transgressed in the
neglecting of any one duty: therefore he which offends in one point, is
held as guilty of the whole law. Such therefore as regard the persons of
the rich, with disdainefull contempt of the poor: transgress the law
therein, and are guilty of the whole law: if we respect the Majesty of God,
which is hurt as well in the breach of one, as of many precepts, albeit (as
has been said) not so grievously.

Which is here set down by the Apostle, least any should seem to flatter
and excuse himself, or vaunt himself for guiltless, when he observes all
the rest of the law; yet in any jot thereof offends.

Wherefore (as if the Apostle should say) let us grant that in many things
you observe and keep the law, and therein offend not: yet can you not deny,
but that in preferring the wicked wealthy rich men before the godly poor
brethren: you have the faith of Jesus Christ in respect of persons: in doing
whereof, his will is broken, who has commanded the rest of the law: and so
you are guilty of the whole law. For he that commands one thing in the
law, commands another: he that commands we should not commit adultery,
commands also, that we should not kill: whereof, in whether soever we
offend, his law is broken: his will and pleasure transgressed: therefore
therein offending, we are guilty of the whole law of God. Thus the Apostle
by this reason drawn from example of the parts of the law, which are all
enjoined by the same lavv-maker which is God: proves the former proposition:
who so ever keeps the whole law, and fails in one point, is guilty of
all. For he that said, thou shall not commit adultery, said also, thou
shall not kill: wherefore if thou commit not adultery, yet if thou kill: thou
art a transgressour of the law. These things being so manifest, we need no
further to dilate this matter: this for the proof of a thing so plain, being
sufficient.

3 The third and last thing in this second reason, is the conclusion, in the
12. and 13. verses contained. In which conclusion there are two things to be
noted. 1 The conclusion it self. 2 The reason of the conclusion.

This conclusion, is as an exhortation: so speak, and so do, as they which
shall be judged by the law of liberty. Whereby we are advertised, that
such as will be exempted and cleared from the curse of the law: must both so
speak and so do, as they which hope to be judged by the law of liberty:
In all our doings, in all our sayings, in all our actions, in all our speeches,
so to conform our selves to the nourishing of love: as they which hope thereby
to be absolved from death and damnation. Wherefore it is good to bewarie and
charie both in our doings, and in our sayings also: that neither in the one,
neither in the other, we fall away from perfourming of duty of love one to
another: which care who so ever neglects: shall not taste of the grace of
God, who has in singular love, and tender mercy delivered us from the curse
of the law especially upon condition, that as thereby we are partakers of his
unspeakable love: so we should in like manner cheerish and maintain charity
among our selves, whereunto this partial preferring of persons is contrary.

By the law of liberty, some understand the law of love: which therefore is
called the law of liberty, because through love we are delivered from
sins: for that our sins and iniquities are covered before God, 1. Pet. 4.
Pro. 10.
when we show the manifest tokens of love toward our brethren. And by this
law men are said to be judged, because in the general judgment, sentence
shall be given either with us, or against us, by the fruits of Matt. 15.
our love. If we shall show unfeigned love toward Christ in his afflicted
members: in feeding them, hungry: in refreshing them, thirsty: in harboring
them, strangers: in clothing them, naked: in visiting them, sick: in seeing
them, imprisoned: then shall we hear sentence of comfort: Come ye blessed of
my father: receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. But if we show no love by these: then shall we hear sentence of
condemnation: Go you cursed of my Father into everlasting fire, prepared for
the devil and his angels. Thus accotding to these testimonies of faith, and
fruits of love, we shall be judged. Howsoever this be true: yet the law of
liberty may rather here signify the Sea 1. Chapter verse 25.
Gospel it self: or the mercy of GOD, in the Gospel preached unto men: and
the Gospel or mercy of God, may therefore be called the law of liberty
because they which are effectually partakers thereof, are thereby delivered
from the curse of the law: from dread of death; from power of Satan; from
slavery of sin; and translated into the glorious liberty of the sons of
Romans 8.
God.

And here to be judged, is to be discharged, quitte, delivered, and absolved
from death and damnation: as the place it self may import unto us; so do, and
so speak, as they which shall be judged by the law of liberty: that is such
as trust by the mercy of God to be delivered from death and damnation.

The reason of this exhortatorie conclusion is: there shall be condemnation
merciless unto him that shows no mercy; and mercy rejoices against
condemnation. Such as in disdayning and contemning the poor, and preferring
the rich, being profane and wicked, show themselves merciless and void of
love: shall themselves taste, not of mercy, but of judgment; not of love, but
of the wrath of GOD: but they which in this point fulfill the royal law of
GOD, commanding men to love their neighbors as themselves; and so shevve
themselves merciful, even toward the poor brethren: they shall triumph
over judgment and condemnation, whereunto they shall not be subject.

This thing, as in the proposed matter it is most true: so in other officices
and duties, it is no less manifest: for generally who so is of an hard
heart, merlesse, currish and cruel toward men: shall find God severe, rough,
and sharp against himself. For mercy shall be restrained from those which show
no mercy, and judgment, or condemnation merciless, shall be to them which
show no mercy. If in Christian assemblies, men prefer the rich with
merciless contempt of the poor brethren: Almighty God in the assembly of
his Saints, and in the meeting together of thousands and ten thousands of his
angels: shall neglect and disdain the^. In the works of mercy who so is
merciles* shall find no mercy: for he that stops Pro. 21.
his ear to the cry of the poor, shall cry himself, and not be heard.
Wherefore the glutton in the Gospel, Luke 16.
neglecting the humble suite of poor Lazarus, only for the crummes which fell
from his table: cries in hell fire for ever, to have the tippe of his tongue
only to be cooled: and finds no favor.

Almighty God in his prophet, shows himself angry, Isai 1.
not favorable, to such as by their avarice, usury, oppression, and
extortion, fraud, deceit, and cruelty in Psalm. 18.
dealing, have been without pity. David the man of God, protesting that God
rejects them when they cry for help, either in pain or in fear, who
reiecte the cry of the poor afflicted: says; They cried, but there was none
to help them: even to the Lord, but he answered them not. In mutual
pardoning and forgeuenes of sin when we our selves are hard and strait
laced: we find God hard and severe toward our selves: for he shall find
vengeance at the hands of God, who seeks vengeance Ecclus. 28. Mat. 18.
Mark 11. 2
in his own private quarrels, as Sirach records; The servant who would not
have pity upon his fellow for one hundred pence; is dealt withal in severity,
til all the debt of ten thousand talents, be discharged, in the Gospel. Who
therefore (says Cyprian) lost that favor which before was showed him: because
he showed not favor to his fellow servant. In judging of our brethren, and all
other Upon the Lords prayer.
duties to be performed unto men: we must look to receive with the same
measure, whereby we have delivered.

If we give by hard measure of rash and cruel judgment, we shall reap, and
receive again by the like. Wherefore our Savior Christ exhorts men not
rashly to judge or condemn: least they be likewise judged and Mat. 7.
condemned: for with what measure we meat unto other men, it shall be
measured with the like unto us again: which is the just judgment of God
against men, in the whole course of their lives.

Such then as are merciless, and nourish not love, shall not only not obtain
mercy, but cannot ask mercy at the hands of GOD or man. For with what face,
what look, what countenance can they ask that, which they have denied to
others? Yea, experience and use of things do plentifully teach us, that mercy
shall be denied the merciless: and condemnation without pity, showed upon them
which show no mercy.

Have we not seen many pinched with poverty, bitten with famine, eaten with
noisome diseases, spoiled of their wealth, robbed of their riches, vexed in
their minds, tormented in their bodies, afflicted on every side: who in the
days of their flourishing wealth, in the soundnes and health of their bodies,
and quietness of their minds, have been merciles toward such, as in this
wise were afflicted? Has not condemnation, execution, punishment, been
merciles toward them, for that they showed no mercy? This is therefore
generally in all things, particularly true, in having the faith of our glorious
Lord Jesus Christ, in respect of persons, that there shall be condemnation
merciles showed unto them which show no mercy.

The opposite and contrary member hereunto is, mercy rejoices against
condemnation: for they which are merciful, shall find favor, grace and
mercy, before the judgment seat of God, and rejoice over condemnation, which
through the grace of God they shall escape: in as much as by their love, and
fruits of mercy, they show themselves truly inserted and ingraffed into the
body of Romans 8.
Jesus Christ, whereby they are exempted and freed from condemnation: For there
is now no condemnation unto those that are in Jesus Christ, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit. These being made by the mercy of God,
the lively members of the body of Jesus Christ: these being the children of the
resurrection: these being the heirs of the grace of god: these being the
iointheires with Jesus Christ: these (by their unfeigned love) showing
themselves the faithful and undoubted Saints: shall not come into
condemnation, neither see death: neither fear they the severity of Gods
judgments, (as do the wicked, but rejoice and triumph over condemnation.

Wherefore, seeing that judgment shall be merciless toward them which show
no mercy, and that mercy reioiceth against condemnation: let us not respect
the outward appearance of men, and regard the rich, with disdainful contempt
of the poor, and so appear merciless: least that we fall into merciless
condemnation: but let us have a right judgment of the brethren, that we serve
one another in the fear of GOD: And so giving testimony of the mercy whereof
we are partakers through Christ: by him may triumph, and rejoice over
condemnation. This the GOD of all might, majesty, and mercy, grant unto us:
To whom, with the son and the holy Ghost, be all praise, honor, and glory,
both now, and for evermore. Amen.

James Chapter. verses 14. 15. 16. 17 18. 19. Sermon 12.
Verse 14. What avails it, my brethren, though a man says he has faith,
when he has no works? Can his faith save him?

15 For if a brother, or sister, be naked, and destitute of daily food:

16 And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace: warm your selves, and fill
your bellies, notwithstanding he give them nothing which is needful for the
body, what helps it?

17 Even so the faith, if it have no works, is dead in it self.

18 But some man might say: thou have the faith, and I have works, show thou
me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works.

19 Thou beleeuest there is one God, thou do well: the devils also believe,
and tremble.


2. part of the Chapter.
HEre now begins the second part of this Chapter, and so is continued to the
end: concerning good works necessarily to be joined with true faith, in all
the Saints of God whereof our faith destitute, is dead, and not that lively
faith whereby men are justified before God.

In this part there are three things. 1. The proposition, 14. ver. 2. The
proof, ver. 15. 16. to 26. verse. 3. The Conclusion, ver. 24. and 26.

These words red, contain two things. 1. The Proposition of the place: faith
without good works, is vain and dead. 2. The 2. first arguments of proof in
this place set down. 1. Is from a similitude. In the which 3. things are to be
noted. 1. The similitude it self. 2. The application thereof* 3. A preventing
of ar^ objection.
2. Is from an absurdity: It were absurd to profess no better a faith then
the deuil^ have: So do men whose faith is void of work^*


1 Now to proceed unto these things as they lie in the Apostle. The first is
the Proposition, whereof thus says the Apostle; What avails it though a man
say he has faith, when he has no works? Can his faith save him? As if he
would say; That faith which is void and destitute of good works, as fruits,
effects, and tokens of a faith: is not to be reputed and taken for a true,
saving and justifying faith: but rather for a show and shadow of faith, then
for faith indeed: for that no man is justified and saved by faith before GOD:
whose faith in due time, and in convenient manner, shows not it self in the
fruits and duties of love.

A doctrine most wholesome, most needful, most necessary, most profitable:
co^teyning a most grave discourse of the fruits of sanctification in all the
elect of god, against such as make show of faith, without godliness: wherein men
are taught that the very profession of Gods word, and christian religion,
profits nothing: unless it be joined with the study of good works, whereby
our faith is made manifest unto men.

This matter and argument is often urged against the shameless hypocrites of
all times, who pretend religion in outward appearance: but practice not true
holiness, whereby their religion might be confirmed: as both in the former
Chapter toward the end, and from this place to the knitting up of this present
Chapter. By Saint Paul; 1. Titus.
who inueyeth against their hypocrisy, who profess in words they know God,
but in works and deeds deny him: being abominable, disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate: whereof the world shall be full toward the end
thereof; as he also foretold his Scholar Timothy: 2. Tim. 3. 2. Pet. 1.
even of them which should have a show of godliness, but should deny the truth
thereof. To whom Saint Peter subscribeth: who requires in the Saints, that
virtue, action and practice of good works, be joined with faith: that there
may be that golden chain of all Christian ornaments in them, wherewith (above
other things) their lives might be beautified. Whereof also Saint John
admonishes, 1. John 3.
in calling men to the practice and doing of righteousness. And our Savior
himself in the holy Gospel, Mat. 7.
casting them off as workers of wickedness: whose whole religion is in words
only; Lord, Lord: and counting the^ for truly religious, who endeavor to do
the will of their Father which is in heaven. Finally, hereunto serve all the
exhortations in holy Scripture, whereby the men of God move us to the practice
of obedience, and study of virtue in the whole course of our life: which is
the only and special drift in the Apostles discourse here set down, as is
manifestly apparent.

Albeit then men by their works deserve not life, ne yet purchase their
salvation by their deeds: but with god are justified only through faith in
Jesus Christ, as the whole body of Scriptures, the examples of Fathers, the
testimonies of the learned Doctors of the Church, confirm: yet are good works
so necessary in those which are once justified by faith before God: as that
where they are not, faith is dead and fruitless: yea, a shadow of faith rather
then faith it self, whereby men are justified and saved before God. Which
thing the Apostle Saint James to intimate, in his affirmance here avouches;
What avails it my brethren, though a man say he has faith, when he has no
works? Can his faith save him?

That faith, the^, which is without good works, is not such a faith, as whereby
we are justified and stand before God: but a fruitelesse, dead, and barraine
faith, whereof we boast in vain. For, outward profession without holy
conversation, is halting hypocrisy: and pretended religion without true
reformation, is double iniquity. This is the doctrine of holy Scripture, this
is the state and proposition of this present Treatise: this is the thing
carefully and continually preached by the Ministers and Preachers of the gospel
now received: yet our adversaries, to bring us into odious and hateful
contempt with men, with batter backbiting, and reproachful slander, say; We
preach liberty to sin: we lay loose the reigns in the necks of men, to all
iniquity: we give license to all licenciousnes and impiety. when we preach
that good works are necessary in all those which are justified: partly to set
forth Gods glory: partly to show and express our unfeigned faith; partly to
win others by virtuous example, to godliness: preach we liberty? when we
teach, that faith void of good works, when time, place, persons, and other
occasions and circumstances serve: is vain, fruitless, and barraine: Teach
we licentiousnes to sin? when we cry against the vain profession of men,
careless of the duties of love: Lay we the raines loose in the necks of
men, to run he adlong into their own destruction? when we avouch that every
one which calls upon Christ, must depart from iniquity: Give we bitte and
bridle to iniquity? Finally, when we all with one mouth and one mind, cry out
against verbal religion, which is only in word: and drive men to the practice
of pure and holy obedience, if they will ever look to inherit the kingdom of
heaven: Do we (like heretics) swerue from the truth, and not rather agree
and meet just with Saint James his doctrine: who affirms, that men in saying
they have faith, when they have no works, avail nothing: neither that such a
faith can save them

The Proposition of the Apostle therefore is this. If a man say he has faith,
when he has no works, it prevails nothing, neither can that faith save him.
In which proposition, and Apostolic affirmance, is lively set down unto men,
the necessity of good works, and fruits of sanctification.

This Proposition is proved from the fifteen verse to the six and twenty,
by four reasons: Whereof two are 1. Is the confirmation of the place.
in these words of the Apostle, to the nineteen, or rather to the twenty
verse contained. The first from a similitude, in the fifteen, sixteen,
seventeen, eighteen verses comprised. The second in the nineteen verse
delivered.

1 Reason, why faith (bringing not forth good works) cannot save men, neither
avails any thing: is from a similitude. In which reason three things must be
considered. 1 The similitude it self. 2 The application of the similitude. 3
The preventing of an objection.

The similitude in these words is expressed. If a brother or sister be naked,
or destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them; Depart in peace,
warm your selves, fill your bellies: notwithstanding you give them not those
things which are needful to the body: what helps it? For a man to say to
the hungry, go fill thy belly: to the thirsty, go drink: to the naked,
go apparel and cloth thy self: to the harborlesse, get thee lodging: yet
gives nothing at all whereby they may do so: For he neither gives meat to
feed him; nor drink to refresh him; neither cloth to cover him; nor
houseroome to harbor him: This bidding the hungry to fill his belly; the
naked to warm him; the thirsty to refresh himself; the harbourlesse to get
himself lodging, is no true charity, nor sound love: but charity in show,
love in word, which Saint John condemns: My little children, let us not love
in word, neither in tongue only; but in deed and in truth: For Christian
charity, and pure love, stands not in words, 1. John 3.
but in deeds, and proceeds from a pure and sincere affection.

For a man to say to him that has purse pennilesse: body cloathlesse: scrippe
meatlesse: remaining harbourlesse: go get thee meat: go cloth thy back: go
fill thy bag: go lodge thy self, makes show only of false liberality. If
a Surgeon say to the wounded person, get thee salve and heal thy self: yet
gives him neither salve nor plaster, nor any thing whereby his sore may be
healed: comfort but slenderly. A physician bidding his cure and pacient to
wax strong: to recover health: to walk abroad: and yet applies nothing,
neither prescribes any thing whereby strength may be gotten, health recovered,
former state restored, by bare words profits nothing. He that meets a
wayfairing man, far from al path or high way, wa^dring; and says, go aright:
yet teaches not which hand he must turn on, which way he must take, which
path he must follow; helps the staier nothing toward his proposed journey.
To bid the hungry go fill his belly, and yet to give him nothing, is no
charity: to will the naked to cloth himself, and minister not whereby that
may be accomplished, is no liberality: for the Surgeon to persuade the wounded
man to cure himself, teaching not whereby he may do it, is no pity: for the
Physician to exhort his pacient, to recover help and health, and prescribe not
whereby the sickness may be repelled, and former state restored; is no
remedy: to bid a man keep the right way, when he is altogether out, and
not to set him in the path he must follow, is no courtesy. Thus by this
similitude, the Apostle shows, that that is no faith which is in words only.

2 The application of this similitude is the second thing in this first
argument and reason: thus by the Apostle expressed: as to say to the hungry:
go fill thy belly: and to the naked, go warm thy self, and give nothing
whereby his hunger may be slaked, and his nakedness covered, and his body
warmed; is no liberality in deed: so neither faith is to be counted faith in
deed, when it is void of good works. Even so says Saint James, the faith
if it have no works is dead in it self. Such faith therefore as brings not
forth good fruits, and is plentiful in good works: is not true faith, but
an image of faith: is not a lively faith, but a certain dead thing, set out
by the name of faith: even as to say to the hungry, go fill thy belly, is no
charity.

A true faith, by the works of love is quickened, revived, and receives, as
it were, life, in the sight and show of men. Wherefore that faith which is
destitute hereof, is as dead, and not to be accounted of. For, as when we see
our brethren naked, destitute of daily food: afflicted and distressed on every
side: and say to them, God help you poor men, God comfort you, go in the name
of God, and provide for your selves, yet we give them nothing: this our speech
argues not true liberality and charity: even so when we say we have faith,
and yet show no deeds, whereby our faith may be known unto men: thus to
boast of faith: thus to say we have faith: thus to pretend that we do
believe, does not argue true faith: for faith says Chrysostom, without Hom.
8. upon 2. Tim.
works, is a figure, show or image without force or virtue. Whereof to
boast, is to boast of a dead thing, wherein is no quickenesse, no life, no
profitablenesse to men: and to incur just reproof, and open reprehension
with the world.

The bare name and profession of faith, which hypocrites and the common sort of
men count and call faith: which by a kind of correction and granting may be
so called: when men pretend in words that they believe, and in outward
appearance profess themselves to have faith, which we may grant to be a
kind of faith: being destitute and void of good works, is in deed vain and
dead: neither deserves it the name of faith more then a dead man, deserves to
be called a man: yet so men call him sometimes: or the image of Caesar, to be
called Caesar: or the picture of King Henry deserves to be called the King.
Which names, if we apply to these things, we speak improperly, as to call a
dead man, a man: or Caesar's image, Caesar; or King Henry his picture, King
Henry: so when we call this dead faith, faith: we speak improperly.

If a man (says he) has faith, and that he believes: yet is merciless,
cruel, covetous, reproachful, blasphemous, riotous, unjust, unrighteous,
ungodly, an oppressor, extorcioner, usurer, murderer, drunkard, proud person,
or carried away with any such like iniquity and sin, from the study and
practice of good works: can that faith save him? Can that faith be counted
such a faith, as whereby before GOD we are justified? Or may we not rather
say, that faith quaileth, dies, and is decayed in him? Which men may grant to
be faith in a speech improper: but not such a faith as is accepted with GOD,
through Jesus Christ. Even as that was no liberality, neither is it, for a man
to say to the hungry, go fill thy belly: and to the naked, go warm thy
self: and yet to give them nothing needful for the body: but rather a
mocking, both of the distressed, and of GOD himself: upon whom the
contumelies, reproaches, injuries, redounde, which are done to his Saints,
afflicted in this world, and discussed.

For as the poor is after a manner mocked, when in words we seem to moan
him, and for his case to be moved: when notwithstanding we show no fruits
of compassion: so is God also after a manner mocked, when we pretend we have
faith, yet show forth no good works, whereby our faith in God might be
testified, and the afflicted Saints comforted: and so our faith is but dead
in us. For what the soul is to the body, that is Charity and the fruits of
love unto faith. And we know that the soul quickens and gives life unto
the body, whereby it is discerned and known from a dead body: so charity
and the duties of love give life unto our faith, and makes it known to be
lively, quick and fruitful. So then as the body is dead without the soul:
so is faith dead without good works which give life, as it were, and
quickens it, in the sight of men. And what health is to this bodily life, the
same are fruits of charity, and sanctification to the faith of each man and
woman. Now health gives strength to the legs, might to the arms, power to
the body, convenient ability to every member, for the perfourmance of
actions in this body and present state of life, required: even so unfeigned
love, reformed life, the fruits of sanctification, the study of virtue and
good works: makes our souls nimble, and our faith strong to perform those
duties, which of the Saints, justified by faith in Jesus Christ: are expected,
looked for, and required.

If faith and works in Gods Saints be so necessarily joined, and so
inseparably united and knit together, as that without good works, faith is
here counted dead: and justification before GOD be imputed to faith, as the
Scripture teaches: Abraham believed, and it was imputed Gene. 15. Romans 4.
unto him for righteousness: how shall not justification be imputed to works
also, seeing they are inseparable?

It may be answered: that faith and good works in the Saints of God now
justified, are inseparable, but to the obtaining of justification, faith
without works only is required, and all works excluded from the work of
justification. Therefore Saint Paul says, that by the works of the law no
flesh is justified in the sight of Romans 3.
God: and that all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God, and are
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ,
whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. A
little after making an Antithisis, and opposition Romans 4.
betwixt faith and works, so that they cannot any wise agree in the work of
our justification: he says, to him that works, the wages is not counted by
favor, but by debt. But to him that works not, but beeleeueth on him that
instifieth the ungodly: his faith is Romans 11.
counted for righteousness. In the same Epistle long after, he reasons in
like manner from things opposed one to the other, whereof both cannot be causes
of the same effects, and so beats flat to the ground all works, from being
either in whole, or in part, cause of our justification: if election (and
justification) be of grace, then is it no more of works, for else were grace
no more grace: but if it be of works, then is it not of grace, for then were
work no more work. To the Church of Galatia: Gal. 2.
know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ. This doctrine he published to his scholar Titus, the Bishop
of the Isle of Creta: wherefore he says in this wise: when that bountifulness
of that love of God our Savior toward man appeared: Tit. 3.
not by the works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his
mercy he saved us. Finally, to the Church of Ephesus: By grace are you saved
Ephe. 2.
through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of GOD: not of
works, least any man should boast himsef.e Whereby it is apparent, that
works are excluded from the work of justification before God, which is by
faith only without works, according to the scripture.

If our adversaries reply, that Paul speaks of the ceremonial law, when he
excludes works from justifying us: I answer: that he speaks not of the
law ceremonial only, but of the moral law also: so that no works justify
us, but all are excluded from that work, before God.

And this may thus appear. 1 When Paul would Romans 3.
prove that both Jew and Gentile are under sin, and so neither by their
works justified before God: he alleges many testimonies out of the Prophets,
David and Isai: whereby all men are convinced of sin: as, there is none
righteous, no not one: there is none that seeks after God: there is none that
has understanding: they have all gone out of the way, they have been made
altogether unprofitable: there is none that does good, no not one. There throat
is an open sepulcher: they have used their tongues to deceyte, the poison of
Aspes is under their lips: and so forth, from the 10. verse, to the 19.
verse. In the twentieth verse upon those former testimonies he infers:
therefore by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in his sight.
His conclusion must hold in the same works, whereof in the proof and
premises he spoke: but his testimonies are touching the moral law, not the
ceremonial law: and therefore speaks he also of the moral law, when he
excludes works from justifying us in the sight of God.

2 In that place: why we, nor any flesh, can by any means be justified by the
works of the law: the reason Romans 3. v. 20
of the Apostle is this: for by the law comes the knowledge of sin.
Wherehence I draw this argument: by those works of the law whereby we have
knowledge of sin, no flesh is justified before GOD. But by the works of the
moral law we have greatest knowledge of sin: therefore even the works of
the law moral, are excluded from the work of justification. And that the
moral law brings knowledge of sin chiefly, Saint Paul showed to the
Romans. Who in another place repeating the Rom 7.
same, that knowledge of sin comes by the law: he gives instance, not in
the part ceremonial, but in the part moral, of the law: I knew not sin
(says he) but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the law had
said, thou shall not lust. If the works of that law, whereby the knowledge
of sin comes, justify no flesh: and the chief knowledge of sin come by
the moral law: then do not the works of the moral law justify more,
then the works of the ceremonial law of God.

3 That law, whose works Saint Paul excludes from being means of man's
justification, causes wrath: Romans 4.
as in the same disputation is avouched: but to cause wrath is not proper to
the ceremonies of the law, which were rather given to reconcile the people to
God: but to the moral law, which thundereth out the fearful wrath Deuteronomy. 27.
Gal. 3.
of God against all transgressions. Therefore not only not the ceremonies, but
neither the moral works of the law do justify us before God.

4 Finally, S. Paul to the Church of Galatia handeling the same argument and
question of justification: Gal. 3.
and therein proving that we art not justified by the works of the law, he
reasons from contraries: by the law we are held accursed: therefore
thereby we are not saved and justified. His antecedent or former proposition
he proves by the law it self, wherein it is thus written: Cursed is every
one, that continues not in all Deuteronomy. 27.
things, that are written in the law to do them. Now this curse is not so
much understood of the breach of the ceremonies, as of the moral precepts: to
the transgression, whereof, from 15. verse, to 26. verse, setting down
several curses, as against idolatry, disobedience of children to their
parents: removing of land marks, vvhereunder he condemns all injuries and
extortions: not counselling and helping our neighbor: hindering the right of
the stranger, fatherless and widow: incest, buggerie, privy hurt, briberie.
36. verse, he concludes: Cursed (says he) is every one that abides not in
all things that are written in this book to do them. Citing therefore that
place in the matter and question of justification, which he applies to faith:
and altogether takes from works, speaks not of the ceremonies of the law
only, but of the moral precepts also: and so of all the works of the law:
which both in whole and in part are denied to justify us before God.

Albeit this controversy betwixt the Jews and Acts 15. 5. Gal. 1. 11. Romans
4. 9.
the Apostles, began about circumcision, which the Jews would have annexed
to faith and the Gospel, as necessary to every one which should be saved, as
appears: yet the Apostle rising from the part to the whole: from
circumcision to all the law of Moises: excludes not only circumcision, but
all the works of the law, from justifying us before God.

It follovveth not therefore because faith and works are both in gods Saints
together; therefore they have the same effect, namely to justify before God.
For albeeit man has at once, feet, hands, ears and eyes, yet follows not
that they serve to one use, but to several: the feet to walk: the hands to
touch: the ears to hear: the eyes to see: so albeit in the Saints there is
both faith and good works: yet by faith, not by works, are we saved and
justified before GOD. In the Sun there are together both heat and light, yet
is not the light, but the heat and influence, cause of the bringing forth of
earthly creatures, and fruits of the ground: and by the light, not by the
heat, it shines unto men. In the Element of water, naturally there is
moisture joined with cold: yet to purge and wash is proper to the moisture,
not to the cold: to cool, proper to the coldness rather, then to the
moisture. So in like manner, albeit faith and good works be in the Saints at
once, yet are men justified by faith and belief, not by works: which in
deed are not good, but in as much as we are justified by faith in Christ, from
whence, as fruits from a tree, they spring unto men, and are manifest to the
world: by order and consideration faith going before as the cause, gendering
good works as effects in the Saints of God.

To apply justification to works as well as to faith, is a deceit and
fallacy from the accident, in applying that to one, which is proper to
another, because both are joined together. Saint Origin upon the 3. Romans
shows that faith alone without works saves, whereof he gives the thief for
exemple, and the woman to whom Christ said, thy sins are forgiven thee, thy
faith has made thee whole. Origin in Romans 3.


Now that we say, faith and works are joined together so inseparably, as that
faith without works is dead, according to this infallible doctrine, in them
which are already justified it is true: not simply. For in men to be
justified they are not: for in them, first faith is, whereby they are
justified, and afterward good works follow. In the poor publican there were
no good works: Luke 18.
but faith was in him, whereby moved, he humbled himself and said: O God be
merciful unto me a sinner: and so destitute of works, he departed justified.
The thief, who through Luke 23.
faith entreated our Savior Christ, that he would remember him when he came to
his kingdom: thereby was justified: yet had no good works apparent, with his
faith. Faith therefore in men to be justified, is without works: but being
once justified, works (as soon as occasion is ministered) show themselves in
the Saints of God, according to this doctrine. Truly therefore says Saint
Augustine; When the Apostle says: we suppose, or conclude, Defide and
operibus. c. 14.
that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law: he does it
not, that men professing and obteining faith, should despise the works of
righteousness: but that every man might know, that by faith he may be justified.
And writing to Sixtus the priest, he says; The Saints have Epist. 105. Sixto.
good works, in as much as they are justified: but to be made righteous, they
have none.

To Honoratus he speaks in like manner; Good Epist. 120. Honorato.
works begin after that we are justified: but we are not therefore
justified, because good works went before justification. Thus must we wisely
distinguish times and persons: the time before justification, when faith is
alone: from the time when we are justified, at what time, faith and works are
joined together. The persons to be justified, in whom faith only is required:
fom these which are justified already, in whom, (besides faith) good works
must also shine and flourish. For they, together with faith, receive also the
holy Ghost, and Spirit of sanctification, as saint Luke Acts 10. 44. Gal. 32.
Romans 4 3. Tit. 5 Ephesians. 1. 13.
records to have happened the Centurion: and Saint Paul avouches to the
churches of Galatia, Rome, Ephesus: and to his Scholar Titus.

And this spirit received with our justification, is not idle, but works so
in the saints, as that he draws them from sin, and pricketh them forward to
al good works, that they may be filled with the fruits of righteousness,
which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory, and praise of God.

Herence is it that Saint Paul teaches the Saints, Romans 7.
that they are freed from the law, to serve God in the newness of the Spirit,
and not in the oldnes of the letter Whom afterward he exhorts to walk, not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit: and thereby to mortify the lusts of the
flesh, that they might live. Faith in these, is the Romans 8. and 13
good tree, which brings forth good fruit: in some thirty, in some sixty,
in some an hundred fold: without which, the grace of Christ is void; the holy
Ghost queanched; the Spirit of sanctification expelled; justification in
vain; profession fruitless; and faith dead, according unto Mat. 7.
this doctrine: Even so faith, if it have no works, is dead in it self: which
is the application of his similitude, whereby he proves faith without good
works to prevail nothing.

After the similitude, and the application thereof, in the next and third place
follows an ironicall and mocking preventing of an objection: set down of
purpose by the Apostle, against those hypocrites, and counterfeit professors,
which so much brag and boast of faith: when as they have no good works at all
in them: they might say to James; What say you of us? have we no faith? do
not we protest that we believe in God? Is our faith a dead faith also?

Thereunto the Apostle answers with their just reproof and mockage; Some man
may say; that is, every man may thus convict thee of hypocrisy, and beat
down thine intolerable pride and insolency: thou have the faith, and I have
works: Show me thy faith out of thy works, and I will show thee my faith by
my works. Let a man say he has faith, yet has no works: he may be justly
reproved for his hypocrisy: for faith must be showed by works, as the cause
is showed by his effect: the effects of faith are works. Good works you have
none to avouch the vnfeinednes of your faith: therefore have you indeed no
true faith. For if you have faith, show it by your works, as I will show you
my faith by my works. If you cannot show your faith by your works: then are
you hypocrites, bragging of faith when you have none. Thus therefore, may every
man beat down your glorious boasting, and the pride of your hearts: Thou have
faith, and I have works: show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show
thee my faith by my works.

The force of this place is, that faith is an internal thing, and habit of
the mind: impressed and imprinted in our hearts by the finger of God, and the
power of his spirit: and therefore being a quality of the mind, cannot be
known or made manifest, but only by works, as the signs and effects
thereof. For as other gifts and qualities of the mind, as wisdom, knowledge,
and learning: are not perceived in men but by speech, practice, working or
other like effects, whereby these qualities are expressed and uttered forth:
even so, faith (lyeng hidden secretly in the mind) is not known but by good
works, as fruits proceeding from it. And as the goodness of the tree, whose
sap in winter season lies low in the root, is not known, but when in the
Spring time it first gives sap to every branch; then buddeth, blassometh,
and finally in her due time brings forth fruit: So faith lies cloased in
our breasts and bosoms, and is not known but by budding, blossoming, and
bringing forth good works in us: the lively fruits of righteousness: in
some thirty, in others sixty, in some an hundred fold. This S. Jame^ knew:
wherefore, to beat down the insolency and pride of these hypocrites, with
mocking reproof he says; Some man might say; thou have the faith, and I have
works: show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my
works: Hereby if we cannot show our faith, it is fruitless, it is dead, it is
barren: for the inward affection is showed by the outward action: and the
outward action shows of what nature or quality the inward affection is.

Our Savior would his outward actions to be the witnesses of his pure
affection; wherefore he says to the John 5.
Jews: The works which the Father has given me to finish, the same works
which I do, bear witness of me, John 13.
that the Father sent me. To like purpose wills he his to embrace love, that
thereby they might be known to be his Disciples, by loving one another. Mat. 7.


In another place, deciphering and discovering false Prophets, whose hypocrisy
lies secretelye covered in Sheep clothing, when within they are ravening
and devouring wolves: he would their inward and secret disposition, to be
known by their outward actions: therefore he Ge.n 22
says; By their fruits you shall know them.

The promptnes and obedience of Abraham's mind, was made apparent by his
outward actions: Every inward habit of the mind, must by outward signs and
tokens be made manifest. Faith therefore being a quality of the mind, must
appear, either sound, or counterfeit, by works Gal. 5.
proceeding from it: therefore works it through love, as Saint Paul
affirms. And Saint James thus much signifies by these works: Show me thy
faith by thy works; and I will show thee my faith by my works. If therefore we
will make our election sure and certain; if we will show the 2. Pet. 1. Romans
8. 2. Cor. 1 Ephesians. 4.
grace of Christ to be in us effectual; if we will make it manifest that we
are sealed up with the holy seal of Gods spirit, to the day of redemption; if
we will make it known, that we are inwardly moved by the holy Ghost: Finally,
if we will approve our faith for true and lively faith in Jesus Christ; then
must we be studious and zealous of good works, that thereby our faith may be
showed: least we incur most just reprehension, and for our hypocrisy be
worthily thus mocked; Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my
faith by thy works?

Herence it then appears, that good works are tokens and arguments of men's
faith: Whereby it may be known, whether they have true faith in Jesus Christ,
or not?

If works declare our faith, what shall we say of the works of the Infidels,
and mis-beleeuing heathen, whose works were most glorious, most vvorthie, most
excellent, in the sight of men? What shall be said of the works of the proud
Pharisees, halting hypocrites, whose works are often (to the view of men)
more worthy and more precious, then the works of the very Saints?

Shall we think that their works are express and lively testimonies and
arguments of faith? What shall we say to the works of men before their
justification? Can they shevve faith, being before, and without faith?

To these it may be ansvvered; that no works, whether without faith, as in
Infidels and hypocrites: or before faith, as in the Saints before
justification, can be accounted or called good.

Many things are done of many men, which have the shevve and outvvard
appearance of goodness: yet proceeding not from faith, whereby they are
sanctified: neither from the same causes, neither after the same manner,
neither to the same end, Whence, how, and whereunto the works of the
Saints, come, are done, and tend: they are far from good works. So that
there is a great difference betwixt the works of the Saints and faithful
people of God: and the works of heathenish people and Philosophers: as
betwixt silver and tin; gold and copper; which are like; yet not the same.
The works of the heathen come from the law and force of nature only; which
is corrupt and vitiate: they are attained unto by use, custom, and exercise
continual: their end is credit, glory, renoume, and estimation in the
world. But the works of Christians proceed from faith, grovve of love,
spring out of the knowledge of the Gospel, and tend to the profit of our
brethren, and the glory of God. These men's works shevve forth and testify
their faith, but not the works of the heathen, Pharisees, or hypocrites,
whose works are not good, neither please God.

Faith makes not only our selves, but all other things Heb. 11.
which we do with the good liking of God, to be accepted and pleasant
before him. From which fountain what soever flovveth not, cannot please him;
For without faith it is impossible to please God. And be our works never so
brave, or beautiful in our own eyes, never so glittering and glorious in the
sight of others: yet if they come Romans 14.
not from faith, they are not only nothing, but naught also: because
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Saint Augustine therefore disputing against the Pharisaicall Contra duas Epist.
Pelag. lib. 3. c. 5. Bonifac.
pride and presumption of the Pelagians, says very well; Our religion
discerns the just from the unjust, not by the law of works, but by the law of
faith* without which faith, whatsoever seem good works, are sins, and turned
into sins.

The works therefore of the heathen, Pharisees, and hypocrites, are not to be
reputed for good: yea all works, which are either before, or without faith, are
not good: as Tertullian, Apol. 39. 46. Saint Augustine in the place cited, upon
Psalm. 31. and 67. in his book of the City of God, chap. 20. against Julian,
lib. 4. chap. 8. of grace and free will, chapter 7. to Sixtus in his Epistles,
Epist. 105. and other places infinite, shows. Who to Honoratus, and to
Sixtus, and in his book of the spirit and letter, chap. 26. affirms, that
Epist. 120. and 105.
no works are good; but in that they follow justification by faith, through
which they are reputed only for good.

Wherence then it may be apparent, that all works show not, ne argue true
faith; neither is it here the mind and meaning of the Apostle, to conclude in
this manner: Works show faith: therefore all works show faith. Or thus Good
works show and argue faith; therefore every one that has works apparently
good: has therefore true faith. But his scope and drift is, to show that where
there is true faith in deed there cannot be but good works will appear and
follow: and that men boast of faith in voine, whose faith is not accompanied
with good works and christian actions: Seeing that there is no good tree, but
in due time brings forth her fruit in convenient measure: Whereof in summer
time destitute, it is accounted naught, dead, fruitlesses, and rotten.

Which good works, as they have show, and do testify of our faith, so that
men gather probably: he has works, therefore faith: but necessarily from
the negative, (which here is respected chiefly,) he has no works, therefore no
true and lively faith: So are these works counted for good, and reckned
pleasant unto GOD, not for their own sake, but for the faiths sake, wherence
the budde, spring out, and issue.

Moses therefore, to intimate thus much in Abel and Genesis 4. Heb. 11
his sacrifice, puts Abell with his faith first, then afterward his
sacrifice, when he says; God had respect to Abell and his sacrifice: to show,
that because God accepted Abels faith, therefore he respected the sacrifice,
proceeding from him: and not the man, or his faith, for the sacrifice. Saint
Gregory thereof in a certain place speaks to the same purpose; In the
judgment of almighty God there is regard Grego.
had, not so much what is done or given; as of who^, and how. Herence is it,
that God is said to have looked unto Abell and his gift: For Moses being about
to say; God looked unto Abels gift; he sets down carefully before: That God
looked unto Abell. By which thing it is manifestly showed, not that the offerer
has pleased, for his gift; but the gift, for the geuer pleased God. For this
cause the gifts of the wicked please not God, because they come from them with
who^ God is not pleased. Thus works are good in respect of men's faith, whereby
they are accepted with favor before God: and are such tokens of our faith, as
without which we boast in vain of faith. Which thing in this place the
apostle giving us to understand, with a mocking quippe, beating down the vain
pride of hypocrites, says; But some man might say; every man might thus mock
thee: thou have the faith, and I have works: show me thy faith by thy works,
and I will show thee my faith by my works.

And this is the first reason why true faith cannot be with out works: which
reason is from a similitude: whereof, and of the other things in that reason,
The similitude it self, the application, and the mocking and ironicall
preoccupating and preventing of the objection: This is sufficient to be spoken.

The second reason why iustifiing faith cannot be 2. Reason.
without good works, is drawn from an absurdity: if that faith which is
without works, be that true faith whereby we are justified; then the devils
might be justified: for they have a bare faith, to believe there is a God:
albeit they apply not themselves obediently to walk in his commandments. But
it were an absurd thing to say the devils be justified; for, because they are
not justified, therefore they tremble at the judgments of God: whereby it
appears that their faith is not true, nor sufficient. Now to boast of such a
faith as is common to devils, what vanity, what folly, what absurdity is it?
This reason the Apostle in these words expresses; Thou beleeuest there is one
GOD, thou do well: the devils also believe it, and tremble.

It were an absurd thing to say the devils are justified: yet if thy faith be
but a bare faith: in word, without works; in tongue, without truth; in
show, without substance; they may as well be justified and saved as thou by
thy like faith may be saved: but by such faith which is destitute and void
of the works of true sanctification, the devils cannot be justified: therefore
neither can thou (O man) be justified by the like. The devils believe, and
tremble: yet not justified, not saved.

Now that the devils believe there is one God: yea and confess Jesus Christ to
be his only son, yet tremble before his throne, and divine presence, the
holy word of God, and the most sacred scriptures do teach us: when our blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was come into the land of the Gergesens, there
met him two m^n possessed with devils, which came out of the graves, very
fierce and terrible: so that no man might pass by that way. And these devils
possessing these two men, cried out unto Christ with trembling and fear;
Jesus, thou son of God, what have we to do with thee? art thou come hither
to torment us before the time?

In another Evangelist in like manner, when the people preaced about Christ to
be healed: the unclean spirits which were in them whom Christ then cured,
seeing him, fell down before him, and cried, saying; Thou art the son of
God. The devil possessing him, whom neither fetters could hold nor chains
could bind, nor bands could bridle: seeing the Lord Jesus a far of: running
and worshipped him, crying with a loud voice, what have I to do with thee,
Jesus the son of the most high God? To this sense sounds that also in the
Evangelist Saint Luke 4. item v. 41. eius deus. Luke 8. 26.
Luke: who writes that the unclean spirit possessing the man in the
Synagogue of Capernaum in Galile, knew Christ, God blessed for evermore, and
also confessed him openly. Whereof the Evangelist says thus: In the Synagogue
there was a man which had a spirit of an unclean devil, which cried with a
loud voice, saying unto Jesus Christ, Oh what have we to do with thee, Jesus
of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I know whom thou art, even the holy
one of God. These places now cited out of Saint Matthew, cap. 8. ver. 18. 19.
of S. Mark, 3. cap. ver. 11. and cap. 5. ver. 2. 3. etc. of Saint Luke. cap.
4. ver. 33. 34. etc. and 5. 41. Luke. cap. 8. ver. 26. and many such like
places, do evidently show a kind of belief to be in the devils: whereby
they be persuaded there is a God. Their confessing also the son of God Jesus
Christ to be God, even the son of the most highest: and their prostrating and
casting down of themselves before his divine presence: Finally their fear,
least he should torment them, and their desiring of him, not to send them into
the deep, the place of their punishment: confirms this truth: the devils
believe also and tremble. The devils then do not only believe there is one
God: but also confess Jesus Christ to be his son, and tremble for fear of
his mighty power.

To conclude, this belief of the devils and unclean Acts 19.
spirits, saint Luke in the Acts of the holy Apostles sets forth most
evidently, in the story of the seven sons of Sceua the priest and Jew.
Which sons of his, being Exorcists, and taking upon them, to call on the name
of Jesus, whom Paul preached: coniured thereby the foul and unclean spirits
to come out of men: but the evil spirit by them thus coniured in a certain
man, answered them and said: Jesus I know, and Paul I know: but who are you?
Thus did the devil, nor only believe, but confess also, not only Christ the
son of the most highest, but Paul also the servant of the Lord, and of our
blessed Savior Jesus Christ.

Albeit these testimonies out of the new Testament be most clear, to teach
us that the devils believe there is one God: yet let us also cast our eyes
upon the former generations: and look even from the beginning: and in the
succeeding ages, and we shall see out of the old Testament also this same
confirmed: and so have a most sweet and pleasant harmony of them both
together.

When God Almighty had made man, and placed him in the most pleasant garden
of Eden: and had given Gene. 3.
him commandment, that he should not eat of the forbidden fruit, which
grew in the midst of Paradise, even of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil: Satan tempting man to disobedience, does not deny that there was any
God, which had given such commandment to man: but as believing there was one
God, and confessing the same unto Euah, asks her, whether God indeed had
commanded them not to eat of the tree of knowledge.

When the sons of God, the holy Angels, stood all about the throne of God,
and Satan himself coming from the compassing of the earth, and the world,
Job 1. and 2.
presented himself also before his divine Majesty: and God had demanded of
him, whether he had considered Job his servant: The devil, as believing the
heavenly and divine nature, confesses the Godheade, in his accusation of Job:
has Job served God for naught? Thus the devil at that time also believed.

Finally, when the Lord Almighty, sitting upon his heavenly throne, and
having all the host of heaven about 3. Kings 22.
him, as it were consulting and devising to bring a just plague upon Ahab, the
wicked and ungodly King of Israel: had but asked the question, who would
entice Ahab, that he might perish in Ramoth Gilead: Satan the devil, as
believing that divine nature, and excellent majesty to be God, submitted
himself to Gods will: offered himself to the execution of his judgments, and
said, I will entice him.

Thus then, both the testimonies of the old, and the authorities of the new
Testament confirm the doctrine of our Apostle: the devils believe and tremble.

Now where the Apostle Saint James says, thou beleeuest there is one God,
thou do well: the devils also believe and tremble: this speech, thou do
well: may have a double sense. For either it may be taken irronically, and in
taunting wise: as justly vpbraiding and reproving them for their vain
ostentation of faith, and their boasting in their belief, which is no better
then the faith of devils. Wherefore, as when men do most wickedly, yet we, in
reproouing, in taunting, in mocking and checking manner say: O, it is well
done: and so reprove their iniquity: So here Saint James: bitterly and
sharply inueighing against the wicked, and justly reproouing their vain
faith, says; Thou beleeuest there is one God; thou do well: the deu^ls
believe also, and tremble: and so condemns their hypocrisy. As who should
say: is it well done in deed, when thou do believe no better then devils do?

Or else it may be spoken affirmatively, and to this sense: thou beleeuest
there is one God: thou do well: for it is a good thing thus to do: but yet
is not this all: neither is it enough or sufficient, neither must thou rest in
that degree of faith, but go on, and proceed, and grow from faith to faith:
and then to believe there is one God, is well. Otherwise thy faith shall not
profit thee: for the devils also believe there is one God: yet tremble they in
desperation.

Wherefore then, if a man should describe unto us faith in this manner: it is
faith, to believe there is one God: this definition, declaration, or
description of faith were altogether imperfect: neither is this the faith
whereby a man may be saved; for the devils themselves have as good a faith as
this: and yet are not saved.

As then it were absurd for any to say, that the devils shall be saved: which
no man affirms, unless he be void of knowledge, bereft of reason,
enwrapped in error, doting through folly: so it is no less absurd for men
to seek to be saved through that faith, which is common unto the devils also,
yet can not save them: which thing our Apostle here teaches and tells us:
thou beleeuest there is one God, thou do well: the devils believe also and
tremble.

To make a plain, evident and apparent difference, Credere deum. Credere deo.
Credere in deum.
betwixt true faith and feigned: the faith of the Saints: and the shadow of
faith in the wicked, the holy ancient and reverend fathers have showed, that
it is one thing to believe that God is, and another thing to believe God: and
another thing to believe in God.

1 To believe that God is, is to believe there is a God, and the same the
creator and the governor of heaven and earth: which the very sight and view
of the creatures, and the frame of the world, does teach all Nations and
people, be they never so rude, never so savage, never so barbarous, as the
heathen man, and Orator of the Romans, Tullie in sundry of his books and
1. Lib. de nature. deorum. 1. Tuscul. 1. de Legib.
works has confessed. And the very devils themselves: Seeing the
wonderfulnesse of his works: the omnipotency of his power: the
incomprehensiblenesse of his wisdom: the terror and severity of his
judgments, and the excellency of his Majesty: are also forced, will they
nill they, to believe and persuade themselves there is one God. This faith then
is common to the heathen and to the Saints: unto men and unto devils: and
therefore thereby can we not be saved.

2 To believe God, is to believe Gods word to be Psalm. 145.
true: to believe that God is faithful in all his sayings and holy in all his
works. Which thing, albeit the wicked sometimes seem to do: yet simply can
they not be said to believe God. For if they either believed him to be true in
his promises, or constant in his threatenings: then would they, neither so
maliciously persecute virtue, neither so greedily follow after vice, as
experience does teach they daily do.

If they believed God, then either the hope of heaven promised in mercy to the
righteous: or dread of damnation threatened in justice to the wicked, would
withdraw them from wickedness: but neither the one, neither the other does
persuade them: therefore do they not rightly believe God.

3 To believe in God, is not only to believe that God is, neither only to
believe all things in his holy word to be most certain and most sure: but also
particularly to embrace, and specially apply unto our own selves, all the
promises made by God the father, in his son Jesus Christ, both concerning
mercy, and also remission of sins, unto the Saints: to rely, rest, and stay
only upon his mighty power: to have all hope of happiness in his only
favor: to persuade our selves of true righteousness, release of sin,
imputation of justice, eternal salvation, only through his dear son our
Savior Jesus Christ the righteous: who only died for our sins, and rose
again Romans 4. 1. Pet. 3. Romans 10.
for our justification: who only once suffered for us, the just for the
unjust, to bring us to God: who only is the fulfilling of the law, for all that
believe: and therefore alone of god for us, made wisdom, justification,
sanctification, 1. Cor. 1.
and redemption: that according as it is written, he that reioiceth, let him
rejoice in the Lord.

This faith who so has from God, does not only believe God is, neither alone
acknowledge him as a most mighty Lord, and most just judge, neither only
persuade himself generally the things in scripture contained to be true: which
in some sort is common both unto men and unto devils: to the Saints, and to the
wicked: but also does love God, as a father full of all mercy: hope in him for
pardon of sins, as in the only fountain of grace and goodness: and this
faith is chiefly proper unto the Saints: in whom also it brings forth the
fruits of righteousness, that in them God in all things may be glorified
through Jesus Christ.

To believe therefore that there is one God, is faith more large and general,
then may be accounted sound and lively faith: whose proper mark and
specifical difference is, to apply the sure promises of mercy by God made
unto the Saints; unto our selves: which neither the wicked of the world,
neither the devils do: therefore by that their faith, can they not be saved:
yea rather as utterly without all hope, through fear of endless damnation,
they tremble.

Paul having in many words noted the wickedness of the natural Romans 3.
and unregenerate men: sets down this as the full measure of their
iniquity: the fear of God is not before their eyes.

Isai 66.
in heart, and tremble at my sayings? This fear Solomon commends as the
beginning of wisdom: and Saint Prou. 1.
Paul opposes it to wicked presumption: be not high minded, but fear: and
requires it in the Saints, as a Romans 11.
mark of salvation: work out your salvation with fear and trembling. This
fear proceeds from love, and Philip. 2.
care we have to please God; loath in any thing to offend him, as our father
most merciful, most bounteous and loving: not so much for fear of receiving
punishment, as for care not to loose the benefit of mercy: as Saint Augustine
wisely has observed. Epist. 120. Honorato. Mat. 25.


But as for the fear and trembling of wicked men and damned spirits: it is
always through remembrance of Gods judgments: and their own endless
torments, which in hell they shall suffer; which are prepared for Satan and his
Angels. They fear, because he always threateneth torments, never promises
reconcilement: alvvaies appears rigorous, never favorable: alvvaies
dreadful, never amiable: wherefore they carrying daily in their breasts and
bosoms tormenting furies: which hold them day and night under dread of
endless destruction: when they see continually the countenance of God against
them: armed with all the weapons of his vengeance to persequute them: when
they see they can take no hold-fast of Gods mercy, for their intolerable
pride, and final apostasy against his heavenly majesty: they cannot but
fear, they cannot but tremble.

Now if the Devils believe there is one God: then Psalm. 14.
the Epicures, the Atheistes, the wicked fools of the world, which say in
their hearts there is no God: are worse then devils.

If the devils tremble before Gods presence, and throne of judgment: then are
many men and women, which jest at the day of judgment, make a mock at
appearing before the tribunal seat of God, to receive according to their
works: worse then devils.

If then hypocrites have no better faith then devils have: and it be a most
absurd thing to say the devils are saved; then is it no less absurdity to
say, that wicked men by like faith can be saved: seeing they are destitute of
all goodness: void of all righteousness: far from all fruits of
sanctification. Which thing this holy Apostle teaches us in this place: thou
beleuest there is one God, thou do well: the devils also believe, and
tremble.

Finally then, it may herehence appear necessary; that as men are truly
justified before God through faith in Christ: so they should by their works,
the lively testimonies of true faith, show themselves before men to be in
deed righteous: that as inwardly with God they are made just by their belief:
so outwardly with men, they might be known to be just by their deeds: that
so they might add to their faith virtue: to their profession, sanctification:
to their religion, holy conversation: which is the scope and drifte of this
Apostles doctrine.

Neither is this doctrine, a doctrine, either rarely heard of, or vnusiall in
other places of holy Scripture: for the whole body of the Scriptures teach us,
the necessity of good works and fruits of sanctification in the saints,
without which all holiness, is hypocrisy: all devotion, dissimulation. And to
this end, not only the Prophets in their books, but our Savior Christ in
the gospel, and the holy Apostles in their sacred writings, have moved men
professing godliness, to the fruits of righteousness, least they otherwise
doing, be justly reproved for their hypocrisy.

And for as much as it is not only a matter of most great account in all times,
to have this godly care of bringing forth fruits of true sanctification unto
Gods glory: but is also the most lively testimony of our election, who are
therefore called of God, that we might be Ephesians. 1.
irreprehensible through love: and the sure sign of our regeneration and new
birth, whose chief end is to walk in good works, which God has prepared for
us; as witnesses the Scriptures: we are the workmanship of God, Ephesians. 2.
created in Jesus Christ, unto good works, that we should walk therein. Which
thing also, Zachary the father of S. John baptist makes the end of our
redemption: Luc. 1.
we are redeemed by him from the power or hands of our enemies; that we should
serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
life. Much more, not only might, but also ought to be spoken touching these
matters; but I hope this may suffice reasonable creatures, touching the office
of faith, and use or end of good works in the Saints of God.

Now God, which is the fountain of all goodness, the father of all lights,
the giver of all spiritual grace, the sender down of all virtues into our
hearts: power down upon us that most excellent gift of unfeigned faith,
without which nothing is acceptable, nothing pleasant in his sight: that, it
in us vvorking through love, and we replenished with all fruits of
righteousness, and abounding in all sanctification: may thereby give
infallible testimony of our justification; and in the whole course of our
life, may always through righteousness and holiness, so glorify God here,
that by him we may be glorified in the life to come; not through our merits,
but of his only mercy, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior: who
with the father and the holy ghost, lives and reigns, one immortal,
invisible and only wise God, both now and for evermore, Amen.

James Chapter 2. verses 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. Sermon 13.
Verses. 20. But will thou understand, O thou vain man, that the faith which
is without works is dead?

21. Was not Abraham our father justified through works, when he offered up
Isaac his son upon the altar?

22. See thou not, that faith wrought with his works? and through the works
was the faith made perfect.

23. And the Scripture was fulfilled which says, Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness, and he was called the friend of God.

24. Ye see then how that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only.

25. Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified through works, when she
had received the messengers, and sent them out another way?

26. For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is
dead.


In these words of the Apostle there are two things to be considered, as
appears. Namely. 1. The other part of his confirmation, containing the 3.
Third argument from the example of Abraham. 20. 21. 22. and 23. 4. Fourth,
from the example of Rahab. 25.
2. The conclusion of the whole discourse, 1. Made and set down verse. 24. 2.
Repeated. 26.



The third reason why true faith is not without good 3. Reason.
works, is drawn from the example of Abraham: who had no doubt, a true and
lively faith: for which cause he is Genesis 15. Romans 4.
highly praised, both of Moses the Prophet, and Paul the Apostle of Christ: yet
did this great and holy Patriarch, by offering up his son Isaac, in whom the
hope of his posterity, and the truth of Gods promise consisted, show what
manner faith he had: not a dead, barren, and fruitelesse faith; but quick,
lively, and plentiful in all good works, to the glory of God. For which
cause he received a true testimony from Gods own mouth, and it was set down
by Moses, for all posterity for evermore, that he was righteous indeed, and
the friend of God. Such a faith ought every one of Gods Saints to have
therefore, whereby they may recete auestimonie from God and man, of their
integrity, righteousness, and justification.

The force of this reason is this; what manner of faith Abraham (the father of
the faithful) had: such faith ought all his children, all the Saints, all
that rightly believe in God, and his Son Jesus Christ, for to have also: But
the faith of Abraham was no shadow nor show, but a substance and soundnes of
faith. His faith was not in word only: but in work also: not in tongue and
talk alone, but in truth and verity: not a bare, barren, fruitelesse faith,
but a lively, working and plentiful faith: such faith therefore ought the
faith of all Gods Saints to be, and not dead, without works. Which thing
Saint James to insinuate and give us to understand, he breaks forth into
these words, but will thou understand, O thou vain man, that the faith which
is without works, is dead? was not Abraham our father justified through
works, when he offered up Isaac his son upon the altar?

Wherein first let us with Illericus, see the annotation and observation or
note of Cardinal Caiatan, one of the Romish clergy, upon these words: will thou understand O thou vain man, that faith which is without works is
Cardinal Caietane.
dead? Mark reader (says he) that James means not, that faith without
works is dead, because it is manifest that we are justified by faith even
without works, as appears by infants baptized, and in old folk also,
baptized, and forthwith deceasing and dying: but he means faith without
works, that is, faith refusing to work, is dead, vain and not able to
justify. Thus even one of their own, (who would herence conclude the
necessity of works in the matter of justification,) spoke that same which we
all speak and defend, and for which we are wrongfully condemned of them,
that faith which is not prepared to do well, when occasion is offered, but
then refuses to work, is dead and profits nothing: for as much as true
faith works always (when matter, occasion, and opportunity is offered)
through love, as Saint Paul avouches. This sense of Saint James, if the
Romanistes Gal. 5.
would hold, if not with us, yet with their own Cardinal, there should
remain out of this place no controversy at all betwixt us and them, in the
matter of justification.

This foretold, the words of the Apostle are plain, the story evident, the
matter manifest, therefore a brief and pataphrasticall running over them may
be sufficient.

Will thou understand (says he) o thou vain man, that faith without works is
dead? Faith in men justified, destitute of works, or as Caietane says;
refusing to do well when occasion is offered, is dead indeed: for that all
the Saints show forth their faith in the practice of works, and virtue.

The apostle Saint James also here calls hypocrites and men vaunting and
boasting of faith, without the fruits of righteousness, empty, or vain:
borowing his similitude from barrelles, or other like vessels: which the
emptier they be, the more they do sound and rumble: so likewise these men,
the voider they are of true faith, the more they prate and prattle thereof: the
less substance they have of sound religion: the greater show and sound they
give, and therefore may be well called vain, or empty.

Was not Abraham our Father justified, when he offered Gen 17. Genesis 18.
his son Isaac upon the Altar? was he not justified through works? Moses
records, that when Abraham had obtained a Son, according to the promise
which was made unto him by God, both when he talked with Abraham, and gave him
circumcision, the seal of the covenant, and also in the day of the destruction
of Sodom and Gomorrha: he was commanded to go to the mount Genesis 22.
Moriah, and there to offer up that Son, whom GOD had witnessed should be his
heir: and in whom all the nations of the world should be blessed. Which thing
Abraham willingly obeying, causes his Ass to be sadled, wood to be prepared,
fire, and a knife to be in a readiness: and the next morning, he, and his son,
and two of his servants, took their journey toward the mount Moriah, there
to offer up Isaac: Abraham a far off seeing the place, commanded his
servants to stay, laid the wood upon Isaac, took the knife, and fire in his
own hands, and so with his Son came to the place which the Lord appointed.

Where he takes and binds his son, he stretches out his hand for the
knife to have cut his throat: This his obedience the Lord seeing, sends his
Angel, stays Abraham from touching the child, and says unto him; Now I
know that thou fear God, in that thou have not spared thy son, for my
sake. This was the work of Abraham, whereby he made manifest, and declared his
lively faith: for which work S. James says he was justified, that is, known
to be just.

This his faith wrought with his works, and was effectual and fruitful
through his obedience: and through that work of his obedience, was his faith
made perfect, declared to be sound, showed to be true, known to be lively and
acceptable before God and man. Who the more he by his obedience showed his
faith, the more was his faith thereby known to be perfect: not that his faith
or any man's faith in this world, can be perfect and absolute 1. Cor. 13.
on every part: For we have here no gift in the highest degree of perfection,
which may not daily be increased: and all men must learn in humility of
their Spirits, daily to pray with the most holy Apostles; Lord increase our
faith. But in as much as by good works our faith Luke 17.
daily rises, and grows to greater measure of perfection, and is daily more
and more thereby confirmed, and known to be perfect: as the more often the
tree brings forth fruit, the more plainly is it known to be good: it is
called perfect.

That Saint James here says of Abraham's faith, that it was made perfect by
works, we may not therence conclude, that the beginning, and first rising,
and springing up of faith is from God, but the consummation and perfection
thereof, from our selves, and our own works: For what were this, but
intolerable pride, in ascribing the less to God, the greater to our selves:
the beginning of good to him, the consummation and accomplishment to our
selves: to challenge and arrogate praise unto our works, and to derogate from
his glory? where against the Princely Prophet David prays, when he says;
Not Psalm. 115.
unto us, o Lord, nor unto us, but unto thy name give the praise.

For were the beginnings from God, but the perfection in our works; then look
how much more excellent the perfection and end of every thing is, then the
beginning: and the consummation of faith, then the entrance or inchoation
thereof: so much more praise should belong to us, then to God himself: Which
thing to desire, were great ungodliness: to attempt, were horrible pride: boldly
to challenge, were not only shameful presumption, but the full measure of all
iniquity.

Wherefore let us learn a better profession, and ascribe all in all unto God,
who both begins, and also makes perfect whatsoever is perfect in us: he it
is that Philip. 2
works in us, both to will, and also to perform, according to his good
pleasure. From whom we have all 2. Cor. 3
our sufficiency, who of our selves, as of our selves, are not able to think
a good thought, much less to make perfect any thing in our selves: but all
our sufficiency is from God, from whom every good, and every perfect James 1.
gift proceeds, as from the father of lights. So that not only the beginning
of faith, but the increase and perfection thereof, is from him.

For which cause as the Apostles prayed to Christ, Luke 17
(who is God, blessed for ever) for increase of says; so S. Paul and Saint
Peter, ascribing the perfection, establishment, and consummation of all things
unto GOD, have therefore prayed unto God, as plainly appears in their
Epistles; The God of peace, that brought again from Heb. 13.
the dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood
of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in all good works, to do his
will, woorking in you that which is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus
Christ, to whom be praise for ever and ever, Amen.

And Saint Peter; And the God of all grace, which 1. Pet. 5.
has called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have
suffered a little, make you perfect, confirm strengthen, and stablish you: to
whom be glory for ever and ever.

Thus then the beginning, continuance, and increase: yea the perfection and
establishment of the very faith of Abraham, was only from God, as the cause:
yet is it known to be perfect, and declared so to be, before men, through
works, as the Apostle witnesses: and the Scripture was fulfilled, when by his
obedience it did clearly appear, how truly it was written of Abraham, by the
Prophet Moses, that Abraham believed, and it was Genesis 15
imputed unto him for righteousness. So that his work is said in the Scripture,
to have made the testimony of Moses true, clear, and evident, that Abraham
believed, and that his faith to that word of promise, (that one of his own
loins and bowels should be his heir) was imputed unto him for righteousness.

This being the argument of Saint James, from the example of Abraham, that what
faith was in him, the like ought to be in all Gods Saints: and that as his
faith was joined with the work of obedience to God, when occasion was
ministered: so ought the faith of every one of the children of God, to be
bewtified, accompanied, and showed forth through good works: The conclusion is
inferred; You see then how that a man is justified of works, that is, The
conclusion made.
proved, and known to men, to be just and righteous before God by works, and
not by faith only: not of a cold, dead, bare, barren, fruitless, idle faith
only: such a faith as is in words, when we say we have faith, though we have
no works: Of which faith hypocrites so much glory, and make boastein vain,
as of that faith which is no true faith.

And this conclusion must agree in the same sense of terms, wherein the
example was proposed: and the terms herein to be noted, are specially two:
Justified, and faith. Justified, in the example proposed, signifies to be
known for just: not to be made just. Faith signifies that bare profession,
whereby in words we say we have faith, and the religion of Christ. Such faith
was not in Abraham, therefore neither is any other man by such a faith reputed
for righteous.

And their words thus in the same and right sense taken, the conclusion is
true: a man is not justified by faith only, but by works: faith only in
words, makes not men to be known for righteous among men: but faith in
works and deeds.

These things thus set down in the example of Abraham: 4. Reason.
the fourth and last argument, which faith in gods Saints is not without
works: is drawn from Rahab the vittailer, tauerner, hostess, or harlot of
Ierico: whose example teaches the same that Abraha^s did: that the faith of
Gods Saints is not fruitless, or void of good works: for she also was
justified through works, when she received the messengers: and sent them out
another way. The story is recorded in the book of Joshua: wherein it is set
down, that at what time as Joshua, by the counsel and Joshua 2.
commandment of God, purposed the siege and sacking of Ierico the City: he
sent before him two men, to spy out, and to view the land, and the City:
which thing coming to the ears of the King of Ierico, that there were such
men come to the house of Rahab: he sent to her to send him the men: she seeing
that, being persuaded they were the true servants of the God of heaven and
earth, and that the land should be given by God into their hands (wherein her
faith consisted:) she hid the men: and told the messengers of the King, that
they were gone, and so sent them away: who being gone, she came to the spies,
and told them how their fear was upon the inhabitants of the land: therefore
desired she them, that as she had showed them mercy, so they would show he^
mercy, when the City should be destroyed. This was promised: a sign and
warning was given, she sends them away: and so they escaped. This her fact
Saint James commends, affirming that thereby she also was justified: even
known for righteous, and declared thereby to the spies of Joshua, and to all
Israel.

The force of this place then is this: as Abraham, through bare and naked faith
deserved not the praise of justice, righteousness, and justification before
men: so neither did Rahab: but as Abraham having occasion thereto, showed his
faith by his holy obedience: so Rahab showed the vnfeignednesse of her faith,
by her saving and sending away safely the messengers of Josua: and so both of
them were justified before men, and in the vewe of the world: not by faith
only, that is bare faith: but by works whereby their faith was showed and
made manifest.

In these two examples, all men are contained, whether Jew or Gentile, whether
righteous or profane and openly wicked. Abraham's example contains all Jews,
and all men of virtue and godliness. Rahabs example contains all Gentiles,
strangers from Gods people, all wicked persons, which yet through the grace of
GOD are planted in the Church, and made members of the body of Christ: wherein
the diversity of the argument consists.

Thus the holy Apostle culled and picked out two most diverse and unlike
examples, the one of a man, the other of a woman: the one of Gods people, the
other of a stranger: the one of one godly, the other of one wicked: to the
end that thereby he might teach men, that none, neither man nor woman, neither
Jew nor Gentile: neither of the people of GOD, nor stranger: neither godly,
nor wicked: can be reputed or reckened for just and righteous before GOD in
deed: whose praise appears not in the practice of virtue and good works, by
which they are showed and known for righteous before men. So that in none,
what kind or condition: what people or nation, what coast or country so ever
they be of, true faith can be void and destitute of works: as by these
arguments now appears most manifest.

Now the Apostle again repeateth the conclusion: The conclusion repeated.
that as the body void of the soul and spirit, is dead: so faith without
works is dead also. That when the soul is out of the body, the body is
void of office, of action, and all things which argue life: So faith destitute
of good works, shows no duty of love: gives no testimony of life: has
no sign or force and efficacy: profits not: is like a dead carcass: is
but an idol or shadow of faith. And this is the conclusion.

These things thus setdowne: howbeeit it may plainly appear, what the drifte
and scope of Saint James was: only to beat down the pride of hypocrites,
who bragged and boasted of faith without the fruits of justification and
righteousness: and not to oppose himself against Saint Paul, who in so many
places proves that we are justified by faith without the works of the
law: and thereunto alleges the same Abraham for example of justification by
faith, whom the Apostle uses for justification by works: as Romans 4. Gal. 3.
our adversaries oppose them, and set the one against the other: as if the
spirit of GOD in them were divided: yet that all doubting and halting betwixt
diverse opinions may be removed: all controversy which in appearaunce
seems great betwixt these Apostles, may be taken away: that the controversy
betwixt us and our adversaries may the better be appeased: and all occasion of
abusing this place for their justification by works before GOD, secluded: there
are four things diligently to be examined and discussed, wherein the whole
matter consists. 1 What faith Saint James means, when in this place he so
inueyeth against it. 2 In what sense justification is to be taken in this
controversy. 3 What works he means, works before or after faith, when
he ascribes justification to works. 4 What manner of men and people he dealt
withal, and to what persons he speaks.

1 Touching faith: all men almost boast thereof, Faith is diverse.
all men glory therein: yet the hundred thousand person scarsely knows
aright, what true, sound, and justifying, faith means: in respect whereof,
and in regard that the sundry signification thereof breeds controversy
betwixt us and our adversaries, in the matter and argument of justification:
therefore may we profitablie consider thereof.

The acceptions and significations of faith, usual and common, are chiefly
five. 1 Is civil faith, consisting in upright dealing, and keeping touch,
word and promise with men. Of which the Philosophers speak much: and M.
Cicero giving the deriuation of the name and word, 1. Off.
says: that faith is so called, because that is done, which is said. The
Prophet David seeing faithfulness to Psalm. 12.
perish and decay in men, touching the trades and business of this life:
complayneth thereof before GOD, Help Lord, there is not a godly man left: for
the faithful are perished from the children of men: and the decay hereof
Jeremy lamenteth in like manner: let every one take heed of his neighbor,
and trust not in any Iere. 9.
brother: for every brother will use deceyte, and every friend will deal
deceytfully. This faith, is the truth and constancy which ought to be in our
deeds, and words, and the keeping of promise in matters of this life: and is
therefore called civil faith, as being conversant in civil things.

2 There is also faith, which is hystoricall: which is the knowledge and
confession of the things to be true, which we read in the old or new
Testament. Thus in general we call the knowledge of these things faith. The
knowledge of the Articles of our belief, is called Christian faith. The
knowledge of things indifferent, is called faith. The knowledge of the story,
which Romans 14.
the devils themselves had, is called faith: the devils believe: they believe
the story of the creation of the James 2.
world, and other things therein contained: they believe the story of
Christ's life, death, passion, sufferings, miracles, to be true: yet are not
saved. This faith is historical, because it believes only the story
written: as they that believe the Chronicles of England, France, Irelande,
Italy, Germany: that such Cities, Towns, Rivers, Mountains, are therein:
have faith, and are said to give faith thereunto. To believe that Carthage was
destroyed by the Romans: Numantia, by Scipio: Jerusalem by Titus and
Vespasian: the Kingdom of Israel to have ended, when Shalmanaser the King of
Assiria overcame them: the Kingdom 4. King. 7.
of Judah and Jerusalem, by Nabuchodonosor of Babel, who carried them into
captivity into Babylon: that the Babylonians were subdued by the Medes and 4.
King. 25.
Persians: that GOD made the world: that Christ was borne of a Virgin: that
he was conversant upon earth thirty years or thereaboutes: that he was put
to death by the malice of the Jews, through the treason of Judas: that he
rose again, and aftetwarde ascended: and so therein to go no further: is an
historical faith, which is common to men and devils; to Turks and Christians;
the godless and godly; the righteous and the wicked.

3 Sometimes faith is taken for the power which is given men, whereby they are
able to work and do great miracles. That faith which there about is
conversant, is called a faith myraculous: as occupied in 1. Cor. 25.
doing miracles. Saint Paul so uses it, when he says, to one is given the
word of wisdom by the same spirit; to an other the word of knowledge by
the same spirit; to another is given faith by the same spirit. Whereof
Theophilact says, not faith of doctrine, but faith of Theophilact.
signs, which when they are wrought have power to move mountains.

In which sense in the next Chapter Paul is to be 1. Cor. 13.
understood, where, entreating of the faith which consists in working of
miracles, says; If I had faith, so that I could move mountains out of
their places, and have no love: I were nothing. Which kind of faith Saint
Ambrose affirms may be even in them Ambrose.
which are wicked, and not of good conversation. Which our Savior puts out
of doubt, when to many Mat. 7.
which prophesied and wrought miracles in his name. he said: Away from me ye
workers of iniquity, I know you not. This faith was even in the traitor
Judas, who with the rest wrought miracles, and did wonders among the children
of men. This faith also, if it Luke. 10,
stay in working of miracles, profits nothing to salvation.

4 Moreover, faith is applied to the outward pretense of men, when in words
and show they seem to believe in Christ, yet are careless of the fruits of
sanctification and righteousness: whereby faith is known unto the world. This
is the faith of hypocrites: and therefore called hypocritical. Saint James
calls it dead, fruitless, barren. This faith bears great sway and swinge
in the world: rules and reigns in the most part of men, and in the common
multitude of professors: whereof the number is infinite, which profess great
faith, great holiness, great religion; yet are careless to walk worthy
their profession: and endeavor not to be fruitful in the works of
righteousness, to the glory of GOD: therefore is their faith vain, idle,
detestable and shameful in the sight of GOD.

5 The last kind of faith is Christian faith: which is a sure trust in the
mercy of GOD, through the merits of Christ: vndoubtinglie persuading our
selves of remission of our sins, by his righteousness: and of eternal
saluauion by his passion: whereby having peace in our consciences with GOD, we
rest and walk in obedience unto his commandments. Whereof the Prophet
speaks: The just shall live by faith. Abac. 2. Romans 3.
Saint Paul. We conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the works
of the law. Again, being justified by faith, we have peace with GOD,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. To the Church of Romans 5. Ephesians. 2.
Ephesus: We are saved by grace through faith: and that not of our selves, it
is the gift of GOD: neither of works, least any should boast. And again: by
Christ we have boldness and entrance with confidence, Ephesians. 3.
by faith in him. Of this faith Paul always speaks, when he entreats of
justification: which we obtain only by this faith in Jesus Christ. And Genesis
15. Romans 4. Gal. 3.
this is the faith whereby Abraham was justified before GOD: when it was
avouched: Abraham believed, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness.

And this faith is never idle in the Saints of GOD, having just occasion
ministered: but it woorketh through love, and has most singular ornaments Gal.
5.
and virtues joined unto it, as inseparable companions in all those that are
truly justified: as invocation of GOD: grateful memory for benefits
received: patience and invincible constancy under the Cross: bounteous
liberality, and loving mercy toward the distressed Saints in their
necessities: obedience to the word of truth, mortification of our earthly
members: renouation of the spirit of our minds, with the works of
sanctification, which as effects of faith, make it shine and be manifest in
the sight of men.

There then being many acceptions of faith: whereof speaks this Apostle? not
of the last as Paul does: but of the second, and of the fourth. That he
speaks of the second, it appears: in the 19. verse, he speaks of that
Verse 19.
faith which is common to men and to devils: for he says: thou beleeuest
there is one God, thou do well: the devils also believe and tremble. Now the
devils have no true nor justifying faith: that were absurd to grant: for they
believe not in Christ, neither hope they for mercy: but tremble in despair at
the judgment of God: but their faith is, to believe there is one God: to
acknowledge the things contained in the scripture of the old and new testament
to be true: to confess Christ to be the son of god: but neither Messiah nor
mediator for the^. That he means faith in the 4. sense, which is the outward
presence of faith: which is rather a show and shadow, the^ any substance rather
an imagination and conceived opinion of faith, then faith in deed: as when we
say we have faith, and in words pretend it. It appears also out of the
Apostle. For Saint James speaks of that faith, when men Verse 14. Verse 19.
say they have faith: as himself in the proposition of this place speaks.
What avails it my brethren though a man (says he) say he has faith, when he
has no work? Can his faith save him? The Apostle inueieth against a bare
pretense of faith: against that faith which is in words only, which is a
verbal faith. As also Saint Thomas of Aquine their angelical Doctor
confesses: S. Thomas.
who expounding the similitude, in the fifteenth and sixtenth verses
expressed: follovving the same sense of faith, says: As liberality in
words helps not the poor, unless meat and other necessary things be
given and ministered: so neither that faith which is in words, can save us.
Thus he expounds Saint James of verbal faith, which in words only
consists. Seeing then Saint Paul speaks of a true, lively, and fruitful
faith, whereby we live: and James of a dead, rotten, barren faith, vvherby
men are counted dead: they speak of faith in diverse significations: and
therefore are not contrary, neither to be opposed: neither can one and the
same effect of justification before GOD, be applied unto both these kinds:
yea the faith whereof Paul speaks, justifies before God, and the faith
whereof James speaks does not: therefore speak they not of one kind of
faith. For which cause the conclusion of Saint James cannot be meant of the
faith mentioned in Saint Paul, but of another: when he says, ye see then
that a man is justified through works, and not of faith only.

This faith then is the faith of devils and hypocrites, not the faith of
Christians. And so the place serves nothing at all against the doctrine,
which we out of Paul preach, that we are justified by faith only, by a
lively faith only. But not by a bare, dead or fruitless faith only: which
with Saint James we also preach unto the world. Thus the adversaries of
Upon 2. chap. ver. 15. 16.
the gospel play in the word faith, and make a doubtful argument out of Saint
James, from the manifold signification of faith: when they conclude, that faith
only does not justify us.

2 Now as faith is manifold, so justification, or to Double justification.
Psalm. 32. Romans 4.
justify, is double. There is justifying before God, which is, to be reputed
as righteous: to have our sins forgiven, and our iniquities pardoned in the
sight of God: which is the righteousness and justification mentioned of the
prophet, and remembered of Paul: Blessed is that man whose unrighteousness is
forgeuen, and whose sins are covered: blessed is that man unto whom the Lord
imputes not sin.

This justification is by faith, as Moses confesses in Genesis 15. Romans 4.
Abraham: and Paul by his example proves in the rest of the Saints: Abraham
believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness. Of this
justification Paul to the Romans, Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, and in
all other places speaks: whenever he affirms, that we are justified by
faith: by which, men, only are justified before God.

As there is justifying before God which is through says: So is there
justification before men: which is to be showed, declared, and known of men,
to be just and righteous. And this justifying is by works, which only show
forth our faith to the knowledge of men: and make it known to the world,
that we are righteous and just indeed. Thus by his obedience (as, the fruits
of his faith) was Abraham justified in offering his son: the offering whereof
made him not righteous before God, but his faith: but it made him known to
men, to have been justified before God through faith: and so he was justified
before men through works. Thus to be justified by works with men, is to be
showed and known for righteous: or as Saint Augustine says; To bring to pass
that one be known Of the spirit letter. c. 26.
and reputed for just and righteous: as in the Gospel, the Pharisie falsely
persuading himself of righteousness, sought to have justified himself: that
is, brought to pass, Luke 18.
that he might have been reputed for just, by fasting, paying of tithes,
giving of alms, and such like works which he did. Thus the Scribes and
Pharisees by their pretended works, and show of godliness, by the outward
appearance and actions which they did in the knowledge and sight of men:
thereby before men sought to be reputed, esteemed, and reckoned for righteous:
Which being done Luke 16.
in singular and notable hypocrisy: our Savior worthelie and sharply inueyeth
against them: Ye are they which justify your selves before men. (How? by their
works, and outward life.) But God knows your hearts: for that which is
highly esteemed among men, is abominable in the sight of God.

Seeing there is a double justifying: one before God, through faith alone; the
other before men, only through works: of which kind speaks Saint James? he
speaks of being justified before men, not before God: which thing shall
appear evidently.

1 Out of the story it self: wherein it is recorded, that Genesis 22.
when Abraham was ready to have slain his son, the angel of God restrained
him, and held his hand, and said to Abraham; Do nothing unto him: for now I
know that thou fear God, for that for my sake thou have not spared thine
only son In that the Angel says; now I know: So other fathers. So
Dionisius Carthusianus upon 2. James.
it must not be understood of the knowledge of God, as if then only he knew:
but of the knowledge of men: now I know, now I make known to men: and so
does S. Augustine expound it. This Angel was God: for it is said, that for
the Angels sake he spared not his son: now I know thou fear God, in that
for my sake thou have not spared thine only son. Godly Abraham was not ready
for any Angels sake, but for Gods sake, to have offered. This angel being God,
and God knowing all things from all eternity: it could not be understood of
his knowledge, but of the knowledge of men: who by Abraham's obedience,
whereunto he was stirred up by the commandments of God: were now assured,
and certified, that he was truly righteous.

Seeing then it appears, that the very story it self has relation
specially to the justifying: and being reputed for righteousness in the sight
of men, not of God: Saint James alleging it, must speak in the same sense as
the story it self does of justification: that is, of justification before
men, not before God.

2 Moreover, S. James could not say in that actio^ that was done which long
before that time was not done only, but also openly witnessed: But Abraham
before God was justified before, and he had the testimony of Moses, who said;
that he believed God, and that was imputed and reckoned for righteousness. Now
this promise, for believing Genesis 22.
whereof, he was reckoned for righteous: was made thirty years before he
offered up his son. If he were righteous before God thirty years before
his sacrifice: how could his sacrifice be cause of his righteousness?

Then seeing James says, that he was justified by that obedience: and he were
before God justified thirty years before: then can he not be understood of
justification before God: but of being justified before men. The like reason
Romans 4.
from the circumstance of time S. Paul uses: Who speaking of the same
righteousness of Abraham before God, says; That he was counted for righteous
before he was circumcised. But he offered up his son long after his
circumcision.

For when he was commanded to be circumcised, he received but the promise
only, of Isaac: and afterward Genesis 17. Genesis 18. Genesis 19 Genesis 20 Genesis 22.
it was repeated: and the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha beeeing past, and
he having dwelt a time in Gerar, received the promise made unto him: in the
twenty chapter of Genesis it is recorded, that GOD visited Sarah; and she did
bear him a Son, and they called his name Isaac. Who then being borne,
growing up, and being now about thirteen years old, his father was by God
commanded to offer him up in Mount Morah.

By the circu^sta^ce of time Abraham being proved to have been (...) speak of
diverse works. Saint Thomas, their holy Doctor, expounding those words, His
faith wrought with his works: and, by the works his faith was made perfect,
says; Faith wrought through works: that is, faith whereby he was justified
before, led and brought him unto the works: and by works, (namely, following
faith) was his faith made perfect; that is, augmented, declared, and showed.

Thus he also affirms, that James spoke of works Heb. 11.
following faith. The author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, showing that that
obedience, and sacrifice of Abraham, was a work following faith, ascribes and
applies it to faith, and says; that Abraham by faith offered Isaac up. If
therefore S. James speak of works following faith, as he must needs do,
alleging this example, which as the truth is in God: and as it is also
confessed, both by Thomas, and the ordinary Gloss also: then can he not
speak of justification before God: for that cannot be accomplished by works
following faith and justification,

4 Finally, we must diligently consider, and carefully Acts 15. Philip. 3.
Gal. 3. and 5. Romans 4.
weigh, with what people, hearers and persons, these two had to deal withal.
S. Paul (as appears in many places of the new Testament) had to do with such
as persuaded men, that unless they observed the law of Moses, they could not
be saved: whom he confuteth, out of the law it self, out of the Prophets,
David, Abacuk, and others: out of the Gospel, and true end and use, both of
it, and of the law of Moses: to which purpose he sets down a doctrine
quite contrary thereunto: that men are justified by faith in Jesus Christ,
without the works of the law of Moses. To the establishing of which assertion,
affirma^ce and opinion, the Epistle to the Romans, Galathians, Ephesians, and
Philippians, seems to have been penned and written. In process of time,
this assured doctrine was wroong and wrested by some: gathering that it was not
needful for such as by faith in Jesus Christ were justified: to be followers
of good works: but that to believe only barelie, without care of holy
conversation, was sufficient. Which to prevent, as S. Paul in those forenamed
Epistles oftentimes joins exhortations to manners: so S. James seeing the
carnal professors greatly to abuse the gospel, to the liberty and loosenes
of the flesh: in this Epistle encountreth with them* testifying and protesting
to all me^, that faith in men pretending justification, without works: is but
as a dead carkas. And thus he writes not against Paul, but with him, against
such as perverted his doctrine, and abused their liberty and free
justification, to the wa^tonnesse of the flesh, as men now do also: who hearing
justification by faith only, think themselves thereby discharged, and set at
liberty from the practice of holiness: which is their error, in that they
conceive not, that as we are freely justified before God through faith, without
the help or respect of our works: so are we known to be just by works before
men: whereby God for his mercy is glorified: and therefore ought to be
performed of us.

Thus Paul disputes against those which attributed too much to works, as
helping causes of salvation. Saint James reasons against such, as making too
vile account of works, utterly neglected them. S. Paul had to do with
pharisaical hypocrites, who swelled with the pride of their own works and
righteousness: S. James with Epicuricall professors, who boasting themselves of
their historical and bare faith and profession: refuse to bring forth the
fruits of righteousness. Seeing then these two speak of diverse kinds of
faith; seeing they speak in diverse sense of justification; seeing they speak
of works diversely: and contend finally against diverse persons; seeing Paul
establishes true, Christian, lively faith: S. James condemns bare,
fruitelesse, idle faith: Seeing Paul speaks of our justification with God:
James how we are known for righteous before men: Seeing Paul speaks of works
before faith, denying them for causes of salvation: James of works following
faith, allowing them for effects and fruits thereof: Seeing Paul denies good
works to go before men, to be justified: S. James confesses them to follow
men being justified: Seeing Paul conte^deth against such as too much preferred
works: S. James against those which too much neglected them: therefore no
controversy, but a perfect consent and harmony in their doctrine. Whereby it
appears more clear (I hope) then the Sun at noon day, how shamelesly our
adversaries abuse this place, against free justification by faith: for the
establishing of works, as causes of salvation and justification with God.

And thus much of faith and works; the cause and the effects, necessarily
joined together in all those that are justified in Jesus Christ: To whom, with
the Father and the holy Ghost, three persons in Trinity, one eternal and
everliving God in Unity, be rendered all praise, dominion and majesty: now
and for ever. Amen.

The Analysis or resolution of the third Chapter of Saint James.
3. Chapter of S. James has three parts. 1 Is of not usurping authority to
judge and censure other men rigorously. v. 1. and part of the second, wherein
there are two things. 1 The exhortation it self: Brethren be not many masters.
verse 1. 2 The reason thereof and it is double. 1 From the judgment of God.
verse. 1. 2 From our own imbecilitie. ver. 2.

2 Is of refraining the tongue. From 2. ver. to 13. verse. Wherein two things
are handled. Namely 1 The proposition of the place. verse. 2. and part of 3. 2
The handling and tractatio^, which is double: partly 1 From the profits
thereof: set down in two similitudes. 3. 4. part 5. ver. 1 Of horses. 2 Of
the rudder of a ship.
2 From the evils. 1 Generally: 2 part 5. v. 1. to. 6, 2 Particularly. 2. part.
6 7. to 13.


3 Is concerning gentleness meekness of wisdom: 13. to the end. In which
discourse 4. things are handled 1 An exhortation to gentleness and and
meekness of wisdom. v. 13. 2 An opposing of the contrary, which is
contention. v. 14. 3 A distingnishing of wisdom, whereby the door and gate is
shut to many evils and mischiefs. v. 15. 16. 17. 4 A reason from reward, why
gentleness and meekness of wisdom is to be followed. v. 18.


THE THIRD CHAP. OF S. JAMES, THE FIRST VERSE, AND PART OF THE SECOND. THE
XIIII. SERMON.
1 My brethren, be not many masters, knowing that we shall receive the
greater condemnation.

2 For in many things we sin all.


THIS third Chapter of Saint James, as by the Analysis and resolution
appears, contains three places or principal matters. The first is, Let no
man usurp authority ambiciously to judge and censure his brother in
sharpness and rigor of judgment: in the first, and part of the second verse
contained. In which there are two things to be noted. 1 The exhortation it
self: My brethren, be not many masters. 2 The reasons of the exhortation:
first from the judgment of GOD, secondly, from our own imbecilitie and
weakness. who our selves in many things offending, we ought not to be too
severe and rigorous against others.

The second place of this Chapter, is concerning the government and
refrayning of the tongue: beginning from the latter part of the second verse,
and continued to the thirteenth verse hereof. In which part there are two
things. 1 The proposition it self. 2 part, 2. verse. If any man sin not in
his tongue, or in word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle the whole
body. 2 The tractation and handling of the matter concerning the tongue, which
is double: first from the commodities of moderating the tongue: which Saint
James expresses by two similitudes: the one of horses, who are governed by the
bitte and cheek of the bridle. 3. v. Then by the similitude of a Ship, which
is guided by the stern or rudder. 4. 5. v. Then he handles the matter of
moderating the tongue, from the evils of the tongue: which he sets down,
first generally: in the second part of the fourth verse, and in the first part
of the sixth: then particularly: from the second part of the sixth verse, to the
thirteenth verse, wherein he notes three particular evils of the tongue, 1
That it defiles the whole body. 2 That it is a thing untameable, and
unbridled. 3 That it is reprochful, contumelious, and given to cursed
bittereesse.

The third part and place is, from the thirteenth verse to the end:
concerning gentleness and meekness of wisdom. In which discourse four
things are touched. 1 An exhortation to meekness, verse 13. 2 The opposition
of the contrary, which is contention. condemned and spoken against by the
Apostle. verse 14. 3 The distinguishing of wisdom, which is either earthly,
or heavenly: by the which the way to manifold mischiefs is precluded and
shut up, 15. 16. and 17. verses. 4 The last is a reason drawn from reward,
why the Saints of GOD should embrace and follow meekness of wisdom, verse
18. Because such as are peaceable, gentle and meek, shall in the harvest of
the world, reap the fruits of righteousness, which they have sown in
peace. And this is the Anatomic of this place or chapter. These words in the
first, and part of the second verse of this third Chapter, concern the first
part and place, which is of not usurping ambicious authority to judge and
censure the brethren sharply, and rigorously: and why we should not so do,
as shall appear.

1. And part of the 2, ver. 3. of S. James, being, concerning not usurping
authority of co^demning the brethren, contain two things. 1 An exhortation;
or admonition: that the Saints of God, do not ambiciously or rigorously censure
their brethren. 2 The reasons of the exhortation: which are two. 1 From Gods
divine judgment, which shall be the heavier over us. 2 From the imbecilitie
and frailty of our nature, which are subject to sin as well as others.


1 Touching the exhortation it self: it teaches us, not ambiciously as
commonly men do: neither to rigorously and austerely to judge, censure and
condemn our brethren. Which exhortation the Apostle infers under this form
of speech and words: My brethren, be not many masters: that is, let not the
Saints usurp authority ambiciously to judge and censure their brethren, with
sharpness and rigor.

Wherein, by masters are not understood such as are called to public place
and office of reproving: but such as being private men, or as private men:
challenge and arrogate to themselves, in the ambition of their mind: an
absolute authority, as it were to judge, give sentence of, and censure their
brethren, in rigor and authority of judgment. A vice and evil common to all
times, and with hypocrites in Saint James his days most usual. Whose steps
men in our days most nearly and narrowly following, take upon them to judge
all other men, and to search, sift, boult out to the very branne, the manners,
lives, actions of their brethren: altogether careless of their own offenses.
This evil the very heathen have condemned, counting it great folly in men,
to judge of the lives of other men, which we always carry in sight, and set
before us: and to be careless of our selves: whose vices to forget, we cast
always behind us. Horace the Lib. 1. Sermon. number.
Poet seems to check men in his time for this evil: for that they being
purreblind in the view of themselves: would notwithstanding be so sharp of
sight, and severe in judging of others. Tulli the Roman orator affirms, 2.
Orationagainst Verris.
that it is an intolerable thing for men, not only severely to judge, but
sharply to reprove other men, when themselves are likewise faulty. Our
Savior Mat. 7.
Christ, willing men to take heed of reproouing and condemning their brethren,
rashly, rigorously, ambiciously: thereby to seem holier then all others:
exhorts them not to judge, least they be judged: neither to condemn, least
they be condemned. Not forbidding all reproof, finding of faults: condemning
one another: but the ambicious hypocrisy of such, as without cause, to appear
holyer then other, usurp authority to judge, condemn, and censure their
brethren.

This thing is mere fantastical: for men ambiciously to challenge authority
to judge other men at their own pleasures. For so did that proud Pharisie,
who Luke 18.
censured the poor Publicane, even to God himself, when in his prayer to God,
he said: I thank thee O God, that I am not as other men, extorcioners, unjust,
adulterers, or as this publicane. Elephas the Themanite usurped authority over
Job, and rigorously condemned him Job 4.
as wicked. The wicked Jews, whose lives were full of all hypocrisy and
iniquity, challenged authority over the Gentiles; to censure and judge them at
their own pleasures: Isai 65.
which as singularly faulty in them, the Prophet reprooueth: they say, Stand a
part: come not near me, for I am holier thon thou: these are as smoke in my
wrath, and a fire that burns continually.

Christ in the Gospel mueighing against the ambition Mat. 7. Luke 6.
and hypocrisy of such as wink at their own horrible and heinous sins: yet
are too curious to spy out, and too rigorous in condemning the faults of
their brethren: cries out against them in this manner: why see thou a moate
in thy brothers eye, and considerest not the beam in thine own eye? Saint
James the holy Apostle in like manner, dissuading from the same evil, and
teaching the Saints not to challenge ambiciously authority to judge their
brethren, says: My brethren, let there not be many masters: or brethren, by
ye not many masters.

Such have all times and ages brought forth: and our time is not void thereof.
Wherein many are so austere so severe, so rigorous and sharp: as that they
condemn all men, all women almost, beside themselves. A presumptuous, proud
and superstitious sort of men, whom nothing pleases, which themselves do not:
and by whom all are condemned, which dance not after their pipe: which walk
not after their rules: which live not after the order of their lives. Who
hunting after the opinion of holiness, and seeking the estimation and account
with men, of greater preciseness then is commonly in others: too rashly in
their words: too rigorously in their deeds: too ambiciously in their
conuenticles and assemblies: censure their brethren. Which as a thing
unlawful in the Saints of God, unseemly in the servants of Christ,
uncharitable in the fellow members of the same body of the Church: Saint
James disswadeth, My brethren, be not many masters. How great soever our
holiness be: how singular soever our piety: how perfect soever our
profession: how upright soever our conversation: how sound soever our faith
be: how unblameable soever our behavior: how ample soever our measure be:
how manifold soever our graces: how large soever our talents be: how rare
soever our gifts received: yet must we learn Christian humility, and show
charity to the brethren, and hold fast the exhortation of the Apostle, that
we be not many masters, in usurping ambiciously authority, to censure others
rigorously. Thus condemns the Apostle, that censure-like arrogancy of the
proud, chalenging authority to themselves to judge others as they lust: and
forbids, that every one should think himself a fit reformer and censurer
of the life of his brethren: My brethren, be not many masters.

James: Brethren, be not many masters, knowing that you shall receive the
greater condemnation. The force of this reason is: they which are rigorous and
streight-laced toward others, shall find God severe and straight toward
themselves. Whose manner is in all things to meet to men, as they have measured
unto other: whether it be in cruelty Mat. 7.
of deeds, or rigorousnesse of judgment: for that of Christ is generally true
in both: what measure you meet unto others, by the same it shall be measured
unto you again. And first in the cruelty of our actions we provoke God to
repay us with seventy. Which thing Adonibesech Judges 1.
confesses of himself: who being taken of them, over whom Judah was captain:
and his hands and feet being cut off he acknowledged it the righteous
judgment of God against him, for the cruelty of himself toward others:
therefore he said: seventy kings having the thumbs of their hands and their
feet cut off, gathered bread under my table: as I have done, so has God
rewarded me. His cruelty was punished from God by like cruelty. Samuel
tells the same tale to Agag, king of the Amalakites: when he cut his body in
pieces in Gilgal, as thy 1. King 15.
sword has made women childles: so shall thy mother be childlesse above other
women: and so he slew him, and cut him in pieces before the Lord: thus
cruelty with cruelty: blood with blood, was repaied from the Lord. And this
is the thing which God by his Prophet threatens against Mount Seir, for their
crucltie against Israel Ezech. 35.
the people of God: therefore, as I live, says the Lord God, I will even do
according to thy wrath, and according to thine indignation and hatred, which
thou have used against them: even as thou have dealt cruelly, even so shall
thou be cruelly handled. The Angel commends the righteous judgment of God,
in executing the severity of his Revel. 16.
wrath against them, who were sharp, severe, and cruel against his people;
Lord thou art just and holy, because thou have judged these things. For they
shed the blood of the Saints, and Prophets: and therefore have thou given them
blood to drink: for they are worthy. Thus have they the heavier judgment
from God, whose deeds are cruel and severe toward others. Neither is this true
only in the cruelty of men's deeds: but also in the rigor of their judgment
against others* who incur so much heavier wrath and iuster condemnation from
God: how much the sharper they are toward their brethren in judging and
censuring the^: according to the apostles doctrine.

Our Savior Christ had respect and regard to this, who dissuaded men from
rash, ambicious, and rigorous Matt. 7.
judgment: judge not, least you be judged: condemn not, least you be
condemned. For they incur the worthier judgment, and shall assuredly find
the heavier condemnation, which offend themselves in judging and condemning
their brethren. S. Paul makes those me^ subject to the greater condemnation,
who being themselves faulty, Rom, 2.
yet ambiciously censure their brethren therefore (says he) thou art
inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art, which co^demnest: for in that thou
conde^nest other, thou co^demnest thy self. Whereby the apostle S. James
disswadeth men from usurping authority of rigourous judgment of others: My
brethren, says he, be not many masters, knowing that we shall receive the
greater condemnation.

By which it evidently appears, that how much the more rigorously we judge
others: so much the heavier condemnation we heap against our selves: but most
especially being guilty of the same sins, or as great, as we rigorously
condemn in our brethren. If we condemn a thief to the bottomless pit of
hell (as unworthy life) yet our selves steal, be oppressors, usurers, or
extortioners of the people: if we condemn without favor or pity, the
adulterous person, and yet our selves break wedlock: if we condemn lying,
and use our tongues to deceit, slander, and horrible blasphemy: if we
condemn drunkenness with austere severity, yet give over our selves to
riotousnes, banqueting, and faring deliciouslie every day: if we condemn
covetousness, yet be ravished Luke 16. 1. Tim. 6. Ephesians. 5.
with love of money; making our gold our god; our silver our safegarde; our
substance our succor: if we reprove anger in our brethren, and burn and
boil in irreconciled hatred, and deadly malice of heart: if finally, we be
rigorous against our brethren, and usurp ambitiously the authority to judge
and condemn them: we provoke the greater wrath, we heap up the seuerer
judgment, we receive the iuster condemnation against our selves. Which Saint
James here uses as his first reason, why we should not so do; My brethren,
be not many masters: knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation.

The second reason why men ought not to usurp 2. Reason.
this authority over their brethren, is from the view of our own weakness,
the consideration of our own condition, the facility in our selves to fall,
through natural frailty: thereof the Apostle thus: In many things we offend
all: therefore we must not be too rigorous against other men: seeking, and
looking rather into our own readiness to sin.

Let us take the view of all states and degrees of men: Princes and people;
masters and servants; fathers and children; husbands and wives; rich and poor;
learned and ignorant; high and low; wise and foolish; preachers and hearers:
all, all (I say) are subject to the same imbecilitie, and frailty of nature:
in many things we fall all.

Is there a body without a blemishe? is there a day without a cloud? is there
a man without offense? is it Prou. 24.
true that Solomon says; the righteous and just man falls seven times a day,
and rises up again? are we not all subject to sundry infirmities, and
offend in many things every one of the sons of Adam? shall not the
remembrance of this our common condition, remove so great severity and rigor
of judgment from us? This ought then to make us less secure, and more remiss
and gentle toward the offenses of the brethren.

The very Heathen knew that all men are subject to H^ratius.
this condition: wherefore one of their own Poets said;

No man lives without crime or sin.

The continual meditation thereof, should induce us to follow gentleness, and
not to use too great rigor toward others.

Men fall and sin (as Lactantius has noted) three Lib. 6. c. 13.
ways: in deeds; in speeches; in thoughts and cogitations: and there is no
man which does not fall through every one of these, sundriwise. In deed men
sin be they never so holy: for who is he whose life is incorrupt; whose feet
have never slipped; whose whole life is clear from all Pro. 20.
sin? Show him me, and I will praise him; tell me where he is, and I will
honor him; let me see him, and I will worship him as a mortal god. He shall be
(in my judgment) holier then Abraham; he shall be more renowned then Moses and
Aaron; he shall be more pure then David or Daniel; he shall be more perfect then
Job the righteous; he shall be more glorious then Paul, the elect vessel of
Jesus Christ: for all these in action have sinned.

In words, whereof in the next place our Apostle shall speak, who offends
not? Who, either in anger moved, or in mirth pleasant, or in pastime delighted,
or by importunity of men pricked forward, has not fallen, either to cursing,
or to slander, or to swearing, or to loosenes or vanity of his talk? that he
has not in respect thereof, just cause with David and Sirach, to pray to have
the door of Psalm. 141. Ecclus. 22.
his lips kept and a seal of wisdom set before his mouth, that he offend not
in his words.

In thought, our falls are so many, as that it passes the strength of man, by
cogitation not to admit the thing which is either wicked in deed, or evil to
utter. In so much as righteous and holy men, who abstain in many things from
wicked actions: yet oftentimes (through infirmity of nature, are carried by
cogitations, to evil thoughts: so that there is no man, unless he be
translated (as it were) into the nature of God, who sins not in cogitation.
So that the Apostle, in respect of these, has here truly avouched, in many
things we fall all. Which thing men considering, shall the better refrain
their severity of judgment, and rigor in censuring their christian brethren.

Three respects there are in men, whereby their rigor toward others should be
abated. 1 To recount what in former times themselves have been. 2 To think
what hereafter they may be. 3 To remember what presently they are.

1 If we consider what our selves have been in former times, it shall
mittigate greatly the severity of our judgments and rigorous censuring of our
brethren. Saint Paul exhorting men to patience, and gentleness toward other,
and not to be severe against their offending and weak brethren, thus reasons;
They now are what you in former Tit. 3.
times have been: call therefore to mind your former condition, and be
patient; show all meeknes therefore to all men. For we our selves were in
times past unwise, disobedient, deceived: serving lusts and diverse pleasures:
living in maliciousnes and envy, hateful, and hating one another.

The recounting therefore of our former condition, must assuage the severity
of our judgment, and make us more moderate toward such, as now are what we
have been. We our selves once were ignorant; we once went out of the way;
we sometimes have been overtaken with natural infirmity: whereby we have
committed things not convenient. Let us not severely judge, and tigorously
condemn such as are subject to the common infirmities, and frailties of nature.

2 As to record our former state, shall abate our sharpnes: so to think with
our selves whereunto we may fall: being compassed about always with these
infirmities. S. Paul (to persuade men to show meeknes, and not sharpenes Gal. 6.
of judgment toward such as fall through occasion) reasons from the
frailty of our state, whereby we are subject to like falling: to which purpose
he thus speaks to the Saints of Galatia; Brethren, if a man be suddenly taken
in any offense: ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of
meekenes: considering thy self, least thou also be tempted. Wherein he wisely
condemns imortunate rigor; and worthelie reproves those, which are commonly
most severe judges against their brethren; when they altogether forget their
own infirmity, whereby they may fall into like offenses.

Now there is no infirmity; no iniquity among men; final impenitencie, and
the sin unto death, or against the holy Ghost, excepted: whereinto, even the
best men, may not fall. Which if they consider, it will easily moderate their
rigor and severity against their brethren, and make them take heed, least
ambitiously they usurp this authority against others.

And how true it is, that even the best may fall, evident examples, and woeful
experience may teach us. Who knows not, that lyeng is a sin against the
ninth commandment, condemned by God and his Prophets: yet holy and faithful
Abraham; godly Isaac, fell thereinto, as Genesis 12. and 26. Genesis 20.
the story bears record.

Murmuring is a great sin against GOD, arguing impatiencie; yet Moses was
thereof guilty, as it appears. Idolatry seems to be sin in the highest
degree; yet that, by Aaron, the Saint of God, was committed. Adulteterie, a
grievous evil, whereof God in his law has forewarned, Exodus 32.
and in sundry people, men, and Nations, punished; Exodus 20. 2. Kings 11.
yet David (the man of God) was tardie therein. To deny Christ, with execrable
cursing, banning and swearing, Mat. 26.
is great iniquity; yet Peter the blessed Apostle therein offended. To
persecute the church, to blaspheme the truth, is horrible impiety; yet Saint
Paul (the chosen vessel of God) committed both. As these examples show that
the best may, because these have done, with whom none are 1. Tim. 1.
now, or have been since to be compared: So daily experience conuinceth the
same: While we see daily before our eyes, men of far greatest excellency to
fall into sundry infirmities.

Out of whose falls a triple profit insueth. 1. Thereby the glory of God, his
power and mercy, is made manifest, in making them vessels of glory: who by
their sins deserved his eternal displeasure: for which cause S. Paul 1. Tim.
1.
cries out; that in his conversion Christ showed all clemency. Secondly by
the falls of great persons, both themselves have cause to humble themselves
before god, and not wax proud of any thing: and others seeing the most
excellent men subject to infirmity, are therence to be admonished of their
greater infirmities: for if the great oaks of Basan, and the mighty and tall
Cedars of Libanon fall: what is to be looked for of the low trees of the
forest? if the righteous be hardly saved: what shall become of the wicked? 1.
Pet. 4.


Thirdly, all men may thereby gather the frailty of their nature: and so pray
to God, when they stand, that 1. Cor. 10.
they fall not.

Now seeing all men are subject to this condition, that they may fall, if they
be not vpholden and supported by the help of God: it ought to qualify our
hasty judgment, and to moderate the severity of the same against the brethren.

3 Finally, we shall be more temperate toward other men: if we consider
whereunto we are presently subject: which is the reason here urged. The
conscience of our own sins, and the diligent view of our own weakness and
wickedness; makes us more gentle toward others: which men then forget, when
they are too severe judges of their brethren. To this purpose Siracides
exhorts me^ Ecclus. 8.
not to despise such, as having sinned, turn therefro: neither to cast it in
their teeth; but rather to remember, that we are all worthy of blame. When we
consider our own selves, we shall see there is in us many things to be
amended. This diligent consideration will make us more careful of not
rigorously and rashely iudgeing our brethren. Are we not covetous, as they are?
yet are we proud and disdainful. Are we not proud? yet are we fleshely and
wanton. Are we not wanton? yet are we slanderous and reproachful. Are we not
reproachful? yet are we envious and malicious. What, are we not malicious?
yet are we riotous and intemperate. What, are we not intemperate? yet are we
prodigal and wastfull. If not prodigal, yet liars and blasphemers: if not
blasphemers, yet extortioners and oppressors of our brethren: Or finally, given
to these and these iniquities; so that it is as clear as the sun in his
brightness, that in many things we offend all. Which who so considers, and
pondereth in equal balance: shall thereby be counterpeized, and brought to a
moderate censure and judgment of the sins and lives of others: and taught
effectually, not to usurp authority, rashly to judge and condemn the
brethren.

This I would to God our sharp censurers, and severe iudgers would weigh, who
give definitive and peremptory sentence of al men; who challenge a chief
power, and absolute authority over all their brethren; who condemn without
charity, whatsoever does not please them selves. Would God they would but
turn over the leaf, wherein their own infirmities are registered, and turn
the other end of the wallet before them, to fix their sight upon their own
blemishes, and blottes of corruption: then would their pride be abated, their
heat assuaged, their chollor cooled, their judgments moderated, their
arrogancy delaied and qualified: and themselves brought to a temperature: not
so ambitiously to usurp and arrogate to themselves, the censuring of their
brethren.

Which to effect and compass in the Saints, the Apostle uses this reason
also; My brethren, be not many masters, knowing that we shall receive the
greater condemnation: for in many things we sin and fall all.

Of our manifold fallings, many are the occasions, sundry are the causes. 1
The original corruption which lies couched in our bosoms, whereby we are led
captive unto sin.

2 The snares of Satan, which he lays to take us, and entangle us in the
pitfold of iniquity.

3 The evil examples which are presented before us, whereby we are drawn to
all ungodliness every day.

4 The lenity of the governors of discipline, who (according to the rule of
justice) take not execution upon sin: whereby others are pricked forward to
like sin. For, whereas punishment is not executed (says Salomo^) speedily,
there are the hearts of men set upon mischief. Eccles. 8. Psalm. 101.
Therefore David says, he would betimes destroy all the wicked of the land,
that he might cut off all the workers of wickedness from the city of God.

5 Finally, the fearefulnes and flattery of the Ministers of the word: who
either for fear, or for favor, tell not men of their manifold offenses,
whereby they are occasioned sundry ways to fall.

The reason of the Apostle is this: Seeing all men are subject to many falls
and infirmities, therefore must they not be too severe against their brethren*
be not many masters (says the Apostle) knowing that we shall receive the
greater condemnation* for in many things we offend all.

Now the fall of man is double: either particular, or general. Particular, as
to fall into any one sin, or more: as theft, dronkennes, adultery, murder,
covetousness, usury, extortion, slander, lying, blasphemy, and the like. Into
some, or many of these, even the most holy Saints have, may, and do daily
fall. General falling, is when men fall Heb. 6. 1. John. 5. Mat. 12
away, not in one only sin, but generally in all: and resist the grace of
God offered. This is apostacy, this is the sin unto death, this is the sin
against the holy Ghost: even a general, and universal falling away from the
known truth. Heb 6. and 10. 2. Pet. 2.
Whereof the author to the Hebrews affirms, that who so does so sin,
cannot be restored by repentance.

And S. Peter avouches, that it were better for me^ not to have known the
truth: then after that they have known it, to fall away from the holy
commandments. Thus do not the Saints fall, but only the reprobate. Of the
former kind the Apostle speaks; for all men fall particularly in many things:
which we ought always to consider: that it might teach us, not to usurp
authority ambitiously to censure and judge our brethren: whereunto this place
and exhortation serves; My brethren, be not many masters, for we shall receive
the greater judgment: for in many things we offend or fall all.

Whereas Saint James wills, that we be not many masters: does it take away
the authority of masters over their servants? No assuredly: for then would
neither S. Paul so carefully, nor Saint Peter so diligently, have given
precepts concerning obedience of servants to their masters. Saint Paul
exhorts servants to be subject to their 2. Tit. Ephesians. 6.
masters, and to please them in all things; to be obedient to them which are
their masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singlenes of
mind, as unto the 1. Tim. 6.
Lord. In another place in this wise he councelleth them; Let as many servants
as are under the yoke, count their 1. Pet. 2
masters worthy all honor: that the name of God, and his doctrine be not evil
spoken of. To whom Saint Peter subscribeth: Servants (says he) be subject to
your masters with all fear: not only to the good and courteous, but also to
the froward. Seeing these Apostles have enjoined this obedience to servants
toward their masters; and the same spirit spoke in them, and in James our
Apostle: it follows then, that the authority of masters is not here abandoned.

If we must not be many masters, neither be judges over our brethren; shall we
think that power is taken away hereby from Princes, judges, and magistrates,
over their Subjects, and such as are under them? Neither. For then would not
the Scriptures teach what magistrates should be in common wealths, neither
enjoin obedience to be performed unto them. Moises being wearied with the
government of the whole people of Israel, Exodus 18.
is taught by Jethro his father in law, the priest of Midian, to choose more
offiicers and governors under him, whose qualities are four. Men they must
be, 1 of courage: 2 fearing God: 3 dealing truly: 4 hating covetousness.
Moises according to this counsel ordained Deuteronomy. 1. and 16.
officers and judges over the people, taught them their duties, and set down
the qualities in them required. To whom obedience by the law of God is to be
performed. Exodus 20.
Which God contained in the fourth commandment: where it is said, honor thy
father and thy mother: not only the parents of our bodies, but the parents and
fathers of the country, which are princes and magistrates in common wealths.
This obedience he requires, when he gives them authority to determine
causes, and wills Exodus 22.
men to stand to their verdit. Our Savior Christ taught the same by his own
example, who in toke^ of civil Matt. 17.
subjection paid tribute to Caesar. And afterward being tempted by the
Scribes and Herodians, and demanded Matt. 22.
the question, whether it were lawful to give tribute to Caesar or no?
answered them in this wise: Give to Caesar that which belongs to Caesar, and
to God, that which belongs unto God. S. Paul by Christ's spirit taught,
wills every soul to be subject to hier powers, because Romans 13.
their power is from God. Finally. S. Peter exhorts all men to submit
themselves to all manner human ordinance 1. Pet. 2.
for the Lords sake. The soueraintie of the prince over the people: the
correcting, controlling, and judging of the magistrate and civil officer of
the transgressing, and offending persons, is not hereby removed.

What if we may not be many masters: shall we think that men are herehence
forbidden, to profess themselves teachers and masters, to inform others in
human arts, liberal sciences and faculties belonging to this life? No doubt
we may not so think: for thus to profess is lawful.

If we may not be many masters, shall we suppose that the office of preaching
and reproving, judging and condemning out of the word of God is forbidden? No,
for it is a thing of all others most necessary. Without which men would run
on headlong into all sin. Saint Ambrose therefore says: he that sins, so
long as he is Upon the 5. chap. Ephe.
not reproved, seems to himself not to sin: and vices grow into manners,
and are received in stead of virtue. The rebuking of sin, is a bridle and bit
to restrain others from the like iniquity. Which when Saint Paul considered,
he wills Timothy to rebuke such openly, as openly offended, that others
thereby might fear. S. Gregory 1. Tim. 5.
says, that when men sin, others knowing thereof: they must also be rebuked
in the sight and knowledge Lib. 13. in Job. cap. 4.
of others: least if the preacher hold his peace, and be silent, he thereby
seem to allow of sin: and that grow into example, which the tongue of the
minister cutteth not off. And as the offenses of men give encouragement to
others, when they are not reproved: so being corrected and reproved, others are
restrained: yea, reprehensions out of the word bring life: as Solomon
affirms: corrections Pro. 6.
for instruction are the way of life. Wherefore commending the most excellent
use of reprehension, by the word of god: he avouches, that the instruction of
a wise man, is as Pro. 13.
the well spring of life, to turn away from the snares of death. Seeing
therefore common reprehension of the ministers of God is the bridle and stay
from sin, and the way whereby we come to life: and brings singular profit
unto men, it is not to be thought that the Apostle here condemns it, which
both the Prophets, and the Apostles also have oftentimes used. Neither does
this place take away, the names and titles of men: the honor unto men in place
of honor and dignity, due: See 1. Pet. 5. verse 3.

Finally, seeing we are forewarned not to be many masters, shall we think
that private reprehension, private exhortation, private admonition is
forbidden? If it were so, why would our Savior, that one man should Mat. 18.
tell another of his fault privately, for reconciliation? Why does Siracides
exhort men, to tell their neighbors their Ecclus. 19.
offenses, that if they have done them, they do them no more? Why does God
will that every man should Leuit. 19. Heb. 3. Col. 1.
friendly reprove his brother? Why does Saint Paul exhort us to admonish one
another, and provoke one another to virtue, by instruction and exhortatien?
None then of these are here condemned: but we are admonished to surceasse from
that maisterlike and proud finding fault with others, when ambiciously we
usurp authority to judge and condemn: to censure and give sentence of our
brethren, without charity, rigorously: without pity, severely: without due
regard of common imbecilitie, austerely. Which thing in this place condemning,
Saint James gives this exhortation: My brethren, be not many masters:
knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation: for in many things we
fall all. And thus much concerning the first place. God for his mercy sake
grant us true humility of heart, that we humbling our selves before the
mercy seat of God, may show like love one toward another: that we being
not too rigorous toward other men, may have regard of our own imbecillitie
and weakness of nature: that we in true love supporting one another, may be
are one another burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ: who died for our
sins, and rose again for our righteousness: to whom with the father, and
the holy Ghost, be all praise, dominion, and majesty, now and for evermore.
Amen.

James Chap. 3. verses 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. Sermon 15.
2 If a man sin not in word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all
the body.

3 Behold, we put bits into the horses mouths, that they should obey us, and
we turn about all their body.

4 Behold also the ships, which though they be great, and are driven of fierce
winds, yet are they turned about with a very small rudder whither soever the
governor will.

5 Even so the tongue is a little member also, and boasts great things:
behold how great a matter a little fire kindeleth.

6 And the tongue is fire, even a world of wickedness: so is the tongue set
among our members, etc. To the thirteenth verse.


HErein, from the second, or latter part The second place and part.
of the second verse, to the end of the twelft, is the second part of this
chapter contained, which is touching the moderation and brideling of the tongue.

In the second part hereof are two things noted and set down. 1 The
proposition or state of the place: 2 part v. 2. that man which offends not,
ne falls in his words, is perfect, and able to rule the whole body. 2 The
handling thereof, which is double. 1 From the profits of a brideled tongue:
set forth in two co^parisons or similituds. whereof 1 Is of horses, checked
with the bridle. 3. verse. 2 Of ships governed by the rudder. verse 4.
2 From the evils of an euiltongue, two ways: namely 1 Generally: therefore it
is called. 1 A fire. ver. 5. 2 A world of wickedness. ver. 6.
2 Particularly by 3. effects: namely, 1 Hurt to the whole body. 2. pa. v. 6 2
Vnbridelednes. v. 7. 8 3 Reprochfulnes. 9. 10. 11. 12.




Hereof to come to the first member, the proposition: The proposition.
that man which falls not in his tongue, is a perfect man, and able to bridle
the whole body: it seems to have a necessary coherence, and a fit
dependence with the former words of the Apostle. S. James has said: that in
many things we fall all. Seeing then there are so many falls in the life of
man: and men most easily of all things fall in their tongues and lips: then
which to govern and keep from falling, there is nothing more difficult:
therefore after that he had affirmed that in many things we all offend: to
give a caveat against that mischief whereunto man is most subject, The falling
in words: Saint James teaches in the second place, that he is a rare and
most perfect man, and able to bridle all the body, which offends not in
tongue. Not that there is any which attaineth unto this perfection: but thereby
is showed how truly it was said before, in many things we offend all. And
most chiefly by that slipperie member of the tongue: wherein who so sins
not, is perfect.

Whereby the Apostle insinuates unto us, that the Saints and servants of God,
whose chief care is not willingly to fall: must have a special regard to
their tongues, be wary and charie over their lips, circumspect and careful
to keep the door of their mouths: Wherein, of all men, is most easily
offense committed. So that to bridle our tongues, to moderate our mouths: to
keep our lips, to guide our words with discretion; is a rare point of
perfection, and a great step to excellent virtue.

How good a thing, how great perfection, how rare a virtue it is, not to
stumble in the tongue: neither to offend in word, Sirach perceived, when he
pronounces Ecclus. 14.
him blessed, which has not offended in the words of his mouth: when he
avouches, that the man which Ecclus. 19.
refrayneth his tongue, is able to live with a disordered and troublesome man,
(which is a great matter) and that he which hates babbling, shall have less
evil. Which thing to do, he reputeth as a point of perfect wisdom, and
the contrary a sign of doting folly: wherefore he says: A wise man will
hold his tongue, till he have opportunity: but a fool and trifler, regards
no Ecclus. 20.
time. To refrain and bridle the tongue, is singular perfection: to launch and
lavish out words lewdly, is condemnable Prou. 17.
folly. For a man of wisdom, says Solomon, spares his words, and he that
understands, is of an excellent spirit. Saint Paul exhorting the Saints of
^phe. 4.
God, to grow to all perfection in Christian virtue and love: as a point and
part of this perfection, commends the moderation of the tongue: by teaching
them to abstain from al corrupt speech and communication, that none such
proceed out of their mouths, but that which is good and gracious, and
brings profit unto the hearers. And more particularly entreating of the
Ephe. 5.
same matter not long after, that the Saints in works and words might be
blameless before the Lord: he advises them, that neither fornication,
neither covetousness be once named among them, as it becomes Saints:
neither filthiness, neither foolish talking, neither ieasting, which are not
comely, but rather giving of thanks. The very heathen, seeing by the very
light of nature, how excellent a thing it is, and of how great perfection
wisely to govern the tongue: have commended moderation and silence, as a
crown of glory: babbling and prating, unbridled and disordered garrulitie
have they condemned, as a great mischief among men. Euripides the Poet
therefore said wisely: comely silence is the crown of a man: but prattling and
much Euripides.
speech has never good in it. Yea is hurtful to conversation and City.
Faustus says, that as there is nothing Pastus.
better then a brideled tongue: so is there nothing worse then a tongue
ungoverned, which always bears dangerous and deadly poison, with sweet
honey. Zeno reckening Zeno.
it a singular point of perfection, to guide his tongue: absented himself
therefore from banquets, least through wine, and the provocation of other men:
he might happily have fallen in his talk. One of the Philosophers, whether
this or another, I now remember not: counting it a most rare thing to keep
silence, and refrain the tongue, that a man fall not therein: being asked of
certain Legates, what they should say of him to their master and King,
answered: that he was a man, which could keep silence.

Cato the wise man says, that he is next unto GOD, that with reason can rule
his tongue: whereunto Cato.
the Apostle in his proposition here subscribing, affirms: that that man is
perfect which falls not in word. Therefore Pambus as it is in the Tripertite
history, lib. 8. cap. 1. being desirous to learn a Psalm, and hearing the
first verse of the 39. Psalm, where the Propher says, I thought I would take
heed to my ways, that I offend not with my tongue: would hear no more,
saying, If I can in deed perform this: this one verse is sufficient. And when
he which had taught him that verse, blamed him that in six months he came
not unto him: he answered that in deed he had not fulfilled that verse. And
living long after, being demanded of a familiar friend if he had learned
his verse: he answered, hardly (says he) have I fulfilled it in forty and
nine years.

It is a thing worthy praise, in anger to keep our hands from fighting: in
hatred to withhold our feet from shedding of blood: in abundance of delicate
fare, to bridle our affections and appetites from riotous lust: in company of
lewd women, to keep our selves from carnal desire: in plenty of wealth: to
refrain from covetousness: in great prosperity to be far from pride: but
the falling by the tongue, being so easy, and the way thereof so slipperie: not
to fall in tongue and words, is a virtue so rare: a thing so seldom seen: as
that Sirach counts Ecclus. 19.
it most marvelous, when he says: Who is he that falls not in his tongue?
And Saint James esteems it as great perfection, when he says, He that
falls not in his tongue and word, is a perfect man, and able to bridle all
the body: which is the proposition and state of this second place.

2 The proposition premised and set down before: in the next place follows
the tractation or handling thereof, The handling or tractation.
which is double. 1 From the profits of the brideled tongue. 2 From the evils
of the unbridled tongue.

1 From the profits and commodities of brideled tongues: great good, and
singular profit grows and rises unto men by moderation of the tongue, and
no small matters are compassed and brought to pass thereby: as by the two
similitudes and comparisons of the Apostle here, appears.

For to show what great matters may be done by moderation of tongue, the
Apostle compares in to the bridle or bitte of an horse. Like as the bitte is
but a little thing in comparison of an horse, yet it guides and rules the
strongest horse that is, and makes him follow the will of the rider: Even so,
the tongue is but a small matter in the body of man, yet it (being governed
with discretion) governs the whole body.

We put bittes (says Saint James) into the mouths of horses, that they
should obey us, and thereby we turn about their whole body. Which comparison
(it may be) he borrowed out of the Prophet David: who exhorts men not to be
like horses and mules, which have no understanding. Psalm. 32.
whose mouths we bind and hold with bit and bridle, least they fall upon us.
By both which places it appears, that horses are guided by the bitte and
bridle, at the pleasure of the rider. Hereby the horse is taught to run, and
to stay; to turn, and to wind; to leap, and to fling out; to stand up, and
karere; to scour out; to retire, and give back; and what else soever the
valiant warrior, or skillful rider lusts: yet is there not a stronger beast
almost, then the sturdie steed.

Notwithstanding his great strength, he is turned and tossed with the bitte, at
the pleasure of the rider. The bitte being little, in comparison of the horse,
prevails so greatly. Even so the tongue, a small part, and one of the least
of all our boidly members, guides the whole body to good or to evil: being
moderated by reason, then it profits (no doubt) greatly. This when
Theophrastus the Theophrastus.
famous philosopher considered, he said not amiss; That it were better
trusting to an untamed and an unbridled horse, then to an unbridled tongue:
for the danger of the horse (by not meddling with him) may be prevented: but
because we carry our unbridled tongues always about us, the peril and
danger thereof cannot be avoided.

The other similitude is from the stern, or rudder of the ship. Behold the
ships also, although they be great, and driven with fierce winds, yet are
they turned about with a small rudder, whethersoeuer the governor lusts. The
rudder is but a small piece of wood, in respect of the whole ship, yet it
turns the greatest ship that is, whethersoeuer the master pleases: to avoid
dangerous rocks, sinking sands, and other perils, of sea and waters, and to
bring it to the desired haven whereunto they bend their journey. So the tongue
is a little member, yet (ruled by reason) it guides the body, and keeps it
from falling into sundry mischiefs, whereunto otherwise we are endangered. It
is little, and small, among other members of the body: yet it boasts great
things, and is effectual and of force to compass, or at least attempt great
matters.

Wherefore, what the bitte in the horse mouth, is to the governing of his whole
body: and the rudder of the ship to keep it from dangers: to turn it, to
wind it, to direct it in all points as shall seem best unto the master: even
the same is a moderate tongue to the rule of the whole body. If thou draw and
pluck in the bridle, thou restrainest: if thou give the head, unbridled
horses will endanger thee: if thou hold wisely the rudder, thou may sail in
safety: if thou let it go as it will, the winds take hold of the ship,
and carry it into peril: if thou pluck the reigns of the tongue, thou
restrainest it: if thou give liberty to the tongue, it will bring thee to
destruction: if thou hold thy tongue with wisdom and reason, thou live in
security: if thou let it run at randonne, thou shall be plunged into
unrecoverable danger.

Thus by these two familiar similitudes of horses and ships; the one by the
bitte, the other by the rudder governed and directed; the Apostle plainly
sets down, what profit and benefit redoundeth by the moderating of the
tongue, unto men: which is the first part of the handling of this matter.

These two similitudes, in the third, fourth, and part of the fifth, were
contained, set down to show the profit The 2. part of the handling.
of moderating our tongues. In the other part of the fifth verss, and in the
other verses to the fifteenth, the Apostle sets down the other part of the
treatise, and handling of this matter: namely, how good a thing it is, to
bridle and moderate our tongues; from the evils and inconveniences which
follow the unbridled tongue. For as the profit of moderating our tongues is
great: so contrariwise the discommodities of the untamed tongue, and unbridled
mouth, are many. Which thing he shows: first generally, then particularly.

Generally, the evils and discommodities of an evil tongue, are set down by
two comparisons. First the untamed tongue is like fire: a little fire is able
to destroy much matter: the tongue being little, yet does great mischief. A
coal, yea a spark of fire, oftentimes has raised great flames, whereby whole
houses, villages, towns and cities, woods, fields and forrestes, have been
devoured. Costly buildings, gorgeous houses, goodly cities, large kingdoms,
huge countries, ample wildernesses, and pleasant forests, by a little fire may
be subdued, and brought to nothing: So the tongue is a fire, which destroys
and wastes the greatest matters. One word of the tongue has kindled fire of
hatred in men's hearts, which until death, has never been extinct and put
out: yea, it has caused so great a flame, as has destroyed many people, and
burnt up many Nations* so that with S, James we may worthily compare it to
fire.

Which to signify, it may be that God almighty has made it of form, color,
and fashion, like unto a fire. The tongue is sharp, round and small at the
tippe, or top: but greater, wider, and broader downward: So fire, upward is
sharp, small, round: but greater, larger, and broader downward: So that the
upper end of the flame is sharp; but the nearer we go to the matter whereon
it feeds, or burns; the larger, wider, and greater, is the flame and fire.
Wherefore, in shape and form, the tongue is like fire.

The tongue in color is reddish: so is the color of the fire: so that therein
they agree together. The fire is swift, and runs speedely, sending out
flames, now this way, now that way: So the tongue runs and rouleth this way
and that way: is swift also and nimble, sending out sound far and near; and
therefore not unlike unto fire: so that for many like respects it may not
amiss be compared unto fire.

Now as it is compared unto fire, so is it called a world of wickedness. It is a
sea of sin, a pit of vice, without bottom, a mass of mischief, and the
original or isntrumental cause of manifold evils: so that very heathen
poets and persons, have confessed it the cause of all evil, as the Poet
Menander did. Menander.


It is a world of wickedness, because most mischiefs, and greatest sins among
men, by unbridled and wicked tongus are determined, attempted, and performed.
By the tongue thieves confer together, talk and determine of robberies:
manquellers and murderers by their tongues raise up braulings, the causes
(oftentimes) of cruel murder. By their tongues adulterous and lechearous
persons, first tempt the chastity of others, and with their words agree upon
the wickedness. By the tongue, lying, dissembling, flattery, and
counterfetting, is committed. By the tongue, slander, backbiting, swearing,
blasphemy and perjury, is uttered. By the tongue, false sentence is
pronounced, either to the condemning of the righteous, or absoluing of the
wicked: both which are abominable before the Lord. By the tongue, men are led
into error through false doctrine: drawn to wickedness Pro. 17.
by lewd council. Through the tongue, by false reports, private men and
princes, kingdoms and countries, towns and cities, societies and families are
set at variance. By the tongue, familiars and friends have been set at
daggers drawing, and their quarrels thereby have ended in blood. By the tongue,
quarrels are picked, contentions See Basil in Psalm. 33. fol. 85. page 2.
caused, braulings grown, to the great hurt of private states, and the
marvelous hurt and disturbance of of weals public. With filthiness of
speech it corrupts: with dissembling and flattery it deceaueth: with lying
and cogging it beguileth: with false reports it slaieth: with slanders it
defameth: with vain swearing it blasphemeth: with enticing it inueigleth: with
smoothnes of talk it inforceth: yea almost every wickedness among the children
Ecclus. 28.
of men, is either determined, attempted, executed, or finished by the tongue.
Insomuch that Sirach having great experience, falls into a large discourse of
those evils which come of the wicked tongue: as, that it has destroyed many
which were at peace; that it has disquieted many, and driven them from nation
to nation; that it has broaken down strong cities, and overthrown the houses
of great men, abated the strength of the people, and been the decay of
mighty nations; that it has cast down many virtuous women, and robbed them
of their labors; that it causes, that such as hearken unto it, shall never
rest and live quietly; that it strikes deeper then any rod, and deuoureth
more then the sword of the enemy, and such like. All which, and the like
mischiefs, the Apostle in general speech containing, calls it a world of
wickedness. And thus by these two comparisons the apostle shows the great
discommodities of tongues unbridled in general.

Now, as generally the unbridled tongue causes great evils, and ministers
matter of great mischief among men: So particularly, the discommodities of
untamed tongues are three. 1 The evil tongue defiles the whole body. 2 It is
untameable. 3 It is given to slander, and reproach of the brethren. Which are
three great evils.

1 It is said to be so set among the members, that it defiles the whole body,
and sets on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire of hell. How
great an evil is this?

That it defiles the whole body, it appears: Our Mat. 15.
Savior Christ disputing against the curious Scribes and Pharisees, who in
greater curiousnes, and superstitious observation of ceremonies, then for any
sound godliness, sound fault with the disciples for not washing their hands
before meat, according to the traditions of the Elders, testifies unto them,
that the meats which they eat with unwashed hands, corrupted and defiled them
not; but the things which came out of their mouths: as, false testimonies,
slanders, and such like. Things therefore framed in the heart, and uttered by
the tongue, defile the lives of men.

Saint Paul condescendeth hereunto, when he affirms, that evil words corrupt
good manners. Neither are 1. Cor. 15.
evil speeches and tongues, the ways and means only to corrupt the whole
life of man: but also they witness the corruption of the heart: which is the
fountain of all our actions. For the tongue speaks from the heart, and by our
talk our hearts are discerned: insomuch, that we Mat. 12.
shall be either justified, or condemned, by our words and speeches.

Saint Augustine, to the brethren in the wilderness confesses 3. Ad fratres in
erimo.
the same; auouching, that what manner of man one is in his heart: such speech
he has in his mouth. Saint Ambrose upon the words of Paul; Let no corrupt
speech Upon 4. Ephesians.
proceed from you, writes thus; What profits it a man to have a clean
life, and a filthy mouth, seeing our Savior says; By our words we shall be
saved, and by our words we shall be condemned: Neither is it credible, that he
lives well, which speaks wickedly: insinuating that the filthy tongue does
defile the whole life of man: and so (no doubt) defiles the whole body. It
fills our lives with lyings, slanders and blasphemy: it pricketh us forward
to adulteries, murder, and all wickedness: it stirs us up to all mischief,
so that it is true which Solomon affirms; Pro. 10.
In many words there cannot be wanting wickedness, and he that keeps his
tongue, is wise. Hereby the whole life of man is corrupted, and the wicked
tongue leads unto mischief, and the lewd speeches of wicked and ungodly
persons, draw men forward to manifold finnes, whereby their whole lives are
polluted and defiled.

Neither that only, but it sets on fire the course of nature, able to
pervert the order of things; enough to set the whole world a burning;
sufficient to stain the whole conversation of man, by the wickedness thereof:
then the which there is neither any thing sharper to pearce, neither any thing
hotter to burn or set on fire, then a venomous and wicked tongue. Therefore the
princely prophet Psalm. 120.
David speaking of the inevitable, and incurable mischief of the evil tongue,
says; It is as the sharp arrows of a mighty man, and as the coals of
juniper. Where the man of God compares the tongue to darts cast, or to
arrows shot of men most mighty, which stick deeper: and to the coals of
juniper, which, both burn sooner, and keep fire longer. Such is the force of
the viperous tongue, as it sets on fire the course of nature, and it self
is set on fire of hell: the devil himself kindles it, Satan himself (for
whom hell fire is prepared) being both a liar and a slaunderer from the
beginning: uses the tongue oftentimes as his instrument: and blowing it with
the bellows of all mischief, sends flame thereinto, whereby it burns to
great destruction: as he set on fire the tongue of the serpent to deceive the
woman: then Mat. 25.
the woman's tongue to deceive the man: so sets he on fire the tongues of al
wicked persons, whereby great coals of wickedness are kindled: And this is the
first particular evil which is of the tongue.

2 As the tongue defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of
nature, it self set on fire of hell: So is it a thing untameable, and
intractable. For whereas the whole nature of beasts, and of birds, and of
creeping things, and things of the sea, is tamed of the nature of man: yet the
tongue cannot be tamed: It is an unruly thing, full of deadly poison: more
unruly then the beasts of the field; more untameable then the birds of the
aier; more intractable then the venomous serpents; more slipperie, and more
suddenly gone then the fishes of the seas, and waters; more hardly governed
then any other creature: for all these are tamed and made mild and meek by
man's wisdom, practice, diligence, use and labor: But of al creatures the
tongue is most disordered, and untameable.

And for beasts, though they be most cruel, savage, and intractable by
nature: yet by practice, use, industry and labor, are they tamed. Bears,
Panthers and Leopardes, Woolues, Tigers and Lions: insomuch that some of the
Roman Emperors have had of these beasts to run, and draw in their chariots
and coaches. Other princes have Lions made so tame, that they might play with
them as with spaniels, whelps, or beagels. The Tiger which was sent from
India, to Anastasius the Prince, was made meek and tame in like manner.

Birds, and Fowls of the aier are made tame by like manner. The crow, the
raven, the hawk, the fesant, the eagle, the vulture, the parrat, the pigeon,
and innumerable the like; are so tamed, as that they will sit on fiste, eat
at hand, come at the lure of him that keeps them. Serpents, adders, snakes,
and creeping things have been tamed: the aspis, and venomous serpent in
Africa, whose sting is incurable, has been so tamed by a certain householder,
as that he came daily out of his cave and den, to take meat at his table.
Snakes have been so meekened, as that men have carried them without danger in
their bosoms. The fishes of the waters have been so tamed, as that the
Dolphin has been familiar, to acknowledge him that well deserved: the Carpe,
the Tench, and such fishes, are made so tame, as to be ready to receive meat
at the hands of their masters, as some men have reported.

Thus the beasts of the field, the birds of the aier, the serpents of the
earth, the fishes of the waters, are tamed, by the travel, use, and industry
of man: though by nature they were not familiar, yet use and custom, travel
and labor has woonne it. But the tongue, more untameable and intractable then
these are, cannot be governed nor made tame by man: being more barbarous then
beasts; more wild then birds; more intractable then serpents; more
insensible then fishes of the seas and waters: more cruel then lions: more
hurtful then bears: more biting then woolues: more bitter then tigers: more
fierce then leopardes: for of all these, and the like, some at sometimes have
been tamed: but the tongue is a thing most untameable. Either because no man is
able to tame the wicked tongue of another: for speak some men or women fair,
or deal with them roughly: entreat them gently, or handle them sharply: pray
them daily: or strike them continually: thou shall remove life and breath
sooner out of their bodies, then speech from their tongues, or make them
silent: Either because no man is so perfect, as can keep his tongue at all
times, but that therein sometimes he offends. Thus is the tongue an
untameable creature, an unruly evil.

That it is called an unruly evil: men must not therefore give it all scope,
to do and speak what it list, because it is untameable, and unruly: but
look how much more unruly it is: so much more ought it to be restrained: and
seeing it is a thing that passes our strength, either sometimes to tame the
tongues of others, either always to bridle our own tongues: therefore ought
we more earnestly to pray to GOD to guide our Psalm. 51. Psalm. 141. Ecclus. 22.
Psalm. 140. etc.
mouths, and to rule our lips to his honor: and also to keep the tongues
of other men, that we suffer no evil thereby.

Now the evil tongue, is not only unruly, but full of deadly poison also,
and greatly infecteth the children Psalm. 140.
of men, and cannot be prevented. Which the princely Prophet David viewing: and
marking carefully the deadly hurt which by wicked tongues are done unto men:
compares them to Adders poison: affirming that Adders poison is under the
lips of the ungodly. For look what poison and venime is in venomous things:
as the Scorpion, Crocodell, Basiliske, Adder, and venemons Serpents: in
plants, herbs, roots, as in Cicuta, which being like the Hemlocke, by
extreemnesse of cold kills: which the Athenians used in executing
punishments upon men: And Photion was made to drink that, and so perished:
being envied of his unkind Countrie-men the Athenians. And it may be that the
same poison was the end of famous Socrates: who being envied for his virtue,
and glory of those Socrates.
which were then in chief authority: was accused by Anytus, Melissus the
Poet, and Lycon the otator, for speaking against their idol gods, and so
drunk poison, and dyed. Or look what venom is in Aconitum, Long-wort the
root whereof makes neesing powder in black Poppie, which kills by sleep:
or in Colloquintida, or wild Gourdes, which slays a man by vehement and
ouer-great purging: what deadly hurt is in any of these, or the like: no less
is in a venomous and wicked tongue: so that the Prophet by his experience could
say truly: that the venom of Aspis was under their Psalm. 140. Jame. 3.
lips. And Saint James by his knowledge: that the wicked tongue of man, is
full of deadly poison: as lies, blasphemy, false doctrine, heresy, error,
deceyte, flattery, false accusations, evil reports, slanders, contumelies,
filthy talk, and infinite the like, whereby the souls of men are often
poisoned and venomed to death: and the poison thereof is most dangerous, and
more infectiue then any poison.

For the poison of the Scorpion is only such, as hurts them alone whom he
strikes with the tippe of his tail: the Viper infecteth none, but such as he
biteth with his venomous teeth: the Crocodile and Basiliske kills none, but
such as they retch and fetch of, either with the sharpness of their sight, or
the strength of their breath. Venomous roots, herbs, plants, infect none,
but those which either touch, taste, smell, or handle some of them: But the
tongue stingeth and strikes: infecteth and poysoneth: kills and destroys,
at hand and far off: at home and abroad: by sea, and by land: in time of
peace, and in time of war: our friends, and our foes:: such as meddle not, as
well as such as meddle: such as have not to do, as such as have to do with
it. so that no place is so far in distance: no love so near by friendship:
no man so bound by duty: no one so dear by good desert: whom the poisoned
tongues of the wicked, do not, or has not molested. Thus for the
vntameablenesse, unruliness, and hurtfulnesse, is the tongue most dangerous:
and this is the second evil in particular of the tongue, wherefore it ought
to be restrained, the vntamable cruelty, with deadly venomousnesse therein
Psalm. 50.
contained.

3 The last and third particular evil here, is that it is reproachful and
slanderous: given to cursed bitterness: therewith we bless God, and curse,
backebite, and slander our brethren: therefore it must be refrained. And this
is an evil even in those which pretend greatest godliness: who pretend they
serve, love, fear, and worship God: bless, praise, and magnify him: yet
do they curse, reproach, slander and revile their brethren, which can not be.
For no man can bless and praise God aright, and yet curse and speak evil of
his neighbor. For that blessing and praising God, is rather a cursing, in that
that it proceeds from an evil and slanderous person whom God hates, and of
whom he denies, so much as to be named.

Which thing he proves by two reasons. 1 No man can give glory to God, and
praise him in his creatures: and yet revile, curse, reproach man, the chiefest
of the creatures of God on earth, framed and fashioned in the chief part of
him, in the soul, to the very resemblaunce and image of God himself, as
Moses records. Gene. 1. 2.
This image is, 1 in the soul, which is spiritual, heavenly, and immortal as
God is: betwixt our souls, and Gods substance, albeeit the inequality be
infinite: yet is there a resemblance of God in us. 2 This image is in
sanctification and holiness, whereinto as first we were created: so again by
Christ are we restored. The first is common to all men: the second is proper to
the saints. Ephe. 4. 2.


Being made to the image and likeness of God: of all the creatures on earth
most excellent: little inseriour to the Angels themselves, being divine
natures and substaunces: Who so speaks evil of him, curses and reuileth
him, so excellent a work of God: how can he reverence, honor, bless, and
glorify GOD, the maker, creator, and woorkemaister of man? The ignominy and
reproach done to man, redoundeth unto GOD: to whose likeness man is created.
Whereby it is evidently apparent, that no man can rightly bless God, who
cursseth or slaundereth man. Which Saint James notes, when he reasons from
things impossible: therewith bless we God even the father, and therewith
curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God.

If God then be blessed in his creatures, as David says, God is faithful in
all his sayings, and to be blessed in all his works: and man the most excellent
of all Gods creatures upon the universal face of the earth, only Psalm. 145.
of all creatures made unto the image of God: then can not a man honor God
himself, which uses cursed speech and bitterness unto man. Let all men and
women herehence learn an infallible truth, a resolute conclusion, a singular
point of wisdom: that they pretend Gods Religion in vain, that they honor
not, woorshippe not, serve not, bless not, ne yet glorify GOD aright, so long
as they are given to cursed speaking, reproachful slander, bitter backebiting
one of another.

This David the princely Prophet weighing, excludes from the Lords
Tabernacle, from the holy hill of Psalm. 15.
GOD, as hypocrites, all such as pretend service to God, yet give themselves
to slaundering their brethren. And almighty God himself protests to the
wicked, that it is a vain thing, and profits nothing, to talk of the laws
of God, and take them in their mouths. Psalm. 50.
If they slander their brethren: to which purpose he says in this wise to
the wicked: What have thou to do to take my ordinances in thy mouth, and
declare my covenant, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and castest my words
behind thee? When thou see a thief, thou runnest with him, and art
partaker with the adulterer: thou give thy mouth to evil, and with thy
tongue thou forgest deceyte. Thou sit and speak against thy brother, and
flaunderest thy mothers son: these things who so do, have not to declare or
speak of Gods ordinances, or to take his covenant in their mouths. They
pretend religion, they show a countenance of godliness, they set a face of
honesty: they seem to be desirous to praise and bless God: yet they slander
and curse their brethren. This no man can do: for no man can rightly honor
the workemaister, which speaks evil of the work: no man can praise the
Creator, which reuileth his creature: no man can bless GOD, which curses men,
made to the image of God himself: If they in whom the general image is,
ought not to be cursed: much less they in whom the second and special
resemblance appears.

2 Now as this cannot be, by the reason from the work to the work master:
from the image, to him whose image it is: from the resemblaunce or pattern, to
him whose pattern and resemblaunce it is in deed: so in like manner shows
he the impossibility of this, by an argument from contraries: the order and
course of things, which God the establisher of nature has set, will not suffer
contrary effects to proceed from the same cause: things in nature opposed,
and repugnant in extreme contrariety: cannot agree together, and be at one in
the same thing. Now, to bless and curse; to praise and slander, are things
contrary; therefore can they not agree in one tongue, at once together. And
this appears evidently by two similitudes, whereby the matter is amplified
and enlarged. I As the fountains and heads of waters, issuing and springing
from the same place: cannot send out sweet water and bitter. 2 And as the
fig tree cannot bring forth Olives, nor the vine tree, figs. Our Savior
himself confirming the same, Mat. 7.
when he avouches that good works cannot come, from an evil man, no more
then thorns come of grapes or figs of thistles, which were against nature.
So neither can blessing and cursing come out of one mouth: praise, and
dispraise: speaking well and slaundering: godliness, and impiety: truth, and
falsehoode. Cursing, and blessing are contrary, so that they can not agree in
one mouth and man together, but it were as monstrous as for sweet water, and
bitter, to come at once naturally out of the same fountain: and for the same
tree to bear figs and olives: grapes and figs together. As every tree in
nature bears one kind of fruit, and not diverse and sundry: much less the
fruit of other trees: so must the tongue have her proper effect, fruit and
work, and that one, not diverse, much less contrary: it must bless
therefore both God and man, and curse no body, as Paul exhorts. Wherefore if
we pretend to bless God in our tongues, and therewithal do curse Romans 12.
14. ^ Pet. 3. 9.
our neighbor: the bitterness of our cursing so turns the nature of our
blessing, that it is unseasonable and unsavory before God. For as sweet and
bitter water, mingled and blended together, the bitter easily takes away the
nature of the sweet: and as honey and poison tempered together, the poison
far less in quantity turns the honey: so when cursing and blessing are in
one mouth together: the bitterness of the curse, turns the sweetness of
the blessing, and makes it odious before God. Wherefore it is apparent, that
we can not bless God, if we curse and slander our neighbor. The doctrine of
this place, may then be this: that with this instrument and member, which is
the tongue, there is no duty acceptably performed unto GOD, when thereby we
harm or hurt our neighbors and brethren. Whom when we thus harm, if we
think to please God, we deceive our selves through hypocrisy.

And thus much concerning the moderating of the tongue: both in respect of the
profits, and discommodities thereof: which out of this place may be
sufficient to have observed: specially seeing in the first chapter, verse 26.
and in the next Chapter, being the fourth, verse 11. more may be gathered.

Now the God of peace, and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, power down
into our hearts his heavenly spirit, that not only our lives may be
reformed according to his blessed word: but our tongues also refrayned after
his holy will: that all the powers of our minds, and parts of our bodies,
may be instruments of his praise: that in both he may be glorified, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost our
sanctifier, be all praise, dominion, power, and majesty, now and for ever.
Amen.

James Chap. 3. verses 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. Sermon 16.
13 Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge among you? let him show by
good conversation his works in meekness of wisdom.

14 But if you have bitter envying, and strife in your hearts, rejoice not,
neither be liers against the truth.

15 This wisdom discendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and
devilish.

16 For where envying and strife is, there is sedition, and all manner of evil
works.

17 But the wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without judging,
without hyhocrisie.

18 And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of them that love peace.


3. Place,
THese words are concerning the third and last part or place of this
Chapter, which is touching meekness and gentleness, to be performed of
Christians.

These words in these six verses contained, minister the consideration of
four things unto us: Namely 1 The exhortation to meckenes. 13. 2 The opposing
of strife and envying, to the worthy virtue of meekenes. verse 14. 3 A
distinguishing of wisdom, where. by a gate is shut up to many evils. 15. 16.
17. 4 A reason wherefore the saints should follow peace and meekenes, drawn
from reward verse 18.

1 Of these four, the first is the exhortation to meekenes, The exhortation.
inferred and brought in by the way of an interrogation: Who is a wise man
(says he) and endued with knowledge among you? Let him show by good
conversation the meeknes of wisdom. As who should say; All men seek to be
counted wise; but if any will be wise in deed, let him by meeknes show his
wisdom: For therein indeed wisdom consists.

The occasion of this exhortation may be the sin which the Apostle in the
first place condemned: namely, that many challenged authority to themselves, to
reprove and check their brethren, and to be as censurers over them: thereby
seeking the opinion of wisdom among men: which (notwithstanding) were
themselves envious, and contentious.

Saint James here (to abate their pride, to beat down the arrogancy of their
spirits, to assuage their malice, and to cool the heat of their madness and
fury,) tells them, that it is not the way to be counted wise, to be
contentious among me^ but rather that herin wisdom consists, that they show
themselves modest, quiet, meek, and gentle, in their whole conversation.

This place condemns the sophistical scholemen; this condemns the brauling
Anabaptists; this condemns al such, whose lives are spent in contention of
words; this condemns popish persons, seditious seminaries, tumultuous
Jesuits, the vain, curious, and contentious men of out time: who give
themselves to tumults, contentions, seditions, dissencions, brauling and
brabling most deadly: to the disturbance of the commonwealth, disquietnes of
the church, slander of the gospel, hurt to private states and conditions of
men. In which practice wisdom consists not, but in meekenes. Christian
wisdom is not in ambitious usurping authority over the brethren: neither in
quarrellous braulings and contentions about trifles: neither in unbridled
pride and arrogancy of spirit: neither in tumultuous vprores, and disquieting
of the people: neither is it sillogistically and sophistically to strive about
words, neither insole^tly to oppose our selves against such as are in chief
authority: neither stands it in foolish affecting of rigorous severity: But
in gentle behavior, in tractablenes of life, and meekenes of conversation:
whereof the Apostle tells us; Who is wise, and endued with knowledge among
you? Let him show by good conversation, his works in meekenes of wisdom.

Meekenes is a virtue moderating pride and anger, repressing desire of revenge,
forgetting offenses, and pardoning injuries, for private and public quietness
sake. Whereunto our Savior Christ exhorts, pronouncing Mat. 5.
them blessed which are meek: to whom also the inheritance of the earth
appertains. Blessed (says he) are the meek, for they shall inherit the
earth. Saint Paul reckoning up the fruits of the spirit in men reformed,
among Gal. 5.
other most holy and excellent virtues, puts down meekenes: The fruits
(says he) of the spirit, are love, peace, joy, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meeknes, temperance; against such there is no law. Who also
exhorting all men to live and walk worthy the calling where-they Ephesians. 4.
are called: and instructing them how they should so do, Walk worthy (says
he) the calling whereunto you are called: in all humblenes and lowlines, in
meekenes, with ^ong suffering: supporting one another in love, endeuou^ing to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of ^eace.

In like manner persuading the Colossians to put on Col. 3.
those virtues and chief ornaments of their lives: where^y their profession
might be better beautified: exhorts after this manner; Now, as the elect of
God, holy and ^eloued, put on the bowels of mercy, kindness, humble^es of
mind, meekenes, long suffering, forbearing one an ^ther, and forgeuing one
another, if any man have a quar^ell to another: eue^ as Christ forgave, so do
you.

Finally, instructing Titus his scholar, and the chief 3. Tit.
Minister of Creta, how he should infourme the people of that I Will and country,
gives him this charge; Put them ^n remembrance that they be subject to the
principalities and powers; and that they be obedient, and ready to every good
work: that they speak evil of no man: that they be no fighters, but soft:
showing all meekenes to all men. Whereunto in this place the Apostle having
respect, uses like exhortation; Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge
among you? Let him show his good conversation, in meekenes of wisdom.

Of which virtue sundry are the examples, whereby we may be drawn to
imitation. For if we look well about us, we shall find almighty God a most
lively pattern, and president hereof: who in great meekenes forbore the sins
of the world along season: and suffered his own people, sinning, and provoking
him forty years in the wilderness, forgetting, and forgeuing daily the
innumerable sins of men. For which cause he is celebrated and Exodus 34. 6
Psa. 103. 6 Joel 2. 13. etc
renowned to be a god of patience, long sufferance, meeknes, and gentleness
toward the sons of men.

Neither God the Father only, but Jesus Christ his son, our savior, in like
manner is our example: who inuiteth and calls men to the imitation of the
same virtue in him self; Come unto me all ye that are laden, and Mark 11
weary, and I will refresh you: take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for
I am humble and meek, and you shall find rest unto your souls. If we
require examples of men, as more familiar unto us, we have not a few: excellent
for wisdom, prepotent in power, renowned for virtue: herein flourishing and
shining to the world. Was not Moses (a man mighty in words and deeds) for
this Number. 12.
virtue excellent among the Hebrews, for which cause, the Scripture says he
was the meekest man upon earth? Was not David worthily commended for the same,
who not only spared Saul his enemy, when he might have flaine him; but
pardoned Simei, who railed on him, and 1. Kings 24 2. 16.
cursed him in the day of his persecution by Absalom his son?

Was not Pericles of excellent meekenes among the Pericles.
heathen, who at night sent him home with a torche, who all the day had reviled
him in open place of judgment? Was not Socrates (among the Philosophers) of a
singular Socrates.
spirit in this behalf, who being told that one had railed and spoaken evil
of him, answered with meekenes; I never knew that he could speak well of any?
Was not Julius Caesar famous among the Roman Emperors, who for meekenes was
reputed as a god among men? Was not Ceasar.
Augustus Caesar worthy in that behalf, who therefore was consecrate of the
people? Was not Philip of Macedonia, Philip.
among the kings, excellent for meekenes, who being bitterly backbitten, vilely
slaundered, and reproachfully spoken of by the Athenians, thanked them, because
thereby he was made more circumspect in his whole life? Whose heroical and
princely spirit Alexander the great his Alexander.
son, resembled, who being evil dealt withal, and reviled, answered; It is
kinglike, when thou have done well, to be evil reported of. Was not
Constantine the great worthy Homil. 20. to the people.
immortal fame for the same, who being infourmed that certain malicious and
spiteful persons had cast down his image, broken the head, and mangled the
face thereof, in jesting manner felt his head and face, and answered; he could
perceive no such thing? as Chrisostom reports of him. The king of Poland.


Finally, did not that Polish king excel in meekenes; who being moved by some
to punish those which said he was evil spoken of by all men, answered merrily;
I had rather that one should be evil spoken of with all men, then all men with
one.

These examples, and infinite the like (both sacred and profane) have we,
whose steps we following, might attain by Gods grace, to this virtue: and
learn by the Apostles council to show our wisdom in meekenes of spirit.

To the embracing of which virtue, many things there are which might allure
and provoke us. 1 The manifold exhortations thereunto serving, given out by the
spirit of God, in the holy Scriptures. Which men cannot contemn, without
contempt done to God himself. By whose spirit they were enjoined.

2 These proposed examples in the holy Scriptures Romans 15. 1. Cor. 10.
which are written for our learning: and the examples, even of the heathen:
whose virtues and righteousnns if we do not excel, we shall never enter into
the kingdom of God. 3 The sharp threatenings of God against such as having lost
patience, are easily provoked to wrath, and take revenge against injuries
committed: which ought only to be referred unto God, who says; Revenge is mine
and I will repay it. 4 To consider, that the more excellent Deuteronomy 32. Romans 12
the spirit of man is, and the more worthy the person; the less desirous he
is of revenge, and more inclined to meekenes: therefore one of the heathen said;

How much more excellent and mighty every man is, so much more easy is he to
be entreated.
And the noble and gentleman like mind, is capable of gentlest and softest
motions.
5 Moreover, if we would but view our own lives, whereby we provoke men, and
God himself: wherein we desire meekely to be dealt withal: we should the
better be persuaded to meekenes: to which purpose Gregory Nazianzene says; If
thou know that thou owe to other G. Naziancene
men, and art beholden to men for remitting thine offenses: use thou then
meeknes toward others: for God is a gentle father, toward those that are
gentle. And certain it is, that so long as men dwell upon the face of the
earth, they both offend others, and themselves are offended, and therefore
need as well to feel gentleness and meekenes from others, as to show the same
unto their brethren: knowing then, that our selves have need of the meekenes
of others, we must also show meekenes to our brethren.

6 Finally, the good and necessary ends which meeknes respects, ought
thereunto to move the saints of God. 1 It respects the holy obedience which
we owe unto God: for obedience unto whose will* we must embrace meekenes. 2
It has regard to the private peace and tranquillity; to the public quietness,
both of the church and commonwealth, which by meekenes is mainteyned. 3. It
has an eye to the prosperous estate of our selves and others: which by
brauling, contention, and trouble somnes is hindered: but by gentleness and
meekenes of wisdom, is nourished. 4 It respects the force of our prayers to
God, which by meekenes are made forceable; by malice hindered; by contention
interrupted; by braulings weakened; by dissension slaked. These are the ends
which this virtue respects: which carefully considered of us, should make us
embrace the council of the Apostle; Who is a wise man among you, and endued
with knowledge? let him show by good conversation his works in meekenes of
wisdom. And this is the exhortation of S. James to embrace meekenes.

2. To meekenes, in the next place is contention opposed. The opposing of
contention.
You brag and boast in vain of meeknes of wisdom: for you are far from
it, in as much as you are given to bitter envy and contention, vices repugnant
and contrary to Christian wisdom: whereunto if you be given, you boast, you
rejoice in vain thereof, says S. James: but if you have bitter envying and
strife in your hearts, rejoice not, neither be yeliers against the truth.

In which place he opposes two vices to the virtue before commended: envy,
and strife or contention.

Envy is a vice or sin, whereby we grieve that another prospers and fares
well by us: that any ^a^ should Envy.
on crease, grow up, be accounted of, besides our selves: desiring to hurt,
disquiet, and remove them, of mere malice. Hereby men pine away and languish,
to see the prosperity of their brethren, as the heathen Poet says; This vice
follows Horace.
the prosperity, welfare, and glory of our brethren, is the shadow follows
the body. Wherefore Solomon Pro. 23.
would not have men company with envious persons, neither to eat at their
tables: for though they make a fair face, yet they think all too much that
another has. This is a work of our corrupt nature, and poison which we draw
from Adam, wherewith all his posterity was infected.

Wherefore, when S. Paul would reckon up the works Gal. 5.
of the flesh, odious in the sight of God, he says; Moreover the works of the
flesh are manifest; which are, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness,
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions,
seditions, heresies, envy, murders, etc. In another place (exhorting Romans 13.
the Saints to walk uprightly) the Apostle sets down certain couples of
vices, as enemies and hinderers of the honest conversation of the Saints: In
which number envy is reckoned. Therefore (says he) walk honestly, as in the
day time; not in dronkennes and surfeiting, nor in chambering and wantonness,
neither in strife and envying. 1. Pet. 2.


Finally, S. Peter informing those that were regenerate, and borne again, not
of mortal, but of immortal seed of 1. Pet. 1.
the word of god, to cast from them the works of their former conversation; and
to embrace those things which were according unto godliness, gives them this
exhortation; Wherefore laying aside all maliciousnes, and al guile and
dissimulation, and envy, and evil speaking, as newborn babes, desire that
sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby. Infinite are the
testimonies of holy Scripture, whereby this evil is condemned.

To the original and beginning whereof if we look, it is from Satan the
devil: who envying the prosperity of man in the beginning, not only to
sequester them from their pleasant aboade in Paradise, but to alienate them
from the favor of God, and expel them from all happiness: tempted to taste of
the forbidden fruit, contrary Genesis 3.
to the commandment: whereby he plunged both himself, and his posterity,
into perdition. Genesis 4.
Whose eldest son Cain (the runnagate and reprobate) by the example of the
devil his father, envied his brother Abell, for that God accepted the sacrifice
of his brother, proceeding from a sincere affection: but not his, proceeding
from a double and dissembling mind with GOD, through which envy he followed
him; never leaving him, he had laid his cruel clubbe upon the innocent head
of his brother. Children of the same father were the Philistims, Genesis 26.
envying the flocks of sheep, and heads, or herds of cattle, whereby Isaac
was enriched: by sundry ways from time to time molested, crossed, and
ouerthwarted the holy Patriarch. Saul, a twigge of the same tree, a bra^ch of
the same root, a child of the same parent; envied the 1. Kings 18.
virtue and glory of David: who for slaying the Philistim Goliath, having far
greater praise then Saul: Saul has slain his thousand, but David his ten
thousand: was therefore (all the days of Saul's life) envied, and sought to
have been destroyed. The Scribes and Pharisees, and Elders of the people of
the Jews, pursuing our blessed Savior Mat. 26. 27.
with like hatred and envy, for the wonderful miracles and works he showed
among the people, never left him, before they had suborned false witnesses to
accuse him, a corrupt judge to condemn him, and cruel persons to crucify him.

Such are finally in our days, such as grieve at, envy and sorrow, at the
riches, honor, estimation, welfare, and every good thing in their brethren: of
which wickedness if they repent not, they shall show themselves the sons of
Satan, the slaves of sin, the children of perdition, the heirs of death and
endless damnation. Of which evil least the Saints should be partakers, Saint
James forewarneth them: and sets it against meeknes of wisdom, a special
ornament in the chosen of God. And this envy has this epithet or addition
bitter: because the heart of man therewith once infected, turns all things
into bitterness.

Now as envy is opposite to meekness: so is strife Strife.
and contention. Strife or contention is stirred up, when men are addicted to
themselves, defending their own opinions and actions, not only stoutly, but
stubbornely: in nothing submitting themselves to the authority of others, but
as wise above all others, they will censure and judge all, but be judged of
none: wherehence great disdain, discord and disturbaunce arises among men,
both in the common wealth, and in the Church of God. Which the holy Apostle
carefully considering, has dissuaded it as a thing pernicious and dangerous
in the Romans 13.
Saints and servant of GOD. This is in those couples which are enemies to
holy conversation, mentioned before: Walk honestly as in the day time: not in
drunkenness and surfeiting; not in chambering and wantonness: not in strife
and envying. This Saint Paul 1. Cor. 3.
condemned as a token of carnally minded men, when he says to the
Corinthians: Where as there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions,
are you not carnal, and walk after the flesh? And admonishes the
Philippians, Philip. 2.
that they do nothing through contention or vainglory, but that in
meekness of mind every Romans 1.
one esteem another better then himself. This is reckened, for one of the
works wherewith the wicked Gentiles were infected. This is a work of the
flesh, Gal. 5.
whereby the life of man is corrupted. This is a mischief which brings great
misery to the Church and common weal of Christians.

The contention betwixt Haimo and Haniball the Carthagenians, was the overthrow
of their famous City. The contention and strife betwixt Lacedemon and Athens,
the two lights of Grecia, was the ruin of their whole country. The contention
betwixt the Numantians, was the only cause they were overcome by Scipio: who
asking Tyretius the captain general, what was the reason that in former times
it was inexpugnable, and the^ ouercom, and vanquished was answered: that their
concord caused their continuance their contention bred their destruction. The
contention betwixt Anthony and Augustus burst into open wars, to the great
damage of the Romans: Betwixt Caesar and Pompei: Silla and Marius, and other
the Romans, was cause of great hurt to the state of Italy. The contentions in
our own country betwixt men of the noblest houses, what hurt it caused, who
was so blind, that saw not; who was so malicious that lamented not: who was so
happy that rued not? In private families, contentions betwixt father and
child: mother and daughter: master and servant: husband and wife, cause both
continual disquietnesse, and daily sorrow, and decrease of state, and many
mischiefs besides, as experience in many too evidently does teach us: so that
there is not a more pernicious thing, either in the common wealth, or in
private estates, then is strife and contention among men.

In the Church it is no less pestilent and pernicious. The contention and
strife betwixt Eusebius the Bishop of Caesarea, and Basil the great: betwixt
Arius after his repulse concerning the Bishoprike of Alexandria: and others in
the Church have done much hurt: contentions, striuings, and brawlings, in our
times about white or black, round or square, and the like things of no
weight, have and do cause great hurt in the Church of Christ. as woeful and
lamentable experience teaches. So that in the common wealth, in private
states, in the Church it self, great hurt comes through contention.
Wherefore with all carfulness it ought to be shunned of the Saints of God.

Wherein we must beware, least through flying of contention, we betray the
truth, for which Sirach Ecclus. 4. Jude v. 3.
and Jude the Apostle would have us contend: or least by desire of peace, we
seem to sooth up men in sin, and foster them in wickedness: yea, for
godliness, virtue religion, Christian faith to shine with all might and maine,
is not lawful only, but lawdable also. The holy Prophets for these causes
have mightily contended against deceyuers and seducers of the people: as Moses,
Elias, Micheas, Esaias, Jeremy, and the rest.

Our blessed Savior, even Jesus Christ, for the truth Mar. 5. 15. 23.
for the law, for justice and equity, contended against the deceytefull,
hypocritical, and superstitious Jews, Scribes, Pharisees, and high Priests.
The Apostles for the same causes had fundrie conflicts and combats in their
times. Saint Paul had sharp contentions every where against the Jews, for
justification by faith, without Epistles to the Romans, Ephe. Galat. Philip.
the works of the law: against Philosophers and worldly wise men, for the
truth of Religion: against the idolaters of the Gentiles: against false
brethren, which craftily crept in to search out the liberty of the Gospel:
Galat. 2. 2. Cor. 11.
all these contentions were godly. Wherefore as Moises against the Amalakites,
Joshua against the Cananites: Israel against the Madianites, Sampson against the
Philistines, David against the Moabites, Idumeans, and Edomites: Asa, Hezichia,
Josias, and other virtuous Princes against idolatrous and wicked persons, are
commended, when they strove and contended: So when for virtue, justice,
religion, Christian faith, and such like quarrels we contend, our contentions
are worthy commendation. So then, not all strife and contending is evil, and
opposite to meekness: but that which breaks love, alienateth the minds of
brethren, renteth in sunder the bond of peace, causes divisions among
Christians, and is against the rule of equity, and this is condemned.

Yea to vary in opinion of sundry things: in confultations and deliberations
to disagree: to jar and dissent one from another in disputations of schools:
pleadings in court of law, so that they be without bitter speeches: without
spuing out of rancour and poison: without wreaking of our wrath, and malice of
our hearts: without up braiding, reuiling, taunting, defaming and defacing one
the other, is not forbidden.

This bitter envy, hurtful and uncharitable contention and strife, whereby
love is broken, peace and tranquillity disturbed and hindered: are the two
evils opposed to meekness: whereunto who so is given, boasts in vain of
wisdom, and lies falsely against the truth. For the Gospel which is an
absolute truth, shows that only to be true and sound wisdom, when flying
bitter envy, shunning contentions and striuings, repressing and keeping down
desire of revenge: we show by good conversation our works in meekness of
wisdom. And this is the opposing of these two vices to the virtue of
meekness: the second thing in this discourse observed.

3 These things thus set down, in the third and next place, the Apostle
distinguishes of wisdom, and A distinguishing of wisdom.
sets each forth by Epithites and additions, by their qualities and marks
of difference: there is one wisdom earthly, another heavenly: that condemned,
and this commended among men. Unto this distinction is he necessarily brought.
For where contention, strife, and brawling commonly grow of pride, and pride
is usually puffed up with opinion of our own wisdom: having spoken of
contention, the effect of pride: he has just occasion to speak of wisdom,
the false opinion whereof, is oftentimes cause of pride among men: and so
distinguishes of wisdom, as that he stops and shuts a door or gate
against manifold mischiefs. The wicked cover and color their brawlings,
brabblements, contentions and striuings under a cloak of wisdom: whose
mouths to stop our Apostle protests: that if to have bitter envying and
strife in our hearts: if to burn and boil in hatred: if to be given to
contentions, brawlings and disturbing of peace be wisdom as many men account
it: yet it is but earthly wisdom, sensual and devilish: and so deserves not
the name of wisdom but improperly, and as men term it undeservedly, and
comes to distinguish of wisdom: one is earthly, sensual, and devilish: the
which is wicked: such wisdom may be in brawlers, and contencious persons:
another heavenly, holy, and divine: and this is only in the true Saints of God.

Concerning the former which is wicked wisdom, Wicked wisdom:
(if we may call it wisdom after an improper speech, and by the common
speech of men so calling it:) it is discribed here by three qualities or
properties. 1 It is earthly: such as smells and sauoureth altogether of the
earth, and of the world, and of worldly demeanor and manners. The wisdom of
earthly and worldly minded men, is to be proud, contentious, quarellous, given
to revenge every trespass, every offense, every injury: herehence it is
that such are counted wise, which take no wrong at any man's hand: that put up
no injuries, which will be avenged by force and might. They are contrariwise
called fools, silly men, innocents, which bear injuries against them
committed. Insomuch as when we are iniuried, and revenge not: the worldlings
saying is, What fools are you to suffer it? If we be slaundered and evil
spoken of, and render not slander for slander, reproach for reproach, rebuke
for rebuke: then say they also, What fools are you? If he had said so by me,
I would have had him by the ears: or I would have spent an hundred pound, but
I would have tamed his tongue, and made him eat his word. Thus the worldly
minded men countbitter envy, and contentious brawlings, and daily striving
with men, wisdom. Which if we grant to be wisdom: yet is it carnal,
fleshly, worldly, and earthly. Saint Paul hereunto agrees: who condemning the
same fault in the Corinthes. Who notwithstanding boasted of their wisdom,
says in this 1. Cor. 1.
wise unto them: Where as is among you, envying, and strife, and divisions, are
you not carnal and walk as men? This is wisdom after a manner: yet earthly
not heavenly: carnal, not spiritual: from beneath, not from above: worldly,
not godly. With this false and colored wisdom many puffed up, think it the
best way to avoid injuries: to put up nothing, but revenge every quarrel:
and the only way to obtain their wills, to cut it out of the whole cloth, to
quarrel with every one: to be at endless debate, and deadly contention with
men: this is far from meekness: this is called wisdom: but this wisdom,
(says Saint James) is only earthly.

2 As earthly, so is this wisdom sensual: naturally blind in heavenly
things: such whereunto by common sense men are carried as brute beasts: who
suffering injuries one of the other, foorth-with either strike again, or push
with horn, or bite and tear with mouth, and so are avenged. Such wisdom it
is to be quarrellous, contentious, and given to revenge. This wisdom is 1.
Cor. 2.
not purged, but corrupt with evil affections of nature: this proceeds from
those who being sensual and carnal men: men natural not regenerate,
perceive not the things of GOD, neither can they understand them, because they
are spirituallie discerned. This is a part of Romans 8.
the wisdom of the flesh, which is enmity with God, and neither is, neither
can be subject to him. This Isai 5.
is a point of selfe-wisedome, where against the Prophet denounces vengeance:
woe to them which seem wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own
sight. Thus to do, we have of our mother wit, and fathers wisdom, even
from our prime, parents, and first fathers, from whom we draw all
maliciousness, envy, and iniquity. Hereunto our own sense moves: our own
desire leads, our own nature pricketh, which we have sucked with our
conception from Adam and Eve, and is altogether sensual and natural.

To give our selves then to bitter envy, to brawling and contention, to strife
and emulation: to trust in our own wits, to flatter our selves in our own
conceit, to stand too much upon our pantiples: to be quarrelous; through pride
to challenge authority over other men, and not to abide the check of any: to
strive and contend with every one, is wisdom in a false persuasion of men:
but wisdom worldly and wicked. Wherewith who so are endued, are carnal not
spiritual: sensual not regenerate: having not the spirit, but led with their
own sensuality as beasts in whom is no reason: this the Apostle to intimate,
tells us that this wisdom is sensual also.

3 Finally, and thirdly, it is devilish. The original of envy and contention,
wherein the wicked worldlings repose wisdom: is from Satan himself, the
author, the fountain, the well-heade of maliciousness, envy, contention,
debate and sed^tion among men: whereunto only through him, are men moved:
Therefore the Apostle calls this wisdom devilish, because it is not
inspired by God, but suggested by Satan: not infused from heaven, but powered
into us from beneath: not instilled from the father of light, but ministered
unto us by the prince of the darkness of this world: and therefore called
devilish.

Satan was contentious from the beginning: lifting up himself even against God
through the insolency of his mind, for which he was cast down from heaven:
Jude v. 6.
and is reserved in everlasting darkness to the judgment of the great day. He
was a murderer from the beginning, John 8.
as Christ witnesses: from whom all envy, hatred, malice, debate and
contention aryseth. He is therefore called the envious man: who sows tares
among the corn Matt. 13.
of the husband man: even the seed of hatred, sedition, debate and contention
in the Church of Christ: and in the common wealth also. By him was the
sedicious contention of Core, Dathan, and Abiram caused: by him were Jannes and
Iambres stirred up to withstand Moises: Number. 16. Exodus 7. 11. 2. Tim. 3. 8.
by him the bellows of all brawlings were blown in the Pharisees and Scribes,
to contend and strive against the open truth of Jesus Christ: by him were the
malicious Jews pricked forward to withstand and contend against the
Apostles and preachers of the Gospel: by him were the heretics hatched, who
contended against the Catholic fathers in the primitive Church: by him were
the proud Popes and prelates of Rome raised up, to sow the seed of sedition
in all the Churches of Christendom: by him are now contentious persons stirred
up to disturb the peace of Jerusalem: by him rebels rise up against lawful
Princes: princes are stirred up one against another for covetous desire, and
ambition of mind, each to seek the casting down of each others crown and
kingdom: by him are private men set at deadly variance, and provoked often to
the shedding of the blood of their brethren: by him all contention and
sedition, all brawlings and brabblements, all fallings out and quarrels, in
private states are caused: so that we may right well conclude with the Apostle,
that wisdom, to contention: strife, and debate, in whatsoever kind it be: is
from the devil, and therefore devilish: and these are the qualities and
properties whereby it is described.

Now as the worldly and wicked wisdom is by properties noted: so is it also
set down by effects, which follow contention and strife. Whereof Saint Sames
says: where envying and strife is, there is sedition and all manner of evil
works. Whereby he teaches, that sedition and all manner of evil works ensue
and follow contention and strife among men: and therefore ought it with all
carfulness and diligence be avoided.

That sedition and all manner of evil works proceed from envious aed
contentious wisdom (in few words) it appears out of Solomon, who
witnessing that when Prou. 13.
every man contendeth and strives for the pre-eminence, and will not give
place to another: much mischief, great disturbaunce, disquietnesse and
disdain to ensue, says: Only by pride, does man make contention: and of
contention, all evil, (as experience proves) follows. Pride is cause of
contention: contention of sedition and tumults: rebellions and vprores in
common wealths. Solomon not in the former place only, but elsewhere also
co^sumeth the first: he Prou. 28.
that is of a proud heart, stirs up strife: the example of Corah, Dathan and
Abiram, confirms the second: for their Number. 16.
contentiousnes caused them seditiously to rise up against Moses. Absalom of a
contentious spirit, covering his aspiring mind with sugered flattery, fell
from contention 2. Kings 15.
with Ioab, to rebellion and sedition against David his own father. The proud
and contentious spirit of Jeroboam, son of Nebat, moved him to lift up his
hand against Solomon the king his master, and openly to rebel against Rehoboam
his son for ever. Zimrie in like manner 3. Kings 11. and 12.
through pride became contentious; and of contentious: seditious and
rebellious: So that he being Captain of half the host of Basha, rose up
against Basha his son 3. Kings 16.
the king, and slew him, and reigned in his stead. The contention of Lacedemo^
and Athens ended in sedition. Themistocles envious contention against
Aristides, raised sparks of sedition among the people. Silla and Marius
contention ended in civil dissension. The like may be said of Caesar and
Pompey: Anthony and Augustus: and infinite the like: whose contentions and
envy has ended in sedition. This is true in the Commonwealth: This is true in
private states of men: This is true in the Church of Christ: This is true in
all states and degrees; so that Saint James says truly; that where envy and
strife is, there is sedition and all manner of evil works.

Seeing then contention, envy, and strife, causes sedition and all manner of
evil works: The wisdom which vpholdeth contention, strife, and envy, may
worthily be condemned: which Saint James does, both in describing the
qualities, and setting down the effects: If you have bitter envying and
strife among your selves, rejoice not, neither be liers against the truth.
This wisdom discendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual and deuelish:
For where envying and strife is, there is sedition, and all manner of evil
works. And thus he painteth out wicked and worldly wisdom unto men.

Now as there is wisdom which is wicked: so also is Godly wisdom.
there godly wisdom, whereof Saint James says; Bur the wisdom that is from
above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits: without judging, without hypocrisy. Where the Apostle
in eight properties sets down this heavenly wisdom unto men.

1 Of which properties and qualities the first is: It is pure, it defends
innocence, purity, and integrity of life; it nourishes charity, and
fostereth cleannes in the whole conversation of man: whereby all such are
condemned, who challenge unto themselves the name of wisdom, yet are impure,
unchaste, unclean in their conversation: In words filthy, in works
shameless, in gesture and behavior outwardly, abominable: in their minds
corrupt, in their bodies loose, in their whole life lewd and licentious. Who
herence are taught by the Apostle, that what wisdom so ever they pretend in
the sight of men, yet are they clean void of heavenly wisdom: whose first
property is to be pure.

Then all adulterers, all fornicators, all incestuous and unclean persons, all
those who give themselves to fleshly impuritie, are void of wisdom; yea and
guilty of folly. Therefore Ammon going about to satisfy his lust upon Thamar
his sister, she dissuaded him in this wise; 2. Kings 13.
Force me not my brother, commit not this folly: and I, whither shall I
cause my shame to go? and, thou shall be one of the fools of Israel. When
Sichem had defloured Dinah the daughter of Jacob, the sons of Jacob hearing
thereof, were sore grieved, because he had wrought folly Genesis 34. Judges 20.
and villainie in Israel. the abusing of the Leuite his wife, by the
Beniamites, was called folly, and abomination in Israel.

If they whose lives are impure be void of wisdom, and such as give
themselves over to fleshly uncleanness, be reputed fools: how many are the
fools of England, seeing therein so many adulteries, so many fornications, so
great uncleanness is every where committed? Whereof, our speeches, gestures,
behauiours of body, are witnesses most manifest. Let men and women therefore
pretend never so great wisdom; let them seem never so grave, sage, discreet:
yet if their lives be stained, either with fleshly lust, or any other iniquity
whatsoever: they are assuredly void of all heavenly wisdom: whose first
quality is purity. Men then which will be partakers of this wisdom, must
retain a pure and chaste mind in their breasts, and pure affections in their
hearts: that they may embrace that wisdom from above, which is pure.

2 As it is pure, so is it peaceable: not contentious, nor quarrellous: it
nourishes quietness; it fostereth peace; it cherishes concord; it seeks
after amity and friendship with all men. Abraham, endued with this wisdom,
Genesis 13.
being provoked by Lots heardmen, was notwithstanding, peaceable: for the which
things sake he desired Lot there might be no falling out betwixt them: and
therefore dividing the la^d, gave choice to his nephew to go which way he would.
Isaac the son of Abraham endued herewith, showed himself peaceable toward
Abimelech and his people Genesis 26.
the Philistims, who had done him manifold injuries. Jacob the son of Isaac,
treading in the steps of his father, Genesis 29. Exodus 5. 16 Number. 11. 16. etc.
through this wisdom lived peaceably with Laban his uncle, of whom he
sustained manifest wrong, in changing his wages at sundry seasons. Moses the
man of God, according to that great measure of this heavenly wisdom received,
was peaceable toward the Israelites, of whom he was sundry ways provoked.
Joshua herewith Joshua.
also endued, as desirous of peace, offered peace to every country and city
he came unto, the cities of Canaan only excepted. This wisdom was in the holy
Prophets, in the blessed Apostles, in the renowned Martyrs, in our only
Savior Jesus Christ; who having many injuries, not only intended, but done
against them: yet as much as lay in them, followed peace with all men. This was
in the princely Prophet David, who followed after peace with Saul, and his
enemies. And this is in all the true Saints Psalm.
of God, as much as is in them, to nourish peace, and so they show their
wisdom: whose second property here is, to be peaceable.

3 Neither is this wisdom peaceable only; but meek and gentle: which
quality appears partly in giving a charitable judgment of other men's
offenses: partly in giving place to the wise reformation and instruction of
the Elders: whereby they are condemned as fools, who neglecting this quality
of wisdom, to be gentle: and refusing to be instructed, think themselves wise
enough, that they need not to learn any further.

These have forgotten that all our knowledge here is imperfect, as S. Paul
says; They remember not, that how much so ever a man profits in knowledge,
yet there is 1. Cor. 13. Ambros. lib. 1. off. c. 1.
none but he needs to learn so long as he lives, as says S. Abrose. Folly
it is, not wisdom therefore, to refuse instruction. The heavenly wisdom of god
therefore is gentle, in censuring other men; gentle, in tollerating injuries;
gentle in receiving instruction from the mouths of the wise: wherein who so
shows not gentleness, is a fool, and has not taste of heavenly wisdom.

4. Again, this wisdom is tractable, easy to be entreated; easy to be
reconciled: whereof they are void altogether, who long time retain hatred,
and keep malice in their hearts: whom neither the threatninges of Gods word,
neither Christian submission, neither brotherly exhortation, neither
neighbourly admonition, neither friendly persuasion, can win to be reconciled.

This wisdom our Savior Christ, the very wisdom of his Father, in whom the
fulness of al wisdom does consist, Mat. 5.
persuades all men to embrace, and wills that we be reconciled before we
offer our gift upon the altar: and to agree with our adversary in the way,
before we come to the Judge, to have our matter decided. Saint Paul admonishes
the Saints to put away al envy and malice out Ephesians. 4. 3. Col.
of their hearts, and to forgive one another whatsoever quarrel one has
toward another. Wherein we draw near unto the divine wisdom of God, whose
properties the Scriptures noting unto us, among others, witness, that he is
easily entreated; that he chideth not continually, neither keeps his anger
for ever; but is ready to forgive Psalm. 103.
give, and be at one with the sons of men.

And as it is a point of tractablenes easily to be reconciled: so is it
another point of this wisdom, reverently to submit our selves to our
superiors: as, to our parents, princes, pastors, ecclesiastical and
spiritual governors, in all our errors, in doctrine or manners, to be
reconciled and reclaimed: of which wisdom they are void, whom self-love,
opinion of wisdom, pride of heart having Jude 2. 2. Pet. 2. 10.
puffed up, despise government, and speak evil of the^ that are in
authority: to whom in the vanity of their opinions; in the fancies of their
own brains; in the conceits of their grene heads, they will not obey: though
they have neither found ground, nor sufficient reason, nor evident proof, to
lead and induce them to their false persuasions. Wherefore they also are far
from this wisdom; whose property it is easily to be entreated.

5 Another quality or property of this wisdom is Isai 55 1. John 2
mercy: it is full of mercy, and mercy is specially in two things. 1. in
pitying the bodily needs of our brethren in poverty and distress, whereof is
largely spoken. 1. chapt. verse 27. 2. In pitying the spiritual needs of the
saints, and of all men: as when they lack good council, to minister it: when
they run astray, to call them home again: when they offend to tell them of it,
that they may be reclaimed: to draw them by all means out of the snare of
satan, whereby they otherwise might be carried away to their destruction.
Whereence it appears that the wisdom from above has a merciful regard,
both to the bodies, and also to the souls of the saints of God: whereof if we
become careless, then have we not that wisdom, which is full of mercy.

6 The sixth property hereof is: that it is full of good works: as constancy
in profession; patience in afflictions; carefulnes in our vocation; continuance
in prayer; mortification of the flesh; renouation of the spirit; reformation
of our life; and finally whatsoever tends to true sanctification.

7 It is also without judging: which is either without respect of persons to
regard the matter; 2. chapt. 1. Either without ambition and rigor in judging
thy brethren; 3. chapt. 1. Either without greedy and busy inquiring, and
seeking into other men's lives: either judging all in the worst part: either
unadvisedly to judge or condemn one another. These kinds of iudgings, either
partially, either ambitiously, and rigorously; either curiously; either
maliciously; either rashly: are here condemned. Not taking away a right
estimation and judgment betwixt man and man; thing and thing; good and bad;
truth and falsehood; justice and injury; oppression and equity; or any the
like, either ecclesiastical or civil judgment.

8 Finally, this wisdom from above is without hypocrisy. This does nothing
colourably or counterfetly: suttlely or guilefully: this wisdom bears not
two faces under one hood: this wisdom pretends not one thing openly, and
meaning another secretly: this does al things plainly and purely, simply and
sincerely: as proceeding from God the God of truth: to whom no dissembling; no
counterfetting; no double dealing is or can be pleasant* and these are the
properties of heavenly wisdom. By this distinguishing of wisdom, he
stops the door and gate to all impuritie; to all contentiousnes; to all
rigorousnes and desire of revenge; to all stubbornnes to be corrected or
informed; to all irreconciliablenes, and vntractablenes of men; to all
unmercifulness; to all wickedness; evil judgment, hypocrisy, and disse^bling
before God and man. Where unto who so is given, how so ever he have that
earthly, sensual, devilish wisdom, yet has he not this divine wisdom
which comes from God.

These things being thus disposed, the last thing in this treatise is, why we
should show by good conversation, our works in meekenes of wisdom; because
the fruits of righteousness are sown in peace of them, which make peace, a
reason from reward, in so much as they shall reap the fruits of righteousness,
which they have sown in peace.

This place teaches us, that whatsoever we do, whether good or evil, it is a
seed sown, whose fruit hereafter is to be expected, if the seed be good, we
shall receive Gal. 6. Job. 8
good; if evil, then shall we receive evil things, even punishments. Which
saint Paul confirms; be not deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man
sows that shall he also reap; if he sow to the flesh, he shall of the
flesh reap corruption; if he sow to the spirit, he shall of the spirit reap
life everlasting. That they may receive pleasant and delectable fruit from the
liberal hand of God, the Apostle exhorts them to sow good seed, even the
seed of peace, that they may receive and reap the reward of peace, mentioned
by our Savior, which is Mat. 5.
eternal blessedness: and to be reckoned for the children of God.

And this reason is set down to persuade the saints to embrace peace, against
the corrupt judgment of the world, who judges them miserable, foolish and
wretched, that live peaceably: but the spirit of truth teaches here the
contrary: that howsoever the world judges of peaceable persons, yet shall
they assuredly in due time reap and receive the reward of peaceable
righteousness. Which reward ought to allure all men to meekenes of wisdom: which
ought of christians so far forth to be followed, as a good conscience be
retained; vice and iniquity suppressed; virtue and godliness promoted; love and
charity in the holy fear of God cherished: And this is peaceable wisdom by
the Apostle commanded. This wisdom, Christ Jesus our Lord, who of GOD is for
us made wisdom and righteousness; sanctification and redemption: grant unto
us, that in all peace and quietness of heart, we may serve one another in love;
and in one spirit and one truth; with one mind and one mouth; may glorify
God the God of peace: To whom with Christ Jesus his son our Savior, and the
holy Ghost our comforter, be praise in the great congregation of the Saints,
Amen.

The Analysis of the fourth Chapter of S. James.
This fourth Chapter (...) four things or places* 1 Is of contentions and
wars: therein 5. things are to be marked from v. 1. to 7. 1 An interrogation
or question, concerning the beginnings and causes of contentions, and wars
among men. verse 1. 2 An answer to the question, containing the assignment of
the causes: which are two. 1 Vnruelie pleasures fighting in our members. 2
Immoderate desire of increasing our private estate and wealth. verse 1.
3 A condemning of those pleasures and desires of men, which bring with them
nothing but anguish and sorrow. v. 2. former part. 4 Why these desires are
without effect, or ineffectuall: the causes are two. 1 Because either men ask
not those things at Gods hand part of the second verse. 2 Or because if they
ask the^, yet ask they amiss. v. 3
5 A sharp reproof of these things Wherein there are 3. things noted. 1 The
reproof it self. v. 4 first part. 2 The reason of this reproof. v. 4. 2
part. 3 The preventing of an objection. v. 5. 6.

2 Place is of our duty to God consisting of two things: namely 1 Submission
to him: wherein three things are to be noted. v. 7. 1 What he commands: to
submit our selves to God. 2 The contrary: to resist the devil. 3 The reason
why: that he may fly from us.
2 Approaching near to God: and therein also are three things touched. v. 8. 1
What he commands: to draw near to God. 2 What he promises such as do so:
that God will draw near to them. 3 How it must be done. After a double manner.
1 By cleansing our hands. 2 By purging our hearts.


3 Is of humiliation or humbling our selves before God: consisting of two
things: namely of 1 Chastising our selves through repentance, and
mortification. Wherein are two things to be noted. v. 9. 1 What he commands:
to suffer affliction. 2 The ways how it must be done. 1 Sorowing. 2 Weeping. 3
Turning laughter into mourning. 4 Joy into heaviness.

2 Casting down our selves before God: where two things are touched by the
Apostle. v. 10. 1 The precept, or thing he commands to be done. 2 The reason
why: that God may lift us up.

4 Touching the remoouing of certain evils of pride: verse 11. to the end. Now
the evils of pride here mentioned, are two: namely, 1 Reproach, and speaking
evil of our brethren: therein two things must be considered. v. 11. 12. 1 What
he forbids: speaking evil of our brethren verse 11. 2 Why it must be
shunned, the reasons are 4. Namely, from 1 The violating of the law. verse 11.
2 The duty of the saints. 11. 3 The usurping of Gods office. v. 12. 4 Our own
condition. v. 12 2. part.

2 Vain confidence, in determining long before, of things to come: therein
five things are noted. 1 What he condemns: vain confidence of men. v. 13. 2
Why we should not so determine. v. 14. 1 Because time alters things. 2
Because our life is vain and uncertain.
3 Acorrecting of the evil. v. 15. 4 The repeating of it, with reproof. v.
16. 5 The conclusion. 17.



THE FOVRTH CHAP. OF S. JAMES, THE FIRST SECOND AND THIRD VERSES. THE XVII.
SERMON.
Verse 1 From whence are wars, and contentions among you? are they not
herehence, even from of your pleasures, that fight in your members?

2 Ye lust and have not: ye envy and desire inordinately, and cannot obtain:
ye fight, and war, and get nothing: because ye ask not.

3 Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might lay the
same out on your pleasures.


IN this fourth Chapter, the holy Apostle goes on with the matter of brawling
and contention, in the end of the former Chapter discussed of: setting down
other causes of contentions and wars among men, which he condemns. The
whole Chapter may be resolved into four branches or members. 1 Is touching
contention. 2 Touching our duty to God. 3 Concerning humiliation. 4 Is the
reproof of two evils proceeding of pride.

In the first there are five things. 1 A question. 2 An answer. 3 A condemning
of vain pleasures, as void of effect. 4 The rendering of causes, why they are
void. 5 A bitter and sharp reprofe of those things. And these are contained in
the six former verses.

In the second place, touching the duty of men to God, there are two things
wherein it consists. 1 Submission, wherein there are three things. 1 What is
commanded. 2 The contratie. 3 The reason: 2 Approaching and drawing near to
God: wherein there are three things also. 1 A precept. 2 A promise. 3 How the
thing is to be done. v. 7. 8.

The third part is of humiliation: and thereof are two branches: 1 Chastising
our selves, wherein two things are to be considered. 1 What he commands. 2
How it is to be done: by sorowing, weeping, turning laughter into mourning, and
joy into heaviness. 2 Point of duty to God, is casting down our selves
before God* therein are two things: the precept: the reason. And this part is
absolved in the 9. and 10. verses.

The fourth part is the condemning of two evils of pride: 1 the one is evil
speaking: 2 The other vain confidence. In evil speech, two things are noted.
1 What is forbidden. 2 Why it is forbidden. The reasons are four. 1 Thereby
the law is violate and iniuried. 2 it is the duty of Christians to do the
law: not to judge it, as in slaundering and speaking evil of their brethren
they do. 3 Hereby men usurp Gods office. 4 Al men are of frail condition,
therefore ought they not to speak evil one of another. 2 The other evil of
pride is, vain confidence, when men long before, without good regard, will
determine of things: therein are five things 1 What is condemned. 2 Why we
should not so vainly trust. 3 A correcting of the evil. 4 The repeating of
it, with reproof. 5 The conclusion. And this last part is finished from the
11. verse to the end.

These things thus generally noted: the first part of the Chapter, is from the
first to the seventh verse, wherein five things are noted. 1 The question. 2
The answer. 3 The condemning of the vain pleasures of men* as without effect.
4 The rendering of reasons, why the desires of men are void of their effects.
5 A sharp reproof of these things.

In the three first verses, are four of these five set down: as namely 1 The
question. 2 The answer, 3 The condemning of the things as void of effect. 4
Why they are void of effect. because 1 They are not asked. 2 They are asked
amiss.


Now let us come unto these particulars: the first 1 The question.
whereof, is the interrogation, demand, or question: wherein the Apostle
beginning a fresh the matter of contention, seeks out other causes thereof,
then in the former Chapter he had alleged: therefore says he, from whence are
wars and contentions among you?

Here, by wars, he understands rather those striuings and broils, whereby
men rise up, by the depressing and ^eeping under of others: and those fightings
and quar^els which in the common life of man fall out: then ^arres commonly so
called: when great multitudes of ^en oppose themselves one unto another: which
wars ^hus commonly and properly so called, oftentimes are ^aused by the same
mean and private contention: braw^ngs, and debates of men of might and power,
do of^entimes break our into open wars. The Apostle to ^arch out other
causes of seditions, tumults, contenti^ns, and the like evils, demands and
asks this question: From whence are wars and contentions among you?

The demand made in few words, requires answer: 2 The answer.
and the Apostle answers the former interrogation, by another question: from
whence are wars and co^tentions among you? Are they not (says he)
herehence, even from your pleasures, which fight in your members? This second
interrogation, with the words in the next verse: ye lust and have not: ye
envy, and desire immoderately: contain the assigment of the causes of wars,
broiles, contentions among men: and the causes, are assigned here two: unruly
pleasures fighting in the members of men: and immoderate desire. If therefore
we demand beside that which before has been spoken. Chapter 3. 14. 15. 16.
verses: what furthermore is cause of brawlings, brabblements, contentions, and
wars among men: we may answer aright: either the unruly pleasures, or the
immoderate desires of increasing our private wealth and estate: for from these
two fountains and well heads, all contention commonly arises. The unruly and
immoderate desire of honor: the infinite desire men have to increase their
own estates, whereby they are carried headlong to those things which seem
pleasant, delectable, glorious, and profitable unto them: chiefly move and
prick men forward to contention, and quarrelling, brawling and fighting:
Insomuch as that Saint James demanding the question, from whence wars and
contentions arise: answers, even from the pleasures which fight in men's
members.

And how truly, unruly pleasures, and immoderate desires are causes not
only of private quarrels, debates, broiles and contentions: but also even of
open wars in deed: experience sufficiently does teach us: so that there is
nothing almost more manifest, then, that the fulfilling of our lusts: the
enlarging of our honor and worldly pomp: the increasing of our private
wealth, is cause of contentions and vvarres among men. Whereof, whether we
will have examples in holy Scripture: they are plentiful: or whether we
look to examples profane of the heathen, they are abundant: or whether we
look to proof at home, it is manifest: or whether we regard experience
abroad, it is evident: or whether we have an eye to private men, or public
persons: to the wise, or to the foolish: learned, or ignorant: base or
honorable; one or another: it is apparent, that the contentions or vvarres
among them have flovved from desire of riches, wealth, promotion, honor,
glory, whereby they might excel one another. From whence was the
contention betwixt the Gene. 13.
heardmen of Abraham and his nephew Lot: was it not herehence, even from
their desires of increasing their wealth; insomuch that they were feign to
depart the one from the other: whereby the very bond as it were of nature was
broken. Wherehence were the contentions and wars betwixt Chederleomer king of
Elam, and Tidall Gene. 14.
king of Nations, Amruphell king of Siner, and Arioh king of Ellosar: against
the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, the king of Admah, the king of
Zeboiim: and the king of Bela, which is Soar: were they not from their
ambicious desires each of others kingdom, which is the chief cause of wars
among princes? From whence was the war and contention betwixt Abimelech Gene.
26.
and Isaac: was it not from the greedy desire to have had the wealth and
riches of Isaac? From whence were the wars of Sennacherib against Hezekiah:
were they 4. Kings 18.
not herehence, even of his greedy covetousness, and ambitious desire
toward the wealth and kingdom of Israel? From whence were the wars of
Nabuchodonosor Iudeth. 1.
against Arphaxad of the Medes, and against all other people and Nations: was
it not from immoderate ambition, and desire of glory, which fought in his
members: that, he might for power have been reverenced as an earthly GOD, of
all men? Wherehence was the war by Antiochus undertaken against 1, Macc. 1.
Egypt? was it not from his desire he had to reign over it, that he might
have the dominion over two countries? thus these and the like examples in the
Scriptures teach us, that the cause both of contention and also open wars,
have been, ambition: unruly lusts immoderate desire of increasing of men's
private estates, according to the doctrine of the Apostle. From whence are
wars and contentions among you? are they not herehence, even from your
pleasures which fight in your members?

If you will by examples profane learn how true this is: it may in two or
three appear evident: what other cause so ever Phillip the king of Macedonia
had against Philipp.
the Athenians: this no doubt was one, of those wars, broils and tumultes
against them: his lust and inward affection: his desire of glory and his
ambition: his greedy care to enlarge his kingdom and increase his riches. The
same pleasures: the like desires moved Alexander the great, the son of
Phillip, to move war Alexander.
against Darius the king of Persia. What other or greater cause was there of
the civil wars betwixt Caesar and Pompey: Sylla and Marius, Antonie and
Augustus, and other Romans: then the lusts, ambition, glory, desire of
increasing of their own estates, which ruled mightily in the^? What cause has
been known greater of the wars and tumultes among the peers of our own
country and common wealth: Then the desire they had, each to exceed and
excel an other in riches, wealth, honor and glory? If we ask the stories,
they will assure us: if we seek the chronicles, they will persuade us. If we
look to private men, and of meaner calling: what causes may be assigned of so
many tumultes, contentions, suites in law, quarrels, debates, fallings out and
strifes among men? are not our unruly desires: the fulfilling of our own
lusts; the enriching of our selves, by the inioying of other me^^ lands,
goods, livings, the chief causes thereof? from whence were the co^tentions
betwixt Eusebius the bishop of Cesaria, and S. Basil: betwixt Demetrius the B.
of Alexandria and Origin: betwixt Arrius and other heretics and the holy
fathers: were they not from the vain glory and ambitious desire in Eusebius,
Demetrius, Arrius and Montanus etc. as the stories ecclesiastical witness?
wherence came the co^tentions among sundry bishops and certain Popes: was it
not about the supremacy which ambitious popes have prowdely challenged?
Finally if we should rippe up all stories, and cast our eyes upon every
particular contention, quarrel, debate and broyle among men; I doubt not but
our vain and unruly pleasures; our ambitious and immoderate desires, shall be
found the causes thereof. So that we may conclude with the Apostle; that unruly
pleasures; evil affections, immoderate desires fighting in our members, are
the causes of all wars and contentions among us: and worthily affirm with
Paul, 1. Timo. 6.
that our covetous desires, are the causes of all evil, the very mother and
root of all wickedness: as from whence, envy, deceyte, fraud, lies,
periuries, swearings, cursings, bitterness, usury, oppression, extortion,
theft, murders, not of strangers only, but friends, familiers, kinsfolk,
brethren, sisters, fathers and mothers also have sprung. Truly therefore may
we say with James, From whence are wars and conte^tions among you? are they
not hence, even of the pleasures which fight in your members?

By pleasures here saint James understands those greedy desires men have
either to enlarge their honor, either to increase their wealth, or fulfill
their desires: and these pleasures are said to fight in our members: because
these pleasures, these covetous, ambitious, volupteous desires, use both the
powers of our mind, and also the parts of our bodies, as soldiers to fight
with: as instruments and weapons whereby sin accomplisheth and finisheth her
work in us.

And it agrees with that speech of Saint Paul: Let Romans 6.
not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it in the
lusts thereof: neither give you your members as weapons of unrighteousness
unto sin.

In some sense, these and all other evil pleasures and Romans 7.
evil desires, as branches of the old tree and root of Adam, fight in the
very elect of God: as saint Paul confessed of him self, that he had a law
fighting in his members, withstanding and resisting the law of his mind, and
leading him captive unto sin; whereof in another Gal. 5.
place he speaks, when he says that the flesh fights against the spirit,
and the spirit contendeth against the flesh, that we cannot do the things
we would. Even in the most elect and chosen vessels of God, there is a
fighting in their members. The unregenerate part strives against the
regenerate: the old Adam against the new Man; the outward Man against the
inward, so so that there is in the Saints a striving and a fighting in their
members.

But here Saint James seems to call that the fighting of pleasures in our
members, not when the spirit strives against the flesh, but when we give
over our selves wholly to the following and obeying of our lusts and pleasures,
in following and seeking after wealth, honor and fleshly lusts: when we bend
all our force; when we employ all our labor; bestow all our time, spend all
our wits and study; when we make our bodies and souls servants of our
wealth, honor and desires; and for those strive by all possible means; then
do our pleasures fight in our members: then use we them as soldiers to fight
for our covetousness and ambition: where unto to resign the rule and
government over us, is properly according to the Apostles doctrine, to have
pleasures fighting in our members.

Where unruly pleasures and immoderate lusts are assigned causes of wars and
contentions, which causes being evil, the effects cannot be good; we may
not therence condemn all contention, neither all vvarres as unlawful. For
neither contention, for religion against superstition: neither for truth
against falsehood: neither for sound doctrine, against blasphemous heresy:
neither for true justice, against open injury: neither for excellent virtue,
against shameful iniquity: is here reproved; but praise worthy; as chapter 3
verse 14. has been shevved. Neither is lavvfull war for defense of
religion: advancement of Gods glory: repelling intolerable injury from the
church of Christ, or common wealth, wherein we live: condemned as a vice, but
as a virtue renowned; as chapter 5. verse 6. shall appear.

Here is then the question asked: here is also the answer made; from whence
are vvarres and contentions among you? are they not hence, eue^ of the
pleasures which fight in your members?

These things thus set down, in the third place Pleasures condemned. 3
he comes to the condemning of these unruly pleasures: these covetous and
ambitious desires of men; these striuings and contentions of men, from their
effects: they profit or help not at all: they bring no good thing with
them: they are without effect; they only bring anguish and anxietie of mind;
vexation and trouble; grief and torment conceived of not obtaining the desires
of our hearts.

Thereof Saint James says: ye lust and have not: you envy and desire
immoderately, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war and get nothing. Thus are
the labors, desires, and travails of men to attain riches and honor by
their own evil means: oftentimes frustrate and void of effects. Carking and
caring, pinching and pining; lusting and desiring; fighting and co^tending for
honor or wealth, prevail nothing without the help of God.

David the Prophet to this purpose avouches, that Psalm. 12* 7.
it is in vain to rise up early, and go late to bed, to eat the bread of
carefulnes: as thereby, by our selves to attain unto great matters: the travel
of man by himself without the blessing of God, is nothing worth, vain,
unprofitable: for of our selves we cannot add one cubite to our stature: Math.
6.
nay we cannot make one hair white or black: as our Math. 5.
Savior witnesses: covetous and miserable men, oftentimes lust and long
after the goods of their neighbors and brethren: they hate, they envy such as
prosper by them: they earnestly desire and affect the riches of others: they
sigh, they sobbe, they sorrow, they grieve that they cannot bring about their
purpose: to enjoy their neighbors livings. As Achab did for not obteyning the
inheritance of Naboth: they fight, they brawle, 3. Kings. 21.
they frette, they fume, they stamp, they stare; they foam at mouth like wild
boores: they raise tumultes as Demetrius for his commodity, against Paul: they
Act. 19. 16. 19.
pick and spy out holes: they frame accusations: they invent matter; they
forge lies; they devise slanders; they suborne witnesses against their
brethren; injuriously to attain unto their riches: by right, by wrong; by
hook, by crook; by all means they seek to rush into the possessions of
their neighbors. They turn every stone: they labor by all means to attain
to honor, estimation, wealth and riches, power and glory in the world: and
all is oftentimes in vain; and they miss of their purpose. They lust says
James and have not; they envy and desire immoderately, and obtain not: they
fight and war, and get nothing.

One man ambitiously desires honor* another couetously hunteth after gain
and commodity: this man aymeth at a kingdom; another shoots at promotion:
one follows his carnal desire, another seeks after other pleasures: every
one either for greedy gain and private increase; or for ambitious desire of
augmenting his honor: trouble, excruciat and vex themselves miserably; and
yet all in vain: For these their unruly pleasures; and immoderate desires are
very often fruitless, and without effect: as experience teaches us. Some men
seek by their greedy desire to attain unto great wealth; therefore they toil
and moyle themselfes, and at years end get nothing. Yea sometimes loose that
they had already: as those that will occupy many trades; set up many shops of
sundry commodities: have many irons in fire at once: busy themselves with
many things whereof sometimes they are ignorant: thus busying themselves, now
here, now there: now about this thing, now about that: trusting many, venting
their commodities diverse ways, for triple gain, as they think: in fine gain
nothing but the loss of time, goods, and labor.

Such also are they, which having very good and gainful trades, whereof they
live well; yet for greedines of gain, they betake themselves unto other
trades: as the occupier, when after many years he will play the merchant
aduenturer (for so he does oftentimes) aduentureth all, and brings home
nothing but a heavy heart, a fools head, experience dearly bought,
repentance too late, the proverb of foolish, had I wist, I would not have done
it. These and such like (over greedy of hasty wealth) lose their labors
oftentimes, and profit themselves nothing at all.

Some in like manner, having aspiring hearts and minds, carried away with
ambition, seeking increase of honor: come to confusion, shame and ignominy:
as Absalom, not content to be the kings son, but hunting after 2. Kings 18
the kingdom before his time, took sword in hand against his father, and was
miserably confounded and destroyed. So even among us, within our times and
knowledge, some in high place, some in lower rooms, endeavoring by greedy
desire to rise and aspire higher then reason and calling required: have applied
themselves: some with popular demeanor, some with shameful treason, some with
secreat conspiracies, some with deuillish and unnatural treacheries, some with
one horrible devise or other, to attain their purpose: But (blessed be God)
all in vain; for thereby they (seeking great honor) have come to fearful
ends. Even so let all thy enemies pearish (O Lord) and the enemies of thine
anointed: But save and defend thou her (O Lord) from the face of her
adversaries, and keep her under the shadow of thy wings: let her be before
thee, as the sun, shining in his might: both now, and for ever, Amen.

Finally, some ambitiously bent to enlarge and increase 3. Kings 23.
their kingdoms, have either lost their lives and labors, as Achab for his
endeavor for Ramoth Gilead: or have spent more by seeking them, then gained by
the recovery of them: or finally, keep those kingdoms, countreies, or provinces
(whereunto they have aspired) with greater labor and cost, then either comfort
to themselves, or commodity unto their people: and so they have not obtained
their purpose.

This has fallen out in former times: this I trust will fall out by the help
of God, to barbarous Turks; cruel Saracens; bloody Spaniards, and such
ambitious persons. Thus no doubt, in these, as in a light ouershadowing, we
see, how truly the Apostle affirms, that the unruly pleasures, and
immoderate desires of men, are oftentimes without effect: ye lust, and have
not; ye envy, and desire immoderatly, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war,
and get nothing.

Now the reasons follow, why such desires of men are void of their effects
commonly: and for the most part, Why the desires of men are void of effaecti.
frustrate: and the reasons are two. 1. Men desire riches, wealth, and honor;
and seek by all means to come thereunto: yet they are often deceived of their
purposes, because they ask not these things from God, the only geuer of all
good things: yea, whose gift riches and honor are in special. And for riches,
who can deny them to be the gift of God? Was it not by God that Abraham becam
so wealthy? were not Isaac his riches the gift of God? did Genesis 13. Genesis 26.
Genesis 30. Genesis 31 Genesis 41.
not God bless Laban with riches for Jacobs sake? says not Jacob to his
wives, the daughters of Laban, that God had taken away their fathers goods and
riches, and given it to him? does not Joseph call the second son who^ the
Lord gave him in Egypt, Ephraim, because the Lord had made him increase in
wealth and riches, as well as in children, in the land of his affliction? Job
confesses riches to have been given him from God, when thereof speaking he
says; The Lord gave, and the Lord takes away; blessed be the name of the
Lord. When God had tried Job, and Job had repented before the Lord, the Lord
gave unto him Job. 1.
twice as much riches as he had before: for his first wealth was seven thousand
sheep; but his later, fourteen thousand: Job. 41.
his former wealth was three thousand Camels; but his later, was six thousand:
his former wealth was five hundred yoke of Oxen; his later, a thousand: his
former wealth five hundred she asses; but his later was a thousand: and this
was from God. When Solomon had from God choice given him, what he would ask;
he asked wisdom, 3. Kings 3.
to govern his people: which thing so pleased god, as that God therefore said
unto him; because he had asked neither long life, nor riches, nor the life of
his enemy, therefore he would give him also that which he asked not: both
riches and honor. Therefore the son of Sirach refers riches to God, as
the geuer thereof. Prosperity Ecclus. 11 1. Sam. 2. 7.
(says he) and adversity, life and death, poverty and riches, come of the
Lord. Seeing then riches are from God, they ought to be asked of him, and
sought for at his hands. Which if we do not, we may labor and travail long
enough, before we shall attain thereunto.

And as riches are from God, so honor also is from 1. Kings 2. Psalm. 113. 7
him. Anna, the mother of Samuel, confesses the same: The Lord (says she)
makes poor, and makes rich; brin geth low, and exalts: he raises up the
poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar out of the dunghill, to set
them among Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory. Whereunto
the Princely Prophet David Psalm. 75.
subscribeth in the Psalms; To come to preferment, is neither from the East,
nor from the West, nor from the South* but God is the judge, he makes low,
and he makes high. God promises Solomon both riches and honor; so that
among the kings, there should be none 3. Kings 3.
like him al his days. David confesses his preferment before 2. Kings 6 3.
Kings 20.
Saul, to be from God. The Queen of Saba refers Salomons glorious and
pompous advancement to god.

Daniel confesses all power, all promotion, all honor, all preferment, to be
from the Lord. Cyrus the heathen king, confesses his glory to have been of
God also. whereby it appears, that both riches and glory are Dan. 2. and 4
1. Esdras.
from the Lord. Wherefore seeing these are both from him: when they are not
asked, no marvel they be not obtained.

The first reason why men's desires concerning wealth and honout are oftentimes
void: is because they ask not these things from the hands of God, whose gifts
they are: but they seek them by their own means; by evil ways; by
unlawful trades; by wicked endeavors. Thus one by fraud, another by force; one
by violence, another by villenie; one by this evil mean, another by that, go
about and seek to attain to wealth and honor: but they seek not these in the
fear of god, nor at his hands which gives them, therefore full often their
purposes are frustrate. Thus men lust, and have not the thing they lust after:
they envy, and desire immoderately, yet obtain not that which they desire,
and whereafter they envy. They fight, they war, they strive, they struggle,
they toil, they moile: yet compass not, nor comprehend that, which they
labor thus after: because they ask it not of GOD, but seek by evil means
to obtain it: They acknowledge not God the geuer of these things, therefore
they labor in vain. They lust, they envy, they desire, they fight, they
war; yet they obtain not, because they ask not.

Wherefore, as men having any thing in their power and hand to give, look to
be asked and desired the gift thereof: and think them unworthy the benefit,
which think themselves too good to crave and desire it: and therefore men
often miss those things they would full feign have, because they seek not to
the geuer, but go about by other means to obtain them: Even so God, though
he give many things unasked, especially to his servants, and sometimes unto the
wicked: yet would he for his riches and honors be sought unto; and thinks
them unworthy his singular benefits, who think scorn to desire them:
wherefore they ofttimes miss of their purpose, because they seek to obtain
it otherwise, then by prayer unto God, who gives these things only, unto
men. Which reason Saint James here sets down in the first place, why men
lust and desire after things which they obtain not, because they ask them not
of God.

Now as this is specially applied here by Saint James, so may we more generally
consider of it: and as it is given here for a reason why honor and riches
(whereafter men seek) are not always attained: so may it be a reason certain
and sound in other things innumerable, that therefore we attain not unto
them, because we seek them not from God. We have no children, and we desire
them, but we obtain not: for we seek by some slibber slabber, or other device,
to obtain the^, but not from god. We have not our health of body, and we
desire it, but we obtain it not, because we seek to cunning women, which for
the most part are arrant witches: or to skillful Physicions, in whom we put our
confidence; and by whom (not by God) we look to obtain it.

To be short, generally in all other things, and particularly in enery one,
this is a just cause of not obteining: because we ask not the things we would
have, from god, the only geuer of all good things.

Where Saint James says, that men obtain not the things which they desire,
because they ask them not: we may herence learn how necessary a thing it is
to pray in all our needs, and necessities to God, for the supply of our
wants. Whereof has been spoken Chap. 1. verse 8. sermon 3. fol. 25. Sermon 27.

2 The second reason why men lust and desire, but obtain not, because they
ask these things amiss; to lay them out upon their pleasures. They desire and
ask riches, to spend them lewdly: they would have honor, to abuse it
shamefully. Thus they ask, but they ask amiss, to spend and lay out riches
upon their pleasures: that is, to evil uses, to evil purposes.

This reason is added by the way of preuen^ing an objection: these men might
have said: Do not we ask? yea, assuredly we ask, and we ask daily, and yet
o^taine not. Wherefore say thou, O blessed Apostle, that we obtain not,
because we ask not?

Hereunto Saint James answers: well it may be that you ask: but when you
do ask, yet you ask amiss: for you ask these things, and Gods good
blessings, to spend them upon your pleasures, to evil uses, to evil purposes:
therefore though you ask, yet you obtain not.

God, who is rich to all such as call upon him, promises to hear men, but yet
so, as that they pray according to his will, and a right: but when we pray
amiss, he will not hear us. Saint John says, that what soever we ask
according 1. John 5.
to the will of God, we shall obtain it. If then we ask not aright, neither
according to Gods will, then may we not look to obtain the things we pray
for. Saint Hierom writing upon the words of Christ in the Upon 7. Matt.
gospel, says well and worthily. If he that asks obtain: and he that
seeks, find; and it be opened to him that knocks; then to whom it is not
given: who finds not, and to whom it is not opened: it is apparent that he
has not asked, sought, knocked as he should: agreeable to the words of this
Apostle: you ask and have not, because you ask amiss.

Many other causes there are, why men (desiring and asking things from God) yet
do not obtain the things they ask. 1 They which ask, are oftentimes
wicked: and such God hears not, though they multiply sundry prayers.

The Lord therefore said to the wicked Jews, that he would not hear them,
though they poured out many Jsai 1.
prayers unto him: neither see them, albeit they stretched out their hands unto
him. To which purpose he protests Ezech. 8 Amos.
in Ezechiel, that for their abominations he would not hear his people.
Amos in many places, almost in every Chapter witnesses, that God would not
turn to sundry people: having regard to the manifold transgressions which
they had committed, for which he would show no favorable countenance unto
them, neither Mich. 3.
hear them. The Prophet affirms that God would not hear the wicked people,
which hated the good, and loved the evil: oppressed their brethren by cruel
extortion, and plucked their skins from their backs: and their flesh from
their bones, and chopped them in pieces as flesh to the pot, and meat to the
caldron. The blind man in the Gospel, restored to sight by Christ, whom the
John 9.
malicious Scribes and Pharisees reputed for wicked, because he did that
miracle on the Sabbath day: shows that Christ was righteous, because that God
heard him: we know (says he) that God hears not sinners: (wicked men,
contemning God, and delighting in sin) but if any man be a worshipper of God,
and does his will: him God hears. Whereby it appears, that the wickedness
of men, is one cause why they are not heard of God.

2 Sometimes men ask and obtain not, because they themselves are hard hearted
unto others, and will not hear them. David auouching that God rejects Psalm.
18.
the prayers of such, as themselves rejected the cry of the afflicted, says:
They cried, but there was none to save them: even unto the Lord, but he would
not hear them. Solomon his son subscribeth to his father, when he writes
that such as shut their ears unto the cries of other Prou. 21.
men, should cry themselves and not be heard. Therefore our Savior exhorts
all men when they pray, to Mat. 6 s and 7. Mark 11. Mat. 18.
be ready to forgive others, and hear their desires, that they themselves
crying, may be received. Wherefore when we will not grant the humble and
needful desires of the poor afflicted: when we are so strait laced: so
maliciously minded, so hard hearted, that we will hear no suite made unto us:
our selves may often cry and not be heard, and sundry times ask that we
obtain not: For God is not commonly wont to hear such as disdain the cries
of their poor brethren.

3 Sometimes men ask those things which are hurtful unto them: therefore not
to ask them were wisdom: but when we ask them, not to obtain them, is
mercy from God. The Israelites asked meat for their Number. 11.
lust: in anger it was given, which to have denied had been mercy. S.
Augustine says thereof: that God denies sometimes Epist. 121.
things in mercy, which in wrath he gives. If then we ask evil things, it
is his loving kindness not to grant them. Wherein God deals with men, as a
tender father with his children: if a child ask an evil thing, the father
denies it in love: if he ask a cole of burning fire: a sharp poynted, or
sharp edged knife: if he ask poison for honey: a Scorpion for an egg: for
an Eele, a Serpent: or whatsoever other thing be hurtful: if he love his
child, he will deny it: even so when we not knowing what or how to ask
aright, desire hurtful things from God: in mercy he hears not, but denies
our prayers. When Plato considered that men through ignorance oftentimes
desire hurtful In Alcebiade
things, which being granted were evil to the parties: he protests this to
be the best form of prayer: which he gathered out of the old Poets: Jupiter
king, give unto us praying, and not praying: vowing and not vowing: those
things which are best: and command that evil things be far from us,
though we desire them. Thus the heathenish Philosopher saw, that it was not
good to be heard, when men pray for, or desire hurtful things. If the heathen
desired not to be heard when they prayed for evil things to their gods, which
indeed were no Gods: shall not we repute it a great mercy, from the eternal
and everliving God, to have our prayers denied, when we desire things that are
hurtful? Men therefore praying for things hurtful to themselves, are in
mercy repelled and denied. Which things if we should obtain at the hands of
God, therein says Chrysostom, God should show himself an enemy, rather then
a loving father. Ho. 18. opere imperf. Mat.


4 Sometimes we ask things unjust, dishonest, unlawful: would we God to
grant our prayers? Some men ask the lives of their enemies: some men ask the
goods of their brethren: some men ask the unlawful use of strange women: some
men ask their own death: some men the death of their children: some ask
against charity: some against equity: some against honesty: many against
piety and virtue. And therefore they have the repulse at the hands of God.
Wherefore it shall be good and profitable for men, thoroughly to determine in
themselves to ask only good things at the hands of God, least they receive
the denial. For men asking unjust, unlawful, dishonest things, are not heard
at the hands of God: and there petitions are void and of none effect.

When an importunate or rather impudent suter came to Agesilaus the king,
earnestly entreating him in a certain matter, and said; Sir, might it please
your grace, you promised me such a thing: Truth, quoth the king, so the thing
were honest and just that thou requirest; otherwise I spoke it, but promised it
not. The suter replied and urged further: It becomes a King to perform
every word of his mouth, yea, if it were but a beck or nodde of his head:
To whom the king answered: no more, says he, then it becomes him that
will crave any thing of a king, to ask only that is rightful and honest. And
thus the king cut off his shameless suter. VVoulde God all Kings, Queens, and
Princes, woudle deny all suits, dishonest, unjust, unlawful, or such as tend
either to private hurt, or public harm in their kingdoms. Shall a mortal
man, and earthly king: shall a heathen which knew not God aright, deny suits
which are unjust: and shall not GOD our heavenly King deny such suits and
petitions as are uncharitable, dishonest, unlawful, unjust, when they are made
unto him? God being righteous, delights only in righteousness, and
equity: Wherefore he will not admit wicked, unjust, and ungodly prayers made
unto him.

5 As for these causes the prayers of men are put back and repelled with God:
so also, as Saint James touches, when we ask amiss, to consume and lay out
these things upon our vain pleasures. Thus when we pray, it is no marvel that
we be denied. Whereby it appears, that in every prayer which we would to be of
force and effectual, we must have a chief regard and respect to the end
wherefore we pray.

The ends of godly prayers, are, as I suppose three: The ends of lawful
praypers. 3
our own need: the want of others: the glory of God. Which ends if we
respect in the d^sires of our hearts to GOD, we shall be heard according to
his will. If we regard other ends then in holy Scripture can be justified,
no marvel that we obtain not.

1 And first, in prayer we must respect our own need, which either is in
things inwardly and touching the soul: which being the more excellent part,
ought first of all to be considered, and those things chiefly to be sought,
which appertain to the salvation thereof: as the most excellent gift of faith,
repentance, love, good works, pardon of sins, patience in adversity,
lowliness in prosperity, peace of conscience, assurance of hope, joy of the
holy Ghost, and the like: whereof our Savior Christ aduertiseth us: first of
all seek the kingdom of GOD, or of heaven, and the righteousness thereof,
and all other things shall be Matt. 6.
ministered unto you. Of which things we should have special regard, in as
much as we are but strangers Heb. 13.
here, and have no city of abode, but look for another, in the kingdom of
Christ, wherein is the dwelling of Gods Saints for ever.

Either else our need is in things outward, concerning our bodies, for the
competencie of things thereunto, it is also lawful to pray-Looking therefore
unto our bodily need, for the supply of that our want, we may pray without
offense to God. Solomon the wise man respecting this end, prayed neither for
much Prou 13.
wealth, neither to be pressed down with poverty, but to have mediocritie,
and a competencie to supply all want. Our Savior would for this end, that
men Mat. 6.
should daily pray, for their daily bread, whereunder all needful things
for this life are comprehended. Thus may we pray for meat, for drink, for
health of body, deliverance out of prison, prosperous success in common
affairs, and all other the like: according as our need shall be. For our own
wants and needs therefore, we may pray to God for temporal things.

2 As the supply of our own wants is one end in prayer respected: so also
may we pray for temporal things, that our brethren may by us be sustained.
Wherefore, when I desire a competent state of living, not only to mainetaine
my self, and mine own family: but that I also may have whereby to relieve my
needy neighbor, I pray not amiss. For if it be a blessed thing, rather to
give, then to receive, as Saint Paul Acts 20.
gathered out of our Savior: then to desire these temporal things, to be
able to minister to the needs of our brethren, is commendable. And for this
cause to desire not goods only, but might also to protect the Saints: power
to preserve them: honor and worldly countenance to deliver them from the
tyranny S. Aug. epist. 64. Chrysostom. 10. ho. Tim. 1.
of the wicked: I hold it tolerable, both in the temporaltie and also in the
clergy.

3 Finally, in our prayers, we must set the glory of GOD before our eyes:
seeking his glory in all things: always bearing in mind Saint Paul's most 1.
Cor. 10. Col. 3.
grave and divine counsel: Whether we eat or drink, or what soever other
thing we do, let us do all to the glory of GOD. This shall we best do, 2.
Kings 15.
when we refer our selves wholly to the will of GOD. As David, who desiring
deliverance from the unnatural dealing of Absalon, and to be restored to the
Tabernacle of GOD: yet he refers all to the will of GOD, to do with him as
should seem Mat. 26.
best in his eyes. And our Savior Christ, craving that the bitter cup of
persecution, yea of his passion might pass from him: yet said he, not my will
O father, but thine be fulfilled. These ends in our prayers ought we to
respect if we will look for any thing at the hands of God, or have our prayers
heard of him.

But if we respect other and worldly ends, our prayers shall be void and without
effects: when then we pray with the mother of Zebedeus children, that either
our selves or children may sit at the right or left hand of Christ, respecting
our own ambition, and not, either our own need, Math. 20.
or the aid of other, or the glory of God; we are worthy with her, to be
repelled: when we desire to bye the gift of the holy Ghost with money as Simon
Magus did; thereby Act. 8.
neither seeking the benefit of the brethren, nor the glory of God: but
thinking by that feate to get much money: we deserve the repulse: and to hear
with him, thy money perish with thee: if men desire riches, not to supply their
own needs: neither to help their brethren in their necessities; neither to
use them to Gods glory; but to counteruaile and counterpeese their enemies in
wealth, and therein to make their parts a good: if we desire riches, to ruffle
in our silks and veluets: and set out our selves in flaunting wise: to
apparel our selves gorgiously, and to fare deliciously every day, with the
glutton in the gospel: to wallow and walter in all carnal and fleshly
pleasure; or any wise to mispende the things we crave Luc. 16.
at the hands of God; we ask amiss, to lay it out upon our pleasures; and
therefore are we seldom heard so praying. Thus to pray for riches to fulfill
our filthy desire, to oppress our poor brethren; to crave honor, that we
may live without check as we lust our selves; to afflict others which are
inferior unto us: this were to ask amiss, to spent the things we ask
upon our pleasures: yea it were great impudency to desire the help,
patronage and favor of God in those things, which shame restrayneth to make
known to others: in which order when we pray, we are not only not heard
of God, but also sometimes severely punished. And these are the two causes why
men's desires are void of effect; partly because we ask not: partly because,
when we do ask, we ask amiss, to consume it on our pleasures. Let us pray,
etc.

James Chapter. 4. verses 4. 5. 6. Sermon 18.
Verse 4. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know you not, that the amity of the
world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world,
makes himself the enemy of God.

5. Do you think that the Scripture says in vain, the spirit that dwells
in us lusts after envy?

6. But the Scripture offers more grace, and therefore says; God resists
the proud, and gives grace to the humble.


5. Thing in the first part.
WHich words contain the last and fifth thing in the first part of this
chapter: which is a sharp and bitter reproof of wicked men, for follovving
the vain and filthy desires of the world.

These three verses containing the fifth and last member of the first part of
this cbapter: note unto us three things, namely 1. The reproof it self, in
part of the 4. verse: ye adulterers and adulteresses know you not that the
friendship of the world, is enmity with God? 2. The reason of the reproof:
in the rest of 4. verse: because he that professes friendship to the world,
professes enmity to Godward. 3. The preventing of an objection. verse. 5. 6.

1. Of these three, the first is the reproof it self: wherein S. James
sharply rebukes men for the lusts 5. part of the first member.
and desires in them, which in these words is contained: Ye adulterers and
adulteresses, know ye not, that the amity of the world is enmity with God?
which speech argues, that the Apostle was much moved and sore troubled at the
iniquity and great wickedness of these men, that he should fall into such
sharp and bitter speeches; ye adulterers and adulteresses.

By adulterers and adulteresses here, the Apostle means not such as defile
their bodies with strange lusts; and join themselves in carnal copulation
with such as they should not: as a woman or woman kind to have the use of any
body but of a lawful husband: or a man, to know any woman in like manner,
but his lawful wife only: but here by adulterers and adulteresses according
to the manner of holy Scripture, he means all such, as prefer external and
outward things, as riches, honor, dignity, and worldly pleasure whatsoever,
to and before the love of God, and his only son our Savior Jesus Christ: and
so leaving God and Christ Jesus, to whom only they should cleave, as a chaste
spouse to their dear husband: join themselves to the Mammon of iniquity,
and other worldly lovers, preferring things temporal, to things eternal:
things earthly, to things celestial: things momentanie, to things perpetual:
and therewith run a whoring after their own inventions. After which sense
the princely Prophet speaks: Lo, they that withdraw themselves from thee,
Psalm. 73. Numbers 15. 39.
shall perish: for thou distroyest all them that go a whoring from thee:
reputing that for whoredom, when men forsake the Lord and seek after his
creatures: and so prefer carnal things before God himself.

So our holy and most blessed Savior calls the Mat. 16.
Jews an adulterous generation: for that they forsook God and his dear Son
Christ; and gave themselves over to idolatry: hypocrisy, vanity, traditions
of the elders, and such like doting follies. S. James following this phrase of
speech, calls the ambitious and covetous persons of his time, who were held
with infinite desire of riches and honors, for love whereof they break the
knot and bond of conjunction with God; adulterers and adulteresses.

Which name in this behalf we worthily deserve; because God has coupled us
unto himself in honorable wedlock, as it were: wherefore he says to his
church: I will Osei. 2.
marry thee to my self for ever: yea I will marry thee unto me in
righteousness, in judgment, in mercy and compassion. I will even marry thee in
faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord. Of this heavenly marriage S. Paul
speaks to the elect saints of Corinth; I am jealous over you 2. Cor. 11.
with godly jealousy: for I have prepared you to one husband, to present you as
a pure virgin unto Jesus Christ. The saints and elect of God, in the receate of
the holy Sacrament of baptism: have pledged and plighted their faith and
troth to God: being then married to God, and betrothed to Jesus Christ, we
ought not to leave our first love, and Revel. 2. 4.
betake our selves to worldly creatures; but wholly to depend, rely and rest
upon him, and cleave inseperably to him, who has freely loved us, in his
beloved son Jesus Christ our Lord.

The case thus standing then with us: to set our affections upon earthly
things: to force and bend all our love to vvorldly wealth, riches and
honor; is nothing else but the loss of our faith to God, the breach of the
knot and bond of love to him, the violating of matrimonial chastity tovvard
the almighty, whereby we become adulterers and adulteresses against the Lord.

The impure and wicked persons of this world, whose only care is the
increase of their wealth and honor, are therefore adulterers and adulteresses
against God: and by the Apostle here so termed; ye adulterers and adulteresses.
Almighty God has sent his only son, of his unspeakable love, to join us
unto himself in heavenly marriage by an inviolable conjunction: by him are we
purged from all iniquity, to be a pure spouse unto him, immaculate Tit. 2. 2.
Cor. 11.
and undefiled before God: that he might make us unto himself a glorious
Church, not having spotte or wrinkle or any such thing. Shall we so soon
forget our heavenly Ephesians. 5.
co^iunctions? shall we so soon forget that inestimable benefit; shall we so
soon falsify our faith and troth to God? Shall we bury in oblivion so
great loving kindness of the Lord? shall we violently rent in pieces the
bond of covenant, with so solemn protestation knit betwixt God and us? shall
we make a divorce from him, who loved us forlorn; and loved us freely without
any portion of goods to commend us? to follow the strange love of the world?
o we adulterers and adulteresses in so doing!

Wherefore as they which have given their faith mutually, and plighted their
troth each to each other, and have so knit the knot of matrimony, and are
joined in honorable marriage together: leaving their own lovers, join
themselves in strange love, are adulterers and adulteresses, and so both
called and counted: even so they, which by solemn protestation have in
baptism betrouthed themselves to GOD, leaving him, and giving themselves to
the strange love of the world, and worldly things: commit adultery against
GOD: and by Saint James are called adultresses and adulterers; Ye adulterers,
and adultresses, know you not, that the amity of the world, is enmity with
God?

Thus to love the world immoderately, as do the wicked, is to hate God; to
profess friendship thereto, is to proclaim war against God; to give our
selves inordinately to worldly things, is to play the adulterers, and
adultresses against the Lord: for which thing, here men are sharply reproved;
Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, know you not, that the amity of the world,
is enmity with God?

2 The reproof premised, the reason followed, why the lusts and desires of
worldly things should be avoided, and cannot be followed without adultery
against God: and the reason is from contraries; the love of God, and of the
world, are contraries: therefore they cannot agree together, neither consist in
one and the same person. For if we love the world, we must needs hate God: and
if we love God, we must hate the world: we cannot love both at once, and
together: for the amity of the world, is enmity with God: and he that makes
himself a friend of the world, professes (as it were) open hatred against
God.

The love of the world is, for men to make the^ selves servants and slaves to
worldly desires, and corruptions. The love of God is, to prefer him before
all things, and wholly to dedicate our selves to his service, in holiness and
Luke 1.
righteousness, acceptable before him. Betwixt which two, there is such
contrariety, as how much a man is inclined to the one, so much he declineth
from the other: how much he is wedded to the world, so much he is alienated
from the Lord. For as a woman, the more she grows in love with another man,
the less love she has, and the less liking of her husband, whom in fine she
hates, and loatheth: Even so we, ravished with worldly desires: the more we
love them, the less we love God: by the means whereof, in fine we also hate
him.

And as a wise husband cannot abide his Spouse wantonly to sport and play with
an adulterer: neither will he part stakes in matrimonial and secret duties of
marriage, with any other: so neither will God, and our Savior Christ, suffer us
his spouse, to dally and sport with Satan, and this present world: whereby we
run a whoring from him. O then you adultresses, and adulterers, who are
tickled with the inticements, choked with the cares, ravished with the love of
worldly lusts: know you not that the love of this world is enmity with God:
and that in loving the world, you grow in hatred with God? So that you cannot
love the world, but you must leave god, and commit adultery and fornication
against him.

How contrary these two loves be; and how impossible it is for us, to love
both God and this world at once, and together: it may appear by our Savior
himself, Mat. 6.
who tells us; that no man can serve two masters (being contrary one to the
other) for either he shall hate one, and love the other; or lean to the one,
and despise the other: that we cannot serve God, and riches: God, and Mammon.
1. John 2.
the Lord, and this world, are contrary masters; so that none can serve the^
bothtogether. The holy apostle John subscribeth to his master and ours, Jesus
Christ; who exhorting men not to love the world, neither the things therein,
reasons from the contrariety betwixt the love of God, and of the world; Love
not the world, nor the things therein. If any man love the world, the love of
the father is not in 2. Cor. 6
him. Saint Paul rightly demands (as a matter impossible) what fellowshippe
has righteousness with unrighteousness; what communion has light with darkness;
what concord has Christ with Beliall? God being righteous, has no fellowship
with the world, which is wicked, and lies altogether in sin: God being
light, and the father 1. John 5 James 1 1. Ioh. 1 Ephesians. 6. 2. Cor. 4
of lights, in whom also there is no darcknes at al, has no communion with
Satan, the prince of the darcknesse of this world. Christ being holy, has
nothing to do, no concord with Beliall, the Prince of wickedness: So that these
cannot dwell in the heart of man together, as in the fountain of love, being
so contrary and opposed. Truly therefore says Saint Augustine, the love of
the S. Augustine.
world, and the love of God, cannot stand, or consist together; no more then
the same eyes at once, can look upon heaven and earth in the same instante.
Being therefore so contrary, God and the world, it cannot be, but that such as
make themselves friends with the world; become enemies unto God. Whereof they to
whom Saint James speaks, not ignorant: are sharply reproved for loving the
world with the hatred of God: Ye adulterers, and adultresses, know ye not that
the amity of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a
friend of the world, makes himself the enemy of God.

And this reason of the holy Apostle, holds not only in the propounded matter
of ambitious and covetous desires, which men cannot love, and love God also;
but it holds in all worldly wickedness, and love of earthly things
whatsoever: which men cannot possibly love, and love God together. For then
might a man be holy, and wicked; godly, and unrighteous all together; for they
which love the world, are wicked and unrighteous; as the world 1. John 5
Leuit. 11 and 2^. etc.
it self lies in wickedness: and such as love God, are godly and holy, even
as God him self is holy.

That we cannot possibly give entertainment to God, and to the world
together, and at once love them God and the world contrary* as appears in
four things.
both: the reason is their contrariety; for things contrary cannot dwell at
once in the same person. And the contrariety betwixt the love of the world,
and the love of God, in four things appears.

1 In the repugnancie of their nature. GOD is by his nature pure, holy,
undefiled, without contagion of Leuit. 11. 19. 20.
sin, and without permixtion of any evil: But the world is altogether
wicked, defiled with sin, spotted with many blemishes of unrighteousness,
full of all contagion, and deadly poison of iniquity: So that in nature there
is a contraietie betwixt the^. Naturally therefore being contrary, we cannot
love them both together. 1. John 5.


2 As their natures are contrary, so are their precepts contrary: for other
things by God, other things by the world are inioined: wherein the
contrariety betwixt the^ appears. God commands mercy, liberality,
pity, compassion: the world persuades cruelty, mercilesnes, covetousness,
hardness of heart, violence, injury, and oppression. God commands holiness,
sanctification, to be fruitful in all good works, to his glory: and to
increase therein to ripenes, and a full measure in Jesus Christ. But the world
moves us to filthy conversation, to defile our selves with carnal lusts,
and all ungodliness: to weary and waste our selves with all fleshly pleasure,
that we may be unclean in soul and in body. God commands us not to lie,
but speak the truth one to another; not to backbite, not to slander, not to
deceive, not to circumuent or defraud one another: not to swear vainly, not to
curse bitterly, and infinite the like: but the world would have us to lie,
counterfette, slander, deceive, circumuent, swear, curse, banne, and give
over all the powers of our minds, and parts of our bodies, to commit
iniquity. Hom. 22. upon Matthew.
Seeing one commands thee (says Chrysostom) to give of thine own goods:
the other violently to take the goods of others: one to embrace chastity, the
other to follow intemperancie: the one to love sobernes, the other to delight
in gluttony: how is it possible we should obey these precepts, being so
contrary: and so seem to love them both together?

3 As their precepts are contrary, so are the qualities of them which love the
one and the other, contrary. For other things please God; other things the
world. Other qualities are required in such as love God; other things and
qualities in them that love the world. The lovers of God must be led by the
spirit of God, and walk in the spirit of God, and bring forth the fruits
thereof: as love, joy, peace, long suffering, ge^tlenes, goodness, faith,
meeknes, temperance, and such like: they must be endued with mercy, humblenes
of mind, kindness, forgeuing one Ephesians. 4. Col. 3.
another, even as Christ forgeueth us. But the servants and lovers of the
world, are possessed with cruelty, mercilesnes, wrath, ennie, currishnes,
contention, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, hatred, debate, emulation,
sedition, murder, drunkenness, gluttony: and the works of the flesh: 1. Cor.
6 Gal. 5. Ephesians. 3. Col. 3. John 4. Psalm.
which who commit, shall not inherit the kingdom of God, and of Christ.

The lovers of God are pure, unrebukable, blameless before him in love,
serving him in spirit and in truth. But the servants of the world, are
corrupt, deceitful from the womb, defiled with sin, flattering God with
their mouth, and dissembling with him in their double tongue. The servants of
God, and such as love him, are sober and temperate: but the lovers of the
world, make their belly their God: whose end is damnation, whose glory is to
their shame, being earthly minded. Seeing therefore the Philip. 3.
qualities of the lovers of God, and of the lovers of the world, are contrary
and diverse; it cannot be that the same should love God, and the world both
together.

4 Finally, the very love it self is in quality contrary: for the love of
God is pure, chaste, and holy, spiritual: but the love of the world is impure,
unclean, profane, and sensual: wherefore no man can love god, and the
world. Yea rather, they which endeavor to become friends of the world, make
themselves thereby the enemies of god.

Wherefore (my dear brethren. beloved in Jesus Christ) if we be the elect of
god, chosen by him out of the world, to love him, and serve him, in such
holiness as is acceptable unto his divine majesty: If we be the professed
Soldiers of Christ, to fight under his displaied banner, against Satan and
the world: shall we (as backsliders from god, traitors unto Christ, enemies of
our own salvation, prophaners of our Christian profession) give our selves to
the love of the world, and commit fornication against god? Cleave thereunto
in league and bond of friendship, and so become enemies unto the Lord our
god almighty? Let vain, wicked, ambitious and contentious persons; let green
flourishing youth, who think to love god and the world also: herence learn,
that they cannot love both, and that in making friendship with the world, they
fall at variance with God. It is God that speaks in his Apostle: it is the
spirit of truth, which informs us: it is Christ in his minister, that opens
his mouth and assures us: that whosoever will be a friend of the world, makes
himself the enemy of God.

Seeing then there is such contrariety betwixt the love of God, and of the
world, as who so making friendship with the world, procures hatred with God:
it is meet therefore that all professed Christians, should address themselves
to the renouncing of worldly love, and seek to hold fast the knotte of Gods
love without wavering, that we may remain his friends for ever.

The case therefore thus standing with men, that who so seeks the friendship
of the world, thereby professes hatred against God; it appears manifestly,
that many men and women which profess christian religion, are notwithstanding
enemies unto God. For whosoever makes himself the friend of this world,
thereby professes himself, or at least makes himself in deed the enemy of
God; and most men and women seek daily the friendship of this world; as the
covetous, proud, wanton persons: ambitious men, adulterers, fornicatours,
unclean persons: vserers, extortioners, oppressors, dronkards, surfetters,
liers, blasphemers, slaunderers, and the rest Isai 29. Iere. 12. v. 2.
of the wicked route: in whose mouths God is often, but he is far from their
hearts and raines: Then is it evident, that many (even professing godliness)
make themselves the enemies of God, in that they strike hands, and enter league
with this wicked world. Whom the holy Apostle therefore reproves; Ye
adulterers, and adultresses, know you not that the amity of the world, is
enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, makes
himself the enemy of God. This is the voice of God, therefore must we hear
it: it is the sonnde of the spirit of truth, therefore must we obey it: it is
Christ Jesus which thus reprooueth in his servants, therefore must we believe
him. And this is the reproof of these desires, and the reason, wherefore they
must be avoided of the children of men, because they purchase hatred with God.

3. The last and third thing in this fourth branch of the first part of this
Chapter, is a preventing of an objection in the fifth and sixth verses
contained. They might have said to Saint James: O blessed Apostle, how is it
that thou in heighest against these desires so sharply, as to repute them for
wicked adulterers and adultresses, which seek and follow after them? are not
these such as nature has engraffed? Being therefore natural, they ought not
with such sharpness, such bitterness, such vehemenice to be reproved.

Hereunto the Apostle answers: do you think that the Scripture says in
vain: The spirit that dwells in us, lusts after envy? But the Scripture
offers more grace: and therefore says; God resists the proud, but gives
grace unto the humble. As who should say. True it is, that we are given to
these vices naturally, and the Scripture confirms the same: yet does not this
excuse us, but rather how much more vehemently we are by corruption of
nature, carried away with these things: so much more diligently must we beware
of them. Neither shall our labor therein be in vain, but shall receive a full
reward: in as much as GOD resists the proud, ambicious, covetous, which
hunt after these desires, and leave him: and also ministers grace, sends
help, gives aid to such as are humble, and in true lowliness of mind,
cleave inseparably to him.

Let us a little unfold and rippe open the words, where he says; Think you
that the Scripture says in vain? What means the Apostle here by the
word, Scripture? Surely he may thereby mean and understand some place
either of the old, or of the new Testament, though the place be not
manifest, neither this sentence verbatim, word for word, as it lies here,
there to be found: so that this meaning may be well gathered out of any
place, as no doubt it might. Albeit then this Scripture it self can no where
be found in holy Scripture: yet seeing it may therhence be gathered, it is
enough: and therefore he calls it Scripture. The Apostles had this liberty,
not only to give out the plain place of any Prophet, or of Christ himself,
for Scripture: but also that which might be gathered out of such places, they
have in their writings tendered for Scripture Acts 20. John 7. 38.
unto posterity. As Saint Paul to the Ephesians at Miletum, alleges for
Christ's saying this: It is a blessed thing to give, rather then to receive.
Which Scripture is not orderly written, nor spoken by Christ in any place: yet
may it be gathered out of diverse places of the Scripture in effect: and
therefore as Scripture he alleges it.

In like manner, in the Epistle to the same Church and congregation, faith Saint
Paul, (after many exhortations Ephe. 5.
and arguments, to persuade them to holiness and sanctification of life:)
therefore he says: awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and
Christ shall give you light. This Scripture word for word is no where to be
found in any place of holy Scripture: yet because it may be gathered out of
diverse places of Jsai, as out of the 9. Chapter 2. verse. 26, chap. ver. 19.
60 chap. ver. 1. or the like, either in him or other: as sundry are of sundry
opinions thereaboutes: therefore he alleges it for Scripture. Saint James in
like manner gathering this Sentence out of the Scripture, though word for word
it be not there to be found, alleges it for Scripture, and so calls it:
Do you think that the Scripture says in vain: the Spirit that dwells in
us, lusts after envy?

This place may be gathered out of diverse testimonies of Scriptures. For it
may be gathered out of Moises, his book of Genesis: where it is thus written,
that God saw that the wickedness of the earth, or man upon the earth, was
great, and the imaginations of his heart only Gene. 6.
evil continually. Where the Prophet teaches that man naturally is wicked,
and all his imaginations of heart, evil: therehence James might gather: that
naturally our spirit lusts after envy, after evil things, seeing the
imaginations of man's heart are all evil continually, It might be gathered
also out of that which after the deluge and flood, God said in his heart, I
will no more curse the ground for man's sake: for the imagination Gene. 8.
of man's heart is evil, even from his youth: this also intimates that man
naturally is given to corrupt lusts, and evil desires, that therehence Saint
James might say, Think you that the Scripture says in vain, the spirit that
dwells in us, lusts after envy? Or else it may be gathered out of
Jeremy, when he says: The heart Iere. 17.
is deceytfull above all things: who can know it? This in effect imports
thus much, that naturally we lust after envy, and evil things. For hereby,
and by other testimonies is avouched, that men not regenerate, are carried
naturally, with all force to evil. Thus therefore he answers their
objection, though these lusts be natural, yet ought they to be ouyded: for
the Scripture teaches us, that naturally we lust after envy, and desire evil
things. Thus the Scripture here signifies that which out of the Scripture is
gathered.

Now he says, that the Scripture says, that the spirit which dwells in
us, lusts after envy. By the Spirit, here the corrupt affection, and heart
of man is understood: the crooked, crabbed, and corrupt disposition of nature:
the fancy, the inclination of Ezech. 13.
our hearts naturally. In which sense and signification, the Prophet uses the
word Spirit: when God willed him to say to those Prophets which prophesied
out of their own hearts; He are the word of the Lord: Thus says the Lord
GOD; Woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have
seen nothing. The Prophet Daniel speaking of King Belshazzar, says, that
when his heart was puffed up, and his Dan 5.
Spirit hardened in pride: then was he deposed from his kingdom, and they
took his honor from him. In which places and the like, the Spirit is taken
for the heart, mind, and corrupt affection of man. The meaning then of this
place is, that it is manifest by testimonies of Scripture tending thereunto,
that the heart, spirit, and mind of man, is naturally set upon envy, evil,
wickedness, neither does the Scriptures speak in vain thereof: for we are
given in deed to lust, to envy, to desire, to quarrel, to contend: either
for increase of wealth, or of honor among men. Therefore the Scripture says
not in vain, for it is too sure and certain: that the spirit, which dwells
in us: natural corruption which possesses the seat of our hearts, lusts
after envy.

Some by spirit here understand the Spirit of God, and read the whole
sentence interrogatiuely think you that the Scripture says in vain: the
spirit that dwells in you, lusts after envy? Making this the meaning:
does the Scripture teach, that Gods spirit moves us to envy, debate, lust,
and such like? No, it is not Gods Spirit that moves men thereunto: wherewith we
are not guided when we are quarrellous and contentious. But how, those words
then, think you that the Scripture says in vain: may be understood, I see
not. Therefore I retain the former sense as most natural.

The other part of this answer, is: but the Scripture offers more grace, and
therefore says: God resists the proud: but gives grace to the humble.
Whereas naturally we are given to evil, and lust after envy: the Scripture
offers more grace, and gives us better counsel then to give our selves to
these quarrels, and to be carried away with such desires: therefore it says,
God resists the proud: but gives grace to the humble.

By the Scripture here, he understands evident testimonies: for this thing,
is in sundry places recited.

By the proud, he understands such as in following their own desires and
lusts, rebel against God. By the humble, he means such as in meekness of
spirit and humility of mind, submit themselves to God with reverence, and
endeavor to suppress their evil affections in themselves: whose endeavor God
favors and furthereth: giving his grace unto them, which is far better
then all worldly riches, wealth, honor whatsoever: or delights and pleasures
most precious among the sons of men.

This saying: God resists the proud, but gives grace unto the humble:
either in the very same words: or in words of the same sense, is often
repeated: and it consists of two members: 1 That God resists the proud. 2
That he gives grace to the humble.

For the first, God resists the proud: David the princely Prophet avouches
the same: God says he will Psalm. 18.
save the poor people: but will cast down the proud looks. Which thing
Almighty God also rhreatneth against the obstinate and rebellious people by
his Prophet: the high look of man shall be humbled: and the Isai 2. Iere. 49.
16. 50. 24. 30. Ezec. 17.
loftiness of man shall be abased: and the Lord only shall be exalted in that
day. Ezechiel setting down the Parable of the two Eagles, whereby,
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and Iochoniah the king of Israel were meant:
which Nabuchodonosor abounding in power, riches, and a mighty kingdom, should
carry the other into captivity: and afterward should be plagued for his
oppression of the Church and people of God; comforting the Saints, the Prophet
tells them, that God would beat down the proud enemies of the Church, and
exalt her, which was low and despised, and says: All the trees of the field
shall know, that I the Lord have brought down the high tree, and exalted the
low tree: that I have dried up the green tree, and made the dry tree to
flourish: I the Lord have spoken it, and done it. In like manner entreating of
the fall of Zedechiah, and the captivity of Iehozadecke the Priest: in the
person Ezec. 21.
of GOD, the Prophet speaks: thus says the Lord God: I will take away the
Diadem, and take away the crown; (whereof the one might concern the priest,
the other the Prince.) I will take away the diadem, and take of the crown;
they shall be no more the same; I will exalte the base or humble, and abase him
that is high. And co^paring Pharao with the king of Assiriah for prosperity:
Ezech. 31.
and prophesying like destruction to them both: witnesses that God would abate
both their prides, and resist the insolency of their spirits. Nabuchodonosor
being cast down by God, and afterward exalted again; Daniel 4.
breaks forth into these words in Daniel the Prophet: Now therefore I
Nabuchodonosor, praise and extol, and magnify the King of heaven* whose
works are all truth, and his ways judgments, and those that walk in pride,
he is able to abate. The whole 10. chapter of Sirach tends Ecclus. 10.
almost to no other purpose, but to teach that God resists the proud.
Solomon the wise, king over Israel, avouches the same truth; and says, the
pride of a man Prou. 29.
shall bring him low: because God evermore resists the proud as the Apostle
teaches. Saint Peter has the very same sentence: deck your selves with
lowliness of 1. Pet. 5.
mind; for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. The
blessed virgin Marie in her song, Luke 1.
sings praise unto God, who had put down the mighty from their seat, and
exalted the humble and meek. Our Savior Christ says, that such as exalt
themselves Luke 14.
in their own pride, shall be abated and brought low. And the heathenish Megera
in Seneca says to Lycus: rule being proud in mind: and bear a lofty and
high stomach: Seneca in his traged.
for God follows at the back, the proud to punish them and resist them. Who
so through worldly desires therefore shall lift up themselves against God, must
look to have God to resist them, as an enemy, and with his mighty power to
withstand them: for the Scripture teaches, that God resists the proud. See
Cyprian. 1. lib. epist. 3. fol. 7.

Now how, and by what means does God resist the How God resists the proud.
proud? by many means and sundry.

1 He resists them by punishing them for their pride against him, as he did
the builders of the Turret of Babel, whose top should have reached to heaven;
if Genesis 11.
their purpose might have been effected. But God seeing the vanity of their
minds, the pride of their hearts, and the insolency of their spirits,
punished them with confusion of their language, that one could not understand
another, and so they were resisted. When Manasses was 2 Chro. 33. Daniel 4.
puffed up with pride, he was resisted by the punishment of God, who delivered
him up into captivity wherein he was humbled. Nabuchodonosor waxing proud of
his goodly and gorgious city which he had builte: was resisted by God through
punishments, for the Lord made him seven years to remain in the fields as a
beast, and bannished him the society of man.

So Jsai the prophet speaking against the proud Babilonians, Isai 13. 14. 13.
Iere. 29. v. 16. 50. v. 29. 30. Psa. 31. 18. v. 27.
brings in God threatening by punishments to resist them: I will visit the
wickedness upon the world, and their iniquity upon the wicked: and I will cause
the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and cast down the pride of tyraunts.
David mentions this way of resistance; the Lord preserves the faithful, and
abundantly rewards the wicked doer. Thus was the pride of Goliath resisted,
when God punished him by little David, who with his sling stone patted him on
the pate, cast him 1. Kings 17
to ground, and with his own svvorde cut of his head, and so abated the pride
and glory of the Philistines. Thus God resists the pride of Assure, by
bringing many punishments upon him, for his arrogancy and insolency of
spirit. Thus God punished the pride of Absalon and so resisted his seditious
enterprices, by hanging him by the 2. Kings. 16
hair of his head in a thicked.

Thus God resisted the pride of Antiochus, who in the hautinesse of his heart,
had threatened to make Jerusalem a common burial place for the Jews: but
immediately 2. Match. 9.
GOD smote him with an incurable disease in his bowels, vvherevvith till his
death he was tormented. So resisted he Herod Agrippa, who making on oration
to the people, vvhereat they cried, it is the voice of Acto. 12.
God, and not of man; he proudly chalenging this praise, was resisted by God,
by like punishments. Capaneus in Capaneus.
great pride, being one of the captains which besieged Thebes; said he would
besiege it in despite of GOD, whose pride God resisted by punishment; for a
thunder bo^^e as some say, or as other write, a stone from the wall fell upon
him and slew him. Finally, when Apryes king Apryes.
of Egypt had proudely said, that neither man nor God cold take his kingdom
from him; he was by the just punishment of god resisted, for he was choked and
so destroyed. Thus by sending punishments upon the proud; the Lord resists
them.

2. Sometimes he resists the proud, by hindering their purposes, by some
mean unlooked for. As when the proud king of Assiriah had intended the
destruction of Jerusalem, god resisted him, first in raising up Tirrhaka the
king of the Blackemores to fight against him, for 4. King. 19, Act. 4. 21.
which he departed; and afterward upon a second siege, by sending his Angel to
destroy his people: which when he saw, he departed and went to his own
country. In like manner was Saules proud and malicious heart a bated, 1.
Kings 23
who purposing the destruction of David: heard say by a messenger upon the
sudden, that the Philistines had invaded the land, for which cause he returned
from pursuing David, and so he was resisted.

3. God also resists the proud, when he turns their devises upon their
own necks: and makes them fall into the mischief and snares which they have
prepared for others. When Haman in intolerable pride had Esther 7. 9.
determined the destruction of the Jews, and had prepared a iubbet or gallows
for Mardocai; the Lord resisted his proud purpose, and caused him to be
hongevpon the same gallows, which he had prepared for another.

When the proud princes of the provinces of Babylon, had divised and
determined the death of Daniel, Daniel 6.
and by a false accusation had condemned him to the den of Lions; God
resisted their proud and malicious devise; and caused that the same Lions
devoured them, their wives and children; whom they had thought should have been
the death of Daniel.

When Cush one of Saules kinsmen had falsely accused Psalm. 7.
David: the man of god threateneth that God would in this wise resist him, and
therefore says: that he has made a pit, and himself was fallen thereinto:
and that his mischief should fall upon his own pate, and his cruelty upon
his own head. In another place shevving how Psalm. 9.
God resisted the wicked and proud men of the earth, by ouerthrovving them in
their own enterprises, and causing their own wicked and mischievous
devises to sall upon themselves: affirms that the Heathen were sunk down
in the pit that they made; and that their feet were taken in the same net
they had spredde for other.

Again witnessing that the wicked enterprises of Psalm. 34.
the proud should turn to their own destruction, the Prophet says;
wickedness and malice shall slay the wicked; and they which hate the righteous
shall perish. To that purpose is that saying: the wicked have drawn their
Psalm. 37. 57. 6. 94. 23.
sword, and bente their bow, to cast down the poor and needy; and to slay
such as are of an upright conversation: but their svvord shall enter into their
own hearts, and their bovves shall be broken. Therefore Solomon his son says:
he that diggeth a pit shall fall therinto: and he Prou 26. Ecclus. 27. v. 25,
26. 27.
that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him. To turn the wicked devises of
the proud upon their own pates; to make the mischiefs of the ungodly, to
light upon themselves: to bring the proud into the pit of perdition which
they have devised for other men: is a way whereby also god resists them.

4. Moreover GOD resists the proud, by confounding their councels,
enterprises and devises: as appears 2. Kings 17.
in proud Achittaphell and others. As in the invincible navy of the proud
Spaniardes (so they called Anno 1588.
it) sent against little England, so miraculously confounded, and in greatest
part destroyed by the mighty hand of God.

5. Neither thus only are the proud resisted, but also God resists the
proud by removing and taking away from them, the things whereof they have
bin proud: as he threatened the damsels of Israel, to take away all Jsai 3.
their bravery and excellent ornaments, because they were proud thereof.
Now some are proud of riches, as he that said to his soul; soul eat and
drink, and take Luke 12.
thy pleasure: for thou have much goods reposed for many years; him God
resisted, by removing him and his riches. Some are proud of beauty: whom God
resisted by sending sickness or other means to hinder and remove that from
them. Some are proud of their vvitte: those he resists by causing the^ to
fall either by palsies or such like, into doting folly. Some are proud of
their strength: which languishing sickness abateth. Some are proud of their
power: as Nabuchodonosor, Senecherib, Antiochus, Pompey, Alexander, and the
like: whom God resisted, partly by taking away life: partly by removing their
power wherein they trusted from them. Which thing Job insinuates; when Job 12.
he says that God loses the color of princes, and causes them to be girte
with a girdle: he leads away Princes as a pray, and overthrows the mighty:
he takes away speech from the counselor, and takes away the judgment of the
ancient: he powers contempt upon princes, and makes the strength of the
mighty weak. This God does not only to punish the people in the defects of
their Magistrates and Princes: but also when men are proud of any of their
gifts, they are resisted by losing the things whereof they are proud: and this
way does God also resist the proud not seldom.

6. God resists the proud also, when he turns their ambition and vain
glory into ignomie and shame: Esd. 1. 1. Macchab. 2. 62. 63. It is verified,
lib. 2. ca. 9. v. 5. 6. 7. etc. Isai 14. 11,
as is apparent by the priests, which seeing the office of the priests to be
in contempt, would have changed their estate by their names: and so called
themselves by strange names: who seeking their vvriting in the Geneologie by
the names they pretended, found them not, and therefore were deprived of their
offices.

Thus such as do ambitiously seek honor and glory; by the just judgment of
God lose both their offices oftentimes, and also their estimation with men: and
Pro. 16. 11. 2. 18.
so are they resisted. Solomon noting this kind of resisting, when God causes
a downfall into all misery, in them which were puffed up with pride, and
swelled in arrogancy of spirit: affirms, that pride goes before
destruction, and an high mind before the fall. Thus the fall follows their
ambitious exaltation; confusion, their vain glory; ignominy, their hautines
and arrogancy; and so they are resisted.

7 Finally, God resists the proud, in destroying their remembrance, and
cutting off their posterity from the earth, for their pride and wickedness.
Thereof the holy Psalm. 34. 37. 35. 36. Ecclus. 10. 21. 4.
Prophet David may be understood; The face of the Lord is against them which
do evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth. The wise Sirach says;
that god cutteth off the remembrance of the proud. Thus did God by Elias
threaten to resist Achab, by destroying him, and cutting off his posterity for
their pride and rebellion against 3. Kings 25
him.

When proud persons, therefore, think to make their names immortal, and seek
to make their houses and habitations to continue for ever, and call their
lands also Psalm. 49.
by their names: then (contrary to their expectation) to root out their
remembrance, is a mighty resistance of God against them. By these, and the
like ways the proud are resisted by God, and this place of the Apostle is
found true; God resists the proud.

Now as God resists the proud, so he gives grace unto the humble: which is
the other member of this sentence of the Apostle. Such as forsaking all worldly
things, addict themselves wholly unto him, to serve and worship him in
humilite: who cast the crown of their own wit, riches, wealth, glory, at the
feet of God, and prefer him before all creatures: These does God help; these
he furthereth; to them he gives increase, and greater measure of his grace;
as to those only, whom he looks unto: As by his Prophet Isai he records; To
whom should Isai 66.
I look, but to him that is poor, and of an humble and contrite heart, and
trembles at my words. These are they in whom he multiplieth his graces, and
furthereth with his favor, as our Apostle speaks: GOD resists the proud,
but gives grace to the humble. This song Anna the mother of Samuel, song in
her psalm of praise; The 1. Kings 2.
Lord raises up the poor out of the dunghill, to set him among the Princes,
and to make him inherit the seat of glory.

Whereunto holy Job agrees; The Lord sets up on high those that are low:
that the sorrowful may be exalted Job. 5.
to salvation. Solomon avouches the same truth; The pride of a man shall bring
him low; but the humble in spirit shall enjoy great glory. And what is the
glory of the humble? is it not the increase of the graces of God here, Pro. 29.
and the recompense of our humility in the life to come? S. Peter uses the
same words which S. James here gives out; God resists the proud, but gives
grace to the humble. 1. Pet. 5.
In many of the former cited places, both members are in one sentence
expressed: that as god resists the proud; so he gives grace to the humble.
These he blesses with plentiful benefits: to these he gives a greater
measure of his holy spirit; to these he shows his loving favor and mercy
in ample manner; these he daily ladeth with greater and greater blessings from
his hand; these he mightily exalts of his fatherly goodness; and thus shows,
or gives he grace unto the humble. Which thing Chylo the heathen Philosopher
(perchance) meant, who being asked Chylo.
what god Iubiter did, answered; he casts down high things, and exalts
the things which are low.

This thing is manifest in Moses, who being of an humble spirit, and walking
lowly before the Lord, received grace many ways from God. David being humble
in spirit, was therefore taken from the flock of sheep, to rule the people of
the Lord. Elizabeth the mother of John B. and Anna the mother of Samuel, Marie
the virgin, and mother of Christ, serving God in their humility, received
grace, and plentiful favor from the hands of God. Finally, the Lord
increases his blessings; multiplieth his graces, enlarges his promises,
extends his favorable countenance to those, which setting aparte all
worldly things: cleave immoueablie unto him; according to this place of the
Apostle; God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble.

Almighty God therefore has his two hands outstretched: the one, wherewith as
with a mallet, or hammer, he bruiseth, and beats down the proud: the other,
wherewith he pours out his plentiful graces upon the humble: the one,
wherewith he resists, and withstandeth those, who through love of worldly
things, rebel against him: the other, wherewith he favorably entreteth, and
greatly enlarges such, as renouncing worldly vanities, cleave unto him in
humility of their minds. Seeing then this is true, let us cast down our proud
looks, and horns, which are set up on high: and let us with all humble
reverence cleave unto the Lord, that he may increase his heavenly graces in us:
for he resists the proud, but gives grace unto the humble. And this I take
to be the plain meaning of the Apostle in these two verses.

Notwithstanding, if any be of an other opinion, I contend not: Every one may
abound in his own sense to edification. For some expound it, as I have said,
thus; Think you that the Scripture says in vain; the Spirit that dwells
in you, lusts after envy? do you think that the Scripture teaches, that
we are stirred up to envy by Gods spirit? is his spirit a spirit of envy,
of quarrelling, of contention? The spirit of God which dwells in you, and
whereby you are sealed up to the day of redemption, Ephesians 4
moves you not thereunto: but rather the spirit of Satan, which was a
murderer from the beginning; who is also that envious man, which sows
sedition, debates, John 8.
contentions, braules and broiles, hartburning, and all mischief, in the
hearts of men. If you think thus, you Mat. 13.
are deceived, for the Scripture offers more grace: and therefore says; God
resists the proud, etc. Whereby, as by a reason of contraries, he proves
that Gods spirit is not cause of contentions, which come of pride: because he
resists the proud and contentious, and gives grace to the humble.

Some others expound it in this wise; Think you that the Scripture says in
vain, The spirit that dwells in you lusts after envy? Think you that
the Scripture says in vain, That Gods spirit in you is jealous; that it
enuyeth that you should love any other; that you should give your selves to the
love of the world? Nay, the Scripture says not that in vain: For the Spirit
of God is a ielous Spirit, and takes in evil part, that you should forsake
him, to love the world: he enuieth, that any part of your love should be
derived from him, to creatures: seing-you are commanded to love him, with all
your hearts, strength, power, might, and all that is in you.

And if you say, it is hard not at all to desire worldly things, and cleave
wholly to God; I deny it not: yet God gives more grace unto you, whereby you
shall be able to do this. They which thus expound it, (as many do,) leave out
this whole sentence; God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.
These being the common expositions, and fathered upon the best Authors:
thereof, that which most agrees with the circumstance of the place, (as me
thinks the first does) let it run for the most currante. And thus much
touching these verses, and the first part of this Chapter. Now let us pray, etc.

James Chap. 4. verses 7. 8. Sermon 19.
Verse 7 Submit your selves to God, resist the devil, and he will fly from
you.

8 Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you: cleanse your hands, ye
sinners, and purge your hearts, ye double minded.


These words contain the second thing in this Chapter, touching our duty to
God. Which consists of 2. things. 1. Submissio^ to god: wherein three things
are noted. Namely: 1 What be commands: to The second place or part of the
Chapter.
submit our selves to God. 2. The contrary: to resist the devil. 3. The
reason why: that he might fly from us.
2. Approaching and drawing nere to God: wherein three things are to be
considered. Namely, 1. What he commands: to draw near to God. 2. What he
promises to such as do so: that god will draw near to them. 3. How it is
done. 1. By cleansing of hands. 2. By purging of hearts.




THe holy Apostle James, having now ended the first part of the Chapter,
concerning contention, which in the end of the former he had spoaken of; and
set down the causes of contentions: the lusts and desires of men, fighting in
their members: and rendered the reasons and causes why men's desires are
oftentimes without effect: and finally, answered the objection, which might
have concerning that matter, been made against him: In the second place he
comes to our duty to God ward: which thing the Apostle opposes to the
other vices before mentioned: showing that as in contention, envy, ambitious
and fleshly desires men follow the suggestions of Satan: so ought they now to
obey God, and resist Satan the general enemy of all mankind: and that with
sure and certain hope of victory: and finally to draw near unto God in
integrity, innocence, and purity of their life. Whereunto these two verses
serve.

Now our duty to God is here set down in two things, in submitting our
selves to God, and drawing Submission to God.
near unto him.

Concerning submission to God; therein three things are to be noted. 1. what is
enjoined. 2. the contrary. 3. the reason.

1. The thing enjoined is submission to God: then which nothing is or can be
more acceptable or pleasant unto him: nothing more commendable among men. For
what does God better accept of, then of our holy obedience unto him? this is
more acceptable to God, then sacrifice, this is more pleasant then the fat of
rams. This 1. Kings 15.
duty men are necessarily to perform unto God, and unto his son Jesus
Christ; to whom they are betrothed, as to an husband.

God witnesses by Ose his Prophet, that he had married the Saints unto
himself, in the words which he uttered unto his chosen people; I have married
thee unto my Ose 2. Isai 54. 5. Ier. 31. 32. 2. Cor. 21.
self in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord. The Church is espoused
unto Jesus Christ: therefore saint Paul says; I have prepared you for one
husband, to present you as a pure virgin unto Christ. Therefore, as the Spouse
and married wife, owes her subjection, submission, and obedience unto him,
whose wife she is; and in all honesty, duetifulnesse ought to apply her self
to the will of her husband: even so ought the Church and Saints of God in all
duetifull obedience to submit themselves to God, and his son Jesus Christ.
For this cause Saint Ephe. 5.
Paul instituteth and makes a large comparison betwixt the wife and the
Church: Christ, and the husband: that by the mutual collation of the Church,
and the married wife: and the anologicall proportion betwixt them: both the wife
might learn obedience to her husband, and the Church and Saints, their
subjection to God. Whose only word, must be the rule of our whole life: whose
will in all things we must obey. To whose commandment we must be applyable:
which is our reverend submission unto God.

Laying therefore aside all envy, malice, contention, wrath, indignation,
fighting, quarrelling: Whereunto we are moved by the contentious spirit of
Satan: we must in all humility of our minds submit our selves unto God, as
the Apostle exhorts: Submit your selves to God.

Men submit themselves unto God, diverse ways. 1 In How are men subject to
God. 1
obediently and reverently yielding themselves to his word and will, in
hearing what he commands: and carefully perfourming, what he inioyneth. For
as the son is subject to his father: and the servant submits himself to
his master, then when the son hears and obeys the will of his father,
and the servant of his master: even so the Saints of God are subject to God,
and submit themselves to him, when they obey the will and commandment of God:
which thing undone, we submit not our selves to him, but rebel against him.
Wherefore as all the Prephets, so Isai chiefly, in Isai. 1. Ezech. 20. 8.
the person of God, calls Israel the people of GOD, rebels against him, in
that they neglected his commandments.

Almighty God in like manner, measures our submission Mal. 2.
by our obedience, confessing that we have cast off his Lordly and fatherly
yoke: where we deny him honorable obedience, as unto a father: and fearful
reverence, as to a master. All the Prophets, our Savior Christ: Steven the
martyr: the blessed Apostles, have condemned the Israelites and Jews as a
rebellious people, in that they would not obey his word: and therein chiefly
show their submission. Now the will of God what is it, but our
sanctification: that we should abstain ^. These. 4.
from fornication: that every one might know how to possess his vessel in
holiness and honor? And wherein is our obedience to him showed? Is it not in
the purity of our life? As obedient children says Peter, fashion not your
selves unto the former lusts of your ignorance, but as he that has called
you is holy: ^. Pet. 1.
so be ye holy in all conversation, because it is written, be ye holy, for I
am holy.

If then our submission to God show it self in the obedience to his will and
word: then neither idolatours, neither cursed covetous persons, neither
filthy fornicatours, neither pestilent usurers, neither blasphemous swearers,
neither bitter backebiters, neither cruel extorcioners, neither violent
oppressors, neither proud Peacockes, neither bloody murderers, neither
shameful liars, neither beastly drunkards, neither deceitful dealers: neither
any such like, of the rabblement and route of the wicked, submit themselves to
God: but rather therein rebel against him.

2 As by obeying his will, men submit themselves unto God: so by yielding
themselves to Gods pleasure to do with them after his will: men submit
themselves unto him. Thus the three children, yeeldinng themselves to the
pleasure of God, either to deliver them, or not to deliver them from the fiery
furnace: submitted themselves Daniel 3.
to him. David the king of Israel submitted himself to God in like manner,
when he says: If I have 2. King. 15.
found favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again into the
City, and show me the Arc and Tabernacle thereof: But if he say I have no
delight in thee: behold here I am, let him do with me as seems good in his
eyes.

Our Savior Christ was subject, and submitted him self to God: when he
yielded himself applyable to the Mat. 26. 1. Pet. 4. 1
pleasure of his father, concerning the drinking of the bitter cup of his
passion: Father take from me this cup, if it be possible: but if this cup
can not pass away, but I must drink thereof, thy will be done. So when in
all our temporal estate, for honor, orignominie on earth: when for health, or
sickness: when for children, or for other things whatsoever, we yield our
selves wholly and obediently unto God: when we freely and voluntarily abide his
pleasure therein: when without grudging or groyning: muttering or murmuring:
Matt. 6.
we can pray as our Savior teaches: Thy will be done in earth, as it is in
heaven: when we prescribe not to God, either time: or place, or manner, or
mean, or measure in any thing, but subscribe wholly and in all things unto
him: then submit we our selves unto GOD: but if we otherwise do: then
submit we not our selves to God, but rebel against him.

3 Neither thus only submit men themselves vn-God, but also when they bear
with patience the cross which the Lord lays upon them, then submit men
themselves to God. Thus the holy Prophets afflicted of the princes and people:
thus our Savior Christ reuyled, slaundered, falsely accused, cruelly executed
by the Jews: thus holy Job: spoiled of the Ismaelites, or Sabeans, robbed of
the Caldeans, tempted of Satan, vprayded of his wife, condemned of his
friends: the Apostles suffering manifold injuries of the adversaries of the
gospel: Finally, the holy martyrs, and all Gods Saints suffering with patience
manifold afflictions, and bearing willingly the cross imposed and laid upon
them: thereby submitted themselves unto God: Whereunto the Apostle here
exhorts: Submit your selves unto god, which is the thing which the Apostle
commands: and the first thing in the first point of our duty observed.

2 The next thing in this first part of duty is the contrary: we must
submit our selves to God: but we must resist the devil: which thing the holy
Apostle Saint Peter in like manner commends unto us: be sober 1. Pet. 5.
and watch: for your adversary the devil like a roaring lion, goes about,
seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast in the faith. To this
purpose not altogether impartinently serves that of Saint Paul: be angry and
sin not: let not the Sun go down upon Ephe. 4.
your wrath: neither give place to the devil. Which thing had Euah our great
grandmother learned: which lesson had she conc^yued: to have resisted and
withstoode the subtle s^eights of Satan the devil, who egged her to
disobedience to God, and drew from her submission to him: she had not tasted
of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.
whereby she plunged herself and all her posterity into perdition. Had the
Israelites learned to have resisted the devil, when by the beauty of the
daughters of Moab he Number. 25.
tempted them: they had not burnt in lust, neither committed fornication with
them, where by the wrath of god was provoked, and they therefore destroyed. Had
the men of the first world rmembred to have resisted Satan, when with carnal
pleasure they were tempted: they had not Gene. 6. 7.
caused the doors and windows of heaven to open, and pour down water upon
them, whereby they and all the world was drowned. Had the Sodomites been
hereof Gene. 19.
mindful (as no doubt they were taught by Lot the preacher of righteousness)
when they burnt in unnatural lust one with the other: they had not so sore
offended, as thereby to call fire and brimstone from heaven, by which they
perished. Had Absalon remembered to have resisted Satan, when by ambition he
pricked him on to rebel against 2. Kin. 15. 16.
his own father David the Lords anointed: he had not endeavored to have
thrust him from his royal seat of honor, neither had he taken sword in
hand against David, the cause of his just destruction. Had Judas the traitor
learned to resist the devil, when he put into Mat. 26. John 18.
his mind for lucre to betray his master: he had not for that sin fallen
into despair, wherein he was his own hangman, the testimony of his
everlasting damnation. If the rebels in the north, not long since, and the
villainous traitors now of late, with the traitorous conspiratours fresh in
memory, had learned and endeavored to resist the devil, when to shed
innocent blood: when to depose the Lords annnointed, Elizabeth by the grace of
God, our sovereign Lady and Queen of England, France and Ireland: to bring
in foreign nations, to set up a murderer of her husband, and the only cause
of many miseries and mischiefs, both here and elsewhere in like manner: to
endeavor the utter calamity and final destruction of their native soil and
Country, they were by him solicited and moved: neither had their bodies
been dismembered, (too gentle a punishment for so heinous iniquity:) neither
their souls endaungered to damnation, as theirs were all, which died in final
impenitencie. Had we our selves, men and women, learned to resist the devil:
when now by pride: now by ambition: now by covetousness: now by extortion:
now by adultery: now by envy: now by one iniquity, now by another, by
him we are tempted to rebel against GOD: then should we not by committing
these and the like sins, so justly open the mouths of our Prophets and
preachers, to thunder out the heavy judgment of God against us, and our
Country: neither should we be subject to so many strange and new diseases, as
the punishment of our new sins: as reign and abound among us from year to
year.

Wherefore, both to avoid many mischiefs and miseries in our common and
temporal life: and also to fly the danger of future calamity, and
everlasting damnation to come: we must evermore remember the exhortation which
is given us, and hold fast the admonition of the Apostle: Resist the devil.
Who being the ancient enemy of mankind, seeks by all means to draw us
from the love and embracing of GOD, and to couple us in love and league with
himself: therefore ought we to oppose our selves unto him as to our mortal
enemy, and withstand all carnal lusts; all fleshly desires, all wordly
prouokements as the instruments of Satan: that having peace with men without
contention: and performing reverent obedience to God, without rebellion; we may
rise up against the devil; and in all things resist him, as we are exhorted.

Now satan the devil is sundry wise resisted of men. How satan is resisted.
First, by faith in Jesus Christ, wherewith we armed, stand fast without
wavering, and thereby resist the assaults of satan the devil. S. Paul arming
men against all spiritual 1. Cor. 16.
assaults by satan and his ministers, and preparing them to the spiritual
battle with the devil and his members, exhorts them to stand fast in the
faith; whereby especially our spiritual enemies are beaten back, resisted and
put to flight: watch says he, stand fast in the faith; acquit you like me^,
be strong. S. Paul calls faith the spiritual shield, whereby Ephesians. 6.
we are able to bear of, and quench the fiery darts of the devil: therefore
exhorting men to put on the whole armor of god, he wills them chiefly to
take unto them the shield of faith, that thereby they may quench the fiery
darts of the devil. The Apostle Peter preparing us, and 1. Pet. 5. 1. John 5.
4 12. Reu. 11.
arming us against satan, wills us to resist him by faith: be sober, says
he, and watch, for your adversary the devil goes about seeking whom he may
devour; whom resist steadfast in the faith. For which cause S. Augustine
attribubuteth Lib. 3. c. 20 de lib. ar. bitrio. S. Basil in psalm. 32.
this effect unto faith, that it vanquished, overcomes and resists the
devil. S. Basil upon Psalm. 32. What man is able to wage war with the
devil, unless he fly to the help of the Captain of the host? therehence
therefore through our faith in him, we wound and thrust through our enemy.
When ^atan then assaulteth with any temptation, there is no way better to
resist him, then by trusting perfectly in the grace of God, which is 1. Pet. 1.
brought unto us by the revelation of Jesus Christ: and to be assured that
seeing we are marked with the seal of Ephesians. 4. 2. Corin. 1. John 10.
the spirit for the sheep of Christ: therefore we cannot be plucked out of
his hands; that since our names are written in the book of life, therefore we
cannot perish for ever, by the temptation of Satan: that in as much as we are
chosen by God and predestinate from everlasting Romans 8.
of the mere favor of God, to be conformable to the image of Christ;
therefore no creature, in heaven above, or in earth beneath: nor in any
infernal place: no not Satan himself, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. This assurance of our hope; this
persuasion of our faith; this certainty of our salvation; if we hold out
before satan without wavering; we shall in his temptations resist him: and thus
by faith is he resisted.

2. As we resist him by faith, so also we resist him by prayer: when in our
manifold temptations we fly by prayer unto God for succor, against the
devil our ancient enemy: when in the midst of the greatest assaults of
satan, we run for strength unto God, who is the defense; the protector,
shield and delivery of his people: and by whom all they which trust in him,
do not only tread down men their enemies, but satan himself, the adversary
of all the sons of God, by which means the assaults of satan are expelled.
This way of resisting the Mat. 6.
devil, our Savior Christ commends unto men, when he wills us among other
things to pray for deliverance from all evil, and temptations of the enemy:
lead us not into temptations, but deliver us from evil.

Saint Paul setting down the parts of our spiritual Ephesians. 6.
armor, which being put on and first girte and buckled about us, we shall be
able to withstand our adversary the devil: after the girding of our loins
with verity, the putting on the breast plate of righteousness, and the shooing
of our feet with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, and the taking in
hand of the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, the sword of the
spirit, which is the word of GOD: he joins unto all these, prayer;
wherevvith satan is also repelled. And experience teaches the saints of God,
that if when they are assaulted by satan, they give themselves inco^tinently
to prayer, then is the devil forthwith repelled and resisted. For God is
near to those that call upon him, and will fulfill the desire of them that
fear him, and deliver them: wherefore when soever we are tempted by satan to
any Psalm. 145.
kind of wickedness: whether it be by covetousness to riches, or ambition to
honor, or envy to murder, or concupiscence to adultery, or malice to
slander, or intemperancie to gluttony, or any other sin to iniquity: let
us incontinently fly to God for help by prayer, that we may over come these
temptations, and resist the devil our enemy. Thus have the holy Fathers in
former times; thus have the Saints of God in all ages; thus must we resist the
devil in like manner, if we will submit our selves obediently unto God.

3. Moreover the saints resist the devil, when they See Cyprian fol. 246.
earnestly give themselves over to the study of virtue, and practice of
godliness, serving the Lord in righteousness and true holiness of life.
Hereby all entry, to satan, is shut up; hereby all holes of our hearts are
stopped, so that he cannot invade us. Wherefore it is called by Paul a breast
plate, which he exhorts all men in the encountering Ephesians. 6. 2. 2. Cor. 6. 7.
with the devil to put on, put ye on the breast plate of righteousness:
which is not meant only of the imputed righteousness of Christ, but also of
the inherent righteousness, which flows there fro, and is wrought in us by the
spirit of sanctification: and this righteousness may be called a breast plate
very well, and in a just comparison.

For as a breast plate defends the heart, the liver, the intrels and vital
parts of man: which being wounded, man falls down and perished: so does
sincerity, vprightnes, and holiness of life, keep the mind, the heart, the
conscience from invasion of satan; so that his fiery darte cannot wound us with
infidelity, want of conscience, coldness of religion, wickedness of life,
corruption in conversation, or any the like iniquity, wherewith man stricken is
greatly endaungered.

Wherefore as bodily soldiers, by their breast plates of iron, steel or such
like defensed, boldly and with courage withstand and resist their bodily
enemies: even so do the spiritual soldiers, who fight under the displayed
banner of Jesus Christ, armed with this breast plate of righteousness, with
invincible courage and fortitude resist satan the devil, the spiritual enemy
of mankind.

Seeing then we have not to fight only with flesh Ephesians. 6.
and blood, but much rather with principalities and powers, yea with the
prince of the darkness of this world, and with all spiritual wickedness in
heavenly things; it greatly stands us upon; to put on the breast plate of true
holiness and righteousness of life, that thereby our enemy the devil may
bekepte out, put of, repelled and resisted; yea put to flight also, and finally
dispatched: and this is done by the careful study of good works, and the
painful practice of true godliness.

Now as satan by sincerity and integrity of life is withstood and resisted: so
by loosenes and licenciousnes of the flesh, by lewdenes of our life, by
iniquity and ungodliness, he is animated, fleshed, and enboldned daily to tempt
and to assault us; foreseeing in us, an inclination to any wickedness, thereof
he blows the bellows and kindles the flame, thereunto he provoke,
stirs us up, and daily pricketh forward, till he have cast us down
headlong into the bottomless pit of final perdition: thus all covetous,
lecherous, luxurious, wanton, proud, and Romans 6.
wicked persons, falling away from grace, from virtue, from godliness: giving
their members as instruments of unrighteousness to iniquity; are so far
from resisting satan, as that they help and promote his kingdom in them, and
suffer him to rule, reign, and rage over them at his pleasure. But let all
those before whose eyes is the fear of God, in whose hearts Christ dwells
by faith, who will be thought to perform their reverent submission unto
GOD, put on the new man Ephesians. 3.
created after God, in holiness and righteousness of life, that they may be
able to stand fast in the day of their Ephesians. 4.
temptation, and in all things resist the devil, as we are exhorted.

4. Satan is besides this, resisted of the saints, when we oppose the law and
commandment, the will and the 2. Cor. 6. 7. Ephesians. 6. Heb. 4. 12. 1. Revel. 16.
word of God, to his suggestions and wicked temptations. And this is also a
part of the spiritual armor and heavenly harness, wherewith Saint Paul
would have us armed in this dangerous combat and conflict with the devil:
this is the svvorde of the spirit, which is the word of God: hereby satan is
kept of, as a man keeps his enemy at the point of his sword. This wise did
our holy and most blessed Savior Christ resist satan Mat. 4
when he tempted him; and kept him of that he could not hurt him: as when the
devil moved Christ for want of bread in the wilderness; to turn stones into
bread: Christ drew out the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God,
against him: and said, it is written, man shall not live by bread only, but
by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. When satan tempted
Deuteronomy. 8
him to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the temple, because God had
given his angels charge over him, Psalm. 91.
to keep him in their hands, least he dash his foot against a stone: Christ
drew out the svvorde again, and vvithstoode him; it is written, thou shall
not tempte the Lord thy God: when finally he tempted Christ with promise Deuteronomy.
6.
of all the kingdoms of the world to fall down and worship him: by the same
sword he resisted; Avoid satan, for it is written, thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and Deuteronomy. 6. and 10
him only shall thou serve.

Now then as our master and head captain Christ resisted the devil in his
own person: by the same means must we also resist him, when either by
himself, or by his ministers we shall be assaulted to wickedness. Wherefore if he
tempt us to malice, hatred, envy, oppression, injury; let us dravv the svvord
of the spirit against him, and say, it is written, thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self* Leuit. 19.
If he tempt us to uncleanness of the flesh, fornication, adultery, chambering
and vvantonnes, let us resist him with thi^ sword, it is written; Fornicators
and adulterers the Lord Heb. 13.
will judge: yea although we shroude and shadow it never so secretly; though
we keep and cover the matter never so cunningly; though we hide it never so
curiously. If he tempt us to steal, resist him with this; It is written, thou
shall not steal. If he move us to lying, let us Exodus 20.
draw out this sword against him; thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor. If he move us to pride, then let us say, it is written; God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. If he tempt us to
blasphemy, let us resist him, with it is written; Thou shall not take the 1.
Pet. 5.
name of the Lord thy God in vain, for he will not hold him giltlesse, that
takes his name in vain. If he tempt Exodus 20.
us to usury, draw out this sword of the spirit, this word of God, it is
written; thou shall not give to usury unto thy Deuteronomy. 23.
brother, usury of money, usury of meat, or of any thing which is put to
usury: which who so does, shall not dwell in the Lords tabernacle, nor rest
upon his holy mountain. Psalm. 15.
If we be tempted to deceit, and sraudulent dealing, let us resist by this, it
is written; let no man oppress, or deceive 1 Thessalonians. 4.
his brother in bargaining, for the Lord is a judge of such things. If he move
us to dronkennes, remember it is written; 1. Cor. 6
the dronkard shall not inherit the kingdom of God and of Christ. If he move
us to disloyalty, and disobedience to Princes, let us resist him with that of
Paul; let every 1. Cor. 6 Romans 13.
soul be subject to the higher powers: for there is no power but of God: and
who so resists power, resists the ordinance of God, and shall receive unto
themselves condemnation. If he solicit us to unnaturalness to our parents, let
us drive him back, and say, it is written; honor Exodus 20. Ephesians. 6.
thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long up pon the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee. If he move us to slander, and backbiting; if he
move us to bribery and corruption; if he move us to false judgment; if he move
us to filthy talk and ribaldrie; if he move us to wastfulnes and
prodigality: finally, to what sin or iniquity soever he moves us, we must
resist him with this; we are by God commanded the contrary. And thus shall we
have him always at a bay; thus shall we keep him still at swords point; and
thus shall we resist him that he hurt us not,

5 To conclude, this our enemy is resisted by the aid of Gods spirit, and by
the presence of his power, whereby we subdue our enemies: therefore are we
exhorted to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: therefore is
the spirit of power, the spirit of might, the Ephesians. 6. Luke 10. 18. Isai 11.
spirit of wisdom, the spirit of strength, the spirit of fortitude, the
spirit of boldness, promised the Church: that by the help thereof, not only
our mortal enemies, but our ghostly adversaries, might be resisted.

By these or the like ways, ought all the saints of god to oppose themselves to
Satan, and resist the devil, as they are admonished: thus should Adam and
Euah; thus should the men of the first world; thus should the Sodomites; thus
should the Israelites; thus should David; thus should Solomon; thus should the
Jews; thus should Judas have resisted, when by satan they were solicited, and
stirred up to wickedness: thus finally, must all Gods servants resist him, if
they will perform true submission unto God. Very well therefore admonishes
S. Cyprian, fol. 196. de zelo and liuore.

3 The precept, and the contrary being thus set down, the third thing in
this former part of duty, is the reason of the contrary: why we should
oppose our selves unto Satan, and set our selves to resist him. Which reason
is drawn from hope of victory: if we thus, and by all means resist him, then
he flies from us; then is he put to flight, repelled, and put back. Resist the
devil, and he will fly from you: that they may put Satan to flight, and
triumph victoriously over him, men ought by all means to resist him.

Satan, the devil, is of a dastardly and cowardly nature; fierce and
furious against the fearful: but flies away from such as withstand and
resist him. Saint Barnard 1. Epistle.
says to this purpose truly of him; The enemy more willingly pursues thee
flying, the^ sustaineth thee resisting: and more audaciouslie and boldly
follows at the back, then resists to the face. Wherefore he may very
worthily be compared and resembled to the Crocodile: who (as it is Crocodile.
affirmed) flies away when a man turns boldly unto him: but follows very
fiercely, when he is not resisted. So Satan, that old dragon, that cruel
crocodile, flies when he is resisted: but follows us hardly when we give
place unto him. Seeing men to withstand him by strong faith, earnest prayer,
true holiness, the sword of Gods Spirit, (which is the word of God) and by the
aid of the power and Spirit of God he flies: wherefore we having this hope
of victory over him, we ought to be encouraged to resist him.





He is therefore like a malicious and professed enemy, who oftentimes put to
the soil, and overcome; driven See Luke 4. 13
out of the field, and put to flight: yet, so long as he lives, he is always
rising and resisting: daiely preparing new force, to give a fresh battle: Even
so Satan, bearing a tyrannous hatred, and malicious mind against the sons
of God, by whom (through Gods resisting grace) repelled, and driven back often,
yet ever and anon renueth his battle, and gives new assaults unto us.

Neitheir is his subtlety altogether unlike the order of Players; who having
for a time spoken, for a time again void the Stage, and go out: disguize
themselves, and change their apparel, and so at length come in again, as if
they were others: so satan sometimes leaves the stage of temptations, and
departs from us for a season: in the mean time he 2. Cor. 11.
disguiseth himself, and changes (as it were) his apparel, and transformeth
himself, even as it were into an angel of light, and enters the place again,
as if he were some other, and then plaieth a new part and prize to deceive us.

Finally, as the beast Camelion turns it self into all Camelion.
forms and fashions: so this great beast, the devil and satanas, changes
himself into a thousand shapes, and ten thousand fashions: with all wilines,
falshoode, lying wonders, all craftines, and spiritual wickedness in high
places; assaulting and assailing men, to draw them to iniquity: In all which
conflicts, the Apostle exhorts us to resist him. To which endeavor he
promises assured victory; resist the devil, and he shall flee from you. This
must be our comfort in this dangerous skirmige; this must be our encouragement
in this fearful conflicte; this must persuade us, neither to fear nor faint;
neither quinche nor quail in this spiritual battle; seeing prosperous
success, and certain victory is promised. And this is the first point of our
duty and submission to GOD, with the things therein contained.

As our obedience to God stands in submitting of our selves to him: so also
it stands in our drawing nee^ unto him in like manner: whereof Saint James
says; draw 2. part of our duty to God.
near to God, and he will draw near to you: cleanse your hands ye sinners,
and purge your hearts ye double minded. In which words 3. things are to be
noted. 1 What he commands. 2 What he promises. 3. How we shall perform the
thing he enioyneth.

1 Touching the commandment, and the precept enjoined, it is; draw near to
God. That we are commanded to draw near unto God, does it not insinuate unto
us, that naturally we are estranged and alienated from god? which is by sin,
originally drawn from Adam, and actually Isai 59. 5. Ierem. 25.
committed by our selves, as the Prophet of the Lord avouches to Israel; your
iniquities have separated betwixt you and your God: and your sins have hid
his face from you, that he will not hear you.

Saint Paul entreating of this natural seperatio^ from God, writes in this
wise; Wherefore remember that ye Ephesians. 2.
being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, and called uncircumcision of them
which are called circumcision in the flesh, (that is, the Jews) that you were
(I say) at that time without Christ, alients from the commonwealth of Israel;
strangers from the covenants of promise: and had no hope, and were without God
in the world. And a little after, describing the lives of the Gentiles, as they
were naturally given, Ephesians. 4.
not called, nor reformed, not regenerate by the spirit of God: he witnesses
the same, and says; This I say therefore, and witness in the Lord, that ye
henceforth walk not (as other Gentiles) in the vanity of their minds,
having their understanding darkened, and being strangers from the life of God:
Strangers from the life of god, whereby God lives in his Saints; whereby, the
alienation, and divorce from God by Adam; and the breach and separation betwixt
God and mankind, by our prime parents, and first father committed; is
intimated unto us. Seeing then men are thus fallen away from God, the Apostle
exhorts them to remember themselves, and come again to God, and so draw
near unto him.

Which exhortation is very necessary to all men, in as much as all men daily
fall away from God. For if me^ daily separate themselves, and sequester
themselves, falling away, and making a divorce from God: some by horrible
idolatry in religion; some by shameful corruption in conversation; some by
impenitencie of their hearts; some by adultery in their lives; some pu^t up in
mind; some burning and boiling in hateful malice toward their brethren;
some by blasphemy against God; some by iniquity against men; some by slander
of their tongue; some by lies of their lips; some by cruel oppression; some
by cut sed covetousness; some by one wickedness, some by another: is it not
needful that we be taught to lay aside these things, and renew a league with
God? Which thing, (as a part of christian duty) the Apostle here persuades
us; draw near therefore (says he) to God.

2 To which short precept is set down a like promise: draw near to God, and
he will draw near to you. Which promise is as a reason to move us to draw
near to God. Wherein the loving kindness of God, and his merciful affection
to mankind appears who has no delight in unreconcilable hatred: neither
pleasure in the death and destruction of men, which by withdrawing themselves
from God, they purchase: but would rather they Ezech. 18. and 33.
should draw near unto him, and live. He is ready to offet himself, and is
pressed and at hand to all such as return and come near unto him: to make them
to feel the comfort of his presence, which draw near to him, and seek him
with their whole heart. Which thing Moses the great prophet of God published
and preached unto Deuteronomy. 4.
Israel; protesting unto them, that if from their idolatries and iniquities
committed against him, they would seek the Lord their God, they should find
him: if they sought him with their whole heart. Thus is God found of them
which seek him; near unto them, which draw near unto him. So God promises
to turn unto those which turn unto him: this being an unspeakable and
incomparable Zachar. 1.
benefit, to have God favorable, pressed, ready, and at hand, and to draw near
unto us; and is compassed and brought to pass by our drawing near to God:
shall not the promise allure us to the performing of the precepte, and his
drawing near to us, move us to draw near unto him?

Where Saint James promises, that God will draw near to us, if we draw
near unto him: we must not think, that our drawing near unto God, is the
first moving cause, to provoke and stir up God to draw near unto us, as
preventing him, and moving him first to love, and then his grace should
follow us: For it is apparent by manifest testimonies of God, that Gods grace
Ier. 31. 18. Lament. 5. 21. Romans 11. 35. Philip. 2. 13. 1. Ioh. 4. 10
does prevent us: as Jeremy the Prophet plainly avouches: and Saint Paul
willingly, both to the Romans, and also to the Philippians confesses: and
Saint John the blessed Apostle in his first Canonical Epistle subscribeth, the
Prophet confessing the beginning of repentance: Saint Paul the inclination of
the will: Saint John the original of all duty to be from God: who first
moves us and inclines our minds to all manner of goodness. But this
Apostle teaches, that neither God himself, neither his heavenly grace,
leaves us at any time, unless we stubbornely alienate our selves from him,
and fall from our duty unto his divine majesty: yea his grace mightily
follows all those which endeavor in holy fear to draw near unto him:
wherefore he says, draw near unto God, and God will draw near unto you.

God may be said to draw near unto man diverse How God draws near to men.
ways. 1 By the manifestation of his Majesty, as to Moses, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and others, both Patriarchs, and Prophets he drew near, when he
made his Majesty known unto them. Exodus 33, verse 23 24. ver. 1. Exodus 3. 2,

2 He draws near also unto man, by the revelation of his will, which thing
publishing and opening unto men, thereby he draws near unto them, as of all
Nations he drew nearest thus to Israel his people, to whom he gave his law
and statutes, whereby he became familiar unto them.

3 By the graces of his spirit, which imparting unto men, he draws near
thereby unto them. Wherefore Christ speaking of the sending of his spirit unto
his disciples, John 14.
calls it his coming unto them, because by the gifts and graces thereof,
he draws near unto Mat. 28. ^0.
the Saints. I will not leave you comfortless, but I will come unto you: not
by bodily presence before the judgment, but by the graces of his spirit,
whereby he draws near daily to his Church. Thus he drew near unto the
Apostles, when in the day of Pentecost Acts 2.
he sent his Spirit in visible manner and form unto them.

4 God draws near to men, by pouring out his temporal benefits upon them,
health, wealth, honor: and sending them deliverance out of their trouble:
Thus he drew near to Israel, whereof Moises speaks: What nation is so
great, whom the gods come Deuteronomy 4. Phil. 4. 5. Psalm. 69. 18 s Psalm. 119. 151
34. 13. 46. 1.
so near unto them, as the Lord our God is near us in all that we call unto
him for? Thus he drew near to Moises, Israel, David, Hezekiah, and the like.

5 God draws near unto man, in offering his mercy, showing his favor,
assisting with his help, multiplying his loving kindness unto them.

6 God finally draws near unto us, in a spiritual union with man, through
the incarnation of Jesus Christ, whereby God is united unto us, and we to him,
in the union of the two natures in the person of Jesus Christ: by which mean
God dwells among us, and is John. 1. 1. Tim. 3.
made manifest in the flesh, as Saint John, and Saint Paul speak, And
therefore Christ Emmanuel.

Where then the Apostle says, draw near to God, and he will draw near to
you: he speaks chiefly of Mat. 1.
drawing near by his grace, favor, mercy, who enlarges his loving kindness
toward all those, which with reverence and fear, draw near unto him.

3 These things thus set down, in the last place, we are taught how we
should draw near to God: which the Apostle expresses in these words: Cleanse
your How man draws near to God.
hands you sinners, and pourge your hearts, you double minded. Which words
howsoever they may seem to others a new, or another exhortation* yet to me
they seem orderly to follovv, as the manner how we should draw near unto
God, namely in purity and sincerenesse of life.

To enlarge this circumstance a little, we may consider, that as God by many
ways draws near unto us: so we by no less draw near unto him.

1 Men draw near to God by outward profession, though it be not always in
sincerity of heart: thus did the people of Israel in outward profession, and
with their mouths draw near to God, which as a token Isai. 29. 58. 2. 3.
of hypocrisy is condemned. God therefore speaking there-against, says: This
people comes near unto me with their mouth, and honor me with their
lips, but their hearts have they removed far from me. Against which
Jeremie breaks out: thou have Iere. 12.
planted them, and they have taken root: they grow and bring forth fruit:
thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins. Thus inueyed he
against such as in mouth professed God, but denied him in heart, which he
means by reins. This is that hypocrysie worthily condemned by Paul: in
words they Tit. 1.
profess they know God: but have denied him in deed, being abominable,
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. Thus men in the outward
profession of the Gospel, though sometimes it be in hypocrisy, are said to
draw near to God: as now most men do.

2 Men also draw near to God by faith in Jesus Christ, whereby they have
enteraunce unto God. Of which kind the holy Apostle Saint Paul speaks: being
justified by faith, we have peace with God, through Romans 5.
our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom we have also access through faith, unto this
grace wherein we stand. Which grace is to be reconciled unto GOD, and knitte
in a Ephesians. 2.
most holy league of heavenly and spiritual fellowship with him.

This in another place is also mentioned, where to the Church of Ephesus he
avouches, that by faith both Jew and Gentile have access and entrance to
the father by one Spirit. A little after in like manner says Saint Paul: by
our Lord Jesus Christ have we boldness, and entrance with confidence by
faith in him. Ephesians. 3.


By faith in the mediation of Christ we come boldly Heb. 4.
unto god: whereunto the Author to the Hebrews exhorts. We have not an
high priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
but was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin. Let us
therefore go boldly unto throne of grace, that Heb. 10.
we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. In another
place, the same author speaking of this drawing near to God, writes and
exhorts in this wise: Seeing we have an high Priest which is over the house
of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in assurance of faith,
sptinckled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in our bodies
with pure water. Let us (says he) draw near with a true heart in assurance
of faith.

Finally, showing the very high way which leads unto God, and whereby we
draw near and come unto him, he makes that to be faith: whereby the holy
fathers have approached and drawn near unto him: whereof he thus concludes:
withour faith, it is impossible to please God. For he which comes to Heb. 11.
God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek
him. Wherefore as through infidelity we were estraunged from God: so by faith
are we reconciled unto him, and knit into a mystical conjunction with God,
whereby we draw near unto him. To trust therefore perfectly in the grace of
God by Jesus Christ: assuredly to believe the promises of God, made unto us in
his beloved: to repose all our hope of happiness upon God, through the
mediation and merits of Christ crucified: to look for eternal salvation from
God by faith, in the only passion of our blessed Savior, and so in our
consciences to have peace with God, and be reconciled unto him: is another and
second way, whereby we draw near unto God.

3 Men draw near to God also by prayer, whereby we ascend, as it were to
heaven, and approach near to the presence of God, which is, as it were, a pair
of wings to carry us to him: whereby, as by a key, says Saint Augustine, 226.
Sermon. de tempo. Ecclus. 35. 15
the door of heaven is opened: and our prayer ascends to him, and the mercy
of God descends to us. Thus the Patriarchs had their passage and entrance to
God. Thus the Prophet Moises in the departing out of Egypt, and in the
encountering in battle with the Amalakites, drew near to God. Thus Joshua drew
near to him, when Exo. 14. and 17
by his prayer the Sun stood still for the space of two Acts 12.
days, until his enemies were discomfited. Thus the saints and church of
Christ, for Peter's deliverance drew near Acts 16.
unto god by prayer. Thus Paul and Silas drew near to god, when at their
prayer ihe very foundations of the earth shook and trembled. Thus the prayers
of gods Saints shake heaven and earth, and make away for us, whereby we draw
near unto God. Thus fly we to God in our needs: thus draw we near unto
him: thus are we joined unto god, to whom we draw near by prayer, which
leads us to the presence of god, and of Christ.

4 Neither do men draw near to god by prayer only, Sophon. 3. 2. Zacha. 1.
but also by repentance, which is a returning again to god, whom through the
sins and iniquities of our lives, we had left and forsaken. Thereof thus
says the Lord by his prophet: turn again unto me, and I will turn unto you
says the lord of hosts. In another of his Prophets the lord speaks in like
manner of drawing nere to god by repentance, O Israel, if thou return, return
unto me, says the Iere. 4.
lord. Thus did David draw nere to the lord, when after his horrible sins, he
repented, and was reconciled unto god. 2. King. 12. Psalm. 51.
Thus Manasses the king falling away from god by shameful idolatry, and
wilful obstinacy: by his repentance in prison returned and drew near to
God. Marie Magdalen, running away from god by loose life, drew near unto him,
by repentance. When the prodigal child by his doting folly had forsaken
his father: yet by confession Luke 15.
and earnest repentance he drew near unto him. So when we our selves by
the transgression of our lives, sequester and separate our selves from god: by
our unfeigned repentance, and sorrow of our hearts, we return and dravve
near unto him. This thing is greatly neglected of us: men and vomen choose
rather to run, and raunge further and further from god by levvdnes and loosnes
of their lives: then by sorrow of heart, remorse of conscience repentance for
their sins, to return and dravv nere unto him, and surely this is a most
necessary approaching and dravving nere unto god then which there is nothing
more expedient in the whole life of man For seeing the just man falls Prou.
24.
seven times a day, from god; and every man so long as he lives by his
iniquity, he separated himself from the Lord daily; neither is there any board
left for us to swim out by, but this of repentance, whereby we grow in favor a
fresh, and draw near unto God: then must repentance needs be a necessary
thing in the life of man, for which cause it is so often and so highly
commended unto us.

5. Men are said more over to draw near to God, when they seek to his holy
arc, when they run to his Leuit. 24. 13. 14. Number. 9. 8. Nu. 15. 33. 27. v.
15. ^. Kings 14
word to ask counsel. As Moses oftentimes, in matters which were hard and
difficult, or whereof he had not manifest commission from God, drew near to
God, by asking counsel from him. When Saul was to follow the Philistians; the
priest, willed that they might draw near unto God; whereby was meant the
asking of counsel at the mouth of God, and of his word. Thus such as in
matters whereof they are ignorant: seek counsel from the mouth and word of
God, in his preachers and prophets: draw near unto God.

6. By reposing all trust and confidence in God, and cleaving constantly unto
him: whereof Psalm. 73. 28.

7. Of none of all these the Apostle here seems to speak properly, but of an
other drawing near, which is by purity and sincerenes of life: whereof chiefly
in this place he speaks: which he commends unto us in these words: cleanse
your hands your sinners; and purge your hearts you double minded. Which I take
not for a new precept, but with Bid and others, as the mean and manner of
performing ^. Bid.
that which here now is enjoined; that we draw near to God in purity and
sincerity of life, which consists in the cleansing of our hands, and purging
of our hearts before the Lord.

Let us then consider the place. 1. In calling them sinners, Sinners.
he means not them which are subject by natural infirmity to the committing
of sin; as all men are so long as they rest and remain upon the face of the
earth: but hereby he notes their heinous and hornble iniquities 1. Tim. 1. 9
whereunto they were given. 2. By wavering or double minded, he notes the
shameful hypocrisy: which was crept in even into their lives, which made
some show of religion, and had a pretense of godliness: such as in outward
show, seemed devout, religious, righteous, and holy: but in their hearts, were
full of ungodliness and impiety: thus they seem outwardly one, inwardly
another: in word one, in work another: one in talk, another in truth;
therefore are they called double minded. Like Ianus whom some take for Iapheth
one of the sons of Noe; others for Saturn, whom the Heathen paint double
faced. These the prophet David often sharply reproves, for that Psa. 12. ^1.
55. etc.
they speak with a double heart, having one thing pro^pt in their mouths;
another covered in their minds: a sin, evil and odious before God and man.
Therefore if we will draw near to God, our double hearts must be purged: that we
may be such indeed, as we pretend to be in show: least we hear with our great
shame; blush you not at it, that when as in show you bear the person of noble
Agamemnon; in deed you play the part of cruel and deformed Thersites? in
being one in show, and another in deed?

If this holy Apostle, did so earnestly call upon them for reformation of their
lives, which were double minded: what shall we do to such as are triple,
quadruple; three minded, four minded, yea of hundredth minds? what voice shall
we sound, what speech shall we utter; what mouth shall we open against such?
Who with the Camelion can turn themselves into all shapes: who are now hot,
now cold in religion: now professors, now Romanish Catholics; now thus, now
otherwise minded and affected, to bleare the eyes of the simple; is it not high
time, that we call out a loud to them to be cleansed, and with open mouth cry
to them to be purged?

3. The words bearing this signification, the matter follows: that men in
purity and sincerity of their lives, draw near unto God; which consists in
two things. 1. In cleansing of their hands; 2. In purging of their hearts
before God.

Cleansing of the hands, notes the redress and reformation What means the
cleansing of hands.
of all the outward life of man, the correcting of all his actions and deeds,
of all which though it be not, yet of most of them, the hand is the
instrument; wherefore the outward works of men, are usually called the works
of men's hands; because most of them have the Ps. 90. 17. Ier. 25. 14. Lamentat.
3. 64.
help of the hand, as the instrument to bring them to pass: as robberies,
theft, picking, stealing, murder, oppression, beating, bribery, corruption,
and such like. Under the word hand, S. James comprising the whole life of man,
and all his outward actions: requires such as would draw near to God, to
cleanse their hands: cleanse your hands you sinners. Which in effect is the
same which the Prophet Isai 1.
exhorted the people of Israel unto: who teaching them information of their
lives, exhorts them to vvash themselves, and make themselves clean; to take
away the evil of their works from before the eyes of the Lord. The princely
Prophet in like manner showing who they Psalm. 24.
were, which by entering into the Lords sanctuary, draw near unto God: says,
they were such as were purged from the filthy soil of this world; whose hands
were innocent, and whose hearts pure. He that has innocent hands (says he)
and a pure heart, and has not lift up his mind to vanity, nor sworn to
deceive his neighbor: he shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and
righteousness from the God of his salvation. Cleansing and washing of hands,
signifies the innocence of our outward life: therefore Mat. 27.
when the Jews besought Pilate to put Jesus to death; to show himself
guiltless and innocent therein, he called for water and washed his hand before
them; and said, I am guiltless of this man's blood, look you unto it. To which
sense this of James sounds: cleanse your hands you sinners.

But least we should think it enough outwardly to be cleansed as hypocrites do;
albeit out hearts remain full of all corruption and filthiness: therefore to the
cleansing of the hands, which contains the reformation of our outward life;
the Apostle joins the purging of their hearts; as an inward reformation, in
all such as by purity Purging of heart.
and sincerenes of life, will draw near to God.

Which thing he does most necessarily. For the heart Mat. 15.
is the fountain of all our actions, from whence all wickedness and evil
proceeds, as to the Jews our Savior avouched. Which when holy David
perceived, he desirous Psalm. 51.
to reform his life acceptably to God, desires that he might have a new
heart, and a right spirit with in him. And to this purpose almighty God
himself in the people of Israel requires not only the purity of the
outward works, but the innocence of their hearts also; and Deuteronomy. 10. Ierem. 4.
therefore wills them to circumcise the foreskinne of their hearts. And
generally in his prophets he requires the purging of their hearts, that their
consciences, minds and inward parts, might be purged from evil works: that
in body and soul, in life and heart, they might serve him and glorify his
name.

Saint Paul seeing that true innocence and purity Romans 12.
must be first grounded in the hearts, without reformation whereof, al is
hypocrisy, both to the church of Rome, Ephesians. 4.
and of Ephesus also, entreating of true reformation and sanctification,
wills that they be renewed in the spirit of their minds. Lactantius in many
words showing Lib. 6. c. 23.
that the heart and mind is the fountain of all wickedness: and that thereis
no purity or chastity when the heart is not purged, says: Howbeit the body be
stained and defiled with no evil, yet is there not therefore perfect
chastity, if the mind be incestious: neither may that be counted undefiled
chastity, when lust has defiled the conscience. Wherefore as in particular,
there is no pure chastity, though our outward man be clean, unless our
affections of heart be pure in like manner: even so generally, there is no true
innocence, though the outward man be reformed, unless the heart be also purged
before God. Saint James to remove all hypocrisy from men, requires in such as
will draw near to GOD in purity of life: not only that their hands be
cleansed, but also their hearts purged; that both inwardly and outwardly they
might be holy.

Now that S. James exhorts men to cleanse their hands and purge their
hearts: as other Scriptures also speak; we may not take him, as if this
cleansing and purging were in our selves, or of our selves; for there is no 2.
Cor. 3.
motion or inclination naturally in our selves to any thing that is good: for
of our selves, as of our selves, we are not able to think a good thought, much
less to perform a good action, pleasant and acceptable to God. Yea all our
sufficiency is from God: who works in us both to will, and also to perform
according to his good pleasure. Philip. 2.
And the Lord God is said in Moses to purge all our evil and wicked
affections, to circumcise and purge the heart Deuteronomy. 30.
of his people. Which is the truth of Gods promise, who promised by the mouth
of his servant Ezechiell, to give Ezech. 11. and 36.
them new hearts; to take their hard and stony hearts from them, and give them
hearts of flesh, which might be reformed. Wherefore when Israel and Ephraim the
people Jerem, 31.
of God saw, that it was not in themselves to return, repent and draw near to
God, they desire to have repenting hearts, and relenting minds from him: and
therefore pray in this wise to God; Turn thou me o Lord, and I shall be turned;
convert thou me and I shall be converted: for thou art the Lord my God. In like
manner in the Lamentations, the saints and church say to God; Turn thou
Lament. 5. psalm. 8. 7.
us unto thee: and we shall be turned. Which David wisely considered, when he
desired reformation and correction of his heart from God. Purge me (says he to
God) with Psalm. 51.
Isope, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be vvhither then snow. And a
little after: Create in me a clean verse 10.
heart o God, and renew a right spirit in me. So that the cleansing of our
hands, and purging of our hea^ts, are not in our own power, but are
wrought by God in the Saints.

Why do the Prophets the^ will us to do these things? Why does Saint James
here will sinners to cleanse their hands, and double minded persons to purge
their hearts?

Surely, to teach us, that when God by his Spirit goes about to reform us,
we must not draw backward; but in all things give token of true repentance;
continually show forth the fruits of the spirit in the whole course, but
especially, in the reformation of our lives. And this is the mean or manner how
we may draw near unto God, even by cleansing our hands, and purging our hearts
before him.

These things being so: if then we submit our selves to God; if we resist the
devil; if we draw near to God in purity of our lives; if with open eyes we
embrace light, and fly darkness: then shall the sun of righteousness shine in
our hearts: then shall Christ Jesus dwell in our minds; then shall God
himself draw near in loving favor unto us, and ouershadowe us with the
presence a^; brightness of his countenance: then shall we be one in t^^ God, and
God with us: then shall he dwell and re^^ affli^^ with us Mala. 4.
for ever. Which thing he give and grant unto us, who has not spared his only
son for us: Eue^ god the father, to whom, with the son, and the holy Ghost,
one one God in glorious trinity, be praise, dominion, and majesty, now, and
for ever, Amen.

James Chap. 4. verses 9. 10. Sermon 20.
Verse 9 Suffer afflictions, and sorrow ye, and weep: let your laughter be
turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness.

10 Cast down your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.


THese words contain the third part and place of this 4. Chapter, which is,
touching The third place ^^ part of the Chapter.
our humiliation, and humbling our selves before God: which consists in two
things, as here by the Apostle is set down.

Namely: 1. In chastising our selves through repentance and mortification of
life: wherein are two things to be observed of us. 1. What he commands: To
suffer affliction. 2 How it is to be done. 1. Sorrowing. 2. Weeping. 3. Turning
laughter into mourning. 4. Joy into heaviness.

2. In casting down, and prostrating our selves before the Lord: wherein two
things are to be noted. 1. What he commands. To prostrate our selves before
God. 2. Why? That God may exalt us.


Now concerning this place, it is the doctrine of humiliation, and humbling our
selves before God, for the iniquities and sins, by us, daily against him
committed.

Wherein the Apostle opposes to the former vices in man, things contrary: to
their wantonness and pleasures, the afflicting and humiliating of themselves; to
their pride and arrogancy, Christian modesty; to their carnal delights,
lascivious and lewd mirth, he sets down unfeigned sorrow and grief, whereby
their repentance might be showed: whereunto these two verses serve; Suffer
affliction, sorrow and weep, etc. wherein two things are to be considered. 1.
The chastising of our selves. 2. And our casting down our selves before God.

1 Touching the chastising of our selves, therein two things may be observed:
1. what he commands. 2 how the same is to be performed. The precept;
Suffer afflictions: which is not an exhortation to patience in trouble; whereof
afterward, c. 5. 7. but to chastise and afflict our selves by true repentance,
and mortification of our lives: suffer affliction, be you afflicted, afflict
your selves by true repentance before the Lord.

Which exhortation is right necessary: because the whole life of worldly and
carnally minded men, whose happiness is in pleasure, lust, delights of the
flesh: is altogether spent in riot, wantonness, banqueting, iollitie, laughter,
mi^th, and wicked reioising: wherein men drowned, forget and neglect their
duty unto God: neither remember they the judgments of god, and his heavy
wrath, which therefore hangs over them: as the story of the first world, in
the days of Noe, declares: Wherein they were given to eating, to drinking, to
riotousnes, to wantonness, and all Genesis 7.
pleasures of the flesh; until such time as the flood came upon them, and
destroyed them. And the example of Sodom confirms, in the days of Lot,
whereof the Genesis 19.
men and the women, with all the people, gave themselves wholly to the
satisfying and fulfilling of all the lusts and desires of the flesh, and
excess of their lives: till the Lord rained fire and brimston upon them from
heaven, and miserably destroyed them.

Which negligence, rising from the plenty and prosperity of worldly things,
almighty GOD foreseeing, gave charge thereof unto Israel his people, that when
they came into the land of Canaan, where they should Deuteronomy. 6. and 8.
possess great and goodly Cities, which they builded not; houses replenished
with all manner of goods, which houses they filled not: wells dug, which
they dug not: vineyardes, which they planted not: When they had eaten and
droken, and were full, abounding and flourishing in all worldly prosperity;
they should take heed, least they forgot the Lord, who had given them all
these things. Seeing then prosperity and worldly wealth; seeing carnal
delights, and fleshly pleasures make us stubborn, forgetful, and negligent
in our duties to God: is it not necessary that we be often admonished, and
earnestly exhorted, thus to chastise our selves by repentance, and true
mortification, least we be carried away with the sway of earthly things, unto
final destruction?

Which when our Apostle Saint James had considered, as having care of our
souls health, exhorting us to true humiliation, and chastising of our selves,
says; Suffer affliction, or be chastised, and sorrow, and weep, that thereby
our repentance, which is to salvation, not to be repented of, might be
witnessed. Will we live for ever? then 2. Cor. 7. 2. Tim. 2
must we die here, by repentance, and mortification, to sin. Will we obtain
eternal rest? then in this life must 1. P^t. 1
we be afflicted. Will we rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious? then must
we here sorrow for a season. Will we have mirth without end? then must we
lament our iniquities in the body, that our souls may live in heaven for
evermore with God.

They which have their pleasure in this world, shall surely have their pain in
the world to come; as Abraham witnessed to the rich glutton in the Gospel:
they which are here full, shall there want: they which here laugh, shall Luke
16 Luke 6
there weep, wail, and lamente: they that live in pleasure upon the earth,
shall suffer punishment and torments in the world to come; unless here they
mortify themselves and be chastised through repentance: let us there fore be
admonished by the Apostle: let us hold fast the exhortation of S. James;
Suffer afflictions.

The afflictions which here we are exhorted to suffer, What is affliction here?
are nothing else but the conceauing of grief for sin: true and unfeigned
repentance for the life past: the chastising of our selves, by fasting,
watching, praying, and such like, before the Lord: the true mortification of
our earthly members, and the subduing of all carnal desires in our selves,
that thereby we may be truly humbled before God.

This affliction holy David suffered, thus did he chastise himself, thus was
he afflicted before the Lord: when he washed his couch with his tears in the
night season, Psalm 6. Psalm. 35.
and watered his bed with weeping: when in the sickness of his enemies he
humbled himself with fasting, and his prayer was turned into his bosom: when
his iniquities Psalm. 38. 102. 9.
were gone over his head, and as a weighty burden, they were too heavy for
him to bear: when his wounds were putrified and corrupt, because of his
foolishnes: when he was bowed, and crooked very sore: when he went mourning all
the day long: when his reins were full of burning, and nothing sound in his
flesh: when he was weakened very much, and greatly broken: when he roared for
very grief of his heart.

Daniel, the holy Saint and man of God, in like manner Dan. 9.
afflicted and chastised himself with sackcloth, fasting and ashes, for his
own sins, and the sins of the people.

Thus have the Saints of God done, thus must all they do which fear God, by
true repentance of their hearts, and true mortification of their lives,
chastise themselves: which is the suffering of affliction, which the Apostle
here teaches; Suffer afflictions.

This place nothing favors their heresy, which hold that they ought to
beat themselves with scourges: Jesuits and Papists.
for that it did more put away sin, then any confession. Which their doting
folly, they compared with martyrdom. Of which sect of heretics Alphonsus
speaks. Who, because they scourged themselves, were called Flagellarij, or
Flagellantes se, beating themselves. Alphonsus de Castro lib. 2. cont. heresis.
Whose heresy has patronage, neither in the old, nor in the new testament:
neither of man nor woman, in all the whole Scripture commended.

Neither must it foster the foolish opinion of wicked Jesuits, and popish
persons, who for vainglory: for opinion of desert and merit at the hand of
God, at certain times scourge and beat themselves in like manner. But of that
popish practice, we have no example, either of holy Patriarch, Prince or
Prophet: either of blessed Apostle, Evangelist, or Martyr: neither of man,
woman, or saint whatsoever, in Scripture mentioned; neither any commandment,
counsel or exhortation, either in the old or in the new testament, neither
from God, Christ, the Prophets or Apostles of Jesus Christ: neither find we
any jot, title, syllable, in all the word of God: therefore is that practice,
as drawn from heretics, condemned and disallowed. Here the chastising of our
selves, and the suffering of affliction by the Apostle specified, is the
unfeigned repentance of our hearts for sins committed: and our true
humiliation before God for the same: which S. James here commends unto us,
suffer affliction.

2. The way whereby this our humbling and chastising of our selves is
performed, is also here expressed, and it is in four things: which are as
signs and tokens of the true chastening of our selves before God.

1 Men show their chastising in their sorrow and heaviness of heart, which is
not the least token of afflicting Signs of this outward affliction.
our selves: and of our suffering affliction prescribed by the Apostle: which
is the inseparable companion of our true repentance before God.

This sorrowing, and heaviness of our hearts, is that contrite spirit, that
humbled and broken heart, which Psalm. 51. 2. Cor. 7.
is a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant before God. Which sorrow Saint Paul
commends, even that sorrow which leads to repentance, not to be repented of.
I now rejoice, says he, not that you sorrowed: but that you 1. Cor. 5.
sorrowed to repentance. This godly sorrow Saint Paul required in the
Corinthians, for that they had tolerated the incestuous adulterer: ye are puffed
up, and have not rather sorrowed, that he that has done this deed, might be
put from among you.

This is that inward grife of the Saints which in their hearts they conceive
for their sins committed against God, and thereby show their afflicting and
chastising of themselves before him. Thus holy David by unfeigned sorrow for
his sins committed, showed himself humbled and afflicted before God: as both
in the story, and in his Psalm of lamentable repentance is affirmed. Manasses
2. Kin. 12. Psalm. 51. 2. Chron. 33.
having done many things against God, to despite the Lord withal: being
carried away into captivity, humbled himself and afflicted himself by
repentance, which in his sorrow and grief he conceived, appeared. Marie
Magdalen chastising and afflicting herself for sin, by repentance, gave
manifest token thereof in the great sorrow which she showed herself to have
conceived even in the presence of Jesus Christ. Saint Peter having denied his
master, showed himself to have been Mat. 26.
therefore chastened, in conceiving such great grief and heaviness of heart, as
forced him to go out of the judgment hall, which was the house of the high
priest, and to weep bittetly. Thus the holy men of god, calling to remembrance
their iniquities and sins againg God committed: and therefore afflicting
themselves by repentance before the Lord: begin their afflicting and chastising
them selves with sorrow.

And this sorrow bewraieth it self, partly in hanging down of the head: in
the casting down of the countenance: partly in outwart behavior and gesture
of the body: partly in our speeches and words, which are the witnesses of our
affections, and give testimony of our hearty sorrow. And this is the first
thing wherein the chastising and afflicting our selves appears.

2 As the chastising and afflicting of our selves consists in sorrow and
grief conceived for sin: so does it in like manner appear in our weeping and
lamenting for the same: when we power out tears before God in token of our
unfeigned repentance unto him. Which thing must not be counted altogether
effeminate, and such as becomes women only: but it is even in the best men,
and most holy Saints of God, a thing commendable and highly to be praised,
being joined with true faith in Jesus Christ. For which cause David the
princely Prophet and holy man of God was not ashamed to confess, that in
sign of his chastising of himself Psalm. 6.
by true repentance, he wette his bed, and watered his couse with tears.

When the book of the law of God was found, and brought to Josiah, the
godly and virtuous prince: and he thereby had perceived how greatly the people
4. King. 22.
had offended, in sign of his humility and chastising of himself with true
repentance, he wept before the Lord. The Prophet Joel calling the people to
this afflicting of themselves by true repentance, therein he requires Joel.
2.
weeping: Turn (says he) unto the Lord with weeping, fasting and mourning.
The Prophets calling the people to repentance, have exhorted them to mourn
and weep before the Lord. Saint Peter for fear of the Jews having denied
and for sworn his master Christ: at the looking back of Christ, he remembered
himself, he repented Mat. 26.
him of his sin, his heart melted and rent in pieces, as it were, for
sorrow: and to testify his humiliating of himself for the sin committed,
he went out and wept bitterly. To this purpose therefore, this Apostle
exhorting the Saints to suffer affliction, to chastise themselves by unfeigned
repentance, shevving the way and manner how it must be done: teaches that
it must be in sorrovv and weeping.

Herehence then we see what the true use of weeping is: and for what cause
we may weep lavvfully: to utter the sorrovv of our hearts: to testify our
true repentance to God: to witness our afflicting of our selves for our
sins against God committed, we are exhorted Why the sai^^ may weep.
to weep. Saint Augustine that grave and reverend father of the Church,
searching and seeking out the true Sermon. 4. domi. 1. quadrag.
causes for which the Saints of God might lavvfully weep, vvriteth that
there be two causes for which they may so do. 1 Because they have omitted
through negligence many things which they should have done. 2 Because they
have committed through boldness many things also, which should have been
undone by them: the one he calls the sin of omitting: the other, the sin
of committing: and for both ought men to weep before God.

Let us therefore look hereinto with vvakefull and vvatchfull eyes: let us
record and recounte with our selves, what duties and good things we have
omitted, which we should have done, either to God or man, either to our
selves or others: to our own charge, or to strangers: to our friends, or to
our enemies: let us call to mind what evil we have done, whereby God has
been dishonored, our neighbors iniuried, our selves defiled, other by our
evil example allured to wickedness. How we have dishonored God, by
blasphemy: oppressed our neighbors by injury, usury, extortion, deceit,
and covetousness: how we have defiled our selves with fornications,
adulteries, wantonness, and fleshly uncleanness: with drunkenness,
surfeiting, or the like enormities: how we have drawn on others to like
sin, by sight, by persvvasion, by action, by motion: shall it not make us to
utter our repentance by weeping? If we forget not, that we have omitted our
duty of prayer and invocation to god, and the performance of humble service
unto him: that we have omitted the ministering to the necessity of the Saints,
and the help we should have shevved to the needy brethren: that we have
omitted many good opportunities which have been offered for the increase of
our virtue, fayeth, patience, mercy and such like: that we have neglected
the careful visiting of the poor destitute, which live in our streets and
complain, and perish before our eyes for lack of relief: that we have
omitted many exercises of prayer, of preaching, of reading and meditating in
the law of God: that we have omitted the doing of many things, which
appertain unto godliness and true sanctification, and committed much
wickedness, privately, publicly, openly, secretly, in our souls, in our
bodies: at home and abroad, against God and men: in our conversation, in our
communication: have we not just cause to chastise and afflict our selves by
weeping? When we hear of our cruel dealings, our intolerable pride: our
silthinesse of the flesh, our riotousnesse of life: our great falsehoode,
lying, deceyte, vnderminding one of another: our envy, hatred, malice,
slander, reproach, backebytings, and all iniquity, which now reigns in our
whole life: merciful God, what fountains, what wells of tears should it
cause in us?

Wherefore if Democritus the Philosopher, wept continually, Democrit. 9.
to see the ignorance, blindness, and doting folly of man: shall not we
weep day and night, to see the blindness, ignorance, wretchedness, and
wickedness of our selves, whereby we continually provoke the wrathful
indignation of God against us?

When our goods are taken by pirates: our wealth consumed by shipwreck: our
houses burnt with fire: our lands taken from us by violent oppression: our
riches wasted by pestilent usury: our liberty restrained by cruel
persecution: our children miscarie suddenly: our friends die from us daily:
and one misfortune fall on the heels of another: what crying, what wringing
Psalm. 42. 7. Job. 2. 15. etc
of hands, what lamenting, what weeping is there among us? But that God by our
wickedness is offended: his name through us blasphemed, his law and holy
word contemned: his patience and long sufferance daily provoked and abused:
his threatenings, his admonitions, his counsels neglected: his loving mercy
forgotten, and his great benefits not remembered: that many good things
pertaining to duty have been through our follies omitted: and many
wickednesses whereof we should have been clear, committed by us, who weepeth?
who lamenteth? Let us dear Christians in the fear of God evermore remember,
and always hold fast this council of the Apostle: that by sorrowing and
weeping we may show our affliction and chastising our selves by repentance.

3. A third way of afflicting our selves, is by turning our laughter into
mourning: our wanton laughing, which proceeds from the dissolutenes of our
minds, must be turned into mourning. Here by laughter is understood that
lascivious and wanton mirth, and giggling which is rife among fools and vain
persons, and which they take up upon every vain occasion in the world,
whereby their folly appears, as Sirach witnesses: who Ecclus. 19.
making the vain laughter of men an argument of folly, says, A man's garments,
excessive laughter, and going, declare what he is, descrie his folly. And in
another place not long after: A fool lifts up his voice with laughter,
Ecclus. 21.
but a wise man does scarce smile secretly. And Solomon in his preacher: like
as the noise of thorns under the pot Eccles. 7.
which for a time crackle but profit nothing, for they are consumed suddenly,
and quickly.) So is the laughter of a fool: this is also vanity. This
laughter our Savior Christ condemns: crying out woe, and denouncing Luke 6.
vengeance against such as gave themselves to wanton mirth, and vain laughter:
Woe unto you that now laugh, for you shall wail and weep. Our foolish
giggling, our profane laughter, our dissolute mirth, our wanton screaming and
scrcking, our disordered lifting up of our voices in our incontinent mirth:
must be laid aside, and be turned into mourning: if so be we will humble our
selves by true repentance unto God.

And here under laughter and mirth, are understood also all those delicates and
delights, all those merry conceyts and pleasant pastimes, all those iollities
and sportings wherein men take pleasure, and so become forgetful of the
judgments of God, and neglect the chastising of themselves for their wealth
unto God. Whereunto our Mat. 24.
Savior Christ witnesses the world should be given toward the end thereof:
yea and at the very appearing of the Son of God in judgment: whereof the
says; As the days of Noe were; so shall the coming of the Son of man be:
for as in the days before the floude, they did eat, and drink; marie, and
give in marriage, unto the day that Noe went into the Arc, and knew nothing
till the flood came, and took them away; even so shall also the coming of the
Son of man be. Wherein he shows that in the latter days men shall be given
to brutish pleasures, delights and pastimes; which the Apostle in the Saints of
God would have to be turned into mourning: suffer affliction; sorrow and weep:
let your laughter be turned into mourning.

4. Finally, as our laughter must be turned into mourning, so must also our joy
be turned into heaviness: the joy which worldly minded men conceive of worldly
things, the wanton rejoicing of men, must be turned into heaviness, hanging
down of head, casting down of countenance in sign of shame for our sins:
the joy which we take in vain or wicked things, must wholy be left of, and
turned into heaviness, if by suffering afflictions and chastising our selves
before God, we will show our selves humbled. Even such joy as we conceive in
our wealth and worldly condition; such joy as of our dignities and honors here
arise in our hearts: such joy as of any worldly thing whatsoever is gathered;
such mirth and joy as either we cause to our selves, or counterfeit fools
make unto us: such vain merimentes as for wanton recreation men devise for
their dissolute and disordered solace and cheering up of themselves: such joy
as the couetuous man takes of his riches: the proud man or woman of their
bravery: the leacherous and adulterous person of his filthy uncleanness, or any
other, makes of any vanity whatsoever, must be turned into heaviness, as the
Apostle exhorts: that so we may show forth the true humiliation and
chastising of our selves by repentance, whereunto the Apostle moves: suffer
affliction; sorrow and weep, let your laughter be turned into mourning, and
your joy into heaviness.

Neither must such like mirth and joy only be removed: but in the days of our
heaviness, in the time of our repentance, in the affliction of our selves
before God; even honest and lawful mirth for a time must be laid a part, and
we must wholly give our selves to mourning: whereunto Saint James called the men
of his time; suffer affliction, sorrow, weep; let your laughter be turned into
mourning, and your joy into heanines.

And have not we as great and as just cause to exhort Why England should
mourn.
men in these days? have not we cause to suffer afflictions? ought not we to
sorrow, and weep? is there not cause now ministered unto us, why our laughter
should be turned into mourning, and our joy into heaviness? 1. If we weigh
and ponder our sins aright, which every one in particular commits; or if
we cast our eyes upon the sins generally committed in the world, and what
punishment might both specially hang over every one, and generally over us all
for the same; is it not cause enough why we should sorrow and weep: why our
laughter should be turned into mourning, and our joy into heaviness?

When the princely prophet David took the survey and vewe of his own sins,
and recounted the due punishment which he had deserved for the same; then
sorrowed 2. Kings 12 and 15. Psalm. 6. 35. 51. etc.
he and wept, then was his laughter turned into mourning, and his joy into
heaviness. When the king of Niniue considered at Jonas his preaching, the
greatness of his sin, and the destruction of the city within Jonas 3.
forty days for the same; then turned he all his laughter into mourning, and
his joy into heaviness: and shall not we, whose eyes are full of adulteries,
whose hands are replenished with bribes, whose feet are swifte to shed
innocent blood, whose lips are given to lying, whose tongues can tell no
truth, whose mouths are full of blaspemie, cursing and bitterness, whose minds
are set on mischief, whose hearts burn and boil with malice: whose lives are
puffed up with pride, whose bodies are stained with all iniquity: sorrow and
weep for these sins? shall not our laughter be turned into mourning, and our
joy into heaviness for these iniquities against God committed?

When Isai and Jeremie the holy Prophets and men of God saw, the sin of Judah
and Jerusalem, and the heavy Isai 22. Ierem. 9.
punishment hanging over them for their grievous iniquities, so turned all
their laughter into mourning, and their joy into heaviness: as that the one
wept day and night therefore, and would not be comforted: the other desired a
fountain of tears in his head to bewail the calamity that was imminent.
When holy David saw Psalm. 119.
that men kept not the law of God, his laughter was so turned into mourning,
and his joy into heaviness: as that his eyes gushed out with water for the
transgression of his people. When Esdras the scribe saw the shameful 1. Esd.
9.
and horrible abominatio^ of the people, in mixing the holy seed with the
people of the land, wherein the hands of the princes and peers of the people
were the chief; he rent his clothes for sorrow, he tore of the hair of his
bearde for grief; he sat down astonished; turning all his laughter into
mourning, and his joy into heaviness. When our blessed Savior saw the
obstinacy and hardness Luke 19.
of the peoples hearts; whose cogitations were so darkened, they could not see
the day of their visitation; and perceived in his spirit their destruction
approaching: eue^ his mirth, such as it was (for his laughter we read not)
seemed to have been turned into mourning, and his joy into heaviness: when he
burst out into weeping watery tears over the city of Jerusalem, and said: o
that thou had even known, at the least in this thy day the things which
appertain unto thy peace? But now are they hidden from thee. Shall these men of
god: for these causes turn their laughter into mourning, and their joy into
heaviness: and in the public breach of Gods laws, in the diminishing of his
majesty, in blemishing of his glory, in falsifiyng of his truth: profaning of
his Gospel, counterfeyting in his profession, abusing of his patience,
contemning of his threatenings: shall not our laughter be turned into mourning,
and our joy into heaviness?

2. Moreover if we consider, how the malice of the whole world, and the hatred
of the greatest princes and men of might is kindled and inflamed against us;
how they are confederate and have combined themselves against the truth of God,
and against the Lords anointed for the defense of the same: who by secret
conspiracies, and open attempts of horrible treason: by raising Anno 1586.
the subject against the Prince, and the people against their lawful
Sovereign, have at many times, by diverse ways endeavored the death of her
Royal person, decay of religion, destruction and utter calamity of this our
native counttie; whose determinations had they effected according to their
minds, our streates had run with streams of blood; our children had been
slain before our faces; our daughters ravished in our own sightes: our wives
abused before our eyes: our houses on flaming fire in our presence; our selves
finally murdered in most cruel manner; Gods truth had perished from among
us; religion and the Gospel had been put to flight: Romish superstition had
invaded this land again, to the destruction of innumerables souls: when with
thankful hearts for this miraculous deliverance out of the jaws of so cruel
Lions; and grateful memory to God, for so wonderful safety from so bloody
enemies, we shall remember these things: shall not our laughter be turned into
mourning, and our joy into heaviness?

3. When we consider besides this, that the hope of our happiness, the state of
our wealth; the continuance of the gospel, the term and time of our peace,
the prolonging of our prosperity stands in the life of one most tender
woman, and virtuous princes, under the shadow of whose wings, by the great
providence of God, we have these 33. years been shrouded from many dangers,
and mightily protected from sundry perils, at home and abroad, by our enemies,
and our own countriemen; by whose godly zeal, religion has been erected; the
truth of Gods word established, the glorious gospel of Christ maintained:
though the Princes of the world, have snuffed and raged, frette and fumed,
stamped and starde thereat; by whose gracious government, every man has
hitherto in peace eaten the fruits of his own orchard, the grapes of his own
vine, the commodity. of his own land, without either hostile invasion, or
civil discention, to any great damage: whose term of days, cannot be but
the end of our prosperity; whose day of death, shall be the beginning of our
woeful vvretchednes, whose rest with God in eternal peace, our entrance into
troubles in this co^monvvealth: her yielding to nature, (which the Lord
differ long to his glory, and her endless comfort) the first step and
degree as it were to our miserable calamity: this I say when we do
consider, shall not our laughter be turned into mourning, and our joy into
heaviness?

4. If we recount that for two years of late past 1585. and 1586. God has
severely punished the profanation of his gospel, the contempt of his word,
the dishonor of his name, our counterfetting of religion; our impiety and
impuritie of our lives, our manifold sins, and great iniquities, which in
every state and condition of men ouerflovv and abound: by great famine, by much
penury, by extreme dearth: which famine if it will not serve to reclaim
us and call us unto repentance, to make us thereby to chaste^ our selves
before God: then is it to be feared, that he will send of al famine the most
grievous, not a famine of bodily bread as now we have suffered; but a famine
of the bread of life, even of the word of Amos 8.
GOD, whereby our souls are nourished, threatened by the Prophet; when we
shall v^ander from sea to sea: from North to East seeking the word of God and
shall not find it: and that for our wickedness, fruitelesnesse and
vnvvorthinesse, he will take away the kingdom Mat. 21.
of God from us, and give it to a nation that will bring forth fruit
thereof: shall not the remembrance of this, turn our laughter into mourning,
and our joy into heaviness?

5 If finally, we call to mind the severity of Gods judgments against like
sinners: and his indignation powered out upon such people, as our consciences
do witness we are, a great number of us: shall not this turn our laughter
into mourning, and our joy into heaviness?

Wherefore, I call heaven and earth to record this day, even against our
selves: that if god in his justice has not spared the old world, the hope of
posterity, but for their fornicatio^s gave them over to the rage of the
swelling waters, to be drowned: if he spared not the famous Genesis 6. and 7.
Genesis 19.
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, the very Paradise of all worldly pleasure: but
for their intolerable pride, riotousnes, and uncleanness of life, stroke the^
from heaven with fire and brimstone, that they pearished: if he spared not not
the kingdom of Israel and Judah, his own people, but gave them over (as
captives) into the hands of the Assytians, 4. Kings 17 and 25.
and Babylonians, for their iniquity: if he spared not Jerusalem, the city
of the Lord, wherein his holy Temple was erected, but for their unworthiness
and ingratitude, gave it over into the hands of the Roman Captains, Josephus.
de bello Jud. lib. 7. Eusebius. lib. 3.
to be destroyed in cruel manner, as the stories report unto us: if he spared
not the noble Corinth, the worthy Philippi, the famous Ephesus, the renowned
Constantinople, but for their fruitlesnes under the Gospel, their security,
and confidence in vain things, gave them over to Turkish slavery: if he has
not spared France, Flanders, and other our near neighbors round about us, but
daily punishes their sins, either with foreign power, or civil sword; either
with danger of dreadful pestilence, or distres of miserable famine, or some such
like way or mean of punishment: Shall we in England (whose knowledge rightly
considered above other people) not inferior to these forenamed in iniquity,
look, or hope to escape unpunished? What, is his power abated, is not his arm
stretched out still, is not he in like manner righteous, as he has been in
former times? shall we remember these things, and shall not our eyes gush out
with tears? shall not our laughter be suddenly turned into mourning, and our
joy into heaviness?

When these calamities shall come upon us, when our deserved punishments shall
overtake us; then shall we (will we, nill we) abide the performance of that
woeful threatening of God, by his Prophet; I will turn your feasts into
mourning, and your songs into lamentation: I will Amos 8.
bring sackcloath upon all loins, and baldnes upon every head: and I will make
it as the mourning of an only son: and the end thereof as a bitter day; and
this day of punishment, how near it is, who knows? Nearer (no doubt) then we
do think or suspect. The terror and calamity whereof that we may shun and
avoid, let us afflicte our selves before God, through true repentance: let us
sorrow and weep for our sins: let our laughter be turned into woeful
mourning, and our joy into heaviness, for the iniquities which we have
committed: that God may be merciful to our unrighteousness, that he may be
favorable unto us his people, that he may turn his wrathful indignation from
us, and be gracious to his inheritance for ever.

But as for us, what man, what woman of many thousands, follow this advise and
council of the Apostle? who soroweth, who lamenteth, who weepeth, who turns
his laughter into mourning, or his joy into heaviness for his sins? Yea,
every man, every woman amongst us, flatter them selves in their own sins,
and there withal are lulled a sleep in the cradle of security. The Usurer
continues in his devouring; the adulterer, and adulteress in their
uncleanness; the proud person in his bravery; the glutton in his riotousnes;
the extortioner in his cruel dealing; the covetous man in his miserableness;
the enuyous in his malice; the lier in his falshoode; the blasphemer in his
vain swearing: the slaunderer in his backbiting: Every one runs on the race
of his own desire: and though our punishment follow us at the heels, yet put
we off the evil day from us, with the blockish Ezech. 11. 3. Amos 6. 3.
Israelites, and approach and draw near to the seat of iniquity.

The wicked face it out with all shamelessness: the common strumpette takes
upon her as if she were right honest: the secret and privy harlotte, minceth
it, and pranketh it in all pride and vanity: the adulterer bears up head, as
if he were right honest: the covetous persons, usurers, oppressors,
extortioners, deceauers, liars, and the rest of that rabble, march on
barefaced, without all remorse, and spend their days in prodigality, and
care not.

Wherefore, if there be any consolation in Christ Jesus; if there be any fear,
or dread of endless death, or love to long, and everlasting life; if we have any
care of salvation, or any fear of utter condemnation; if we have any desire to
the continuance of the Gospel amongst us, or any zeal to Gods eternal
glory; if we delight in sweet and pleasant peace, or take pleasure in the
prosperity of our Country: then let us in the fear of GOD, sorrow and weep
before our destruction come upon us: let us turn our wanton mirth into
mourning, and our joy into heaviness: that by our true and hearty repentance,
and unfeigned mortification before God: we may turn away the indignation and
wrath, which we have most justly from him deserved.

2 As our humbling our selves before God, stands in thus afflicting of our
selves by repentance: so also does it in our casting down of our selves
before God: wherein there are two things to be noted.

1 The precept. 2 The reason.

Touching the thing, thus says Saint James, Cast down your selves before the
Lord. Like unto which council is that of Saint Peter; Humble and prostrate 1
Petr. 5.
your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt this casting down
of our selves, whereby we acknowledge our own unworthiness, and testify and
bear witness of our sins before his divine majesty, confess from our
hearts, that we have deserved al plagues, al miseries, all calamities, all
punishments: and thereby crave pardon and forgeueues, that we may escape that,
whereof our consciences are afraid: is, and has been, a sign of our humbling
of our selves, and of true repentance in the saints of God. When holy David saw
the wrath of God kindled against him for his adultery; and his sore
indignation beginning to burn in the punishment of the child; then besought 2.
Kings 12.
he the Lord: then went he in, and fasted, and lay all night upon the earth,
and so cast down himself before God. In like manner, when Absolon had slain
Ammon his brother, David the king feeling the wrath of God upon his house (as
was threatened by Nathan) rent his garments, and 2. Kings 13 Luke 18. 13 Mat. 8.
8
lay on the ground, in most humble and lamentable manner, casting down, and
prostrating himself before God.

Thereunto Saint James in this place exhorts, and wills us to humble our
selves, by casting down, and prostrating our selves before the Lord. Thus must
we abate our proud spirits, cast down our lofty and lordly looks, cover our
faces for the shame of our sins against God committed. Whereunto the Apostle
respects in this exhortation: Cast down you selves before God: thus to do,
how holy a sacrifice, how acceptable an offering, how pleasant a duty is it
to the Lord?

To the perfourmance whereof the rather to move us, The reason.
the Apostle sets down a reason full of comfort; Cast down your selves
(says the Apostle) before God, and he 1. Pet. 5.
will lift you up. The same reason Saint Peter uses; Humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of god, that he may exalt you in due time.
That men therefore should not think their labor lost, when they prostrate and
cast down themselves in true humility before God, neither their humility to
be destitute of reward: the Apostle reasons from the effect; Cast down your
selves, and God will lift you up. The proud then shall not always be aloft,
neither shall the humble always be cast down: but the days will come, when
both the proud, which exalt themselves, shall be brought low: and the humble,
which cast down themselves, shall be exalted.

The Lord exalts those, which in true humility of their hearts, cast down
themselves before him. This preached Ezech. 17
God by Ezechiel, where promising to pull down the proud enemies of the Church,
which exalted themselves against it: and to exalt and lift up the Church which
was low, cast down, and contemned; both in the sight of the world (by
maliciousnes of the wicked) and in the sight of their own eyes, (through
humilite) says; All the trees of the field shall know (that is, all the world
shall know) that I have brought down the high trees, and exalted the low tree:
that I have dried up the green tree, and made the dry tree to flourish: God
exalts those that are cast down, and humbled.

Herunto holy Job subscribeth; God sets up on hie Job. 5
them that be low, that the sorowful^ may be exalted to Job. 22
salvation. In another place, entreating of the deliverance of the Saints,
which humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, and cast down
themselves before his his throne of glory, when the proud and wicked shall be
destroyed round about them, he faith; When others are cast down, then shall
thou say; I am lift up: for God will save the humble person.

And Solomon to like purpose avouches; that the Pro. 29
pride of a man should bring him low, but the humble in spirit should enjoy
glory. The son of Sirach witnesses Ecclus. 10
to like effect, that God casts down the thrones of the proud Princes, and
sets up the meek in their places. Which thing our blessed Savior preached
to the Luke 14.
people, whom when (as ghestes) they should be bidden to any feast, he
exhorts that they should not take the highest, but the lowestroomes: because
such as humbled themselves, should be exalted.

In the parable of the Pharisie and Publicane, whereof Luke 18.
the one lifted up himself in pride, and therefore was contemned of God: the
other cast down himself, and was exalted: he concludes, and knitteth up the
matter with this heavenly, divine, and most godly sentence; He that exalts
himself, shall be brought low: and he that humbles himself shall be
exalted. Finally dissuading his Apostles from vain desire of honor, exhorts
them to serve one another in humility and true love: because Mat. 23.
they who exalt themselves are brought low of God: and they which humble
themselves, are by him exalted. Seeing then our casting down before God, is
rewarded with exaltation and lifting up by him: we thereby ought to be moved,
to cast down our selves before him.

Falling abasement, as the Grecians say, is the companion of pride: and the
lofty mind goes before Prou. 16. 18. ver. 12. Prou. 15.
destruction, says Solomon: so the casting down of ourselves goes before our
exaltation and glory. Solomon therefore a little before says to this purpose:
the fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom, and before honor goes
humility. So then the high way, and right path to be exalted of God, is to
humble and cast down our selves before him: wherefore if our casting down
and abasing our selves before God, work our glory, and our lifting up by him;
it is reason sufficient thereunto to move us, cast down your selves before
God and he will lift you up.

Now God exalts and lifts up such as cast down How God lifts the lowly.
themselves before his divine majesty, diverse ways 1. When he ministers
inward comfort of his holy spirit in all the difficulties and dangers of
this present world. in so much, as come life, come death, come sword, come
famine, come plague, come persecution, come peril, come nakedness, come
prosperity, come adversity, come sickness, come health, come wealth, come woe;
these are lifted up in heart, with comfort from God: So they which cast down
themselves, have the Spirit of God in all distress to comfort them, and so
are they exalted by God.

2 God also lifts up those, who cast down themselves, and humble themselves
before him: by sending the^ deliverance, and riddance from their troubles,
wherewith Genesis 41.
they were afflicted; So Joseph, submitting himself, and casting down
himself in all Christian duetifulnes to God, was therefore lifted up by God
and delivered. God speaking Esah. 17.
by his Prophet of the deliverance of the Church and Saints, which cast down
themselves in dutiful manner: and were also low and contemned in the world,
affirms that as he would bring down the high tree, the proud: so would he
by deliverance, exalt and lift up his servant the low tree, and the tree cast
down in the world. The Prophet David entreating of the lifting up of the Psalm.
149.
Saints by deliverance from their trouble, says: The Lord has pleasure in
his people: he will make the meek glorious by deliverance. Thus lift he up
Jacob, who in Genesis 3. and 32.
the humility of his mind cast down himself before God, when he kept him
from the injuries of Laban, and from the cruelty of Esau his brother. Thus did
God lift up David, whom he delivered out of infinite troubles. Thus did God
lift up Hezechiah, when he delivered him from Sennacherib the king of
Assiriah. Thus lift he up many of his dear Saints, when he rid them from
their miseries and afflictions, whereunto they were subject. Thus he lifts us
up daily: now delivering us from troubles at home, now from troubles abroad:
now from troubles by sea, and now by land: now by strangers, now by our
domestical and household people: now by professed enemies, now by counterfeit
friends intended. Hereof have we examples innumerable: hereof have we
experience, in other, and in our selves: thus God Almighty lifts them up by
deliverance from their troubles, who humble and cast down themselves before
him. Whereof never people nor nation has had greater experience, and An. 158^.
trial, then we of England now presently have: whom the Lord has delivered
by his own hand from immenent danger, and present peril of the proud
Spaniards, who, with determinate purpose, and full resolution to have invaded
our Country, and subdued our Nation, came with bloody minds, prepared
tortures: with a mighty navy, with long preparation, with help of
manieprinces: but the Lord has delivered this humble and despised land: and
has lodged their ships in the bottom of the sea: and sent their dead
carkesses, partly into this land: partly into Scotland: partly into Ireland:
partly into other Countries, to proclaim what access their devilish and
desperate attempt has had.

3 Neither thus only, but God aduaunceth them up to great honor, who in the
humility of their heart humbled themselves before him. When David humbled
himself before the Lord, and counted himself unworthy 1. Kings 18.
of that honor, to be the kings son in law: the Lord not only advanced
him thereunto, but made him to reign and rule in the stead of Saul the wicked
king of Israel. When Moses was appointed by God to do a Exodus 3.
message to Pharaoh, he in humility refusing it, was therefore exalted to be
the prince and captain of his people. Daniel humble in mind, and cast down
before the Lord, Daniel 1. 2. 3.
was by him exalted to great glory, even to be the chief, and ouerseer of all
the princes of the provinces of Babylon. Psalm. 113. 1. Kings 2.
And thus we see it true, both that David and also Anna the mother of Samuel
song: that the Lord raises up the poor and meek out of the dunghill, to set
him among his princes, and to inherit the seat of glory.

4 Finally, God lifts up those which prostrate and cast down themselves
before him, by exalting them in the end, to the glorious kingdom of his
son, even to the eternal kingdom of heaven. Which our Savior Christ
promises to such as are truly humble: Blessed Matt. 5.
says he, are they which are humble in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven. To this kingdom they are in due time exalted, who prostrate and cast
down themselves before God. And as Christ humbling himself before God, was
therefore highly exalted by him, far above Philip. 2. Ephesians. 1.
all principalities and powers: and every name that is named, not in earth
only, but in heaven also: even so does our most gracious God highly exalt and
lift up such, as in meekness of their hearts, in humility of their spirits,
in lowliness of their minds, cast down themselves before him. These in fine
he crowned with eternal glory and immortality: these he raises up
together, and makes the^ to reign with Christ in heavenly places: to these he
promises his eternal kingdom of gorie, there to rule and reign with the
Saints for ever: according to the doctrine of the Apostle: cast down your
selves before God, and he will lift you up.

Now the Lord for his mercy give us this grace, that we may in all things
humble our selves, and prostrate our selves before him, and be by him exalted.
And the God of peace, which brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus
Christ, the great shepherd of the sheep, by the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make us perfect in all good works, to do his will: working in us
that which is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise
for ever and ever. Amen.

James Chap. 4. verses 11. 12. Sermon 21.
verse 11. Speak not evil one of another, brethren: he that speaks evil of
his brother, or he that condemns his brother, speaks evil of the law, and
condemns the law: and if thou condemnest the law, thou art not an obseruer of
the law, but a Judge.

12 There is one law giver, which is able to save, and to destroy: who art
thou that iudgest another man?


^ part.
THese words and the rest to the end, contain the fourth and last part of
this Chapter: which is touching the remoouing of two evils and mischiefs which
grow of pride. Whereof the one is reproach and speaking evil of our brethren:
the other is the vain confidence of men, whereby they rashly determine long
^wo evils of ^ide.
before, of things to come. The former of these two is contained in these two
verses.

These two verses contain the condemning of the first evil of pride, which is
evil speech: wherein there are 2. things observed: namely 1 The thing and evil
which he condemns: reproach, slander, evil speech against our brethren. 2
Why men should not so do. The reasons are four. 1 Who so speaks evil of his
brother, or condemns his brother, speaks evil of the law, and condemns
it: So From violating the law. 2 Christians must observe and keep the law and
not judge it. From the duty of the Saints. 3 To judge and speak evil of our
brother, is to usurp the office of god. From usurping that office which
concerns not us. 4 We our selves are frail by condition: therefore ought we
no^ to condemn and speak evil of others. From the frailnes of our own state.


1 Of these two, the first is the thing it self, which he condemns: whereof
he gives this precept negatiuely: speak not evil, says he, one of another,
brethren. In which precept negative, all slander, all rash judgment, all
reproach, all obloquie, all vile and backbiting speech, proceeding from
malicious, hateful, proud, and perverse judgment, is condemned: whether it
be open or secret, whether before thy face or behind thy back: whether
publicly or privately it be done: to our selves or others, for the
discrediting, defaming, and impeaching the estimation and good report of the
brethren.

Which evil and mischief for the most part comes and rises of pride, when
insolent and arrogant persons: when the high minded and proud men of the
earth, desire that all men should dance to their pipe, and live according to
their wills: which thing if it be not done to their contentation, then break
they and brust out into evil speech: then fall they to rash judgment: then
condemn they every thing, and every person which pleases them not:
wherewithal the Apostle to meet, and to repress so great a mischief in the
life and society of men, gives out this precept and exhortation: Speak not
evil one of another, brethren.

This evil how great it is, and how largely spredde abroad in the lives and
manners of men, who is so blind that sees not? Who is so ignorant that
knows not? Who is so wilful that confesses not? Is not this the custom
and common course of all men, to revile, to speak evil of, to judge at their
own pleasure, whatsoever, and whosoever they mislike, and is not according to
their fancies? Then which there is not a greater, or more manifold mischief in
the life of man.

Against theft, robbery, spoiling, and taking away of our goods, we all with
one voice cry out: against the taking away of our good name, against the
impeaching of our honesty: against the impairing of our estimation and lawful
credit, shall we not cry out? If a good name be to be chosen before great
riches, and Prou. 22. 1.
loving favor before silver and gold, as Solomon writes: then how much the
good name of a man, is greater then riches and worldly wealth, so much greater
evil, is evil speech and slander, whereby a man is spoiled of his credit and
estimation, then robbery whereby he is bereft of his riches. And as every
sin ought to be Deuteronomy. 25. 1.
punished with greater or less punishments, according to the nature of the
sin: then since evil speech is greater then theft and robbery, it ought also
to be subject to the greater punishment.

This thing is quite contrary to the law of love; this is altogether repugnant
to the law of charity; this is a manifest breach of the second table of Gods
holy commandments; therefore in the sacred word and divine law of God, not
once, but often; not in the old testament alone, but in the new in like
manner, worthily condemned. What, that God in the ordering of the commonwealth
Leuit. 19.
of Israel his people, commands, that they should not go about as slaunderers
and backebiters, with tales and evil reports against their brethren? what
that the wise Sirach counsels us, not to be counted tale bearers, Ecclus. 5.
neither to wait with our tongues to speak evil: for that shame and
repentance follows the thief: and an evil condemnation is over him that is
double tongued: but confusion, hatred and envy, pursues him that is a
backebiter and evil speaker of his brother? What that the princely Prophet
seeking and searching who they be, Psalm. 15.
that should dwell in the Lords tabernacle and rest upon his holy hill; and be
reputed for true members of the Church, there hence excludes, and thrusts
out all such as with their tongues speak evil, and slander their neighbors?
What, that our blessed Savior Christ, the true expositor of the law of God,
condemns slander Math. 5.
as a part of murder, for thereby, with our tongues we slay and murder our
brethren: adiudging him worthy hell fire which shall be found guilty thereof?

What, that Saint Paul by the same spirit moved, 1. Cor. 6.
cries out to the Church, be not deceived; for neither fornicators, nor
idolators, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor thieves, nor
drunkardes, nor raylers, nor backebiters, nor extortioners shall inherit the
kingdom of God? What that the same Apostle condemning Ephesians. 4.
all the works of old Adam in the Saints, and exhorting them to put on the
new man created after God in holiness and true righteousness, in fine and
conclusion of his discourse, knitteth and shuts up the matter with this
admonition: Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, and envy, and evil
speaking be put away from you, with all maliciousness? What that Saint Peter
sings 1. Pet. 3.
the same song to the Saints: finally my brethren, be ye all of one mind, one
suffer with another; love as brethren; be merciful, be courteous: not rendering
evil for evil, nor rebuke for rebuke; but contrariwise bless, knowing that
you are called thereunto, even to be heirs of the blessing? do not these and
infinite the like, condemn all backbiting, evil speaking, slaundering one of
another; which ought to be wholly aba^doned and abolished from the saints of God?

Wherefore, whether it be openly and to the faces of me^ done; as reproachful
and taunting speeches, or whether it be privily and secretly done; as
backbiting and slander; tending to the diffamation, discredit, and hurting of
his name of who^ men speak, it is generally and indifferently condemned.

The original of this evil is from satan, and the petigree of evil speech is
to be fetched and derived from the devil; the great dragon, the old serpent.
For which cause as Revel. 12.
by the way of prerogative above all other, he is called the slaunderer, the
backbiter, the false accuser of the brethren before God. whose labor and
study, whose endeavor and travel is, to raise up lies, false accusations,
evil reports of the saints of God, and therefore is called by a name agreeable
thereunto, Diabolus; a slaunderer, an accuser. This father and patron of all
evil speech, spared Genesis 3.
not God himself, but spoke evil of him to Adam and Euah in paradise: has
God, says he, said you shall die? nay but you shall not die: for God knows
that at what time you eat, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods,
knowing good and evil. Thus he sought to have falsified the truth of God; thus
he brought up an evil report of God himself; as inuying the state of Adam;
thus he shronke not, ne sticked to speak evil of God, who Psalm. 31. Psalm. 145.
is the God of truth, and in whom there is no unrighteousness at all: who is
faithful in all his sayings, and holy in all his works; as the Scripture
teaches.

This enemy of God and man, with like malice set Job 1.
upon holy Job, the righteous person; accusing him as a temporizer, and seruer
of time; a counterfeit and hypocrite in heart, and such a one, as served God
for profit only. Wherefore of him thus speaks satan to God: what does Job
serve thee for naught? haste thou not hemmed and hedged him in on every side?
haste thou not blessed the works of his hands? and his substance is
increased in the land? but stretch out thine hand, and touch all that he
has, and he will blaspheme thee to thy face: thus he sought to bring Job into
dislike and disfavor with God: thus he brought up an evil report of the
most holy patriarch: thus he accused him of hypocrisy, who served the Lord
unfeignedly from his heart: thus he impeached his credit, like whom there was
none upon the earth; a just man and upright, fearing God, and eschewing evil.

This is he that begitteth all slanderous and reproachful persons; all evil
speakers and backbiters of their brethren: he it is who rayseth these motions
in our hearts, and blows the flame of these affections in the minds of the
wicked, in whose steps who so treads, whose example who so follows: whose
practice who so expresses, whose suggestion, who so obeys, therein may not
be reputed as the servant of Christ, but the slave of satan; not the child of
God, but the son of the devil; not the heir of life, but the firebrande of
hell; there to suffer torments with their ghostly father, the slaunderer of the
brethren for ever: unless they heartely repent themselves of the sin, and
leave the iniquity whereunto they are given.

This is that poison of Aspis the venomous serpent, Psalm. 140.
which lies and lurketh under the lips of the reproachful slaunderer: this
is that deadly poison, wherewith the Apostle says the tongues of men are
infected: these are James 3.
those biting and cruel beasts, who slay many with the venim of their lips;
of whom Diogenes the philosopher Diogenes.
speaks; who being demanded what beasts did bite most daungerously: answered
of tame beasts the flatterer; of wild beasts, the slaunderer biteth soorest.
These wound and slay at hand, and far of, at home and abroad, the quick and
the dead: these spare neither prince nor people; neither priest nor prelate:
neither friend nor foe, rich nor poor: base nor honorable; man nor woman, one
nor another; these destroy whole houses and families: as Doeg 1. Kings 22.
by his slander caused the family of the priests at Nob to be destroyed.
Haman his slander caused sentence of condemnation Hester 3.
to go out against the whole family of the Ecclus. 28.
Jews: these have destroyed such as have been at peace among themselves.
Therefore Sirach exhorts men to abhor the slaunderer and double tongued, for
as much as such have destroyed many that were at peace and unity among
themselves. This has disquieted many, and driven them from nation to nation,
cast down strong cities, and over thrown the houses of mighty men: and
brought down the strength of mighty people and been the decay of many nations:
this is that sets princes at variance, and armed mighty men one against
another: for the froward person sows strife, and a tale bearer makes
division Prou. 16.
among Princes, says Solomon. See more 3. chapt. James v. 8.

How great then is the sin, which God condemns; David excludes from the
tabernacle of God: our Savior counts for cruel murder: Saint Paul shuts
out from the presence of God and in his kingdom: S. Peter reproves, and which
works so great evil to the children of men?

The common causes for which men speak evil Causes of evil speech.
one of another, are chiefly these. 1. Men slander and speak evil, thereby
to be reue^ned of ^uch as either have done them hurt, or else are thought to
have done them injury. Thus men and women, not able with violence to make
their part a good, use their slanderous tongues as instruments and weapons of
their revenge: thus the desire of revenge which burns and boileth in our
breasts, stirs us up to speak evil, and to slander those on whom we would
be avenged. Here hence it is that having sustained injury at the hands of
men, and otherwise not able to be revenged: we to revenge our quarrels, and
repay the injury, give over our tongues to revile, to slander, misreporte,
backbite and speak evil of them, by whom the injuries are done and committed:
and how commonly this cause moves us hereunto, our selves are better then all
witnesses; and daily experience shows more plainly, then that we ought in
any wise to doubt thereof.

2. As desire to be avenged pricketh men forward to this mischief, so also
desire of gain moves men thereunto: for we see sometimes, that the bringing
of others by slander into contempt, may breed our commodity; wherewith all we
moved, give over our tongues as weapons and instruments of slander: and this
thing makes men not only to speak evil of others, before private persons, but
also in the presence of princes. Doeg might seem to have 1. Kings 22.
respected this matter in his slanderous accusation of David, and Achimclech
with the Priests of Nob, to Saul the king: from whom he expected not only
great favor, but great profit also at the kings hands, by this accusation But
without peradventure, Siba the servant of Mephibosecke 2. Kings 16.
had regard in his slander to his gain and commodity; when he told David
the king, that Mephiboseck the son of Jonathan, in David's persequutio^ by
Absolon his son, had said, that that day the house of Israel would restore to
him the kingdom of his father. This cause moved Ptolomeus 1. Machab. 11. chap.
the king of Egypt to forge and frame a foolish accusation to Demetrius,
against Alexander, that he sought his death and would have slain him; that thus
by bringing him into discredit, he might the better invade his kingdom; the
desire whereof, moved him to slander: being the only thing he aimed at, shot
at, and looked unto, as the thing shows.

In Princes courts nothing is more common, or customable, then for men (clear
from false surmised crimes, and void of all deserved spotte of false
suspicion) to be assailed and assaulted, with reproachful slander of the
wicked: wherein they seek neither the glory of god, neither the peace of
their country, neither the welfare of Princes, neither the happy estate of
Commonwealthes: but only their own private profitte and commodity, which
they endeavor to enlarge and increase, by the discrediting, diffaming,
backbiting, and slaundering of others.

Neither is this true in great personages, in Princes, and Peers of
Commonwealths, before whom the innocent, oftentimes for gain, are accused of
the wicked; but also in our private and civil life, it is a practice most
general, for our own gain, private lucre and commodity, to accuse,
condemn, speak evil of other men, and to slander one another.

3 Neither for these causes only do we speak evil of our brethren; but also,
stirred up by envy, for the graces and benefits of God, poured in plentiful
manner upon our neighbors whereat we being moved through envy, we speak evil
of them, as unworthy those graces and benefits received: and therefore it
comes oftentimes to pass, that the wicked moved with envy, for the
blessings of God upon his children, speak evil of them. When the malicious and
malignant people of this world, see the Saints of GOD to flourish in virtue,
to increase in grace, to excel in faith, to be zealous in religion, constant
in profession, of good hope in all afflictions, advanced to honor, enriched
with worldly wealth, or any such way, either inwardly, or outwardly blessed by
God: they envying them for the same, slander them, taunte them, and speak
evil of them in most wicked and ungodly manner.

The princes of the provinces of Babylon seeing the virtue, honor and glory,
of Daniel, whereunto he was advanced by God, through Darius the King of
Babylon; envying his state: forged and framed an accusation Dan. 6.
against him to Darius, whereby he was adjudged to the den of Lions. when the
obstinate and rebellious Jews, saw the zeal, boldness, constancy, and courage
of the Ierem. 18.
holy prophet, who would not be feared with the faces of men, from exequting
his charge: then they through mere malice and envy, slaundered the prophet,
and devised against him, and smit him with their bitter and backbitimg tongues.
The scribes and Pharisees, through envy of the graces of God in our blessed
Savior Christ, Mat. 12. John. 8.
raised up many false accusations and uttered many slanderous speeches against
his royal person, as the holy gospel witnesses. Herewith were the Jews
stirred up against Acts 6
Steven, whose spirit they not able to withstand and resist, they raised
false accusations, and suborned false witnesses, in forged manner,
slanderously to accuse him; as one that had spoken evil of Moses, and God.
The same cause pricked them forward in like manner, to speak Acts 13.
against the doctrine of Saint Paul, and to rail against his person: through
malice and envy conceived against him. To conclude, there is nothing more
common in the life of man, then for such as are endued, either with inward
graces of the spirit, or outward benefits by the hand of God, for the malice
and hatred wherewith men follow and pursue them, to be evil spoaken of, and
slaundered.

4 Finally, and that which properly concerns this place, our evil speaking
proceeds of pride: and therefore, as a mischief and effect of pride, it is
here condemned. The pride which of our selves we have conceived, makes us to
mislike whatsoever is not according to our pleasures, and mislike moves us to
speak evil of other men, who walk not, live not, do not all things to our
liking. For as the Ape and Raven think their own young ones fairest, and best
favored: yet is there not a more deformed thing among beasts, then the Ape:
neither a fouler among the birds, then the young Raven: So men like their own
doings, be they never so bad, and condemn all others in comparison of
themselves. The Isai 65.
Jews (through pride of their own hearts,) contemned the Gentiles, and spoke
evil of them: Stand aparte (say Luke 18.
they) to the Gentiles, for I am worthier then thou. The proud conceit of his
own righteousness, which the proud Pharisie had conceived, made him to
contemn the poor Publican, and to speak evil of him, even to the face, and
in the presence of God, in the Temple; I thank thee (O God) that I am not as
other me^; extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publicane. The
proud and wicked men of the world, seeing that the Saints would not run the
same excess of riot with them, and live as pleased them: therefore says Saint
Peter, they speak evil 1. Pet. 4
of them.

Our Apostle here making pride the cause of this evil, and insinuating, that
the proud and arrogant persons of the world, will proudely condemn, and
slanderously speak of all those, who live not after their pleasures:
condemns it as the effect of pride: neither is there, finally, any thing that
more moves men to speak evil one of another, then pride does: So that the
proud person hardly ever speaks well of any, but that he only may be in
estimation, account, and credit, he speaks evil of al others.

These and the like causes may be alleged of this evil, and mischief, which
S. James worthily condemns; Speak not evil one of another, brethren. How
men speak evil.


This mischief is manifold: and sundry ways are men said to speak evil
one of another.

1 When men misreport of us, and charge us with that which is not true, then
speak they evil of us. In this kind was David evil spoaken of, as in the
Psalm he witnesses; Cruel witnesses rose up against me; they asked me things
Psalm. 35.
I knew not: they charged him with things untrue, to bring him into disgrace,
discredit, and disfavor with men.

Thus Doeg the Edomite, (the chief of Saul's Heardmen) spoke evil of David,
and Achimelech the Priest of Nob, affirming that they took council together
against 1. Kings 22.
the king: I saw the son of Ishai, when he came to Nob, to Achimelech, the
son of Ahitub, who asked council of the Lord for him. Such evil speeches
were they, of those flattering Parasites, and backbiting Sicophants, who
falsely infourmed Saul, that David intended mischief against him. In this
kind proud Hamon spoke evil against Mardocheus, 1. Kings 24 Hester 3
and the people of the Jews, who charged them with things untrue, in bringing
up evil and false reports of them: There is a people (says he) scattered and
dispersed among the people, in all the Provinces of thy kingdom: whose laws
are diverse to all laws, and observe not the laws of the king. In the service
(indeed) of their God, they obeyed not; but in civil things, they were
obedient unto the laws of Assuerus, and therefore were charged falsely with
disloyalty, and rebellion against the laws of the king.

Thus we speak evil one of another, when to defame and discredit one
another, we forge, we feign, we frame and devise false things against our
brethren, to bring the^ into hatred, that we only might be accounted of.

Wherein we play the parts of malicious persons, who bedaube and bedashe with
dirte, the faces of other folk, that we might seem the fairer: and soil,
slurrie, and file the garments of our neighbors, that ours might seem the
gayer and gallanter. Thus by false reports, and slanderous speeches: thus by
reproachful contumely, and backbiting, men defile the name, fame, and credit
of men, and impeach their estimation, that themselves may appear and seem the
wiser, iuster, honester, and worthier in all things. And thus by reporting
false things of our brethren, to discredit them, we speak evil of them.

2 Neither thus only speak men evil one of another, but also when they
amplify, exaggerate, aggrauate, and make the infirmities and faults of men
far greater, by their reports, then indeed they be, to make them odious in
the sight of men: as when our neighbor is something choloricke and hasty; to
report him to be so mad, furious, and headstrong, that none can abide it. If
a man only salute a woman by the way, to say, he talked with her of
adultery. If our btother smite in anger, to say, he would have slain and
murdered. When by our report, we make the infirmities of men greater, and
far more heinous then they be indeed: this is evil speaking, and worthily
to be condemned. And it is usual among men now, to discredit, and make other
folk odious in the sight and hearing of others, to amplify their faults, and
make them far greater then they are indeed: this is also slander, this is
evil speech against our neighbor. Thus do eloquent Sycophants: thus do
rethoricall slaunderers: thus do backebiting whisperers: thus do false
accusers of their neighbors, who make every thing worse then it is in deed:
and by reporting, increase their crimes: this ought also to be avoided of the
Saints of God, who ought not (so much as in this wise) to speak evil of their
brethren.

3 Besides this, men speak evil of their breathren, when they blase abroad
the secret sins and infirmities of their brethren, when they should have
covered them in love, only to discredit, and defame the offenders. Solomon
making the detecting and revealing of the Pro. 11. 20. c. v. 1*
secreate sins of their brethren, a part and branch of evil speech and
slander, says, that he that goes about as a slanderer, discovers a
secret: but he that is of a faithful heart, concealeth a matter. Wherence it
appears, that to detect, open, and make known the secret sins of our
brethren, (which in love we should cover) is the point of a backbiter, and
slaunderer, and one that speaks evil of his neighbor, to discover secret
sins, when he needs not: to publish privy infirmities, when he should hide
them through love: to blaze abroad the unknown offenses of men, when he is
not thereunto in any wise enforced, and that to the end he may thereby
diffame them, and discredit them among men: What else,

4 Again, men sin by speaking evil of their brethren, when they deprave the
good deeds, and well doings of them, when they extenuate and make less, then
in deed they be, the good qualities in men, or call their virtues by the names
of the vices near thereunto. In this manner, men sin when of the good deeds
of men they say, they were done to evil end, upon evil intent, by unlawful
means, not in sincerity, and love to virtue, but in colorable manner, and in
fraudulent and deceitful hypocrisy.

Thus did Satan by deprauing the service of God in Job, speak evil of him to
God: when he said, that Job served God for gain, not sincerly. Thus the
disco^tented 1. Job.
Momy of the world, and finders of faults with every thing which them sealues
do not, speak evil, who calumniate and deprave every thing, be it never so
well don of us. If there be any thing done well to the country and common
wealth, they deprave it, and say, it was done not for love of country, but for
praises: and favor of the people: if any exployte be done in ware, they say it
was not for love to peace, but for desire of renown among men: if when men
labor faithfully in the Church, men say, it is for their own glory, and not
for the glory of God: if when men be devout, we should say, it is for a
fashion, not in sincerity: when men call the valiant man bold, the just,
rigorous and severe: the prudent crafty: the wary subtle: the liberal nottuous
and prodigal: he that speaks in defense of right, inprudente and licentious:
He that calls the sparie, miserable; or the temperate, wretched; the
peaceable, doltish; or the patient cowardly; slaundereth in like manner.

Not thus only, but also when men excel in learning, be singular for virtue,
renowned for faith, or any such gift and grace of Gods spirits. To deminish
and extenuate these things and make them by our envious reports, far less
then in deed they are: what is this then but evil speech here condemned?
wherefore as to exaggerate and amplify the vices, so to extenuate the virtues
and good gifts in the Saints, is slander, and evil speech also.

5 Moreover men speak evil, though they speak that which is true, touching
the sins and infirmities of their brethren: when they speak those things not
for love of the truth, but for the slaundering of the person, which has
offended. Fot as that Judge, which pronounces sentence of judgment and
condemnation against Basil reg^l^^ Monacho. cap. 33.
a malefactor: yet not for love of justice, but for an old grudge against the
man, is therein no just judge, but a murderer before God: albeit he do that
which justice prescribes, and requires also: even so when men report even
true things of their brethren, not for hatred of the sin, and love they bear
to the truth: but for the malice they have to the men, and to the end thereby
they may discredit them: are not therein to be counted tellers of a truth,
but rather bitter backebiters, slaunderers, and evil speakers, though they
report no more then is true, because they do it not for the love of the
truth, but to the slander and defaming of the persons of their brethren.

6 Finally, this evil is committed, when in the pride of our hearts we
vvoulde have all men live according to our pleasure and will: which when they
do not, we arrogantly condemn them: we slanderously report of them: we
maliciously censure them: we rashly judge them: in which sense, and of which
kind our Apostle chiefly here speaks. To condemn those which dance not
after our Pype: to speak evil of such as will not be led at our pleasures,
to report otherwise then well of such as will not live, and do in all
things as we vvoulde have them: this is the mischief of pride by the
Apostle principally intended, and spoken against in this part of Scripture.

This mischief has been in all times: and men there have been always, who
through the pride of their hearts, would have brought the whole world to live
at their pleasure: and to come to their call and lure, in the which their
conceived imagination, if any resisted, withstoode, and refused: they censured,
they judged, they spoke evil of, and condemned them.

Were there not (think you) in the time of the prophets, men puffed up with
this pride of spirit, who condemned arrogantly, censured foolishly: slaundered
wrongfully the holy Prophets and people of God, for that they would not live
after their pleasures? Did not the proud Mat. 9. 12. 15. etc.
Scribes, Pharisees, Priests, and Princes of the people, condemn and speak
evil of Christ and his Disciples, because they would not be in all things
conformable unto them? Did not the wicked in the days of Saint Peter, speak
evil of the Saints, and the elect servants of God, because they would not
live according to 1. Peter. 4.
their line and rule: and run on with them, the same race of riot? Are their
hearts otherwise affected, and not rather swelled and blown up with like
pride, who challenge to themselves wisdom, zeal, godliness, above their
brethren: and both in the common wealth, and in the church of Christ, would
have all things done, said, and ordered at their pleasure, and speak evil of
all men, that do not there after? Are there not many of our own coats and
callings, the Ministers of Christ Jesus, who because they can not have all men
to be as themselves are, and things in the Church at their pleasures ordered:
and all things done as they would have them: speak evil of them which excel
in authority? Privily refourme, and talk with the Parishioners against their
Pastors, Not subject to the law of their imagination? Which uncharitably,
unchristianly, unbrotherly, nay Iudasly betray their brethren: and bring by
their libels spredde abroad, the good names of such their fellow Ministers,
as never have been detected of any notorious crime, into question, and by
their slanderous and malicious speeches, have greatly diminished their
credites, empeached their estimation, wherein before they have been: and bring
them into contempt with men? Is not this the mischief of pride, which makes
them to condemn and speak evil of every thing and person, whosoever
pleases not them, and is not according to their minds?

Wherefore let me exhort all such in the fear of God: to examine their own
affections, to enter into the closet of their own thoughts, to cast down
their presumptuous and peremptory judgments: to leave the stealing away of
the hearts of the people from their ordinary Pastors, by mislyking of their
lawful and tolerable doings: and let me in the bowels of Jesus Christ beseech
them, and by the mercies of God entreat them: that when things are not to
their minds: yea, if there be blemishes, spots and wrinckles in the face of
the Church, (as there shall be to the end): that with patience they would
bear them, as becomes Saints: with prayer they would seek to redress
them: that they speak not evil against such as in opinions vary from them:
that they power not out the poison, venom and rancour of their hearts, by
condemning their brethren: that they tear not in sunder, the unseamed coat of
Jesus Christ by their bitter contending, with backbiting and discrediting of
their fellow laborers, and work fellows in the Lords harvest: but that
they take singular heed, and have special care to abandon and abolish this
mischief of pride, and to hold fast this exhortation of the Apostle: Speak
not evil one of another brethren.

Reasons of the precept. 1
And this evil he disswadeth, by four reasons, 1 From the violating of Gods
law: which is broken and violated of us, when in the pride of our mind we
condemn and speak evil of our brethren: thereof Saint James speaks in this
wise: he that speaks evil of his brother, or condemns his brother,
speaks evil of the law, and condemns the law. Thus when we speak evil
of our brethren and condemn them, because they walk not after our wills,
neither live according to our pleasures: we are not only injurious to our
brethren, but we are injurious to the law of God, whereof we speak evil, and
which we condemn in speaking evil, and condemning our brethren: to speak
evil of the law, and to condemn it, is a great sin, and great evil.
Therefore, must we not speak evil or condemn our brethren: because thereby
the law is evil spoken of, and condemned by us.

How does the law sustain injury, in thus iniurying How speak we evil of the
law, when we speak evil of the brethren.
of our brethren? how is it violated, how is it evil spoken of, and
condemned, when our brethren are evil spoken of and condemned by us?

Gods law teaches us not to condemn, not to speak evil of the brethren.
When notwithstanding this law, we do and will speak evil and condemn our
brethren: then we speak evil of the law, and condemn it in effect: because
we will not be brideled thereby: when we will not be restrained from proud
and arrogant condemning, nor withhelde from speaking evil of our brethren by
this law of God. When we violate and break this law, and do contrary
thereunto, our deeds speak even as it were of the law: that it is not
worthy, that it is not good enough to be the bridle and rule of our life.
When this law says: thou shall not slander or speak evil of thy neighbor:
Leuit. 19. Matthew. 7.
when this law says; Judge not, least you be judged: condemn not, least you
be condemned: and yet we will speak evil of our brethren, and condemn them:
do we not say, as it were by deeds, which in this matter speak for us, that
this law shall not teach us: it shall not bridle our tongues: we will not
thereby be restrained? Thus in effect we speak evil of the law, and
condemn it as insufficient, imperfect, unworthy to teach us: thus in our
actions, and by our deeds we speak evil of the law, and condemn it, as not
wise enough, as not good enough, as not circumspect enough: thus we find
fault with the law, as if it did not well in forbidding us to speak evil one
of another: and thus in the actions and practice of our lives, we speak evil
of the law, and condemn it, when we speak evil of our brethren, and
condemn them, which thing the law forbids.

Wherein it fares with the law of God, as it often fares with the positive
laws of Princes. For when positive and civil laws and statutes are made by
Princes in their common wealths, for the government and ordering of the
manners of men: and men infringe, break, and violate them: neither will
resour me their manners according to the prescript thereof: do not they
thereby show, that they like not such laws: that those laws are not
worthy to be the bridle of their lives: and thus in effect speak evil and
condemn them? even so when Almighty God has established a law: that no
man shall speak evil of his brother, nor rashly condemn him at his pleasure:
when obstinately and stubbornly we vvithstand this, and will not be
restrained and brideled from speaking evil of, and condemning our brethren:
what do we else, but in effect speak evil of it, and condemn it, as not
worthy to be our teacher and informer? And thus by speaking evil of our
brother, and condemning him: we speak evil of that law, and condemn it,
which says; Thou shall not speak evil of, or condemn thy brother.

Now who so speaks evil, and condemns any law, speaks evil and
condemns him, whose law it is: proud and wicked men speaking evil of the
law of God, and condemning it speak thereby evil of God, and condemn him,
by whose finger this law was written: and to find fault with the
wisdom of God, and to speak evil of his eternal spirit, and the
unsearchable councels of his heart: to take upon us to control and correct his
laws, statutes, and ordinances: what intolerable impiety: what desperate
iniquity, what singular ungodliness were it? How great is the wickedness
then of men, who by speaking evil of, and condemning their brethren, speak
evil of, and condemn the law: whereby they speak evil also and condemn God
himself, by whose finger it was written? This the Apostle confidering,
draws his argument from the breach of Gods law, and the injury thereunto
done, when we speak evil of the brethren, and dissuadeth us there from, by
this argument; in speaking evil of the brethren and condemning them, we speak
evil of the law and condemn it; therefore must we not speak evil of the
brethren; for he that speaks evil of his brother, and he that condemns his
brother, speaks evil of the law and condemns the law. Which reason of
the Apostle holds not only in this particular, whereunto it is applied, but
it is generally true in the whole law of God, and every part and member
thereof, that when we break it, either in whole, or in part, thereby we
speak evil and condemn it, either in whole or in part likewise. 1. When the
law therefore says: Thou shall have no other God but one; notwithstanding, to
make many Gods, as the idols of the Heathen: the works of our own hands, the
righteousness which our selves have wrought: the Saints in heaven, as many we
do: to make our gold our God, as the covetous; to make our bellies our Gods, as
the Epicures: to make our backs our Gods, as proud persons do; this is to
speak evil of the law and condemn it. 2. When the law says: Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven image, of any likeness whatsoever to worship
it: notwithstanding to make the image of the father, son, or holy ghost, to
express the divine majesty, and thereby to worship God; to make the image of
Marie, Peter, John, James, Paul, or any other man or woman, and in our temples
to erect them, and do worship unto them, is to speak evil of the law and to
condemn it. 3. When the law says: Thou shall not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain; notwithstanding this, to name God irreverently; to profess
him cou^terfetly; to call upon him deceitfully, to swear by him falsely, or
vainly, is to speak evil of the law and to condemn it. 4. When the law
says: Remember to keep holy the Saboth day; yet not regarding that law, to
profane the Lords day, in banqueting, in surfeiting: in dicing, in dancing,
in enterluding, in play following, in bearbaiting, and bulbaiting, in going and
gadding abroad, in sleeping, in idleness, in other lewdenesse or loosenes
whatsoever: what is this but to speak evil of the law and condemn it? 5.
When the law says: Honor thy father and mother; notwithstanding this, to
deny duty to our parents, in not reuerencing them as becomes us: is not
relieuing them in extreme age and poverty: to be disobedient to the fathers
of our countries, princes and magistrates: to neglect our spiritual fathers,
our ministers and pastors, which begitte us daily through the ministry 1.
Cor. 4. Gal. 4.
of the gospel: not to give duetifull service to such as are our masters
after the flesh, and for the time in steed of our parents: not to perform
that reverence to all our elders and betters, as by due belongs unto them: is
to speak evil of the law, and to condemn it. 6. When the law says: Thou
shall not kill; yet either in heart by hatred, or in tongue by slander, or in
hand by violence to murder either our selves or others; is it not to speak
evil of the law, and condemn it? 7. When the law says: Thou shall not
commit adultery: yet to hunte after strange flesh, in thy heart to desire any
other besides thy married and lawful wife, in sight, in show, in sign to
pretend carnal looseness; to join thy self unlawfully by fleshly
conjunction to any other, then thy yoke fellow appointed by God: is to speak
evil of the law, and condemn it. 8. When the law says: Thou shall not
steal; yet, to rob, to spoil, by sea, by land, to oppress by violence, to
retain by force the goods of our brethren, to deceive by fraud the simple of
his right: to pick, to steal, to pilfer, or by any sinister way, to possess
that is not thine own: what is this but the speaking evil of the law, and
the condemning thereof? 9. When the law says: Thou shalt not bear false
witness against thy neighbor, notwithstanding, to testify and witness a
false matter, to lie and speak untruly of, and to our brethren; to use disceit
or forged cauillation in our tongues, to counterfeit, to dislemble, to gloss
with our lips, or any like way, here against to offend, is to speak evil of
the law, and to condemn it. 10. When the law says: Thou shall not covet;
though we abstain from the outward action, and doing of evil; yet burn
inwardly in unlawful lust of any thing which is not ours; what is this, but to
speak evil of the law, and to condemn it? Finally, whatsoever the law
enioyneth, therein not to be obedient; what is it but in effect, to speak
evil of the law, and condemn it? Which we then speak evil of, and condemn,
when thereunto we will not be obedient. Thus then the law of God violently
broken, wilfully withstood, voluntarily resisted of men, is evil spoken of and
condemned for that they show in effect, that they mislike it; as not worthy to
direct and lead them in the race of their lives; and this is the first reason
why we may not speak evil of our brethren, nor condemn them rashly, because
thereby we speak evil of the law, and condemn it, which teaches us not to
speak evil of, or condemn our brethren.

A second reason, why we should not speak evil of, ^. Reason.
or condemn the brethren, is drawn from the duty of the saints; it is the
duty of Gods children, to do the law, not to judge or condemn it. The law
says, speak not evil of thy brother, neither condemn thy brother; this law
must Leuit. 19. Mat. 7.
we do, and endeavor to fulfill it in every point, and not by withstanding it,
seem to condemn it, and be judges of it. Men condemn the law, when they
condemn their brethren: they judge the law, when they will not be taught
thereby, nor reformed; but as judging it unworthy to be the rule and line of
their life, they withstand it. God has not appointed us to judge his law, but
rather to do it, therefore by not speaking evil of the brethren, must we do the
law, and not by resisting it, condemn and judge it.

How men are said to do the law, See. S. James chapter 1. v. 22. The meaning of
this place is, that we are ordained to be doers of the law, and by God willed
to labor to fulfill it; therefore it stands us upon thereunto to tend:
therein to labor and travel: and not by arrogantly judging of our brethren,
rashly to judge of the law.

Men become the judges of the law, when by obstinately transgressing of the
law, they seem superiors and above the law, as such as will not be subject
thereunto: and not, by doing it, seem inferiors, as they which will be ruled
thereby: then, when we speak evil of our brethren, which the law forbids,
in rising up and resisting against this law, we seem to be above the law, as
such as will not be restrained thereby. To judge the law, and not to do it, is
great sin. Therefore must we rather in not speaking evil Deuteronomy. 27.
of the law, do it, then in speaking evil thereof, judge it. Great blessings
are promised such as do observe the law, a great curse likewise is threatened
to them which do not keep it: Moses therefore says, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all the words of this law to do them. This Apostle
pronounces them blessed which look into James 1. 1. Ioh. 2.
the perfect law of liberty, to do it: Saint John witnesses, that such as do
the will of God, shall remain and abide for ever: and we are called to the
doing of the law, we ought therefore to do it, that we may be blessed in our
deed, and remain for ever: and not judge it, by violating thereof, least we
taste of the curse which is threatened. When we speak not evil of our
brethren, we fulfill the royal law: which says, Love thy neighbor as
thy self: when we speak evil of them and judge them, because they walk
not according to our pleasures, we judge the law, which is far from our
duty.

The law is by God ordained to be the line and level of our life: the guide
of our feet, the governor of our paths: therefore the princely Prophet
David Psalm. 119.
says: Thy word (o Lord) is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my
paths: this law of God is the touchstone of our actions, the trial of al our
works: the balance to weigh whether they be according to the law of
equity and justice: to do this law, not to judge it, ar we called. For which
cause almighty God in his law witnesses, that Deuteronomy. 4 and 6.
he had given laws unto his people to do them. Our Savior so often requires
the doing of the law and word of God in the saints: not every one that says
unto me Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 7.
but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven; to the woman which
pronounced the womb blessed Luke 10.
that bore him, and the pappes that gave him suck: He says, yea rather
blessed are they that hear the word of God and do it. To his disciples after
the washing Ioha^. 13.
of their feet: blessed are ye if you know these things and do them. Saint
James requires this, and calls James 1.
men to the doing of the law and word of God; be ye doers of the law not
hearers only. Finally, the Apostle in his Revelation: blessed is he that
reads and hears Revel. 1.
the words of this prophecy, and keeps those things which are written
therein: to this law we must submit our selves, and give over all our actions
thereby to be judged: this law forbids evil speech of the brethren; this
forbids proudly to judge them, arrogantly to condemn them, because they
walk not according to our wills: this law must we not resist, but obey;
notwithstand but fulfill: this is the duty of the saints of God: this is the
thing, we are bound unto: wherefore if notwithstanding, we speak evil of
the brethren, we do not the law, but we judge it, and so swerve from the duty
of Gods saints and the thing whereunto we are called, which is to be doers, not
to become judges of the law of God. And this is the second reason of the
Apostle, why we may not speak evil of the brethren: because in so doing we
are not doers of the law which duty requires, but judges, which becomes not
the saints.

3. A third reason, why men may not proudly condemn, 3. Reason.
and arrogantly judge their brethren, is drawn from the usurping of the office
of God and of Christ, men must not proudly arrogate that to themselves, which
is proper to God: to give laws of their lives unto men, which if they embrace
not at our pleasure, to speak evil of the^ and to condemn the^ therefore,
appertains not to us, for there is one only law giver, which prescribes
rules to us and to our brethren, how we shall live, and one judge which shall
judge both us and them, if we do not thereafter: and this law maker and judge,
is not man's fancy, will, pleasure: but God himself: so that when we will take
upon us to prescribe unto other men, and would have all men live after our
examples and pleasures: Which if they will not, proudly to judge them, bitterly
to speak of them, severely to censure and condemn them; is to usurp the
office of God our heavenly father, to arrogate to our selves the thing which
apperteineth not unto us: therefore ought we not to do it.

That God is the only Law geuer and judge, which is able to save, and to
destroy: and that no man ought to take upon him to set laws of life and death
to men's consciences, and restrain them to their pleasures, it appears. For
in the holy mountain, with great fear and terror, with sights and soundes from
above, almighty God Exodus 19. and 20.
delivered unto Moses the two tables of the law. In the preface whereof, the
Lord sets down his own name, as the author thereof; I am the Lord thy
God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, thou shall have no other
Gods but me. To the observing whereof, blessing and life is promised: to the
breach thereof, death and cursing Deuteronomy. 28. and 30. Deuteronomy. 27. Leuit. 26.
is threatened.

This is that law, which only gives definitive sentence, and judgment
peremptory upon all men.

In the whole course of the law and Prophets, it is witnessed, that the laws
of life and death, which press the hearts and consciences of men, are only the
Lords: and that he only according thereunto judges: so that men may not take
upon them to draw all others after their tails, and lead them at their
pleasures: which when they refuse, the^ also to speak evil of the^, and judge
the^. The holy Prophet Isai subscribeth hereunto; The Lord is our Isai 33.
Law geuer, the Lord is our king: he will save us, says the Church by the
mouth of the Prophet: It was the Lord Psalm. 147.
which gave this law unto his own people Israel: the Lord showed his word to
Jacob, his statutes and his ordinances to Israel: he established a law in
Jacob, and ordained a testimony in Israel: which he commanded our fathers to
teach their children: says David the holy Prophet. And this concerning the
moral precepts thereof, is everlasting, universal, and to all the world
given. Therefore he is to be reputed the law giver and the judge only which
gave it first unto Israel his people.

Who being the only geuer of the law, can thereby either save or destroy:
condemn, or justify, pardon or punish: wherefore this must men leave to him
alone, which if they do not, but will condemn their brethren after their wills,
then challenge they to themselves the right of God: then thrust they him from
his heavenly throne of judgment: therein endeavor they, as it were to rise up
in his rome, and give that sentence, which only belongs unto him: then which
arrogancy and pride, what can be greater?

It is the Lord that searches the hearts and raines: it is he, who perceth
into the cogitations of men, and sees that they are but vain: he knows only
who are his, and he alone can tell when and whom to save or condemn to
discharge or destroy: this prorogatiue we take from God, of this privilege we
spoil him, of this preferment of judging and condemning, of making and setting
laws of life and death to the consciences of men, we then bereue God: when we
in the pride of our hearts speak evil and condemn our brethren, when they
displease us and our humors. Thus men challenge to themselves that which is
Gods and Christ's only: thus take they sentence of judgment out of the mouth of
God: and take the power of giving laws to the Church, out of his hands: how
great is this blasphemous presumption, how heinous is this extreme ungodliness?

For as it is not only doting and foul folly, but horrible impiety, and
wickedness in the highest degree, for men to take upon them to repele the
eternal laws of God, given by him to the Church and all posterity for
evermore: So is it likewise no less ungraciousness, an lover bold and
presumptious rashness, ^o make other laws contrary to his, as if we would
teach him wisdom: and thereby to judge our brethren.

Christ is our king, he only is the head over his Church, therefore, as unto
the king, and chief head of his Church, it belongs of right to give laws to
the saints. Was it ever heard among earthly Princes, that loyal subjects
either could, or would, either repel, or change the laws of their Princes? or
do they at any time take upon them to make laws of their own heads, without
their Princes, in their own kingdoms? or can there be greater treason and
rebellion, then to endeavor to seek such lewd liberty? do the Princes and
Peers of Commonweals, call Parlements, set down laws, without the
authority of their Kings and Emperors? were not this great conspiracy? and
shall men take upon them in the church, which is the royal seat of Christ, and
the very septer of his kingdom, to establish laws without his license? were
there ever laws proclaimed in any kingdom, but in the name of that king which
there reigns? and shall men proclaim laws of their own devising, in christ's
kingdom, under any other name, or authority, then by the name and authority
of Jesus Christ? wherefore, we deny Christ's soueraintie over us, when without
him we will make laws to others: and we refuse God to be our law geuer, when
besides his laws, we will proclaim laws to bind our brethren. Which thing,
as gross sollie, and great impiety, the Apostle condemns: testifying, that
God only is our law-geuer, and judge; in whose power it is to save and destroy:
and therefore men ought not to challenge that to themselves, in any wise.

Of this evil how many are now guilty? is not every one ready to prescribe
laws of the lives of their brethren, and sisters? If we see any, either in the
habit of apparel, or in the talk of the tongue, or in the gesture of the
body, either in the course of his Common life, or in the religion, and
worship he performed to God, or any other thing, which walks not according
to our pleasures, and agrees not in all things to our life and ruie: how soon
speak we evil of him? how proudly do we judge him? how peremptorily do
we condemn him? Thus one man deals with another: one woman thus judges
another: thus the people condemn the pastors; the pastors the people: thus the
Clergy speak evil of the Temporaltie; and they of the Clergy: thus one
preacher of another; one lay man of another: and almost every one of his
neighbor.

Is not this to usurp that which belongs unto god? is not this to take the
scepter of judgment out of the hand of Jesus Christ? This is reproved by
Saint Paul, who art thou that condemnest another man's servant? he stands, or
falls, to his own master: what have thou to Romans 14.
intermeddle where thou have not to do? This is condemned by this Apostle: who
ascribes prescription of laws, and pronouncing of judgment, to God only:
who can save, and destroy; but thou (o man) can save none: therefore by thy
proud judgment, condemn and destroy none: yet condemnest and destroyest (as
much as in thee lies) thy brother: when, because he lives not after thy
pleasure, thou speak evil of him. And this is the third argument of the
Apostle.

The fourth, and last reason, why we should not speak The fourth reason.
evil, or rashly condemn our brethren, is, from the frailty of our own
common state and condition: For all men are subject to infirmities, therefore
ought we not, one of us rashly to condemn another. And this reason, that it
might be more forcible, it is proposed in the manner of an interrogation; Who
art thou, which iudgest another? art not thou a man subject to like
infirmities? why do thou so proudly then judge thy brother? who art thou
that iudgest another man? whence art thou? who did give thee that authority?
who has beautified thee with this prerogative, and preferment, above thy
brethren? who has lifted thee up to so great glory, as to give sentence of
judgment of thy brother?

By which speech, men are not only admonished of their infirmities; Who art
thou? art thou singular and alone, in whom there is no imperfection? Art thou
exempted from the common condition of all men, in whose life there is neither
spotte nor wrinckle, nor any blemishe of sin? but also told and taught their
unworthiness, how far they are from that preferment and pre-eminence, to
judge of their brethren; Who art thou, that iudgest an other man? so that by a
just derison, and a bitter taunt, the Apostle shows both their infirmity of
condition, and unworthiness to so great a thing, which take upon them to judge
their brethren.

Wherein he rightly alludeth to the common speech of men; who seeing a proud
person, taking too much upon him, and arrogating great matters unto himself,
to teach him his gross folly, and to tell him of his unworthiness, say in
this wise unto him; Alas good Sir, who are you? what, are you better then your
fellows? is there none so good as you? So the Apostle, to beat down their
pride, by the consideration of natural infirmity: and to abate their lofty
stomaches, through view of their own unworthiness, to be in that place over
their brethren, which they proudely challenge, and take to themselves, breaks
out, and says; Who art thou, that iudgest another man?

There is no better bridle to the headie, and hasty judging of other men, then
to be plucked back with the raines and bitte of our own frailty, and view of
our own infirmities: which thing greatly abateth our pride, asswageth our
hatred, cools our courage, and tempereth the hastines of our judgments
against our brethren.

When the Peacocke beholds his tail, beset with such variety of beautiful
colors: then he swells in pride, contemning, and condemning all other
birds in comparison of himself: but when he looks upon his black feet,
and veweth the deformity thereof, his comb is something cut, and his courage
abated: So when we lift up our eyes to the graces and gifts of God bestowed
upon us: then we wax proud and insolent: but when we cast our eyes down
upon the manifold infirmities whereunto we are subject: then is our pride
abated, and our insolency of spirit diminished, and we made more moderate, and
temperate, in judging of our christian brethren. See. 14. 15. Sermons upon 3.
James, verse 2.

What man is without his fault? what person without his blemish and infirmity?
If all men be subject to like infirmities; if they all be made of the same
frail and brittle moulde; if they all carry about them the same weakness of
condition; and are compassed about with like infirmities; why should they then
speak evil, and rashly judge their brethren?

When the Scribes and pharisees were too hasty and John ^
severe in judging the woman taken in adultery, Christ gives them this bone
to gnawe upon; He that of you is without sin, let him cast the first stone at
her: not therein justifying the fault, nor forbidding to punish wicked persons:
but telling men when they reprove others, they must have an eye to their own
infirmities: and when they punish and correct the faults of other mo^, they
must yet have regard to the frailty of their own condition, but specially be
clear and void of those things, which in others, by them are condemned, that
they may be led with true zeal to justice, and have regard to the common
condition, whereunto they are all subject, that so their judgments may be
moderated toward their brethren.

A Physicion, full of foul diseases, without regard thereof, dealing roughly
with his pacients, may worthily hear with shame; Physicion, heal thy self. A
man too Luke 4
severe in searching out, and judging other men, without an eye to his own
blemishes; may rightly be touched with that in the Gospel; Hypocrite, first
pluck out the beam in thine own eye, then shall thou see the better Luke 6
to pluck out the moate that is in the eye of thy brother. Such as in the
pride of their minds, speak evil of all men, and judge rashly those which
please them not, may well be checked with this bitte of S. James, who art thou
that iudgest another man?

If we look well about us we shall find something in our selves worthy to be
condemned: let us not therefore rashly condemn our brethren: least with
confusion of face: hanging down of looks and countenance, casting down of
eyes and head for shame, we hear the tau^t of the apostle: who art thou that
iudgest another man?

For the day will come, when even they that thus proudly condemn other men,
shall themselves wirh all 2. Cor. 5. Romans 14.
men, stand before the tribunal seat of Christ, there to give accounts of
their own works: and not to take accounts of the lives of others, or sit in
judgment to condemn them. Then shall these proud persons be called to render
accounts of their own bailivvicks: there shall every one stand to be judged,
and not sit to give judgment of his brethren. This glory only belongs unto
Luke 16.
Jesus Christ, who is ordained of God the only judge of the quick and the
dead. What man shall be so forgetful of his own infirmity? who shall be so
mindlesse of his John. 5. Romans 2. 2. Tim. 6.
own vnvvorthinesse, as not remembering the one, and altogether forgetting the
other: shall in the pride of his heart, speak evil, condemn rashly, and
proudly judge his brother and neighbor? From which as unseemly in the Saints
of God, the Apostle in this place dissvvading, breaks out in this force of
speech; Who art thou, that iudgest another man? And this is the first mischief
of pride here condemned: and the four reasons thereunto used by the holy
Apostle.

Now let us pray to God for the aid of his spirit, that it may abate all
pride in our hearts, vvherby we svvel one against another: and teach us to
leave all judgment unto God, and Jesus Christ, to whom to judge al,
apperteyneth: that we acknovvledging our own infirmities, may be moderate in
judging of our brethren, that so God may in all things be glorified through
Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom, with, etc.

James Chap. 4. verses 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. Sermon 22.
Verse 13. Go to now, ye that say, to day or to morrow we will go into such a
city, and continue there a year: and by and sell, and get gain.

14 Yet we cannot tell what shall be to morrow. For what is your life? is it not
even a vapor, which appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes away?

15 For that ye ought to say: if the Lord will, and if we live we will do this
or that.

16 But now you rejoice in your boastings: all such rejoicing is evil.

17 Therefore to him that knows how to do well, and does it not, to him it
is sin.


2. evil of pride
THis is the second evil and mischief of pride: even the vain confidence
that men have in themselves: when presuming of themselves, and the certainty
of their lives and states: they determine long before of these and these
matters: as if it were in their own powers to do what they lust: and all
things did not rather depend and hang upon the will, pleasure, and providence
of God. This other mischief of pride, the Apostle in these words condemns.
Go to now, ye that say, etc.

In which words five things are to be considered, and noted of us. Namely 1
What he condemns: the vain confidence of man, in determining that before,
which is not in himself to compass. ver. 13. 2 Why we should not do so, two
reasons there are alleged. verse 14. 1 Because times alter things, and are
uncertain. 2 Because our life is unsure, that thereof we can promise nothing.
3 A correcting of the evil, and thing here reproved. ver. 15. 4 The repeating
thereof again. verse 16. 5 The conclusion. verse 17.

1 Now of these five, the first is the reprehending of the evil and sin it
self: Go to now ye that say: to day or to morrow will we go into such a
city, and continue there a year, and by and sell, and get gain: in which
place the Apostle reports and refers the words of the proud Merchants
and occupiers of the world, or generally of any the like, who in the
insolency or arrogancy of their hearts, and vain confidence in themselves,
leaving the reverend account they should make of the divine providence of God,
whereby all things only are directed, too much trusting in themselves, say,
to day, or to morrow will we go into such a city, and continue there a
year, and by and sell, and occupy: Thus in a vain confidence determine they
of future business, and things to come, which is great pride and presumption.
For who can appoint before hand such matters, seeing the event of the things,
the state of their own life, the power to compass our determinations, is not
in our own selves, and own hands, but wholly depends upon the will of God,
and his divine providence.

Let all such as presume too much in vain confidence of themselves, and say
with him in the Gospel: soul rest, eat, drink, be merry, for thou have much
goods reposed and laid up for thee, for many years: beware least Luke 12.
they hear with him the terrible voice of God unto him answering again: Thou
fool, this night shall they take thy soul from thee. This vain confidence of
wicked and proud persons, Saint James here condemning, cries out, Go to now
you that say, to day or to morrow will we go into such a city, and continue
there a year, and by and sell, and gain: which words may seem most plain
unto us, if we consider but a little the speech and practice of proud
occupiers: who leaving the providence and will of God, whereby all things are
governed, determine of things long before, at their own pleasures, and say
among themselves, this will we do, and that will we do, who shall hinder
it? who shall let us?

Are there not many in our times likewise culpable of the like pride and
vanity? Say not princes this will we do the next year, and the year
following, and who shall hinder us? Say not captains, we will beseege such a
City, and such a time will invade such a town, and what shall let us? Say not
our marchaunts among themselves, we will shortly go to Turkey; to Barbary; to
Venice; to Constantinople; to Hambrough; Norenbrough; to France; to Flaunders;
to Spain; to the East Countries, and there will we occupy thus long; and
have our factours and agents in this place, and that place of the world? Say
not Gentlemen, and rich Citizens; at such a time we will ride down into the
Country, and there continue so many weeks, so many days: we will then
return and spend the winter in the City? Say not all men and women almost in
the confidence of their own states; this will we do; and that will we do:
not looking to the will and providence of God, but determine their matters long
before in the vanity and pride of their own minds? This is the vain
confidence which men conceive of themselves, reproved by the Apostle, Go to
now, you that say, to day or to morrow will we go into such a City: and there
continue a year: and by and sell, and occupy and gain.

2 This speech and vain considence the Apostle The reasons condemning this
pride.
condemns by a double reason. 1 From the uncertainty of events which times
alter: who knows what to morrow may bring? The time to come is uncertain,
to morrow may have events which we know not, nor dream of: to morrow may
bring things to pass quite contrary to our purposes, which, may altogether
alter these determinations: we can not assure our selves of like events to
morrow, as we see to day: who knows whether to morrow will bring life or
death, poverty, or adversity: sickness or health: good or evil? Therefore
ought we not to presume of the time to come. One night alters many things.
Many men are alive over night, dead in the morning. Many are over night rich
and wealthy: by next day, impouerished and beggered altogether. Many houses
stand to day, which before to morrow may utterly be destroyed and burnt to the
ground. Many regions are now dry land, which by to morrow may be
ouer-flowne, and over whelmed with sudden rushing in of the sea and waters.
Many at liberty to day, which ere to morrow may be restrained.

These events are uncertain, neither know we what to morrow will bring
unto us: what vanity then is it to determine of things long before, seeing
that one night may so easily alter all, and turn things up side down? The
Sodomites were suddenly consumed: the men of the first world, well over
Gene. 19.
night: by the next day ouer-vvhelmed with the floods, and deluge, and so
destroyed. The sons and Gene. 6. 7.
daughters of holy Job, were merry the one day, Job. 1.
but on the morrow they were oppressed and slain, the house falling on them.
Job himself the one day rich, in children, in sheep, in oxen, in asses, in
camels: but the next day miserably empouerished: seeing therefore one day can
thus altar the state and condition of things, what gross folly is it, for a
long time then to determine before hand, of these like matters? Let us hear
therefore the grave counsel of Solomon the wise; Glory not of to Prou. 27.
morrow, for thou know not what to morrow will bring. Many things alter in
moment of time: the Latin proverb is true assuredly; that many things fall
out betwixt The latin proverb.
the pot and the upper lip: many ready to put the cup to their heads, have
been hindered therefro. Now if in so short a time, as a man may put the cup
to his mouth, many things oftentimes do wonderfully altar: what madness is it,
and vanity of vanity to determine long before of things to come? and if we
can not promise to our selves the events of one day, neither can be assured
what shall fall out to morovv; what presumption and pride is it to promise our
selves security and continuance of our state, for months, years and terms
of time at our own pleasure? the first reason therefore why the Saints of
God, neither any other what soever, should not say in this wise, to day or to
morrovve will we go into such a city; is because the time, and event of
things is uncertain, neither can we tell what to morrow will bring unto us.

2 Now as we ought not thus to determine of things to come, because the time is
uncertain, and the event of things doubtful: so neither ought we thus to
determine; because our life is frail, brittle, unstable, and of all things
most uncertain. For which cause it may be compared The uncertainty of man's
life.
unto a vapor in the air, carried up by the beams of the sun, which there is
dispersed suddenly, and vanishes. Wherefore we are not able to promise any
thing absolutely to our selves: so frail is our state, so transitory is our
life, and our days so short and uncertain.

And touching the shortness of man's life, and the uncertainty of our worldly
condition, it is a large field to walk in: it is a most ample scope; it is a
thing whereof many have spoken many things: this the holy Scripture
preaches, thereof the men of God have witnessed; to that, experience of all
men and women which have been in former age, subscribeth.

Holy Job falling into the consideration of the mortality Job. 7.
of man, and the uncertainty of this temporal life; breaks out into these
words, my days are swifter then a vveauers shittle, and they are spent
without hope: remember that my life is but a vvinde; and that my eye shall not
return to see pleasure: my days have been Job 9.
more swift then a post, they have fled, and have seen no good thing. Man
that is borne of a woman has but Job. 14.
a short continuance, and is full of misery: he shoots forth as a flower,
and is cut down; he vanishes as a shadow and continues not. Thus he
compares our life, to things of least and shortest continuance; to the
weauers shittle, which he catches and presently casts out of hand again:
to vvinde which is of greatest swiftness: to a post, which tarrieth not
long in a place, but soon departs: to the flower of the field which quickly
withers, to a shadow which most easily vanishes. When David and his
Princes, not long before his death, 1. Chron. 29
offered for the building of the temple, he freely confesses, that he and they
were strangers as all their forefathers were; and their days like the shadow
on the earth. In his heavenly Psalms and songs to GOD, he sometimes Psalm. 90.
compares the life of man in swiftness and celeritie, to a thought, then
which what is sooner past? our days are past in thine anger, we have spent
our days Psalm. 103.
as a thought. In another place: the days of man are as grass, as a flower of
the field so flourishes he, for the wind goes over it, and it is gone, and
the place thereof shall know it no more. Finally, man's life says he, is
vanity, Psalm. 144.
his days are like a shadow that vanishes.

Isai the Prophet of God, describing the uncertainty Isai 40. 1. Pet. 1.
of man's life and earthly glory, cries out; all flesh is grass, and all the
glory of man, is as the flovver of grass: the grass vveathereth and the
flovver falls away. This Apostle to discipher and discover unto us the
great weakness of our nature and the uncertainty of our life, compares it
also to a vapor, a thing of short continuance.

The very Heathen and natural men, by the only light of nature, have seen no
less, and have confessed the same: painted out the frailty of our nature, and
the shortness of our life in a diverse manner. Some have called man a bubble,
which rises and falls suddenly. Pindarus the Poet terms a man, a thing of
one days Pindarus.
continuance: and again he calls man the dream of a shadovv: a shadovv
seems to be something and is nothing: and to dream of a shadovv, is less
then nothing: yet does he call man, the dream of a shadovv. A certain
philosopher being asked what the life of man was, compared it to the playing
of a part upon a stage and scaffold, vvhereon the plaier stands a little
while: fetches a turn or two, and so departs: even so plays man his
part upon the stage of this world, vvhereon he turns and walks a while
and then departs.

Another of the Poets calls man a breath and shadovv only, then which
nothing more subject to corruption Sophocles.
to vanity. Therefore have some made large and long discourses: and write
whole books of the misery, vanity and shortness of man's life. The truth
whereof experience of al men and women that have been before us, shows.
For where is now Adam, Cain, Abel, Noe? where are the patriarks, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and the rest? where are the Prophets, Moses, Elias,
Nathan, Michea, Isai, Jeremy. Ezechiel, Daniel, and others? Where are the
kings, Saul, David, Solomon, Jereboam, Rehoboam, Achab, Jehozaphat, Hezechiah,
Josiah, Iehoram, Ieconiah, and all the princes of Judah and Israel? Where are
the Apostles and Martyrs? Where are all the men of might, and such as for
virtue have been renowned? where are all men, women, rich, poor, young, old,
learned, ignorant, wise, foolish, high, low, base, honorable, princes and
people which have gone before us? is it not manifest in them all, that this our
earthly life, is no better then a vapor? the consideration whereof should
keep us from presumpteous determining of things to come. Let us therefore
oppose our miserable state and wretched condition to this vain confidence,
that thereby our pride may be abated, for which things sake it is here set
down by the Apostle, as a reason to dissuade us from our vain confidence.
Seeing therefore that the events of times are doubtful, and our life a thing
uncertain, it were mere madness for us thus to presume of our selves, and in
the vain confidence of our hearts to determine of things to come, long
before; which thing here is condemned by the Apostle; and dissuaded by this
double reason: Go to now you that say, to day or to morrow will we go into
such a city, and continue there a year; and bie and sell, and gain; yet ye
can not tell what shall be to morrow: for what is your life? it is even a vapor,
which appears for a time, and afterward vanishes away.

3. The thing condemned and the reasons, why, delivered: in the third place
follows a correcting of the evil: in stead of saying, to day and to morrow we
will go to such a city: let us say, if the Lord will, and if we live, we will
do this or that; thus corrects he the evil: for ye ought to say, says he,
if the Lord will, and if we live, we will do this or that.

It is a special point of godliness, in all things that are to be done, first
to make honorable mention of the Lords will and pleasure: and evermore to
recount and record our own frailnesse: and in all things to say, if the Lord
will, and if we live, we will do this or that. Our whole life relieth upon him:
in him it is only to direct all our way,: without his leave can we do
nothing, let us therefore refer all things to his will, and say as we are
taught by the Apostle; if the Lord will, and if we live, we will do this or
that.

The whole course of man's life is ruled by God, the heart of man, says Solomon
purposes his way, but the Lord Prou. 16. Prou. 20.
directs his steps: the steps of man are ruled by the Lord, how can a man
then understand his own ways? I know says Jeremy, that the way of man is
not in himself; Ierem. 20.
neither is it in man to guide and direct his steps. And this is not only true
in walking after the law of God, and directing our lives according to his
will, which without his special favor and grace cannot be: but of the whole
course of our life, which is altogether directed by his pleasure and
providence: wherefore in all things, men ought to prefer the will of God. To
which purpose our Savior Christ, puts a petition, concerning the will of
God, before Mat. 6.
the things appertaining unto this life. What can any man, otherwise of never
so great might do, without the will of God? if Pharao could have done any thing
by his Exodus 14.
own absolute power, without the will of God: then had the Israelites at once
been overthrown, and his kingdom in security. If Aman could have done any
thing without Ester. 3.
the will of God, then had Mardocai gone to the pot, and all the men of the
Jewish nation. If Sennacherib could have done any thing without Gods will,
then Hezechia 4. Kings. 18. 19. Reave. 12.
had been plagued by the Assyrians. If the devil himself could do any thing
without the will of God, then long since had the whole Church of God been
destroyed utterly. No man, neither in these like matters, nor in any civil
affairs can do any thing, but according as God has determined, and after his
will: for which cause in all things and actions we adventure and enterprise,
we must prefer his vvil, if God will.

When Paul took his leave of the Ephesians, ready Acts 18.
to journey toward Jerusalem, he promised to return to them again: yet
not simply, but if God would. Being at Corinth, he protests to the Romans,
that he prayed to God, that he by one mean or another, might have Romans 1.
a prosperous journey unto them, by the vvil of God. When he was at Philippi
in Macedonia, and from thence vvrote to the 1. Cor. 4.
Corinthians, into whose church many false brethren were crept, he promised to
come shortly unto the^ again: yet he prefers the will of the Lord, and
says: If that the Lord will: wherefore he says; But I will come shortly unto
you, if the Lord will, and will know, not the words of them which are puffed
up, but the power. And again, I will not now see you in my journey, but I
trust to abide a while 1. Cor. 16
with you, if the Lord permit. In all his determinations had he special
respect to the will of God, as is apparent. By whose example, according to this
council, must men correct their vanity, and foolish speeches: If the Lord
will, we will do this, or that. Seeing Gods will must be preferred in all
things, who at his own pleasure, and by his divine providence, rules over
all: if we can do nothing without him, in whom only we have our life, being,
and Acts 17.
moving: what temeritie and rashness, what impiety and ungodliness is it, in
this pride of our hearts, without any regard had to his will, of our selves
to determine any thing?

Now (as Gods will) must first be preferred to all our actions: So also, having
respect to our mortality, and frail condition, subject to speedy death, we
also add; If we live: which is requisite to our determinations, seeing our
life is so uncertain. The Apostle therefore, to correct this great evil and
mischief of pride: whereby men in vain confidence, promise to themselves many
matters, and determine long before of things uncertain: in that they say; To
day, or to morrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a year,
and by, and sell, and gain: teaches us in stead thereof to say; if the Lord
will, and if we live, we will do this, or that.

This, even reason it self (beside the word of GOD) teaches us: for is it not
reason that we should say, by his leave we will do this, or that, from whom
we have our life, our moving, and being? and this we have from God: is it not
reason that we should yield our selves under his will? Wherefore Socrates
(taught by natural reason this doctrine) wills Alcibiades in all things to
say; If God Socrates,
will. Christians ought therefore (rather by the word of truth taught) to
learn this lesson, least in their affairs, determinations, counsels and
business not preferring Gods will, they be worse then the very heathen.

4 Have not our age hatched many such birds, as say not only not, if God will,
we will do this, or that, but will he nill he, we will do it. Have we not such
as determine things long before, against religion, justice, equity, honesty
or Godliness? have we not many proud and wilful persons, which in their
purposes, counsels, determinations, actions, never care for the will of God,
nor regard whether he will or will not, such things as they determine? But let
all such as fear God be advised by the Apostle, and correct the vanity of
their pride, and say in all things, if the Lord will, and if we live, we will
do this or that, as here we are exhorted.

Yet is it not the purpose of the holy Ghost here to condemn all for proud
and wicked, who at all times and in all things use not thus to say, if the
Lord will and if we live, we will do this or that. For the very Saints of
God, trusting perfectly upon the grace of God brought 1. Pet. 1.
unto them by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, who serve God instantly day and
night, and worship him in spirit and in truth, whose souls and bodies are
quick, holy and acceptable sacrifices unto him, whom they serve in holiness
John. 4. Romans 12. Luck. 1.
and righteuousnes all the days of their life: do not always use it in word
of mouth, but give the consent of their hearts there unto. And in all things
and at all times to repeat the words, might seem vain superstition, and
babbling folly. But the spirit of God in this place is vehemently carried away
with just condemnation against such, as with out regard had to the good
pleasure of God, or respect had to the mortalytie of our nature, would have
all times, seasons, things and events, to serve them at their wills, for which
cause in the pride of their hearts they determine presumtuously of things to
come: and say in their vain confidence, to day or to morrow will we go into
such a city, and there continue a year, and by and sell and gain, which
thing the Apostle condemns and corrects, and in stead thereof, teaches us
to say; If the Lord will, and if we live, we will do this thing, or that thing.

4 The Apostle having thus reproved the sin, and corrected this evil among
me^, in the fourth place he repeateth the same vice and mischief, with
reprehension, although in other words, yet to like purpose: and therefore
says; You rejoice in your boasting, all such rejoicing is evil: you do not
only conceive such vain confidence in your hearts, but you also utter it in
your words: neither do you only utter it in words, and in your speeches, but
also you boast of your sayings: you rejoice in your boastings: all such
rejoicing is evil. In presuming thus of your selves, in the vain confidence
of your own hearts, in the lewd liberty of your tongues, whereby you
derogate from Gods providence, and arrogate to your selves: you rejoice, but
all such rejoicing is evil.

And in that he says not; all rejoicing is evil, but, all such rejoicing is
evil, it is apparent, that he condemns not all rejoicing, but only vain
rejoicing, conceived of the trust and confidence we have in worldly things.

For otherwise God permitted, yea willed and commanded Deuteronomy. 12.
his people to rejoice, as the Scripture teaches us. By his servant Moses he
charged Israel his people, that they should not eat their offeringes within
their own gates, but in the place where the Lord had appointed; they, their
children, their servants, and the Leuite that was within their gates, and so
to rejoice before the Lord Deuteronomy. 16.
their God, in all they put their hands unto. To which end and purpose they
were commanded to keep the feast of weeks, which was Whitsontide, and therein
also to rejoice before the Lord, through the view of the plentiful increase
which the Lord God had given unto the earth. and Other Feasts, also, as the
Feast of vnleaue^ed bread the Feast of Tabernacles, at the gathering in of
their harvest, wherein it was alowable, and permitted them to rejoice. Exodus 23.


The Prophet David often exhorts to reioicing, therefore he advises the
people to sing joyfully unto the Lord Psalm. 81.
their strength, and to sing laud unto the God of Jacob: to take the song, to
bring forth the timbrell, the pleasant Psalm. 122.
harp, with the lute or viole. David himself was not void of this affection:
but rather therewithal ravished, he breaks out; I rejoiced when the people
said, we will go into the house of the Lord. To which affection, as in some
respects lawful, he stirs up his people, and godly Subjects; O come, let us
sing unto the Lord: let us heartelie Psalm. 95.
rejoice in God, the strength of our salvation. The Savior of the world, even
Jesus Christ the righteous, commends Mat. 5.
rejoicing unto his in misery: and exhorts the^ in the midst, and among
their greatest afflictions, and persecutions, to rejoice.

Whose example the elect vessel of God Saint Paul imitating, advises the
elect servants of Christ, in their Romans 12.
troubles to rejoice. Which thing, of himself, and the rest of his brethren,
he freely and liberally confesses. When Romans 5. 1. Cor. 4 Ephesians. 5
he speaks unto the Church and Saints of Ephesus, exhorting them to be
filled with the spirit, and to sing to themselves in psalms, hymns, and
spiritual songs, making melody in their hearts unto God, Does he not commend
unto them the affection of rejoicing? When he wills the Saints of Philippi
to rejoice in the Lord always, what else commends he, then the affection of
rejoicing? Philip. 4.


What that the Prophet wills, that neither the wise man Ierem. 9.
glory, and vainly rejoice in his wisdom; neither the rich man in his riches;
nor the strong man in his strength: but that he that rejoices, should rejoice,
and glory in the Lord: Does he not condemn one, and commend another kind of
rejoicing? What that Christ wills his not to rejoice that the devils were
subject unto them, but Luke 10.
that they should rejoice that their names were written in the book of life?
What that he exhorts the Church against the day of judgment to lift up
their heads, and to rejoice, because their redemption approaches? Does he not
commend the affection of joy, as lawful in some Luke 11.
measure, in the Saints of God? What that Paul beseacheth Philip. 2
the Saints of Philippi, in Macedonia, by their unity, and religious consent,
to fulfill his joy? What that S. John reioiceth John 2. and 3. Epist.
over the saints, because they walked in the truth? argues it not, that there
is a joy and rejoicing, lawful in the people of God?

To rejoice therefore in the aid and help of Gods spirit, and in the
presence of his power: to rejoice in his gifts and graces, either upon our
souls or bodies plentitifully poured, moderately to rejoice in our public
peace, and private quietness, in our obedient wives, and tractable children: in
our trusty servants, and faithful friends: or the like tokens of Gods favor
toward us: so that all confidence be wholly reposed in him, that is the
author and fountain of all graces, and goodness, is not forbidden: the mirth
of their hearts proceading from a good conscience in the holy Ghost, the joy of
their minds lightened by assurance of the mercies of God, in Jesus Christ: the
affection of rejoicing stirred up, and raised in the inward parts of man,
through duetifull view, and thankful remembrance of the blessings of God
toward us, as tokens of his love, is not condemned by S. James, nor here
forbidden the Saints of God. Which the very circumstance of the place does
teach us, for inueying against the vain confidence of proud persons, who
without regard had to the will of God, and the shortness of their own lives,
say within themselves, and sometimes utter their speeches unto other; To morrow
we will go to such a City, and there continue a year, and by, and sell, and
gain; he infers this speech, now you rejoice in your boasting, all such
rejoicing is evil: Not all rejoicing then, but rejoicing in our own vain
confidence, and foolish boasting, is here condemned: all such boasting, all
such rejoicing is evil.

The Saints of God are not herence, neither by any the like place, interdicted
mirth and reioicing altogether that they should be as stocks or blocks, void
of al affection or rejoicing: but as they are subject to mourning: so are they
capable of mirth, so are they lightened with joy; as they are touched with
sorrow. and pressed with heuines: so are they partakers of rejoicing in
moderate measure of their affections, and it is not forbidden; then not all
rejoicing but vain rejoicing in themselves, and in the confidence they repose
in things uncertain, is here therefore condemned. Now you rejoice in your
boasting, all this reioycingis evil.

5 These things then thus disposed and ordered by S. James, he finally and
fifthly concludes this treatise: therefore to him that knows how to do well,
and does it not, to him it is sin.

Which conclusion seems to be added, to prevent and turn away an objection,
which these proud persons might have made: They might have said unto him; we
know this well enough, you need not tell us, that Gods will ought to be
preferred before all things, as the rule of all our actions: we know that in
all our determinations, we must have regard to his pleasure, and the shortness
of our life: we know men should rather say, if the Lord will, and if we live,
we will do this, or that. All this we know already, you need not tell us
this tale.

Hereunto S. James answers, by preventing their objection; If you know it,
and do it not, you have the greater sin: if you know it, and yet do the
contrary, your sin is less excusable, and your selves subject to greater
condemnation: for to him that knows to do well, and does it not, to him it is
sin, it is sin with advantage, it is greater sin.

Knowledge of Gods word, without performance of his will, makes our sins
greater before the Lord: and the more we know touching our duty, and the
less we do, makes our negligence mo^e heinous in his presence. Our Savior
Christ therefore tells the Jews, that therefore their sins remained as
testimonies of their wilfulnes, John 9.
because they pretended they were not blind, but had a deep sight, and great
knowledge in the law of GOD. Whose sins he conde^neth as inexcusable,
because they John 15.
seeing him hearing him, knowing him; and therefore ought to believe him, yet
would not be obedient unto his doctrine. Whereby moved against the unthankful
cities of Matt. 11.
Corisin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, he denounces so much the sharper
judgment, how much the greater knowledge they had obtained. The like reason
and respect Ezech. 16.
moved Almighty God to condemn the Jews and men of Judah, for greater
sinners than they of Sodom, or their sister Samaria, for that their knowledge
of Gods will, and their inducements to his obedience, were greater in them,
the^ either in Sodom, or in Samaria. Al which Luke 1^*
agrees with the resolute conclusion of Christ Jesus our Savior: the servant
which knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes. Now the greatness of the punishment, argues the greatness of the
sin: and increase, by the increase of our knowledge: according as the Apostle
teaches: he that knows to do well, and does not, to him it is sin: how
this is so, we may see more upon 1. chap. ver. 22. fol. 70. and 71. Sermon. 7.

Now this axiom and conclusion of S. James, is resolute, and true in every
point and part of duty, which is either to be done to god, or performed to
man: if we know we must worship but one God, and do it not: to us that know
it, it is greater sin: if we know we must not make graven images, to worship
and adore them: then if we do not obey it, we have the greater sin: if we
know to take the Lords name in vain, to profane his Sabbath, not to honor
our parents, to commit murder, to steal, to commit adultery, to bear false
record or witness against our brother, to covet or desire the wife, servant,
or goods of our neighbor, to be sin, and yet we do it: if we know that to
obey these laws is good: and yet we will not obey them: to us it is sin. If
we know how to cleanse our hands, and purge our hearts: if we know how to
refrain our lips, and keep our tongues from lying, slander, blasphemy,
reproach, cursing and bitterness: if we know how to minister to the necessity of
the poor, to comfort the feeble minded, to bear with the weak: if we know
how to restrain our feet from every wicked way, and to keep our vessels and
bodies in holiness and honor, 1. Thessal. 4. Ephesians. 4.
and not to defile our selves with fornication and uncleanness, as do the
Gentiles which know not God: if we know how to abate our flanting pride, the
pricking and pra^king up our selves in all disguised manner, and new fangled
fashions: if we know how to walk righteously, holily, soberly, Romans 12. Tit. 2.
in this present world, and yet do it not, that we may be presented as pure
virgins and unblameable being Jesus Christ: then is it sin, that is sin
with a witness unto us. If we know how to live with our brethren, without
injury, 2. Cor, 11.
oppression, extortion, usury, cruelty, fraud, deceit, and all
unrighteousness: and yet do not live thereafter, to us it is sin. Finally, if
we know in every duty, both to God and man, how to do well, and yet do it not,
to us it is the greater sin: for this sentence and conclusion of the holy
ghost in the apostle, is universally in all, and particularly in each one true,
He that knows how to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin.

This concerns the sovereign and the subject: the pastor and the people:
the father and the child: the wife and the husband: the master and the
servant: the captain and the soldier: the judge and the officer: the merchant
and the occupier: the handie crafts man, and the labourer: one man and another:
every man and woman in particular, and generally all, that if they know their
duty, what, and how to do well, and do it not: then are they compassed and
held with the greater sin. This must stir up all men and women of our
time, in who^ knowledge abounds: to al careful obedience to Gods word.

God be merciful therefore unto our iniquities, and pardon our offenses: and
grant unto us a greater measure of his spirit, daily to illuminate our hearts
more and more: that as thereby we be led into all truth of his word, so we may
also be brought to the performance of his will: that all vain confidence and
pride being abolished out of our hearts, and our knowledge joined with pure
obedience: God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The Analysis or resolution of the fifth Chapter of S. James.
The fifth chapter of S. James contains 4. things. namely: 1 A bitter
reproof and sharp commination against profane rich men, from 1. verse, to 7.
therein are 2. things. 1 The denouncing of extreme destruction and calamity
against them. verse 1. 2. 3. 2 The reckening up and numbering of their sins,
for which so great destruction is denounced: and the sins here mentioned are
three. 1 The detaining of the wages of their laborers. verse 4. 2 Their
sensuality, consisting in three things. 1 Pleasure. 2 Wantonness. 3
Banqueting and riotousnesse.
3 Their cruelty against the poor just men, consisting in two things, in 1
Condemning them. 2 Slaying them, not resisting them.

2 An exhortation to patience. 7. v. to 12. therein are 4. things noted:
namely, 1 The propounding of the exhortation, that Christians should wait
Christ's coming with pacient minds. v. 7. 2 A similitude thereunto tending: in
which three things are noted. 1 The similitude it self, part of 7. v. 2 The
application of the similitude, first part. 8. verse. 3 The reason in the later
part. 8. ver.
3 The contrary. verse 9. 4 Reasons moving to patience, which are four. 1
From example of the prophets in general. verse 10. 2 From reward of patience.
v. 11. first part. 3 From example of Job, and the issue and event of his
temptation. 4 From the nature of god: last words. 11. v.

3 An inuectiue against swearing. ver. 12. Therein are three things to be noted
of us: 1 The condemning of the sin. 2 The correcting thereof. 3 The reason,
from punishment.
4 A counsel how to behave our selves touching the infirmities of our
brethren: or in our own afflictions, and that two ways. 1 Outwardly, and that
two ways. 1 Generally, what remedy is best against afflictions: prayer, which
helps in sorrow and in mirth. v. 13. 2 Particularly in sickness, therein are two
remedies: namely 1. Prayer of the Elders. ver. 14. 15. 2 Mutual confession
with prayer. v. 16. 17. 18.

2 Inwardly, therein are two things also. 1 The travel of the Saints in
converting the brethren. verse 19. 2 Their reward. verse 20.




THE FIFTH CHAP. OF S. JAMES, THE FIRST SECOND AND THIRD VERSES. THE XXIII.
SERMON.
BEfore we come to these words of the Apostle, let us briefly again note
the sum of this chapter: which may very conveniently be divided into four
parts or members. 1 Contains a sharp and bitter reproof of wicked and
profane rich men, against whom he denounces extreme destruction and
calamity: for the iniquities and sins whereunto they were given. Which
beginning at the first verse, ends in the sixth. In the which there are (as
you see) two peculiar branches: the denouncing of their destruction, and the
sins wherefore that destruction is denounced: which are three. ^ Their
detaining o^ their workemens wages. 2 Their sensuality of life. 3 Their
cruelty.

2 Part of this Chapter is rouching patience, from the seventh verse to the
end of the eleventh verse. ^herein the Apostle notes four things. 1 The
exhor^ation. 2 A similitude thereunto tending. 3 The ^andling of the place of
patience, by noting the con^^arie. 4 Reasons of the exhortation, why we
should be pacient. 1 From example of the Prophets generally. 2 From reword of
our patience. 3 From example of Job* 4 From the nature of God.

3 An inuectiue against swearing, is the third member of this place: and
therein he notes three things. 1 The condemning of the sin and evil. 2 The
correcting of the same. 3 The reason why men should not swear vainly,
because of the punishment ensuing. From the danger and hurt which comes and
follows thereof, the Apostle disswadeth from swearing, and this is contained in
the 12. verse.

4 Part of this Chapter is, how we should behave our selves in our own
afflictions: and how in the infirmityes of the brethren: and both in outward
afflictions either generally, or particularly: and also in inward infirmities:
in curing the diseases of the minds of our brethren, and the errors of their
lives: wherein are set down two things: the labor and travail in that
behalf, and the revvard thereof.

Now these things being briefly repeated: the first general member has
also two special and particular branches. 1 Is the denouncing of extreme
destruction and calamity upon the profane covetous rich men of this world.
2 And the other, the reckening up, and naming of those sins, for which the
destruction and calamity is denounced. The first of these two is contained in
these three verses.

Verse 1. Go to now, ye rich men: weep, and howl for your miseries that
shall come upon you.

2 Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are motheaten.

3 Your gold and silver is cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness
against you, and shall eat your flesh, as it were fire. Ye have heaped up
treasure for the last days.


In which three verses there may five things be noted of us. 1 The
denouncing of calamity Go to. 2 The persons against whom he denounces: the
rich men. 3 What he denounces: their miserable and comfortless lamentation,
and sorrow they should sustain. 4 Wherefore? for their miseries to come. 5
Where in their miseries consist: in the loss of such things ^s wherein was
their chief treasure, comfort, and confidence.

To come therefore to the particulars: the first 1. Part of the Chapter.
thing and part in this Chapter, is a sharp and bitter reproof of the
profane rich men of this world, who abusing their wealth and riches, are
drunken and drowned in voluptuousness, and vain confidence: whose doting
folly, and foolish trust, the Apostle derideth: against whom for the same he
denounces destruction and extreme calamity. So that in the first part and
place, there are two things to be weighed. 1 The denouncing of extreme
calamity and destruction against the wicked. 2 The sins for which this
destruction is denounced.

1 The first of these, in these three first verses contained, ministers these
circumstaunces to our considerations. 1. A denouncing of destruction and
calamity: 2. The persons against whom it is denounced. 3. What he denounces,
their miserable and comfortless troubles and lamentation. 4. Wherefore? for
their future miseries and wretchedness to come. 5. Wherein their misery
consists, in the removing and loss of those things, wherein their hope,
their happiness, their chief treasure, their only comfort and confidence
consisted.

1. Concerning the first of these, which is denouncing of calamity and
destruction, and the foretelling me^ the woeful miseries whereof they should
taste, in these words is it contained; Go to now ye rich men: go to.

To denounce vengeance against wicked men, is usual in the whole course of the
scriptures of god: though some times under diverse former: but most commonly
under the word woe; whereby all misery, calamity, wretchedness, and
infelicitie whatsoever, is understood: in which form many of the prophets, our
Savior himself, the blessed Apostles have denounced destruction and
unhappiness against the wicked. This co^mination and threatening of extreme
calamity, Iere. 48.
is familiar in all the Scriptures. When Jeremy the prophet should foretell the
destruction of Moab, and their extreme calamity, through captivity by
Nabuchodonozor; before he fought with Pharao Necho king of the Egiptia^s, he in
this wise denounces their destruction: woe be unto Nebo for it is wasted:
Keriathaim is confounded and taken: Misgab is confounded and afraid. The
prophet Isai foretelling Isai. 3.
the plagues which the wicked should suffer, cries out, woe be unto the wicked,
it shall be evil with him, for the works and reward of his hands shall be given
him. And a little after denouncing the vengeance of God upon Isai. 5.
the covetous, drunkards, wantons, and the like, which seek all occasions to
harden their consciences in sin, and all prouocations and allurements to
prick them on, and stir them forward to all wickedness: against every of
them he denounces misery and calamity under the common phrase of Scripture:
Woe says he to them which join house to house: woe to them that rise early to
follow drunkenness: woe to them which draw iniquity with cords of vanity,
and sin with carte roapes. Who Isai. 29.
also entreating of their wretchedness, who like hypocrites in heart despised
Gods word, mocked at the admonitions of the Prophets, yet outwardly set a
fair face on the matter, and pretended in behavior, religion and godliness:
under the same phrase denounces their destruction: woe be unto them which seek
deep, to hide their councels from the Lord; for their works are in
darkness; and they say, who sees or knows us? In another place foretelling
their calamity, who contrary to Isai. 30.
the commandment of God, and their solemn promise unto him, depended not
upon his protection and mighty power, but sought succor in their adversity
at the hands of strange princes: he says; woe unto the rebellious children,
who seek counsel, but not at me: and cover with a covering: but not my
spirit: that they may lay sin upon sin. Woe unto them that go down into
Isai. 31.
Egypt for help, and stay upon horses and charrets, because they are many, and
in horsemen because they be very strong: but they look not unto the holy one
of Israel, neither seekevnto the Lord.

Amos denounces many plagues against many people Amos. 6.
and places in his prophesies under this form: wherefore foretelling such
wicked and profane rich men, as gave themselves to all volupteousnesse,
without regard had to the miserable distress of their brethren; in like
manner cries out and denounces against them: woe to those that are at ease in
Sion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria: which were famous at the beginning
of nations: and the house of Israel came to them. Go you unto Calneth, and
see: and from thence go to Hamach the great: then go to Gath of the
Philistines: be they better then these kingdoms? or the border of their land
greater then your border? ye that put away far from you the evil day, and
approach to the seat of iniquity? they lie upon beds of iuorie, and stretch
themselves upon their beds, and eat the lambs of the flock, and the calves
out of the stall: they sing to the sound of the viole, they invent to
themselves instruments of music like David: they drink wine in bowls, and
anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but no man is sorry for the
afflictions of Joseph.

Abacuc foreshewing the punishments of GOD, which should light upon the heads
of covetous, cruel Abacuc. 2.
and corrupt persons, breaks out and cries: woe unto him that builds a
town with blood: and erected a city by iniquity. Many the like we read and
hear in the prophets.

From whom if we descend and come to Christ in the gospel, shall we not see,
that by like speech he denounces like destruction against the wicked? Does not
Christ Luc. 6.
our Lord and Master foretell them that were full in this world, and lived in
all looseness and licentiousness of life, and such as were puffed up with
pride, vaineglorie, ambition, and arrogancy of the spirit: of their miseries,
when he cries out against them: woe be unto you which are full, for you shall
hunger: woe to you which now laugh, for you shall mourn and weep: woe unto you,
when men speak well of you, for so did their fathers to the false prophets?
does he not denounce like miserable Mat. 11.
calamity against the cities of Corozin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, when he in
this wise vpbrayded them for their unthankfulness and impenitencie? woe to
thee Corozin: woe to thee Bethsaida: for if the miracles done in you, had been
done in Tyrus and Sidon, they had long since repented in sack cloth and ashes.
Verily, I say unto you, it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sidon in the day of
judgment, then for you. And thou Capernaum which art lifted up to heaven,
shall be cast down unto hell: for if the notable signs which were wrought in
thee, had been done in Sodom and Gomorra, they had remained until this day.
But I say unto you, it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom, in the day
of judgment, then for thee. Does not Christ threaten like calamity against
Mat. 23.
the Scribes and Pharisees for their hypocrisy, under the same form of
commination? when he breaks our and says: woe be to you Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites for ye tith minte, and anise, and commine, and leave the
waightier matters of the law, as judgment, mercy and fidelity: these ought
you to have done, and not left the other undone. Ye blind guides, which
strain at a gnat, and swallovv up a Camel. Woe be to you Scribes and
Pharisees hypocrites, for you make clean the upper side of the cup and
platter, but within you are full of briberie and excess.

Does not Saint Paul shevving what misery, calamity, 1. Cor. 9.
and punishment he should suffer, if he preached not the gospel, note it in
the same phrase of speech; woe unto me if I preach not the gospel?

Does not Jude under a woe, denounce all misery Jude v. 11.
upon the wicked? woe unto them: for they have followed the way of Cain, and are
cast away by the deceate of Balams wages, and perish in the gain saying of
Core? Does Reave. 8. 9. 10.
not the Angel in the holy Revelation under the three woes therein mentioned,
express all the miseries and calamities of the wicked?

Our Apostle, according to the use and manner of the Prophets, our Savior, and
the Apostles: in this place, albeit in another form of speech, yet to like
purpose denounces against the wicked, extreme destruction and calamity; Go
to now ye rich men: weep and hovvle for the miseries that shall come upon
you. So then if we run over the books of the Scripture; if we peruse the
works of the Prophets: if we cast our eyes upon the practice of Christ, or
look unto the examples of the Apostles, we shall see and find, that in all
times, destruction, calamity, and misery has been denounced against men.
According whereunto he foretells in this place their destruction to the
profane men of the world, and says; Go to ye rich men, weep, and howl,
etc.

This being the denouncing of calamity, in the second place the persons are to
be considered against whom he thus denounces, who by the Apostle are
specified: go to now, you rich men. The rich men then of the world, are they
against whom the Apostle threatens: what shall we say? are all rich men under
this denouncement and commination? shall they all weep and howl for their
miseries which should come upon them? was Abraham the Genesis 12. and. 13
noble patriarch, whose riches were great and his wealth exceeding, subject to
this or the like judgment? was Isaac Genesis 26.
his son, whom for his herds of cattle, flocks of sheep, and other riches
the Philistines envied, under this co^mination? was David the king, a man
according to the mind of God himself: greatly enriched by God, hereunto
subject? was Hezechiah or Josias the famous princes, whose zeal to Gods
religion and glory, the Scriptures have renowned? were the Centurions mentioned
in the gospel Mat. 8. Act. 10.
and story of the Apostles, men of wealth, condemned by this place of the
Scriptures? no assuredly. For these and many more mentioned in the book of
God, have been wealthy, and rich; yet godly also: neither does James
denounce this against all men which are rich without all exception: for riches
are the gift of GOD, and oftentimes bestowed upon the most elect, and most
dear children of God: for the which they are not subject to this condemnation,
commination and threatening.

Wherefore as when Christ had told his disciples, Mat. 19.
that it was easier for a Camel to pass through the eye of a needle, then for
a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven; he expounds his meaning:
for he means Mar. 10.
not of all rich men in general, but of such as trusted in their riches: which
he plainly protests to his disciples: who took an occasion thereby to
doubt of the salvation of many: even so when the Apostle threateneth rich
men, whose utter destruction and calamity he denounces, he ought not to be
understood of all rich men without exception: for there be many rich, who use
their riches to Gods glory, and the comfort of their poor brethren: who are to
be exempted from this commination of the Apostle.

Manifest it is by the circumstance of the place, that his drifte is only to
condemn profane and wicked rich men, who abuse their riches and wealth, to
all impiety, iniquity, and ungodliness: whose life is puffed up with pride:
whose heart is oppressed with cruelty: who wallowe and welter in uncleanness of
the flesh: who altogether flow in pleasure. These are they whom the Apostle
calls to weeping and howling: these are they, against whom this destruction
is denounced: who exceeding in abundance of all things: living at ease, and in
all security; giving themselves over to all vanity; in the midst of all
their iollitie; have iuster cause of mourning, then of mirth; of sorrow, then
of joy; of weeping, then of laughter; of howling, then of rejoicing: for that
riches in wicked persons, are the occasion of manifold mischiefs: they gender
vain hope; they nourish wicked confidence; they hatch fraud and deceate; they
cause oppression, extortion, wrongful dealing, voluptuousness, intemperancie,
and pride: the mother of all wickedness: Which when they consider, they have
cause to lament; seeing that so sharp a sentence, so strait a judgment, so
bitter a commination, is given out against them; go to now ye rich men.

Against like profane covetous rich men, the like threatenings are gone out by
others. Isai the Prophet denounces vengeance and calamity upon those cruel
and Isai 5
profane rich men, who in their insatiable covetousness, join house to house,
and land to land, that they alone may dwell upon the face of the earth.

The Prophet Abacuk, in like manner, cries out against covetous rich men: who
by briberie and corruptition; Abac. 2
by cruelty and oppression; enriched themselves: woe to him that coueteth an
evil covetousness to his own house, that he may set his neast on high, to
escape from the power of evil. Thou have consulted shame to thine own (...)

The Apostle Saint James therefore, in deciphering their miserable and wretched
state to come, and their future calamities whereof they should taste, when
they should drink up the dregs of the judgment of God prepared for them,
exhorts them to weep: and how? not thereby to prevent by repentance the
miseries to come: but as without all hope, and as plunged over head and ears
in all despair, with all horror, and terror of mind, to look daily for these
miseries, which should not be prevented, nor avoided of them.

4 This thing these profane persons must do, because of the miseries which
they shall suffer, and the eternal punishments, whereof in fine they shall be
partakers. For though in this world they rejoice, solace, and repaste
themselves, and take their pleasure upon earth; as the rich chuffe and carle
did, in the Gospel: who was costly apparrelled, and fared deliciouslie every
day: yet shall they be assured hereafter to taste of all misery, and torments
Luke 16.
intolerable: the recounting and recording whereof, should cause them to
weep, to wary, to howl, to cry, to lament without ceasing, and gnash their
teeth for pain and punishment to come.

For seeing these are thrust clean out of the favor of God; seeing they are
excluded from the kingdom of Christ; the inheritance of God, the fellowship of
the saints: seeing they hear in their own consciences the dreadful sentence
of eternal condemnation pronounced against them; seeing they have so bitter
and sharp a judgment given of them, and so heavy destruction threatened by
the Spirit of God, in the mouth of the Apostle; seeing they are concluded in
that number, which at the left hand of Christ, shall have their deserved
reward to go Mat. 25.
in to hell fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: Have they not cause,
for this extreme misery (of all miseries the greatest) to weep, and howl,
as they are advised by the Apostle? Go to now you rich men, whose gold is
your god, whose silver is your safety, whose felicity, is worldly
prosperity, whose glory, is your shame, being earthly minded, weep, and
howl for the miseries which shall come upon you. Which miseries are not
common, but tragical, and full of extreme calamity: as the misery of Ajax,
Oedipus, Hercules, or the like, among the heathen.

By which the Apostle teaches the woeful event, and unhappy end of the
wicked: which, howsoever they pass their days here, (where sometimes they
taste of the cup of Gods wrath,) yet shall they in fine receive the just, and
full reward, and measure of their wickedness: Whereunto the Apostle had respect
in this place, when he wills them to weep and howl for their miseries to
come.

5 Whose miseries being generally touched, as the cause of their comfortless
lamentation: so in the last place it is showed, wherein this their misery
consists. In this especially, that the things wherein they so greatly
trusted, are vain and uncertain, and shall testify against them, in the day
of their punnishment: And for as much as by their vain trust and confidence in
these things, 1. Cause of their weeping and the first point of their misery.
they heap and hoorde up for themselves, treasure of the wrath of God, against
the last day.

1 And first, the things wherein they trusted are uncertain: which appears,
both in general, and in particular also. In general, riches are uncertain,
vain, and transitory: subject to manifold corruptions: which this Apostle
teaching, tells the profane, and wicked rich men of the world, that their
riches are corrupt.

Does not the holy Scripture often foretell us of the corruption, vanity, and
uncertainty of riches? Is it not an argument oftentimes beaten upon in the
word of truth? Are they not (for great vncertainnes) to be compared unto an
Ecle, which wringeth, slideth, and slippeth out of the hand, before we be aware
thereof? Are they not like a bird, which now we have in hand; but our hand
being opened, she flies from us, and we cannot recover her? Psalm. 37.
Solomon dissuading men from immoderat love and desire thereof, gives this
wise advice and council; Travel not too much to be rich, but cease from such a
purpose: will thou cast thine eye upon it that is nothing? for riches takes
her to her wings, as an Egle, and flies into the heavens. Whose father the
princely prophet David entreating of the uncertain condition of profane and
wicked Psalm. 37.
rich men, cries out: be it they be strong and shoot up as the green bay
tree: yet are they cut of from the earth like grass, and wither as the green
herb; they pass away and are not; if thou seek their place thou shall not
find it.

And Solomon in his book of wisdom makes the wicked Wisdom. 5.
rich men now burning and boiling in hell torments, to acknowledge the
frayltie and uncertainty of riches, which pass and perish as a shadow, or a
post that passes by, fly away as an arrowe in the air, a ship in the
water, a bird in the heavens. Our blessed Savior entreating of the
corruption of vvorldly riches, confesses Mat. 6. Luke 12.
they are subject to theefes, to the moth and canker. The uncertainty whereof
he shows in the parable of him who enlarged his barnes, and said unto his
Soul, Soul, eat drink and take thy pleasure, for there is great store of
riches reposed and laid up for thee, for many years: to who^ it was replied
by God, that that night, they should take his soul from him. And many fold
experience teaches us, that when men have feathered there nestes at their
pleasure, and hope to live at ease many fair years, and purpose with them
selves to spend their days in iollytie, even then often times not living
only, but life is also taken from them. Saint Paul seeing the ftayltie and
uncertain state of riches and the corruption where unto they are subject,
gives them this epithet or addition, 1. Timo. 6.
uncertain: charge them that are rich in this world, that they trust not in
uncertain riches. This our Apostle not varying from him self, describing the
brittle and fickell state of riches, compares them to grass, which is James.
4.
subject to sudden and speady corruption: for as soon as the sun arises
with heat the grass wethereth and the flower falls away: so subject is the
state of riches to corruption and vanity.

Though Cresus King of Lydia were of infinite riches, so that it grew into a
proverb, richer then Cresus: yet came his riches, and all his glorious pomp
unto corruption: when waging war against Cyrus the king of Persia, he was
overcome, taken and subdued. Though Xerxes were never so rich, that he
conducted an infinite army of 1000000. men against Greece: and with his
ships made a bridge over the sea Hellespont: and through his riches waxed so
proud, that he thought not only, that al men should obey him, but commanded
the Sea also, to be quiet and calm, and the mountains to give place unto him:
yet was his state subject to corruption, when his army was discomfited by the
navy of the Grecians, on the Sea by the Isle Salamine: insomuch as himself,
for the security of his own person, was forced to escape unknown, in a
fishers boat: and so with great dishonor, and loss of infinite preparation,
men and riches, returned. Though many men in our memory, and the memory of
our forefathers, have in their times flourished in wealth: yet their riches
have corrupted: and themselves oftentimes have been thereof suddenly bereft,
or else their heirs have not enjoyed the riches of their fathers: whereby it
appears in plain evidence, how subject to corruption our riches be: that
the Apostle might rightly say, that their riches were corrupt: and therefore
they trusting to a thing uncertain, and subject unto vanity, and for love
thereof leaving the Lord, who for that contempt brings destruction upon
them, they ought to weep and howl for that point and part of their misetie.

Seeing then in general, that riches are things uncertain, and shall in fine
vanish away and come to nothing: seeing they are of no continuance, but subject
to alteration, change and corruption: seeing the time shall come wherein they
shall perish from you: and when you Wisd. 9.
shall say with the wicked, in the wise man Solomon: what has pride profited
us, or what has the pomp of riches brought us? All these are past away like a
shadow, and as a post that passes by: as the ship that passes uer the
water, which being gone by, the trace thereof cannot be found, neither the
path in the floods: as the flying and flittering of a bird in the air: or as
an arrowe shot at a mark, which passes through the air, and no man can
tell the way whereby: therefore for this misery weep and howl: Go to now
you rich men, weep and howl for the miseries shall come upon you: your riches
are corrupt. The corruption and uncertainty of their riches wherein they
trusted, is one point of their misery, wherefore they are called to
comfortless lamentation.

2 As riches ingenerall ar uncertain and subject to corruption, so neither are
the parts of riches more sure: but every thing under heaven whereof a man
makes his account, as of riches, is subject to vanity and corruption: and the
chiefest parts of riches, are gaye clothing, and costly apparel: Silver,
gold, and the like: which all are subject to corruption.

1 Touching gay garments, costly clothing, fine apparel: Apparel.
though it be never so costly and curious, never so gay and gairish: never so
goodly and gallant: yet is it subject to corruption, as other things. For the
matter whereof: be it cloth, be it silk, be it velvet, it is subject to
the moth, which in time will devour it: eat it and consume it.

Let rich men make never so great account of their manifold and costly suites
of apparel: of their gay garments and fine clothing: yet all this is but
vanity, and subject unto the moth, (of worms, or flies), not the greatest. By
which mean, because garments and apparel commonly are consumed, therefore the
Apostle tells the profane rich men of the world, that if their treasure
and riches be in costly apparel, their hope is vain: for that apparel is
subject to moth-eating: your garments are moth-eaten.

Our Savior Christ setting down the common Mat. 6.
means and ways whereby men's riches are consumed and wasted, and therefore
exhorts his Saints and servants, not to treasure up to themselves such manner
of riches, but such as are heavenly, and of everlasting continuance: affirms,
that their are three ways whereby riches are subject to consuming, rust, moth,
and the thief. What our Savior generally applies to riches, as a way to
bring them to corruption: the same our Apostle particularly applies to one
part of riches, which is apparel, and tells the rich men of the world,
that their riches are corrupt and eaten with moth. Your garments are
moth-eaten. Wherefore when we think our garments without harm, hurt, or
danger in our Chestes or Presses, fair brushed, well foulded, carefully laid
up: even then is the moth in eating, and the vile Worm in consuming of them.

And if any man should here say, all garments are not consumed and eaten with
moth: for we can keep our fine apparel from that well enough, that they
shall not thus perish: thereunto be it answered, that yet our apparel is
thereunto subject: and that oftentimes it thus comes to pass, or by like
ways that our garments are consumed. The Apostle having regard to that way of
their consuming which is most usual, and comes most naturally of themselves:
as the moth grows of apparel it self, which it also consumes: tells the
rich men, that as their riches generally are subject to corruption: even so
particularly their gay and gallant garments, their curious and costly apparel,
is also subject to moth-eating: your garments are moth-eaten.

If there be no greater stay nor certainty in riches, and specially in
apparel then this: if they be so subject to alteration and corruption, that
the vile moth is able to consume them: what doting folly, what extreme
madness is it for men to wax proud of things, so vain, or put any trust in
such vncertainenesse? Wherefore seeing you rich men of the earth, wax
proud of these things: seeing you make these a chief part and portion of your
wealth and riches: seeing you have no small confidence herein: in as much as
they are subject to worme-eating, and are consumed with the moth: this part of
your confidence, joy, and comfort, removed: Weep and howl for your miseries
to come. For your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moth-eaten.

2 Another chief part of riches, wherein greater Gold and silver.
confidence is reposed, is gold and silver. Which of all metal or things
growing in the mineralls and bowels of the earth, is the finest and most pure:
yet have they also their consuming and corruption: for the rust and canker
eats and consumes those things also. And this experience teaches: if it be
gold in our bags and coffers: or plate in our Chests: the one, and the other
is subject to canker and rust: money is oftentimes kept so long, as that the
canker has eaten into it, and the rust has consumed it. How is it else that
we sometimes receive money in payments, as green as a leeke with rust: eaten
in sundry places with the canker? But because either long kept, or lost for a
time, it gathers cause of it own corruption, and thus is oftentimes consumed.

Besides this, which all men's eyes at one time or another do see: does not
the daily use of man, the often using, the much handling, the often delivering
of money from man to man, show that money, gold, or silver is subject to
corruption: in as much as by these daily uses it wears? Money of long time
used, which has passed through the hands of infinite men, thereby waxes
thinner, and by little and little consumes.

Plate in our Chests: in process and continuance of time, gathers moisture,
air, and dust, or some such soil: the cause of rust or canker: oftentimes
being never so curiously and carefully kept: yet at length even as out of it
self, the canker and rust rises and grows. So that the Apostle may truly
say thereof, as oftenest comes to pass, and whereunto naturally these things
are inclined: that their gold and silver is cankerd: and thus the chiefest and
most special treasures of men, and the greatest matter of their wealth and
riches by these means are consumed, and come to nothing: for which cause they
have to weep and howl for the miseries which should come upon them.

Wherefore as the drunkerd and surfetter weepeth and howleth without hope or
comfort, when the occasion of his excess, as wine and delicate meats are
taken away from him: and as the proud man consumes away when the matter
whereof he is proud, is removed: and the ambicious person languisheth with
sorrow, pineth away with grief, falls away with heaviness of heart,
when the hope of his honor is gone and perished: even so ought the profane
and wicked rich men of this world: seeing their riches, as apparel, gold
and silver, is subject to corruption, wherein they so much rejoiced, and
delighted: seeing the things wherein they trusted, and reposed the whole hope
of their happiness, are and shall be utterly and altogether removed, come to
nothing and be consumed: weep and hovvle, as men without hope: for these
miseries which thus shall come upon them: whereunto the Apostle in this
denouncing and threatening of them their destruction, calls them: Go to now
ye rich men, weep and hovvle for the miseries which shall come upon you:
your riches are corrupt: your garments are moth-eaten: your gold and silver is
cankerd. And albeit this be true in many covetous men: yet some covetous men
keep the rust from their gold by their flying usury, whereby they gaul
their brethren, a common trade among many. For which sin would God either
some Lycurgus vvoulde thrust from the gates of Lacedemon: or some severe Cato,
vvoulde expel from Cycilia: or some Agis vvoulde banish the^ the common wealth
of Sparta: or some worthy Emperor, put them out from all Christian regions.

2. As the corruptible state and transitory condition 2. Cause of their
howling, and another part of their misery.
of these things, wherein the rich men repose their trust, is one chief cause
why they should weep and howl: and the first part and point of their misery:
so the next and second thing which increases their misery is, that the very
^ust of their gold and silver shall rise up and bear witness against them,
and consume their flesh as it were fire.

When much gold and silver shall be heaped and hourded up by profane covetous
men, and through their insaciable desire, shall lie until it ruste or canker, or
be any way consumed: the very consuming, the very canker and rust it self,
shall rise up and witness against them. Thus the Apostle gives a person to a
thing without life; and makes the very ruste of the rich man's riches, to rise
up to condemn him. Like is that of Abacuc: who witnesses Abacuc 2.
that the stones in the wall, and the timble of houses builded with blood,
should cry out against the builder, and witness that it was builded with
blood. So the ruste of the gold and silver shall rise up against the rich men
and witness against them: which when they consider, they ought to weep and
howl, as for a great misery and calamity coming upon them.

To keep those things to private use which should be conferred in public: to
hold that in our hands and keep it in our cofers, which being put to use,
might profit many: to lay that long by us, to no end, which might be employed
to the comfort of our brethren; to let that consume, rotte, canker and ruste
for lack of use, which is ordained for common use of men; shall be a sufficient
witness in the day of the Lord to condemn us. For rich me^ to keep their
garments till they be rotten or motheaten: their gold and silver till they
ruste or canker: this very keeking of the^ till they perish: this consuming,
this rust this canker shall condemn them, eue^ their own consciences shall
condemn the^ in the great day of the Lord, that they kept these things from
the use of men, til they were consumed: and the corruption, consumption, and
spoil of these things shall show their insaciable covetousness: their infinite
desire of riches; and declare their ungodliness.

Wherefore as when we keep our bread in our binnes and cubberds until it
moulde, rather then give it and break it unto the needy; or when we suffer our
drink to sour on our hands, rather then give and draw it out to the
thirsty; or when our garments rotte for want of wearing, and are motheaten,
wherewith we should cloth the naked: it does testify our covetousness, our
cruelty, our hardness of heart toward the needy and distressed members of
Jesus Christ: and the very withholding of these things from the poor, shall
rise up in judgment, as it were, and condemn us of insatiable desire of
riches; when the remembrance thereof shall press our consciences: even so the
canker and ruste of our gold and silver in our cofers, wherewith the Christian
captives should have been redeemed: the distressed relieved; the naked clothed:
the hungry fed, and the poor succored: shall show our immeasurable
covetousness, and bear witness unto our consciences in the day of the Lord;
and thus are these things said to bear witness against the rich men of the
world.

And wherefore shall these witness thus against wicked rich men? because these
blessings and riches are given men, thereby, after their own state moderately
considered, to help and soccour others. Wherefore the Scripture makes not
rich men, lords over their riches, to keep the^ Mat. 24. Luc, 16. 1. Pet. 4.
or spend them at their own pleasures; but stewards, who ought to lay them
out at the pleasure, and to the glory of their masters. And for this cause
men sin not only by mispending of riches, but also by keeping them Luc. 16.
back from the use of others: and therefore for both these, as also in respect
of the wrongful getting of them, they are called riches of iniquity. When men
being hereof but stevvardes, shall keep them from profiting others thereby,
and by keeping them, they consume, ruste, and canker: the canker and ruste of
them, shall rise up against them.

Neither that only, but forasmuch as what redoundeth unto us, above necessary
relief of our selves and families: and a godly moderate, (not insatiable and
endless care) of providing honestly for our houses, vviues, 1. Tim. 5.
and children, which who so does not, is worse the^ an infidel, and denies
the faith; is not ours now, But the goods of the poor: whereof who so
depriueth him, is a murderer says Sirach. To whom Saint Augustine
subscribeth; Ecclus. 34. S. Augustine. Homil. to the People of Antioch. 34.
when he counts him slain, whom we have not fed, being able.

And Saint Chrysostom tells the rich among the people of Antioch, in that his
assertion which there he holds, that whatsoever is above our necessary
maintenance, is not ours, but the goods of the poor: and to retain this thus
from them, cries alowde in the ears of the Lord, as a shameful sin and
extreme oppression and cruelty against the brethren: the ruste, the canker,
the consuming of such things shall stand as it were as witnesses to condemn
us in the day of judgment, and accuse us as guilty of their deaths, from whom
these things have been by us thus detained.

In as much therefore as the rich are not lords of their riches, but the
stewards of God, to employ them to the glory and pleasure of their master: and
the overplus of their riches none of theirs, but the poores, whom they slay and
murder, as much as in them lies, when they detain it: therefore, when they
suffer the poor to perish; the naked to sterue; the needy to die for want of
necessary succor: when in the mean time, their garments are moth-eaten, and
their gold and silver cankered, the consumption, canker and corruption of these
things shall stand up in judgment against them, and witness of their
insatiable coueteousnes, extreme cruelty, hardness of heart, immoderate
desire of riches, and the great impiety and ungodliness which lurketh in
them, for which they shall be condemned.

Neither do these only witness against us, but also they eat up our flesh as
it were fire: because that couetuous desires pine men, and greedy gaping after
riches consume them. Wherehence it comes to pass that Sirach Ecclus. 31.
his saying is found true: waking after covetousness pineth away the body; and
care after riches drives away sleep. This, miserable and wretched experience
teaches in the route and rabble of couetuous persons: whose flesh i^ dried
from their bones; whose skins wyther upon their backs; whose bodies are
pined and consumed away for greediness of gain, and continual carking and
caring: so that the Apostle might say truly, that the ruste and canker of
couetuous men's riches, shall consume them and eat them up as fire.

For as fire deuoureth, consumes, and licketh up all things that it touches:
so insaciable and greedy desire of riches; consumes and eats up the flesh
of the couetuous; and causes, that finally they shall be devoured of hellish
torments. So that both here and there, their own consciences shall feed and
gnaw upon them, and the recordation and remembrance of these corruptible
vanities, wherein they only trusted; shall as it were continually eat them up
and consume them.

And this is no small part of their misery, and final destruction which he
denounces against them, for the which in despair and without hope, they must
weep and howl as they are foretold by the holy and blessed Apostle.

The third and last thing wherein their miserable destruction, 3. Thing wherein
their destruction and calamity stands.
and final calamity consists, is that they have heaped up treasure for the
last days. These are the treasures of the wicked, which shall not help, but
hurt them in the day of the Lord. For thus profane rich me^ hourd and heap
up treasure of Gods just wrath, heavy displeasure, and deserved indignation
against themselves, in 2. Cor. 5.
the day of wrath and indignation, when all men shall stand before the
throne of Jesus Christ, to give an account Romans 2.
of their works, and to receive according to that they have done in their
bodies, be it good or evil. Then shall they lie open on every side to the
just judgments of God, and will they, nill they, they shall hear the fearful
sentence of destruction against them. Then shall their sins be revived in the
midst of their bowels, then shall their consciences find no rest: then shall
they day and night feel death working in their hearts: and hell shall stand
before their eyes: yea sin shall be at their right hand, and satan at their
left; destruction shall be without to consume them, and the immortal worm of
conscience within their soul to gnawe them: God above to condemn them, the
devil beneath to take and carry them to fire and brimstone in that bottomless
lake that burns for ever: wherein their fire fails not, and Isay. 66.
their worm dies not. This is the treasure which profane rich men lay up
for themselves against the latter days.

Some expound these words otherwise: you have heaped up treasure against the
latter day: that is, in these latter days: wherein you should watch and pray
continually, that you might be thought worthy to escape the Luke 21.
wrath to come; when you should seriously expect and look for the appearing
and coming of Christ in glory; to give judgment against all men, and to
rebuke all Jude. 14. 15.
the ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly
committed, and all their cruel speaking, which wicked sinners have spoken
against him: you give your selves to heaping and hourding up of riches: as if
there should be no end, either of your life, or of the world it self: and the
nearer you grovve to the end of the world, the more covetous you are: you
heap up treasure for your selves against the latter days: what wickedness is
this?

Covetousness ought alvvaies and at all times to be avoided, as the root and
mother of all wickedness: but 1. Tim. 6.
most especially toward the coming of Jesus Christ: least by worldly
carefulnes, we become forgetful of his coming: therefore our Savior Christ
preparing his disciples against his coming in glorious majesty to sit in
judgment, and to pronounce sentence against all the world: Luc. 21.
advises them above other things, that their hearts be not overcome, and
oppressed with dronkennes, surfeiting, and the cares of this world; least he
come upon them unawares: notwithstanding, even against this time, to be
dronken, and drowned in covetous desires, is great ungodliness. And thus do men
heap up treasure for the last days.

Some hereof make this sense: Go to now you rich men, you think to heap up
riches enough to serve you unto the last day, and to the very end of the
world: and therein show your extreme covetousness and ungodliness. For what a
sin is this, that men should think themselves able, by themselves, to heap
and boarde up enough to serve unto the last days, and to the end of the world?
But to augment and increase their misery, and to paint out their destruction
in more lively, and in more fresh colors; the Apostle may seem to have meant
of the heaping up of the treasures of Gods vengeance, and judgments against
them in the latter days, in the day of judgment.

And these are the particular circumstances, which out of this place (in my
judgment) may be gathered: whereof thus says our Apostle; Go to now you rich
men, weep, and howl, for the miseries which shall come upon you: your riches
are corrupt, your garments are moath-eaten, your silver and gold is cankred,
and the rust thereof witnesses against you, and shall eat your flesh, as it
were fire: ye have heaped up treasure for the last days.

God for his mercies sake, grant unto us such grace, from his holy Spirit,
that we thereby first seeking the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness
thereof; may (according to his merciful promise) obtain all other things
necessary for this present life: and that we through his special grace, (being
risen in all fruits of righteousness, and works of true sanctification, with
Christ) may seek the things which are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God: and effectually setting our affections upon heavenly things, and
not upon things upon the earth, may also so put our trust and confidence in
the Lord, that if riches increase and multiply unto us by his goodness, yet we
may not set our hearts upon them: but that even in this life, we may with all
our might and maine, lay up for our selves treasures in heaven: where neither
rust nor moath does corrupt; and where thieves break not in and steal least
that we setting our affections (with profane persons) upon uncertain riches,
thereby we treasure and heap up for our selves, treasure of Gods just
judgments, and wrathful displeasure, and so be subject to this sharp
commination, and threatening of final destruction: From which he deliver us,
that suffered bitter death upon the cross, for us: even Jesus Christ our
Savior: To whom, with the father, and the holy ghost, be praise in the great
congregation of the saints, now and for evermore, Amen.

James Chapter. 5. verses 4. 5. 6. Sermon 24.
Verse 4 Behold, the hire of the Laborers, which have reaped your fields,
which is of you kept back by fraud, cries: and the cries of them which have
reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts.

5 Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and in wantonness: ye have nourished
your hearts as in the day of slaughter.

6 You have condemned and killed the just: and he has not resisted you.


IN these words are reckoned up the sins and evils of profane rich men: for
which, this so dreadful a destruction is denounced against them: And it is the
second branch of the first part of this Chap. in particular The evils and
sins of the wicked rich men, for which their calamity is threatened, are
three. 1. Their injurious and fraudulent detaining of the wages of their
Reapers, and harvest servants. 2. Their sensua litie: which stand^eh in these.
3. 1. Pleasure. 2. Wantonness. 3. Banqueting, and riotousnes.
3. Their cruelty which in two things appears. In 1 Condemning the
righteous. 2 Slaying them, when as they resist not.




1 The first sin and evil condemned in these wicked rich 1. Sin in the
wicked.
men, with whom, and against whom, Saint James deals, and for which, so
sharp a sentence of so just condemnation, is given out against them: is, their
fraudulent detaining of their hirelinges wages: whereof he gives special
example in their harvest laborers, such as reaped their fields: who helping
them to get and gather in their grain and corn into their barnes, and
bringing in the increase of their land, for them, whereon they lived: Yet for
so needful and necessary; so painful and profitable a work, they were
unrewarded, and their wages detained by fraud from them: no doubt an extreme
point of evil dealing. And under this particular example, the holy Ghost
conteyneth all injurious dealing with their servants, either in this kind, or
in any other kind whatsoever.

The greatness of their sin the Apostle amplifieth in most effectual manner;
Behold (says he) the hire of the laborers, which have reaped your fields,
which is by you kept back by fraud, cries, and the cries of them which have
reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts.

1. Says he, behold: Of which speech there are diverse uses. Sometimes it is
used in cases of joy and rejoicing: as, when Christ the Prince of peace and
eternal Mat. 21.
glory, should come into the city of Jerusalem, to the great joy of all such
as received him; the Evangelist citing the words of Zachary the Prophet,
says; Go tell the daughter of Sion, behold, thy king comes unto thee, Zach.
9.
meek, and sitting upon an Ass, and a colte, the fool of an Ass used to the
yoke.

Sometimes it is used for a greater evidence, and certainty of a thing. Saint
Jude citing the words of Enoch, the seventh from Adam, for a great evidence,
and certainty Jude v. 14
of the Lords coming to judge the world, uses this phrase of speech; Behold,
the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints, to give judgment against all
men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds,
which they have ungodly committed, and of all their cruel speeches, which
wicked sinners have spoaken against him. In like manner, in this place to
assure Job. 4. 18. Revel. 7:
them, that their wickedness was certainly gone up into the ears of the Lord,
the Apostle breaks out in this manner; Behold, the hire of the laborers,
which have reaped your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries:
and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord
of hosts.

Sometimes it is used to move attention unto a thing spoken: and this is
familiar in the Prophets, in our Savior, and the apostles also, sometimes to
this purpose used. The Prophet Nahum prophesying of the peace which Nahum 1.
Judah should enjoy by the death of Sennacherib, the king of the Assyrians, to
move them to greater attention thereunto (as it may be thought) he says;
Behold upon the mountains, the feet of him that declares and publishes
peach.

And Abacuk prophesying of the strange plagues and Abacuk 1.
calamities, which should befall the people, for their shameful iniquity,
and contempt of Gods word: to stir them up to greater attention thereunto (as
I suppose) he cries out; Behold among the heathen, and regard, and wonder,
and marvel, for I will work a work in your days, you will not believe it
though it be told unto you. And may not the princely Prophet David be thought
in Psalm. 133.
this sense to have used this word: when he commending peace, love, and unity
among men, says; Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is, brethren to
dwell together in unity?

Sometimes it is used in strange and wonderful things, which rarely are heard
or seen: as Jsai, entreating Isai 7.
of the strange and extraordinary, rare and wonderful manner of Christ's
conception, in this wise expresses it; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and
bear a son: and they shall call his name Emmanuel. Our Apostle, as wondering
at the hard dealing of the wicked, may not amiss in this sense be thought to
use it; Behold, the hire of your laborers which reaped etc. as a thing
therefore, either most certain, that the cry of their servants were entered
unto the ears of God: or a thing to be wondered at, that any would be so
heard hearted, as to defraude their laborers of their hier, the Apostle
breaks out and says behold the hire of your laborers etc.

2 The hire of those laubourers which reaped their fields was detained: this
amplifieth their wickedness. To detame the wages of any labourour, who by the
toil and moyle of his body, and in the sweat of his face, eats his bread,
connot be but agreat sin: but to deny them their wages, by whom our fields
are reaped, our corn and grain got and gathered in to our garners; the
fruits of our Lands safly brought into our barnes and houses: whereof we, our
wives, children, and famylies do live, the surplus whereof, we turn to the
increasing of our riches: is no doubt a greuious and most heinous sin before
God: therefore the Apostle leaving other servants, whom no dout they defrauded
in like manner: rehearses those, in whose injury their iniquity most
manyfestly appears. Wherefore he says, behold the hire of your laborers,
which have reaped your fields, whose wages by you is held back through
fraud, cries.

3 The wages of their hired servants was by fraud kept back: to detain and
hold back the wages of the hierling and seruante, which for his living
works with men, is an evil and sin by the law and word of God forbidden.
Whereof the Lord by his seruante Moses admonished Leuit. 19.
the people of Israel: to which purpose they had commandment from the mouth
of God, that the wages of the hierling should not rest nor remain with them
till the morning: intymating, that as every one had done his work, so he
should receive his wages, which by the Deuteronomy. 24.
masters should in nowise be detained. And in another place, thou shall not
oppress says he, the hired seruante that is poor and neadie, neither thy
brother, neither the stranger that is within they gates, thou shall give him
his hire for his day, neither shall the sun go down upon it*

For he is poor, and therewith sustaineth his life, least Malach. 3.
he cry unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. The Prophet Malachie in
the person of God, condemns the same in the people: who pronouncing judgment
against their manifold sins, cries out: I will be a swift witness against
the Southsayers, and against the adulterers, and against the false swearers,
and against them that wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages. Who
condemning there the same sin, where against here the apostle speaks, uses
the same phrase of speech which the Apostle also uses. Jeremy sharply
inueighing Ierem. 22.
against the oppressions of men toward their poor brethren, and denouncing
fearful judgment against them for the same; among other great gauls,
miseries, and oppressions of the poor, he makes this one; woe, says he,
therefore, to him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers
with iniquity: he uses his neighbor without wages, and gives him not for
his work. Tob. 4.
Tobias having special care and regard hereunto, among other his fatherly
lessons, and exhortations given to his son: wills him in no wise to detain
and withholde the hire from the labourer. Wherefore he says: Let not the wages
of any man which has wrought for thee tarry with thee, but give it him out of
Tob. 1 ^.
hand. Which thing moved him to say to his son, after his return from his
journey out of Medea, provide for the man wages, my son, which went with
thee, and thou must give him more. Wherein his care appeared in giving and
paying every man for his work and labor. Which thing kept back and
withhelde, is great extremity, violence and injury: for thus the poor
hireling and labourer is murdered as it were of the hirer: as the son of
Sirach says: he that takes away Ecclus. 34.
his neighbors living, slaieth him: and he that defraudeth the labourer of
his hire, is a murderer. The hire of the labourer is his living, whereby his
wife, children, and poor family is daily relieved: to withholde the daily
relief of a man from him, what is it, but as much as lies in us, to take his
life from him: for we keep back the thing whereby he lives: and this is
murder before the Lord.

This holy Job knew to be a most grievous sin: Job. 31.
wherefore in his protestation of his innocence, among other special points
thereof, he makes this one, that he had not kept back the wages of the
labourer: if my land cry against me, or the furrows thereof complain
together, if I have eaten the fruits thereof without silver: or if I have
grieved the souls of the masters thereof: let thistles grow in stead of
wheat, and cockle in stead of barley: if, says he, my land cry out
against me, or the furrows thereof complain together: as though I had
withholden and kept back their wages that labored therein. This is that first
evil and sin condemned here in profane rich men, for which this so sharp a
commination and denouncing of threatening is given out against them, namely
because they held and kept back the laborers wages, and their hire from the
workers in their harvest, and that by fraud and deceit. Now the wages of the
hireling ought to be paid. 1, because he is poor and cannot spare it: for it
is his living, and the living of his family. 2 Because if it be withhelde, the
cry thereof will come before the Lord, who will avenge the injury. 3 Because
the detaining of wages terrifieth the labourer from such masters: who
notwithstanding can not be wirhout hirelings, so the covetous in thus doing
hurt themselves. 4 Because so, men kill and slay the poor, as do these rich
men, by withholding their wages. Notwithstanding some are so cruel, that with
Solomon, 1. Pro. 17. with Isai 3. with Miche. 3. with David, 14. Psalm. 4. we
may pronounce of them: That they pray upon the poor and simple people, and are
like Sargus the fish of the Egyptian sea, which deuoureth the lesser fishes.
Thus the rich will be purse-bearers and cofferers to the poor, whether they
will or no: and they that worst may shall hold the Candle, and the weakest
always shall be thrust to the walls by the wealthy.

And this sin of fraudulent detaining and withholding How wages a^^ detained.
the wages of hired servants and laborers, is diverse ways committed. 1 When
the hirelings wages is stopped altogether under some colorable pretense, and
intended matter, not right, not true, not just, but deceitful. In which kind
they sin, which quarrel with their workmen, after their labor is ended,
that they might use their neighbor without hire. As when they pretend, they
loitered, when they labored faithfully: when they pretend they have done this
hurt, or that hurt, which far exceeds their wages: when under this color,
or that, they deceitfully, or fraudulently detain the wages of the poor
labourer, they are guilty of this sin, here condemned. 2 Moreover this
cruelty is done, and sin committed, when the wages is deceitfully deferred
longer then the poor can well spare it. As there are many shifts, many
deferrings in rich men, that the poor workman shall not after many commings,
much entreaty, long forbearance, receive his hire for his labor, his wages
for his work, but it shall be kept back from him. 3 And men become guilty
hereof also, when through fraud they misrecken the poor hireling being simple,
or any ways diminishe of the wages of the labourer.

4 Or, finally by changing the wages of the servant and workman, to their hurt
and damage. In which Laban may be condemned as fraudulently detaining the wages
Gene. 31.
of Jacob; in as much as he often changed his wages, against covenant,
composition, and promise betwixt them: as Jacob had just cause thereof to
complain of him. For when it was agreed upon, that Jacob should have for
keeping Labans sheep, the parti-colored, when the sheep brought forth
parti-colored: Laban would have him take the spotted: and when the sheep
brought forth spotted, then he must take the parti-colored: Thus Jacob
complains of him, that he changed his wages ten times: that is often, to
his hinderance. Not unlike are those masters, who hyring workmen to labor
for them, their work ended, give them not money for their work, as they
should do but either corn or wares, and that at their price, (which is
extreme injury) by which means they are benefited, and the poor hireling
oppressed. By these and like means, as men's own skill and knowledge may teach
them, is this sin of the Apostle here condemned, committed. In committing
whereof, the profane rich, covetous, and miserable wicked worldlings, contemn
the law of God forbidding it: despise the words of the Prophets dissuading
it: neglect the counsel of the wise, condemning it: break the law of love,
equity, and justice, reproouing it: and finally, regard not the manacing,
threatening, and denouncing of utter destruction by the Apostle against them for
the same, and his foretelling of final calamity for that so great iniquity.

4 To conclude, this sin is mightily amplified, in that the cry thereof is
said to ascend and come to the ears of the Lord of hosts. Which speech is
used in heinous and horrible sins. For albeit there be no sin, so little
or small, in the opinion or estimation of man, but that it comes before the
Lord, and enters into his ears: whose ears hear, and whose eyes see, all
the works of men, neither is their any sin kept from his knowledge: yet to
note the horror and haynousnesse of some sins above others: the holy Ghost
in the sacred Scripture says of such, that they cry unto the Lord.
Wherefore Moises to show the great and grievous sin of Cain, in murdering
his loving and natural Gene. 4.
brother, brings in GOD speaking thereof to him: Cain, what have thou done?
the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the ground. When the
filthy Sodomites had stained themselves with unnatural lust: with foul
fornication, and all shameful uncleanness Gene. 18.
of the flesh, impiety and ungodliness: the cry of their iniquity was great
in the Lords ears, and their sin exceeding grievous in his sight. To show
the barbarous cruelty of the people of Egypt, and their extreme exactions
wherewith they ouercharged Exodus 3. Isai. 5. 9. 1. Kings 9. 16 Job. 34. 28.
and pressed to ground the Israelites, the Prophet thereof speaking, brings
in God thus conferring with him there-about in Horeb: I have seen, I have
seen the oppression of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their
cry, because of their taske-maisters. To like purpose our Apostle, setting
forth the great iniquity and injury done to the poor laborers in the
detaining and keeping back of their wages by the rich men of the world,
affirms that the same cries unto God, and that the cry thereof is gone up
to the ears of the Lord of hosts.

Wherehence we are taught, and may well learn, that albeit men themselves by
us oppressed, do not always power out the bitterness of their hearts,
neither always ring in the ears of the Lord, against them by whom they are
oppressed: yet the very iniquities and sins of the wicked themselves, cry
out day and night in the ears of the Lord, against them for vengeance. Thus
Gene. 4.
murder though kept for a season from the knowledge of men: thus adultery,
fornication, and fleshly uncleanness, Ecclus. 23.
though it be done in secret, that no eye does see it: thus oppression and
extortion, though all men almost practice it: thus pride, though the whole
land Isay. 3:
flies after it: thus usury, briberie, and all manner covetousness: thus
perverting of righteous judgment, and all manner wrongfulnesse and injury:
thus lying, swearing, blasphemy, and slander: thus all iniquity and
unrighteousness of men, whereby the land Sophonie. 3. Osea. 4.
is altogether polluted, and blood thereby touches blood: cries in the ears
of the Lord of hosts: who being a righteous judge, and that GOD only, to
Deuteronomy. 32. Psalm. 94.
whom repaying vengeance belongs, will reward it accordingly.

And assuredly, as all sins at all times have cried out for vengeance from
the Lord, who has heard them, and in just measure punished them: so the
heinous and horrible sins of our age, cry out in like manner for vengeance:
our shameless adulteries, whereof our country is full: our cruel hatred,
whereby we murder one another in our hearts: our intolerable pride, in
flaunting ruffes, in colored starchings; in new cuts and iagges, in
periwigges, and french frilles; in the devil and all, which our vanity and
the iniquity of our times have devised; our subtle and fraudulent dealings;
our voluntary bankerouting; our great oppression and extortion, whereby the
faces of the poor are pitifully grinded; our usury which has succeeded and
got in the place of noble marchaundizing, whereby we eat up one another: our
manifold, open and secret, public and private offenses, daily and hourly in
most wicked manner committed, cry out in the ears of the Lord of hosts:
and unless we seek speedy redress, through unfeigned repentance unto GOD,
we shall feel the smarte and grief thereof: subject to the like destruction
here mentioned by the Apostle, since we are guilty of the like, or the same
iniquities, against which it is justly denounced.

Here God is called the Lord of hosts, which attribute God the Lord of hosts.
or addition is oftentimes and in sundry places given unto him, because he
has all his creatures always ready, as an innumerable and infinite host to
fight at his pleasure and beck, against the wicked, for the maintenance of
his glory, and defense of his servants. Which thing Sirach notably
expresses: there are says he, spirits created for vengeance, which in their
rigor Ecclus. 39.
lay on sure strokes; in the time of destruction they shevve forth their power,
and accomplish the wrath of him that made them: fire and hayle, and famine, and
death, these are created for vengeance: the teeth of wild beasts, the
scorpions and the serpents, and the sword execute vengeance for the
destruction of the wicked. They shall be glad to do his commandment, and when
need is, they shall be ready upon earth, and when their hour is come, they
shall not over pass the commandment.

The drops of rain from heaven were his host, to fight against, and destroy
the men of the first world. Fire Genesis 6 7. Genesis 19.
from heaven was his host to fall down and consume the Sodomites and them of
Gomorrah. The mighty hayle stones which fell upon the soldeours of the kings
which joined battle with Joshua, wherewith more perished, then by the sword of
the people: the scrawling worms, the hopping Joshua 10.
frogs, the creeping lice: and other like creatures, were his host to fight
against Pharao and his people, Exodus 7. 8. 9. 10. 14.
and the raging sea rose up against him, and overwhelmed him and his army. One
people is his army to punish another; and every one of his creatures serve at
his Psalm. 105. 28. 29. 30. etc.
pleasure, either to work the deliverance of his servants, or the destruction
of his enemies: and therefore is God often called the Lord of hosts. The
Seraphins in the prophet stood up and cried one to another; holy, holy, holy
is the Isay 6. 1. 9.
Lord of hosts, the whole world is full of thy glory. Jeremy Ierem. 10.
the prophet yields this attribute and name unto him; who co^paring the
idols of the nations with the Lord, says; the portion of Jacob is not like
them: for he is the maker of all things, and Israel is the rod of his
inheritance: the Lord of hosts is his name. Nahum the prophet, Nahum. 2
describing the victories of the Caldeans against the Assyrians, and the
punishments by God brought by them upon the same people: cries, behold I come
unto thee, says the Lord of hosts, and I will burn her charrets in the
smoke, and the sword shall destroy thy young lions, and I will cut of thy spoil
from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard. In the
prophecy of Malachie it is often given unto the Lord, that he is the Lord of
hosts: as 1. c. v. 6. and 8. and 9. 10. 11. 14: 2. c. v. 2. 4. 7. 8: chapter 3. v.
1. 5. 7. 10. 11. 14. 17: c. 4. v. 1. 3. And innumerable the like places in holy
Scriptures. Whereunto our Apostle according to the phrase of Scripture
respecting, to note the power of God, and his hablenes to bring destruction
upon the profane rich men of the world, for detaining and holding back the
wages of the hireling, affirms that the voice of the detained wages cries,
and is gone up into the ears of the Lord of hosts.

Which place contains no small comfort unto the poor afflicted saints of
God; in that the Lord is called the Lord of hosts, who being mighty in power,
and having all the creatures in heaven and earth at a bay, and uses them at
his will as his host and army, protests and professes himself to be the
protector and defense of his servant. S. James therefore partly for the
terror of the wicked, who in due time shall feel the weight of his revenging
hand; and partly for the comfort of his afflicted servant, whose wages
wicked men hold back by fraud; calls almighty God the Lord of hosts; as
having a power always prepared, and an army evermore in a readiness, to
fight against his enemies.

Now if the cries of their detained wages which work in our bodily and earthly
harvest, be entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts, which of wicked
persons is held back by fraud: and therefore hear so heavy a sentence of
endless destruction against them: how much more fearful judgment shall be
pronounced against them: under how woeful and wretched condition are they, who
by fraud, or by force detain, withhold and keep back the hyre and wages of
them that labor in the heavenly Mat. 9. Mat. 10. Mat. 20.
and spiritual harvest of the Lord? who sow the forrowes of your hearts with
the divine seed of the word of truth; and should reap the increase of their
labors with great ioyfulnes; which are Gods laborers sent into Heb. 13.
the harvest of the world, to gather in many souls into the Lords barnes,
and to fill his garners with the spirits of the Saints.

This me^ care not for in these days: who do not only withhold from the
ministers and preachers of the word of God, which labor in the spiritual
harvest of the Lord, those wages and that hire, which by them is due unto them;
but also endeavor by all means to take that hire from them, which many years
past, for this end has been given: that there being no hire, no reward, no
wages, or at the least very little proposed, they might discourage all from
laboring in the Lords vineyard; and might bring in barbarism and dark
ignorance into the church of Christ. And I would to God they did not tempt this
matter, who would otherwise seem most zealous to Gods glory; and as it were
chief men in the Church of Christ. God for Christ's sake grant that the venim
of this poison sink not into the hearts of princes and men in authority: for
then shall there be nothing to be looked for, but desolation, misery,
wretchedness, extreme contempt, and utter subuertion of the glorious gospel:
which evil be far from us and our posterity, now and for ever Amen.

The first evil then in this place condemned, and for which this sentence of
judgment is gone out against the profane rich men of the world, is their
fraudulent detaining and withholding of their laborers wages, the cry whereof
entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts.

This second evil and sin for which the Apostle 2. Evil or sin in the
wicked.
threateneth their destruction to the wicked, is their sensuality and carnal
life: which consists briefly in three things. 1. Pleasure. 2. Wantonness. 3.
Riotousnes and excessive banqueting: you have lived in pleasure on the earth,
and in wantonness; you have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.

Pleasure here signifies the deliciousness of men in this life, whereunto
they give themselves, that they faring deliciously every day, may spend
their time and life in pleasure like Epicures: by the which, they are not only
condemned as injurious unto others, but also are accused as mispending that
which they detain from their workmen, upon their own pleasure and delights.
Such pleasure the men of the first world gave themselves unto; such was the
pleasure and delicacie of the Sodomites; Mat. 24. Ezech. 16.
for these gave themselves to eating, to drinking, to pleasure and daintiness
of their lives; and so lived in pleasure upon the earth. Which is that evil
condemned by Solomon, Eccles. 2.
when men withhold nothing from their souls, but give them whatsoever their
hearts or eyes desire: withdrawing themselves from no joy nor pleasure. Who
encourage one another to the fulfilling of their lusts: Come let us Wised. 2.
enjoy the pleasures that are present, let us cheerfully use the creatures as
in youth: let us fill our selves with costly wine and ointments, let not the
flower of life pass by us: let us crown our selves with rose buddes before
they be weathered: let us be partakers of our wantonness, let us leave some
token of our pleasures, in every place where we come, for this is our portion
and our lot. These are such as S. Paul mencioneth, whose belly is their God:
Philip. 3.
whose glory is to their shame, being carnally minded: who imitate and follow
the example of the rich glutton, who Luc. 16.
fared deliciously every day: they eat, they drink, they rest, they sleep,
they give themselves to idleness, and in all things take their pleasure, wherein
their sensuality appears. The^ which there is nothing more dangerous or
pernicious in men: in so much that the very heathen folk, and philosophers
have said, that it is not only dangerous, but altogether unworthy the
excellency of man. The Saints of God ought to remember with themselves how far
it is from duty: thereby the holy garment which we have put on in the day of
baptism is stained: thereby the temple of the holy ghost, which are the bodies
of Christians, is polluted and defiled with the filthiness of satan in the^
faith, patience, te^perance; modesty, justice, and all the rest of christian
virtues should appear: all which that filthy strumpet pleasure, puts out of
place, whereunto rich men for the most part give themselves; and therefore are
condemned by the Apostle.

2. Their sensuality also shows it self in the wantonness of their lives;
whereby carnal uncleanness is understood; as S. Paul to the Romans: walk
honestly as in the day Romans 13.
time; not in drunkenness and surfeiting, not in chambering and wantonness;
where, by chambering and wantonness is understood, that effect which rises of
chambering and wantonness, as venerie and fleshly uncleanness: thereunto also most
rich me^ are given. For riches minister matter of living deliciously; delicious
living pricketh forward to flesh lines and bodily vnclea^nes: for which causes
adultery is often set down, as the effect of excess: and this wantonness, as
the offspring of pleasure before condemned, as Saint Augustine, Augustine.
Ambrose. Hierom.
and Saint Ambrose upon the cited place to the Romans, have observed: and Saint
Jerome subscribeth to the same; The belly boiling with wine, fometh out
filthiness. Saint Ambrose citing the words of Paul to the Church of Sup. 5.
Ephesians.
Ephesus, be not dronken with wine, wherein is excess, writes in this wise;
Where is dronkennes, there is excess and luxuriousness; excess and
luxuriousness provoke to carnal filthiness.

Solomon the wise man, searching and seeking out the Pro. 23
effects of dronkennes, and deliciousnes of life, notes these two specially;
Looking upon strange flesh, which is lusting after women unlawfully, and the
speaking of lewd things, which is, rebaldrie. The Prophet reckoning up the
evils and sins of Sodom, and the cause of that unnatural Ezech. 16.
lust, which burned in their bowels like fire, notes unto us their fulness of
bread, which was, their riotousnesse, and delicious life, and their sloth and
idleness, whereunto they were given, to have been the principal causes of that
horrible uncleanness. And the practice of Genesis 19.
Lot, otherwise a man most righteous, who after he was made dronken by his
daughters, committed incest with Judith. 13
each of them. And Holofernes, the Captain general over the army of the
Assyrians, then only tempts the chastity of Judith, when before he was
dronken.

Seeing therefore, this wantonness is the effect (as it were) of pleasure, of
dronkennes, and deliciousnes of life: therefore in the second place it is
added, to show the sensuality of the wicked, here condemned.

To which their wantonness, as they are too prone by natural inclination, so
have they many pricks and prouokements: as, filthy songs and sonnets, which
by their ears, pass on to their hearts: laughter, merimentes, jesting, which
are not comely: immodest and unchaste music, whereby the adulterous hearts of
men and women are set on fire and inflamed: dalliance, toying, iesture not
convenient, filthy speech and talk, the very instrument of this wickedness:
whereby chastytie is assaulted, continency invaded, honistie corrupted, and al
filthynes determined. To this wantonness rich men giving them selves, and
thereby carried headlong to all manner ungodliness, are therefore in this place
reproved; and it is set down as the second thing wherein the sensuallytie of
profane persons consists, which is the second sin for which destrution
and final callamitie is threatened against them.

3 Of their sensualytie the last and third branch is, that they nourished
their hearts as in the day of slaughter. Whereby their continual study to
banquet and make merry is noted, that their whole life might be as it were a
continual day of feasting: by which they grew as fat as porke or brawne, for
satan the devil to feade on, in the day of iudgmente,

The Hebrews call the days of feasting, the days of slaughter. Because at
great feasts, there is great killyng, great slaughter. Calves from the stalle,
sheep from the fold, oxen from the pasture, kyddes from the goats, lambs
from the ewes, dear from the forreste, bucke from the chase, fish from the
sea, foul from the fenne, birds from the air, capons from the coope, fesant
from the wood, partrige from the couie, rabbet from the warrant, and infinite
the like are then slain to be devoured* so that the days of feasting may
welbe called the days of slaughter. The prophet Isay speaking of the day of
Isreal's destruction by Nabuchodonosour King of Babylon, wherein Isay. 22.
the people gave them selves to feasting and banqueting, says: in that day
did the Lord call to weaping and mourning, to baldenes and sackcloth, and
behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh and
drinking wine: showing that in the days of feasting, there was slaughter and
killing. Whereunto the Apostle Saint James in this place having regard,
painting out the insaciable desire and study in the wicked rich men
continually to feade and fatten them selves by banqueting and feasting, says
that they nouriched them selves as to the day of slaughter: preparing
themselves day by day, to feasting and banqueting: though it be with the hurt,
need, and hungerstaruing of the poor people of the land. For like fault may
not we give like judgment, and pronounce like sentence of condemnation against
the rich men of these days? Did not they in the great famine of the land,
wherewith the poor were miserably pinched, sit eating Anno 1586.
and drinking, feading themselves and feasting, banqueting and surfeiting,
whereby they even nourished their hearts as in the day of slaughter? and therefore
must needs hear the thundering threatening of the Apostle; Go to now ye rich
men, weep and howl, for the miseries which shall come upon you, etc. You live
in pleasure and wantonness; you nourish your hearts as in the day of slaughter;
you feast your selves with the goods of the poor; you pamper up your selves
with the penury of your brethren; you fare deliciouslie every day by pinching
of the needy; Go to now therefore, weep and howl for the miseries which
shall come upon you. Your neighbors sterue, they pearish with hunger, with
whom you have to do: the distressed with famine, die in your streets, and yet
you prolong your feasting and banqueting continually: weep therefore and
howl, for the miseries which shall come upon you: who live in pleasure on the
earth, who give your selves to wantonness, and carnal lusts; you nourish your
hearts as in the day of slaughter: giving your selves to daily banquerting, and
feeding your selves full, much like unto fed beasts, prepared for the
slaughter.

Albeit, there be some covetous rich men, so far from pampering up themselves
in this manner, as that they cannot affoorde themselves a good dinner or supper
once in a quarter, and that for very miserablenes, and insaciable covetousness
of their minds: which thing is one of the vexations under the sun, spoken of
by king Solomon, Eccles. 6.
in his preacher; When men have riches, but yet not a liberal heart to use
them for their comfort: who therefore may well be compared to Tantalus, king of
Phrygia, whom poets feign (for disclosing the council of the gods) to be
tormented in hell, with apples over his head, which (as he reached for them)
departed, and went up higher: and water under him, whereunto when he stouped,
it flowed away: so that he could neither eat nor drink in his torments: yet
because for the most part, these branches of sensuality, are commonly in the
profane men of the world: therefore he reproves it, as a thing incident to
that condition of men. And this is the second evil, for which the Apostle
denounces this fearful judgment, and utter destruction against them.

The third sin and evil, for which these men are 3. Evil, or sin in the
covetous me^.
subject to this judgment, is their cruelty, which in these two things
appears. 1 That they condemn the righteous men. 2 That they condemn them
not only, but also slay them, when they make no resistance.

The wicked men of this world condemn the righteous at their pleasures; they
give what sentence they lust against the just and godly men: they judge the
innocent at their wills, if in all things they do not please them: which is
great cruelty, and a thing abominable before God. For he that absolueth the
wicked in judgment, and Pro. 17.
condemns the righteous, both are abominable before God, says Solomon.

Neither do these only wrongfully judge and condemn the righteous: but also
they slay him, and he resists them not, This is fiercenes, and intolerable
cruelty.

Now the righteous is slain diverse ways. 1 In heart by hatred: He that
hates his brother in his heart, is a murderer (says Saint John.) 2 In tongue
by slander: therefore Christ contains it under the nature of murder, 1.
Ioh. 3.
making it subject to like judgment. 3 Or by denying help in their misery,
wherein we suffer them to Mat. 5
pearish without succor. 4 Or when by fraud, or force, we take, or hold from
men, that which is their own: whereby, as much as in us lies, we murder them.
5 When finally, we bereave men of their lives. Which al agree with this place of
Saint James, and are found in the rich wicked men of this world: who albeit
themselves, by themselves, do not always these things; yet since by their
means and power these are done, therefore are they said to do it. So partly
by themselves, partly by others, the rich profane men of the world, condemn
and slaye the righteous, when he resists them not: which thing is a point of
great cruelty. For can there be any cruelty co^parable to that, to wax
fierce, to rage furiously against him that resists not? Is not this
sauagenes far exceeding the cruelty of the Lion; before whom if a man fall
down, and lie prostrate, seeming neither to stir, strive, nor struggle, the
Lion often suffers him, and touches him not? But these (more ravening then
Wolves, more hungry then bears, more greedy then Tigers, more cruel then
Lions) fall upon the righteous to slaye him, when he resists not.

Seeing here it is said, that these men slay the righteous, when he resists
not: it may be enquired, whether righteous and just men (wrongfully oppressed)
may resist at all, or no.

Our Savior Christ instructing his how to behave Mat. 5.
themselves against worldly oppressions and injuries, wills them not to
resist evil: but if any smite them on the one cheek, they should hold out
the other: if any strive for their coats, they should let them have cloak
also: and if one forced them to go a mile, they should go two. The holy
Prophet of God, Jeremy, commending the patience Lament. 3.
of the just and righteous man unto us, affirms of him, that he gives his
cheek to him that smites him; and is filled with reproach. The blessed
Apostle S. Paul, Romans 12.
aduertising the Saints what they should do in their oppressions and injuries,
which here they were sure to sustain and suffer: would, they should not
avenge themselves, but rather give place unto wrath. Isai painting out the
singular patience of Jesus Christ the righteous, avouches Isai. 53.
that he was brought before his enemies, as a sheep before the shearer, and
opened not his mouth, much less resisted. The Apostle (finally) of the just
and righteous man affirms, that he was slain of the wicked, and resisted not.

What shall we say then? Is it not lawful at all to resist injuries, but shall
we suffer our selves to be spoiled, robbed, iniuried, smitten, and murdered,
without resisting? by notwithstanding the^, shall we flesh them, animate them,
encourage them to further mischief? Shall we (as it were) prick them on
forward to do more violence, in that we resist them not, nor withstand their
rage and fury?

Hereunto I answer; though it be commanded us that we shall not resist, and
commended in the righteous men, that they did not resist their oppressors: yet
it follows not, that the righteous may not at all resist. For, touching the
commandment of Christ, and his Apostle, it is apparent, that they spoke of
impatient resisting, and of such resisting as was joined with greedy desire of
private revenge: in which manner, the Saints of God are every where forbidden
to resist.

In other respects it is not unlawful to resist: but either by avoiding their
oppressions; either by telling the wicked of their injuries; or finally, by
repelling force by force, when we cannot have the lawful aid of Magistrates,
it is lawful to resist the wicked when they oppress us; which doctrine may be
warranted out of the infallible word of truth.

Our Savior Christ commanded his Disciples to fly from City to City, when
rhey were persecuted: and Mat. 10.
so by avoiding injuries, to make resistance (as it were) to their persecutors.
And when himself was in danger of John 8
stoning, he conveyed himself from them, and did not suffer the Jews to
wreake their wrath upon him: so by his shunning, he withstoode their violence.
When Aretas the governor of the Damasens, laid wait for Saint Paul, he
stood not still, but was let down out of a window, by 2. Cor. 11.
a baskette, through the wall of the City, and so escaped. When more then
forty men had conspired, and sworn Acts 23
his death, vowing with an other, that they would neither eat nor drink
before they had murdered him: he withstoode their rage and fury, when by the
conduct of soldiers he fled to Cesarea. David the Saint of God, a 1. King.
1^. etc.
man just and righteous: seeing the rage of Saul against him, offered not
himself to his cruelty, but by auoydaunce withstoode him: sometimes only by
turning aside, when Saul's spear was ready to have nailed him to the wall:
Sometimes escaping by the means of his wife, being laid wait for: Sometimes by
flying from place to 1. King. 21. c. 22. 23. 24.
place, as the story records. So then righteous and just persons, compassed
about with danger, oppressed of the wicked, persecuted by the tyrants of the
earth: afflicted of the ungodly of the world: are not hereby forced to stand
still: to be swallowed up of dangers: but must and may avoid, if there be an
honest mean thereof, and so resist the injuries of men: which is neither
against precept nor example in holy Scripture, duly considered and pondered:
yea the contrary were folly, and is worthily condemned in men.

2 Neither by avoiding and shunning their injuries, is it lawful only to
resist the wicked: but also by telling them of the wicked oppressions, and
extreme cruelty, which they show toward their brethren: though in the mean
time our bodies be subject to their tirannous outrage and fury. Our Savior
Christ therefore, being caught John 18.
of the Jews, not against his will, but by voluntary offering of himself,
because his time was then come: and standing in the judgment hall, examined
and apposed concerning his doctrine by the high priest, whom he willed to ask
such as had heard him speak and preach: for which answer he was smitten of a
servant of the high priests: though in mind he put up the injury: and in
body was now at their pleasures: yet in speech and word he withstoode the
injury, when he said to his smiter: If I have spoken evil, bear witness
of evil: If well, why smitest thou me? Saint Paul being smitten on the face
at the unjust commandment of the Acts 23.
high priest Ananias, resisted in words that injury and unjust fact, and
said; the Lord shall strike thee thou painted wall: fittest thou here to
judge me according to the law, and commaundest thou me contrary to the law, to
be smitten?

Saint Augustine writing to Marcellinus, diligently Epistol. S. Mercel.
weighing the precept of Christ, and of Paul: and carefully comparing their
examples with their doctrine: witnesses that the precepts of our Savior and
the Apostle, ought rather to be referred to the patience and quietness of our
hearts in the bearing of injuries, then to our outward actions and behavior:
affirming that in these cases outwardly, we ought to have greater care of our
oppressors profit, then of their wills and pleasures: concluding that by the
precept of not resisting evil in holy Scripture contained, we are prepared in
mind and heart evermore, to more and more injuries: but outwardly, that it is
lawful either to do, or to say that, which may most profit the oppressor,
and best keep him from doing further injury. As Christ and Paul his Apostle
in mind and heart prepared to death it self: yet outwardly did and spoke
that, which might best repress and restrain the adversary.

VVherehence it follows, when by bearing and suffering of men, we make them
worse rather, then by our patience, win and gain them: then is it our
duty, in mind to prepare our selves still to bear: but in our outward
action, speech and behavior, to do that which may most profit the
oppressor, and withholde the enemy from further injury: and in this wise
also is it permitted the Saints of GOD, to make resistaunce: not repugnant to
this, or any like place of holy Scripture.

3 Finally, there are times and seasons, when by repelling force by force, it
is lawful to resist also. When Christians are so narrowly besteed, and so
straightly beset with their enemies, as that they cannot have the aid of civil
powers and lawful magistrates of the common wealth: but must either resist by
force, or be in danger of the loss of their lives and goods, without all
recovery or recompense: in such a case to resist I hold it lawful
altogether: so that it be done in a moderate defense of our selves, without
private malice, or desire of shedding of blood.

If a man in a house be beset with wicked persons, so that he can not have aid
of civil power for the present instant, neither has hope of recovering the
damage which he may sustain, either of goods or of life: to resist with all
strength, power, and courage, and to fight for our goods, lives, and bodily
safegarde, is not forbidden. If in the high way we be inwrapped in danger,
where no Magistrates are to succor: we are as extraordinary Magistrates to
our selves to withstand force by force, violence, by violence, might by might.
Which properly is not violence or injury, but lawful defense, which nature
it self has imprinted and impressed in the hearts of men.

Thereof the heathen Orator Tullie speaks: it is, For Mil^.
(says he) a law not written, but borne with us, which we have not
received, learned nor read: but drawn and sucked from Nature her self; unto
which we are not taught but made; not infourmed, but inured, that if our life
fall into snares, force, ot darts of our enemies or robbers: we should seek
all honest means of preserving our safeguard and health.

And our blessed Savior Christ permitted his Disciples Luke 22.
to carry and wear swoordes about them, for their own defense, when they
could not have the lawful aid of princes and Magistrates. So that albeit he
reproved Peter for smiting with the swoorde, and cutting off the ear of
Malchus: for that then the magistrate and civil officer was at hand, and
should have defended his innocence: yet at other times, and when they went
abroad, he permitted them to wear weapons. Hereunto the customs of
Countries and Nations yield, which permit it as lawful in iourneyes and
travails, and the like opportunities to wear and carry weapons for their
honest defense, about them. And by these means is it not forbidden the just
men to resist the wicked.

Now as in some cases it is lawful to make private resistance to private men,
howsoever blockish Anabaptists chatte, chirpe, or chatter to the contrary: so
may it be demanded, whether it may stand with a righteous and just man's duty,
to make public resistance by war, and public reuengement.

I answer that these places do not forbid lawful wars. Which to be a
thing lawful in the Saints of God, it may many ways appear evidently: the
old and the new Testament confirms it: the examples of renowned men highly
even therefore commended, approve it.

Saint Augustine writes that the Manichies for this Contra Faust. Manich. lib.
22. cap. 73.
cause found fault with Moises, because he was a man of war: and such a
prince, as armed the people of God against many Nations, and slew mighty
princes, and shed much blood. The like fault the Anabaptists find now with
Christians, whose opinions, as they are not soundly grounded upon the word of
God, nor the examples of the Saints: so neither is there any substanciall Why
wars are lawful.
reason to approve the^: but manifoldly may they be refuted.

1 And first of all, it may appear that some wars be lawful, in that
Almighty God himself, teaches Dent. 20.
what in wars by his people ought to be observed: as first to offer them
conditions of peace, and other things in the law expressed. Moises promises
the people, that the Lord should be their captain to destroy the nations, and
Deuteronomy. 31.
by wars subdue them to the people. The Lord armed the people in sundry
cases, and commanded them Deuteronomy. 13.
with the sword, and by force of wars, to subdue the idolaters of the land.
For which cause he also willed Number. 10.
Moises to prepare him Trumpettes, and other warlike instruments for the
people. The Lord God spoke in an other place to Moises, and willed him to
avenge the injuries Number. 31. Exodus 17.
done by the Madianites against his people: and against the Amalakites in
another place in like manner, whom the Lord by dint of the sword of Israel
mightily destroyed. By God was Joshua set a work in all Joshua. 1. etc.
his wars: from whom he had both commandment, and courage for the fighting
of the Lords battles. After whose death, and the manifold battles he had
with Kings and Countries: the people came to the Lord to enquire who should
succeed him as their captain, to Judges 1.
fight against the nations, and he appointed Judah captain over them. David
the valiant warrior, confesses in sundry Psalms, that his warrely prowis
and fortitude Psalm. 18.
was from the Lord: therefore he cries out in the Lords praise: I will love
thee dearly, O Lord, my strength: the Lord is my rock and my fortress, and
he that delivers me: my God and my strength, in him will I trust: my
shield, the horn of my salvation, and my refuge.

To like purpose in another place: Through thee, Psalm. 44.
(says he to God) we thrust back our enemies, and in thy name shall we tread
down those that rise up against us. Finally, he breaks out and praises God:
Blessed be the Psalm. 144.
Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to fight, and my fingers to
battle: he is my goodness and my fortress, my tower and my deliverer, my
shield, and in him I will trust, whch subdueth my people under me. Which had
been great impiety in the princely Prophet, had wars been altogether
unlawful. Solomon the divine and heavenly Eccles. 3.
preacher, affirms that there is a time for all things: a mong other things
he says: there is a time for peace, and a time for war. Now we know there
is no time for wicked things: if war were wicked and evil, there were no
time for it.

2 Neither do these places only show it to be lawful in the former times
under the law and Prophets, in the time of the old Testament: but also the
new Testament confirms the same, to be as lawful under the Gospel.

When John Baptist preached, and infourmed all Luke 3.
states and degrees of men in their duties: when the soldiers asked him what
they should do: he bids them not forsake their calling, as a thing
unlawful; but shows how it might be used aright; oppress no man, says he,
and be content with your wages.

Whereupon Saint Augustine thus concludes, whom he wills to be content with
their wages, he wills not Epist. 5. Marcellino. Mat. 8.
to leave their warfare. When our Savior was besought to heal the Centurions
servant, which was a man of war; the governor of a hundredth soldiers:
he neither disdained his person, neither condemned his calling, nor denied his
suite, but commended his faith without any more ado, which he would not have
done, had the calling been unlawful.

Saint Peter by God was sent to another Centurion Act. 10.
to whom he preached all the words of life: yet is there no syllable nor
sound of condemning the condition and calling of the Centurion Cornelius. When
there was a great conspiracy against Paul, of more then forty, which sought
his life; he was contented through the aid Act. 23.
of armed soldiers to be brought safely to Cesaria, and so delivered from the
rage of his enemies; which either he would never have done, or if through fear
he had done, yet it should and would, either by Luke in the story, or by
himself in some place, have been confessed to have been evil done, were
vvarres unlawful altogether.

The author to the Hebrews commending the most holy men and Saints of God, as
for other many excellent Heb. 11.
effects of faith, so also that through faith they subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, obtained the promises, stops the mouths of Lions, quenched
the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword: of weak were made
strong, waxed violent in battle, turned to flight the armies of the aliants. If
to wax strong in battle, to subdue kingdoms, and put to flight the armies
of the aliants, be praise-worthie, how then can vvarres be but lavvfull?

3. Tributes are certain contributions made by the people, and given to the
Prince to defend them by war if occasion served, whereof being demands his
judgment, whether it were lavvfull to give it or no: our Savior Mat. 22.
willed tribute to be given to Caesar the Emperor, and himself for himself
and his train paid it: as Saint Mat. 17. Romans 13.
Matthew records. Saint Paul exhorts the Christian subjects to the paying
of tribute, as part of their subjection and obedience, vvilling that custom
be paid to whom custom; and tribute be paid, to whom tribute belongs.

4. The learned ancient fathers found no such matter in vvarres but commended
them as things most lavvfull. Saint Cyprian in his Epistles says of war:
When 2. Lib. epist. 2.
private men shed blood, it is sin and a great fault: but when it is
publicly done, it is a virtue: wherein he counts private revenge and thereby
shedding of man's blood, heinous murder: but waging lawful wars, he reputeth
as a singular virtue.

Saint Augustine in sundry places, as in his Epistles to Epist. 5. and 48. to
Bonifa. a warrier.
others; and also in that which he writes to Bonifacius a warrier; shows
that as the Gospel has not taken away the lavvfull use of meat and drink,
marriage, riches and such like: so neither has it taken away the use of
lavvfull wars, without which no commonwealth can be preserved: the
lavvfulnesse whereof the examples of Abraham, Moses, Josuah, David, the godly
Centurions in the gospel, and infinite the like, show most evidently.

5. Conditions in vvarres required, that they may be lavvfull: though there
might many be assigned: yet I suppose that these be the chiefest.

1. That no wars be undertaken but by the authority of the King, Prince,
Emperor, or other chief officer and governor in the commonwealth: so that
wars without his appointment, are not lawful wars, but vprores, rebellions
and civil seditions, utterly condemned. Thus Core, Dathan, and Abiram rising
up against Moses. Absolon Number. 16. 2. Kings 15
taking sword in hand against David his natural father. Adoniah against
Solomon, Basha, Zimrie, Shallum, and 1. Kings 1.
the servants of Ammon the king, not armed by the authority of their princes,
but against them, are thus condemned. Brutur and Cassius and such like, of
their own heads arming themselves against their commonweals and countries,
have been condemned as seditious persons.

2. Wars also must be vvaged and undertaken for defense of religion; of
public peace; of the state of the country, and the safety of the
commonwealth and people committed unto princes: for the suppressing of wicked
malefactors, and the lavvfull defense of loyal subjects. Saint Augustine
therefore vvriteth thus to Boniface Augustine to Bonif. 48. Epist.
the vvarrier: all things are quiet and hushed, when vvarres are vvaged: for
they are not undertaken of desire to rule, or for cruelty, but for study of
peace, that the godly may be supported, and the wicked punished: which ends
even the very Heathen respected.

For Homer brings in Hector exhorting his soldiers Homer. Ili.
to fight valiantely in this wise: fight says he and fear not: for it is
great honor to loose a man's life for his country: therefore the rest of the
citizens are defended by our virtue: the mothers and children are thus in
safeguard, which are the seed of the age to come: Thus the temples remain, and
good laws, piety, and shamefastness: thus every one shall enjoy his own
things and lands, when the enemies be expulsed: to this end have lawful
wars been undertaken by the Saints: these ends Abraham, Moses, Joshua, the
godly judges, Samuel, David, and the rest in their vvarres have respected: and
for this cause do we also pray for princes and magistrates, that by their
power and provident care, we may lead our lives in 1. Tim. 2.
godliness and safety.

3. Lastly, wars may not rashly, but advisedly be undertaken, with
deliberation and counsel; thereunto Prou. 24.
the wise man exhorts, with counsel thou shall undertake vvarres; peace
must be bought and redeemed though it be with loss; as Hezechiah would
rather give his treasure to Sennicherib, then wage war with him. Al things 3.
Kings 18
and always must be tried, before we come to handie 3. Kings 18. 1. Off.
blows: which counsel the wise Roman orator gives: all things are first
to be tempted before we contend by force and weapons: and the way to discide
matters must first be sought out: before we try the strength of vvarres.
Wherefore as surgions try alvvaies before they cut or fear of a man's member:
which they do at last, least it breed to further danger: so may not vvarres
be undertaken, but when other means have been sought, and there is imminent
peril and danger ready to ensue: thus by wars, in certain cases to resist
is not unlawful.

And these things in general, as they may stop the mouths of the
Anabaptists, so are their reasons in particular ansvvered by Peter Martyr,
upon Genes. fol. 56. upon 1. Samuel, fol. 190. And by Calvin against them in
his little work so titled: against the Anabaptists, fol. 56. as the book is
in Octauo.

Finally, it may here be enquireth, whether righteous men may not resist the
rage, violence, and force of men by aid of law.

I answer, they may: Paul withstood the rage of his Act. 24.
false accusers and enemies by defense in law before Festus the governor;
from whose corrupt judgment, he chalenging the benefit of the law, appealed
to the judgment Act. 25.
seat of Caesar the Emperor of the Romans. Saint Augustine commended
Maximinus the Bishop, for that Epist. 50. Boniface.
he withstood the rage of the cruel Donatists by the aid of the law, and
appealing to the magistrate, which had he not done says he, his patience had
not deserved commendation, but his negligence had deserved worthy reproof.
Neither does Paul find fault with the Corinthians for going to law; but that
they went to law under unbelieving 1. Cor. 6.
judges; and that for trifles, or else thereby to oppress one another. So that
neither this resistaunce is against righteousness and justice: neither here
forbidden when S. James says, that profane rich men slay the righteous, and
he does not resist them.

And these are the three evils and great sins for which the Apostle
denounces their destruction against the wicked: their fraudulent detayning
their laborers wages: their sensuality of life, and their cruelty: and thus
is the first member, with the true particular branches thereof, ended. Now let
us pray: O eternal and most mighty God, the only righteous judge of all the
world, who hate all oppression, cruelty, and unmercifulness among men, and
delightest rather in justice, equity, and unfeigned righteousness: send down
thy heavenly spirit into our hearts, power down thy holy Ghost into our
minds, that we always careful of upright dealing, true innocence,
brotherly charity; may fly all deceitful detayning, all cruel oppression,
all wrongful iniurying of our neighbors: and embrace, mercy, pity,
compassion toward the poor distressed: that we being always far from
withholding the right from others by deceit; from afflicting the brethren
through violence; from murdering the righteous by unmercifulness; may thereby
avoid the dreadful sentence of endless condemnation against the wicked rich
men of the world denounced; and evermore remain in thy loving favor, and be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, through Jesus Christ our
only Savior. Amen.

James Chap. 5. verses 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Sermon 25.
Verse 7 Be patient therefore brethren, unto the coming of the Lord: behold,
the husbandman watches for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long
patience for it, until he receive the former, and the later rain.

8 Be ye therefore patient also, and settle your minds: for the coming of the
Lord draws near.

9 Grudge not, my brethren, one against another, least ye be condemned: behold
the judge stands before the door.

10 Take, my brethren, the Prophets for an example of suffering adversity, and
of long patience: which have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord.

11 Behold, we count them blessed which endure: ye have heard of the patience
of Job, and have known what end the Lord made. For the Lord is very pitiful
and merciful.


THese words are an exhortation to patience: 2. Place of the Chapter,
Being the second place and part of this Chapter. Which place being resolved
into the parts and particulars therein, contains four special members,
Namely. 1. The exhortation to patience. 2. A similitude, whereby patience is
taught us: therein are three things. 1. The similitude 2. The application. 3.
The reason.
3. The handling of patience, by the contrary, which is grudging* 1. The thing.
2. The reason.
4 The reasons why we should be patient: and they are four. 1. From example of
the prophets in general. 2. From the reward of patience. 3. From example of
Job. 4. From the nature of God, who is merciful, and pitiful.




1 Touching the first, it is the exhortation, which S. James very fitly and
conveniently sets down: for in the former place having entreated of the
cruelty, and injuries which by the profane men, and covetous wicked rich
persons, the poor suffer: least therewithal they should be pressed down to
the ground: The Apostle, against these, and all other injuries, troubles, and
afflictions, incident to this life: comfort them; exhorting them patiently
to bear the cross imposed, and to suffer with quietness, the manifold
troubles of this life: earnestly expecting in their minds the coming of the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall plentifully avenge their injuries upon the heads of
their oppressors: for which cause they ought to be patient unto the coming of
the Lord.

This virtue of patience, is a most excellent ornament in the life of a
Christian; neither is there any other thing more seemly, or more answerable to
the condition of the professors of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, then with
invincible courage and constancy, to bear and sufferre the manifold
afflictions, whereunto we are subject, whenever the times be; what manner so
ever the means be; what kind so ever we suffer in. For which cause, the
exhortations in the holy and sacred word of God, thereunto apperteyning, are
sundry and manifold.

Which to pass over, and (as it were) only to give a taste thereof by the
way: What says Saint Paul touching Romans 1^.
this matter? Does not he exhort the Saints to rejoice in hope; to be patient
in tribulation; to continue in prayer? Who elsewhere setting down the steps
and degrees wherein the Saints must tread, if they will walk worthy the
calling whereunto they are called, requires, Ephesians. 4. 1. Pet. 4. 12. James 1.
2. Revel. 2. 10. Heb. 10. 35. 36.
(as the third step to Christian conversation) long suffering, or patience:
wherefore he says; I therefore (as a prisoner in the Lord) exhort you, that
you walk worthy the calling whereunto you are called. How? With all
humbleness of mind, and meekness; with patience, or long suffering;
supporting one another through love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace.

The holy and blessed Apostle Saint Peter, describing 2. Pet. 1.
unto the Saints that golden chain of all excellent virtues, wherewith he
would have all the elect of God to be adorned, and beautified, as the most
incomparable ornament of their life: makes patience the fifth link thereof,
whereunto in this wise he persuades, therefore give all diligence thereunto;
Join moreover, virtue with faith, and with virtue, knowledge; with knowledge,
temperance; with temperance, patience; with patience, godliness; with godliness,
brotherly kindness; with brotherly kindness, love. For if these things be in you,
and abound, they will make you not to be idle, nor unfruitful in the
acknowledging of our Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ.

These, and infinite other the like places we have, generally moving us to
this excellent and commendable virtue, patience.

Particularly the Apostle in this place exhorts to patience, which is, in
bearing and suffering the injuries and cruel oppressions of profane rich men:
by whose tyranny and cruel dealing, they were marueylouslie afflicted, which
they ought with all patience to bear, looking and waiting for the coming of
the Lord Jesus Christ, to avenge their causes, and quarrelles against the
wicked.

Our holy and blessed Savior Christ, in particular exhorts unto patience:
which in the bearing of violence Mat. 5.
and injuries of men, consists. Resist not evil (says our savior Christ)
but if one smite thee on the one cheek, offer unto him the other: and if he
sue thee at the law, to take away thy coat from thee; let him have thy cloak
also: if he constrain thee to go with him a mile, go two. Whereby our Savior
exhorts the Saints, to prepare themselves always against injuries: and with
all patience and quietness of their minds, to bear the oppressions of men,
which wrongfully should be offered. Hereunto this Apostle having respect,
wills and exhorts the Saints, to bear the injuries and cruel oppressions
of the wicked, with patience: and with all godly quietness to wait for the
coming of Jesus Christ. Be ye therefore patient, says the Apostle Saint
James, until the coming of the Lord.

Wherein we are taught, that seeing we must stay our selves, and settle our
hearts, and with patience run the race of afflictions, until the coming of
Christ: therefore, both the reward of their patience, and other virtues of the
Saints, and also the punishment of their adversaries and oppressors, are
reserved till the day of Christ, till his coming in glorious majesty, to
judge the quick and the dead, and to give sentence against all men.

Wherefore, albeit the Saints of God have some small and little feeling of
their future joys, and glory to come: as in the meditating upon heavenly
things, in the settled peace and quietness of our consciences with God; Col. 3.
Romans 5.
and the like: and the wicked also, even in this life, sometime feel and taste
of their extreme calamities to come, Isay. 57. Isay. 66.
by the disquietnes of their consciences; the continual anguish of their
souls; the great vexation of their minds; and the comfortless sorrow of
their hearts, which they often suffer: Yet neither the Saints shall have the
consummation of their joys: neither the wicked the full measure of their
punishments, before the day of judgment, and coming of Jesus Christ.
Wherefore S. James here exhorts the Saints to wait for both these til the
coming of the Lord.

The consideration hereof is comfortable, and the knowledge thereof most
profitable to the Saints: wherefore we may note this in particular a little.

And first for the glory of the Saints, and their deliverance, it is in
perfect measure to be looked for, only at the appearing of Jesus Christ in
glorious majesty. Our Savior Jesus Christ to that purpose foretelling his
Apostles of his coming to judgment, and the signs which Luke 21. Mat. 24. 31.
should forerunne it, exhorts them against that day, to lift up their heads,
to be of good cheer, and to be comforted, because their redemption approached:
then only promising them full deliverance from miseries, and perfect
redemption of soul and body. Saint Paul affirms to the Romans, that in this
life they should be subject to Romans 8
manifold afflictions and troubles, even as the Lord Jesus Christ was: and that
here there is no end of affliction to be looked for, but we must wait for
that, til the coming of Christ: which with sighing and sorrowing he witnessed
they waited for, even the deliverance, and redemption of their bodies. This
glorious redemption only is perfected at the coming of the Lord. Paul writing
to the church Coloss. 3.
of Colossa, avouches that our life is hid with Christ: and that when Christ
which is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory.
What is the glory of the Saints? Is it not to be conformable to the image of
Romans 8.
the son, and to be made like unto him? But we come not to that perfect
conformity and likeness with Christ, in this mortal life, but in the life to
come: therefore the Col. 3. 1. John. 3.
glory of the saints, in the day of judgment, in perfect measure, only is
revealed.

Saint John therefore says, now are we the sons of God, but yet it is not
made manifest what we shall be: and we know that when he shall appear, we
shall be like un to him, for we shall see him as he is. Thus the glory of Gods
Saints, in perfect beutie shall not appear before Jesus Christ be reueiled
again from heaven. The holy Apostle and elect vessel of Christ, Saint Paul,
looked for his glorious 2. Tim. 4. 1. Pet. 1. 5. 6. 7. 1. Pet. 4. 13. 1. Pet.
5. 4.
crown only in the day of Christ his appearing, therefore says he, I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course: (I have ended my race), I have
kept the faith: from hence forth therefore is there laid up for me a crown
of righteousness: which the righteous judge shall then give unto me, or in that
day: and that day, is the same day, wherein Jesus Christ shall appear in
glory, to render unto every one according to that he has done in his body,
be it good or evil. Wherefore as fathers lay up for their children, gold,
silver, lands, possessions, yet give 2. Cor. 5.
them only when they are of age: so God has laid up eternal treasures for us,
but gives them unto us only, when we are of perfect age in Jesus Christ: and
that is only in Ephesians. 4.
the life to come.

And as the glory of Gods Saints is reueiled only in the day of Christ's
appearing: so also the full measure of the punishment of the wicked, is there
unto reserved, that as God suffers them to fulfill the measure of their
iniquity here, so also they should in that day receive the perfect measure of
their punishment, whereunto they are said to be reserved. The holy patriarcke
Job, preaching of the eternal torments and punishments of the wicked, Job. 21.
the wicked says he is kept to the day of destruction: and they shall be brought
fourth to the day of wrath. Sirach says that the most highest hates the
wicked, and will repay Eccl^^. 12.
vengeance to the ungodly, and keeps them to the day of horrible punishment.
Saint Paul entreating of the impenitent and hard hearted persons, who contemned
Romans 2.
the lenity, long sufferaunce and great patience of God, avouches that
therefore they treasured and heaped up to themselves, wrath against the day of
wrath, and declaration of the just judgment of God, who should reward every
man according to his works. The same doctrine did he publish to the comfort of
the Saints, and terror 2. These. 1.
of the wicked, to the Saints of the Church of Thessalonica: affirming that the
Lord Jesus Christ, showing himself from heaven with his mighty Angels,
should in flaming fire render vengeance unto them that know not God, nor
obeyed the Gospel of Jesus Christ. To whom Saint Peter subscribeth, the Lord,
says he, knows 2. Pet. 2.
how to deliver his out of temptation: and to reserve the unjust unto the day
of judgment to be punished.

S. Jude in his Epistle general painting out in flourishing Jude ver. 13. 14.
15. 2 Pet. 2. 4. and 1. 3. c. v. 7.
and lively colors the ungodly of his time, and the great impiety whereunto
they were given: noting their punishment, which in full and perfect measure
should fall upon them and be powered out also in the day of the Lords
appearing, affirms that they are reserved for the blackenesse of darkness
for ever. Lactantius Lib. 5. cap. 23.
thereof therefore says well: Albeeit God use both here and in the life to
come, to punish the vexations and afflictions of his people: yet does he will
us patiently to look for that day of heavenly judgment, wherein he will
either honor, or punish every one for their deserts. Let not sacriligious
persons and souls think, that such shall be despised and contemned, and left
unrevenged, whom they have thus torn, as it were, in pieces: For their
reward shall come assuredly upon the ravenous wolves, which have tormented the
silly and simple souls which have done no wickedness. Let us only about,
and endeavor, that righteousness alone be puni^^^^ by men in us: let us give
all diligence, that we may deserve from God, both the revenge of our suffering,
and the reward also. Thus Lactantius.

As the Scriptures alleged speak severally of each: so sometimes jointly of
both. For Daniel the Prophet entreating Dan. 12.
of the deliverance of the righteous, and the just punishment of the wicked,
refers both unto the day of judgment. Wherefore he says: Many of them
that sleep in the dust shall awake: Many, that is all: some to life: that is
the reward of the godly: some to ignomnie and perpetual contempt, as the
wicked. Christ teaches the same in the parable of the tares and the wheat in
the Matt. 13.
Gospel: by tares he understands the wicked: by wheat the godly: and the
harvest notes the day of judgment: whereupon this is concluded: that both the
tares (the wicked) shall be cast into the furnace of destruction, and (the
wheat) the godly gathered into the barn of Gods mercy: and should shine as
the Sun in the kingdom of heaven. In another place it is avouched, that both
the Matt. 25. 5. John 29.
righteous should hear their comfortable and joyful sentence of entering into
their kingdom only at the day of judgment: and the wicked the dreadful voice
of their final condemnation, to be cast down into hell fire, therein to be
punished with the devil and his angels for ever. Finally, S. Paul writes,
that in the day of Christ's coming only, 2. Cor. c. 5.
we shall all appear before his tribunal seat, every one to receive
according to that which he has done in his body, be it good, be it evil. So
then it appears most manifestly, that neither reward is given the Saints, nor
punishment rendered the wicked in full and perfect measure, before the day and
coming of the Lord Jesus: which thing Saint James to persuade us, wills the
afflicted Saints of God to be pacient till the coming of the Lord.

Before which time, neither Abel, nor Noah, nor Enoch: neither Abraham, Isaac,
nor Jacob: neither Joseph nor Job, nor any of the Patriarchs: neither Elias,
nor Isai: Michai nor Jeremy: Daniel nor Amos: neither any of the Prophets.
Neither David nor Asa, nor Hezechiah, nor Josiah,: neither any one of the
Princes: neither Peter nor Paul: John nor James, nor any of the Apostles.
Neither Matthewe, Luke, Mark, nor John, nor any of the Evangelists: neither
Steven, nor Policarpe, nor Ignatius, nor any of the holy martyrs, have received
the fullness of their glory, but shall at the day of judgment have the
consummation of their blessedness. Neither Cain nor Ismael, Esau, Saul, nor
Pharaoh, Ahab, nor Judas, nor Pilate, nor any of the rabble of that wicked
route, have their full punishment: but it is reserved until the coming of the
Lord: when, as the souls and bodies of the righteous shall be cladde with
immortality and glory: so also the bodies and souls of the wicked, shall be
cast into eternal torment. Thus Saint James partly to be a comfort to the
godly, and partly for a terror to the wicked, exhorts the Saints to be
pacient unto the coming of the Lord.

2 The exhortation thus set down, the next and second thing in this discourse
of patience, is the similitude, which the Apostle uses to show them how they
ought to be pacient. And it seems to be added to prevent that which the
poor afflicted might have objected: we (might they say) have been pacient a
long while, and waited for deliverance from our oppressions and miseries: yet
see we no remedy: we find no end of our troubles: it seems that the Lord
deferreth his coming to avenge us of the profane rich men, which grievously
do afflict us: what shall we now do then? You must (says James) immitate and
follow the wise and skillful husband man, who endures all weathers: patiently
abides the appointed seasons: is not discouraged by any means: who casting
the seed into the ground, thinks not long for harvest, but wayteth the
appointed time thereunto: in the mean time endures many things patiently.
So must you, O my brethren, wait the Lords leisure, in paciencie of your
minds: who has prefixed and prefined the day of your deliverance from these
oppressions of your enemies: until which time you must rest your selves
contented. And this is the sum of the Apostles similitude, wherein there are
three things to be noted. 1 The similitude. 2 The application. 3 The reason
annexed.

1 The similitude: behold the husband man wayteth for the precious fruits of
the earth, and has long patience for it, until he receive the former and the
later 2. Tim. 2. v. 6.
rain.

The fruits of the earth are here called precious, because they are the means
of our nourishment, and the instrument of the preservation of our life. For
without corn and grain, our life is not, ne yet can be maintained: and
therefore are they in deed precious. This precious fruit the husbande-man
commits to the ground, where he leaves it, and lets it alone for a
season, patiently waiting for the time of the harvest, and has long patience:
for from seed time to harvest, time he wayteth for the increase of his
labor: and in the mean time many stormy tempests, many glowmie days, many
rainie showers, many alterations of weather, are inflicted.

He has long patience till he receive the former Early and later rain.
and the latter rain. The early or former rain, is that rain which falls
immediately after seed time, whereby the grain is beaten into the bowels and
bosom of the earth, that there it may be covered, that it may have some root
and fastening in the heart of the earth.

The latter rain, is that which falls immediately before harvest, which
makes the corn swell and yield, increase and grow greater and weightier in
measure. Both these the husbandman patiently wayteth for. If rain fall not
betwixt Michaelmasse and Alhalonride, which is the seade time and so after: yet
he rests himself contented. If the Summer be dry and no hope of rain to
make the corn swell, flower and yield, yet he will not be discouraged, but
waits the appointed time with long patience.

This he speaks of the husbandman, not that there is none of them which
murmr and are discontent for some there be which are offended at lack: and
others are grieved with plenty: so that even among them there is sometime
murmuring: but because the greater part of them are in these things pacient,
and know that they must, will they, nill they, abide the appointed season:
therefore he says, the husbandman has long patience, till he receive the
early and later rain.

Some refer this former and latter rain, to the land of promise: the land
of Canaan: which they report to bring forth twice yearly: In March first, and
then again in September. And then they take the former rain, for that which
rypeneth the former croppe: the latter, for that rain which falls something
before September, whereby the latter harvest is ripened.

But it seems that the Apostle means generally of al husbandmen, who with
patience tarry their appointed times, and so with long looking for, at length
receive the increase of their labors.

By the early and latter rain, the seasonable times of the year are meant,
which Moises promised unto Israel Deuteronomy. 28.
the people of God, if they would walk in the laws of the Lord, and be
obedient unto him. The Lord says he, shall open unto thee his good treasure,
even the heaven to give rain unto the land in due season, and to bless all
the works of thy hands. In another place Leuit. 26.
promising a blessing unto them that keep his commandments, the Lord says
in Moises: I will then send you rain in due season, and the land shall yield
her increase; and the trees of the field shall give their fruit, and your
threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the
sowing time, and you shall eat your bread in plenteousnesse, and dwell in your
land safely.

And happily the Prophets in like speeches had like relation and respect. For
the Prophet Osee expressing Osee 6.
that comfort which the people should have, if they, by their corrections from
GOD, would be reclaymed, and return unto him: compares it to the
pleasantness of the morning, and to the sweet rain which falls in due
season: therefore he says: then shall we have knowledge, and endeavor our
selves to know the Lord, his going forth is prepared as the morning, and he
shall come unto us as the rain, and as the later rain unto the earth: where
the rain, and the later rain signifies the rain which in due time and
season falling, makes the ground fruitful.

And Joel also noting unto the people the seasonable Joel. 2.
weather wherewith God would bless them, and the rain, which God in just and
perfect measure would send, upon their repentance, as he was wount unto a
people reconciled: says; be glad then ye children of Sion, and rejoice in the
Lord your God: for he has given you the rain of righteousness, and he will
cause to come down for you the rain, even the first rain, and the later
rain in the first month. Moses finally, expounding the promise of God, when
he promises to send rain in due season; and to Deuteronomy. 11.
bless the works of their hands: says in the person of God: I will also give
rain unto your land in due season, the first rain and the later. The first in
the se^de time; the later toward the harvest. And the Apostle alluding to
these like promises of God, affirms that the husband man has long patience
until he receive the former and the later rain: and this is the similitude of
the Apostle: behold the husband man waits for the precious seed of the
earth, and has long patience till be receive the former and the later rain.

2. In the similitude the second thing is, the application: be ye therefore
patient also, and settle your minds. As the husband man from seed time to
harvest is patient; and settleth his heart, and then looks for the fruit of
his labor: so must we also settle our hearts, and bear the tediousnes of our
times, and the hardness of afflictions; steadfastly and constantly looking for
the fruit of immortality and glory, in the harvest of the world, and the
day of the appearing of Jesus Christ. And if the husbandman have long patience
for temporal fruits and commodities, not being discouraged, disquieted,
disco^forted, for tediousnes of labor, continuance of time, and length of
days, from seed time to harvest: shall not christians looking for immortal
fruit of their patience, settle their hearts, so that neither multitude of
troubles, nor weight of miseries, nor grieuousnes of oppressions, nor number of
injuries, shall be able to dawnte and disquiet them? be ye therefore patient,
and settle your hearts says the Apostle.

And in the manifold afflictions of this life, the hearts Men's minds settled in
affections.
and minds of Gods Saints are sundry ways settled. 1. Our hearts are settled
in our afflictions, by the sweet promises we have from God of our deliverance;
who has promised to deliver the righteous out of troubles, and such a^ put
their trust in him. David thereof says; Many are Psalm. 34.
the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers out of all. In another
place to like purpose: the salvation Psalm. 37.
of the righteous is of the Lord, he shall be their strength in time of
trouble. Therefore almighty GOD Psalm. 5^.
says to his people: call upon me in the day of thy trouble and I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me. The Prophet exhorting men to settle
themselves, to rest Psalm. 36. 91. 15.
and rely upon God in their miseries, yea in all things: gives this counsel
from the promise of God: commit thy cause or thy way unto the Lord, and trust
in him, and he shall bring it to pass. He will bring forth thy righteousness
as the light, and thy judgments as the noone day. Thus has God promised to
defend our cause to restore us to our right, and in our miseries to deliver us,
therefore ought we thereby to settle our minds. God says 1. Cor. 10.
Paul is faithful; which will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength,
but will give the issue with the te^tatio^, that we may bear it. And S. Peter;
The Lord knows how 2. Pet. 2.
to deliver the godly out of tentation. Seeing then we have such sweet
promises of deliverance out of troubles, therefore therein ought we to be
patient and to settle our minds upon these promises; that the Lord will
deliver us in due time from all afflictions, and finally wash away all tears
from our eyes, as the Scripture teaches.

2. As by the promises of our deliverance our hearts or settled through
patience in our oppression: so also ought they to be settled in the experience
we have of the power of God in the deliverance of the righteous. If we look to
others, or our selves, we shall find experience and trial of this truth;
whereby our hearts ought in all our miseries to be settled. Has not God
delivered Moses and Exodus 14.
Israel his people, from the army of Pharao, when the red sea was before
them; hard and sharp rocks on both sides the enemy at their heels
following; so that their state was dangerous? What, did not God deliver David
from 1. King. 18 19. 20. 21. 23. 24.
sundry attempts of Saul, who sought by many ways his utter confusion: for
which cause he so often praises God for his deliverance, as the book of
Psalms therewith is replenished and full? Was not Hezechiah the godly king
delivered Psalm. 18. 23. 27. 86. 144. 4. Kings 19
mightily by God from the power and army of Sennacherib, into whose jaws God
put his bitte and bridle, and led him away into his own country, by a
rumor of inuision that was brought him, and by the destruction of his army
by the Angel of God? Did he not deliver the Israelites out of the hands of the
Philistines and other their enemies, which often and long time had them in
subjection; as the book of Judges and of Samuel records? When the Aramites
had besieged Samaria, and therefore Judges. 1. Samu. 4. Kings 7.
the people, Prince and country, in great distress by famine; and peril by
reason of the enemy: was it not delivered miraculously by God, who caused the
Aramites to hear a noise of horses and charrets; wherewith they terrified,
fled, and left their provision behind them? Was not Iehosaphat by him
delivered, both in the battle 3. Kings 22
in Ramoth Gilead, and also from the Moabites, Amorites, and Amalachites which
joined battle against him? has he not delivered infinite other his holy Saints
from 2. Chron. 22
their oppressions, afflictions, and troubles they have suffered? if we seek
experience in our selves: which of See Psalm 61. v. 4. 63. v. 7. 91. 4.
us is it, whom at one time or another God has not delivered, either from
peril by land or by sea; at home or abroad; either from oppression and
injuries of open enemies, or dangers of counterfaite friends: either from
grief of mind, of sickness of body: either from spoil of goods, or peril
of life by the wicked? Seeing therefore we have this trial and experience of
Gods help in our oppressions: shall we not therein be patient and settle our
hearts?

3. Neither thus only are our hearts settled in our miseries, but also when we
cast our eyes upon the crown of glory which we shall receive; and the glorious
hope whereof we shall be pertakers, if we endure with patience; we should settle
and quiet our minds in our miseries. Thus Paul exhorting the Romans to settle
their hearts, and in their Romans 8.
afflictions, which by the example of Christ they should suffer, comforting
them; tells them that the sufferings of this their mortal and temporal
life, are not to be compared to the glory which should be revealed to the
sons of God, And in like manner to the Church of Corinth; the 2. Cor. 4.
momentanie afflictions which are for a season, cause unto us a far more
excellent and eternal weight of glory: while we look not to things which are
seen, but to things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. Our Savior Heb. 12.
Christ settled his heart upon the hope he had of the glorious crown whereof he
should be partaker. By whose example S. Paul exhorts us also, to endure with
patience the afflictions of this life, and run with settled minds the race which
is set before us looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of the faith. Who
for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the
shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. This crown is given
the Saints after their miseries here be ended: and they are made partakers of
the promises after the troubles of this life are finished: whereunto having an
earnest regard; and casting their eyes continually, thereby their hearts and
minds are settled: so that these miseries and afflictions are mightily borne
of them, under the burden whereof they are not greatly disquieted. As in the
Apostles; the holy martyrs, and many other of the chosen Sons of God, is
apparent.

4. Finally our hearts in afflictions are settled, when we record and recount
often the fearful judgments of God, upon them which have afflicted and
cruelly persequuted his Church and Saints in all times. This might easily
assuage and mitigate all grief and sorrow of out hearts. Cain for persequuting
and murdering Abell; was Genesis 4.
punished with a desperate mind all the days of his life; with eternal
torment of conscience in the kingdom of satan for ever. Ismael for
persequuting Isaac the seed of Genesis 21. Gal. 4.
the promise, was therefore cast out of the house of Abraham, which was the
ripe of the church of God. Pharao and the Egyptians having a longtime afflicted
the people Exodus 14.
of God, were therefore finally overthrown in the red sea: and so prince and
people; horse and man; perished. The Philistines, Amalachites, Madianites,
Babilonians, Assirians, and others, for like persequution were also punished.
Achab king of Israel persequuted the prophets, 3 Kings 22.
afflicted the saints of God, and slew them; to whom his bloody wife Jesabell
blew the bellows of cruel tyranny: therefore he perished in the battle in
Ramoth, Gilead by the Syrians: and the dogs licked his blood in the poole of
Samaria: and she was cast down at a window, 4. Kings 9.
her brains being dashed out, and her body devoured of dogs. When Antiochus
the king of Siria had raised great persequution against the people of God, he
himself was grievously punished by God: for not only Maccab. 1. 6. and. 2. 9.
etc.
his army was greatly wasted of Judas Maccabe; but also when he purposed to
have made Jerusalem a common sepulcher for the Jews, he was stricken with a
grievous and incurable disease of his bowels, and scrawling of worms in his
body; and such a filthy stincke, as that no man could abide it, so that he
was forced to wa^der in the mountains and so ended his days in misery. Haman
afflicted Ester 7.
Mardocaie, and the people of the Jews; for which cause God caused him to fall
into the disfavor of Assuerus, who caused him to be hong upon the gallows he
had prepared for Mardecay Herod called the great, persecuting our savior
Christ in the infa^ts of Bethlem and the coast thereof, Mat. 2.
whom from two years old and under, he caused to be murdered: for the same
was stricken with the fearful disease of Antiochus, and after unspeakable
torments thereby ended his life most wretchedly: as both Josephus Joseph. lib.
17 c. 9. Antiquis. 1. lib. c. 8. 9
writes, and Eusebius records in his Ecclesiastical history.

Herod called Antipas, the son of Herod the great, caused John to be beheaded
in prison, at the request of Herodias, for that he had said; It was not lawful
for him to have his brother Philips wife: For which thing Herod was punished of
God. His father in law Aretas, the king of Arabia, overcame and slew his
army, and he fled to Lugden in France, whether his incestuous harlotte
followed him, where in miserable banishment, he and she both perished.

What punishments the cruel Jews suffered, for Joseph. 18. lib. c. 20. Antiq.
De bello Iudaico.
persecuting Christ and his Apostles, it is at large in seven books showed by
Josephus, who showed the great and miserable war, the Roman Captains Titus
and Vaspasian had against Jerusalem, and the wonderful distress the Jews
were driven unto thereby, as is apparent: and our Savior before had
threatened. Herod Agrippa, as he imitated Luke 19. Mat. 23. Luke 21. 23. Acts
12.
the persecution of his Grandfather Herod the great, so was he punished as he
was. For having slain James, and cast Peter into prison, making an oration to
the people, for which they gave him the name of God: is this the voice of God,
and not of a man: he chalenging the same, was stricken by the angel of God:
worms scrawled also out of his body, and so he died.

Nero the Emperor persecuted Paul and Peter, and the Saints, but he fell by
his own hands, and became his own butcher. Domitian the persecuting
Emperor, was slain of his Subjects, and buried without honor. Like
punishment befell like persecutours.

Finally, many who have afflicted private men, have been themselves also
grievously afflicted, and punished by God: whose just reward if we did
consider, it should cause us in our afflictions to be patient, and to settle
our minds as we are here exhorted, partly therefore by the promises of our
deliverance, and partly by the experience and trial of the power of God in that
behalf: partly by the hope we have of our glorious reward if we continue
patient: and finally that almighty God does severely punish the wicked, who
have persecuted his Church or any member thereof, in our afflictions our hearts
must be quietted and settled, according to the doctrine of the Apostle: be ye
therefore patient also, and settle your hearts.

3 The third and last thing in the similitude, is the 3. Reason.
reason annexed: the Saints of God must be patient and settle their hearts,
because the coming of the Lord approaches. Though the Lord seem to ^a^ie
long, yet will he come and not tarry. The prophet Abacuc showing Abacuc 2,
that both the enemies of Gods elect shall be destroyed, and the Saints
certainly delivered, so that the issue of both shall be assuredly at the
appointed time, though not always according to our rash, headie, and hasty
affection: faith that the vision thereof, that is, of the deliverance of the
Saints and the punishment of the wicked, is for an appointed time, but at the
last it shall speak and shall not lie, though it tarry, wait: for it shall
surely come and not stay. Which Saint Paul applying to the coming of Christ
Heb. 10.
as a fear full auenger against the wicked, and a plentiful rewarder of the
patience of the righteous, therefore tells the Hebrews that they have need
of patience, that after they have done the will of God, they might receive the
promises. For yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and not
tarry. Our Savior Christ in the holy Revelation speaking of his coming which
he Revel. 22.
will not prolong, but rather hasten for the elects sake, says unto his
Church, behold I come shortly, blessed ^at. 24,
is he that keeps the words of the Prophecy of this book. Seeing
therefore the Lords coming to revenge his elect and punish their enemies, is
at hand and draws near: the saints ought not to think the time of their
affliction long, but to settle their hearts and endure with patience. Which is
the reason of the Apostle in this place, to move unto patience.

Which reason, if it might persuade men in the time of the Apostles, to be
patient, and to endure the time of their trial, because the coming of the
Lord for their full deliverance, drew near: how much more effectual is it,
to move us to endure the time of our trial, seeing the time of Christ's coming
is so much shortened?

And if the coming of the Lord in the apostles time was nie, how much more
ought every one of us, to prepare our selves to be in a readiness to enter in
with our bridegroom Christ: and look continually for his appearance? For if
Saint Paul could truly say of himself, and 1. Cor. 10.
the Saints of his time, that they were they upon whom the ends of the world
were come: If Saint Peter could 1. Pet. 4.
persuade the Church of Christ to be sober, and to watch unto prayer, because
then the end of all things was at hand: If Saint John could say truly unto
the faithful of 1. John ^.
his time; Babes, it is the last hour, and as you have heard that Antichrist
should come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know it is the
last time: If Saint James here could move the afflicted Saints of God, to
acquit themselves patient, because the day and coming of the Lord approached;
how much more truly may we affirm the same, seeing (since their time) so many
years are finished, that it cannot be, but that his coming is a^ the door,
and very nearly approaching? Which careful consideration should make us, both
with greater quietness to settle our minds in the days of our affliction, and
with greater carefulnes to wait and watch day and night for his approaching,
and glorious appearing.

This day many forgette: and not a few think it to be yet for a long time and
season to come: wherefore they live in all careless security, and wallowe and
welter in all iniquity.

But that cannot be possibly far off, the signs and tokens whereof,
altogether are finished: for whether we Mat. 2^.
take that of Christ, that before the end of the world, their charity shall
wax cold in men, and their iniquity shall abound, is it not manifest? Was
ever less love seen among men, when every one goes about to eat up, and
devour his neighbor? Was ever sin at a higher flow, or in fuller measure,
then when pride possesses all degrees of men; and adultery is counted as no
sin; covetousness reputed as nothing; blasphemy and cursed swearing, is in
the mouth of every man and child? then when lying is the trade of men's living;
deceate and craft common among us; slander and backbiting usual in all men;
oppression and usury practiced of high and low, noble and worshipful,
citizen and gentleman? then when dronkennes and riotousnes ouerfloweth the
land; murder and manslaughter is committed, and left unpunished; when treasons
and trecheries are every where intended, and all loyalty and Subject like
duty trodden under feet in the world? when every man violateth the laws of
the realm, and with venomous tongues speak evil of such as excel 2. Pet. 2.
Jude. 8.
in dignity?

Or whether we look to earthquakes and rumors of wars, are they not
finished? has not GOD, not long since, shaken the earth; and does not the
flagge of defiance stand out almost in every Country? are not our
neighbors up in arms round about us; and is there not preparations for
wars almost in every land and kingdom?

Or whether we cast our eyes upon false Prophets and deceauers: impostors and
seducers of the people: is it not clearer then the sun at noone day, that
the world swarmeth with such? The sect of the Libertines, and Anabaptists
revived: Papists, Jesuits, Seminaries, and Schismatickes, multiplied: the
foul family of loose and licentious love, increased: diverse gross and
newfangled opinions, crept out of the professors themselves, of the glorious
gospel: and infinite other like Spirits of errors, Phi^ip. 3. 1. Tim. 4. ^.
Tim. 3.
whereof S. Paul in sundry places has foretold and prophesied.

Or whether we look to the working of the mystery of iniquity, whereby there
shall be a falling away, and defection from the faith: which begun to work in
the Apostles time, works now, and so shall continually to the end: is it
not apparent, how great a fall there is from the faith? even of the countries
where the gospel was first, and most purely preached, how many have revolted,
and fallen to barbarous idolatry? Jerusalem, Constantinople, Ephesus, Corinth,
and innumerable the like places, cities, towns, and countreies? how great a
part of Reuela. 17.
Christendom has left the purity of Christ's religion, and is become dronken
with the dregs and dross of Popish superstition, out of the cup of the great
whore of Babylon? Where is the Gospel preached sincerely, without mixtur^ of
man's vanity, but in England and Scotland, a handful of Christendom? And
even among our selves how many be they, which have brought in damnable 2. Pet.
2. Jud. v. 10.
heresies: by whom the way of God is evil spoken of?

How many have risen, even as it were, out of the bowels and bosom of the
Church, which speak perverse things, to bring Disciples after them: which have
al made a defection from the faith? Thus the man of sin, by Act. 20. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
whom the defection shall be made, frist received life in the time of Christ and
his Apostles, and shall not utterly die before Christ come in glorious
majesty, when he shall destroy him with the breath of his mouth. So that now
nothing hinders in the knowledge of man, wherefore the coming of Jesus
Christ should not now be at the door, and even present.

This coming, in the eternal purpose and council of God, draws near: in
whose power are all things: who rules times and seasons at his pleasure:
before who^ all times are present, to whom a thousand years are as 2. Pet. 3.
one day; and one day as a thousand years: So that albeit God do not execute
his purpose according to the hastines of our vain affections, yet are the
issues of his judgments certain, and in their appointed times shall be showed
to the confusion of the enemies of the Saints, and the eternal comfort of the
church: which drawing near and approaching, the Saints in all their afflictions
must be patient, and settle their hearts, according to the doctrine of this
Apostle: be ye therefore patient, and settle your minds; for the commming of
the Lord to judgment draws near.

3 In this treatise of patience, the third thing is the handling of the place
by the contrary; you must be patient, and not murmr, which is proper to
worldlings and wicked men: who in their miseries, afflictions, and troubles,
through impatiencie, break out into murmuring. In the setting down of this
contrary there are two things to be observed. 1 The contrary it self,
murmuring. 2 The reason. We must be patient, and not murmr, for the Lord is
at hand to reward us in free mercy, if we be patient: or to punish us in
severe justice, if we murmr in our afflictions.

Murmuring is not here generally taken for every grudging and groyning, either
against God or man: as Murmuring what it is.
whereof in other places of Scripture is spoaken: but particularly for that
murmuring which is against men: therefore says he; grudge not one against
another. This grudging and murmuring, is either when we greiue that wicked rich
men should so highly be exalted; should abound in wealth; excel in power: and
the poor, yet righteous, and just men: should by poverty, injury, and
pen^rie, be pressed down in the world. Or else it is, that muttering, and
murmuring, whereby we take it in evil part, that our selves should be so tossed
and tormoiled; and other should be dealt withal more gently: thinking that we
bear a greater burden, and heavier cross from God, then we have deserved:
and that other men (as yet not touched) have deserved more.

Or finally, it is that grudging which is in our afflictions, whereby we are
discontent that we should sigh so long under our afflictions, and the wicked
which afflicte us, should so long escape unpunished: and through impatiencie,
complain hereof to God. This ought not to be in the Saints of God, who ought
to be renowned for their unspeakable patience. Whose bounden duty it is to
pray even for their enemies: to wish well to them which have done them injury;
to bless them that curse Matt. 1. and 6. 18. Ephesians. 4. 1. Pet. ^.
them: or forgive and forget offenses committed, in all godly moderation to
settle their hearts: and to commit their cause to him that judges righteously.

And if this moderation and equity of our minds, be to be showed toward our
enemies, for whose injuries and oppressions we ought not to murmr, or
impaciently to complain against them, unto god: how much less ought we then
to grudge or murmr one against another? How much less becomes it the
Saints to grudge and murmr one against another for the daily offenses which
are given? For who is he that can live so uprightly, but that in one thing or
another, at one time or another, he shall give offense: If every one give
some offense unto another: shall we complain to God in the bitterness of our
heart: shall we desire revenge from God against the^? and shall we not all then
perish? for no man lives without some offense giving. We therefore in these
small offenses asking judgment from God, and revenge against others: desire
the same against our selves, in as much as we in the like offend our brethren,
and so shall we all be condemned.

This grudging and muttering proceeds from impaciencie, argues
coffeehouse of the mind, causes mutual complaining unto God, and desires
revenge against such as have done us injury. Which thing is far from the
excellency and dignity of a Christian. Finally, it brings condemnation upon
us: who have lost patience: according to the denouncing of the scripture: woe be
unto them that have lost patience: thereby falling from duty to men: from
charity to the brethren, from obedience to God, from trust in his divine
providence, from sincere embracing of the Gospel of Christ, which prescribes
unto us patience, and so we incur just and deserved condemnation: for which
cause the holy Apostle in this place does not only recommend unto the Saints
the excellent virtue of patience, but also disswadeth murmuring, thereunto
contrary: grudge not one against a^ other, brethren, least ye be condemned.

The reason why we should not murmr one against another, is drawn from the
presence of the Lord: who is at hand as a just judge, to avenge us of our
enemies, and to crown us for our patience, or punish our murmuring. The Lord
our God beholds our injuries with open eye, and sees our oppression by the
wicked: he is pressed and at hand to rescue and deliver us, as it shall seem
best to his divine majesty: he marketh all our behavior under the cross: let
us not therefore be impacient, neither murmr, but therein show all Christian
moderation as becomes Saints.

The Lord is at hand, the judge stands before the How God is at hand.
door. 1 In that he sees all the creatures of the world, and beholds all
the miseries and oppressions of his people. Thus was he at hand and at the
doors of the Egyptians, to see and behold the grievous oppression of his
people Exodus 3.
Israel. Wherefore he protests to his servant Moises, I have seen, I have
seen the trouble of my people Israel in Egypt, and have heard their cry,
because of their taskemasters: and do know their sorrows. For it is the Lord
that beholds from heaven, all the children of men: Psalm. 33.
and from the habitation of his dwelling, he considers them all that dwell on
the earth. Thus was he at the doors of Abraham to behold the mocking and
persecution of Jsmael Gene. 21.
against Isaac: at the doors of Isaac, to hear the intended murder of Esau,
against his brother Jacob. He was at hand, and at the doors and gates of Laban
to behold his oppressing of his nephew Jacob. He was at the doors Gene. 27.
Daniel. 3.
of Nabuchodonosor, to behold the fiery trial of the three children. At the
heels, doors and gates of the princes of the provinces of Babylon, to behold
and see, hear, and mark the wicked purpose and devise they imagined against
Daniel. At the doors of Saules palace to behold Daniel 6. 1. King. 18. 19.
etc.
the persecution of David. At the doors of the S^cibes, Pharisees, high
priests, and princes of the Jews, marking and viewing their cruelty against
his son Jesus Christ, and his holy Apostles. At the doors of the persecuting
Emperors, to behold their cruelty toward the blessed martyrs. At the doors
of all oppressors, extortioners, usurers, covetous persons, iniurers and
hurters of their brethren, to see, view mark and behold with open eye, the
violence and wickedness of men against his servants.

2 As he is at hand and at the door to see our miseries: so also is he at the
door to deliver us from our enemies, rescue us from our oppressors. Moises
tells Israel, Deuteronomy. 4^.
that there is no God that comes so near to any people, as the Lord comes
near to them, to help and deliver them from all their dangers. David the
princely prophet Psalm. 34.
subscribeth and consents hereunto: the Lord says he, is near unto them
that are of a contrite heart, and will save such as be afflicted in spirit; to
deliver them: for though many be the trobles of the righteous, yet is the Lord
at hand to deliver them. Therefore says he in another place, God is our hope
and strength: our help in trouble near and Psalm. 46.
ready to be found. And the Lord himself promises his presence to help his
Church and defend it against all Isai 27.
their oppressions and injuries. I the Lord, says God, do keep it; that is
his Church, I will water it every moment, least any assault it. I will keep it
night and day. Thus is the Lord at hand: thus stands the judge at the door,
evermore, pressed and ready,

3 The Judge stands at the door to behold our behavior under the cross,
and to see how we take these afflictions which he suffers according to his
good will, to be laid upon our loins. He is at hand to view whether through
impacience we bite the lip, hang down the head, wring the hands, stamp
with the foot, stare with the eyes, murmr with our mouths, or any wise
frette, fume, or rage against God: or whether in the moderation and quietness
of our minds, we in invincible fortitude, manhood, and courage, do bear
the oppressions of the wicked, that either he may punish our impaciencie, our
crown, our constancy, with immortality, and glory.

This consideration might teach us carefully therein to behave our selves. For
as the eye of the mistres keeps the maiden: the eye of the parents the
child: the eye of the master his servant, in awe, and in order: even so the
presence of the Lord, and his watching and wakefull eye, keeps us in our
afflictions in godly moderation, that therein we break not out into rages
through our impaciencie.

4 Finally, the Lord is at hand, and the judge at the door, to execute his
just judgments upon them that wrongfully afflict his servants: and power out
the vessels and vials of his wrath against them that trouble his chosen. So
that albeit our persecutours and adversaries for a time rage, and exercise
their tyranny upon us, yet they shall not endure and continue always, neither
shall they escape scotfree: neither shall they avoid the revenging hand of God,
which in it due time shall light upon them in full weight, and press them to
powder, in his sore indignation: who suffers not the rod of the wicked
always to be upon the righteous: but by executing vengeance upon their
adversaries, gives peace unto Israel: whereunto he is ready: for as a Judge
he is at hand to revenge the righteous, and to punish also the wicked and
cruel oppressors of his people.

This place of Saint James may easily teach us, that the cause of all
impaciencie, and desire of revenge against our adversaries: and all muttering
and murmuring in our afflictions, proceeds and grows from this wicked
stock, root, head, or fountain: even from the ignorance of the power and
presence of God. For were we thoroughly persuaded that God almighty sees our
miseries: is able to deliver us: beholds our behavior under the cross: and
will in due time avenge our cause upon our enemies: were we fully assured that
we are not left to the rashness and temeritie of foolish fortune and blind
chance, which things Christians do not acknowledge: neither subject to the
wills, pleasures, cruelty, and tyranny of men: but according to the good
purpose of our God: who numbreth even every hear of Matt. 10.
our heads, so that without his providence, not one of them shall perish: what
a step would this make to patience? what quietness would it work in our
hearts? what strong consolation and comfort would it cause in our afflictions?
how effectually would it remove all murmuring from us? that in all things we
should hold fast the exhortation of the Apostle: grudge not one against
another, brethren, least you be condemned: behold the judge stands before the
door.

Reasons why we should be pacient.
4 The fourth and last thing in this treatise concerning patience, is the
rendering of certain reasons, why the Saints of God ought to addres them to
patience under the cross, and the manifold afflictions of this life: the
reasons are four, as has been noted.

1 From the example of the Prophets which have spoken unto us in the name of
the Lord. Which reason may thus be formed: that which the holy Prophets of God
have suffered, that we by their example ought to suffer in like manner: but
the Prophets of God have suffered adversity, and have had patience: we ought
therefore to suffer in like manner, and in all our troubles to have patience.

To reason from example of other, and thereby to move to patience, is most
usual in holy Scripture. Christ Matt. 5.
our Savior, exhorts his to suffer patiently reuilements, persecutions, and
all manner of evil, by the example of the holy prophets, whom men in their
time Heb. 12.
likewise persecuted. The author to the Hebrews reasons from the example of
our Savior Christ, whereby he stirs and moves the Jews to patience: seeing
we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us cast away
every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangs on so fast, and let
us run with patience the race which is set before us: looking unto Jesus the
author and finisher of the faith: who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, despised the shame and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God. The Apostle S. Peter also reasons from the same 1. Pet. 2.
example in sundry places of his first Epistle to the same virtue: but chiefly
when he thus writes: hereunto are ye called: for Christ also suffered for you,
leaving you an example, that you should follow his steps. Who when he was
reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, threatened not, but committed it
to him that judges righteously: in which place, through the consideration and
view of Christ's example, the Apostle moves Christian servants to abide with
patience the heavy yoke of their hard servitude, under infidels and
unbelieving masters. And our Apostle S. James persuading the saints and chosen
servants of God patiently to endure the cruel persecution and affliction of
profane rich men of this world, draws his first argument and reason from
the example of the holy prophets: take says he, my brethren, the prophets for
example of suffering adversity, and of long patience, which have spoken unto
us in the name of the Lord.

The examples of Gods saints in general, who have been subject to manifold
afflictions, and therein have quit themselves patient, are many: And leaving
Abels suffering by Cain his brother: Abraham his patience in the injuries he
suffered, by the Egiptians, Philistines and princes of the east: Isaac his
patience in respect of the injuries of Ismael, and the Philistines: Jacob
touching the oppressions, attempts, and devises of Esau: Joseph, by the
patriarks his brethren; and infinite the like: the Apostle generally
propounds unto us, the example of the prophets which have spoken unto men in
the name of the Lord. Which thing if we shall particularly unfold: let us begin
with Moses, the great Prophet, which spoke in the name of the Lord to Pharao
and the Egyptians, to Israel and the Jewish people, Exodus 5. 6. 16. Nu. 11. 16.
the chosen people of God: what vile speeches, reproaches and checkes bore he at
the hands of Pharao: what rebellions, vprores, false accusations suffered he at
the hands of the people; who is so blind that sees not, or so ignorant, which
knows not? How Elias was persequuted by 3. Kings 18. 19. 4. Kings 2. and 9.
Achab and Iesabel: how Eliseus was mocked of the children; and sought for by
the king of Syriah to have been punished: the stories abundantly witness unto
all posterity for ever. Isai speaking to the people in the name of the Lord,
was sawen in pieces with a saw of wood, as the Hebrews record in their
writings. Jeremy spoke unto Ierem. 5. 20. 42. 44.
the Israelites in the name of the Lord, and his word was contemned and
lightly regarded as wind, himself smitten by Passhur the priest; his counsel
rejected by the people and men of Israel, and he commanded to speak no more
unto them in the name of the Lord, and this bore he patiently. What should I
speak of Micheas 3. King. 22 Amos 7. 2. Chro. 24. Daniel 6.
stricken by Sidkiah the son of Hananie: Amos abused by Amasiah: Zachary
slain by Ioash the king: Daniel cast into the den of Lions: with what
invincible courage and constancy, with what patience and long suffering, they
have endured contempt of the people; persequutio^ by the princes, famine and
hunger of the land; restraint and imprisonment by false suggestion of the
wicked, reproachful taunts and vile speeches, cruel torments and bitter
threatenings, bloubie wounds and undeserved death: the holy Scriptures and
sacred stories plentifully do teach us.

If such men therfote, of such piety and godliness, of such eminency and
excellency, of such renown for virtue, so dear and so greatly beloved of God,
which have spoken unto men in the name of the Lord, have been partakers of like
calamities; have been companions of like sufferings, and therein have showed
themselves patient: shall not we, far inferior unto them in all degrees, be
content to suffer with patience, that which they have suffered before us? when
then we are subject to the injuries, oppressions, afflictings of men; when we
are under the cruelties, persequutions and furiousnes of the wicked; let us
cast our eyes upon the sufferings of the prophets and their patience: let us
hold fast the counsel of this Apostle, that we take the holy Prophets for
ensample of suffering adversity and long patience; and by their example learn
to address our selves in all our afflictions thereunto: that we being
compassed about with so many examples of the prophets, may without murmuring,
and sinister affection, run on with joy the race that is set before us, that
finally with them we may possess our souls in patience: whereby the Apostle
stirs us up in this place and first reason. Luke 21.


2. Another reason is drawn from the acknowledged and confessed revvard of
patience: we, says the Apostle, count them happy which endure. If we our
selves make this account, and acknowledge that they are happy which suffer
adversity patiently, shall not we endeavor to attain unto that, which our
own consciences acknowledge to bring felicity and happiness?

That they are blessed which endure, and suffer adversity wrongfully, it has
been sufficiently shevved. 1. James. v. 12.

Greater revvard to virtue none ca^ be given, then felicity and happiness: and
hereunto all me^ tend; hereafter they strive, that they might be happy;
though not all a right: this happiness is promised to the patience of Gods
saints, wherefore we ought to give all diligence, in all our afflictions to
behave our selves patiently, that we may be partakers of this happiness. And
so much the more earnestly we ought to strive there after, because the revvard
is known and confessed of us, and we our selves count them happy which
endure: therefore the full persuasion of this so excellent a revvard, ought to
stir up out dull affections to the performaunce of patience.

What induraunce receives this blessed reward, we may easily conjecture,
not suffering and enduring for every thing: but when we suffer and endure for
the truth sake; for the profession of the gospel; for righteousness, then are
men happy: for not the suffering, but the cause makes martyrdom, as S.
Augustine avouches to Dulcitius. Neither the enduring, but the cause and
quarrel Epist. 61. Dulcitio.
wherefore, and vvherin men suffer, purchases the crown and reward of
happiness: wrongfully to suffer at the hands of men: is a thing acceptable
unto God: wherefore if either for Gods cause and his truth sake, or for no 1.
Pet. 2.
deserte in our selves, but of the malice and wickedness of wicked men, we
suffer wrongfully, and therein endure patiently; we shall receive the crown
of glory, even eternal blessedness, and felicity in the kingdom of God.

Thus the Patriarks, thus the Prophets, thus the Apostles, thus the holy
Martyrs are counted blessed, for they have endured. Thus also such as suffer
loss of goods, sickness of body, anguish of mind, slander of name, death of
friends, restraint of liberty, oppressions of men, or other cross or
affliction whatsoever, if therein they endure patiently, shall also be blessed.
If happiness be promised as the revvard of our patience; and so accounted with
men; what reason of greater force; what persuasion of more weight, what
argument of sounder substance may be made, to persuade to patience, then the
reward of patience, even eternal happiness? Behold says James, we count them
happy which endure.

3 The third reason is drawn from the example of Job. Ye have heard of the
patience of Job: and you know what end the Lord made. What the sufferings and
trials of Job were; what he suffered in his children, in his goods, in his
body, by his wife, by his friends, the story teaches us: and it was
wonderful. It had been a great matter to have lost at one time by the Sabeans
500. yoke or oxen, and as many she asses, with the death of his servant: but
at the same time and immediately to hear tidings, that fire from heaven had
burnt up 7000. sheep, and all his servant and sheapheards which kept them,
increased his trial mightily, and wonderfully proved his patience. It had been
a great cross thus to have been bereft and robbed of his riches and
substance: but together, to have his children all at one clap to be slain
with the fall of their own brothers house, when they were making merry, and so
suddenly to be oppressed with stones and timber without all rescue, help, or
succor, what a strange trial was this?

It had been much thus to have lost both his riches and his children together:
but afterward to be stricken with botch and boil from top to toe, that all men
abhorred him: what increase of his cross, what weight of his affliction was
this?

The loss of goods, the death of children, the disease of body was great; but
for his own wife, who should have been his comfort, to be his corsie: which
should have been a help, to become a hindra^ce; who should have encouraged him;
to prick him on to curse God, that he might die: what sea of sorrow could be
greater? and finally to make up the full measure of al affliction; for his dear
friends to check him and charge him as an hypocrite: what anguish of mind
might hereunto be compared? in one day, of rich to become poor; of wealthy to
become destitute: of full, to be emtie; of plentiful, to become needy; of a
father of many children, in one hour to become childlesse altogether: of
whole, to become fore: of reverenced, to be contemned; to be reproched of his
wife, to be slau^dered of his familiar friends, to be abhorred of all men: what
calamity like unto this? one misery to follow at the tail of an other, one
affliction to follow another at the heels, as water follows water in the
conduits and water pipes: one Psalm 42.
trouble to meet another in the neck, that all misery might seem to have
been powered out upon one man; was a wonderful trial: yet was he patient in all
these his troubles. Wherefore as the only pattern of rare patience is he
proposed unto us in the holy Scriptures of God. Of whom with reverend mention
the Apostle speaking, uses his example for a reason to move unto patience: you
have heard of the patience of Job, and have known what end the Lord made.

But thou will say; how may he be thought a vvorthie example of patience, who
shevved so many signs of impatiencie? he cursed the day of his birth, he
wished he had perished in the womb of his mother: and uttered Job 3.
many such like speeches, whereby it appeared that he was impacient.

I answer, that as his trials were wonderful, so had he diverse and sundry
conflictes in himself: wherein he showed the great weakness and infirmity
of nature. Yet after many combattes and conflictes with his own reason, and
natural wisdom: after diverse striuinges and struglinges against his own
weakness, and frail affections, in fine and end, he submitted his judgment
to Gods wisdom: he raunged himself under the good pleasure of the almighty,
and became tractable unto his will: So that he carried away (like a most
triumphant and victorious Captain) most glorious victory, in all his
temptations, and is therefore set down as an example of singular patience,
to all posterity for evermore. Whose example we must follow; whose patience
we must imitate; whose virtue we must embrace; whereunto we are referred in
this place: You have heard of the patience of Job; and you have known what end
the Lord made.

As the patience of Job was rare: so the gracious and merciful Lord, gave and
made a good end thereof: for he both gave him strength to prevail against all
temptations, and blessed him in the end, after his sundry afflictions. Satan
tempted him, but did not subdue him; anguish and grief of mind assailed him,
but did not suppress him; loss of goods, loss of children, and all that ever
the man had: troubled him, but did not overcome him; inhumanitie of men,
wickedness of wife, soreness of body, pressed him, but did not cast him down;
misery and affliction disquieted him, yet therein was he more then
conqueror, through the assistance and help of God: who in all things gave him
good success and issue: and in the end increased and doubled his wealth;
multiplied his children, enlarged his days, and blessed Job. 42.
him with long life: So that he saw his sons and daughters, to four
generations. This was the end which God gave to his patience.

By whose example, if we suffer loss of our goods, death of friends, decay of
wealth, oppressions of men, injuries, and manifold afflictions which here
shall be offered us: then will the Lord also look down favorably upon us; then
will he send happy success, good issue, blessed end, to our afflictions also:
even in sorrow, joy; in bonds, freedom; in prison, liberty; in sickness,
health; in trouble, comfort; in death, life; and in misery, happiness, and true
felicity: let us therefore by his example learn to be patient.

4 The last reason is drawn from the nature of god, who in punishing us any
manner of way, yea even by the oppressions and injuries of the wicked, is
therein merciful, howsoever he seem to our corrupt affections, severe, rigorous
and hard. Then seeing, even in these our afflictions, his mercy appears:
therein we ought therefore to be patient.

The princely Prophet David says; that as a Father pittieth his children, even
so has the Lord compassion on Psalm. 103.
them that fear him: and as the mercy, and love of natural parents, appears
no less in their fatherly corrections, then in their fond cockerings: so the
loving kindness of God, and his mercy, appears no less toward us, when
for our benefit he punishes; then when for our comfort he sends his
manifold blessings upon us. Therefore, the author to the Hebrews, exhorts
men in their corrections and chastisements from God, to show themselves
patient; Heb. 12.
My son, despise not the chastisements of the Lord, neither faint when thou art
rebuked of him. For whom he loves, those he chasteneth: and he scourges
every son whom he receaueth.

Albeit then, God for great and just cause, lay affliction upon our loins;
though he cause us to pass through Psalm. 66.
fire and water; though he cause cruel men, by infinite oppressions to ride
over our heads, and many ways to afflict us: yet even in the midst of these
afflictions, has he remembrance of his mercy: and therefore never suffers
his to be tempted above their strength, but even in the 1. Cor. 10.
temptation gives he an issue, that we may bear it. Whether (therefore) we be
afflicted in our selves, or in others which are near unto us; whether we
suffer loss of goods, or be oppressed by the wicked; whether we be reviled by
the bitter teeth of backbiting, or be iniuried by the profane wicked men of
the world; or whatsoever other calamity we are subject unto; all in God is of
mercy: who therein is evermore prone to lenity, kindness, and loving
compassion: so that thereby we ought to be patient.

Let us therefore in our afflictions respect the nature of God, who brings
calamity upon men, not always in rigor, and severity of his judgments: but
oftentimes in mercy; thereby to correct enormities in our nature: as the
merciful and pitiful Surgeons and Physicions, do many things which are
painful to the patient: thereby to correct and repress corrupt humors, and
other infirmities of the body: we acknowledging him in the middle of our
afflictions, to be prone unto mercy, might in all things show our selves
patient: which is the force of the Apostles reason, why in our afflictions we
should be patient; because even therein the Lord is merciful, and inclined to
pity; correcting us for our benefit, ready in our afflictions to deliver
and rescue us: and to send us a gloririous deliverance out of all our
miseries, according to Psalm. 50.
the infallible truth of his promise; who wills us to call upon him in the
day of our trouble, and promises to deliver us, that we might glorify him.

And thus much of the second part and place here set down by the Apostle, of
the matter of patience. God for his infinite mercies sake, grant unto us this
most excellent gift of patience: that without fretting, fuming, stamping,
staring, grudging, or murmuring against him, in all our troubles we may wholly
rest and rely upon his divine pleasure: that after we have suffered a little,
he may make us perfect, confirm, strengthen and stablish us. To whom be glory,
dominion and majesty, now, and for evermore Amen.

James Chapter 5. verse 12 Sermon 26.
Ver. 12 But before al things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, nor
by earth, nor by any other oath: but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay:
least ye fall into condemnation.


3. Place of the Chapter.
NOw comes the Apostle to the third place in this chapter handled: which is,
concerning swearing. Unto which he slideth, and descends very orderly: for
that in the former treatise, he had exhorted the Saints to patience, and
dissuaded al murmuring and impatiencie: and commonly most grievous and horrible
oaths, with most bitter execrations, grow of our impatiencie: Therefore having
discoursed thereof, he adds in the next place, admonition and council
touching swearing: willing us to detest all such wickedness, and to accustom
our tongues to simple and true speech. Though then the Apostle seem properly
to speak of such vain and wicked oaths, as where unto men break oftentimes,
through impatiencie: yet will I touch this more generally, and hereunder
contain all oaths whatsoever are rashly and wickedly made by men.

In this 12. verse (containing the third place, concerning swearing) three
things are to be noted. Namely: 1. The condemning of the thing, as horrible and
detestable sin. 2. The correcting of that evil, what men in stead of wicked
swearing should do. 3. The reason why men ought not to swear.

1 Touching the first of these things, thereof thus says our Apostle; Above
all things, my brethren, swear not. Where he condemns oaths, and swearing.
Which place being falsely applied by the Anabaptists, for the condemning of all
oaths, and of swearing, it shall not be impertinent to this place, but both
profitable and proper, to consider whether all swearing ought utterly to be
condemned, or no. And if not: then, what swearing, what oaths the Apostle here
reproves.

Which thing, that it may the better appear, let us in brief, and in a word,
consider what an oath is, and what it is to swear.

An oath, is the affirming or denying of a thing, An oath.
with the calling on of the name of God, to witness and avouch the truth of
the thing uttered. To swear, is to affirm, or deny a thing, with the calling
on of the name of God, for the auouching of the truth of that thing, which
with solemn oath we have protested. Or, an oath is an earnest and vehement
affirmation, or negation, of a thing lawful and honest, by the name of God,
whereby we desire him to be a witness unto the truth: and a revenger and
punisher of all such as use deceat and falsehood. This being the definition of
an oath: whether is it altogether condemned, or not?

The Anabaptists abusing this place, and that of our Savior Christ; Swear not
at all: condemn all oaths as Mat. 5.
unlawful in Christians. But the word of God, rightly and truly understood,
permits Christians in some causes and cases to swear. By which men must not
challenge unto themselves liberty of swearing for what they lust, but ought
to learn never to swear at al, but so and under such condition as the
scriptures teach them: and no other wise.

That Christians and the Saints of God may swear Wheather Christians may
swear.
in some cases, and therefore all oaths and swearing not utterly condemned: it
may by sundry grounds and arguments be proved.

1 What the moral law of God permitted, that is lawful: for the moral law
is perpetual, universal and general, binding all men, comprising all times,
containing al things that are lawful. This law permitteh men to swear, this
gives license to the Saints in some cases and some causes to swear. Moses in
the repeating of the Deuteronomy. 6.
law from the mouth of God gave this charge to Israel the people of God: thou
shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and thou shall swear by his name.
To the like purpose in the same book the prophet gives the like
commandment, thou shall fear the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 10.
thou shall cleave unto him, and swear by his name. Thus almighty God makes
the calling upon his name in their lawful oaths, to be a part of his divine
service, and permits the same unto his people, so that to swear by the law
of God is permitted. The holy prophets, the best expounders and interpreters
of the law, have therefore taught the people in certain cases to swear:
Jeremy says thus to Israel: thou shall swear, the Lord lives, in Ierimie.
4.
truth, in equity, in judgment. The prophet David, the Psalm. 63.
worthy prince of Israel, protests that all they shall be commended, that
swear in the name of God their heavenly King. Isay exhorts and wills, that
who so swears Isay. 65. Ierimie. 12.
on earth, should swear by the true God. The Lord in Jeremy his prophet,
teaching this not only to be lawful, but laudable and praise worthy in all his
servants, and therefore also requires it as a part of his divine service,
and says: it shall be, that if they have learned the ways of my people, then
they shall swear in my name, the Lord lives. Thus the law and the Prophets
teach, that in certain cases, and in some respects, it is lawful to swear.

2 That whereof we have God himself, the Patriarchs, Christ and Saint Paul for
our example and warrant, cannot be altogether unlawful* But the Lord our God,
a most holy God, and most just: the Patriarchs the most dear servants of God:
Jesus Christ the eternal son of the father, and the only true pattern of
all perfection: the holy Apostle, the most elect vessel, and most pure
servant of Jesus Christ have sworn: how then are al oaths unlawful? how is
all swearing forbidden?

And first touching God: is not he recorded at sundry times to have sworn,
and that by himself? When Abraham at Gods commandment was ready to have
Gene. 2^.
offered up his only son in sacrifice to God, the Lord stayed his hand, and
said; by my self have I sworn, says the Lord, because thou have done this
thing, and have not spared thy only son, therefore will I surely bless
thee, and will greatly multiply thy seed, as the stars of heaven, and as
the sand which is upon the sea shore, and thy seed shall possess the gates
of their enemies.

The princely Prophet David, prophesying of the Psalm. 110.
eternal Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ, brings in God, swearing unto
him: The Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech. Who speaking also of the oath of the Lord made unto
him, touching his posterity, whereon the Psalm. 132.
people grounded their prayers, and desired the establishment thereof, says
in like manner: the Lord has sworn in truth to David, and he will not
shrink from it, saying, of the fruire of thy body will I set upon thy
throne. The Prophet Isai speaking of the deliverance of the Israelites out of
their captivity in Babylon by Cyrus, Isai 45.
and of the calling of the Gentiles, for the faithful accomplishment of that
promise, he brings in God himself swearing: I have sworn by my self: the
word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return: that
every knee shall bow unto me, and every tongue shall swear by my name. The
Lord himself wills the Prophet in his name to make this protestation unto
the Ezech. 33.
world: Say unto them; as I live (says the Lord God) I desire not the death
of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his ways and live. Which place
Tertullian citing, cries out: the Lord swears, saying; as I live: he Lib.
de poenitentia.
would that men should believe him, O happy men, for whose cause the Lord
swears: O most miserable and wretched, if we believe not the Lord when he
swears. More of the oath of God may be seen. Psalm. 95. v. 11. Iere. 11. 5.
Luke 1. 73. Heb. 6. 13. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 21. and 31.

From God, to come to the example of the Patriarks. Abraham the great and
mighty Patriarch, making a Genesis ^1.
league with Abimelech the king of the Philistines, swore unto him, that he for
his part would keep that league inviolable. Whose son Isaac the patriarch
to like Gene. 26.
purpose swore to the same prince and his people. David a Prophet, and a
Patriarch, as Peter calls him, swore to Jonathan 1. Kin. 20. 2. Acts 2.
when he made a league of friendship with him, and by oath also promised to
Saul, that he would not destroy his posterity. Our Savior Christ his oath in
the Gospel was Amen, Amen, Velily, verily, I say unto you: 1. King 24.
which not only S. Chrysostom takes for an oath, but others innumerable of
great learning, sound judgment, singular knowledge in the Scriptures of God.
Which oath is in many places set down by the Evangelists: as Mat. 5. 18. and
26. v. in John more often: 3. John 3. v. 5. John 24. 25. verses, 14. John. 12.
John. 16. 20.

Saint Paul drawn on and led by these examples almost in every Epistle
swears: God is my record, whom I Romans 1.
serve in my spirit, in the Gospel of his son, that without ceasing I make
mention of you: says he to the Church of Rome, then being. In another place: I
take God to record 2. Cor. 1.
against my own soul, that to spare you, I came not as yet to Corinth. To the
Church and Congregation of God Gal. 1:
at Galatia he thus breaks out: the things that I write unto you, behold, I
witness before God, that I lie not. Thus both God, and the Patriarchs, Christ,
and his Apostle, is our example hereof, so that it cannot be a thing unlawful.

Now if they reply: that it was lawful in the time of the law, but not in
the time of the Gospel: that may easily be refuted: for our Savior Christ
disanulled no Mat. 5.
part of the moral law, but fulfilled it: therefore thereof says he, I
came not to break the law, but to fulfill it. And this is a part of the
moral law: therefore at Christ's coming, was it not abholished, but stands
in full strength, power, and virtue for ever. Neither can their cavil impeach
this doctrine: for that our Savior the setter forth of the Gospel: and Paul a
faithful preacher of the same, and both in the prime of the Gospel, have
sworn, wherehence it is apparent, that even under the Gospel, it was lawful
for Christians to swear.

3 Lastly, the lawfulnes of an oath, even among Christians herehence appears,
in that the end of oaths is profitable, and the use necessary among men. For
whose use is profitable and good, and whose end is needful and necessary:
that must needs be good, profitable and lawful. Such a thing is an oath taken
in the fear of God.

Some things are done in such secrecy, and so privily, that they cannot be
known, or come to light, but only by an oath: then men are forced to take an
oath, and to witness a truth in the name of God: the knowledge whereof is
right necessary among men. So in the law, when a man had laid a pawn, or any
other thing upon trust to another: and the thing were lost or miscarried under
Exodus 22. Number. 5. 19.
his hands: if the thief were not found, the receyuer should be brought
before the Judge, and take his oath, whether he had stole it, conveyed it away
and embefiled it, or no. Whereof seeing the owner had no witness, he to whom
it was committed and had receyned it, was put to his oath, whether it was gone
by his mean and knowledge. Thus had this oath a necessary end and use among
the people. When the people of Israel were afflicted by the men of Ai, for the
trespass and sin of Achan, in taking the execrable thing from Hiericho:
Joshua 7.
this thing being secret and unknown: Joshua commanding all the tribes to
appear: and Achan at the length taken, Joshua wills him to swear, and to
utter the truth, which he did, and was punishid, and the favor of God again
obtained for his people. The author to the Hebrews commending lawful oaths
unto Heb. 6.
men, affirms, that an oath for confirmation among men, is the end of all
strife. In every christian common wealth, oaths are for many such causes
taken: without which, as many sins would lie secret and unknown, to the
great hurt of men: so many duties would be unperformed, were not men thereunto
bound by solemn oath, and protestation: the reverend care whereof woorketh
great good in the Church and common wealth, albeeit many most wickedly and
ungodly, have and do despise the religion thereof. Seeing then the law it
self commends it, the example of God, the Patriarchs, Christ, and his
Apostles confirms it: seeing the end is necessary, and the use profitable in
the church and common wealths of Christians: what absurdity is it in
supersticious Anabaptists, to condemn all oaths, and al swearings among men?

Oaths then taken only in the name of God for matters weighty, and of
importance: righteous, just, and true: to the glory of God, the ending of
controversies, the performance of duty, the profit, peace. and quietness of
the Church and common wealth: with pure affection to truth, equity and
godliness: with hateful minds to falsehood, injuries, wickedness, and
oppression: are lawful in the Saints of God, and in true Christians, even
under the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

These things thus premised and set down before, wherehence it appears that
all oaths are not condemned, neither every manner of swearing forbidden the
Saints of God: what manner of swearing does the Lord in his law; our Savior in
the Gospel; and this Apostle in this place forbid and condemn?

When the Lord in the law said, thou shall not take Exodus 20.
the name of the Lord thy god in vain: it is apparent, that seeing in other
places he permitted the Israelits to swear, therefore thereby he forbad not
all swearing: but vain swearing, false swearing, loose and licencious,
dissolute and disordered swering.

For seeing that swering by the name of God, is a part of that divine service,
which is due unto him, as in holy Scripture is apparent. Exo. 20. v. 7. c. 23.
v. 13. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. v. cap. 10. ver. 20. Isai. 65. 16. Ierem. 4. 2. 5. 7. ver.
Isai. 45. 23. c. 48. 1. Iere. 23. 7. 8. verses. Psalm. 93. 11. v. Therefore
would he his people, to take diligent heed and beware that they run not
into any superstition, irreligiousnesse, or impiety by vain and wicked
swearing: which evil to prevent, and that the religion of an oath might be
inviolable, therefore the Lord in his law commanded that they should not
take his name in vain, by rash, vain, wicked, and false swearing, or any
other way whatsoever.

Our Savior Christ in the Gospel teaches his: that they should not swear at
all: not forbidding such Matt. 5.
oaths as the law of God commends: but correcting and controlling the
disorderednesse and licenciousnes of swearing, which in his time was crept into
the manners and mouths of men, in whose time it was in custom to swear by
creatures; by heaven; earth; Jerusalem the great City; by the Temple thereof,
and such like: as in the Gospel appears. Which thing says Saint Hillarie,
they did in reproach of God, and to his dishonor: who is then Hillar. 4. upon
Matt.
highly dishonored, when his religion or any point thereof is applied unto
creatures. This detestable wickedness our Savior condemns, willing that his
should not swear at all. And worthily does Christ altogether forbid that
wickedness and vanity of swearing, especially by creatures: for it is plain
idolatry, in as much as men make those things their gods, whereby they swear.
S. Chrysostom writing upon S. Matthew his gospel, handling Homil. 12. operis
imperf. upon Matthew.
the matter of swearing by creatures, affirms truly, that who so swears by
heaven, earth, or what thing else so ever: he therein and thereby makes that
his God, whereby he svveareth: and so every one that svveareth by any thing
else then by God, thereby makes himself an idolatour: because he applies the
religion of an oath to a creature, which is only due unto God the creator,
and to no other. S. Hierom expounding that place of Christ, swear not at all,
neither by heaven etc. subscribeth hereunto; Upon S. Matthew.
Men, says he, swearing by angels, heaven, earth, the elements, worship
carnal and corruptible creatures with divine and holy worship. Now to give
divine worship to creatures, is idolatry: therefore to swear by any thing
then by God, is idolatry. Lactantius reproving Lib. 3. de falsa sapientia. c.
19.
the vanity of Socrates the philosopher, whom the ancient heathen held as
the wisest among men, among other things he finds great fault with him for
that he swore by a dog and a goose, reputing him for mad, in having a most
filthy creature (as a dog is) for his GOD, thereby intimating, that what
creature so ever it be, albeit most vile and contemptible, yet we make it our
God by swearing by it: as Socrates did a dog and a goose, whereby he swore
usually. If then thus to swear, be a thing so wicked, as our Savior rightwell
considered, then no doubt our Savior had just cause to forbid swearing
altogether: yet not meaning all in general, but all vain, idolatrous and
wicked swearing, whereunto that time was given.

Saint James likewise, not forbidding or condemning all swearing, but that
swearing which grew of their impatiencie under the cross: and the
disorderednes of oaths which was crept into their lives and manners, gives
this exhortation to the Saints: But above all things my brethren, swear not,
neither by heaven, neither by earth, neither by any other oath condemning their
vain oaths, their oaths by creatures, their needless oaths in their private
communication, and so in all things agrees with our Savior Christ, who to his
disciples says: I say unto Mat. 5.
you swear not at all.

If S. James and our Savior Christ also, forbad men to swear by heaven,
earth, or any such creature, or other whatsoever; and will, that rash oaths
proceed not out of our mouths: shall we then think it lawful in vain and
upon every occasion rashly to swear by him that sits upon the Cherubins,
which walks upon the wings of the wind, and rides upon the heavens as an
horse? shall we not swear by the earth, and shall we think it lawful to
swear by the most precious price of our redemption, paid by the only death
and blood shedding of Jesus Christ? shall we not swear, nether by heaven, nor
by earth, nor any other oath; and shall we think it lawful to swear by the
creator of heaven and earth? shall we think it lawful to pearce the sides,
wound the heart, slay the soul, tear and rent the body of Jesus Christ by
vain swearing? All vain oaths therefore; all swearing by any creature, al
swering in any manner, otherwise then the express word of God allows, is
condemned. The vanity of our times in this behalf is utterly reproved; whose
detestable oaths are: by this light, by the holy sacrament, by Gods wounds, by
Gods heart, by the blood of Christ, by Gods side, by the passion of Christ, by
his death, by heaven, by the Lord, and a thousand more, which a man is afraid
for very horror to name. This utterly condemns our most disordered and
dissolute manner of swearing in every childs mouth most rife and ready: this
conuinceth the licentiousnes of our age, whose common speech and communication
is intermingled and interlaced with manifold oaths and horrible blasphemy: this
altogether reproves our false and filthy oaths in our shoppes, ware houses, in
barganings and occupyings: this condemns the ruffenly swearing of men
destitute of knowledge, void of all fear of God: who glory in their
blasphemy, and encourage themselves in their wickedness, who have their
pleasure and felicity in their disordered and dissolute swearinges, in rapping
out oath after oath, to the great dishonor of God and his son Jesus Christ.

2. The Apostle then reproving the vain, rash, and wicked swearing of men,
teaches how the fault may be corrected, what remedy against the evil is best
to be used. Therefore, says he, swear not, neither by heaven nor by earth,
nor by any other oath; but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay: that is use
in all things which are to be affirmed, a plain affirmation; in things to be
denied, a flat negation and denial. If a thing be so or so; say so it is: if
it be not so; then say it is not so. This is to let our yea be yea, and our nay
nay.

The like correction of the like vanity and wickedness, Mat. 5.
has our blessed Savior in the most holy gospel set down unto the saints: who
forbidding men all vain, rash, unnecessary swearing, and their usual oths by
heaven, earth, Jerusalem, by their heads and such like: wills that in steed
thereof, all their communication should be yea yea, nay nay: teaching that in
our familiar and common speech, in our usual talk and communication, we
should not swear at all; but should affirm things to be affirmed, and deny
things to be denied in all simplicity of speech, without all oaths whatsoever.
And it is to be observed, that as our Savior repeated and iterated the words
twice, yea, yea, nay nay: so our Apostle says, let your yea be yea, your nay
nay: to teach by the geminating, repeating and doubling of the words, how
constant we should be in all our talk and communication with the brethren:
which constancy and simplicity ought to be in the tongues and talk of all
christians: which were it practiced of men professing godliness as it should,
then should wicked swearing, and horrible blasphemy be easily abandonned,
and abolished out of the common speech and talk of Christians. To which
simplicity, if exhortations, admonitions, inhibitions, co^minations and bitter
threatenings out of the sacred word of God cannot persuade; then ought me^ by
force of civil laws, be thereunto compelled. Wherefore it ought to be not the
least, nor the last care of Christian princes, to make laws for such as by
vain and wicked swearing shall blaspheme the name of the eternal and
everliving God. Whereof that noble Prince of most famous memory Henry the
eight, the Henry. 8.
most victorious K. of England; not ignorant; endeavored to plant simplicity
and singlenes of speech in men, and to remove all forged swearing: enacted and
made a law, that to the use of the poor, every Duke for every oath sworn,
should pay 40. shillings; every Lord for every oath tvve^ty: every Knight ten
shillings: a gentleman forty pence, for every oath swearing. Maximilian the
Emperor careful in Maximilian
this point of the glory of God, that it by vain swearing might not be
dishonored, decreed, that who so was deprehended for a vain swearer, should
pay 13. shillings and four pence; which money who so refused to pay, and
repented not of the wickedness, should loose his head. Lodouike Lodouike.
a king of France, ordained, that all common and vain swearers, should have
their lips seared with an hot burning iron: which he caused to be exequuted
openly in the city of Paris. And Philip another of their kings, made a Philip.
law, that who soever he were, poor or rich, high or low, base borne or noble,
in what place soever it were, though in a common tavern at the wine: when, and
where wisemen oftentimes ouershote themselves, if he blasphemed Gods name by
vain swearing, he should straight way be drowned. Justinian the Emperor made
a law, and gave in commission Justinian.
and commandment to the governor of the famous city of Constantinople, that
he should put to death the blasphemer, least that god himself should punish and
plague both the city and the whole realm, for leaving so great wickedness
unpunished. Would God some Henry or Henry his seed, some Maximilian, some
Lodouick, or Philip, some Justinian were stirred up in every christian
commonwealth and kingdom: that laws might not only be made but severely
executed against the disorderednes of all states and degrees of men for
swearing; that neither king nor Caesar; prince nor people; duke nor earl, lord
nor knight; gentleman nor yeoman; page nor peasand; man nor woman; young nor
old; one nor another, might be found guilty of blasphemous, vain, and wicked
swearing: but rather that all degrees and states of men, and whosoever
professes godliness, might either by this correction of the Apostle; Let your
yea be yea, and your nay, nay: or else by severity of the Civil and positive
laws, there hence be restrained: hereof the Apostle according to the example
of our Savior Christ, most careful, corrects the vanity and wicked
disorderednesse of their swearing; and says, Let your yea be yea, and your nay
nay.

3. Why men should thus correct and reform their The reason of not swearing.
blasphemous oaths, the reason follows; least they fall into condemnation.
Great danger hangs over the heads of vain swearers, and the wrath of God is
over them to destroy the^. This did almighty God threaten in his law, when
Exodus 20.
he would that me^ should not take his holy name in vain, for if they did, they
should not be counted guiltless; but should be under that bitter curse of
comdemnation pronounced Deuteronomy. 27.
by the mouth of Gods holy prophet: Cursed is every one that continues and
abides not in all the words of the law of God to do them. In sign of Gods
high displeasure Leuit. 24.
against so grievous wickedness, almighty God commanded that the blasphemer
should be put to death: whether he were stranger or borne in the land, he
should die the death if he blasphemed the name of God. To which sin as due
punishment is threatened, not the death only of the body, which in the wicked
is the entrance to endless comdemnation, but of the soul for ever, without our
unfeigned Zach. 5.
repentance therefore, in this present world. This eternal co^de^nation against
wicked and vain swearers, the prophet of God in his revelation foretells:
who from heaven saw a book 20. cubits long, and 10. cubits broad, wherein was
nothing but plagues, calamities, curses, and miseries, threatened against the
these and vayn swearer. Whereunto Sirach Ecclus. 23.
having regard, protests unto men, that the plague of God hangs over their
houses for ever, which are given to blasphemy, and delight in swearing.

And albeit we do not always see the exequution of Gods just judgments
against such persons: yet is it most sure that thereby they fall into
condemnation, and incur the just displeasure of God: for which cause, as
sometimes he punishes here, either in themselves or in their posterity: either
in their bodies, or in their minds, so does he undoubtedly punish in the life
to come: such as offend in this point against the law of the highest. This
eternal condemnation, and the intolerable wrath and indignation of God for
ever, if we will avoid and shun: then must we hold fast this exhortation:
that in common talk, in familiar and daily communication and conference, in
our civil dealings among men, we swear not at all: but that in all things our
yea be yea, and nay be nay, least we fall into condemnation.

If then condemnation be here threatened against vain and wicked swearers; and
all men, of all states and degrees; of all sex and kind; men, women, young,
old, high, low, rich and poor, herein have corrupted their ways: who daily
slay the soul, wound the heart, pierce the sides, rent the body of Jesus
Christ; and blaspheme the holy name whereby they are called: are not all then
under this condemnation? Let as many then as have any fear of God before their
eyes, any care of their own salvation, any desire to escape endless
condemnation, any remorce of conscience for their sin in this behoof
committed, any sparcle of grace, any feeling of the Spirit of God, whereby
they are sealed up to the day of redemption: Ephesians. 4.
repent themselves of this wickedness; correct this grievous sin in their
manners; reform, and refrain their lips from all vain swearing and
blasphemy; that thereby they fall not into condemnation, but may live for
ever. If condemnation be threatened to the vain swearing of men, how much more
subject thereunto are they, which give themselves to horrible periuries, and
false swearings? Which thing almighty God reserving finally to be punished in
eternal torments of hell fire: yet to show how greatly he detesteth this
wickedness, even in this life, in some measure he punishes it. When Joshua, and
Josua 9.
the Princes of Israel had made a faithful oath to the Gibeonites, Saul
afterward violated it, almighty God in the 2. King: 21.
days of David, punished it with three years famine through out Israel, till
the seven sons of Saul were given to the Gibeonites to be slain. When
Mataniah named by Nabuchodonosour Zedichiah had sworn subjection to the 4.
Kings. 24. and 25.
King, but afterward forswearing him sealfe and rebelling: the Lord punished
his perjury by the King of Babylon, who took him prisoner, slew his sons
before his eyes, then put out both his eyes, and carried him bound into
Babylon, where he was kept in perpetual misery. I need not say that
therefore none of the posterity of Edward the fourth came unto the possession
of the crown of England, because he solemnly swore at York, to hold him
sealfe contented with his own duke dome, and to perform loyal obedience to
the King. Duke Elphred conspiring against King Adelstane, for swore him sealfe
in his purgation therefore at Rome, wherefore almighty God stroke him
presently in Saint Peter's church there, and so he died. Earl Godwine having
treaterously slain Alphrede brother to King Edward the third: thereof charged
by the King at table at a certain time, the Earl took bread in his hand and
swore, desiring that the bread might choke him, if he were there of guilty:
which bread he eating, was there with all suddenly choked, that he fell
down and died. To be short, one may stand for many, which is notoriously
known, that a woman which in the year 1575. for alittle flaxce forswore her
self in wood-streate in London, therefore was presently stricken and miserably
died with great torture, torments and terror. Infinire like exampls of the
just judgments of God in this behalf are exstant, and albeit God do not
always, strike all persons in like manner offending, yet that it might appear
how greatly he detesteth this wickedness, he gives men a taste of his anger and
wrathful indignation even in this life present, showing thereby how much more
sharply they shall be punished in the world to come. And thought in great
patience he bears with this intolerable sin of men for a long time and
season: yet shall they not be unpunished for ever. Truly in this thing
therefore says the poet Tibullus.

Though that perjury be at the first covered: yet at length punishment comes
without noise, secretly.

And Homer in like manner says;

Albeit God forthwith punish not periuries, yet does he at length: whereby
most grievous punishments fall on the author, his companion, and children,
which has committed them.

Which thing seems to have been fulfilled in Philip king of Macedonia his
children: whom Pausanias records to have fallen into so many miseries,
calamities and troubles, because he violated his oaths, and falsified his
promises so often. Wherefore, howsoever either vain swearers, or perjured
persons, do here escape the revenging hand of God: yet shall they undoubtedly
be subject to eternal condemnation, unless they both leave their wickedness,
and speedely repent themselves of their sin, and embrace the council of the
Apostle; who corrects this evil; Let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, least
ye fall into condemnation.

This reason drawn from danger, not temporal only, but eternal rather, might
be a sufficient stop and stay, to keep our lips from this wickedness: from which
refraining we are so far, that we pretend excuses to our vanity.

1 Some therefore say, I am forced to swear, men otherwise will not believe
me. Shall man force thee to blaspheme, and shall not Gods word draw thee to
obedience? shall man make thee to do more in transgressing, then Gods word in
obeying? Is there any necessity to force thee to do that, which doing, thou
fallest into condemnation? yea, is not thy own vanity, thy inconstancy in
thy words, thy falsehood in thy promises, thy perjury in thy oaths, thy often
swearing not vainly only, but untruly also, cause that no man gives thee
credit? if in all things thy deeds were agreeable to thy words, and thy
performa^ces according to thy promises: if thou were thy words master, and
never protestedst but the truth: if thy tongue were given to simplicity, and
thy lips not defiled with lies: then should thy word be believed as well,
yea, rather better, then thine oath: but because thy words are but wind, and
in thy speeches there is no hold: because thy promises are without
perfourmance, and in thy saying there is no faith: because in thy tongue there
is no trust, and in thy talk there is no truth: therefore thou swearest, yet
thou art not believed. The law says: He that is once presupposed and taken for
an evil man, is always so presupposed: and he that is taken once for
faithless and untrusty, is always so presupposed. Aristotle (as Laertius
writes, or Demetrius, as other affirm) being asked what Laertius de vitaphilo.
profit men gate by their lies, falshoode, and untruths in them, answered;
this only, that oftentimes when they tell the truth, yet men will not believe
them. The fault therefore redoundeth upon thy own head, that thou art not
believed: so far therefore is this pretense from excusing thy swearing, that
it rather increases thy offense.

2 If we pretend our custom, does this excuse our sin? Nay, does not
custom of doing evil, aggrauate the wickedness? that servant that is
accustomed to rob his master, and does it therefore more commonly, is more
punishable the^ he that has once done it, and so has done. The child that by
use and custom grows to be disobedient, deserves with more severity to be
chastened, then he that once offends, and so leaves. Every wickedness how
much more commonly it is done, so much more heinous is it. The man more
accustomed to adulteries, is the more filthy whoremonger: the wife that has
more usually prostituted her self to others, is the more detestable harlot:
the thief that by custom robs, deserves more justly to be hanged: the
more usually any evil is committed, the more heinous and horrible is the
sin, both before God and man. And shall we think it our lawful excuse? we
have got a custom of swearing, and we cannot leave it, therefore we are to be
excused. Things therefore that are received by custom, being evil, are so much
the worse, how much more customable: and ought with so much greater care to be
corrected, how much more we are therewithal inured.

3 Neither can example of the multitude help us, we do but as all other men
do: we see such men, and such women swear as deeply as we do. This excuses
not the fact: this delivers not from punishment. The more men sinned in the
sins of the first world, the more was Genesis 6. 7.
Gods wrath kindled, and the heavier condemnation fell upon them. The more
universal and common the sins of Sodom were, the louder they cried to GOD
for vengeance. Genesis 19.
The more the Israelites were defiled with fornication with the daughters of
Moab, the more therefore by the hand of God, pearished. The more the Prophets
of Numb. 25.
Baal were, the more horrible was their idolatry. The 3. Kings 18. Ierem. 44.
more resisted the word of the Lord by the hands of Jeremy, the greater was
the rebellion. The more rose up against Steven the Martyr, the greater was
their contempt and wickedness.

The Apostles of Christ, Peter, Paul, and Jude, do not diminish the sin, but
increase the wickedness of the seducers Acts 7.
of men, by their multitude. Let not the multitude of wicked persons; let not
the vain example of vile sinners draw us unto this transgression* but laying
apart all excuse for the vanity and wickedness of out oaths, let us
incontinently leave them; least we running on in our horrible and blasphemous
swearing, procure the heavy hand of God against us in this life, by sundry
plagues to punish us: and in the life to come, to cast body and soul into that
bottomless pit of perdition, and final condemnation, there, for our vain
swearing, to be punished for ever. From which torments he deliver us, who was
wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, chastised and
punished for our sins: and through whose only stripes we are healed: even
Jesus Christ our blessed Savior, To whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost,
be all praise, dominion, power, and majesty, now and for ever. more. Amen.

James Chapter 5. verses 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. Sermon 27.
Verse 13 Is any afflicted among you? let him pray: Is any merry? let him sing
psalms.

14 Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church: and let
them pray for him, and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord.

15 And the prayer of the faithful shall save the sick: and the Lord shall
raise him up, and if he has committed sins, they shall be forgeuen him.

16 Acknowledge your faults one to another, and pray one for another that you
may be healed: for the prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be
fervent.

17 Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed
earnestly, that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth for three
years, and six months.

18 And again he prayed, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth brought
forth her fruit.


4. part of this chapter.
IN these words, and the rest to the end of the Chapter, the fourth and last
part of this Chapter is contained: namely, touching our behavior, both in our
own infirmities, and in the infirmities of others, what is best therein to be
done. In which place two things may be observed. First, what is the best
remedy against outward and bodily afflictions and infirmities: Secondly, what
is best to be done in the inward infirmities of our brethren, and how we
ought therein to behave our selves. These words concern the first thing, what
is the best remedy against bodily and outward infirmities or afflictions, and
how therein the Saints should behave themselves.

These words therefore show how we should behave our selves in bodily
afflictions and infirmities: which thing the Apostle does 1 Generally: showing
what is the best remedy against all afflictions outward and bodily: namely
prayer, which has place both in sorrow and in joy. 2 Particularly in sickness
what ought to be done, and what remedies to seek after. 1 The prayers of the
elders with anointing with oil in the name of the Lord. 2 Mutual confession
with mutual prayer.


Concerning then the remedy against bodily and Remedy against outwar^
afflictions in general.
outward molestations and infirmities, the Apostle begins with the general:
showing what is the best remedy generally against all afflictions of the body
and outward: even prayer, which has place both in sorrow and in mirth and
joy: whereof thus says the Apostle: Is any among you afflicted? Let him
pray. Is any merry? let him sing. Wherein we are taught what Christians should
do, and how to behave themselves in all the chaunges and chances of this
life: whether they taste of the bitter cup of afflictions, or else be
partakers of the pleasantness of prosperity: whether they be in woe, or
whether they be in wealth: in both which states and conditions of our life,
our recourse must be to God: in affliction, by petition: in joy and mirth, by
thanks giving, the other part of prayer. So that prayer is profitable, and
has it place both in sorrow and in joy: both in mourning and in mirth, which
thing Saint James to insinuate and signify to us, says: is any man among you
afflicted? Let him pray: Is any merry? let him sing. Thus in our afflictions
must we pray for comfort and deliverance: in joy and mirth must we sing
Psalms of praise and thanksgiving, for his blessings and benefits, unto God.

Whereby the corruption and perverseness of our nature is corrected: who in our
afflictions, cast down the countenancethang down the head: grind the teeth,
and foam at the mouth: in our posperitie and mirth, are forgetful of God the
giver of all goodness and graces: are puffed up with pride: and swell in our
vain confidence. Deuteronomy. 8. Psalm. 10. etc. 30. Iere. 31.
Which our vanity is here corrected, and we taught in affliction to pray, and
in joy to be thankful.

And to come to these in particular: is any man among you afflicted, says the
Apostle? let him pray.

Affliction in this place is not so much that destresse, and trouble whereof
the causes are apparent and manifest, against which, patience, from the seventh
to the twelft, ver. was set down as a remedy: as that trouble whereof the
causes are not known, or apparaunt so manifestly as the former: and yet we
afflicted; whereunto the Apostle sets down prayer as the best remedy. Is
any among you afflicted? let him pray. Are we pinched with poverty? are we
distressed with famine? are we pressed with misery? are we compassed about
with any calamity? then let us pray: that God will give patience to bear it:
send deliverance to be rid out of it: make a way, 1. Cor. 10.
and give an issue to escape, whatsoever might be dangerous unto us.

Natural and carnally minded men, in whose hearts the spirit of God rests
not, being afflicted, distrust, despair: frette, fume: mutter, and murmr
against God, Number. 11. 1 16.
as the Israelites in the wilderness did, as Moises records. In their
calamities they relent not, they amend not, they reform not themselves, they
call not upon God in their hearts, they run not by prayer to the throne of
Heb. 4*
grace, there to find mercy in the time of need: but they blaspheme God, as
the wicked did in the Revelation, upon whom when the Angels had powered out the
viols of Revel. 16. v. 9. 11. 21.
Gods wrath, then blasphemed they the God of heaven, for their pains and sores
they sustained: but repented not of the works which they wickedly had
committed. The ungodly being perplexed, afflicted and tormented, curse, banne,
stamp, stare, fly to valawfull remedies, wise men, witches, sorcerers,
cunning women, enchaunters, and such like, for riddance therehence, and for
deliverance: they run to the wine tanern^s: fly to strong drink, hunt after
lewd company: seek and search for such means for their solace and comfort:
they send for instruments of music: they seek for melodious harmonies, they
delight in harp, lute, and viole, therehence desiring in their afflictions to
be recreated, refreshed, and revived: but the Saints of God, as else where, so
out of this present place learn a better profession, to seek for a more sound
and safe remedy, even by prayer to have recourse to him, who delivers our
souls from death, our eyes from tears Psalm. 56. and. Psalm.
and our feet from sliding. Thus are we taught by the spirit of God in the
Apostle, when for our afflictions we be heavy in heart, troubled in mind, sad
in spirit, to fly to god by prayer: Is any among you afflicted? let him pray.

Which is the thing almighty God taught his saints, willing them in their
troubles to call upon him, from Psalm. 50.
whom they shall have deliverance. Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Our blessed Savior Christ
ordained this Matt. 7.
as the only mean in all our lackes and wantes: wherefore to his he says,
ask, and you shall have, seek and you shall find: knock and it shall be
opened unto you. It behooves us therefore according to this admonition of the
Apostle, according to the commandment of God, and the precept of his only
son our Savior Christ, in our afflictions to solicit him with incessant
prayer: who knows how to deliver his out of temptations, and to reserve the
wicked to the day of judgment 2. Pet. 2.
to be punished. To him in our necessities and miseries must we have recourse,
whose eyes are over the righteous, and his ears open unto their prayers, and
so delivers them out of all their troubles. Psalm. 43.


Wherefore whenever any of the saints be afflicted, whenever they be tried
with any temptations: when they feel any peril or danger immenent and at
hand: whenever they are pressed with any misfortune, and cast down by any
adversity: their only remedy must be prayer, and thereby to draw near
unto God: of whom they must earnestly desire, patience in trouble, constancy
in affliction; strength in misery; comfort in destresse; deliverance in
calamity; riddance out of tribulation, as shall seem best to his divine
majesty. Thus did the renowned patriarchs: thus did the godly princes: thus
did the holy prophets: thus did the blessed apostles: thus did the constant
martyrs: thus did all the holy men of God: thus must all the Saints of God in
their affliction do: that they may practice the precept of the Apostle: Is any
among you afflicted? let him pray.

As here we are exhorted in affliction to pray: so do afflictions mightily
stir up the Saints of God to pray: so that they which oftentimes greatly
forget God in their flourishing wealth, in their abounding prosperity, in
their plentiful condition, in their continued health; in their affliction,
adversity, and misery: fly to him by prayer, and seek him with their whole
hearts. Which is not the least profit redounding unto the Saints by
affliction. For men in prosperity often forgetful of GOD, cold in zeal,
slack in prayer, negligent in duty; their loins weakened and pressed with a
heavy weight and burden of troubles: and passing through the fire and water
of affliction, run speedily by prayer to God for succor, as the Scriptures
of God, and examples of the Saints teach us. When the Prophet had denounced
calamity and misery against Isai 17.
Damascus, and Ephraim, and told the people what affliction should befall
them: showing the effect and work which afflictions cause in the Saints
especially, even to force us to God, and make us by prayer to humble our selves
unto him, says; At that day shall a man look to his maker, and his eyes
shall be to the holy one of Israel.

In another place answerable and correspondent is Isai 26.
the saying of the same Prophet hereunto: Lord, says the Prophet, in
trouble have they visited thee, they powered out their prayers, when thy
chastisement was upon them. David himself, a man according to the Psalm. 120.
mind of GOD, at other times not unmindful of God: yet when he was afflicted
by his enemies, was more effectually stirred up to prayer: therefore he says
of himself; when I was in trouble, I called upon God, Psalm. 81.
and he heard me. And rehearsing the story of Israel, who in their welfare
were rebellious, and forgetful, but by adversity were drawn unto God through
prayer, affirms that when God punished them, and any wise afflicted them,
then they returned unto him by prayer. And the books of Joshua, Judges, and the
first of Samuel, especially, show how effectually their calamities and Joshua,
Judges, 1. Samuel. etc.
afflictions moved them by prayer to have recourse to God: insomuch as it
appears, when by their prosperity they were puffed up: yet when they were
either smitten with the sword of their enemies, or pinched with penury and
want: or distressed with famine: or persecuted by grievous pestilence from God:
or any wise by him afflicted, then they by prayer returned unto the Lord. And
this experience in our own selves abundantly teaches us: who in our
afflictions, if ever, have our recourse by prayer unto God. This is therefore
in all afflictions the best remedy, to fly unto God by prayer, which has
place both in adversity, and in prosperity, both in mourning and in mirth,
both in sorrow and in joy, whereof the Apostle in this place assures us, is
any among you afflicted? let him pray.

And to teach us that prayer is profitable also in joy: therefore Saint James
adds; is any among you merry? Let him sing. As in our afflictions we must not
snoffe, fret, or fume; so in prosperity must we not wax vvanton, riottous,
forgetful of duty; nor swell, or be pufte up with pride and vain
confidence of our flourishing state, which is both uncertain and variable: but
we must sing Psalms of praise and thanksgiving unto God, by whose means, and
at whose hands, we receive all good things: to him therefore must we offerre
a sacrifice of praise, even the fruit of our lips confessing his name: least
Heb. 13.
we abuse his benefits to his contempt and dishonor; whereof the Apostle
admonishes in this place: is any among you merry? let him sing.

Now that the Apostle here says, is any among you afflicted? let him pray: is
any merry? let him sing: herehence some think that men in affliction may not
sing, neither can pray singing: therefore condemn they in us the singing of
the Lords prayer: because Saint James, say they, wills if we be afflicted,
that then we should pray and not sing: but if we be merry, then to sing: So
that the Apostle seems to make prayer and singing, opposite and contrary; as
if prayer in affliction only, and singing in mirth and prosperity alone, were
to be used.

To this I may answer in this wise. 1. That James does not oppose prayer and
singing as so contrary, as that no man can pray singing, nor sing praying: for
we see in the Psalms of David, which are both songs, and also most earnest
prayers, that he song them, and played thereunto with sundry instruments,
and yet at once prayed thereby most earnestly to God; and had oftentimes under
a sweet sound, a woeful and heavy heart: as when he was persequuted by
Saul, who could more earnestly have prayed, then he does in his fourth Psalm:
wherein Psalm. 4.
he most fervently desires succor against his enemies? yet was that committed
to him that excelled, and was appointed to set the tune and begin the Psalms,
and he begun that Psalm upon the instrument called Neginoth, or he song it to
a tune so called.

Who could or can pray more heartily then David Psalm. 51.
did, being reproved by Nathan for his adultery and murder? yet was that
Psalm to be song and begone by him that was most excellent among them that
were appointed to sing the Psalms, and to play upon the instruments: and to
this purpose shall you read almost before every Psalm; to him that excels,
a Psalm of David: that is; a Psalm of David to be song and begone by him that
among the rest excelled in music and playing on instruments.

In like manner when he was sore vexed by the false reports of Saules
flatterers, he made that woeful and lamentable Psalm. 120.
song; when I was in trouble, I called upon the Lord and he heard me, etc.
And it is called a song of degrees; that is in rising and falling: of lifting
up the tune, and falling with the voice in singing: and more the like, in that
Ptophete may be seen.

Wherefore let us know that Psalms and songs are of two sorts: there are
some songs and psalms full of lamentable and woeful heaviness, which are song
with heavy and relenting hearts, as many of the psalms of David were: some
which are of joy and gladness; they, at our suites in our troubles; suing for
pardon of sin; seeking for the wonted favor of God; desiring ease and
release in misery; praying for riddaunce out of affliction are used: but these,
are our Psalms and songs of praise and thanksgiving, for the benefits and
blessings we have received.

Saint James, in this place teaches us, when we are in great distress and
extreme anguish of our hearts for our affliction, wherewith we are pressed, so
that for the present we cannot but be heavy: to fly to God by prayer, to
humble our selves thereby before him, and of him only to seek succor and
safeguard in all our miseries: as the fittest remedy, and most commonly in
greatest affliction to be used. Not leaving this as a rule in all afflictions:
for in some, and sometimes it is also lawful to power out our hearts in
psalms and songs to the Lord: but for as much as in greatest anguish and
grief for afflictions, our hearts are so heavy, that our voices are unfit to
sing: the Apostle in such would, that then we should pray; is any among you
afflicted? let him pray.

In like manner, when we are in prosperity, and enjoy the blessings of God at
our wills, and in large manner, that therefore our hearts are light and merry,
in which case commonly we give our selves to singing: the Apostle wills us
that when in our mirth we will sing; that then we should singe Psalms and
songs of praise, not other songs, vain, light, and wicked, as worldlings
do, who in their mirth sing bawdie ballets and sonnets full of filthy
ribauldrie: not making this a rule which cannot be broken; for it is lavvfull
even in prosperity, in fervent prayer to mourn, to lament, to sigh, to sobbe
before the Lord. So then, as in affliction he forbids not lamentable, woeful
and sorrowful singing; so neither in prosperity and wealth, in mitth and
rejoicing, interdicteth he, sad, heavy, and groaning prayer: but shows that
where as in great affliction, the wicked either fall into despair, or break
out into blasphemy, or seek unlawful means of deliverance: therein the
saints should be take themselves to prayer: and when in prosperity, mirth and
rejoicing, vvorldlinges singe filthy songs and sonnets; the saints of God
disposed to singe, should singe songs of praise and thanksgiving unto God.
And so prayer here may be apposed to despair, blasphemy, seeking after evil
means: and singing may be opposed to the immodest mirth, the disordered joy,
the vvanton and filthy rejoicing of the wicked.

2. We may thus answer: that Saint James by prayer here means request or
petition; by singing, not the lifting up and falling down of the voice and
tune, as is in musical songs; but a plain thanks giving to God. For his
benefits and blessings: and so touches both the parts of prayer, as by the
deuines it is distinguished; whereof one is petition, desire, request, for
that which is wanting: whereof here Saint James, if any among you be
afflicted, let him pray: desire and crave assistaunce, patience, riddaunce and
deliverance out of his affliction: the other is thanks giving, praising God
for his blessings, graces and benefits so fatherly, favorably, and
plentifully bestovved upon us: vvherof Saint James in these words speaks, is
any man merry and joyous for his prosperity? let him sing: that is, give
thanks therefore to God.

Now if we take singing in that sense wherein it is commonly taken, for the
rising and falling of the tune: for the lifting up and depressing of the voice,
and the variety of tunes and measures in our singing; it may here be demanded
what singing becomes the saints of God.

Touching the matter of their songs, the things they must sing; must be the
praises of God, giving thanks What singing is lawful.
unto him for his blessings bestovved upon us: which is the matter here by the
Apostle mentioned, though sometimes our godly songs may contain some other
argument, as the songs and Psalms of David were for sundry purposes, and of
manifold matters. Yet here I say, S. James speaks of singing praises unto God.

Concerning the manner how we must sing: though curious and divided music, in
our private houses, and for the exercise of our skill, for the attaining to
perfection of that art, cannot be condemned: yet in our songs and exercises
to GOD, most chiefly in the face of the church, and in the middle of the holy
congregation, we must sing in most plain and modest manner, and so as shall
serve best for edification; that we have regard, not so much to the sound,
as to the sense of that which is song.

Singing in the best times and among the most holy men of God, has had, and
now may also have three ends, or opportunities when and wherein it is lawful
and laudable to sing.

1. To recreate our heavy and sorrowful hearts with some holy and godly song
and Psalm. The princely prophet David oftentimes in the sorrow and heaviness
of his heart, song to solace and recreate his sorrowful spirit before God.
Christians in like manner, in the anguish of their spirits: the troubles of
their hearts, the vexations of their minds, the griefs of their souls, may
sing for their godly recreation, songs and Psalms unto God, that thereby they
may be lightened, and comforted.

2. Another end, use and occasion of singing, is the testifying of our
thankefulnes unto God for his immeasurable mercies, bountiful benefits,
gracious goodness toward us. Wherein Miriah the sister of Moses, with the
damsels Exodus 15.
and daughters of Israel, is an example: who after the destruction of Pharao
and his army in the red sea, to testify their grateful memory, and
thankful hearts for so vvonderfull a deliverance, song as follows; I
will singe unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously etc.

When Barak by the counsel and pricking on of Deborah, had armed the people
against Sisera the captain of Judges 5.
the host of Iabin king of Canaan; and had confounded and discomfited his
army; and chased him to the tents of Iael, who slew him, and so delivered the
people from the slavery of Iabin, for so unlooked for a victory; for so
glorious a conquest, and mighty deliverance: Deborah and Barake in token of
their thankfulness song the same day: saying; praise ye the Lord for the
auenging of Israel, and for the people that offered themselves so willingly.
When little David so victoriously had triumphed over the proud Goliath of 1.
King. 18.
the Philistines, the daughters of Israel met Saul the king, and David his
servant, singing and playing upon their timbrels, violes, and other
instruments, and in token of thanks giving: said; Saul has slain his
thousand, and David his ten thousand.

David being marueilouslie preserved from his infinite enemies, and at the
length by the mighty power of Psalm. 18.
God, brought to sit on the throne of Israel: in sign of his thankfulness to
God therefore, even at the entering in to his kingdom, he sings a psalm of
praise unto God; I will love thee dearly, o God my strength, the Lord is my
rock, and my fortress, and he that delivers me: my God, and my strength, in
him will I trust, my shield, the horn also of my salvation, and my refuge.

When almighty God had heard the humble suite 1. Kings 2.
of Anna, the mother of Samuel, who being barren, desired that she might have a
child: and at her request he had given her Samuel her son: to testify her
thankfulness to God for the same, song a song of praise therefore unto GOD. When
the Lord had looked to the humility of the blessed Virgin, and made her the
vessel of Christ's conception; for that blessing she brake out, and sang; My
soul Luke 1.
magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit reioiceth in God my Savior.

Zachary and Simeon in like manner, the one after the birth of John Baptist
his son: the other after he had received Luke 1. 68 Luke 2. 29.
Christ into his arms, according to the promise of the holy Angel, song in
token of their thanksgeuing: the song of the former is Benedictus, Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel: the song of Simeon is, Nunc dimittis; Lord now let
thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word. Whereby, and by the
like examples it is not only lawful, but laudable also in the Saints of God,
either for benefits and blessings, either of victory against our enemies; or
of deliverance out of trouble: or for the fruits of the earth received in due
season; or for what thing soever we have mercifully received at his hand, to
sing to God, and so be thankful.

3 The third use and end of singing, is to advance thereby the glory of God,
to stir up men to zeal to his word, feruencie in prayer, and earnestnes of
perfourming all laudable service unto him. Whereunto the example of Elizeus may
be referred, who at the request of Iehosaphat, 4. Kings 3
called for a minstrell, who playing, and singing psalms to God, thereby was
stirred up to pray, and prophecy.

David provoked himself by all means forward, more earnestly to pray to God,
and to praise him for his Psalm. 57.
mercy: wherefore he says; Awake my tongue, awake viole and harp: I will
awake early. I will praise thee among the people o Lord, and I will sing unto
thee among the nations.

Thus by all possible means; as by playing upon instruments, and by singing,
the Prophet stirs up himself to the aduaunancement of Gods glory. And to
this end he brought in sundry instruments of music, divine kinds of songs
and psalms, variety of tunes and harmonies into the church of God.

The old Hebrews took up and set down the ark of God with singing: this was
used in the time of the Apostles. Saint Paul says; I will pray in the Spirit,
I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the spirit I will sing
with the understanding also: whereunto he exhorts 1. Cor. 14.
all the Saints; be filled with the Spirit, speaking unto your selves in
psalms, and himnes, and spiritual songs, Ephesians 5. 19 Col. 3. 16
singing, and making melody in your hearts unto God: giving thanks always for
all things unto God, even the father, in the name of Jesus Christ.

This use the believing Jews afterward retained: as both Pliny his answer
thereof to Traian the Emperor, and Tertullian in his Apologetico abundantly
records: Lib. 10. Epist Tertul. apolog. 2. ca.
who both avouch of them, that they rose up early to sing: songs and psalms to
God.

Saint Augustine writes that Saint Ambrose brought the same manner into the
Church of Mediolanum, where Lib. confis. 9. c. 7.
he was Bishop: Whom the other of the west Churches followed: and affirms
that in Africa it was received: to the end that men might thereby be the more
stirred up to zeal to Gods word, feruencie and earnestness in prayer, and al
other laudable services to God. And this was in such moderation, as that the
note carried not away, nor lib. 2. retrac.
confounded the dittie: neither the sound, the sense of the thing.

Whereof Saint Augustine being afraid, desired the use of Athanasius in the
Church of Alexandria, who caused his Reader to stand and sing, with so little
inflection Lib. 10. confis. 23.
of the voice, and so great moderation and modesty, that it was more like the
sound of one pronouncing, then singing: and yet singing in that modest manner.

Such like singing therefore, whether it be in our private houses; or whether
it be in the face of the Congregation, is commendable. And this is the kind of
singing in our exercises to God, whether they be private, or public, that may
be justified.

Saint James requires in our private gratulations, and thanksgeuing for
benefits to almighty God, that we should in this wise sing; Is any merry?
let him sing. To sing therefore in the modesty and moderation of our
affections, in the manifold joys and blessings of this life, in token of our
thankful hearts to GOD, for the blessings and benefits from him so
plentifully received, is here commended by the Apostle; Is any man merry? let
him sing.

In the general afflictions therefore of our life; the best remedy is prayer,
here by Saint James prescribed: whereof there is use, both in sorrow and in joy;
in adversity and prosperity, according to the doctrine here delivered; Is any
among you afflicted? let him pray: is any merry, let him sing. Thus are we here
taught generally, when we are either moved by affliction, or merry in mind,
by occasion of Gods blessings, what to do: which is the first part of this
treatise.

2 As men in their afflictions generally are here Remedy in particular
affliction of Sickness.
taught, to commend their causes and cases to GOD by prayer: so in the next and
second place, he teaches us what particularly in sickness we should do:
showing to what remedy we must run; to what Physicion we must seek to, in
our extremity of sickness, a particular affliction: whereof thus says Saint
James; Is any sick among you? Let him send for the Elders of the Church, and
let them pray for him, etc.

The elders of the Church must be our chief Physicions: Ecclus. 38 9. 10. 11.
12
their prayers unto God for us, must be the first remedy we must seek after in
our sickness, according to the doctrine of the Apostle.

By Elders here are understood the grave, godly, wise and discreet brethren,
they chiefly of the ministry, as most convenient it should be; as unto whom
this excellent gift and power was given: with other of the people, as
oftentimes just occasion served for them: and so often both together, as was
most profitable: such as were able in error to instruct; in grief to comfort;
in sorrow to solace, and in sickness to advise the patient. To them, not to
sorcerers, inchaunters, witches, wise-wome^, or wise men, are we commanded by
Saint James in our sickness to fly.

To the Saints and Elders of the Church, in the Apostles time, was the gift of
healing sickness, and bodily infirmities given, according as our Savior Christ
had promised his Disciples: whom sending forth, Christ encourages them from
the effect their preaching should (...) 16.
take, and from the graces which should be given them, which believed through
their preaching; Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature: he that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that
will not believe, shall be condemned. And these tokens shall follow them which
believe; In my name they shall cast out devils, and shall speak with new
tongues, and they shall take away serpents, and if they shall drink any deadly
thing, it shall not hurt them: they shall lay their hands on the sick, and
they shall recover. This gift was therefore promised the faithful, and the
brethren, in the second sending forth of the Apostles into the world. Of which
gift the Apostles in their first sending out, were partakers. Therefore Saint
Mark thereof speaking, says; They cast out many devils, and anointed many
that Mark 6. Mat. 10. 8.
were sick, and they were healed. The Apostle S. James speaks of this matter
as it was in his time, wherein the Saints and brethren had the gift of healing.
Saint Paul reckoning up the gifts of the holy Ghost, in his time poured out
upon the Church, mentions there-among, the gift of healing; To one is given
the word of wisdom, to 1. Cor. 12.
another is given the word of knowledge by the same spirit, to another is
given faith by the same spirit, to another the gift of healing, by the same
spirit.

The sign of this gift of healing, was anointing with oil, in the name of
the Lord: therefore Saint James here exhorts, that the Elders of the Church
be sent for: that they pray, that they anoint the sick in the name of the
Lord. Whilst then the gift of healing, being but a te^porall gift, to continue
for a season, was in the church: so long the sign thereof, which was
anointing with oil, continued: the gift shortly after the apostles time
ceasing, the sign ceased also.

Notwithstanding, our adversaries the Papists, by an apish and eluish imitation
of the Apostles, contrary to their meaning, retain the sign, the thing
ceasing: And albeit healing be taken from the Church, yet do they anoint
still, which also they make a Sacrament, and call it extreme unction: which
they minister to the sick, not in sign of health and recovery, as the
Apostles did: but when there is no hope of life in them, then annointe they men
and women, as a goodly remedy and help against sin, satan, death and
damnation.

Whose erroneous opinion has no sure foundation, no certain ground, no true
establishment in the Scriptures. And for those places which they use, and
allege for the same, they help no whit at all. Where they allege out of
Mark, that the Apostles did anoint with oil, and so healed, it is true. Let
them therence reason, Mark 6.
and their reason is absurd. The Apostles anointed such as were thereby
healed: therefore we will use to anoint such as are ready to die. What
sequence or following is there in this reason? The Apostles did it to such as
recovered; they do it to none but such as they give over to death, and have no
hope of their life. The Apostles did it in token of health, they do it as a
sure aid against satan, sin, death and damnation, holding that who so in
that extremity is so anointed, shall be out of danger of Satan and death. This
continued but for a time, and these men would have it to remain as a sacrament
for ever. How can it be grownded then upon the Evangelists doctrine? The
Apostles themselves did not always necessarily use that sign in healing: but
sometimes the word and prayer only: sometimes laying on of hands only: sometimes
touching Act. 3. v. 6. Act. 9. v. 34. and. 40. Acts 28. 8. Acts 20. 10 Acts 5.
15
only, sometime lying upon, as in the Acts of the holy Apostles in sundry
places appears. Sometimes the very shadow of the Apostles served, as the
shadow of Peter healed many: sometimes things brought from them, and given to
the sick, as from Paul were brought unto the sick, kercheifs and hand
kercheifs, and deceases were taken from them, and foul spirits departed. So
Acts 19
then it was no such sacrament in the days of the Apostles.

Neither does this place any whitte help or profit them. For here annoynting
is a sign of health and recovery, the gift thereof seasing, the sign must
cease also, neither meant James, that it should be used as a salve of a surgeon:
or as a medicine of the physician, but that in sickness they lifting up their
minds to God: and pouring out their prayers to him, might receive that in
sign, that as their bodies by that external mean should be healed, so their
souls should be clenged, purged, and purified by the holy annoynting of the
spirit of God, and of Jesus Christ. So that the Apostle speaks not of their
sacrament, which thing even Cardinal Caietane their Caietane.
own man confesses in like manner.

The Aposte in this place speaks according as the gift of healing was in
force in his time: and binding hereby men thereunto, during the time of the
continuance of the same, and not for ever as the papists do.

Out of which place we may learn thus much, that as when in the Apostles time
the gift of healing was in force, men were willed to send for the Elders of
the Church, that they might pray for the sick, and anoint them with oil,
that they might recover: So now (the gift being taken away) in our great and
extreme sickness, to send for the elders of the Church, the Pastors, the
Ministers, the preachers of the word: with the faithful brethren: that by
them we may be taught, that the cause of our sickness is our sin: that they
may inform us in the doctrine of unfeigned repentance: that they may comfort
and counsel us in our extremities: that they may power out prayers unto God
for the assistance of his grace, and increase of all needful spiritual
virtues in us: and for riddance out of our pains and sickness, as shall
seem best to his heavenly wisdom. Which done, we may use all other lawful
means of physic, or the like for our recovery, in the fear of God.

But now is it quite contrary with most men: for, as if sickness befell men,
rather by chance and fortune, then by the providence of God: and by natural
causes only, and not as punishments of sin, chastisements of men in this
world from the hand of God, or as trials of our patience, and exercises of our
faith: in their bodily diseases, they forthwith fly to outward remedies:
showing that they have more care of the life of their bodies, then of the
salvation of their souls. They post to the Physician: they send in all haste
to the Apoticarie: they run to the Surgeon: they greedily seek after all
outward means: but their hearts are not turned to God, who sends death, and
gives life: who wounds and makes whole: brings to grave, and lifts up
again: they search not out the true cause of their sickness which is their sin:
But when Phisitio^ leaves, hearing cease, speech fails, senses are gone,
and the party more then half dead: then do most send for the minister,
run for the Pastor: seek to the preacher, when he can not profit the sick
person. What counsel can now be given? what instruction can now be taken?
what comfort can now be ministered? what exhortation can prevail in this
extremity? This ought not to be so my brethren: it is not the meaning of the
Apostle, whose counsel is rather that in all our bodily diseases, we should
fly first to spiritual and ghostly physicians, as appears. Wherefore in
this place the Apostle wills, that if any be sick, they should call for the
elders of the Church, that they might pray for them,

Whose prayers in that behalf of what force they be, the Apostle expresses:
and the prayer of the faithful shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise
him up: and if he have committed sin, it shall be forgiven him.

Which place teaches, that healing in that time was not to be ascribed and
assigned to the annoiting with oil: but to the prayers of the Elders flowing
from faith: and the prayer of the faith shall save him, says the Apostle. The
prayer of faith, proceeding from a steadfast hope, an undoubted trust, an
earnest belief, is therefore of great force. For God is near at hand to hear
all such as call Psalm. 145.
upon him, even such as call upon him faithfully: and our Savior tells him
which in the Gospel sued for his son possessed with a foul spirit, that
all things Matt. 9.
are possible to him that believed: and in another place: whatsoever you ask,
believe, and you shall obtain it. Of Mark 11.
this matter see more. James 1. ver. 6.

Prayer is the effectual instrument, and mean to the obtaining of health,
which to that effect God would to be used. Therefore when the holy Prophets or
blessed Apostles, restored life to the dead, sight to the blind, limbs to the
lame, health to the sick, hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumme, or the
like: they have used prayer thereunto. Elias the Prophet, restoring the son
of the widow of Sareptha being dead, to health, or rather 3. Kings 17.
to life it self: stretched himself upon him, and called upon the name of
the Lord. And Elizeus his servant and successor, in the place of prophecy,
restoring the dead son of the Sunamite to his life again, went into the
child, shut the door upon 4. Kings 4.
him, prayed and stretched himself upon the child, and he revived

When Peter restored Tabitha to life, he kneeled Acts 9.
down and prayed, and then turned to the body, and said; Tabitha arise. When
Christ raised up Lazarus, he first John 11.
prayed: Father, I thank thee, that thou have heard me: I know thou hear
me always: but because of the people that stand by, I said it, that they may
believe that thou sendest me. And in other cures, both our Savior himself,
and the Apostles used prayer.

Which is the mean and instrument of healing, here by the Apostle set
down: the efficient cause whereof is God himself: therefore he says; And
God shall raise him up: and if he has committed any sin, it shall be
forgiven him. Life and death, Ecclus. 11. Deuteronomy. 32. 1. King. 2. 6. 16. Wisd.
13. 13. Tob. 2.
sickness and health, are in the power of God alone: and not in the hand of
mortal man. Men are means, prayers are instruments, but it is God that
saves, yea which heals.

Another effect of prayer is, that through the faithful prayers of the Saints,
their sins are forgiven the sick. If, says Saint James, he has committed
sin, it shall be forgiven him. Where^^^o Saint John condiscendeth: if any man
see his brother sin a sin not unto 1. Ihon. 5.
death, let him ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto
death. As therefore the faithful prayers of Gods Saints are not causes, but
instruments of obtaining health: so are they also means of obteyning remission
of our sins at the hands of God. Matt. 6.
Therefore our Savior in that form of prayer which he would to be used for
our selves, and for our brethren also, wills that we should pray for
forgiveness of sins, not in our selves only, but in our brethren also.
Wherewith Christ moved, prayed for the Luke 23.
Jews: and Steven for forgiveness of those men, which persecuted him. Seeing
therefore that the prayers of the Acts 7.
Elders has this double effect: they ought not to be neglected of men.

Now where the Apostle witnessed: that the sins of the sick should be
remitted and forgiven by the prayers of the Elders: it sufficiently refuteth
the sharp and rigorous censure of the Nouatian heretics, and their horrible
blasphemy: who deny pardone of sin to such as any wise sin after their
conversion to the Gospel, and the knowledge of the truth. Saint James
affirms, that if any of the brethren, any of the professed Christians: any
of the Church after the profession of Gods truth, should commit sin after
their conversion, and the Elders prayed for it: it should be forgiven. Solomon
confesses, that the righteous offends seven times a day, and is a gain
restored. David sinned Pro. 24.
after he knew God, and his sins (though notorious and grievous) yet were
forgiven, as to him upon his confession and repentance Nathan promised. James
our Apostle 2. King. 12.
speaking of the professors of the Gospel, confesses that in many things
they all sin. If there were no James 3.
remission of sin after the profession of the Gospel, and the knowledge of
the truth: why does Saint Paul will Gal. 6.
the brethren of Galatia, that if any offended of infirmity: they should
restore him in the spirit of meekness: considering themselves, least they
also were tempted? why does S. John, speaking to those that knew the truth:
say; that if any of them sinned, they had an advocate with 1. John 2.
the father, who was the propitiation for their sins, even Jesus Christ the
righteous? Palpaple therefore is this heresy of the Nouatians, and refuted: by
these and like places of Scripture.

Moreover that here the Apostle mencioneth sins in men's sickness, it
intimates and gives us to understand, Deuteronomy. 28.
that sins are for the most part, the causes of our sickness and bodily
diseases. The Lord threatens sickness, pestilence, and diseases against
such as sinned and transgressed his commandments. God brought upon Egypt,
botch, blaine, boil, and sore Exodus 9.
diseases upon the people for their churlish cruelty toward the Israelites:
their shameful contempt of the Prophets: the abusing of the patience of God.
Meriah Number. 12.
the sister of Moises was stricken with the leprosy, for murmuring against her
brother the Lords minister. Abimelech and the Philistines, were stricken with
diseases in their Gene. 20.
secret places, for taking away the wife of Abraham. Gehesie was plagued with
the leprosy of Naaman the Assirian, 4. King 5.
for his covetousness and receiving of gifts. David confesses that Gods
heavy hand of sickness was upon him for his sin, from top to toe: so
that he had Psalm. 38.
no rest in his bones by reason of his iniquity. Saint Paul records to the
Church of Corinth, that many of them 1. Cor. 11.
were diseased for the abuse of the Lords supper. Our Savior Christ healing
him which was diseased eight and thirty John 5.
years, willed him to sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto him:
noting thereby, that the cause of his disease was his sin. And no doubt the
cause of our new sickenesses whereof we taste every year, is the new
sin, which we daily increase: our new adulteries: New sins procure new
sickenesses.
our new devised pride: our new extorcion, covetousness and oppression: our
new cruelty, and iniquity, which we multiply continually against the Lord.
Which thing Saint Jamee to teach us, tells us, that if the sick have
committed sin, it should be forgiven by prayer: and this is the first remedy
against bodily infirmities, both general and particular: as the Apostle has
prescribed.

The second remedy in particular affliction, as 2. Remedy.
sickness, is mutual confession joined with prayer: so that prayer again is
annexed and joined as a remedy, whereby that we might help one another the
better, there is required mutual confession, and free conferring one with
another, touching offenses given. Acknowledge ye your sins one to another,
and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. For the prayer of a righteous
man avails much, if it be fervent. Helias etc. In which words these things
may be observed. 1 Mutual confession with prayer is required. 2 To what end?
to the end we might be healed. 3 The force of the righteous man's prayer. 4
How that force is showed? by example of the prayer of Elias.

Concerning mutual confession and conferring one Mutual confession.
with another about offenses given and done, it is very necessary to the
recovery of health in sickness: for God soonest hears such as have put away
al malice and hatred out of their hearts, and are at peace and love with their
brethren; this is chiefly done where brotherly we confer one with another,
touching offenses and trespasses committed; which done we can best help one
another with our mutual prayers. As therefore members al of one body ought Romans
12. 1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4.
to help one another: so Christians being all members of one body, and each of
them members of each other, ought by mutual help to assist and aid one
another in sickness. Wherefore to this purpose, as in sickness he willed that
the Elders of the church should be sent for, and assembled to pray for the
sick: so a second remedy and help in sickness is, that the brethren thus
assembled, should confer mutually touching offenses committed, that mutually
confessing, and mutually forgiving, God might the better hear their mutual
prayers of love, for those which were sick among them. To which purpose this
place serves: acknowledge your faults one to another: open that which
grieueth you, that a remedy may be sought and found out for it, the better.

This mutual confession and acknowledging one to another, wherein one of us
has offended another, the sacred word of God, and the holy Scriptures commend
unto us. To which end our Savior Christ exhorts the Saints, that when they
come to offer any gift upon the altar, and Mat. 5.
then remember any breach betwixt them and the brethren; there to leave their
gift and to go, and be reconciled: which is by ripping up and acknowledging
offenses. To like purpose the Lord Jesus teaches us, that if our brother
offend against us seven times a day, and say it repents Luc. 17.
me; and confess the offense, that we should forgive: meaning that how often
soever our brethren offend us, and acknowledge their faults: we should
forgive them: showing that of mutual offenses there should be mutual
acknowledgment.

Saint James in this place, either for mutual comfort which they might receive
one of another by acknowledging their faults: or for mutual reconciliation,
which in sickness is requisite; exhorts the saints to acknowledge their
faults one to another: which thing is most expedient: for it is not expedient,
that such as have given offense, should acknowledge the offense done, thereby
to satisfy for the trespass committed, to entertain peace, unity, love, and
charity among themselves? to live and love together as brethren? And for
as much as we here either not at all, or very hardly live without offense
giving unto others, is it not very necessary for the saluing up of all
matters, that we mutually confess offenses, mutually be reconciled, and
mutually forgive one the other?

And this acknowledging of our offenses and faults, this confession, is of
private offenses done by one to another: which as at other times is needful,
so in our sickness is necessary: that we being in perfect love and peace with
all men: may either thereby find release of pain the sooner, or else with more
quiet minds sleep in everlasting rest and quietness, when we shall be
dissolved out of these our mortal bodies.

This thing, how greatly does it profit? an evil mind full of wrath and
indignation, replenished with envy, burning with mortal hatred, and boiling
with desire of revenge: increases our pain, prolongeth our grief, continues
our sickness, incenseth almighty God more sharply against us, and hinders
his loving kindness and favor toward us: it is good therefore to put away
all malice, wrath, anger, fierceness, hatred, out of our hearts, and to
acknowledge our faults one to another.

This being the plain meaning of this place, how can our adversaries establish
their auricular confession hereupon? this place by the very circumstance of the
place it self, does not make any thing for their purpose. For first here is
mention made of confession of faults in sickness at the private houses of men
sick and diseased; that the sick person to the standers by might confess
wherein he had offended them: and the standers by, wherein they had offended
him; and not in the Church; not in health to the priest, not in his ear at
Lent. 2. Here he requires that we confess our sins and faults one to
another; and not all to one, wherefore this place binds the minister to
acknowledge asvvell to the people, if in any thing he has offended them: as
the people to the minister, if they have offended him. The priest must asvvell
confess to the parish, as the parish to the priest by this rule; or else how
can they be said to confess one to another? if many confess unto me, and I
confess unto none; how may it be said that we have confessed our faults one
to another? 3. As we are commanded to confess our faults one to another,
so must we pray one for another. But they blush to say, that this appertains
only to the priest; why should confession then more appertain to the priest,
then prayer? Wherefore as the people may pray one for another; and for the
priest also: so the priest for the people and for himself also: that so it
may be done mutually.

4. In like manner, by this place the people are willed to acknowledge their
offenses done against the priest, and the priest his against them: and this is
mutual prayer and mutual confession.

^. John. 1.
Where beside this, they urge Saint John, if we confess our sins he is
righteous to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness: it cannot be understood of the priest without horrible
blasphemy. He to whom we must confess, is righteous; but no man can be so
counted absolutely: therefore it cannot be understood of the priest. Moreover
he to whom we must confess, is said to be righteous and faithful to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: and can any priest
forgive sins, and cleanse us from all unrighteousness? Does it not
appertain to God alone to forgive sins? Does not God challenge that as
proper Isai 43. 44 Ps. 31. 52.
to himself? Does not David confess the same, when for the forgiveness of
sins, he prays only unto God? Did not the Jews hold that for a truth,
being therefore offended with Christ because he took upon him to Mat. 9.
forgive sins? not erring in their opinion, that none could forgive sins
but God only: but in this, that they knevv not Christ for true God, and
therefore able to forgive sins: neither of these places therefore establish
their auricular confession.

With which doctrine the Scripture is not acquainted: hereof the Prophets have
not spoken; neither have Ioh. 14, and 16.
the Apostles heard of it: this did not the holy Ghost teach the church; yet
was it promised that it should bring them to all truth, and teach them all
things. If the holy Ghost shall teach the church all things, why has it not
taught this one thing? And if it shall lead the Saints into all truth; if this
be a truth, why has it not, and why does it not lead them thereunto? The
Gloss seeing that Distinct. 5. ca. de penitent.
the spirit of God has not taught it, denies it to be taught in the
Scripture: therefore refers it to the traditions of the Elders and of the
Church. Wherefore he says: it is better to say, that this confession is from
the tradition of the universal church, then ordained, either by the authority
of the new, or old testament.

The reverend Fathers have disallovved it as curious and needless. S.
Chrysostom thereof says in this wise; Hom. 31. upon the Hebru.
I say not unto thee, that thou come forth and show thy self openly, neither
that thou accuse thy self to others; but I would have thee to obey the
Prophet saying; reveal thy life unto the Lord. Upon the 51. Psalm thus 2.
Homil. upon Psalm. 51.
says the same Father: Confess and tell thy sins, that thou may blot and
put them out: if thou be ashamed to tell them any body, then tell them every
day in thy soul. I say not that thou confess them to thy fellovv servant,
that he may cast thee in the teeth; tell them to God which cures them.

And in another Homily; let the inquisition and inquiring out of thy sin, be
in thy heart and thought: Of confess. and repent.
this inquiring and judgment, let it be without witness; let God alone see thy
confessing, which only does not vpbraid thee with the sins, but forgiueth
them.

Saint Augustine not abiding that proud presumption Lib. 10. confess. c. 3.
of men, sharply inueigheth against them in his confessions: what have I to
do says he, with men, that they should hear my confessions, as if they could
heal my sores? a curious kind of men to know the lives of others, and a
slothful to correct their own. How know they when they hear of me, of my
self, whether I 1. Cor. 2.
speak the truth, since no man knows* what is done in man, but the spirit of
man that is in him?

This intolerable arrogancy of men to hear the confessions of other men's
sins, Lysander could not abide; wherefore when he asked counsel in
Samothracia Lysander.
of the Oracle: being willed by the priest and keeper thereof, to tell the
greatest sin that ever he committed: asked whether he should do it at his
bidding, or at the commandment of the gods. When it was told hm, it was the
commandment of the gods: he willed the priest to stand a part, and he would
tell it the gods, if they did ask him. Thus the very heathen detested this
auricular confession of their sins unto others. Wherefore let that be
abandoned far from the school of Christ, which the very heathen by reason
did not admit, and let it be condemned for ever, as an error or heresy not
tolerable, which neither Scripture confirms, nor Fathers allow of.

Saint James in this place speaks nothing hereof, but only of confession of
offenses privately committed, which either for mutual comfort, or for mutual
reconciliation, ought to be mutually confessed, as Erasmus and Bid expound it.
Unto which confession, mutual prayer is joined: whereof albeit in the 14. and
15. verses he had spoken, yet to show the excellency and necessity thereof,
here repeateth it again and requires it. Which he commends from the effect:
that all men might see and know, that there is nothing more effectual and
forceble to the healing of our bodily diseases, then unfeigned prayer,
proceeding from a lively faith, a pure heart, and good conscience to God.
Which effect of mutual confession and prayer, is health: acknowledge your
faults one to another, and pray one for another, that you may be healed: our
minds clear of malice; our hearts of hatred; our affections of envy; our
desires of wrath and revenge: our bodies shall the sooner be restored to health
by the Lord.

Seeing then such an effect follows mutual prayer, we ought to be councelled
by the holy Ghost, and advised by the Apostle to pray one for another; that
we may be healed. But of this more has been spoken upon the 14. and 15.
verses before going.

Where Saint James exhorts us to pray one for another, it no whitte at all
favors the opinion of Popish persons, either for their prayers to the dead;
or for the dead. To the deceased Saints, herence are we not moved to pray, as
to mediators and advocates for us to God. For here the Apostle (as before)
desires the living saints to pray one for another, that they may be healed.
The Lords prayer teaches, that men alive may pray for men living; therefore
therein we pray not for our selves alone, but for the whole body of the
Church. One man may sue to God for another being alive, and we are willed to
seek for the prayers of the living Saints, that they may be poured out for us
to God. But to sue for the help of the prayers of the souls, and spirits of
men and women deceased: neither does this place, neither any other in the
canonical Scriptures of God, teach or persuade us.

And as we are not taught to sue to the dead: so neither are we taught to sue
for the dead: for the living saints must pray one for another being alive: they
are willed to pray for those that are sick, but not dead. David prayed 2.
Kings 12.
for the child begotten of Bersebah, when it was sick: but as soon as it was
dead, he ceased. Abraham prayed for the Genesis 18.
Sodomites being alive, but when they were destroyed, we hear no prayer for
them. Moises prayed to GOD for the Leuit.
transgressing Israelites, but when they were destroyed by the hand of God, he
prayed not. Saint Paul prayed for the Romans 9. and 1^
jews, his brethren according to the flesh: but it is never mentioned that he
prayed for any of them deceased. Prayers for the souls in purgatory therefore
herence can no wise be gathered.

Now that health follows the prayers of Gods saints, we must not take it,
that as all they for whom prayer was made, were always healed in the time of
the Apostles: even so also now: but that as in that time, it was the ordinary
mean, and had his effect in all: even so ought it to be a mean now, and no
doubt in sundry it shall be, and is assuredly very effectual, (though the gift
of healing be not as it was in the time of the Apostles;) for GOD will hear
the prayers of his servants, and will fulfill their desires: whose ears are
open to the suites of the righteous, and will grant their requests, as shall
stand best with his heavenly wisdom.

This effect oftentimes to follow the prayers of the Saints, it is showed, for
that the prayers of the righteous are very forcible, and prevail much, if they
be fervent. Of the force of the Saints prayers, see Sermon 2. upon S. James,
leaf 19. 1. page, etc. Sermon 3. leaf 26. page 1. etc. Sermon 17. upon 4.
James, leaf 184. page 1. etc.

To which places this also may here be added, that Two things required in
prayer, that it may be effectual.
to the efficacy of men's prayers, the Apostle requires two things: One in him
that prays, the other in the prayer it self.

1 Touching him that prays, if he will have his prayer heard, he must be just
and righteous: for it is here said; that the prayer of the righteous avails
much. They must be such as fear God, and believe in Jesus Christ: such as are
careful to serve him in spirit and truth: such as do walk before him in
holiness and righteousness of life. These are they, whose prayers avail much.
For this cause Saint Paul exhorts men to pray to God lifting up pure 1. Tim.
2 Psalm. 145. Psalm. 34. 1. Peter 3
hands unto him. The Princely Prophet David affirms that God will fulfill
the desires of them that fear him, and hear their cry, and save them. And in
another place which is alleged carefully by Saint Peter, the prophet
promises the present help, and the priest aid of god to our prayers, when we
are righteous: the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open to their prayers. The prayers of the righteous pearce even Ecclus. 35.
unto heaven, they reach unto the clouds, they come unto God himself: they
ascend to him, and his graces descend unto the righteous.

Though then there be infinite distance betwixt heaven and earth, God and man:
yet hears he from his holy hill, the prayers of his righteous servants,
poured out unto him.

Which Jeroboam that wicked king also knew: who having his hand (which he
thrust out to have taken the 3. Kings 13
man of God) dried up; he desired the Prophet and man of Exodus.
God, to pray that it might be restored. Pharao king of Egypt knew that the
prayer of Moses and Aaron, the righteous servants of God, prevailed much;
wherefore, when the plagues of God fell upon him and his people, then desired he
Moses and Aaron to pray for him. This the captains Jerem. 4^
and remnant of the people of Israel, after their overthrow and destruction by
Nabuchodonozer right well co^fidered, how effectual the prayers of the
righteous we are with God, for which cause they besought Jeremy, the Lords
servant, to pray for them. This thing to teach Abimelech king of Gerar,
almighty God told him, that Abraham (whose Genesis 20.
wife the king had taken away) was a Prophet, and he should pray for him: who
praying, the people and Prince, were healed of their disease, wherewith God
(for Sarah) had plagued them. To which purpose, to show of what weight the
prayers of Gods Saints are with him, he commanded the three friends of Job to
go and be reconciled unto Job, Job. 42.
whom they had not comforted in affliction as they should have done: and
tells them, that he should pray for them, at whose prayer he would be
entreated.

All which teaches, that only their prayers are of force with God for good,
who are just and righteous. The prayer (says Saint James) of the righteous
prevails much.

As in him that prays it is required, that he be righteous: so is it required
in the prayer of the righteous, that it be also fervent, proceeding from a pure
affection, flowing from unfeigned faith, kindled by a burning zeal, influmed
with fervent love, continued in great earnestness and constancy: without
which our prayers obtain little or nothing at the hands of God; but being
earnest, constant, and fervent, they prevail greatly. When Moses continued
Exodus 17.
fervent in prayer in the battle against the Amalechites, the people of Israel
prospered. Our Savior Christ teaches by two places in Saint Luke his gospel,
that our Prayers must be fervent and constant, by the example of Luke 11. and
18.
the man that obtained the borowing of bread of his friend by his feruencie and
earnestnes in asking, and would not take the denial or repulse, and so through
importunity obtained: and of the widow, who soliciting the unjust judge to
avenge her cause upon her enemy, obtained her request at length with much a
do: through her constancy and continuance in prayer. Whereby our Savior also
teaches us, that we must continue in prayer and cease not, if we will obtain
the petitions of our hearts with God. The woman of Cannan, often rejected, yet
still fervently persisting, obtained Mat. 15
and had her request for her daughter, from our savior Jesus Christ. And the
Apostle in this place, teaches that the prayers of the righteous avail much;
if they be fervent: Wherefore, as he that prays must be righteous, so must his
prayer be fervent, earnest, and constant, if he will obtain any thing at the
hands of God.

Wherence we may learn, that the wicked are out of hope of obteining for their
comfort, the things they pray for: because it is said; that the prayers of the
righteous avail much: not the prayers of the wicked: whose prayers being heard
of God, tend to their greater and iuster condemnation, destruction and
punishment.

And the prayers also of the righteous are then effectual, when they are
fervent. Let all them which hope to receive their petitions at the hands of
God, in all things apply themselves to righteousness: let them not be faint
hearted, of a wavering mind, cold in asking, easily repelled, soon
discouraged in praying: but let them be fervent and constant therein, if they
look to be regarded: for our Apostle affirms, that the prayer of the
righteous avails much, if it be fervent.

And that the prayer of the righteous avails much, being fervent, the Apostle
proves by the example of Elias; at his prayer the heaven was (as it were)
shut up for a time: and again, thereat opened, Whereof thus says S. James;
Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and prayed earnestly that
it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth for 3. years and 6.
months: and he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought
forth her fruit.

This story touching Elias is recorded in the book of 3. Kings 17. and 18.
Kings, where it is mentioned, that in the days of Achab and Iezabel, there
was great and extreme famine and drought upon the land, so that men perished
for want of food, cattle died for lack of water in the Country of Samaria. In
which distress, Achab and his servant Obadia divided the land, to seek for
water for the residue of their cattle and horses, least they also for want of
water should pearish. At what time Obadiah met with Elias, and Elias talked
with Ahab, whom he councelled to make have, and to get home, least the rain
should stay him. After which, rain ensued immediately; in the land. Which
story James here citing, faith, that Elias prayed, and it rained not for 3.
years, and 6. months, and he prayed again, and it rained.

In the story there is no mention of his prayer, neither for drought, neither
for rain: concerning the drought, this only is said; that Elias told Ahab the
king, that there should neither rain nor dew fall, but according to his word,
for certain years: yet the Apostle says he prayed, and it rained not for 3.
years and 6. months. Concerning the rain, he is said to have told this to
the king; whom he bids to haste, least the rain did stay him: he is said
to have couched upon the ground, and to have put his head and face betwixt his
knees, and to have commanded his seruante to look to the sea ward: but
mention of his prayer is none. But hereby is it manifest, that in both cases
he prayed: when he saw the horrible idolatry of the princes and people, and
the bloody persecution where unto the Church and Saints were subject: for
zeal to Gods glory, for care over the church, he prayed for famine and
drought from the Lord, that thereby they being punished, might remember them
selves, repent of the wickedness they had committed, and return unfeignedly
unto God. Whose prayer God heard, and brought famine and drought upon the land
for three years and six months. And afterward, either seeing their
repentance, or hoping for their amendment, or touched with the extremity
whereunto the innocent and silly people were subject, he prayed unto God
again, and the Lord heard him, and it rayned, and the earth brought fruit.
Thus at his prayer the heaven was shut for a time, and opened again, whereby
it evidently appearerh, that earnest and fervent prayers of the righteous, are
of great force.

Elias in deed was a great prophet, in high fouour with God, therefore it is
no merueile that his prayer so greatly prevailed, but far unlike him, are we.
He raised the dead, he caused fire to come down from heaven, he therefore
might thus prevail, but all are not like him.



James Chap. 5. verses 19. 20. Sermon. 28.
Verse 19. Brethren, if any of you have erred from the truth, and some man has
converted him:

20 Let him know, that he which has converted the sinner from going astray out
of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall cover a multitude of sins.


AFter the remedies to bodily diseases set down: generally and particularly:
generally in affliction to pray: particularly in sickness to send for the
Elders of the Church, that they might pray for the diseased, and anoint them
with oil in the name of the Lord, (which in that time was in force, though not
now:) and also that they should acknowledge their sins and offenses privately
committed, one to another, and pray one for another, that they might be
healed: The Apostle discendeth to the remedy of inward infirmities and
diseases, in the errors of men's Remedy of inward infirmities, as errors.
minds, whereof greater care ought to be taken: so that whether they err in
manners and conversation, or in faith and opinion touching religion: the Saints
and brethren ought to seek by all means their conversion. Which in this place
Saint James here commends unto us, who therewith ends and shuts up his
Epistle, as with a most golden sentence, and grave exhortation for the
converting of others, and leading them into the way of truth, that they may be
saved: then which there is no duty, no deed, no action more precious,
pleasant, or pleasing unto God.

These two verses containing this argument and matter, have two things to be
noted. namely, 1 The counsel, travail, and endeavor to call such as go
astray, unto the way of truth. 2 The reward of them, and the benefit, which by
reclayming and calling from error other men, they shall receive, which thus
call and convert their brethren.

Concerning then this exhortation, touching inward diseases, and infirmities of
the mind, it follows very orderly upon the former. For seeing inward
diseases as errors of our minds, either in manners and life, or in opinion
and faith, are oftentimes causes of our outward infirmities and diseases of
the body: and the Apostle has before spoken of bodily infirmities: it
follows directly, that he speak some thing touching diseases of the mind
and errors, how they also ought to be dealt withal: which thing in the last
place, and last words is prescribed. Therein two things observed: thereof the
first is, what the Saints ought to do when their brethren err and go
astray: they must do their endeavor, and give all diligence to reclayme,
convert, and call home such as go out of the way, and err.

Double error.
Now seeing men err and go astray two ways: either in false opinion
concerning faith, or in corruption touching life: in both these must the Saints
of God travel for the conversion of such as therein wander: of whose error
this is the only remedy, to seek their connersion and drawing into the way
of truth.

This is a divine labor, this is a holy exercise, this is a heavenly travail,
the labor and travail to purchase and get souls, and win them to Gods holy
truth: whereunto as unto a most needful point of love the holy Scriptures
exhort us. Wise Solomon speaks of this excellent labor of love, when he
says, that the fruit of Prou. 11.
the righteous is a tree of life, and he that wins souls, is wise. To win
souls in this place, is to bring them to the knowledge of God, and his holy
truth: and as the Apostle speaks: the converting of a sinner from going
astray out of his way. Our blessed Savior seems to Matt. 1^.
have aimed and shot, as it were hereat: when in the Gospel he would have the
Saints by telling the offending brethren of their private offenses committed,
and warning them thereof: to endeavor to convert them from their error: which
if private admonition could not effect: then they should make two or three
acquainted therewith: if that could not prevail, they should tell it unto
the Church: leaving no mean or way unattempted for their conversion. Where he
speaks of offenses and errors in life and manners. Saint Jude teaching the
Saints what Jude v. 22. 23
love they should have of their brethren: and what care should press their
hearts for their conversion, wills that they should have compassion upon
some, putting difference: and that they should save other with fear, plucking
them out of the fire. Not only teaching men this duty to seek the
conversion of the brethren which go astray and wander: but also teaching them
how therein they should behave themselves, to make this godly choice therein,
that they seek to win some by gentle means, and in merciful compassion:
others by terror and godly severity: thus by all possible means must we
seek the turning and conversion of our brethren.

Did not God intimate that in his law? when he Exodus 23. Deuteronomy. 22. 1. and. 4.
v.
bids, that when we see our neighbors ox, or ass, or beast whatsoever,
ready to fall into a dit^h and danger, wherein he might perish: then we
should hold them from hurt, keep them from perishing, and pluck them out of
danger? Has God care of oxen, and not much more of men? Shall we draw an
ox out of the pit wherein he might perish, and shall we not draw our
brethren out of their errors, wherehence if they be not reclaymed, they shall
be plunged into the bottomless pit of perdition?

When God likewise wills in his law, that if we see our neighbors beast
going astray: we should bring Exodus 23. Deuteronomy. 22. 1. and ver. 5.
it home to the owner, and not cause it to err: Has he care over brute
beasts, that they should not wander? and would he not much rather that men
themselves wandering, should be converted from their errors unto the way of
truth?

Nature it self teaches us, that it is a point of humanity to call the
wanderer into the way: therefore have the heathen made laws against them, and
set down punishments to such as refused to teach and lead the wandering
stranger into the right way. Shall nature teach us care of men's bodies, and
shall not grace teach us care of their souls? Shall we bring into the right
way him that wandereth in body, and shall we not turn them into the true
path which leads unto life, which through error wander in their minds?
Pro^lides they say, devised certain images or signs, which Statuae
Mercurialis.
they called Mercuriall, having three heads: and caused them for this purpose
in places where three ways met, to be erected: that they might, as it were,
point and tell, which of the three ways the wandering and weary trauayler
might take, without error or going astray our of his way. And for this cause I
suppose, in Why crosses were sea up in high ways.
high ways which meet, in our Country, there have been pillars, Crosses, or
images likewise erected, afterward by the vanity of men abused
supersticiously. Have the very heathen had care to lead men into the right
way from erring and wandering: and shall not christians give all diligence, and
employ all pains: to bring their brethren into the right way, least they
wander to their destruction? Shall not Christians hereof be chiefly careful,
being themselves happily informed in the ways of the Lord, and in the sound
doctrine of the Gospel, to train up others therein, and to call thereunto such
as err and wander? As almighty God gives not men riches that they alone
might use them, to whom they are given: but that others might therehence,
receive comfort: so neithet gives he riches of the mind, as knowledge,
learning, wisdom, understanding to men: that they should shut them in the
closet of their own hearts: but that Prou. 15. 7. Mat. 25. 27. Mat 24. 25. 1.
Pet. 4. 11.
like wise and good stewards, they might communicate them to the benefit of
others, that they may make many brethren partakers of their joy. Wherefore,
when we, through the prosperous and happy mind of Gods unmeasurable
greatness and riches of mercy, are arrived at the desired haven of knowledge
and truth: we should not only courteously, but Christianly endeavor to show
such as yet are tossed with the waves of error, what way they may escape the
quicke-sandes, the sharp rocks, the dangerous courses and shipwreck it
self, and as it were with stretched out hands, be ready to receive, them
least they perish: and so by all means to labor their conversion.

This Apostle has exhorted Christians in the former treatise, by prayer,
confession of faults, and the like, to seek to drive away the diseases of the
bodies of their brethren: how much more care should we have of driving away the
diseases of their minds?

Wherefore, if we see any man or woman, brother or sister, carried either with
vain opinions into falsehood, or with wicked life into corruption: and so
either err in the one, or in the other: we ought not bitterly to vpbraid them,
nor sharply to rebuke them always: neither reprochfully to check them, nor
utterly to neglect them: but rather by all meekness and gentle demeanor to
reclaim and convert them, that they may come to the knowledge of the truth,
and so be saved.

But if we suffer and let them alone, either in the falsehood of their
opinions, or in the corruption of their lives, therein to stand or fall, live
or die, sink or swim: we show our selves careless, and of a dull spirit:
hardened in heart: not mollifyed nor softened with Christian charity, to be
touched with the errors of our brethren.

It is the duty then of every one that is strong, to reach the hand to the
feeble and weak brethren to convert them: of them that are wise, learned, and
of understanding, to offer their help to the ignorant, to bring them to
knowledge: of them that are already anointed with the oil of gladness above
their fellows, to give Psalm. 45.
all diligence to win many unto Jesus Christ, that they may make many
brethren pertakers of their joy: that 1. Cor. 9.
they may hold fast the exhortation of the Apostle, and study to convert
sinners from going astray out of their way.

And the Saints of God seek the conversion of sinners from their evil ways,
by sundry means. How men seek to turn their brethren from error.


1. By instructing them which are ignorant and in error, that they may thereby
come to the knowledge of the truth: (...) hereby are men turned away from their
errors and evil ways: as the wiseman Solomon affirms; The instruction of a
wiseman (says he) is as a well spring Prou. 13.
of life, to turn away from the snares of death: by telling and teaching our
brethren what is religion, what is superstition; what is right, and what is
wrong: what is good, what is evil: that the one may be embraced, the other
refused; we seek to convert our brethren from going astray out of their way.

2. We seek the converting of our brethren out of their errors, when we
brotherly reprove them of the wickedness they have committed, that thereby they
seeing their own errors and iniquities: may thereof repent, and therefro be
turned. And this Solomon also makes a way to convert Prou. 6.
the brethren, which err and go astray: wherefore showing that reprehensions
out of the Scriptures, whereby our sins are reproved, are ways to reclaim
us, and to lead us unto life: says, corrections for instruction, are the way
of life. Nathan by his reverend reprehending of the sins of 2. Kings 12
David, brought him to the knowledge of his wickedness, and so converted him
from his error of life, stained with shameful adultery and cruel murder. The
holy prophets, the blessed Apostles, by reproving men of their wicked lives,
reclaimed and called them away oftentimes from their errors, and so converted
them. The ministers and preachers of Gods word, the residue and rest of the
Saints of God, by reproving and reprehending men for their extreme oppression,
insaciable coueteousnes, biting usury, swelling hatred, intolerable pride,
horrible adulteries and uncleanness, beastly dronkennes, filthy lying,
reprochful slander, and other their iniquities which they have committed:
oftentimes thereby reclaim and convert them. Which care most men, most women,
have now cast of. For we are so squemish, and so full of good manners, that for
fear of offense, we will not reprove the brethren and sisters, that they may
be converted. We let them blaspheme, speak filthily, weary and wast their
bodies in uncleanness: by lying, to slay their souls, run on headlong in
their shameful pride: and by committing al manner sin and iniquity, to rush
into final destruction. Thus have we forgotten the exhortation of the Apostle:
but let all such as fear God, learn a better profession, by brotherly
admonition, reprehension and correction, to seek the conversion of their
brethren, as the Apostle teaches.

3. Neither thus only, but by exhortation men convert sinners from going astray
out of the way. For what way can men be sooner converted from error, then by
dissuading from vice, persuading to virtue, wherein exhortation consists? When
Isai the Prophet of God sought Isai 1.
the conversion of the people from their error in idolatry, iniquity, and
wickedness, wherein a long time they had wallowed: he seeks it by exhortation:
persuading them to virtue, dissuading them from vice. To which purpose that
exhortation serves: wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your
hands from before my eyes: cease to do evil, learn to do good: seek
judgment: relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, defend the widow. To
this purpose the Apostle to the Hebrnes exhorts men, Heb. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11.
professing godliness, to stir up one another, and to seek their conversion
which were departed from the living God, and to prevent the fall of others by
exhortation; therefore he says; takeheed my brethren, least there be at any
time in any of you, an evil heart and unfaithful to depart from the living
God, but exhort one another daily, while it is called to day: least any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. This means used Paul and the
holy Apostles, to conue^t and call away men from their errors in the time of
their ignorance, and to bring them to the true knowledge of the gospel.
Neither is there any way, whereby we more reclaim and convert our sinning
brethren, from going astray out of their way, then by daily exhortation: and
therefore especially is it needful and necessary, that we exhort one another
daily, if we have any care of winning the souls of our breth^en and sisters,
and of bringing them to the knowledge of godliness. And this mean is common
to all Christians: thus must the magistrate, thus must the minister, thus must
the parents, thus must the masters, thus must the scholemaisters, thus must
the neighbor, thus must every man seek to convert every one that erreth, by
exhortation to turn him from going astray out of his way.

4. We seek more over the conversion of our brethren out of their errors,
when we confer with them gently and courteously, concerning the causes of
their errors, Wherefore to unfold such places as may seem to bolster up the
erring brethren in falsehood of opinion: and to remove such offenses as whereby
they are wrapped in error of their lives by conference with them in brotherly
manner, this is also away to convert them.

5. Finally, we convert the erring and wandering brethren, by our good and godly
example of holy life. For men erring, either in manners, or in opinion, seeing
the example of all virtue and godliness in the Saints, their faith flourishing,
their patience abounding, their humility singular, ^. Pet. 2. 12
their modesty rare, their obedience excellent, and all manner of virtue in
perfect beauty: thereby are oftentimes forced to confess the truth of their
religion, which are thus renowned for virtue: and by their godly demeanor to
acknowledge their own corruption, and so be converted. It stands us therefore
greatly upon to beware, least in this respect we be careless and negligent,
and so loose by evil example, whom we might by good, have won to Jesus
Christ, and his gospel.

And for as much as the lives and examples of Gods Examples prevail much.
Saints prevail greatly, either to virtue, or to vice; and either persuade to,
or dissuade from our errors in both kinds: from whence as from a perpetual
well spring, the flood of all that is good or evil flows, it is our bounden
duty which fear God, every one to watch over his brother, that by all good
example we may call them from their errors, and convert them, as here we are
exhorted.

6. To conclude, we seek the conversion of our brethren, by sharp chastening
out of the word of God. For where gentle ^enitiues will not serve, there sharp
corsies must be used; and when mild preparatiues prevail nothing, then must
scowring and searching purgations be applied. Thus did the Prophets, thus did
our Savior Christ, thus did the Apostles seek their conversion, whom by other
means, they could not reclaim, nor bring from error.

Seeing the case thus stands with us, and so great necessity constrains,
and is laid upon us for the conversion of our brethren: then; woe to them, who
then subvert, when they should convert the brethren* which hinder, when they
should help their conversion; whose salvation God has as it were put into
their hands. Woe to the carnal professors of the gospel, whose wicked
examples encourage the erring brethren and persons, to continue in their
error. Woe to the contentious and waywarde, intractable and disobedient of our
time, who with their quarrel picking, and bitter striuings about things
oftentimes frivolous and not weighty, and other grievous debates: make
division and cause schism in the church, whereby the Papists, Jesuits, and
other erroneous persons, are fleshed in their errors. Woe to al men and women,
by whom the conversion of souls shall be in aniwise hindered; seeing we are so
necessarily enjoined the care of their conversion.

This is the council of the Apostle, this is the remedy against inward
infirmities, and diseases of our minds, this is the labor and travel of the
Saints of God, by all means to seek the conversion of such as do wander and
err out of the way.

The double profit of this care.
2 The next and second thing is, the profitte which redoundeth, and the reward
which is given them that are careful to convert such as err: let him know
that he that co^uerteth a sinner from going astray out of his way, shall save a
soul from death, and cover a multitude of sins.

Cor. 7. 6.
1. He that thus endeavors the conversion of other, and turns a sinner from
going astray, from out of his way, saves his soul that is converted: whom he
reclayming, delivers from death and damnation, wherein through error he was
intrapped.

Now to procure the salvation of any one soul, is a work both more excellent,
and more difficult, more hard, and more victorious: then the subduing of
Countries and kingdoms by dint of sword: or atchieuing glorious conquests by
force of arms, over our enemies. This is a service and sacrifice more pleasant
unto God, to sacrifice up one soul to salvation: then the slaying of all the
bulls and oxen upon a thousand hills, and to offer them in sacrifice to God.

Ezech. 18. and 33.
Hereof God himself rejoices (as it were,) whofe delight is not in the death
of a sinner, but rather that he should repent, and be saved: Hereof the powers
and holy Spirits of men and Angels in heaven, rejoice: as our savior
records in the Gospel: auouching that there is Luc. 15.
joy in heaven over any one sinner that repents. This is therefore a singular
benefit which comes of this Christian and godly care we have to convert
other, even the saving of their souls.

2. The other profit herence rising, is the covering and hiding of the
multitude of sins. The manifold sins of men converted, are hid in their
conversion: so that he which conuerteth another: as he conuerteth, so puts
he away, and hides the multitude of his sins, which is now rightly
converted, and turned to the knowledge of the truth.

To convert one from his sin, and from going astray, from out of his way, is
a special point of love. and a notable effect thereof, and it is a property of
love also, to cover sins. Love (says Peter, out of the wise Solomon) 1.
Peter 4. Prou. 10. 12.
covers the multitude of sins. Wherefore, in converting the brethren, we
thereby hide and cover their sins also. And thus this double benefit
redoundeth to him that is converted: even the saving of his soul, and the
hiding of his sin.

Which as it is referred to the party converted, so may it be to him which
conuerteth. In the converting of others, he saves his own soul, in
discharging so great a work of love. And men thus save their souls, in
perfourming Ezech. 3 and 33.
of this action, as the watchman is said to save his soul, when he has
descried the enemy, and admonished the people of their danger, which hangs
over the^ for sin. And as the Minister, by exercising himself in the
Scriptures, and by continuing in reading, is said to save himself, and those
that hear him: So men, in performing 1. Tim. 4.
this duty toward their brethren, by discharging a good conscience, and
perfourming so excellent labor of love, do thereby save their souls.

And as they save their souls, so they hide a multitude of their own sins,
when they endeavor the conversion of others. For God is commonly marvelous
merciful to their sins, which endeavor to win others unto him: by which
travail they purchase great favor with the Lord, and obtain thereby the
pardon of their manifold sins: wherefore S. James says; they hide a
multitude of sins.

Albeit then this may stand with a just proportion, and an analogy of the
Scriptures: yet I think rather, that the first ought to be referred to him
that is converted: and the second to him that conuerteth in this wise: let him
know, that he that conuerteth a sinner from goeing a stray out of his way,
saves a soul from death, even that soul which he conuerteth: And hides a
multitude of sins, even the multitude of his own sins, which almighty God
hides, forgiueth and covers for the exceading love he shows to his
brethren in their conversation. Which shows the unspeakable reward which
shall be given them which seek to win other unto God. Which thing the holy
prophet Daniel long before had for Daniel. 12.
told: who speaking of the glorious crown of the ministers of God, and also
of all the faithful, which instructing the ignorante, bring them thereby to the
true knowledge of God: says, they that be wise shall shine at the brightness
of the firmament: and the that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the
stars for ever and ever: thus shall they be rewarded at the hand of God,
which conue^t sinners from going astray, and turn others to righteousness. God
for his Christ sake so prepare our hearts in holy fear, that we may be
instruments effectual through him, of the conversion of others: that so we may
win wandering souls to God, and bring the straying sheep of Christ into his
sheepefolde, that they thereby may by his grace be saved, and our sins in his
fight covered, in the only righteousness of Jesus Christ: unto whom, with his
father and the holy Ghost, our everlasting comforter, three persons in
trinity, one eternal God in unity, be rendered al power, praise, dominion and
Majesty for ever and ever Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing: the chiefest whereof are here noted, and may
be found out easily by this direction: looking to the leaf first, then to the
page, next to the section or division of the page, and lastly to the line of
that section or division.
Monarchs, for monarchies. fol. 6 page 2. sect. 2. line 12. groan, for
groyne. f. 15. p 1. s. 2. l. 2 Crotoniales, for Crotoniates. f. 15. p. 2. s. 2.
last line. wuering a, wavering. f. 20. p. 2. s. 1. l. 13 kind, kinds. f. 33. p.
1. s. 2. l. 14 churchme^, church me^. f. 39. p. 2. s. 2. l. 18, efficiencie,
efficient f. 53. p. 1. s. 3. l. 2. received, reserved. f. 57. p. 1. s. 2. l.
29. malistious, malicious. f. 61. p. 2. s. 1. l. 8 from the end. addistion,
addition. f. 64. p. 1 s. 2. l. 11 here, hear. f. 65. p. 1. l. 28. 2. from the
end of it. spared, saved. f. 67. p. 1. s. 3. l. 5 professorus, professors. f.
69. p. 2. s. 3 l. 5. her, heuier. f. 70. p. 2. s. 2. l. last. and, when. f. 70.
p. 2. s. 3. l. last. then, the. f. 72. p. 2. s 2. l. 2. from the end Melta,
Melita f. ^8. p. 2. s. 2. l. 12 I say, superfluous. f. 79. p. 1. s. 2. l. 6
bodies, body. f. 84. p. 1. s. 2. l. 8 removed, moved. f. 84. p. 1. s. 2. l. 11
shedheard, shepherd. f. 91. p. 2. now, out. f. 92. p. 1. s. 2 l. 18 degreles,
degrees. f. 98. p. 2. s. 1. l. 2 obseured, observed. ead. pa. l. 21 other,
either. f. 102. p. 2. s 2 l. 11 reforming, informing. f. 106. p. 1. s. 1. l. 8.
or, of. f. 107. p. 1. s. 2. l. 20 correction, concession. f. 121. p. 2. s. 3.
l. 3 say he, is wanting. f. 122 p. 1. s. 2. l. 1 discussed, distressed. f. 122.
last word, s. 2. voine, vain. f. 127. p. 1. s. 2. l. 5. from end running,
ran. f. 128. p. 2. last word which, why. f. 137. p. 1. s. 2. l. 2. sign,
life. f. 138. p. 1. s. 1. l. 4 fourth, fifth. f. 146. p. 1. s. 1. l. 17
bitterresse, bitterness. ead. last word, section 1. secure, severe. f. 149. p.
2. s. 2. l. 9 boidly, bodily. f. 157. p. 1. s. 3. l 5 them, him. f. 168. p. 2.
s. 1. l. 1 there, that. ead. l. 3 them, him. l. 3. there twice until, lacks
there. s. 2. l. 7 shine, strive. f. 170. p. 1. s. 1. l. 1 followed, follows. f.
190. p. 1. s. 3. l. veheminice, vehemency. f. 192. p. 1 s. 3. l. 2. resist
him, resist the devil. f. 20. s. 3. ^ your, you. f. 211. p. 1. s. 4 signs of
this outward, for of thy our. margin. f. 216. p. 2 partly in, for and other.
f. 217. p. 1. s. 3. l. live, lie. f. 218. p. 1. s. 3. l. last in, redoundeth.
f. 229. p. 1. s. 2. l. ^ imprudent, impudent. ead. l. 18 even, evil. f. 234. p
2 s. 3. l. 10 we, men. f. 235. p 2. middle. laud, loud. f. 242. p. 2. s. 1. l.
2 this, such. f. 248. p. 2. s. 1. l. 6 their, there. f 258. p. 1. s. 1. l. 5
violent, valiant. f. 275. p. 2. s. 4. l. 7 that, is lacking. f. 295. p. 1. s.
2. l. 8 divine diverse. f. 310. p. 2. s. 3. l. ^

