A THEOLOGICAL DISCOVRSE OF THE gracious and blessed Conjunction of Christ and
a sincere Christian.

By THO: TVKE Preacher of Gods word.

1. COR. 6. He that is joined unto Christ, is one spirit.

The blessed Virgin Mary brought forth Christ, the Catholic Church brings
forth all true Christians.

LONDON Printed by Edw: Griffin dwelling in the little Old Bailey near the
sign of the Kings head, 1617.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR FRANCIS BACON Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England.
Right Honorable,
THere is no sound reason, why any man should glory in himself being Alone,
and I think, no man, that is compos animi, does desire it, seeing no man can
be complete and happy, no not in this world, without a Fellow. It is no man's
unity in himself, but his Union and Communion witb others, that makes him
blessed. Woe therefore unto him, that is alone.

But amongst all our Unions one with another there is none to be compared with
our Conjunction with our blessed Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. For Princes,
Parents, Patrones, Husbands, Wives, Children, Kinsfolks, Friends, Neighbors,
and all others also, with whom we are conjoined, are but the spoil of Time,
and a prey for Death. Adam and all his Children are but Eatrh. Some of them
indeed stand above their Brethren like Mountains: yet these Mountains (as
well as Mole-hills) are but earth: and earth will to earth, though all the
world say nay. But our Lord Jesus Christ has mastered the grave in the grave,
and overcome death in death: he is alive and lives for ever. And whereas no
other Union, no not all the Unions in the world together, can assure the soul
of Gods fatherly grace, and give it a true Title to everlasting life; this can,
and does, in so much that he, which is joined to Christ, may say, and say
truly with Saint PAVL, I am dead to the Law, Gal. 2. 19.
I am crucified with Christ: but I live: yet not I any more, but Christ lives
in me. And in that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son
of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. A happy man indeed;
clothed with Christ, partaker of his merits, endued with his Spirit, and
transformed into him by his grace. This man cannot perish out of doubt, but
Christ, who died for him, and lives in him, must also perish with him. which
cannot be. There is good reason therefore to judge an unfeigned Christian the
Only blessed man indeed, and to make more account of this Conjunction then of
all earthly things, how glorious, how great, or how good soever.

A Discourse hereof I do here offer unto your Honorable Lordshippe: and it
comes cheerfully to you, as being bold upon your generous spirit and love to
learning; though in it self it be unworthy of so learned and judicious a
Person, and comes, it may be, also out of season; your Lordshippe being full of
great and weighty businesses. But yet I beseech you grace it with your kind
acceptance, and vouchsafe to pardon my boldness with your Lordshippe. Go on,
right noble Lord, go on. As you do enjoy your Fathers Honors, so continue, as
you have begun, to express his noble Virtues, that while you live, not only
your own Friends and Followers, but that many a poor Priest, that has waited
long at Altar, and done faithful service in the Church, a prentishippe, or
perhaps two or three, and could never come by Benefice, either for want of
friends, or through the cruel and cursed corruption of sacrilegious Patrones:
and not such only, but that all, which love learning, godliness, truth and
equity, may love you, and honor you, and bless God for you: and that when
you shall depart from hence, you may enjoy his Happiness in heaven, and leave
as honorable a Name behind you here on earth.

The great God of Heaven and Earth double his graces in you, and grant you
health and long life for the good of this Church and State, and the comfort of
all those, that love your Person, and honor your Virtues.

May 24, 1617. Your Lordships ever humbly THO: TVKE.

Of the Conjunction of CHRIST and a Christian.
Our Lord Jesus Christ is Romans 9. 5.
God, and 2 Timothy 2. 5.
Man, Symbol. Nicen. and Athan.
God of God, light of light, very God of very God, Man of the Math. 21. 9. and
22. 42. Luke 3. 23. 31.
seed of David, borne of a woman Gal. 4. 4.
at the fullness of time, a virgin-man of a Math. 1. 25.
virgin mother, the Math. 1. 21.
great Savior of the world, the Is. 9. 6
King, Heb. 4: 14.
Priest, and Math. 23. 8. 10.
Doctor of the Church, which is his Ephesians. 1. 23.
mystical body, and dearest Cant. 4. 9.
Spouse.

A true Christian is he, that belieues truly in Christ, and expresses his
confidence in him by constant obedience to his law, which is his light, and by
sincere love unto him; and unto his members.

He is unworthy the name of a Christian, that is not endued with the faith of
a Christian.

He does really deny Christ and his Lordship, Luke 19. 27.
that will not that Christ reign over him. He does deny him, that denies to
serve him. And he does not love him, that does not love his servants. He is
indeed a Christian (faith Saint Augustine) who shows mercy unto all, who
feels another man's sorrow, as his own, who denies no poor man his meat, who
is contented to be inglorious before men, that he may glory before God and his
Angels, who despises earthly things, that he may have heavenly, who succors
the miserable, and is moved to weep by the tears of others.

A true Christian is the true sheep of Christ: now the Shepherd best knows
his own sheep, and is best able to describe them, and show with what marks
they are branded, and are to be discerned.

Ye believe not ( says Christ) for ye are not of my sheep. John 10. 24. 26.
27.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and am known of mine, and they
follow me.

A true Christian is Christ's true Disciple; one, that hears his word gladly,
and conformes himself unto it carefully, delighting to hear the things that
are worthy to be done, and to do the things, that are worthy to be heard,
accounting it to learn well to live well, and to know well to believe well.
Now true Christian charity discouers the true disciple of Christ. By this
(says Christ) shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, John 13. 35.
if ye have love one to another. For sure he loves not the Master, that hates
the Scholar: neither deserves he the name of a scholar in the school of
Christ, that loves not the learning of Christ, wherewith all his scholars are
both known, and graced; and this is Charity, the poor man's riches, the rich
man's honor, and the great man's crown, without which rich men are worse then
beggars, learned men viler then idiots, and they, that think themselves
highest, are lower then the lowest, even nothing, just nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 2.
worse then nothing, for nothing can neither do hurt, nor take hurt.

So then, true Faith in Christ, true knowledge and acknowledgement of Christ,
true and right hearing and discerning of the voice of Christ, which is his
word, and true following of him, which consists in obedience, subjection and
conformity to him, and finally true Christian charity, are true marks and
characters, and infallible arguments, by which a man endued with them may
demonstrate and prove himself to be a sincere Christian, or true disciple and
sheep of Christ lesus, who is that good Ioh. 10. 11.
Shepherd, even the 1 Pet. 2. 25.
Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, the Heb. 13. 20.
great and 1 Pet. 5. 4.
chief Shepherd, who gave Ioh. 10. 11.
his life for his sheep, that they might not die, but have everlasting life
throughhim.

This true Christian, and Christ Jesus, God and Man, are united, and coupled
together by God so, as that they are now no more two, but one: yet not one
flesh, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
but one Spirit, or spiritual body.

Before a man be joined to Christ, that is, before a man's effectual vocation,
a man and Christ are at odds, are two, are divided, are enemies. Te were at
that time, says Saint Paul, Ephesians. 2. 12.
that is, in your days of ignorance and paganism, without Christ, and were
aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and were strangers from the covenants
of promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the world.

But after they be conjoined and knit together, after they have given
themselves each to other, and have taken and entertained each other, they are
now like man and wife no more to be reputed two, but one.

Neither is a man to think that he is a true Christian, and adorned with true
Christian faith and charity before he be united unto Christ. But then, when he
is first truly coupled unto Christ, even then, and not before, he is endued
with those Christian virtues, and is become indeed a Christian. For there must
be an union with Christ, before there be communion, or fellowship. We are
knit to Christ, before we draw any virtue from him. Before I say, not in time,
but in nature. So that faith, hope, charity, obedience, are not virtues had
before this union is made, but then, when it is made, and after wards. They go
not before the union, but they are given at the making of the union, and show
him, that is united. Then, when Christ is pleased to come unto a man, and to
unite himself actually to him, even then, and not before, he breathes into
him the breath of life, to wit, his holy Spirit, who creates in him faith and
love, and moves him to give himself unto Christ, and works in him a certain
spiritual hunger and thirst after him, and learnes him to feed upon him, as a
child on's Nurse, or as a hungry man on the meat, that is set before him. But
more of this hereafter.

This Conjunction is not imaginary, Ioh. 17. 22. 23. 26.
and deceitful, but real, and true. The glory, which thou gave me, says
Christ, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one: I in them,
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. And I have declared unto
them thy name, and will declare it, that the love, wherewith thou have loved
me, may be in them, Ioh. 14. 20.
and I in them. And again, At that day shall ye know, that I am in my Father,
and you in me, Verse. 23.
and I in you. And yet more, If any man love me, my Father will love him, and
we will come unto him, and will dwell with him.

There are some, that dream they eat and drink, yet indeed they neither eat
nor drink: but awaking they rise up hungry, and a thirst. Some have imagined
in their dreams, they have been married, and yet in truth, were not. These
marriages are but dreams and phansies: but the union of Christ and his members
is true, certain, and demonstrable. Indeed as some phrantique men have
thought many things theirs, which were not: so Hypocrites who are like the
flower Granadelle, which is very fair to the eye, but has no smell (as Joseph
Acosta writes) and other wicked and false hearted Christians (who are like the
wild Tunalls in the western Indies, Ios. Acost. hist. Ind. lib. 4. c. 23.
the which do carry no fruit, or else that, which is very pricking and
unprofitable) may through a certain frenzy of spirit imagine and persuade
themselves, that they are true Christians, wedded and united unto Christ, and
possessed of his grace, being in truth clean void of Christ, and wedded to
their own Idols, which they dote on, and embrace for Christ, as Ixion did the
cloud for Juno.

There is a true Union, or Conjunction of love, among true friends, as between
David, and Jonathan. For ( Amicus est alter ego) a man and his friend are both
as one; either one, or none. If divided, then no friends. But this is the union
of amity, the conjunction of consent. Such a like conjunction is understood,
where it is said, the multitude of them, that believed, Act. 4. 32.
were of one heart, and of one soul. And behold the communion issuing of this
union, behold the goodly fruit of this their godly conjunction by their
Christian charity, an effect indeed of their union with Christ himself;
Neither said any of them, that ought of the things, which he possessed, was his
own: but they had all things common.

For true love rauishes the lover, and transports him out of himself into his
love, and makes him to communicate and distribute himself and his unto his
beloved for his good: whence it is truly said, that among true friends and
lovers all things are in common.

Now sure it is that there is a league of love and friendship between Christ
and all true Christian people. Ioh. 15. 14. 15.
I have called you friends, says Christ, and ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you. And by reason of Christ's love to them, and of their
love to Christ (springing from him, as water from a fountain) Christ and they
are united and joined together in one, like loving friends, one of them
inamored with the other, he delighting in them, and they in him, he seeking
their glory, and they his. For as hatred parts those, that are united, so true
love unites them, that were divided, it conioyneth souls, and causes true
contentment and delight among those, 1 Cor. 13. 5.
that it has united, and makes them to seek one another, and not themselves,
or their own things only.

But yet this is not all the Conjunction, that is betwixt Christ and his
Church, and the true members of it. A friend cannot do that for his friend,
that Christ does for us, who gives us his very Spirit, Ioh. 14. 17.
the Spirit of truth, who dwells with us, and abides in us: who himself
also is in us, as an helper and vpholder: and from whose aid and presence no
distance of place, or fury of the enemy can disioyne us: and from whose very
sacred body also we suck that nurriture, which does not only refresh and
comfort us (as meat does a man's body) but as a true caelestiall and lise-giuing
cordial repaires and preserues the supernatural sap of the soul, the
radical humor of grace infused into our hearts in our conversion, that tho
there may be a separation made of soul and body, yet there shall be no
total separation of the soul from God.

Friends may dye, must die. They are but men, and men must die. Dust we are,
and to dust we must return. We and our friendships too must perish. We are
seen a while, and after a while we are seen no more, but fall like drops of
rain into the sea, and are known no more. And oftentimes friends fall flat
out, and end their friendshippes before they end themselves. But Christ and his
faithful friends do never part, the grave cannot part them, neither can any
such unkindness happen between them, but that they may and shall be
reconciled.

And whereas many men will shake of their friends and acquaintance, if they
grow poor and needy, the Lord Jesus, tho now at the right hand of the Father,
far above all Powers and Majesty's, does take great delight in all those,
whom he has united to him, how poor or mean soever, and is a Cherisher of
them in all their wants, yes is troubled with them in all their troubles,
afflicted in all their afflictions, and accounts himself the receiver, when
any of his poor friends are relieved, entertained, honored. But I pass on
further.

The Soul and body of a man are joined together to make a true and perfect man.
For neither the soul alone, nor the body alone, but the soul and body
together do make a perfect man: as neither the King alone by himself, nor the
people alone by themselves, do make the Kingdom, but the King and the people
jointly together. But the conjunction of Christ and of Christians is not of the
same kind.

For the union of soul and body is natural: but our union with Christ is
supernatural.

The soul is not given a man in the very act or instant of generation: but
afterward, when there is some organ or organs fitted for it: but Christ is
given a man in the very act and article of regeneration.

The soul is created by God in the body, and to every particular body there is
a particular soul. For though all men's souls are one in kind, yet they are
not one in number, but have their numericall and particular differences. But
there are not so many Christ's, as men. There is but one Christ in all
belieuers. And although Christ may truly in the Apostles sense be said to be
formed in us, Gal. 4. 19.
which is when we are reformed, and made conformable to him, yet we must beware
we do not think him to be formed in us as the soul is, which is formed wholly
at once, and not by degrees, and is so formed in us, as that it is not out of
us, nor in any other body, and did not subsist out of us before it was created
in us.

The soul now framed, and being by nature immortal is united to a frail and
corruptible body, and enters upon it with condition to depart again and leave
it, when God shall please: but Christ comes not into us upon the same terms,
but taries with us, and abides in us for ever. He takes the soul into an
heavenly mansion, where it forsakes her earthly Tabernacle, and forgets not our
dust, our less then dust, which we leave behind us, but sees it always, is
mindful of it, and can distinguish it from the dust of beasts, of Reprobates,
and will again one day blow upon it, and make it live again.

And whereas the soul and body being knit together make one and the self same
person, so that the soul is not one person, and the body another person. For
in a man there is ( aliud and aliud, but not alius and alius) diversity of
natures, but no distinction or division of person. Our Lord Christ Jesus is a
distinct, complete, and absolute person, subsisting by himself: and there are
as many distinct and particular persons of Christians, as there are Christians,
every man being a distinct and perfect person by himself, as Christ is by
himself. Indeed he and they altogether make but one entire mystical body,
and whereas every man susteines himself, I confess that Christ does vp-beare
us all with his grace and power, as a goodly Oak or Cedar does her branches,
or as a foundation and pillars do the building of stones, and timber, and other
materials, that are laid upon them.

Christ (as the Apostles, Romans 9. 5. 1 John 5. 20.
S. Paul, and S. John do teach us) is very God, God over all, blessed for
ever. Now to Christ, as God, the great Creator and Vpholder of all things, Joh.
1. 3. Heb. 1. 3.
by whom all things were made, who vpholdeth all things with the word of his
power, All things created are united ( union depe^dantia) with the union of
dependence, without the which nothing that is created, can last a moment. But
as the light depends upon the Sun, and is after a sort joined to it, so that
if any thing should come between the light and the Sun, which is the
fountain of light, the light would instantly vanish, and there would be
nothing but very darkness: and as in this Microcosme of man the liver is the
source of blood, and the spring, by which it is disfused by veins throughout
the body: and the heart is the fountain of the vital spirits, which are
thence by arteries carried into the body, as need requires: or as the head is
the original of the nerves or sinews, by the which motion is caused, so that
if any thing should come between the liver and the veins, the heart and the
arteries, the head and the sinews, that they should be parted, of necessity
blood, spirits, motion, and life it self must presently decay and fail: even
so all creatures in the world depend on Christ, as God, and are so united to
him, that they cannot be without him: so that if any thing could come betwixt
him and them, which might hinder their dependence on him, and coherence with
him, they could not but vanish as light, and be brought to nothing. The very
dust of dead men would not be dust, but would presently perish, were it not
vpheld by the power of his word. But the godly are united to Christ more
blessedly then thus only. For even beasts, yea and the Devils themselves, and
all damned souls are thus coupled with him and depend upon him. Without this
kind of union they were not able to subsist the twinkling of an eye, but must
needs perish, vanish, and come to nothing.

This therefore is not the union we treat of, which makes a man, that is, to
be well: it presupposes being, but causes blessedness: it finds nature, but
gives grace: it meets with a man, but it makes a Saint: it finds him on earth,
but brings him to heaven: it finds him poor, naked, wounded, sick and
succourlesse, but it gives him riches, garments, soundness, health and
comfort, which shall not be taken away from him, whether he will, or no, as
his body, goods, good name, life, liberty and such transitory and glassie
things, over which fire, water, earth, air, beasts, men, and Devils have a
tyrannizing power, when God permits.

But besides this union of universal Dependence there is also another kind of
Conjunction, whereby not only all Christians, but all other men also, yea and
all the creatures in the world are united or joined unto Christ, as God.

For the Deity by reason of the immensitie and subtilty thereof is most fully,
and most inwardly, totally present in, and to, and throughout all creatures
corporal and spiritual, comprehending all things, but comprehended of
nothing, piercing all things, but pierced of nothing; and is far more
thoroughly present, and more fully, then either light, or heat, is in the
air, or then the soul is in the body. So that if that should be, which yet
cannot be, that is to say, if the creature did not depend on Christ, yet by
reason of the all-piercing subtilnesse, and vnmeasureablenesse of his Godhead,
he should penetrate and fill all things (it self being filled of nothing) and
be most inwardly and thoroughly present unto them, and so be in some sort
conjoined with them. But this Conjunction is common: that of true dealing
Christians and Christ Jesus is special, and proper to them.

This Conjunction is of the Creature to Christ, as God: but the other is of man
to Christ, God-Man, or Man-God, and Mediator betwixt God and man.

Here Christ is present by a most inward, and thorough penetration, his very
Deity enclosing, touching and piercing all things. But there he is present by
the presence of supernatural grace, yea and his very flesh is not away, or
wanting, but present, as I will declare hereafter.

The Conjunction, which is by penetration and omni-presence, makes no man
happy, as the other does: with the which whosoever is united unto Christ, he is
certainly in the state of grace, and lives in sure hope of the state of glory.

And whereas the union of Christ and a Christian is indeed a true and certain
union, and may properly be so called; this Conjunction by penetration and
presence does not properly contain any union, but only vbiquity, indistancy,
and an insensible, but thorough, repletion of all things.

There are not two Christ's, but one: and this one Christ has two distinct
natures in him; one Divine, the other Humane: and both these names are united
together in one and the same person by a personal union.

But we are not so united to Christ, as our nature is to the nature of God in
Christ. (I call Christ's humane nature ours, because it is indeed ours, not in
number the same with any man's, but in kind the same with all men's, endued with
a true humane soul and body, not being created a new of nothing, Gal. 4. Heb.
2. 16. Luke 3.
or from another piece of clay, but made of a woman, who came from the loins
of Adam.)

For by the virtue of this union, which is Hypostaticall, God is man, and man
is God. But if Christians were united personally to Christ, then the very name
of Christ and God should be given to them, which were absurd to think. And
which were very gross and horrible, then also God might be as truly and as
orthodoxally said to sin, when a Christian man sinned, as it is said that God
died, was crucified, and rose again, because the man, who is true God, in one
person, our Lord Jesus Christ was crucified, died, rose again.

Though it be true that Jesus, the Son of the blessed Virgin Mary, be the
true and eternal Son of the eternal and true God, yet it were false and
impious to say that the Church is the eternal and true natural Daughter of
God, or that every true belieuer were Gods natural Son, or God, which yet were
so, if we were personally united to the Godhead.

There are many Mary's mothers: but only the Virgin Mary was the mother of God.
I doubt not but that Christ is formed, and is in forming in many a Ladies
heart: but yet he was only formed in that Ladies womb, as a child. Her
child only is the natural Son of God, he only is the Word, the
substantial, the consubstantiall and coeternall Word. But if we were
personally united to the Word, or to the God head, or to both Godhead and
Manhead in the Word, then might we be called the Word of God, and God, yea and
the Virgin Mary might be said to be our mother as well, as the mother of God,
yes and we could not but be full of merits, power, and virtue, even as Christ.
But what pious ear can endure to hear such blasphemies? Moreover, though it
be most true, John 14. 20.
which our Savior says, I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you: yet
we must not think that we are hypostatically united unto Christ, nor that we
are so in Christ, as Christ is in his Father. This speech therefore of Christ
must be taken with a grain of falt. For Christ is in his father, as being of
one and the selfsame substance and nature with his Father, Heb. 1. 3.
being indeed the brightness of his glory, and the very character of his
Person, and his true natural Son and substantial image: but he is in us, as
an helper, ayder, and susteiner, by whom we have our spiritual being, life,
breath, sense, and motion, and who bears us up and feeds us, as the root does
the body and branches of a tree.

Furthermore, there is a certain union of the workman and his tool, of the
hand and the instrument in it. And thus by way of similitude Christ and all
faithful Christians, who are instruments of his praises, and whom he holds
in the right hand of his power and protection, bearing them as an Eagle does
her young ones, may be said to be conjoined. And as in an instrument of music
tho one wind give a general sound, yet by the diversity and disequality of
the pipes and organes, all which the wind fills, the tones are varied: so
though one Christ be in all true Christians, and one spirit be inspired as a
celestial and living wind into them all, yet they differ in their tunes,
actions, motions, and iubilations, according to their own personal and
particular capacities, and as the Spirit, who works, not as a natural, but as
a voluntary agent* does impart and diffuse his grace.

But whereas a sword, lute, trumpet, and other instruments of Art, are void of
life, Christians are living and breathing Organs, intellectual, spiritual and
voluntary instruments for Christ to work with, and are liker a man's hand, or
other liue-member of his body, then a sword of steel, or other senseless and
dead instrument, void of reason, sense, life and will, able to do no more,
then it is made to do by plain force.

And whereas the workman does not, nor cannot always make or mend his tool,
Christ does always both make and mend his tools. For we are his
workmanship, He has made us, and not we our selves. He that makes himself,
is always marred in the making. And he, that teaches himself, has a fool
for his master.

And whereas a workman and his tools may part: how good or dear so ever unto
him, he may yet be deprived of them, and separated from them flat and full
against his will, or may loose some one of them, or spoil it through
negligence or forgetfulness, or may throw them by, as being wearied with the use
or bearing of them; no such mischance and accident can come to Christ against
his will: he cannot loose us against his will, neither is he weary of us, or
careless of our good. Those, which are his, he loves, cherishes, delights in,
preserues, and keeps fast and safe for ever. But this is not all.

There is also a certain Conjunction between brothers and sisters, and such,
as are Coheires, or Partners in some office: but this is either natural, or
else legal, and political or civil. But our Conjunction with Christ is not
natural or civil, nor of humane institution, but ghostly, heavenly,
invisible, and above nature, either as it was created, or as it is corrupted.
And

Though we be the Heirs of God, Gal. 4. 7.
and heirs annexed with Christ, Romans 8. 17.
and be called his Brethren, and therefore must needs be coupled together,
Heb. 2. 11. 12.
and have fellowship with him, yet we must not imagine our union or communion
to be the same, that natural brothers in blood have, or which are partners of
the same office, Gal. 4. 7.
or inheritance. For he is a natural Heir, we are adopted by grace. Indeed as
he is man, he is heir by the grace of hypostaticall union. And that we are
heirs we are beholding unto him. For we are Heirs in him, and by him, and
not without him, nor by our own personal merits.

Yea whatsoever we either are, or have, which is spiritual, celestial,
supernatural, and Christian, or hereafter shall have, we are, and have it all,
and wholly, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Ephesians. 1. 5.
Adoption, 1 Pet. 1. 10.
vocation, Romans 4. 26.
justification, Ephesians. 2. 10.
sanctification, Romans 5. 1.
peace, 1 Pet. 1. 13.
hope, 1 Cor. 15. 87.
victory over death, and the purchase Romans 6. 23. and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9.
of eternal life, are all of them by the merits and grace of Christ, as the
holy Scriptures show us.

And albeit we have an office and high calling (for Christ has made us Kings
and Priests unto God his Father) yet are we no such Kings and Priests, as he
is: but as we have received our honor from him, so we should return it to
him, and glorify him with it, and not be like those captious spirits, who,
because they hear they be Kings and Priests, heirs of GOD, and heirs
annexed with Christ, their Brother, think it a disparagement forsooth of their
honor (as some of them scribble, and other of them babble) and weakening in
show of their fellowship with him, if they shall receive the blessed Sacrament
upon their knees bended to him; either (as it seems) forgetting, or not
knowing that they are the Heirs of God through Christ, Gal: 4: 7.
by whose only merits they do receive all their honors and happiness, their
life and luster, their grace and goodness.

Brothers and sisters may die, shall die: heirs may fall out and undo one
another, or others may spoil their inheritance: and where many are heirs,
their portions are the less: some of them may lack and complain of need.
But Christ and his brethren, cannot be parted, their portions cannot be
destroyed, nor taken from them their inheritance cannot fail, nor discontent
them: but every one of them shall have enough, and shall enjoy it for ever.

But there is yet a nearer conjunction, then this of Brothers or Partners,
which is the holy, honorable, and inviolable conjunction of man and wife.

By this matrimonial conjunction, they that were two before, are now become
One. Matthew: 19: 6.
They are no longer twain, but one flesh, says our Master:

And they are tuely one, and not two, because GOD the Author of man and
marriage has said it.

For this cause shall a man leave his father and his mother, Genes: 2: 24.
Matthew: 19: 5.
and shall cleave unto his wife: and they two shall be one flesh. So that
though all men should say that they are not one, but two, yea though they
themselves should say so too, yet they are not therefore two, because man says
so: but one, because God has said it.

For, Non nostrum dicere dat veritatem rebus, sed conforinit as eius cum mente
diuina, things are not so and so, because men say they are so: but because they
are so with God, in Gods ordinance and appointment.

Though all men should say gold were not gold, yet it is gold. And though
all the Goldsmiths in the world should say copper is gold, yet it is not gold
for all their saying, but copper still, because it agrees not with the divine
mind, God has not said it is gold, it is not gold in his decree and
judgment, and therefore it is not gold.

Well then, man and wife are but one, and not two. Yes, they are two distinct
persons, and not one. They have two souls, and not one: two bodies, and not
one: two distinct wills and not only one. They are of two different sexes, and
have their own personal virtues and infirmities, He his, and She hers.

Yet nevertheless these two are made one matrimonial creature, the man being
as head, and the woman as the body; or if you will, he being as the Soul, 1
Cor: 11: 3.
and she the Body. For as Christ is the head of the man, so man is the head of
the woman. And this is in respect of authority and dominion, in which regard
Christ is not the wives head, but the husbands, neither is she the image of
Christ, but he only.

As Christ is the head of the Church, Ephesians: 5: 23.
so the husband is the head of his wife.

And as the soul and body, though things greatly differing in themselves, are
yet coupled together by God, and do live and work together: and as two
distinct No similitude runs on all four.
rivers meeting together, do now mingle and blend themselves, and become as
one common water or river: so man and wife are (indeed not confounded, but)
united together, live together under one roof, draw together in one yoke, take
care mutually of one another, and become by Gods ordinance one foundation and
fountain of generation.

So that here is more then a conjunction of affections, as uses to be among
friends, as was betwixt Damon and Pythias: there is also a conjunction of
bodies, for the propagation and perpetuation of mankind, and that there might
also be a way made for the fulfilling of the number of Christ's mystical
members, Gods adopted sons and daughters.

For generation must go before regeneration, and nature before grace. Yes
sanctification must follow sin. For Christ came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance: neither did he die for the just, but for the
unjust. There must first be a man, and then a Christian: first a sinner, and
then a Saint: filius soli, before there be filius poli: one of Adams planting,
before there be one of Christ's transplanting: one of Eues breeding, before
there be one of the Churches bearing.

Now without doubt our Lord God and Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, has
contracted and united himself unto his people, Eos: 2: 19: 20.
and is their head and loving husband. And therefore the Apostle tells the
Corinths that he prepared them for one husband, 2 Cor: 11: 2.
to present them as a pure virgin unto Christ. Wherefore also Saint Austen is
bold to say that ( Omnis anima aut Christ's sponsa, aut diaboli adultera est,
Every soul of man is either the spouse of Christ, or Devils adultresse.

And as in simple contract or marriage, there is a mutual and reciprocal
giving and taking made between man and wife of each other: so in this holy,
happy, and spiritual contract and conjunction betwixt Christ and all true
believers, there is a mutual giving and taking of each other.

God gives his son to us, the son also gives himself freely to us: and God
gives us also unto his son, as he did Eve to Adam, and we also by his grace
preventing, assisting and co-working with us, do give our selves willingly
unto his son; Phil: 2: 13. Ioh: 3: 16.
Willingly (I say) God having given us the will, who willingly, and of his own
accord sent us his Son.

And if the promise made by a woman to her husband in the day of her Marriage
or Espousals be worthily called, The Covenant of her God, Prou: 2: 17.
as it is indeed so called by the Holy Ghost, well then and worthily may our
vow and promise made unto Christ in our Baptism, by which we are engrafted
into him and coupled with him, be called the Covenant of our God, being made
not only according to Gods appointment, and in his name and presence, but unto
him also, who himself is God, even our God, who has upon his thigh and upon
his garment a name written, Reu: 19: 16.
The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

And therefore also as the wife is called by the name of her husband, and no
longer of her father: for to this new estate belongs a new name: so when a man
has separated his soul from the world, and has put himself into the power
of Christ, and has joined himself unto him, as a woman unto her husband, a
new title belongs unto him, the name of Christ is now called upon him, and he
is now no more to follow the world, nor the carnal affections and commands of
old Adam: but as a wife must forsake father and mother, and all, and cleave
unto her husband ( For thy desire (says God) shall be subject to thy husband,
Psalm: 45: 10. Gen: 3: 16.
and he shall rule over thee) so a man, that is wedded and united unto Christ,
must deny himself, his own reason, Psalm: 45: 10: 11 Matthew: 16: 24.
and will, and worth, and forsake the world, even whatsoever is opposite to the
will of Christ. He should fashion himself unto his pleasure, and cleave unto
him, continuing constant, as Penelope, and should so chastely bear himself,
and so discreetly, that no other name might be justly cast upon him, but that
he might be called only by the name of Christ, whose he is, and to whom
alone he espoused himself.

For no greater shame can befall a wife, then to be called in contempt and
disgrace by another man's name, and not her husbands, which comes to pass, when
she forsakes the Guide of her youth, and forgets and violateth the covenant
of her God.

Such goodly huswiues were Messelina, the wife of Emperor Claudius, and Marie
of Arragon, wife to Otho the third: but we need not go so far to seek
such weeds; they thrive too well in every Climate. But let us return.

Albeit a woman be allowed to change her fathers name, when she is married,
and to cleave unto her husbands, yet she may in no case change her Christian
name: that she must hold fast unto death. Neither indeed see we any woman
change or forsake her name in Baptism (unless such, as turn Turks and
Apostataes) thereby being instructed to be faithful unto Christ her heavenly
husband, and to wear his name as a garland of honor unto death. For she is
not married unto Christ, as she is to her Christian Husband, till death her
do part. For death has no power over Christ our Lord, as it has over us his
servants, who are but bubbles and breathes of air.

And therefore though he should change as many husbands, as She This woman
lived at Rome in the time of Damasus and Ierom, and was at last married to a
man, that had had twenty wives before: and living to bury her, the people
honored him with a crown of Laurel.
did, who had (as Saint Hierome writes) three and twenty, and so likewise be
called by as many names, yet she must ever remember to keep fast the Name and
Faith of Christ, and beware she make no change of him for Idols, like Glaucus,
that changed golden armor with Diomedes for brazen, that so Christ may delight
in her, and in her virtue, which (as Saint Chrysostom faith) is the true
beauty of the Soul. For he is her Lord God, and most loving husband, in
opposition to whom she must call no man husband, nor acknowledge any man, nor
any thing else in the whole world.

By reason of this sweet contract and union of Christ and his Church, there
pass from them many loving kindnesses and embraces, expressed by either to
other really, as is evident by those patheticall passages of love, that are set
down in the Book of the Canticles (the Churches Love song) wherein their love
to each other is most lively described.

But yet the Conjunction of man and wife in holy matrimony, comes far short of
the conjunction of Christ and his Church, and does not sufficiently express
and unfold it to us. For by wedlock the man and his wife are made one flesh:
two (faith the Scripture) shall be one flesh. Matthew. 19. 5.
But he that is joined to the Lord, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
is one spirit, as the Apostle teaches. Now all flesh is grass ((...)) and
all the glory of man and woman, 1 Pet. 1. 24
as flesh and blood, is as the flower of the grass, which fades and falls away,
before the grass itself does die. The strongest men are but sturdie grass,
the goodliest women are but goodly grass, dust and ashes, worms and worms
meat.

Death separateth the most loving and faithful couples, that either are, or
ever were united and wed together, as Abraham and Sarah, Jacob and Racheb,
Ulysses and Penelope, Seneca and Paulina, Mausolus and Artimisia, Pompey and
lulia. But death cannot separate Christ Jesus and his Church. Romans 8. 35. 39.
Who shall sever us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written,
for thy sake are we killed all day long. We are counted as sheep for the
slaughter. Nevertheless in all these things we are more then Conquerours
through him, that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor Principallities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to sever us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

We say of many men, that they marry they Executours: but so do not Christ
who has vanquished death in his own den, and lives for ever.

Yes, many men have married their owue Executioners, as did Domitian the
Emperor, Albonius King of Lumbardie, Sergus a King of Scotland, Arden of
Feuersham, and many others. But the Church of Christ, and Christ her head, are
free from either doing or suffering such barbarous cruelty betwixt themselves.

The Devil and the World may prevail against some married couples, and
sometimes do, to the destruction of their souls no doubt: Matthew. 16. 18.
but hell-gates shall not overcome the Church: 1 Ioh. 5. 4.and Joh. 16. 33.
the World cannot prevail against faithful Christians. My sheep, hear my
voice (says Christ) and I know them, Ioh. 10. 27. 28.
and I give unto them everlasting life: and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my hands. If Christ himself cannot be damned,
Romans 4. 2 5.
then not they, that are joined to him, who died for them, and rose again for
their justification. And therefore we may boldly say, There is no condemnation
to them, that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1.
who walk not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.

Every godly Christian is endued, is invested, is clad with Christ, and wears
him as a wedding garment. Gal. 4. 271
For so many of you (says St. Paul) as are baptized into Christ (that is, as
are regenerated and borne a new of water and the Holy Ghost, by whom we are *
1 Cor. 12. 13.
baptized and incorporated into the body of Christ) have put on Christ, as a
rich, precious and glorious garment, whereby their naked filthiness, and
filthy nakedness is covered, and are themselves accepted of God as beautiful
and gracious, in the beauty and grace of Jesus Christ, in which they stand and
appear most sweet and amiable. Now if such a man can be damned, being lapped
and wrapped up in Christ, who couers him from top to toe, them must Christ
needs be damned with him (which cannot be) as a man that is flung in the
fire with his clothes on, is burnt together with them.

Many men in marrying make very dangerous adventures. They venture their name,
their peace, their goods, their soundness, yea and sometimes their souls too;
for which respect God forbad his people to marry with the Heathen, for fear
they should turn them from God to Idols. And this is the case of many women
also, who by their marriages do buy themselves repentance and sorrow, that
whereas it is said of Iepthaes daughter, Judge. 11. 38.
that she went out to bewail the days of her virginity, they may go out and
bewail the days of their marriage, and that not for two months only, but
perchance as long as they live. It is good for them therefore to look before
they leap, and to sound before they sail. But men by joining themselves to
Christ venture nothing, lose nothing: or if they do lose, they gain by their
losses, and are enriched by their calamity. Matthew. 19. 29.
Whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother,
or wife, or children, or lands, for my name sake (says Christ) he shall
receive an hundred fold more, and shall inherit everlasting life.

Many sore unkindness, heart-burnings and quarrels do now and then fall out
betwixt many men and their wives, that sometimes they even loath one another,
and forsake one another. But Christ never forsakes his Spouse, nor she him.
Heb. 13. 6.
He is with her, to save, protect, Matthew. 28. 20.
assist and guide her to day, and for ever. He loves all those which are his,
Ioh. 13. 1.
unto the end he loves them. His covenant with them is everlasting. Ier. 32
39. 41.
He will never turn away from them to do them good: but he will delight in
them to do them good, and will put his fear into their hearts, that they shall
not depart from him. He will give them one heart and one way, that they may
fear him for ever. And if at any time they shall fall, he will lift them up
again, as he did David and Peter: and though he do sometimes chastize them,
yet he will not remove his loving kinduesse from them.

Men and their wives are sometimes clouen-hearted hypocrites unto God, and
hollow-hearted one toward another, inconstant, uneven, and like the beast
called Onocentaurus, whose upper part resembles a man, and the nether an ass.
1 Pet. 2. 22. Cant. 6. 8. 9. and 7. 10.
But Christ and his Spouse are true-hearted, and holy. All the essential and
true members of the true Church, Ephesians 5. 26. 27. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Revel. 1. 5.
are true Saints, justified and sanctified.

Every person married is not a member of the Church, has not the Church for a
mother: but every one, whether wedded or single, that is truly joined unto
Christ, may justly call the true Church, Mother, and the true God, Father.

Every man and his wife are indeed partakers of the nature of man: but every
true Christian, who is borne of God, and is the Son of God, and is espoused
and united unto Christ, is partaker of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
which many a man, and his wife too, are void of, being not the children of
God, but the sons of Belial: not the members of Christ, but the very limbs
of the Devil.

But yet the Churches true children, true Christian belieuers, are not so, in
that manner and measure, partakers of the divine nature with Christ, as women
are partakers of the humane nature with men, as I have sufficiently before
declared. And besides, the differences of a man and a woman (if we regard
nature) are not specificall, and substantial, but numericall and accidental.
Homo, (...), Man, is a name as common to women, as to men; But Deus, God, is a
name proper to Christ, who is essentially God, and in whom the Divinity
dwells personally; and does not commonly belong to all Christians, who are
partakers of the divine nature, as concerning consolation, assistance, and
holy, happy, and saving operations: and are indeed endued with a new nature,
which may be called divine, because it is from Gods special grace, and is for
his honor and glory, is according to his will, and is opposite to that vicious
and sinful work of the Devil, which has corrupted the nature of man,
deforming the image of God, according to which he was created. For sure it is,
if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, a divine creature, the work of
Heaven. The devil (who reigns in more, then in unmarried people) is expulsed
out of him, the spirit of God is inspired into him, and a new spirit, another
heart, a better heart is given him: which spirit a woman has not, because this
or that man has married her, but because she is joined unto Christ, who has
given himself unto her.

There are some men, that never truly loved their wives, but their wives
wealth, not Them, but Theirs. For their riches they took them, and when once
they became Masters of them, they cared no longer for them. And such usually
prove those young sprigges, that are grafted into old stocks. Unhappy women,
who love, but are not loved again! But they more unhappy, who in their elder
days, when their wombes are dead do give the reins to lust, dreaming and
doting after youths, when they should rather be preparing and trimming
themselves for Christ, their thoughts being ascended higher then the Temples of
Venus, Flora, Cupid, mounting up into the highest heavens, where are perfect
pleasures, pure delights, immortal joys, and everlasting contentment. But
Christ loves his Church truly, expressing his love to her, Ephesians. 5. 25.
by laying down his life for her. He was so desirous to cleanse her, that he
spared not his own blood, his best blood, Revel. 1. 5.
his heart blood, but washed her in it. Here was love indeed. He did not love
her, because she was fair, or rich: for she was of her self (till he came and
prevented her with his grace, and made love to her) poor, naked, polluted,
Izek. 16.
wretched, and inglorious: but by his love he has made her lovely and loving:
by his ornaments he has made her shining: by his purity he has made her
clean: by his beauty he has made her gracious: and with his blessedness
she is made an happy woman.

She was once as black as pitch: but she is now as white as the driven snow.
Psalm. 45. 13.
The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of broydred gold.
She is so fair and lovely in his eye, as that his love will suffer him to spy
no blemish in her, Numb. 23. 21.
as it is written, He sees no iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in
Israel. For indeed he has covered all her sins, and washed her from all her
foulenes, Ephesians. 5. 27.
ridding her of all her wrinckles, freckles and deformities, by the merit and
virtue of his own blood. Behold his own speeches of her praises, which he
speaks unto her, and mockes her not. Cant. 4. 6.
Thou art all fair my Love, and there is no spot in thee. Cant. 6. 9.
Who is she, that looks forth in the morning, fair as the Moon, Cant. 7.
1. 6.
and pure as the Sun? How beautiful are thy goings with shoes thou Princes
daughter! How fair are thou, and how pleasant art thou, O my love, in
pleasures!

Yea to express his full contentment in her, he speaks somewhere to her,
like a man rapt out of himself, and overcome of love. My Sister, my Spouse,
Cant. 4. 9.
thou have wounded mine heart: thou have wounded mine heart with one of thine
eyes, and with a chain of thy neck. My Sister, my Spouse, how fair is thy
love! How much better is thy love, then wine, and the savor of thine
ointments, then all spices? Thy lips, my Spouse, drop as hony-combes: honey and
milk are under thy tongue, and the savor of thy garments is as the savor of
Lebanon.

It is certain that the power of ruling appertains unto the Husband: but yet
sometimes he wants wit to rule himself: and some wives are now and then sick
of the unruly evil, being very thwart, and foolish.

But Christ being the Wisdom of God, and the very fountain of goodness and
commiserations, performs the office of a wise and tenderhearted Husband
always to his Church, his Spouse, which is not morose, scornful and unruly,
but humble, gentle, and obedient. And therefore the Apostle exhorting women to
be submissiue to their Husbands, propoundes unto them the example of the Spouse
of Christ. Ephesians. 5. 24.
Therefore (says he) as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives
be to their own husbands every thing. And when he would persuade the men to
love their wives, Ephesians. 5. 25. 29.
and to use them tenderly, he prouokes them to it by the practice of Christ,
who loves the Church, and nourishes and cherishes it, as a man his own flesh.

It is allowed to one man to have one wife at once, and no more then one. For
God gave Adam but one. Though he had abundance of spirit, Mal. 2. 15.
yet he made but one, but one woman of one ribbe, for the help, comfort, and
contentment of one man. Therefore he says by his Prophet, keep your selves in
your spirit, Mal. 2. 15.
that is, bridle your affections, and keep your selves within your compass,
and let none trespass against the wife of his youth. Our Lord likewise has
but one wife or Spouse, our Head has but one Body. For though every godly man
be united unto Christ, and be a member of his body, yet all the godly in the
world, that either have been, are, or shall be, being all jointly considered
together, do make that one and only Spouse or wife of Christ, who shall
reign at his right hand with him in all honor and glory for ever and ever.
This is she, that is his, and his only, and no others with him. This is his
Dove, his Love, his loving Hind, and pleasant Roe. Her eyes do hold him, her
breasts do satisfy him, her love contents him, in her, and in her love he
delights continually.

Yet truly may every true Belieuer say, Christ is my Head, Christ is my
Husband: for he is united to him. But yet is Christ husband and head to one so,
as he is Head and Husband to the rest: as Jacob was a father equally to all his
sons: as a man's head is the head of all his members, the feet as well, as the
hands: or as a King is head and husband civil unto all his Subjects
indifferently, without respect of persons.

But Christ does much more to the Church, then the Husband can unto his Wife. A
man may, as our Seruicebooke speaks, worship his wife with his body, that is,
he may honor her with his body, which he does in that he does appropriate
it to her, making her the Mistress of it: for as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 7.
4.
the Husband has not the power of his own body, but the wife. But no man is
able to give his wife his spirit or soul. Though a man and his wife may live
so lovingly and peaceably together, specially a time, as that a body would
almost think and say there were but one soul in both their bodies: yet in
truth each of them have their own private spirits; the man's soul is not in
the woman, nor the woman's in the man. His animates and possesses him, and hers
animates and possesses her, one of them truly differing from the other, not in
kind, but in number, not in substance, but in accidents.

But our Lord Jesus Christ has bestowed his Spirit on his Church. She lives
not by her own life, but by his life. She is not ruled by her own spirit, but
by his Spirit. Yes, every man united to Christ has the Spirit of Christ. The
very soul of man is not more common to all his members, then the holy Ghost is
to all the godly.

And whereas some men's wives have been (and I would none were now) possessed
with an evil Spirit, being very torments and trouble houses: the Spouse of
Christ is possessed with the good Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 6.
which is the Spirit of peace, gentleness and love, who susteines, comforts,
instructs, Gal. 5. 1
and leads her, and dwells with all those, Ioh. 2. 27.
that can truly call her Mother. Joh. 14. 23.


There is a certain transcendent and strong coherence betwixt Christ and his
Church. He cleaves to her, as an husband to his wife; and she to him, as a
wife to her husband: but yet so, as that one of them cannot be broken from the
other, one of them cannot be absent from the other, no distance of place, nor
crossenesse of wind and weather, nor any perturbations of mind, being able to
divide or devil them, as they may do a man and his wife.

An husband may be in Italy, and his wife in England: and when he is there,
he is not with her here. And while she is here, she is not with him there:
but one of them (both being definite and circumscriptible) is absent from the
other. But ( Christus est totus in toto corpore Ecclesiae, and totus in
qualibet eius part) Christ is whole with the whole Church, and whole with
every part of the Church, as touching his person, which can no way divide it
self, or be possessed by degrees or portions.

Christ is no where, never, absent from any godly Christian: but is present
with him in all places, with his light he sees, with his grace he is adorned,
with his Spirit he is revived and comforted, which Spirit resideth in him
always, and works in him really, though not always sensibly. He works in
him, I say, yet not as an instrument, but as an artizan: not as a servant, but
as a master: nor as the Sun or Moon, which are natural Agents, but as a
voluntary Motor or workman, according to his will, in which he is one with
Christ, who sends him.

There is many a true soul, which puts her trust in her husband, and relies
upon his honesty and faith, but being absent from him is deceived, injured,
mis-vsed, by reason of his unfaithful and insatiate spirit, and sometimes is
left in scorn, and turned of at six and seauens. But Christ is fast and
faithful, constant and true, plays not fast and loose, as incontinent and
goatish Carnalists: and being still present with his Church is a wall of fire
round about her, a shadow against the heat, a fountain against her thirst, an
antidote against poison, friend in trouble, a treasure of all good things
against want, an impenetrable Buckler to all those, that put their confidence
in him. He, 1 Pet. 2. 6.
that belieueth in him, shall not be ashamed. Whereas many a poor woman is
ashamed of her husband, and confounded in her self, being even at her wits
end, not knowing which way to turn her self.

We have a Byword, Out of sight and out of mind. And indeed it falls out
often twixt man and wife, that absence and distance make them forget each
other, or not so mindful, as they should be. But the Church is never out of
Christ's sight, never out of his hand, never out of his heart. Can a woman (trow
ye) forget her child? can she forget or not have compassion on the son of
her womb? but say she should, Is. 49. 15. 16.
yet will not Christ for get his Church. Why? she is set as a seal on his
heart, as a signet upon his arm. Behold, says he, I have grauenthee upon the
palm of mine hands: thy walls are ever in my sight.

Men must needs rest themselves and sleep ( Quod caret alterna requie,
durabile non est) and so shut their wives out of their eyes, tho not out of
their breasts: and in sleep much cruelty (as Stories declare) have been
showed sometimes against both them and their wives. But the Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Keeper of Israel, and husband of his people needs no such
refreshment. He that keeps thee, Psalm. 121. 3.
that is, the Church, will not slumber. Behold, he, that keeps Israel,
shall neither slumber, nor sleep.

Yea such is his power and providence over her, that he will preserve her
night and day continually from all evil, and so order all things, that
nothing shall hurt her, but work-together for her good, Romans 8. 28.
and the good of all her children, which she bears him.

But this is quite out of man's power. He is unable to turn all things to his
wives good, or to the good of his children by her.

He can say unto her, with all my worldly goods I thee endow. Though they be
his only in discretion to dispose, yet they are all hers in participation to
use: all which sometimes are so few, as that they are scarce able to discharge
the Churches rites, and buy a wedding Dinner, and a bed to lie in. But how many
soever, 2 Timothy: 6. 17.
and how glorious, yet are they very uncertain, and love to change their
Masters often: yes and she too, (unhappy man) does sometimes prove as uncertain
her self, as any thing he has, showing her self a mooueable, ever a
gadding, even the same that Solomon speaks of, Prou: 7. 11. 12.
whose feet cannot abide in her house: but now she is without, now in the
street, and lies in wait at every corner.

But be his goods what they may be, and be his Wife another Sara, Rabel, Anna,
Penelope, or Lucretia, yet he is not able to say to her, because she is his
Wife, that therefore all things in the world are hers. The greatest Prince on
earth cannot say so, and speak the truth, unto his Wife. But the spouse of
Christ is I desire this may not be strained, but interpreted by Rom: 8. 28.
32. and 1. Cor: 3. 22. and 2. Cor. 6. 10.
Lady of the whole world: Christ has given her of his own riches, his own
ornaments and honor, and bought her such a Crown, such a massy Crown, set
with such rich Pearls and Jewels, as does as far surpass the Crowns, all
the Crowns of all the Kings and Emperors in the World, as Heaven does Earth,
as the fairest Diamond does the poorest stone.

One looking on a Crown when it was offered him, Valor: Mau.
said unto it, before he would accept and take it, Oh Oh if men knew the
misery that comes with thee, there is no man would stoop to the ground to
take thee up: For as Seneca well said, Senec. ad Polyb. consol: cap. 6.
Great service follows upon a great estate. The waking of the Prince defends
the sleeps of all men, his labor maintains their leisure, his industry their
delights, his occupation their vocation. Crowns are full of care and fear:
and be they what they may be, they are subject to alteration and destruction:
But the Churches Crown is incorruptible, and eternal, never to be won from
her by deceits, nor taken away from her by force and fury. And when once she is
actually invested with it, she shall enjoy it always without fear or doubt.

Yea even in this life we have such riches as the world cannot afford unto her
followers. For we have the grace of God, pardon of our sins, the freedom
and peace of a good conscience, hope, and comfort. Yea, the kingdom of God is
in us, all things are clean unto us, Tit: 1. 15.
al things in the world are ours, if we be Christ's, if Christ be in us, and we
united to him.

All things are yours (says the Holy Ghost) Whether Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 22.
or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come, All are yours. And if all things be ours, then nothing shall
hurt us, but all things shall further us. For seeing all things are ours, it is
meet that all things should co operate for our good. Yea the Devils themselves
are ours, if we be not theirs, but Christ's. Christ will so order the matter
that they shall but wreath garlands of immortality for us (though sore against
their wills) and increase our glory.

And whereas many men forget the honor of their wives, and are regardlesse of
their decency, Lanquet. Chron
as Sergus that Scottish King, who so basely neglected his Wife, and held her
so penurious, that she was driven to serve other Noble women for her living;
Christ Jesus is so careful over his Spouse, who stands at his right hand in
gould of Ophir, Psalm: 45. 9.
that rather then she shall want attendance and honor, he will move even
Kings to be her nourishers, and Queens her nurses, Is. 49. 23.
who shall bow down unto her with their faces toward the earth, and lick up
the dust of her feet.

The conjunction of Man and Wife does not necessarily cause either, or both of
them to be piously disposed: For, as he that touches pitch is usually
defiled with it, and as sweet rivers running through fennish grounds are
thereby corrupted, so the company of a wicked man does oftentimes corrupt the
manners of a good natured woman. And although a man may take a woman to his
wife, yet it is not in his hands to make her either a good Woman, or a good
Wife, if he find her naught. But our conjunction with Christ does change us
all over, and turns us vpside down: he contaminates and infects no man, he
cannot but he purifies and makes good all that come unto him, and bestow
themselves upon him.

And albeit the Wife does in some sort depend upon her Husband, seeing she is
united to him, and is his: yet if that knot were dissolved, either by just
divorce, or death, it might fall out that she might live still as well, and
be as godly as she was before. For neither her Virtues, nor her life, depends
on him, nor upon his life, neither yet her happiness always, nor her good
success in the world. She may find better friends then her Husband was: or she
may be married to a second Husband, in whom she may be happier by far, then in
her first. But the Church and all her children do so depend on Christ, that
without him they cannot continue a moment: for by him we live, and move, and
have our being, and all our wellbeing, both as we be men, and as we are
Christian men. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
From him we have our selves, our justice, holiness, and all our happiness.
In him we are Ephesians: 1. 4.
elected, in him Ephesians: 2. 10.
created, by him Col. 1. 14.
redeemed and Jude 1. John 15. 12.
preserved. Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing; and so also without
Christ we can be nothing. If something, yet that something, that is worse then
nothing; for nothing cannot sin, and nothing cannot suffer for sin. Nothing
can do no wrong, and nothing can feel no pain. It were more profitable for a
man not to be, then to be a man out of Christ. Though he were married to the
best woman in the world, though he were coupled with the best friends in the
world, though he were joined in blood or alliance to the cheifest Monarchs in
the world, though he were possessed with the greatest and richest kinngdomes
of the world, yet if he were not united to Christ Jesus, if he were not
possessed of him, he were nothing, he had nothing, he were more miserable then
the dust he treads on For Christ is all things, he that has Christ, lacks
nothing: he that wants Christ, has nothing. A man were better be nothing, then
something having nothing. Who is able to express the worthiness of Christ
Jesus? He is our life and our light, our comfort and our crown, our grace and
our glory, Col. 3. 11.
he is our all things: he that has him, 1 John 5. 12.
has life (says Saint John) but he that has not him, has not life. But had
I the tongues of Men and Angels, I could not declare the praises due to Christ
Jesus my Lord and Savior. If all the water in the Maine were incke, yet all
that incke were not enough to write down his worthy praises.

Common experience teaches that women feed their children, yea out of their
own bodies, Gen: 21. 7.
as Sarah did Isaak with her own milk. And I have read of a woman, who gave
her own mother suck of her own body, when she being in prison was kept from
meat: and after such a sort a woman may preserve the life of her husband, a
while at least: but did I never either see, hear, or read of a man that fed
and nourished his wife of himself. He may bring her meat, but he is no meat,
he makes not himself a dish to feed on: he gives his wife his heart but not
as Hawkes-meat to prey on, not roasted to live on. But Christ Jesus the Husband
of the Church, is also the very food of our souls. John 6. 48.
I am that bread of life, John 6. 50. 51. 56.
(says Christ) I am the living bread. The bread which I will give, is my
flesh. He which eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I
in him. Here is a lover indeed; the globe we tread on, bears not a husband
half so kind, nor all the Markets in the world can afford such meat, as here.
If there were but a Baker, which could make such bread for the body, to keep it
from death, men would to him, if he were in the farthest angle of the earth,
Countries would go together by the ears to get and enjoy him. I suppose that
if he had his choice, he would rather choose to dye, then to live. For sure,
men would wear his flesh to the bones with labor, and would scarce suffer him
either to eat or sleep. But what gains a man by long life without this Bread
of Life, Christ Jesus? The Judgment will come at length, and shall not be put
off: and the longer a sinner has lived, the more sins he has committed,
the greater accounts he must make, and the greater torments he must endure.
And what pleasure; think we, will the soul then take to be kept in the body
(like a Prisoner in a strong Goal, under much pain, want, and sorrow) against
her will, and not to be able to get out, through she would beg it with floods
of tears continually streaming from the eyes, and would give even all the
world, if she had it, if she could but die, and come to nothing?

Our Lord, our Husband is better bread then so. He is the bread of eternal
life to all that are united to him, and which feed upon him. They, whom he
feeds upon himself, are safe from staruing, sure enough from destruction. And.
whereas other Bread is turned and concocted in us, the truth is, This bread of
life is not turned in us, not turned into the substance of our soul or body:
but it turns and transforms us rather into it. For Christ does so metamorphise
and alter a man, whom he couples to himself, that he does put a new life into
him, he gives him another kind of spirit, and does so furnish him with his
own things, that it may be truly said, He is a man translated and transformed
into Christ: he is not in the flesh, but in the spirit: not Satan, but Christ
Jesus does dwell and reign within him. O happy men, that are in Christ Jesus,
that have Christ Jesus for their Husband, who is the staff of their lives, the
breath of their nostrills, and their Hope! Many a man is saved, and his wife
damned. Two shall be in a bed, one of them shall be taken, the other forsaken.
But whoseeuer shall be found coupled to Christ shall be saved. For he is the
bread of life, and life eternal to all, that have and hold him.

There are some men (or I wot not well what in the shapes of men) that wax
weary of their wives with a little acquaintance, contemn them in their
decaying days, and whether young or old, will not be pleased in them without
a deal of artificial bravery, and borrowed favor.

But the Lord Jesus esteems the heart of a man, and not his Art: he delights in
substance, not in naked shows: counterfeit virtue, which is true hypocrisy,
is accounted with him for double iniquity. It is not outward beauty that he
stands upon, but inward Virtue, inward Truth, and not outward trappings.
Painting of the face with him is as the guilding of a nutmegge, or the
coloring of a statue, and as pleasing to wise men when they spy it, as a
painted Sepulcher when they smell it, or as counterfeit coin, when they
discern it. But grace, true grace, which is accidental to a man or woman, is
essential to a true Christian.

This is that which pleases Christ, which he with his own finger has
painted and engraven in the soul.

This, this is the tincture, and the luster, that he delights in. And as for
old age, he will cast no man off for that: but the longer he has been
acquainted with any, the longer any man has lived in his service: the longer
that any have been coupled with him, the more account he uses to make of them.
Old friends, old servants, old followers, old consorts, if sincere and trusty,
are of all others most gracious, and shall have their rewards with the chiefest.

I said before that the Husband and his Wife are appointed by God to be one
common fountain and foundation or Original of Posterity by generation of
children.

For neither is the Man without the Woman and efficient, nor the Woman without
the Man. And neither Man nor Woman without the benignity of the Sun. For it
is true that ( Sol and homo generant hominem) the Sun and Man beget a Man.

Our Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ, has children, and no children, but those,
which he gets himself. But the Sun, which is a natural agent, has no hand,
helps nothing in Regeneration, which is supernatural; as it does to
Generation, which is natural.

And though a Man cannot beget without a Woman, yet is Christ, God and Man,
able to regenerate a Man without the cooperation of any Creature by himself
alone. But yet ordinarily, if not ever, he does beget men to himself by the
Church. For my part, I am persuaded that he that cannot call her Mother, has
no right to call him Father. For Jerusalem, the City of God, whose Original is
from Heaven above, and not from the earth below, Gal. 4. 26.
is the Mother of us all.

But whereas the Mother nourishes her child with food from her own body, the
Church feeds her children with the milk and meat of Gods word. For the two
Testaments are the Churches two Breasts.

And as Parents beget children according to their own image, that is, men, and
sinful, and do sometimes also lend them their own diseases, as Leprosy,
Palsy, Gowt: so the Lord Jesus begets his children according to his image
(substantial I mean not, but accidental) consisting in light, justice,
holiness, and true Christian Virtues. Indeed our Parents beget us, when
before we werenot: but Christ begets us, being men before, though in truth but
dead men, dead in sins and trespasses, and the children of wrath. Ephesians. 2.
1. 3.
And as they give us their sin, which has been derived to them from Adam,
so Christ gives us his Justice and Merits to cover our sins, as I shall
afterward show more fully.

A Woman may be a Wife, and yet no Mother: and some are Mothers and yet no
Wives. Or she may be a Mother, and yet an adultresse. But this is a man's
affliction, when either his wife is barren or unchaste. And it is a woman's
shame, when either she is a mother before she be a wife, or is unfaithful
when she is a wife. But the Church can have no children but by Christ her
husband, without whose gracious influence and intention, no man can make a
Christian. The Catholic Church (as Fulgentius well observes) is a Spouse,
Fulg. ad Probam. do virgin. ep. 3.
because she is united, and adhereth unto Christ: a mother, because she is made
fruitful by Christ: and a virgin, because she does purely persevere in
Christ.

She is indeed a singular wife, of rare endowments, Psalm 45.
and full of honor. Cant. 7. 1.
For she is the great kings Daughter, Ephesians. 5.
and coupled with him, that is God and Man.

She is not subject to violence, as the daughters and wives of men are, as
Lucretia the wife of Collatinus; Dinah the daughteer of Jacob; and they that
were ravished by Brias, Rodericus, Nouellus Cararius, Osbright, and such like
monsters in the shapes of men. Neither brings she any children to God by any
adulterous mixture (as some wanton wives) but only by the grace of her husband
Jesus Christ. As for Heretics and Infidels, they be not the fruits of her
womb, but Bastards of the Devils getting, and the worlds conceiving and
bringing forth.

She is an high and honorable mother. For she is Mother and Nurse (no cruel
stepmother) but a loving mother and tenderhearted nurse to all Gods adopted
children. They that have not her for mother, have not him for Father. She is
mother to all the true members of Christ, to all his brethren. They that have
not her for mother, have not him for their head and elder brother.

She is our spiritual mother Eve, the mother of all the living, Gal. 4. 26.
that either live a spirituiall life in this world, or shall live a celestall
life in the world to come.

She is the mother to all true Israelites according to the faith, as Sarah was
to all Israelites according to the flesh. And as God made Sarah a mother, and
gave her a son out of his own good will: so God makes his Church a mother,
and gives her children as he pleases.

I read of a certain Roman Lady, by name Paulina, a very chaste and honest
matron, who by no means would yield to the Just of Mundus a Gentleman of
Rome, who attempted to have corrupt her, who yet being couzened by certain
Priests lay with him (like a supersticious fool) in the Temple of Isis, under
the name of Anubis the God of Egypt, who desired her company, as those varlets
told her. And in those heathenish days it was accounted a great favor to
have to do with a God.

But Gods Church is no Paulina, yeeldes not to Mundus, the World, but is able
to distinguish betwixt God and the world, under what habit or color soever the
world appears. She is neither so dimme-sighted, nor so supersticious and
foolish, as to mistake or leave her husband, or to give her self to the Just
of any, out of the love either of their favor or dalliance with them. She
loves to bear, but yet only by her own husband. Him she knows well, his
voice she hears, him she follows. But the voice of strangers she knows not,
Ioh. 10.
them she follows not, but flies from them.

A man may take a wife, but he cannot always make her a mother. God makes the
barren woman to be a joyful mother of children. Gone. 30. 1. 2.
A man is not able to remove sterility, Psalm. 113. 9.
nor (though his wife were fruitful) to beget a child when he will himself.
Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord, Psalm. 127. 3.
and the fruit of the womb, is his reward. But Christ Jesus the Churches
husband, a man indeed, but more then a man, even God eternal, is able to make
his Spcuse fruitful, and to give her children, when he will, and children of a
better condition and complexion, then husbands give their wives, Job 25. 4.
which are worms, and worse too, unclean and wretched, subject to the wrath
of God, and under death.

For all the children of the Church, which she bears unto Christ, are clean
and happy, fair and lovely, endued with the holy Ghost, and clad with Christ
himself, who is their father, and enrobed with his justice, as with a garment
rich enough to redeem the world, Gal. 3. 27.
in which appearing before the great and righteous God, the Judge of all the
world, they rejoice his heart, and obtain his blessing, as Jacob obtained his
father Isaachs, Genesis 27. 15.
coming to him with his brothers fair apparel on him, which his mother had
with her in her house. Of such blessed Parents how can there be but blessed
children? O blessed, thrice blessed are all the children of the Church: The
children of the greatest Kings and Queens in the world are not to be compared
to them; They are not worthy to be named together in one day. The truth is
they are but very wretches (how glorious soever they be in the world) till
they come and call her mother, and become obedient to her.

But be it that a woman be a wife unto her husband, and a mother too; yet she
is not both houswife and house too. Men dwell with their wives, but not in
their wives, except by love. But the Catholic Church is Christ's huswife and
his house too, his Spouse and his Temple also. 2 Cor: 6: 16.
Ye are the Temple of the lining God, says Saint Paul. Revel: 2: 15
In this temple Christ is always present, always resident, Cant: 8: 13.
always president. To him this Temple is erected, by him it is set up and kept (
sartumtectum) safe and sound. This he fills, in it he walks and rules, and
takes great delight. Psalm: 149: 4.
The Lord has chosen her for his own habitation, and loves to dwell in her,
Ps: 132: 13: 14.
saying; This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell: for I have a delight
therein. Coloss: 3: 4.
She is a living Temple, and Christ is the life thereof. She is a light house
(but no light huswife) and Christ is the Light thereof. Ioh: 12: and 1 Cor: 1:
30. 1 Pet: 2: 5.
A part of which princely Palace is every godly Christian, who as a living
stone is hewn out of that rock of life, Christ Jesus, and by him made up, and
put into that goodly building.

So then, whereas many a poor child which has both father and mother, is yet
destitute oftentimes of a house to put his head in, and is compelled to lie
under hedges and walls, or in the open fields; there is not a true child of
God, there is not a man alive, if he be ( filius Ecclesiae) the son of the
Church, but he has an house to rest his soul in; and so long as he is under
the roof he is safe from evil, being under the Lords protection, Psalm: 18:
30. Prou: 2. 7.
who is a sure shield and castle of defense, invincible, vnbatterable, unto
all, that put their trust in him, and walk uprightly with him in his house.

But I will haste a little faster on. No man makes his own wife. For she is
first, without him, a woman, before he take her to be with him, as his wife.
It is too much for a man to make a woman (for some find it too much to mend a
woman) so that he must let that alone for ever, as a work peculiar unto God.
And though it be an easy matter for a man to get himself a wife, such as she
is: yet a good wife, a virtuous wife, a prudent wife, Prou: 31: 12.
one, Prou: 18: 22.
that will do her husband good and not evil, all the days of her life, Prou:
19: 14.
is a blessing, that comes from God. Parents can give nature, but God gives
grace. They can give flesh and blood, but virtue and well doing are the gifts
of God, Iam: 1: 17.
who is the fountain and father of lights. And it falls out sometimes by the
iniquity of rigid and covetous parents, that a man has a wife thrust upon him,
being constrained to take her for avoiding greater dangers and more grievous
evils. And when they have them, they love them as men do straight shoes, and
clothes they care not for.

But the Lord lesus has no wife obtruded on him against his will: neither can
any with subtle sleights steal into him, and go beyond him, as some women
use to win their husbands. But he takes, whom he takes, willingly, and
makes the first motion of love always himself: neither does he cozen or
beguile any, but leads them on with truths and sollid demonstrations, and
promises no more then he can and will perform. Yea, he takes but what he made
before. For all creatures have past through his hands, he had the forming of
them all. And whom he makes his wife, he does not mar in the making (as
sometimes men do) but reformes and beautifies them: whereas men sometimes take
upon them (moved by worldly respects) to marry some perverse, wicked, or
supersticious women, hoping, and now and then bragging they will reform them,
whereas commonly they buy repentance too late, and in stead of mending them are
sometimes marred themselves, infected with their vices, as wine or water with
musty vessels.

And whereas men do not beget their wives, they mean to marry. For men marry
not with their daughters. And sure if Lot and Cyanippus had not both been
drunk, Plutarch.
their daughters had not been vitiated by them. Neither had Valeria Thusculana
got the incestuous company of her father, but under the color of another
woman. Which so soon, as he did perceive, he killed himself in detestation of
the fact.

Every Christian soul ( est filia and sponsa Christi) is both the daughter and
the Spouse of Christ Jesus, descended from him, and united to him. He weddeth
none, but his own, whom he does himself beget by the power of his Spirit.
There is none joined to God, but he, that is borne of God. The Spirit, which
regenerates us, and gives us a new life, is the same, by which we are coupled
unto Christ, and by whose holy inspirations faith and love are created in us,
whereby we believe in Christ, embrace him, and are transformed into him. The
soul is the life of the body, and Christ is the true life of the soul, even
the souls Soul: take away the soul from the body, and the body dies, even
so take away the soul from Christ, or Christ from the soul, and the soul
will die. In this case the body is but a living and breathing Sepulcher of a
dead soul, a breathless soul, the breath whereof is the very breath of
Christ.

Eve may be some light herein unto us. For Eve was made of Adam, who seeing her
said, Gen 2. 22. 23.
This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh: and so also we are of
Christ, Ephesians. 5. 30
of his flesh, and of his bones, as the Apostle speaks. God has framed his
Church out of the very flesh, the very wounded and bleeding side of the son of
man. To all things living Christ is life, and to men light, as he is the
son of God: to the Church both light and life eternal, by being made the son
of man for us, and by being our Surety and Savior, whether we respect him as
God, or as Man.

His body crucified, and his bloodshed for the life of the world are the true
elements of our Christian and heavenly being, which makes us truly alive and
holy, as he is, of whom we come.

And as by nature we are in our first parents, Adam and Eve: so by grace we are
every one of us, that are truly spiritual, in Christ and in his Church.

As men, we are all originally in Adam: as Christians, or new men, we are all
originally in Christ.

As men, we have the nature and blood of Eve: as new men, or Saints, we are
partakers of the Spirit of the Church in her ministry by the gift of Christ.

As we are men, Adam and Eve were our Parents: but as we are regenerate, so
Christ is our father, and the Church which sprang out of his holy side opened
upon the cross, is our holy and honorable mother.

And as Eve made not her self, neither was made or begotten by a man, but by
the hand of God, even by the hand of Christ, John 1.
by whom all things were created: so the Church is not the workemanshippe of
any creature, nor of her own making and moulding, but is made and fashioned by
God, whose workmanship we are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians.
2. 10.
which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them.

Indeed Adam had no stroke in Eues making: she was made out of him, but yet
without his help; of him, not by him; of his ribbe, not by his hand. But
Christ has a great stroke in the framing of the Church. She is both taken out
of him, and made up by him: and without him she could not be formed.

For by his will she is, by his holy breath she is quickened, his finger framed
her, and his merits are her making. Nay, not her self alone, but all she has,
that is good, she has received from him, of his fullness. There is not an
ornament about her, but is a favor, she has had of him. There is not a pin
of her sleeue, but he has given it her.

And tho God made Eve neither witting, nor willing, yet he quickens us,
restores and reformes us, both witting and willing. He made us without us, but
he does not sanctify and save us without us.

But it is he, that makes us willing and obedient, Phil. 2. 13.
being without his grace unwilling enough of our selves, dead in our sins and
trespasses, void of a true spiritual life and being. He both gives us feet
and makes us run. He gives us hearing ears, and seeing eyes, and makes us
hear and see. He opens our mouths, and makes us speak. He unties our bands,
and makes us move. We work and work willingly: but he gives us hands to work
and makes us work. He works all our works for us. He gives us both the
will and the work, and that of his own good will, without our deserts.

But whereas not the soul of Adam, but her own did quicken, sustain and
govern Eve: and whereas neither of their souls in number do inhabit or
animate any of their children: but that very personal soul, that every one of
them has received of God, who is the Father of spirits, Heb. 12. 9. Eceles.
12. 7.
and who gives unto every man his own proper spirit; the truth is, that Christ
bestows his Spirit upon his Church, which holy Spirit is derived from Christ
into every true Christian man and woman, who are his seed and children, the
issues of his Ioynes. Who are not borne, Is. 53. 10. Heb. 2. 13.
as mere natural and sinful men, of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor
of the will of man, Ioh. 1. 12.
but of God, who of his own will begets them, Jam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 23.
not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, with the word of truth, as the
holy Scriptures show us. And therefore also the holy A postle says expressly,
that, Romans 8. 9.
if any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. And again,
because ye are sons, Gal. 4. 6.
God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts. Which Spirit no
sooner comes into the heart and inhabits it, but he gives life spiritual,
even as the soul no sooner is in the body, and is united to it, and dwells
in it, but it affords the life, that is natural or corporal. And as the
soul works in the body, and mainteines the natural life thereof, and makes
a man show himself to be a man, and indeed to be a man, and not a beast, or
some senseles or liuelesse lump of flesh: so the spirit of Christ works in
the soul of a Christian, and preserues the spiritual life thereof, and makes
him to be, and to show himself to be a Christian, and not a mere carnal or
natural man, and child of the Devil.

And whereas many Parents are grieved to see their children increase so thick
upon them, and some more unnatural through diffidence in the providence of
God, are even glad, when they are rid of them by death, or almost any way else;
the Lord Jesus Christ and the Catholic Church, his Spouse, our Mother, take
great delight and pleasure in their children, are never grieved for the numbers
of them, or troubled with their fellowshippe: But she rather takes it kindly,
and with all thankfulness of heart, when her Lord does visit her and give her
children, both sons and daughters of all sorts and nations, and is very
careful in their breeding, when she has them, that they may be fit
Instruments of his glory, and may doeseruice to his name in all ages and places
of the world, wherein and whilst they live.

But that we may yet further our knowledge of the Conjunction, that is betwixt
Christ and us, it will not be amiss to consider of three other similitudes
used in the holy Scriptures to set it forth unto us. The first is of a Vine,
the second of a Body, the third of a Building. And this I will do with the help
of Christ.

I am (faith Christ) the Vine, Ioh. 15. 5.
ye are the Branches. Now we know that the Vine and her Branches are joined
fast together by nature: and not as boards are in a ship with pinnes and
nails by Art, but a great deal closer.

For the branches shoot forth of the Vine, are animated with the spirit of the
vine, live the life of the vine, are fed, nourished, and sustained of the vine,
and abiding in the vine bring forth fruits according to the nature of the
vine, out of which they grow and in which they live. Even so are we coupled and
joined unto Christ, and so fast, that we cannot be rent or broken in pieces
from him by violence, as branches may be from a vine.

We grow out of Christ, as an heavenly root, from whom by the favor of God and
influence of his grace, we do all as new creatures or heavenly branches arise
and spring forth.

Adam is the root of all men, as men: and when God created Adam, he created us.
And as many, as are sprung from Adam, have in themselves the root, out of which
they spring. Even so the children of God have Christ, as a second Adam from
heaven for a certain celestial and blessed root, whose progeny and branches
they are by regeneration, or heavenly birth.

And the good Spirit of Christ is from Christ derived to them all, Romans 8. 9.
10.
who does animate, consolate, and sustain them. And from Christ they receive
food and nourishment, by the which they are refresht and cheered, and preserved
from death, by the work of the Spirit.

True it is that life and all good gifts and graces are from the father, Iam.
1. 17.
as from the original or beginning of them all: but they come not to us but by
the Son, 1 Ioh. 5. 11.
in whom, Col. 2. 3.
Life is, and, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
Mal. 4. 2.
who is the Sun of righteousness with healing in his wings, Reu. 3. 18.
and has gold, raiment and eye-salue, and all other medicines to enrich us,
cloth us, and cure us of all our soule-diseases. But yet none of all these
things come unto any of us in particular, but by the holy Ghost: and therefore
the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 13. 14.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowshippe
of the holy Ghost.

And being now endued with the holy Spirit of Christ, Gal. 2. 20.
they live a spiritual and Christian life. They live indeed, 2 Cor. 3. 17.
and yet not they, but Christ and his Spirit live within them. Christ is in his
Spirit, and his Spirit is in him. And where the Spirit of Christ is, there is
liberty. They live then, and live free, delivered, and out of fear.

And for because Christ is in them, and they in him, and for that the spirit of
Christ is not idle in them (even as the soul is not idle in the body, or as a
vigilant Prince is not idle in his kingdom) but is busy, as a Be, working,
like a careful and prudent husbandman, his holy works within them, therefore
also they are not barren, and take up room in vain, but bear, and bring
forth fruit, as God by the influence of his grace does give increase. For
neither is he, that planteth, 1 Cor. 3. 7.
any thing: neither, that waters: but God, that gives the increase.

Whence it is that our Savior spaith, Abide in me, and I in you. Ioh. 15. 4. 5.
As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine: no
more can ye, except ye abide in me. He, that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit.

And the fruits, they yield, are such, as become the vine Christ Jesus, whose
branches they are, and whose spirit makes them bear. For vine-branches bring
forth vine-fruites, Math. 7. 18.
vine-berries, Luke 6. 44.
grapes, Iam. 3. 12.
and not sour slowes, crabbes, or hawes. Every tree brings forth fruit
according to his own kind, even as every man, beast, bird, and fish, begets
and produces according to his own species, kind, and image.

But although the faithful be in Christ, and Christ in them, yet they do not
all equally draw virtue from Christ: but as one branch receives more from the
vine, then another, and as some are stronger, fairer, and fuller of fruits,
then some others are: even so one Belieuer receives more grace and virtue from
Christ, then another: and as Christ does more or less impart himself unto us,
so we suck more or less virtue from him, and so also are more or less
fruitful in good works.

Sure it is that God does give all his children his spirit, Gal. 4. 6.
and that this spirit resideth in them: 1 Cor. 6. 19.
but this spirit works not equally in them all, nor alike at all seasons: but
in some more, and in some less: and at one time more sensibly, then at an
other, as the Sun does in the heavens, or a workman in his shop.

God dwells in all his children, and they in him: and they are all truly, 1
Ioh. 3. 24. and 4. 15.
one as well as another, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
partakers of the divine nature: but yet God does not manifest and express
himself in the same degree unto all (as neither Parents to their children) not
that he could not, but because he will not for causes just, but best known
unto himself: and hereupon it comes to pass that one is more virtuous, and
better then another, fuller of good works, and more like unto himself, as
that child is unto his father, into whom his father has more fully and more
happily powered forth of himself into him in generation, tending him like wife
afterward with a more careful and ingenuous education. Aug. Epist. 57.
Whence is it (says S. Austin) that some be holier, then others are: but
because that God does dwell in some more plenteously, then in others?

Christ is the Sun, the light, Mal. 4. 2.
that gives light of nature, Ioh. 8. 12.
grace Ioh. 1. 4. 9.
, and glory unto the world. Every Christian man is a star receiving light
from Christ, who shines into his soul: now as one star is brighter, then
another, according as it receives more light from the Sun, then another:
even so one Christian excells another in the light of grace and good works,
according as he receives more plentifully from Christ, and is more nearly
joined with him, and partaker of his light, and spirit. And thus of the first
similitude. I come to the second.

Christ and the Catholic Church are a certain Mystical, 1 Cor. 12. 27.
or spiritual body. Ephesians. 1. 22. and 5. 30 32.
Christ himself is the Head of that body. And every true Belieuer is a member
of it. We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, says S.
Paul. And this is a great mystery.

The Head is not a perfect body of it self alone. For no man's body is all head.

Neither is the Body a complete body without the head. But being both united,
and no part wanting, they become one entire and perfect body.

Even so Christ, and his Church instructed with all her true parts and members,
make together one complete body, or (as it were) one perfect spiritual man.

It pleases him in his mercy to count himself incomplete, and maimed, without
his Church, which is his Body, Ephesians: 1. 23.
the Fullness of him, that fills all in all.

And we, for our parts, are most certain, that without him we are just
nothing, but that we all receive of his fullness, because he is Justification
to us, and is also in us, as a most free moving, and working cause, whence many
blessed effects do come, all of them tending to eternal life and glory, as
all waters unto the Maine.

I say Christ is the head, the sole head of the catholic church, which is his
only body. For the Father has put all things under his feet, and has given
him to be the Head over all things to the Church. Ephesians: 1. 22.
So by way of supereminencie and praedominancie, he is our Head alone.

There is no other man but this man, Christ Jesus, who is head and Husband to
the Church, which is his, 2. Cor: 11. 2.
and his alone.

Truly ( says Saint Gregory) Peter Greg: Mag: lib: 4. Epist: 38.
the Apostle is the chiefest member of the the Holy Catholic Church, Paul,
Andrew and John, what are they else but heads of several or particular people.
But yet they are all members of the Church under one Head.

He ( says S. Ambrose) is the Bridegroom, that has the Bride: Ambr: lib: de
benedict: Patriarch: c. 4.
that is, He alone is the Churches Husband.

The Apostles, and other Pastors of the Church, Bishops and Presbyters, are the
servants or friends of the Bridegroom: but none of them have her for their
Spouse, none of them is her Husband. Saint Bernard thus speaks to Pope
Eugenius, Bern: ep. 237.
If thou be(says he) the friend of the Bridegroom, do not call his
Beloved, thy Princess, but Princess, challenging nothing for thine in her,
save only that thou ought to give thy life for her, if it were behoouefull.

We do therefore all of us say with Saint Paul, We preach not our selves, 2
Cor: 4. 5.
but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake.
Weacknowledge Christ for our Lord, and our selves his servants, called and sent
by him to wait upon his Church and children, 2 Cor: 11. 2.
to prepare them for Christ, as a Virgin for her Husband, to give them all
their portion of meat in due season, and to present every man in Christ Jesus.
Col: 1. 28. 29.
This is our proper office, this is our strife and study, and this is the voice
of us all, all, all.

I say further, Greg: vbi supra:
that the Catholic Church alone is the mystical Body of Christ. The Saints
before the Law (says Saint Gregory) the Saints under the Law, and the Saints
under Grace, All these perfecting the Lords Body are members of the Church. Not
some of the members, but all, that are constituent and essential.

venerable Beda speaks the like, Bed. Hist: Eccles Lib: 5: cap: 22.
when he says, All Churches throughout the world make one Catholic.

This Catholic and mystical Body of Christ, consists of true believers, and
such, as are truly sanctified. For the Church of Christ and all her proper
members, are made clean and holy, not having spot, or wrinkle. Ephesians: 5: 26. 27.
The Church of Christ is Christ's Dove and Fair one: Cant: 2: 13: 14.
but Doves are not Kytes, Crows, Vultures, Snakes, Adders, Dragons, Lions,
Bears, and Leopards. Cant: 4. 1.
His Church is fair and beautiful, washed with Water, and anointed with
Oil, and is very beautiful and perfect through the beauty which God has put
upon her. Ezekiel: 16. 9: 13. 14.
Yes, She is the fairest among Women. And therefore neither she, Psalm: 45. 7.
nor any of her natural and loving children ought to be reputed foul, Cant:
5. 19. 17.
vile, and ugly.

The members of the Church are Christ's sheep, John 10.
and he is their careful and good Shepherd, who makes them to rest in
green Pastures, Psalm 23. 2.
and leads them by the still Waters. But Sheep are not Wolves, and Foxes,
Goats and Tigers, Dogs, Swine, nor fat Bulls of Basan. To make any such to
be members of the Catholic Church were to make Christ a Neateheard, which
were a transcendent indignity: but let us hear the Fathers and Doctors of the
Church, which shined like Lamps in the house of God in ages long ago. They
(says Saint Origin) which have not spot or wrinckle, Orig: in Genes: Homil: 1.
or any such thing about them, are the true Church. In Luc: Hom: 2.
And in another place he shows the reason why the Church is said to be holy,
and without spot, namely because she is reputed pure and sincere.

In the Church ( says S. Chrysostom) there is no earthen or wodden vessel:
Chrysostom: in 2. Tim. Homil: 5.
but all are of silver and gold. For there is the body of Christ, a chaste
Virgin, not having spot or wrinckle.

When we say the Church ( faith S. Cyrill of Alexandria) we mean the most holy
multitude of the godly. Cyril. Alexan. in Is: lib: 4. Or at: 4.


The Church (says Saint Ambrose) is the mother of those that are alive. Ambr:
in Luc: lib: 2. cap. 3.
Surely the good Father never thought then that men dead in sins, and
inwardly vicious and irreformed, though they should make a fair outward
profession, were to be reputed true members of the Catholic Church.

The Church of Christ ( says S. Hierome) is glorious, Hier: in Ephe 5.
not having spot, or wrinckle, nor any such, therefore he which is a sinner, or
defiled with any filthiness, cannot be said to be of the Church of Christ,
nor subject unto Christ.

Prosper accordingly says, Prosp: in Psalm: 106.
that the Catholic Church consists in the Elect foreknowne of God, the
children of the promise, the members of Christ's body.

Rupertus in like manner affirms Rup: 1. Pet. c. 2.
that the universal Church is cleansed in the blood of Christ from all fault.

And Bernard, Bern in Cant: Ser: 68.
What is the Spouse? but the congregation of just ones. And what is this
congregation, but the generation of them, that seek the Lord, of them that
seek the face of the bridegroom.

As for haeretiques, hypocrites, and other wicked and ungodly men, they
pertain not to the holy Church of God, Aug: de Bapt: Contr: Donat.
as Saint Augustine speaks, L. 1. c. 10. and. l. 4. c. 3. and 1. 6. c. 3.
although they may seem to be within it.

But as Christ is the Head of the Church, which is his Body, and shall reign
with him in everlasting glory: even so the Devil is the Head (and Heards-man)
of the wicked, Aug. de Doctr.
who are after a sort his Body (as the said holy Father shows) who shall be
punished with him in aternall fire. Chr: lib. 3. c: 37.


As concerning these three points of Popery, to wit, That the Bishop of Rome is
the Head of the Universal Church on earth, to whom every soul of man must be
subject, or else he cannot but be damned.

Secondiy, that the Church of Rome is the universal Church of Christ, the
only Catholic Church of Christ.

Thirdly, Bellar: de Eccles.
that no inward virtue is required to make a part of the Catholic Church,
Lib: 3. cap: 2.
but only an exterior profession of the faith, and followship in Sacraments.

These three points of Doctrine have in these latter times crept out of the
Alps, like Mise, or Rats. Rome has set her mark upon them, and allowed them:
but the Catholic Church of Christ neither did, nor does, nor will ever own
them for her own, being indeed mere Counterfets, and Bastard Plants. And so
I leave them to them that coined them, and so proceed.

This Body, this Catholic congregation of Saints, and all the true, natural,
and essential parts and members thereof, 1 Cor: 12. 12.
are all of them united and coupled to their Head, Ephesians: 4. 15.
and one unto another: Col: 2. 7: 19
even as we see a natural body, and all the parts thereof, to be joined and
knit unto their natural head.

But whereas the head and body of a man may be pulled, torn, or cut asunder, as
it fared with S. John Baptist, who was beheaded: the truth is, that Christ and
his members cannot be parted or torneasunder. The Church, which is the body of
our Lord, perseuering firmly in the faith ( Nulla res separare potest a
Christo) Nothing is able to separate from Christ lesus, as Saint Cyprian
speaks truly. Cypr: Epist: 63.
For why? Christ shed his blood for the Church and all her children. Therefore
sure, He will not that those should perish, for whom he paid so dearly, as
Saint Austin somewhere speaks. Charity fails not from the Church (says
Saint Bernard.) The Church is founded upon a Rock: and the Rock is Christ.
Bern: in Cant. Ser: 79.
And therefore we neither could, nor can at any time hereafter be souered
from the love of Christ, neither by the verbosity and babbling of Philosophers,
nor by the cauils and Sophistry of Heretics, nor by the swords of Persecutors.

For indeed, they that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, Psalm: 125.
which cannot be removed, but remains for ever.

As the mountains are about Jerusalem: so is the Lord about his people, Verse:
2.
from henceforth, and for ever.

And that Annoynting, 1 Ioh 2. 27.
which the members of the true Church have received of Christ, dwells in
them: and the seed of God remains in them, 1 John 3. 9.
whereby he has begot them: and they shall remain in that annoynting, that
is, in the Holy Ghost.

Seeing therefore the Lord is always about his people, 1 Pet: 1. 5.
Guarding them by his power through faith unto salvation; seeing also the
Spirit of Christ Jesus dwells and remains in them, and they in him, it is
impossible that they should be separated or cut off from Christ, or that they
should drop off from him as dry and withered leaves, or rotten springs and
branches from a tree, or fall like old rotten teeth out of a man's head.

But when I say that all holy and righteous men, being the natural and only
liue-members of the Church, are united unto Christ, my meaning is not (as I
have touched before) that they are holy, righteous, and spiritual before the
union, but then, when they are united. They are not holy without the union, but
by the union. The conjunction does not find them just, but makes them just.
They are not holy till they be conjoined. For all our holiness, justice,
wisdom, and goodness is from the Lord Jesus, partly by imputation, 1 Cor: 1.
30.
and partly by inspiration: 1 John 1. 7.
which we would not have, Ephesians: 2. 5.
unless first we have Christ himself, Rom: 8. 9. 10. 12.
and be united to him: even as a man cannot have comfort from his clothes
unless he put them on, and buckle them about him: or as the hungry, and
sick, or wounded person cannot have the virtue of meats, and medicines and
salues, unless he have the very things themselves first, and that they he
applied to him. And therefore Saint John having said that Life is in the
Son, 1 John 5. 11.
infers thence that he that has the Son, has life, and he that has not
the Son, has not life. Now who has the Son, but he that is united to him? who
has the Husbands fellowship, but the Wife? Who inioyes the love of a friend
and his love tokens, but his friend? What has sense or motion from the head,
but that which is united to the Head, as are the members of the body? Who has
the payment of a surety, even he, that has the surety himself? And who has
the surety, but he, whose person the surety is pleased to undertake, and put on
upon himself, and with and for whom he stands in bands or covenants to see
the debt discharged? Now the Lord Jesus Christ is our friend, our surety, our
head and husband; when once we are united to him, (but not before, except in
predestination) then we come to enjoy him, his benefits; and graces, which are
more worth then the grace of all Princes, the gifts of all rich men, and the
prizes of all things that can be prized in the world.

They say of Venice, she must be seen before she can be prized. But though
a man cannot tell what she is worth, yet he may tell what she is not worth.
She is not worth all the Cities of Italy: She is not worth all the towns in
Europe: She is not worth all the earth besides, is she?

But the City of God, Gal. 4: 26.
the City of the great King, Jerusalem, which is above, the spiritual body
of Christ, the Mother of us all, is worth all the Cities in the world, is
worth all the world besides. Her foundations are in heaven, her walls are
Jasper, her building gold, pure gold, her street such also, her gates pearl,
and her shining like abstone most precious. She is wonderfully rich and
glorious. Christ is her King, and her Temple, and her Sun, she sees by. She
may well say, Come see me, and then esteem me. But who can see her yet? who
can prize her? I see her not, I cannot see her: but I do believe her being and
her beauty, and I count it above all earthly happiness to be her son. If I
forget thee; o Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her dexterity. If I do not
remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth: if I prefer not
Jerusalem to my cheifest joy. But I have been over carried.

Adam is the Head of men, of all men, both good and evil, saints and sinners,
so far as either nature or vice of nature reaches: even as Gehezi was head
of all his issue, as touching their humane, their sinful and their leprous
nature and disposition: but with some difference. For he was but a subordinate
and secondary Head to them, as they were men and sinners, guilty of original
corruption: for here Adam, has the primacie. But he was indeed the first
head and original of their leprosy. For he was by the singular and sudden
judgment of God first himself a leper, and then they afterward by him.

So Christ Jesus is the head of godly Christians, of all godly Christians, and
of none but such: of all blessed men in the world, and but of such.

Adam is to he found, yea and felt in every man: even so Christ is to be found
in every Saint.

There are prints of Adams setting in every mortal man: and there are likewise
certain marks of Christ's imptinting in the soul of every godly man, who is
immortal in hope, which shall not fail him.

Nature springs from Adam, as Gods living instrument. And sin also comes from
Adam, and from sin death. Even so also grace is from Christ: justice and
holiness, imputative and inhesiue; true life and liberty, victory over death
at last, victory over the world in this life, and all future felicity proceed
from Christ, as from their Author, or Springhead, from whence they flow.

There is much liberty in the world, there is a peace of worldlings, many
honors and outward favors, given them by GOD, but not through Christ.

Many men have had victories from God, as Nebuchadnezzar, Caesar, Pompey,
Tamerlane, the great Turks, and many more unbelievers, Rom: 5: 1.
but not through Jesus Christ. 1 Cor: 15: 57.
But spiritual peace, Rom: 6: 23.
liberty, life, health, joy, victory, and salvation, Ephesians: 5: 1.
no man has but by Jesus Christ or Lord.

So then, if we were not of Adam, and had not Adams nature in us, and sin,
which does defile it, we should neither be men, nor sinful men, and so not
men subject unto death. Even so, if we were not members of Christ, sprung from
him as our head, and had him not in us and with us, we could not be Christian
men, we could not be spiritual and holy, we could not be under grace, but
under the Law, we could not be free, but bondmen, we could not be justified,
we could not be saved.

A man therefore that would have life, light, grace and glory, and so become a
true blessed man, must needs have Christ his head, he must needs be his
member, he must needs be coupled with him, and issue from him, as well as
sinners (to make them men and sinners) have their father Adams nature in them,
and that, which does infect and poison it.

Now Christ is the head of the Church, as he is both God and Man. Even so we
who are his members, are united to him, as he is both God and Man.

Christ, God and Man dwells in us, and we dwell in Christ, who is God and
man. We are partakers of both his natures, divine and humane: Christ is in us,
as touching both, and we are in him, as touching both: he in us, and we in
him: and both fast knit together.

But this must be wisely understood; and for the clearing hereof, I will
speak a little yet more fully and punctually, by the help of Christ, who is
abundantly able beyond all to unfold and define what this union is, and to
answer all the questions, that may be put about it.

First it is readily granted, that the divine nature of Christ fills heaven
and earth, and is essentially all the world over present whole in all places,
and at all times.

Secondly, that very Man Jesus Christ, the Virgins Son, has the divine
nature by hypostaticall union: so that in the person of the eternal Son of
God, which is not double, but single, the two natures, divine and humane, are
united fast together, and for ever, the humane being received into God, having
never had any personal subsistence out of the person of the Son of God. A
certain similitude thereof is in the Misselto, which (as Pliny writes) grows
not but in a Plant of another kind. Plin. hist. not. lib. 16. cap. 44.
Indeed whereas the Misselto may be plucked by force or stubbed up out of the
plant it grows in, the humane nature of Christ cannot be severed from the Word.

Thirdly, the Conjunction of the flesh with the Deity is extended as far, as
the Deity it self. For the Deity is no where severed from the Man-head: but
yet the actual Position of the flesh is restrained and tied to a certain
place.

Doubt not ( since Saint Austin) but that the man Christ Jesus is now in that
very place, Aug. ep. 57.
from whence he shall come in the same for me and substance of flesh, which he
carried thither, and from which he has not taken nature, but given thereunto
immortality. According to this form he spreddeth not out himself into all
places. For it behooves us to take great heed, lest while we go about to
maintain the glorious Deity of him, which is man, we leave not the true
bodily substance of man. So then, tho the flesh be actually seated there, or
there, and not every where: yet it is every where joined to the Godhead, which
fills the whole world: and no place, no not hell it self does hinder that
Conjunction.

But though we cannot say that the Man-head of Christ is every where present,
yet we may truly say that the man Christ is every where present: because that
person is every where present, from whose Godhead the Man-head is no where
separated: or, because this man is very God, and so by his Deity he is
omni-present, tho in his humanity he be but in one particular space or place
at once. So by reason of the hypostaticall union we may say the man Jesus is
eternal, is omnipotent, is God, is Mediator between God and Man. But we
cannot so speak of his man's nature.

Fourthly, the flesh or humane nature of Christ, or Christ as he is a true man
consisting of soul and body, now knit together, may be rightly said to he
every where present, as touching cooperation with the Godhead, and that in
all things.

For the divine nature of Christ, which before his incarnation wrought all
things without the man-head, does now work nothing, wherein the man-head,
which he has assumed, is either absent from it, or idle.

He which came down from heaven, and descended into hell, is ascended into
heaven, that sitting at the right hand of God, invested with all majesty,
might, power, honor and glory, he might from thence govern and dispose all
things, and fill his Church with the gracious and blessed fruits of his saving
presence.

His humane nature before his glorious Ascension, and Session, was not without
the possession of this power: but the full use and exercise thereof was
suspended, till his humiliation, which had before veiled Majesty, was ended,
and laid aside.

For the Session at the right hand of his Father is the actual exercise of
that power and regency, wherein his Man-head was joined and matched with his
Godhead.

This regencie and dominion he now exercises, both as God and man; as God, by
essential presence with all things; as Man, by cooperation with his Godhead,
which is essentially all the world over.

I say then that the Manhead of Christ cooperates with his Godhead, to which it
is personally joined. For the humane will of Christ assenteth to althings,
which his divine will affects, and wills, what the divine dislikes. And
from his humane understanding nothing, which his Deity works, is concealed:
so that by knowledge and assent the soul of Christ is present with all things,
which his Deiry works.

And as concerning his very body of flesh: seeing it is the Body of God, and
personally united to the Godhead of the Son of God, by whom it was also made
a propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, it therefore
receives a Presence of force and efficacy, by reason of the said Conjunction,
throughout all ages and generations of men. In so much that no stint, or limit,
can be set to the value, virtue, and merit of his sacrificed body it knows
no bounds of efficacy unto life: but is also it self infinitely able to purge
and save all in any place, or age, on whom Christ is pleased to confer it.

We are then united by the union of grace to our blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, being locked and joined to him by the union of a singular and
most blessed Dependence, as he is both God and Man.

For our very being, as we are Christians, and true members of the Church, his
body, does wholly depend upon him.

Our new life and pardon, our justice and holiness, and all our spiritual and
celestial gifts and comforts, flow from him, as water from a fountain, or as
light from the Sun, and altogether depend upon him so, as that if any thing
could come betwixt us and him, that could sever us from him, or from the
gracious operations of his Godhead, or from the Cooperation and merits of his
Manhead, we could not, we should not continue new creatures, Saints, or living
members of his mystical body, one moment of time: but must needs presently
become nothing, dead, cursed, slaves, firebrarnds of hell, and perishable.

I say again, the Godhead of Christ is in us, dwells in us, and we in it; not
only because it fills us, as it fills all things else, and is present with us,
as it is throughout all the world: but because cause it works mightily in us,
and very graciously, pouring forth and giving us all our new being, life,
joys and virtues, which we have: and for that it does also sustain and keep
us in this good estate, it sets us in. In which respect we may truly say that
God is absent from the reprobate, and that they are separated from him. And
therefore also Saint Gregory says that All we, which believe in Christ, Greg.
in Job. l. 2. c. 16.
are out of doubt his body. And because he is become the head of his members by
a marvelous dispensation of piety, therefore he is also only with us, the
rout of Reprobates being repulsed.

The Church of Christ is the chosen inheritance of Christ, Rab. in Eccles. l.
5. c. 13.
as Rabanus truly speaks: and therefore the Godhead of Christ visits and
tends her only with the visitation and presence of grace and mercy to
salvation, passing over the vast and dry Deserts, and craggy rocks, and
sterilous mountains of wicked Cast-awayes, which are the heritage of Satan,
and confusion.

I say further, the very flesh of Christ is in us, and we in it. And that, not
only Propter identitatem naturee, because he has a true humane soul and
body, as we have, but without sin: like as the head and the body, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
and the vine and her branches have one kind of substance or nature: Heb. 2.
16. 17. and 4. 15.
nor yet only Propter conformitatem affectuum, Cyril. in Job. l. 10. c. 13.
for conformity of affections, or similitude of virtues, or for because he is
in our hearts by love, and we in his, which may be among faithful lovers, and
loving couples: but also, because we are his work and creation, his fruit
and edifice. His very flesh does sanctify us, his blood does cleanse us: by the
means and virtue whereof, being the flesh and blood of God, our souls are
quickened, Act. 20. 28.
our hearts are purified, our sins are washed away, and we nourished,
refreshed, strengthened, and preserved to life and glory.

From this sacred flesh of his our very bodies do receive that life, which
shall make them glorious at the latter day, and for the which they are now
reputed parcels of his blessed body.

These corruptible bodies of ours could never live the life, they shall live,
but that they are here joined with his body, which is incorruptible, and that
his is in ours, as a cause of immortality; a cause by removing, through the
inualuable death and merit of his own flesh, that, which hindered the life of
ours.

And if a man may say the fire is in a man, when the heat and virtue of the
fire is in him, as when he is hot, burnt, scorcht, or scalded, well then may a
man truly say that Christ is in a man, who partakes of his merit, virtue, and
operations, and who has his very spirit dwelling and abiding in him, who
moulds him, turns him, fashions him, mortifies him, quickens him, and repaires
him, scorching, drying, consuming, and burning up the petulant and luxurious
lusts and humors of sin within him.

Christ then, both as God and Man, is in us, within us, and is our Head, Col.
2. 10.
in whom we are complete.

And as from the head is conveyed sense and motion into all the parts of the
body. And as the same soul, which is in the head, is in all the members of the
body, quickening, moving and directing them. Even so the holy Spirit of Christ
is from Christ derived into all the members of his spiritual body: and from
him, as God and Man, we receive our godly life and being, and all those
perfections, wherein our godliness and happiness stands.

The Godhead indeed is the fountain of all grace and comforts: but the manhead
is the conduit-pipe, by which they are from that fountain, or springhead,
conveyed and brought unto us, even as blood is diffused by veins throughout
the body from the liver, or as the sinews do minister sense and motion from
the brain.

But whereas, sinews, veins, and pipes of wood, lead or other matter, lack
reason, judgment and will, the flesh of Christ is furnished with them in all
perfections: so that indeed neither the Deity without the Humanity, nor the
Humanity without the Deity, but both do work together for our good, and
worke-out our life and glory.

So then, we participate whole Christ, and the whole of Christ. We participate
Christ, God and Man, agent and patient, living and dying, descending and
ascending, abased and exalted.

He, that has the tree, has the fruits: he, that has the field, has the
corn: he, to whom the sheep belongs, is owner also of the fleece and fruit.

We participate Christ partly by imputation, his obedience, holiness, and
sufferings, being imputed to us, and judged to be ours, For the Surety being
ours, his money is also ours, to pay our debts, having freely undertaken upon
him so to do. This money is the justice of Christ imputed to us, wherewith we
buy out our justification and liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus. This (as
Solomon speaks of money) does answer all things. Eccles. 10. 19.
By it we obtain access to God, pardon of our sins, redemption from our
enemies, and everlasting salvation.

And partly also we participate him by habitual and real infusion, as when
grace is really wrought within us, and inhereth inwardly in us, true holiness
being engraven upon our hearts by the finger of God, whiles we live on earth,
and hereafter more fully, when both our bodies, and our souls, shall be made
like unto his in perfect glory.

And because Christ works by his Spirit, therefore he bestows his Spirit,
even the holy Ghost, who is breathed from him, upon his whole body, and every
particular member thereof. This Spirit is that odoriferous Northwinde, and
Southwinde, which blows upon the Garden of Christ Jesus, which is the Church,
Cant. 4. 16.
that the spices thereof may flow out. These wholesome and sweet winds do
nip, and kill the naughty swelling humors of our spirits, and do also
mollify, supple, refresh and comfort us. So that if any man would have these
winds to blow upon him, let him abide in this Garden. If any man would enjoy
this Spirit, let him abide in Christ's body. For as Irenaeus says well, Iren.
lib. 4. cap. 18.
Where the Church is, there is the Spirit: and where the Spirit of God is,
there is the Church, and every grace. Ioh. 14. 17.
And the spirit is truth.

So then, a godly Christian is more than a man, and far better then a sinner.

He is become a new Creature, a new man, 2 Cor: 5: 17.
a Saint on earth, Coloss: 3: 10.
a tree transplanted out of an ill ground, Romans 1. 17.
out of the world, 1 Cor: 1: 2.
the Devils territory, Gal. 1. 4.
and translated into the kingdom of Christ, Col: 1. 14.
a brand taken out of the fire, a Lamb plucked out of the Lions mouth, a man
taken out of Adam, and incorporated into Christ, 1 Cor: 12. 13.
a man baptized, that is, regenerated and ingrafted into that One Body, whereof
Christ is Head, even the head of the whole Church, Militant and Triumphant,
throughout the World. From whom the whole Body fitly joined together, Ephesians: 4.
16.
and compacted by that, Col. 2. 19.
which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
measure, of every part, makes increase of the Body, unto the edifying of it
self in love.

Every true Christian therefore is a liue-man, a living limme of Christ's body,
a man revived, Ephesians: 2: 5.
reformed, Col: 2. 11. 13.
and as it were transformed into Christ, Ephesians: 4. 15.
and may say with Saint Paul, I am crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live,
yet not I, Gal. 2. 20.
but Christ lives in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live
by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

Who now would not be a member of this Body, who has so glorious an head, and
is endued with such an excellent Spirit?

Behold all the heads of the world, natural heads, political heads,
oeconomicall heads, Ecclesiastical heads; what are they all? even dust, earth,
and ashes. A learned head, is but learned earth: a wise head is but wise earth:
a great head is but a great clot of earth: a noble head is but noble earth.
Emperors and Kings, the great commanders and swayers of the world, they are but
earth, imperial earth, royal earth. Earth and ashes will one day lay them
even with their Subjects. The finest heads in the world, what are they else, but
handfuls of dust: make the best of them, They are but fine dust and ashes. For
all flesh is grass: all flesh is not one manner of flesh. But there is one
manner of flesh of men, another of beasts, another of birds, another of fishes.
But the flesh of all men, as well as of all beasts, birds, and fishes, is but
grass, very grass, less then grass: Yet behold how we admire the persons of
men, of great men, rich men, Princes, Heads, who are but clay, but dust, but
dreams, alive in the morning and dead at night.

But Christ, our head, our royal head, is alive and gives life, lives, and
will live for ever: Dust, Death, Devils, Men and Angels, Earth and Heaven, and
all things are at his beck. If he say to the dead, Live: they shall live. If
he say to Death it self, die, be not: death must die, it cannot longer be.
What he will have done, shall be done, there is no resistance.

Vouchsafe O Lord, to look upon me, as thou use to look on those that are
enamoured with thee, and do desire thee. My soul thirsts after thee: Come
unto me, bring me to thee, and let me find thee, and enjoy thee Lord Jesus
come quickly, and let me feel thy grace, and the joys of thy Spirit in me.

But the contemplation of our thrice excellent and most blessed head has made
me tarry a little longer then I thought.

I am come at last, though long first, to the last similitude, which I
propounded for the illustration of our Union with Christ, which is of an House
of Temple, wherein I promise to be plain and brief.

The Catholic Church is the Temple, 1 Timothy: 3. 15.
or House of the living God. 1 Cor: 3. 11.
Christ is the Foundation thereof. Ephesians: 2: 20.
He is the Principal and energeticall foundation, and chiefe-corner-stone
thereof.

The holy Prophets and Apostles are ministerial foundations and Pillars
thereof. Revel. 21.
For by their ministry and doctrine this house is builded, Ephesians: 2. 20.
and confirmed.

Christ also is the chiefest Architect of this building. The Apostles and other
Pastors of the Church, are his Ministers, 1 Cor. 3. 9.
with and by whom he works, Math: 28. 20.
and with whom he is present to aid and prosper them to the end of the world.

They are in this House as Servants, and under-officers, 1 Cor: 4. 1.
and stewards: but he is in it, Heb: 3. 6.
and over it as a Master, being the only begotten Son of God, Hebr. 1. 2.
and Heir of all things. He also is the light and beauty of it. Reu: 21: 23.


This house of Christ grows out of Christ, John 8. 12.
and is ruled by the Faith of Christ. The rule of the Faith is the holy
Scripture: The Church is the ground and Pillar of the Truth, 1 Cor: 3. 15.
Chrysostom.
and the truth is the ground and Pillar of the Church: yea therefore she is
the ground of the truth, because the truth is the ground of her, and for
because the spirit of Truth inhabits and directs her: John 14. 17.
which spirit, because he spoke in the holy men of God, 2 Pet. 1. 22.
is therefore best able to give the sense of the Scripture, and accordingly
does teach the Church all truths therein contained, needful to salvation.

This house is a spiritual house, a living Temple, 1 Pet: 2. 5.
and Christ is the Life thereof, 1 Cor: 6.
and his Spirit possesses and keeps it.

All the stones of this Temple are living stones, I Pet: 2. 5.
growing out of the living and life-giuing Rock, on which the Temple stands.
They are all made alive, and kept alive by the Spirit of Christ, who is
resident always, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
and president in them.

There are in these diversities of gifts and operations, but the same Spirit
which works all in all. 1 Cor: 12. 4. 6.
Who is seven, Revel. 1. 4.
yea seauenty times seven fould, not in person (for so he is but one) but in
variety of gifts and gracious operations. Ephesians: 4. 4.


Now as the foundation bears up all the house that is laid upon it: so Christ
holds up and confirms the Church, being rooted and built in him, Col. 2. 7.
and stablished in the Faith. And this he does, partly by his providence and
circumspection, and partly by his merits and efficacy, through his Spirit.

And as all the parts of an house are compact together, and joined to the
foundation: so are all true believers, all devout and sincere Christians knit
together in one, Colos: 2. 2. 7.
and joined unto Christ by Faith and Charity (as it were by lime, pins, nails,
and sawder) through the holy Ghost, who heweth, frames, and sets every
stone in order in Christ, In whom all the Building fitly framed together, Ephesians:
2: 20.
grows unto an holy Temple to the Lord.

This is a rare and singular house: for they that are hereof, are Stones, and
Kings, 1 Pet: 1: 5. 9.
and Priests. Revel: 1: 6.
So then the Church is a living Temple, a spiritual House, and a Royal
Priesthood: a kingdom of Priests, and a Priestlie kingdom.

And no marvel it is if Christians be stones, seeing Christ Jesus, out of whom
they are cut, and grow, be a Rock: or though they have a certain Kingdom
and Priesthood, seeing they be members of him who is a King and Priest. Psalm:
45.
They are Christians: 1 John: 2:
it is enough; they are annoiuted with the oil of gladness, that they may be
able to overcome the Deuiil, the World* and the Flesh, as Kings that reign by
Christ; and may also have grace like Priests to offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God by Christ, with whose holy oil they are anointed.

For as the precious ointment, that was powered upon Aarons head, Psalm: 133: 2.
ran down upon his beard, and went down on the border of his garments: So
the holy oil, the most sweet and saving oil, which was powered upon our head
Christ Jesus, has run down over all his body into all his members, and
be-deawes them all, as the deaw of Hermon, which falls upon the mountains of
Zion. And (which is no small favor) this precious and holy ointment tarrieth
on us, 1 Ioh: 2: 27.
and dwells in us, as St. John does assure us.

In a word, this Temple, this House has a privilege above all the temples and
houses in the world.

For no wind can drive it down, no water can wash it down, no fire can burn
it down, no canon can beat it down, no weight can weigh it down, no might
can cast it down, no witchcraft can work it down, no underminer can
undermine it down, no thunder or lightning can tear or fire it down: neither
men nor Devils have power over it. For Christ vpholds it against all assaults
of enemies whatsoever. It is built by Christ upon himself who has also said
that the gates of hell, Matthew: 16: 18.
shall not overcome it. Christ has spoken this concerning no house, that is
material and earthly, but only of this his own spiritual Temple: and being
Truth it self, Ioh: 14: 6.
we may well believe him. 1 Ioh: 5: 19.
Whose house we are, Heb: 3: 6.
if we hold fast the confidence, and rejoicing of hope to the end, as the
Apostle speaks unto the Hebrews.

Thus have we seen our Conjunction with Christ, Ioh: 14: 20.
who is in us, and we in him.

He is in us, as a cause in the effect: we are in him, as the effect is in the
cause.

He is in us, as a worke-man is in his work: we are in him, as a work is in
the worke-man.

We are in him, as Eve was in Adam: he is in us as Adams rib and nature was in
Eve.

He is in us, as the Sun is in the air or house, to illuminate and warm
it: we are in him, as the air or an house is in the Sun, which is lightened
and warmed of it.

He is in us as a kernel or seed, and the earth it grows in is in the plant:
Similitudo non c^rrit quat uor pedibus.
we are in him, as the plant is in the kernel or seed of which it comes, and
in the ground, in which it is set, and by which it is fed.

He is in us, and we in him, as Adam is in his children, and his children in
him: or as the fountain is in the river, and the river in it: or as a root is
in the boughs, and they in the root.

But who is able sufficiently to express these things? who can declare how he
is fashioned in his mothers womb? or tell how his soul and body are knit
together: Ephesians: 5: 32.
This is a great mystery, says Saint Paul; but I speak concerning Christ and
the Church.

I doubt not but that many a poor soul is the Spouse of Christ, and one of
his true members, tho he be not able to say much about his union and
incorporation, 1 Cor: 12: 13.
which is by the Spirit of Christ.

And though a man said never so much hereof, and could speak of heaven, as if
he had been there, yet all were but dreams, unless he be joined to
Christ, and have his spirit really to possess and lead him.

That which quickneth us, is the spirit of Christ: 1 Cor: 15: 22: 45
and his flesh that wherewith he quickneth us.

That which sanctified our nature in Christ, that which made it a sacrifice of
reconciliation, Heb: 9: 14.
is the same, which quickneth it, raised it from the grave, and exalted it to
glory.

And therefore if a man have not the Spirit, or Godhead of Christ, and be
partaker of his flesh, he is but a dead man, a miserable man, a man
unmortified, unsanctified, and without hope of glory. I am the living bread
(says Christ) which came down from heaven. Ioh: 5: 21: 53.
If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread, that I
will give, is my flesh, which I will give, for the life of the world. Except
ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in
you.

But how can a man eat bread, if he have it not? How can we eat his flesh and
drink his blood, unless we have it? The truth is, he that gives us this
meat to eat, must also give us hands to take it, and mouths to taste and eat
it, and a stomach to crave and hold it. We must needs therefore be united to
Christ, and be truly possessed of him and of his grace, or else we cannot live
by him.

And because no man eats him, but by grace, and for that no grace is but by the
holy Ghost, who divides to every man severally, 1 Cor: 12: 11.
as he will, and seeing by this eating of Christ he is not turned into us as
bodily food, but we receive nurriture and confirmation from him, and are
transmuted into him, and grow up in him, and he in us, which neither can be
wrought, but by the Holy Ghost, it is of absolute necessity that we be
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have him dwelling in us.

So then whatsoever men talk of the Spirit, all is nothing, they do but beat
the air, and make a dinne, they are most miserable wretches, viler then the
dust on their shooe-soles, unless they be endued with him.

He it is which anointed the blessed soul of our Savior Jesus Christ, and
which does fashion, unite, animate, and actuate all that spring from him, in
all the ages and places of the world, as if both he and they together were so
many members or parts compacted into one body, being all possessed and endued
with one and the self samesoule.

This Conjunction is most sweet and comfortable, and indeed that, wherein our
blessedness consists, whiles we live on earth, and gives us right unto the
perfect blessedness of the life to come.

We count it a great courtesy to be taken into some Corporation or Society
amongst men in some Town, City, or College; and esteem it a great
advancement, when a poor Maiden is married to a Prince, or to some mighty rich
man: what favor then has God shown us, how highly has he graced us, how
great is our happiness, seeing he has given us unto his one eternal and
only Son, to whom we are fast united, with whom we are clothed, whose
spirit, grace and merits we do participate, and from whom nothing shall be able
to disioyne and part us, no not the gates of hell?

What shall we render unto the Lord for his love unto us? what praises shall
we sing unto him? O Lord, what is man, that thou should so regard him, or
the son of man, that thou should so advance him? Man is a worm, and the son
of man is a worm, dust and ashes, sin, shame, and confusion. What are we all,
even the best of us all, but vapors, shadows, dreams, glasses, and very
vanity? yet as base, as we be, the great God of heaven has looked down upon
us, and not scorned us. O Lord, how shall we praise thee? where shall we
begin, or how shall we make an end?

The Angels, which transgressed, thou have passed by, and would not give thy
Son unto them. Thou do punish their pride against thee, and their envy at
our felicity. They fell without a Tempter, and they perish without a Savior.
But man, poor man, distressed wretch, who being fallen by Satan's subtlety,
had no strength left him to rise again, and with himself overthrew all his
issue, thou have out of pure pity relieved and raised up again, and a many
also of his children, even as many, as thy grace made choice of.

On him thou did bestow thy Son, thy dear and only child. Thou have
espoused and knit us to him. His we are (who once were Satan's) he is our life,
Col. 3. 4. 11.
our crown, our hope, our happiness.

In him we have all things, and he is all things in and to us.

We poor wretches are sick and wounded: but he is our phisique and
Phisician; in him we find perfect health and soundness.

We are weak and feeble, but he is our fortitude and strength.

We are naked, having nothing on us, but rotten rags, and stinking patches:
but he is raiment for us, and does array us, and preserve us from cold and
nakedness.

We are hungry and thirsty, empty and hollow, yea even famished for lack of
meat: but he is meat and drink, Pabulum and Pastor, our food, and feeder,
our nurriture, and our nurse, 1 Cor. 6.
Esca mentis, non ventris, meat indeed for the soul, not for the belly.
Meats are for the belly, and the belly for meats, and God will destroy both
it and them: but this food is for the soul, and the soul for it, and the
soul shall besaued by it, if it do receive it, and shall not be destroyed.
All refections are in him: if we have him, we can lack no meat to strengthen
us, no drink to cool us, no wine to cheer us, no dainties to content us, no
waters to revive and comfort us.

All the aqua vitae, aqua caelestis, aurum potabile, all the waters, wines, and
drinks in the world, cannot quicken a dead man, or preserve a living man, that
he see not death; much less then are they able to revive a dead soul, and to
save soul and body from hell fire, and raise a dead body from his dust.

But our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom we are, and he in us, Joh. 14. and 17.
whose flesh we eat, Ioh. 6. 50. 54.
whose blood we drink, he, he is able, fully able to do all this for us.

He is the Fountain of the gardens, Cant. 4. 15.
the well of living waters, Ephesians. 4.
the Leader of captivity captive, 1 Cor. 15.
the death of death, Col. 3.
the destruction of the grave, Ephesians. 5.
and the Author of life, grace and immortality to all his body.

When we were cast forth in our nakedness and blood, Ezekiel 16.
and lay as forlorn and dead, he, I say, he came to us, took pity upon us, and
clothed us, and said unto us live, Col. 2. 13.
and we are become alive.

He has crucified our sins, washed our souls, Reu: 1.
reconciled us to God, 1 Cor: 5.
quieted our minds, Romans 5.
saved us from hell, given us his Spirit, the Spirit of life and comfort, of
grace and holiness: and when the fullness of time is come, Ioh. 5.
he will raise up our dead bodies, 1 Cor. 15.
and make us triumph over death, and hell, and sin, and all our infernal
enemies, in eternal and euer-blessed glory with him; his holy Name be praised
for ever, and for ever, Amen.

The Time, wherein we are first joined unto Christ actually, the time, I say,
in which he is first actually in us so, as has been said, and we actually in
him, is at our effectual calling and turning unto God, then when we are first
actually incorporated by the Spirit into his body.

As concerning Gods eternal counsel, and foreknowledge, and purpose of
adoption, and incorporation, we were in Christ, and Christ in us, before the
foundations of the world were laid: but we are not actually knit unto him, he
is not actually given to us, and we to him, until we be actually regenerated,
or called: Even as Eve was not actually united to Adam, till God made her, and
gave her to him, and he received her. And our being in Christ by eternal
foreknowledge saues us not without our actual calling, and adoption, and our
real incorporation in time into his body, which is perfect in him, the head,
whence all the body by ioints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit
together, Col. 2. 10. 19.
increases with the increase of God. The time when our Union and Contract with
Christ shall be solemnly celebrated, is at the latter day, then when our dead
bodies are restored alive and glorious unto us, and when all our enemies shall
be actually trodden under our feet, and for ever. Against which day he
prepare and fit us for himself, who has prepared it for himself, and us.
Come o Lord, Lord Jesus come quickly, and take us to thee.

The man, that is united unto Christ and is partaker of him and of his
benefits, that man (I say) may discern this his blessed union with Christ, and
Christ's abode within him by these notes ensuing.

Our blessed Lord and Savior says, if a man love me, Ioh. 14. 23.
he will keep my words, and my father will love him: and we will come unto
him, and make our abode with him. He therefore, that loves Christ, and keeps
his word, has Christ in him, and is in Christ.

Again, behold, I stand at the door, and knock: Reu: 3. 20.
if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come into him, and sup
with him, and he with me. He therefore that hears Christ speaking to him in
the ministry of the word and good motions of the Spirit, and opens the door
of his heart, Psalm. 24.
that this glorious King may come into him (for he will not break in like a
Theife or Murderer by violence, against a man's will) he has Christ in him, and
he is himself in Christ. For Christ is in no man, as a Savior, but in him,
who as a man saved is in Christ, And he is a Savior to none, but such, as
entertain him for their Lord, and will be ruled by him, as obedient and loving
Subjects.

Further, Ioh. 6. 47.
He, that belieueth in me, has everlasting life. Therefore by true faith in
Christ a man believing may see his union and fellowship with Christ. For no man
has eternal life, but he, that is in Christ, and has Christ. For Christ is
the life, even eternal life: life, even everlasting is in him, and flows
from him. Romans 8. 1.
Yea Christ expressly says, He that eats my flesh, 1 Ioh. 5. 12.
and drinks my blood, Ioh. 14. 6.
dwells in me and I in him. But, qui credit, 1 Ioh. 5. 11. 20
edit, he eats, that belieueth. Why preparest thou thy teeth, Ioh. 6. 56.
and thy belly, says Saint Austin, Believe, and thou have eaten, Creed, and
manducasti, He eats him, which belieueth in him. Noli parare fauces, sed cor:
make not ready thy chaps for the matter, but thine heart.

For a good soul is a good stomach: a good mind is mouth enough: it is no
matter tho the teeth be rotten, and the gummes be naught, if the faith be
sound: or tho the mouth be shut, if the heart be open.

Moreover, he that dwells in God, and God in him, dwells in Christ, and
Christ in him. Ioh. 14. 10. 11.
For Christ is in God, and God in him. Ioh. 17. 23.
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. Now we may
know that God dwells in us, and we in God, by obedience to his precepts, by
mutual love one toward another, and by his holy spirit.

1 By obedience: For, who so keeps his word, 1 Ioh: 2. 5.
in him verily is the love of God perfited: hereby know we that we are in him.
He that keeps his commandments, 1 Ioh. 3. 24.
dwells in him, and he in him.

2 By mutual love: if we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is
perfect in us. God is love, and he, that dwells in love, dwells in God, and
God in him.

3 By his holy Spirit: Hereby we know that he abides in us, 1 John 3. 24.
by the Spirit, which he has given us. 1 Ioh. 4. 13.
And again, Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he
has given us his spirit.

True it is that there is no condemnation to them, that are in Christ Jesus.
But who are they? Even they, that walk not after the flesh, Romans 8. 1.
but after the spirit.

Certain it is, if any man have Christ, the same has the spirit of Christ. For
if any man have not the spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9.
the same is none of his. And the spirit is known by his works, as a strong
wind by his effects, as a tree by her fruits, or the soul by her actions in
the body. Luke 6. 44.
But the fruit of the spirit is love, Gal 5. 22.
joy, peace, longanimity, gentleness, goodness, fidelity, meekenes, temperance.
And as the body is dead without the spirit, Iam 1. 26.
so is the soul without the spirit of Christ, and a man's faith and godliness
without good works, which does manifest it, as the light does the sun, or as
the heat does the truth of fire.

Many men abuse themselves with their own fancies, thinking they have the
spirit of Christ in them, whereas in truth they live in the flesh, follow the
flesh, dance after the Devils pipe, run when the world whoops, living in
ignorance, and pride, in presumption and security of the flesh, delighting in
one known evil or other, and will not be separated from it: but cleave unto
it (let John Baptist say what he will) as Herod to Herodias his brothers wife.
But the truth is, the spirit of God dwells in none, but those that are not in
the flesh but in the Spirit: in none, Romans 8. 9.
but those that are led by the spirit, and not by the flesh. And they that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof. Gal: 5. 24.


It is no such difficulty for a man to distinguish his friend from his foe, for
a Woman to know her own husband from a stranger, or for a man to know his own
head from another man's. Neither is it indeed so hard a matter for a true
Christian to know Christ to be his and himself to be Christ's.

Indeed Epicures, Atheists, Mammonists, malicious Idiots, Hypocrites, and
Christians only in name, find it not only difficult, but impossible: or
else, like melancholy fools and frantic men, they feed and fill themselves
with foolish fantasies.

For he that would know himself to be in Christ, must needs first be in
Christ: as she that would know her self to be such a man's wife, must first
be his wife: or as a man must have wealth or health before he know he has
it, and must be alive before he knows he is alive, and can tell another
that he is alive.

In vain do they say, that they are in Christ, which do not the works of
Christ, and have not his holy Spirit, but a spirit of uncleanness in them. And
in vain do they imagine or tell folks, that they have the spirit of Christ,
when they adhere unto Antichrist, or while they follow and fulfill the lusts of
the flesh, as adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
Gal: 5. 19. 21.
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
enuyings, murders, drunkenness, reuellings, and such like, which whosoever
does, 1 Cor: 6. 10.
shall not inherit the kingdom of God, and therefore plainly declare that
they are not in Christ, and Christ in them.

The course that men should take to become partakers of Christ and his
benefits, is this. First duly to consider, and bitterly to lament their
wretchedness out of Christ, and to hunger and thirst eagerly after him.

For unless we see and feel our miserable and fearful estate without him,
we shall make no reckoning of him.

Unless we know and acknowledge our indigence of him, and that he is
abundantly able to supply our wants, we shall not esteem and desire him.

What should he do with a friend or surety, that sees no need of him? Or what
should she do with a husband, that knows not what a husband means? Or what
should they do with money, that knows not what to do with it? or with
clothes that know not how to put them on, or what they should do with them:
like the wild Virginians that count them cumbersome unto them, choosing to go
naked?

A full stomach loathes an honnycombe, contemnes all sorts of delicates: but
true hunger makes a man desire and seek for meat. The sense of sickness and
nakedness makes a man desire health and clothing. The feeling of poverty and
lack, mooues a man to seek riches and supply. The pinching of could weather
makes a man run to the fire, and leave the open air. The smart of pains
causes a man to seek ease. The miseries of wars make men seek peace and
pursue it.

Oh that we could see our unrighteousness, that we might affect the
righteousness of Christ. Oh that we could feel our heavy sins, our sins
that oppress our souls, and have swallowed us up, that Christ might deliver
us from them, and give us ease. Oh that we could fear, that we might come to
hope, and sorrow, that we might rejoice in Christ. They that would have much
joy, must first have much sorrow: there is no way to sound joys, but by bitter
sorrow: and a little sorrow will sustain but a little joy: Of short sorrow
arises but short joy: of counterfeit sorrows, but counterfeit joys.

He that would hope, must fear: the true way to hope, is by true fear, and
they that would hope much, must fear much: they that would build high, must
dig low; the tallest trees have the deepest roots: a little fear will
support but a little hope: a little distrust but a little confidence.

Oh that we could, and at last would distrust our selves, that we might repose
all trust in Christ. 1 Pet. 2.
He that believes in him shall not be ashamed.

Oh that we could sorrow, lament and howl for our vileness, and weep
bitterly for our sins with Peter, and even wash our Saviors feet with our
tears, as that poor penitent woman did. Oh that the fountains of sorrow were
broken up within us, that whole floods of tears might gush out from us: then
all our sorrows should be turned into joys, our mourning into merriment, and
our tears into songs.

O that we could go down into the deepes, the deepest deepes, and cry out (as
Jonah did) out of the belly of hell. Jonas 2. 2.
Then our fears would be changed inhope, and our sighs would end in solace.
Oh that our souls did faint within us, and that we were even brought unto
true despair of our own strength and valor, that we might only trust in
Christ, and seek to him for succor. For all other helps are but as a sliding
foot, a rotten tooth, and a silly reed. And they that wait upon lying
vanities, forsake their own mercy.

Behold we the spirit of S. Paul, Ion: 2: 8.
who was able to say for himself as much as another; yet seeing his own
necessities and the perfections of Christ, he was content to cast off
himself, to put on Christ: to cast down himself, to build up himself in
Christ: to vilify himself to be made glorious in Christ: to become nothing in
himself, to be something (even that whole thing which he is) in Christ: and
even to lose himself in himself, that he might find himself safe in Christ.

What things (says he) were gain to me, Phil: 3: 7.
those I counted loss for Christ. Yea doubtless and I count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ my Lord. For whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of
the Law: but that, which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith: that I may know him, and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellow-ship of his sufferings, being made conformable
unto his death: if by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the
dead.

Secondly, to gain Christ Jesus and his graces, and gracious blessings, we
ought to apply our selves to the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments. For
these are the golden pipes, through which the oil of the spirit is conuayed
and brought unto us, and by which we become enriched with the merits and
virtues of our Savior.

For as concerning the Word: Iam: 1: 8.
it is the word of truth, by which we are begotten in Christ to God by the
Spirit, who works by it. Heb: 6: 5.
It is the good word of God: a word, that conuerteth the soul and gives
wisdom to the simple. Psalm: 19: 7.


It is the word of grace, the word of life, Phil: 2: 15. 1 Timothy: 4: 6. Tit: 2:
8. Ephesians: 6: 15: and 1: 13. Iam: 1: 21:
the word of faith, an wholesome word, the word of peace, the word of
salvation, able to save the soul, in which it is engrafted.

It is a word that shows us our poorness, nakedness, blindness, and
wretchedness, and is withal that happy organ of grace and glory, in the which
God shows us his Son, in whom we may have remedy, and holds him out unto us,
willing us to take him of him: and by receiving of which word we may come to
enjoy that substantial and thrice-blessed Word, who is our life and glory.

And as touching the Sacraments: they are not only memorials, signs and
testimonies, but effectual means and instruments (not natural, but moral:
not humane, but divine) by the which God, when we take the Sacraments,
delivers unto us Christ Jesus and his merits, and that grace that is
needful to salvation.

By these we are put into possession of Christ, of his spirit and grace, both
imputative and inhesiue.

In these our Lord Jesus Christ, God and Man, comes unto our souls, and
applies himself unto us, and works in us, as he pleases.

Yet to speak properly, by Baptism we receive but the beginning of those
graces, the increase and confirmation whereof we receive afterward by the
often receiving of the Lords Supper.

We receive Christ Jesus in Baptism once, as the Author and first Beginner:
in the Communion often, as being by continual degrees the Finisher and
Perfecter of our life.

When we receive this Sacrament, the spirit is sent a new into us: not as if
he moved place (for he is every where whole all the world over) but because he
is now to begin some new grace, or to confirm and augment some formerly
begun, or to raise up some languishing, or to give some joy, some comfort,
where either none was, or was scarcely felt, or is decayed.

So then that healing and saving grace, which Christ originally is, or has, as
the fountain of life and grace, for the good of the whole Church, he does
severally by Sacraments divide and derive into every particular member thereof
Neither does he ordinarily bestow the grace of Sacraments on any, but by
Sacraments.

But yet this grace, which we receive by the Sacraments organically, we
receive not from them energetically, but from him: as they that looked upon the
brazen serpent, Wisd: 16: 7.
were not healed by that they saw, but by the Lord, their Savior.

But yet it is very just, and more then probable, that they which contemn or
neglect the Sacraments, should be without the grace of the Sacraments.

Christ is the kernel of the word and Sacraments: they, that would eat the
kernel, must crack the shell. These are the vestiments in which he comes
unto us.

They are worthy to go without him, that will not use the means to get and
keep him.

Without doubt it is either ignorance, or worldliness, or wantonness, and
presumption, or something that is naught, that makes men contemn and pass by
these holy ordinances of Christ.

I assure my self their stomachs are full, their hearts a sleep, and their
mouths out of taste (something doubtless is amiss) that they have so small
desire to them, and feel so little sweetness in them.

Something does bewitch them, that they can neither see nor feel their own
wants, nor that superabundance of supply, that is offered to them in Christ,
who stretches forth himself, and exhibits his spirit, and all his merits in
these holy mysteries.

Questionless these men lack faith, in stead whereof their heads are filled
full of fancies. For had they faith, they would fly to the Communion, and
press on themselves, as she in the Gospel, Matthew: 9.
in her issue, whose faith made her come to Christ, and go behind him, tho
but to touch the outer garment of Christ. And what followed? virtue went forth
of Christ, she was instantly cured. Christ Jesus is offered unto us in the
Sacrament. Now if we would come to it, as she did to his garment, we should
find grace. But how came she? her body was consumed, her blood was spent, her
purse was emptied: and all this she felt, and was well affected with. Further,
she saw all her helps failed her. She does despair of the skill of all
Physicians. And for herself, she saw there was no hope of help in nature,
which daily decayed in her: she saw she could not long hold out in this estate.
What does she then? kill her self, or run out to wizards? Oh no: but she
bethinkes her self of Christ, whose miracles she either had seen or heard
of. To him she trudges, and touched the hemme of his garment. For she said in
her self, If I may touch but his garment only, I shall be whole. And she
was made whole at that same instant. Matthew: 9: 22.
In like manner the Scripture reports of the men of Gennazaret, Mattth: 14: 35.
36.
that when once they knew Christ, they sent all the sick people about them to
him, and besought him that they might touch the hemme of his garment only. And
as many as touched it, were made whole.

See, these people knew by sense the misery of sickness and diseases, as we
say the ox knows not the loss of his horn, till he has lost it: they also
knew Christ and believed his power, and they were well persuaded of his gentle
nature: neither were they so simple as to think his garment able of it self
to heal them: but they knew that the virtue came from him: but yet they
desired only to touch his garment, because they knew it was a testimony or
sign sufficient of their confidence in him.

Questionless Christ is the only Physician of the soul, the only fountain
of life and grace. And in the Sacrament he tenders himself unto us, as he is
both God and Man. He is the same that ever he was, as potent, as gracious, as
easy to be entreated. And we for our parts are full of defects. F^ther
therefore that men neglect the Sacrament, or make light regard thereof, it it
because they are ignorant of Christ, and believe not in him, but either deny
his might or else his mercy, or both: or else it is because they are insensate
and ignorant beasts, without knowledge and feeling of their own miserable
wants and beggarly baseness: or they do not understand and believe what the
Sacrament is, and what may be obtained by touching, tasting and receiving it,
in a faithful, penitent, and humble manner.

But if we came preparedly to the Sacrament, with good belief, and unfeigned
desire of grace, touched with a thorough feeling of our wants, we should
certainly obtain his Spirit, and receive grace by the taking and tasting of
the Sacrament, which grace proceeds originally from his Godhead, which
dwells personally in his flesh, which is there with his whole person and all
his merits exhibited to the faithful and humbled soul.

Faith then we see is a gift of great importance: for by faith we come to
Christ: John 1. 12.
by faith we love Christ: by faith we receive Chirst: by faith we rest in
Christ: Rom: 3.
by faith we are justified by the blood of Christ: Gal: 2.
by faith our hearts are purified: Gal: 3.
by faith we live: by faith we walk: Ephesians: 6.
by faith Christ dwells in our hearts: 1 Pet: 5.
by faith we become the Sons of God: 1 John 5.
by faith we resist the Devil: by faith we overcome the world: by faith we
are saved. What shall I say more? Heb: 11.
Without faith it is impossible to please God: Heb: 4.
without faith the word will be unprofitable in us, and the Sacraments
likewise: without faith a man cannot enjoy Christ: for none shall have him, but
such as do receive him, and none receive him, but such as put their confidence
in him, and rest contented in his love And in a word In Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing, Galat. 5. 6.
nor uncircumcision: but faith, which works by love.

A man lackes nothing, that has himself: but he has himself that has
Christ, and he has Christ that believes in Christ, in the power of Christ,
in the grace of Christ, in the word of Christ, and rests himself in his
doctrine, regency and salvation. He that has faith has all things; but he
that is without faith, has nothing, but in the middst of all things round
about him, is nothing. All the riches, treasures, honors, and learning in the
world come short of the work, the worth and efficacy of true Christian Faith.

This is enough to make it esteemed, because by it he dwells in our hearts,
who has riches for us if we be poor; Ephesians: 3. 17.
sight for us, if we be blind; hearing for us, if we be deaf; apparel for us,
if we be naked; bread for us; if we be hungry; drink for us, if we be
thirsty; strength for us, if we be weak; health for us if we be sick;
freedom for us, if we be in bonds; and sufficient means of satisfaction if we
be in debt, and will come by faith, and seek unto him for his grace.

O Lord increase in me faith, and help mine unbelief. O Lord open my blind
eyes, that I may see my wretchedness, and behold thy glory. Touch me with a
lively sense thereof, that I may fly to thee for succor.

Come down to me, and make me to go up to thee.

Seek me up, that I may seek thee, and seeking thee may find thee.

Let me find no rest in my self, till I do find rest in thee.

Unite me fast unto thee, that I may enjoy thee, and in enjoying thee, enjoy my
self.

Hold me, that nothing may withhold thee from me.

Withold me, that nothing may intise or draw me from thee.

Give me thy self, O Lord, yea give me thy self, that I may give my self
unto thee.

Pardon my sins, O Lord, O Lord pardon all my sins, and purge me with thy
holy spirit.

Guide me, that I may follow thee, and follow me that I may not go away from
thee.

Thou art the way, give me grace to walk in thee.

Thou art the Truth; learn me to know thee, and persuade me to love thee.

Thou, thou art the Life, make me to come to thee, and to continue steadfast in
thee.

Thou art the only Savior, save me, O Lord, I beseech thee for thy mercy
sake, and vouchsafe to deliver me from the hands of all mine enemies: so shall
I praise thy name, for ever and for ever, Amen.

Trin-Vni Deo Gloria in secula seculorum, Amen, Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

