The whole book of Psalms, collected into English Meter by Thomas Sternhold,
I. Hopkins and others: co^ferred with the Hebrew, with apt Notes to sing them
withal. Faithfully perused and allowed according to the Queen's Majesty's
Injunctions.

Very meet to be used of al sorts of people privately for their solace and
comfort: laying apart al ungodly songs and Ballades, which read only to the
norishing of vice and corrupting of youth.

JAMES. V. If any be afflicted let him pray, and if any be merry, let him sing
Psalms. COLLOS. III. Let the word of God dwell in you in all wisdom, teaching,
and exhortyng one another in Psalms, Hymns and spiritual songs, and sing
unto the Lord in your hearts. Imprinted at London by John Day.

Cum gratia and priuilegio, Regi^ Maiestatis per septennium. Anno 1565.

royal coat of arms

A Treatise made by Athanasius the great, wherein is set forth, how, and in what
manner ye may v^e the Psalms according to the effect of the mind, of gladness,
or sorrow accordingly, which Psalms ye shall use for prayer, which for
thanks geuyng, which for rehersall of gods wonderful acts to the praise of
his name. Also ye may see in them how God has helped his chosen people from
time to time, and never forsaken them.
THe whole Scripture universally, is as it were a divine maistres, teaching
both virtue and true faith: but the book of Psalms has over and besides that
in a manner an express Image of the state and condition of souls. For as he
which goes to a king, composeth first his behavior, and sets in order his
words, least he should be counted rusticall and rude: so this divine book,
first by choice of all motions, where with the soul is affected, warns, then
frames and instructs by diverse forms of speaking, all such as covet virtue,
and desire to know the life of the Savior. It is easy therefore for every
man to find out in the Psalms, the motion and state of his own soul, and by
that means, his own figure and proper erudition. Moreover, with what words
he may please God, and with what words he may correct himself, and give God
thanks, least if he speak that thing which is not leafull, he fall into
impiety. For not alone of deeds, but also of every word must we give account
before the Judge. Wherefore if thou wylt pronounce any man happy and blessed:
thou have how and wherefore, and whom thou may call happy in the Psalms, as
you may see in the first Psalm, 32. Psalm. 41. Psalm, 112. Psalm. 119.
Psalm, and the. 128. Psalm.

If thou will complain of the laying awayte of the Jews against the Savior,
say the second Psalm.

If thine acquaintance persecute thee, and many rise against thee, thou have
the third Psalm.

If thou being troubled on this sort, have called upon the Lord, and because he
has heard thee, thou would give him thanks: sing the.4. Psalm and
the.115. Psalm.

If thou perceiuest wait to be laid for thee of evil willers, and desire
that thy prayer should be heard, sing the.5. Psalm.

If thou feel the threatenings of God, and thereby perceiuest thy self to be
dismayed, thou may say the.6. Psalm, and the.37. Psalm.

If any consult or conspire against thee, as Achitophel against David, and some
man tell in thee, sing the.7. Psalm.

When thou considerest the grace of our Savior every where spread abroad, and
mankind restored unto health, then if thou will talk to the Lord, sing the.8.
Psalm.

If again thou will sing of the wondrous works of God, giving God thanks,
thou have the 8. Psalm, and the 81. Psalm.

If thou will have thine enemy stopped and driven back, and nevertheless the
creature to be saved, not trusting in thy self, but in gods son, say the, 9.
Psalm.

If any man will make thee afraid, thou with trust in the Lord shall sing
the.10. Psalm

If thou see the pride and malice of many to abound, so that nothing (which
is good and godly) is regarded amongst men, fly thou unto the Lord, and say
the.11. Psalm.

If the lyinges in wait of enemies continue still, do not forget thy self as
though the lord set naught by thee, but call upon the Lord, singing the.26.
Psalm.

If thou hear any man blaspheming and speaking ill against gods providence: be
not thou partaker of their wickedness, but flying unto God, say the.14. Psalm,
and.53. Psalm.

If thou will know what sort the life of a Citezin of the kingdom of heaven
is, sing the 15. Psalm.

If thou have need of prayer for them which withstand thee and compass thy
soul about sing the.17. psalm, and 86. 89. and 142. Psalm.

If thou will know how Moses prayed, thou have the.96. Psalm.

If thou art escaped from enemies, and delivered from them which persecute
thee, sing the 18. Psalm.

If thou maruelest at the order of things created, and the grace of the divine
providence, sing the.19. 26. 27. Psalms.

If thou see any man troubled, comfort them, and praying for them, say the
words of the 20. Psalm.

If thou see thy self kept of the Lord, and that thou prosperest, rejoice
and sing the, 23. psalm.

If thine enemies rush upon thee, lift up thy soul to God, and say the.25.
Psalm, and thou shall see them work wickedness in vain.

If thine enemies persevere and continue, and with bloody hands seek to seduce
thee or kill thee, give not judgment unto man, for all humayne things are
suspect. But requyryng God to be judge, who is the only Judge, say the 26.
Psalm. and 35. 43. Psalm.

If thine enemies cruelly curse thee, and multiply as it were an host with
despite: fear not no more then though thou were nothing in danger at al, and
sing the 46. Psalm.

If again they be impudent, which lie in wait, set thou nothing by them, but
sing unto the Lord that which is in the.47. Psalm.

If thou wylt know how thou ought to go unto the lord, when thou will give him
thanks, plainly thou shall understand and see in the 48. Psalm.

Furthermore, when thou renuest thy house and soul, which receives the Lord,
and the sensible house in which thou bodily dwell: give thanks and say the
49. and 127. psalm.

If thou see thy kinsmen and friends hate thee for the truth, leave not of thy
love, neither fear such adversaries, but think what is to come, and sing the
31. psalm.

If thou see them that be christened, delivered from the corruptible birth,
maruelyng at the divine bounteousnes, sing the.31. psalm.

If thou will sing with the just men, and remembering them which live a right,
sing the 33. ps.

If thou have fallen amongst enemies, and wiselye escaped them, and fled
from their snares, and therefore wilt give thanks, call together the meek, and
sing with them the.34. psalm

If thou see the wicked strive to do mischief, think not that sin is
naturally in them, as certain heretykes held an opinion, but say the 36.
psalm.

If thou see the evil work unrighteousness, and bear themselves loftye against
the lower sort, and desire to warn some thereof, say the 37. psalm.

If thou haste determined to take heed unto thy self, and see the
aduersarye lying in wait, who is most earnest against such, and would
arm thy self against him, sing the 39. psalm.

If thou see many poor men and beggars, and would pity the^, thou may
both try them which are now pitied already, and exhort other to do the same,
saying the 41. psalm.

If thou have a desire toward God, and hear the enemies vpbraiding, let it
not dismaye thee, but understanding the immortal fruit, which springs of
this desire, comfort thy soul with hope toward God, and with this relieve,
and mitigate the griefs of life, saying psalm.42.

If thou wylt often call to remembrance the benefytes of God which he showed to
the fathers, both in the going out of Egypt, and in the wilderness, and
how God was good to them, but they were unthankful: thou have the 44.
psalm, and the.79. 80. 102. 106. 107. 114. psalms.

If flying unto God thou haste escaped such things as were spoken against
thee, and would give thanks unto God, and declare his liberality and
goodness toward thee, thou have the 46. psalm.

If thou have sinned, and being turned. fallest to repentance, and would
obtain mercy, thou have the words of confession in the 51. psalm.

If thou have suffered a false accusation before an evil king, and see the
enemy to boast: go aside and say the.52. psalm

If any persecute thee and quarrel, willing to betray thee, like as the
Phariseis did Christ, and strangers David, abashe not thy self, but with
trust in the Lord, sing the 54. psalm, and the.56. psalm.

If persecution chance, and the persecutor unawares enter into the cave where
thou art hid, fear not, for thou have in this strayte profitable words, both
for comfort and forremembraunce of these things, in the 57. psalm, and a 142.

If he that lies in wait of thee, have commanded to watch and beset thy
house, and thou have escaped, give thanks unto god, and in the tables of thy
soul, grave the thing, and say the 59. psalm.

If the enemies which trouble thee, vpbrayde thee, and with many words
backbyte thee which seem to be friends, and in the exercise of this thy cross
thou art somewhat weak: thou may call upon the same also saying the 4.
psalm.

Against hypocrytes and such as brag to a man's face, say to convert them
withal, the 58. psalm.

If they sharply rush upon thee and would catch thy soul, set against them
thy subjection to Godward, and be of good comfort, for the fiercer they are,
the more shall they be subject unto God, say thou the 62. psalm.

If to avoid persecution thou flee into the desert, fear not as though thou
were there alone and desolate: but having God, and in the dawning of the day
rising to him, sing the 63. psalm.

If the enemies make thee afraid and cease not to sow deceytes, and search
always against thee: although they be never so many, cease not for all that,
for their nets shall be like shaftes of little children, if thou sing the 64.
68. 70. 71. psalms.

If thou will sing of god and his praise, thou have the 65. psalm.

If thou will enstructe any man in the mysterye of the resurrection, thou
haste the.80. psalm.

If thou ask mercy of God, sing the 67. psalm.

If thou see the wicked prosper in peace, be not so offended that thou be
moved, bnt say the.73. psalm.

If god be angry with his people, thou have words wherewith thou may comfort
thee in the same, in the 74. psalm.

If thou think expedient to confess thee, sing the 71. 75. 92. 105. 106.
108. 111. 118. 136. and 138. psalms.

If thou will rebuke a Gentile and an heretic, namely such a one as knows
not God, thou may with intelligence sing and say that which is in the 86.
psalm.

If thenemies have taken thy refuges, and thou art in great distres, although
thou art troubled, yet despair not, but pray, and if when thou criest thou
art heard, give thanks unto God, saying that which is in the.77. psalm.

If the enemies hold on and continue breaking in, and defiling the house of
god, and killing the saints, and casting their bodies to the fowls of the
air, fear not their crueltye, but suffering with them that suffer affliction,
say the.79. psalm.

If thou will sing to the Lord in solemnity, call together the servants of
God, and sing the. 81. and the 95. psalm.

If the enemies be gathered together every where, and threaten the house of the
Lord, conspiring against godliness, let not the multitude and power of them
dismay thee, thou have as it were an author of hope, the words which are in
the.83. psalm.

If thou see the house of god and his everlasting tabernacles, and have a mind
or affection toward them, as had the Apostle, say the 84. psalm.

If rancor be stinted and captiuitye released, thou have to give god thanks
withal, the 85 psalm, and a 116.

If thou will know discord of the catholic church against divisions, and
would convert them, thou may say that which is in the.87. Psalm.

If thou will move thy self and other to true religion, and persuade that the
hope in God makes not the soul ashamed, but rather put away all fear, praise
God, saying the.91. Psalm.

If thou will sing upon the Sabbath, thou have the.92. Psalm.

If thou will give thanks upon the Sunday, thou have in the.13. Psalm.

If thou wylt give thanks in the second Saboth, sing the.95. Psalm.

If thou will sing upon the day of preparation, thou have a form of praise in
the.93. Psalm. and therefore a song of reioycyng ought to be song unto god
himself.

If there have been imprisonment, and the house wasted and builded again, sing
that which is in the, 96. Psalm.

If the land have been vexed of the enemies, and whiles the Lord rules and
raygneth, it be at quiet, thou have to sing the.97. Psalm.

If thou will sing upon the fourth Saboth, thou have the.94. psalm, for then
he being betrayed, began to revenge death, and to tryumphe over the same.

Therefore when thou read the gospel, and see the Jews consulting against
the Lord, and the Lord himself standing boldly on our side against the devil:
sing that which is in the. 94. Psalm, as is next before said.

If thou markest the providence of the Lord in all things, and the Lord of
the same, and would instruct any with the faith and obedience thereof, when
thou have persuaded the^ first to acknowledge, sing the.100. Psalm.

If thou know power in him to judge, and that god judges mingling judgment
with mercy, and have a desire to attain unto it, thou have for this purpose
words in the.101. psalm.

If because of the imbecility of our nature, thou art after the manner of a
physician, irke and weary of the manifold mischiefs of this life, and
would comfort thy self: thou haste the 102. Psalm.

Forasmuch as it is meet and convenient always and in all things to give
GOD thanks, when thou will praise him, thou have wherewith to exhort thy soul,
the 103. Psalm.

If thou will praise god, and know how to praise him for any thing, and what
words he that prayieth ought to use, thou have.113. 127. 146. 133. 147. 148.
149. 150. Psalms.

If thou have faith, as the Lord has said, and beleuest in those things which
thou speak when thou prayest, say the.96. Psalm.

If thou be captiuated with strange cogitations, and have perceived thy self
to be led out of the way, and art sorry therefore, cease from henceforth, and
staying where thou perceiuest thy self to sin, sit and mourn also as the
people did, saying the.137. Psalm.

If thou suppose temptations to be for thy trial, give thanks after the
temptation unto God, saying the.139. Psalm.

If thou art again caught of thine enemies, and would be delivered, say the
140. psalm.

If thou will make thy prayers, say the.5. Psalm, and the.141. 142. 143. 144.
Psalms.

If an enemy and tyrant be risen up against the people, fear thou no more then
David did Goliath, but with David believe and sing the 144. Psalm.

If thou call to remembrance the goodness of God toward thee and all men, and
would praise God, say the.85. Psalm.

If thou will sing unto the lord, thou have to say in the 96. Psalm, and in
the 98. Psalm.

If thou (being but a mean man) peradventure art set before thy brethren in
some thing, puff not up thy self in pride against them, but give the praise
to god, and sing the 152. or the 151. psalms.

If thou will sing obedieuce, thou have the 105. and the 106. 107. 111. 112.
113. 114. 115. 116. 117. 118. 119. 134. 145. 147. 148. 149. 150. psalms.

If thou will sing particularly of the savior, thou have of him in every
psalm: but specially in the.25. and the.110. Psalm

Such psalms as show his lawful generation of the father, and his presence,
is the.11. Psalm.

Such as preach of the divine cross, and how much lying in wait he received
for us. and how great things he suffered, are the.2. psalm, and the.119.
psalm.

Such as signifye the lyinges in wait of the Jews, and the malice, and Judas
Iscariothes betrayinges, are the.21. psalm, and the.50. 72. psalms.

Such as declare his kingdom, and power to judge, and his presence in the
flesh, is the 16. psalm.

For declaration of his glorious resurrection in the flesh, read the.24. and
the.47. psalms.

For his ascension into heaven, read the.93. psalm.96. and the.98. the.99.
psalms.

Which if thou read, thou may espy what benefits the Lord bestowed upon us
by his passion.

To him be glory for ever.

The use of the rest of the psalms not comprehended in the former Table of
Athanasius.
IF thou would praise God, because he has given us a good prince, which
will and does punish the enemies of Christ's religion, use the 21. Psalm.

If thou be persecuted without a cause, if thou would have no affinity with
vice, nor with the vicious, use the.26. Psalm.

If thou would not be wicked, if not accounted as a malefactor: but would
have the^ punished, and thy self and such other godly men defended from their
tyranny, use the.28. Psalm.

If thou see the nobility, the council, the magistrates, and princes not
given to religion, nor to the praising of God, use the.29. Psalm.

If thou desire to be just and virtuous, use the.33. Psalm.

If thou be afflicted with any sickness, and would feign live and see good
days and Christ's glory to be increased, use the.39. Psalm.

If thou be banished for religion, and art almost in despair of returnyng to
the country, use the.42. Psalm.

If thou perceive thy self forsaken of God, and therefore persecuted for
religion and virtues sake, use the.44. Psalm.

If thou would complain of Doeg, of a wicked man, and would have him to
be rooted out, and thy self to have prosperity, use the.52. Psalm.

If thou would be delivered from thine enemies which persecute thee unto
death, use the.54. Psalm.

If thou would have the help of God against such as persecute thee without
a cause, use the.59. Psalm.

If thou would prepare thy self to fight against the Idumeans, or such like
enemies of Christ, use the.60. Psalm.

If thou would have Christ to come conquer and beat down the Sirians,
Idumeans, Aimnonites, Papists, Antichristians, Nullifidians, Neutralles, and
ungracious Pelagians, use the.68. Psalm.

If thou be persuaded that Christ will come and punish offenders, aid the
true worshippers, and pour out the dregs of wine, and the vengeance of his
cup, on the ungodly, use the.75. Psalm.

If thou neither would have Idolatry, neither any lycentious lusts rain in
Christ's common wealth, thou must give God thanks, if thou be persuaded, he
both will and ca^ take them away, using the.81. Psalm.

If thou would gladly know Christ's Church, and how that Sion signifies
it, and how that the true religion shall be delated and spread through the whole
world, use the.87. psalm.

If thou go to fight against the Idumeans, or any of Christ's enemies,
whether they offend in manners, or in doctrine, and would desire God to give
the victory, use the.108. psalm.

If thou would live a godly life, if you would replenish thy mind with
godly precepts, and thereby obt^ine immortality, and eternal felicity: Study
diligently the.119. psalm.

If thou be thrust into a college, or into a parish, town or country, whose
inhabitours are wicked, crafty, and malicious pickequarels, would be
delivered from the^, use the.120. psalm.

If thou would have the congregation of Christ to prosper, use the.122.
psalm.

If thou would be delivered from contempt, infamy, and the derision of the
wicked, use the.123. psalm.

When thou art delivered out of prison, captivity, or any distres, in geuyng
thanks to God, use the.124. psalm.

To understand the safety that those are in, which are under the tuition of
the Lord, Iehoua, and how that the wicked shall be punished, consider the.125.
psalm.

If thou desire to know the felicity that he has which reuerenceth God,
and lives godly, the tra^quilitie and peace of conscience which he enjoys in
this life, and the unspeakable joy in the life to come, meditate diligently
the.128. psalm.

To understand how the good and godly are defended by the aid of the Lord,
and the wicked perish, consider the.129. psalm.

If thou would not be arrogant and proud, use the.131. Psalm.

If thou would praise unity and concord among brethren, use the.133.
psalm.

To sing praises to God for his mercies, use the.134. Psalm.

FINIS.
Veni Creator.
^ COme holy ghost eternal God, procedyng from ^ above, both from the Father
and the son, the ^ God of peace and love. Visit our minds and into us, thy
heavenly grace ^ inspyre: that in all truth and godliness, we may have true
desire.

Thou art the very comforter, in all woe and distress:
The heavenly gift of God most high, which no tongue can express.
The fountain and the lively spring, of joy celestial:
The fire so bright, the love so clear, and unction spiritual.
Thou in thy gifts art manifold, whereby Christ's church does stand:
In faithful hearts writing thy law, the finger of Gods hand.
According to thy promise made, thou geuest speech of grace:
That through thy help ye praise of God, may stand in every place.
O holy ghost into our wits, send down thy heavenly light:
Kindle our hearts with fervent love, to serve God day and night.
Strength and stablish all our weakness, so feable and so frail:
That neither flesh, the world, nor devil, against us do prevail
Put back our enmies far from us, and grant us to obtain:
Peace in our hearts with god and man, without grudge or disdain.
And grant (O lord) that thou being, our leader and our guide:
We may eschew the snares of sin, and from thee never slide.
To us such plenty of thy grace, good Lord grant we thee pray,
That thou may be our comforter, at the last dreadful day.
Of all strife and dissension, O Lord dissolve the bands:
And make the knots of peace and love, throughout all christian lands.
Grant us (O Lord) through thee to know, the father most of might:
That of his dear beloved son, we may attain the sight.
And that with perfect faith also, we may acknowledge thee:
The spirit of them both always, one God in persons three.
Laud and praise be to the father, and to the Son equal:
And to the holy spirit also, one God coeternall.
And pray we that the only son, vouchesafe his sprit to send:
To all that do profess his name, unto the worlds end. Amen.
Venite exultemus. Psalm xcv.
Sing this as the Benedictus.
O Come, and let us now rejoice, and sing unto the Lord:
And to our only savior, also with one accord.
O let us come before his face, with inward reverence:
Confessing all our former suns, and that with diligence.
To thank him for his benefits, always distributyng,
Wherefore to him right joyfully, in Psalms now let us sing.
And that because that God alone, is Lord magnificent:
And eke above all other gods, a king omnipotent.
His people does not he forsake, at any time or tide:
And in his hand are all the coasts, of all the world so wide.
And with his loving countenance, he looks every where:
And does behold the tops of all, the mountains far and near.
The sea and all that is therein, are his, for he them made:
And eke his hand has facioned, ye earth which does not fade,
O come therefore and worship him, and down before him fall:
And let us weep before ye Lord, the which has made us al.
He is our God, our Lord and king, and we his people are:
His flock and sheep of his pasture, on who^ he takes care.
This day if ye do hear his voice, yet hearden not your heart:
As in the bitter murmuring, when ye were in deserte.
Which thing was of their negligence, committed in the time,
Of trouble in the wilderness, a great and grievous crime.
Where as your fathers tempted me, and tried every way:
They proved me and saw my works, what I could do or say.
These forty years I have been grieved, with this generation:
And evermore I said they e^d, in their imagination.
Wherewith their hearts were fore combred, long time and many days:
Wherefore I know assuredly, they have not known my ways.
To whom I in mine anger swore, that they should not be blessed:
Nor see my joy celestial, nor enter in my rest.
Gloria patri.
All laud and praise be to the Lord, O that of might art most:
To God the father and the Son, and to the holy Ghost.
As it in the beginning was, for ever heretofore:
And is now at this present time, and shall be evermore.
The song of Saint Ambrose, called Te deum.
^ WE praise thee God, we knowledge thee, the ^ only Lord to be, and as
eternal father all the ^ earth does worship thee. To thee al angels cry, the
heavens and all the ^ powers therein: To thee Cherub and Seraphin, to cry they
do not linne.

O Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord, of Saboth Lord the God:
Through heau^ and earth thy praise is spread, and glory al abrod.
Thapostles glorious company, yield praises unto thee:
The prophets good ly fellowship, praise thee continually.
The noble and victorious host, of Martirs sound thy praise:
The holy Church throughout the world does knowledge thee always,
Father of endless majesty, they do acknowledge thee:
Thy Christ, thine honorable, true and only son to be.
The holy Ghost the comforter, of glory thou art king,
O Christ, and of the father art, the son everlasting.
When sinful man's decay in hand, thou tookest to restore:
To be enclosd in virgins womb, thou did not abhor.
When thou had overcome of death, the sharp and cruel might,
Thou heavens kingdom did set open, to each believing wight.
In glory of the father thou, do sit on Gods right hand:
We trust that thou shall come our judge, our cause to understand.
Lord help thy servants who^ thou have, bought with thy precious blood
And in eternal glory set them with thy saints so good.
O Lord do thou thy people save, bless thine inheritance,
Lord govern them, and Lord do thou, for ever them advance.
We magnify thee day by day, and world without end,
Adore thy holy name (O Lord) Vouchesafe us to defend
From sin this day. Have mercy Lord, have mercy on us all:
And on us (as we trust in thee) Lord let thy mercy fall.
O Lord I have reposed all, my confidence in thee:
Put to confounding shame therefore Lord let me never be.
The song of the three Children, praising God, prouokyng all creatures to do
the same.
^ O Alye works of god the Lord bles ye the ^ Lord, praise him and magnify
him for ever.


praise him and magnifye him for ever.

praise him and magnifye him for ever.





























praise him and magnify him for ever.
O Azarias bles the Lord, bles thou the Lord,
praise him and magnify him for ever.
And Misael bles thou the Lord, bles thou the Lord,
praise him and magnify him for ever.
The song of Zacharias called Benedictus.
^ THe only lord of Israel be praised evermore: ^ for through his visitation,
and mercy kept in ^ store, His peoplenow he has redemde, that long has been
in thral, ^ and spread abroad his saving health, upon his servants al.

In David's house his servant true, according to his mind:
And also his anointed king, as we in Scripture find.
As by his holy prophets al, often times he did declare:
The which were since ye world began, his way for to prepare
That we might be delivered, from those that make debate:
Our enemies and from the hands, of all that do us hate.
The mercy which he promised, our fathers to fulfill:
And think upon his covenant made, according to his will.
And also to perform the oath, which he before had sworn:
To Abraham our father dear, for us that were forlorn.
That he would give himself for us, and us from bondage bring:
Out of the hands of al our foes, to serve our heavenly king.
And that without al manner fear, and eke in righteousness:
And also for to lead our life, in steadfast holiness.
And you (O child) which now art borne, and of the Lord elect:
Shall be the prophet of the highest, his ways for to dyrect.
For thou shall go before his face, for to prepare his ways:
And also for to teach his will and pleasure all thy days.
To give them knowledge how that their, salvation is nere:
And that remission of their sins, is through his mercy mere.
Whereby the day spring from an hie, is come us for to visit:
And those for to illuminate, which do in darkness sit.
To lighten those that shadowed be, with death and eke oppressed:
And also for to guide their feet, the way to peace and rest.
The song of blessed Mary, called Magnificat.
^ MY soul does magnify the Lord, my sprite eke ^ evermore, reioyseth in the
lord my god, which ^ is my Savior. And why? because he did regard, and gave
respect unto, ^ so base estate of his hadmaid, and let the mighty go.

For now behold al nations, and generations all:
From this time forth for evermore, shall me right blessed call.
Because he has me magnifyed, which is the Lord of might:
Whose name be ever sanctified, and praised day and night.
For with his mercy and his grace, all men he does inflame:
Throughout al generations, to such as fear his name.
He showed strength with his great arm, and made ye proud to start:
With all imaginations, that they bare in their heart.
He has put down the mighty ones, from their supernal seat:
And did exalt the meek in heart, as he has thought it meet
The hungry he replenished, with all things that were good:
And through his power he made ye rich, often times to want their fode.
And calling to remembrance, his mercy every deal:
Has helped up assistantly, his servant Israel.
According to his promise made, to Abraham before:
And to his seed successively, to stand for evermore.
The song of Simeon called Nunc dimittis.
^ O Lord because my hearts desire, has wished ^ long to see, my only lord
and savior, thy son be ^ ^ore I die, the joy and health of al mankind, desired
long before, which ^ now is come into the world, of mercy bringing store.

Thou suffer thy servant now, in peace for to depart:
According to thy holy word, which lighteneth my heart.
Because mine eyes which thou have made, to give my body light:
Have now behold thy saving health, which is the Lord of might
Whom thou mercifully have set, of thine abundant grace:
In open sight and visible, before all peoples face.
The Gentiles to illuminate, and Satan ouerquel:
And eke to be the glory of, thy people Israel.
The Creed of Athanasius.
Norton.
^ WHat man soever he be that, salvation will attain ^ the catholic belief he
must, before al things ^ retain. Which faith unless he holy keep, and
vndefiledly, without ^ al doubt eternally, he shall be sure to dye.

The catholic belief is this, that God we worship one:
In Trinity and Trinity, in unity alone.
So as we neither do confound, the persons of the three:
Nor yet the substance whole of one, in sunder parted be.
One person of the father is, another of the Son:
An other person proper of, the holy ghost alone.
Of father, Son, and holy Ghost, but one the Godhed is:
Like glory coeternal eke, the majesty likewise.
Such as the father is, such is the Son in each degree:
And such also we do believe, the holy Ghost to be.
Uncreate is the Father, and uncreate is the Son:
The holy ghost uncreate: so uncreate is each one.
Incomprehensible Father is, incomprehensible Son:
And comprehensible also is, the holy Ghost of none.
The Father is eternal, and the Son eternal so:
And in like sort eternal is, the holy ghost also.
And yet though we believe, that each of these eternals be:
Yet there but one eternal is, and not eternals three.
As ne incomprehensible we, ne yet vncreat three:
But one incomprehensible one, uncreate hold to be.
Almighty so the father is, the son almighty so:
And in like sort almighty is, the holy Ghost also.
And albeit that every one, of these almighty be:
yet there but one almighty is, and not almighties three.
The father God is, God the Son, God holy Ghost also:
yet are there not three Gods in all, but one God and no mo.
So like wise Lord the Father is, and Lord also the Son:
And lord the holy ghost, yet are there not three lords but one.
For as we are compeld to grant, by christian verity,
Each of the persons by hymfelfe, both God and Lord to be:
So catholic religion, forbids us always:
That either gods be three, or yt there lords be three to say.
Of none the father, is ne made, ne create, nor begot:
The Son is of the Father, not create ne made, but got.
The holy Ghost is of them both, the father and the Son:
He made, ne create, nor begot, but does proceed alone.
So we one Father hold, not three, one Son also not three:
One holy Ghost alone, and not three holy Ghostes to be.
None in this Trinity before, nor after other is:
Ne greater any then the rest, ne lesser be likewise.
But every one among themselves, of all the persons three:
Together coeternal al, and al coequal be.
So unity in Trinity, as said it is before:
And Trinity in unity, in all things we adore.
Therefore what man soever that, salvation will attain:
This faith touching the Trinity, of force he must retain.
And nedeful to eternal life, it is that every wight.
Of the incarnating of Christ, our Lord believe aright.
For this the right faith is that we, believe and eke beknow:
That Christ our lord ye son of God, is God and man also.
God of his fathers substance got, before the world began:
And of his mothers substance borne, in world a very man.
Both perfect god, and perfect man, in one one Jesus Christ:
That does of reasonable soul, and human flesh subsist.
Touching his Godhode, equal with his father God is he:
Touching his manhood lower then, his father in degree.
Who though he be both very God, and very man also:
yet is he but one Christ alone, and is not persons two.
One, not by turning of Godhode, into the flesh of man:
But by taking manhood to God, this being one began.
All one, not by confounding of, the substance into one:
But only by the unity, that is of one person.
For as the reasonable soul, and flesh but one man is:
So in one person God and man, is but one Christ likewise.
Who suffered for to save us all, to hell he did descend:
The third day rose again from death, to heaven he did asce^d.
He sittes at the right hand of God, the almighty father there:
From thence to judge the quick and dead, again he shall retire.
At whose return all men shall rise, with bodies new restorde:
And of their own works they shall give account unto ye lord.
And they into eternal life shall go, that have done well:
Who have done il, shall go into eternal fire to dwell.
This is the Catholic belief, who does not faithfully
Believe the same, without al dout, he saved cannot be.
To Father, Son, and holy ghost, al glory be therefore:
As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
The Lamentation of a sinner.
Marckant.
^ O Lord turn not away thy face, from him that ^ lies prostrate: Lamenting
sore his sinful life ^ before thy mercy gate. Which gate thou openest wide to
those, yt do ^ lament their sin: shut not yr gate against me lord, but let me
enter in.

And call me not to mine accomptes, how I have lived here:
For then I know right well (O Lord) how vile I shall appear.
I need not to confess my life, I am sure thou can tell:
what I have been, and what I am, I know thou know it well.
O Lord thou know what things be past, and eke the things that be,
Thou know also what is to come, nothing is hid from thee.
Before ye heavens and earth were made, you know what things were the^,
As all things else that have been since, among the sons of men.
And can the things that I have done, be hidden from thee then?
Nay, nay, you know the^ all, O Lord, where they were done and when.
Wherefore with tears I come to thee, to beg and to entreat:
Even as the child that has done evil, and fears to be beat.
So come I to thy mercy gate, where mercy does abound:
Requiring mercy for my sin, to heal my deadly wound,
O Lord I need not to repeat, what I do beg or crave,
Thou know, O Lord, before I ask, ye thing that I would have.
Mercy, good Lord, mercy I ask, this is the total sum:
For mercy Lord is all my suit, Lord let thy mercy come.
The humble suit of a sinner.
^ O Lord of whom I do depend be hold my care. ^ full heart, and when thy will
and pleasure is release ^ me of my smart, you see my sorrows what they are, my
gref is known ^ to thee, and there is none that ca^ remove, or take the same
from me.

But only thou whose aid I crave, whose mercy still is pressed:
To ease all those that come to thee for succor and for rest.
And since thou see my restles eyes, my tears and grievous groan.
Atte^de unto my suit, O Lord, marck well my plaint and moan.
For sin has so enclosed me, and compast me about:
That I am now remediles, if mercy help not out.
For mortal man, cannot realease, or mitigate this pain:
But eue^ thy Christ, my lord and god, which for my sins was slain.
Wose bloody wou^des are yet to see, though not with mortal eye:
yet does thy saints behold them all, and so I trust shall I.
Though sin does hinder me a while, when thou shall see it good:
I shall nioy the sight of him, and see his wounds and blood.
And as thine angels and thy saints, do now behold the same:
So trust I to possess that place, with them to praise thy name.
But whiles I live here in this vale, where sinners do frequent:
Assist me ever with thy grace, my sins still to lament.
Least that I tread in sinners trace, and give them my consent,
To dwell with them in wickedness, whereto nature is bent.
Only thy grace must be my stay, least that I fall down flat:
And being down, then of my self cannot recover that.
Wherefore this is yet once again, my suit and my request:
To grant me pardon for my sin, that I in thee may rest.
Then shall my heart, my tongue and voice, be instruments of praise,
And in thy church and house of saints, sing Psalms to thee always.
The Lords Prayer, or Pater noster.
^ Our father which in heaven art, lord halowd be ^ thy name, thy kingdom come,
thy will be done ^ in earth, even as the same in heaven is. Give us, O Lord, our
daily ^ bread this day: As we forgive our detters so, Forgive our dettes ^ we
pray. Into temptation lead us not, From evil make us free, ^ for kingdom,
power and glory thine, both now and ever be.

The.x. Commandments of Almighty God. Audi Israel. Exodus xx.
N.
^ Hark Israel, and what I say, give head to ^ understand. I am the Lord thy
God ye brought ^ thee out of Egypt la^d, eue^ from the house wherein you did in
thraldo^ live ^ a slave: None other gods at all before my presence shall thou
have.

No manner graven image shall thou make at all to thee:
Nor any figure like by thee, shall counterfayted be,
Of any thing in heaven above, nor in the earth below,
Nor in waters beneath the earth, to the^ thou shall not bow.
Nor shall them serve. The Lord thy God, a ielous God am I,
That punish parents faults unto the third and fourth degree,
Upon their children that me hate: and mercy do display,
To thousands of such as me love, and my precepts obey.
The name thou of the Lord thy God, in vain shall never use:
For him that takes his name in vain ye lord shall not excuse.
Remember that thou holy keep, the sacred Saboth day:
Six days y^ labor shall, and do thy needful works always.
The seventh is set by the Lord, thy God to rest upon:
No work then shall thou do in it, ne thou nor yet thy son,
Thy daughter, servant, nor handmayd, thine Ox, nor yet thine Ass:
Nor stranger that within thy gates, has his abiding place.
For in six days God heaven, and earth, and all therein did make,
And after those his rest he did, upon the seventh day take.
Wherefore he blessed the day that he, for resting did ordain,
And sacred to him self alone appointed to remain.
yield honor to thy parents, that prolongd thy days may be
Upon the land, the which the Lord, thy God has given thee.
Thou shall not murder. Thou shall not commit adultery:
Thou shall not steal, nor witness false, against thy neighbor be.
Thou shall not covet house that to thy neighbor does belong,
Ne covet shall in having of his wife, to do him wrong:
Nor his man servant, nor his maid, nor ox, nor ass of his,
Nor any other thing that to thy neighbor proper is.
Beatus vir. i.
Thomas Sternhold.
Whether it was Esoras, or any other that gathered the Psalms into a book: it
seems he did set this Psalm first in manner of a Preface, to exhort all godly
men to study and meditate the heavenly wisdom, for theffect hereof is, that
they be blessed that give them selves wholly all their life to Gods law: And
that the wicked contemners of god, though they seem for a while fortunate, yet
at length shall come to miserable destruction,

^


Which brings forth most pleasant fruit in her due time and tide.
Whose leaf shall never fade nor fall, but flourish still and stand:
Even so al things shall prosper well, that this man takes in hand.

But as the dust which from the earth, the wyndes drive to and fro.

Nor yet the sinners with the just, shall come in place or sight.

And eke the way of wicked me^ shall quite be overthrown.
Quare fremuerunt gentes. Psalm.ii.
T. S.
David reioyseth, that notwithstanding his enemies rage, and worldly power, yet
god will continue his kingdom for ever, and aduau^ce it even to the foremost,
end of the world. And therefore he exhorts kings and rulers, that setting
vain glory a part, they would humble submit them selves under gods yoke.
Herein is sign^^ed Christ and his kingdom.

Sing this Psalm as the first.
WHy did ye Ge^tils tumultes raise, what rage was in their brain?
Why did the Jewish people muse, seeing al is but vain?

Against the Lord and Christ his son, which he among us sent.

And of their doctrine and their law, let us reject the yoke:

And make the^ al as mocking stocks, through out ye world so wide.

And in his fury trouble them, and then the, Lord, will say:

I will therefore Lord preach thy laws, and eke declare thy will.

Thou art my dear and only son, to day I thee begot.

The ends and coasts of all the earth, by thee shall be possessed.

And as the potters shardes shall break them with an iron rod.

By whom the matters of the world be judged and discernde.

Se that with reverence ye rejoice, to him in like manner.

Least in his wrath ye suddenly perish in the mid way.

Oh then al they that trust in Christ, shall happy be and blessed.
Domine quid multiplicati. Psalm.iii.
T. S.
David being persecuted, and driven out of his kingdom by his own son
Absalon, was greatly tormented in mind for his sin against god: and therefore
calls upon god, and waxes hold through his promises, against the great
terrors of his enemies: yea, and against death it self, which he saw present
before his eyes. Finally he reioyseth for the good success and victory, that
god gave him and all the Church over his enemies.

^ O Lord how are my foes increast, which vex ^ me more and more? They kill my
heart when ^ as they say: God can him not restore, but thou. O Lord, art my ^
defense, when I am hard bestead, my worship and mine honor ^ both, and thou
holdst up my head.


And he out of his holy hill, did hear me by and by.

For why? I know assuredly the Lord will me sustain.

For thou art still my Lord my God, my savior and mine aid.

For thou have broke the chekes and teeth, of these wicked me^ al.

Thou do bestow upon thy folk, thy blessing and thy love.
Cum inuocarem exaudiui. Psalm.iiii.
T. S.
When Saul persecuted David, he called upon God, trusting most assuredly in his
promise, and therefore holdly reproves his enemies, who by wilful malice
resisted his dominion. And finally prefers the favor of God before all
worldly treasures. Let us likewise learn to trust in gods promises, when we
are afflicted with any kind of Cross, and so we shall neither fear our
enemies, nor yet be over commen with tentations.

Sing this as the first Psalm
O God that art my righteousness, Lord hear me when I call:
Thou have set me at liberty, when I was bound and thral.

For unto thee incessantly, to cry I will not rest.

Why wander ye in vanity, and follow after lies?

And when to him I make my plaint, he does me not refuse.

And in your chamber quietly, see you your selves convert.

And look that in the living lord, you put your trust always.

But Lord grant us thy countenance, thy favor and thy grace.

Then they that of their corn and wine, full great increase have had.

For thou only wilt me, O Lord, alone in safely keep.
Verba mea auribus percipe. Psalm.v.
T.S
David having suffered great calamity, as well by Doeg a Achitophel Saules
flatterers, as by other infinite enemies, calls to God for succor, showing
how requisite it is, that God should punish the malicious envy of his
adversaries. After being assured of prosperous success, he conceyueth
comfort: concludyng, that when God shall deliver him, other also shall be
partakers of the same mercies.

Sing this as the third psalm.
INcline thine ears unto my words, O Lord my plaint consider:


My prayer early in the morn to thee for to direct.

That art not pleased with wickedness, and il with thee dwells none.

Vain workers of iniquity, thou have always abhord.

And God will hate the blood thirsty and the deceitful man.

And reverently will worship thee toward thine holy place.

And eke the way that I shall walk, before my face disclose.





And render thanks for thy defense, and give thy name the praise.

And with thy grace, as with a shild, defend him from all ill.
i. Domine ne in furore tuo. Psalm.vi.
T. S.
When David by his sins has provoked gods wrath, and now felt not only his
hand against him, but also conceived the horrors of death everlasting: he
desired forgeuenes, bewayling that if god took him away in his indignation, he
should lack occasion to praise him as he was wont to do whilst he was
amongst men. Then suddenly feling gods mercy, he sharply rebukes his enemies,
which reioyseth in his affliction.

^ Lord in thy wrath reprove me not though I ^ deserve thine ire: Ne yet
correct me in thy rage, ^ O Lord I thee desire. For I am weak therefore, O
Lord, of ^ mercy me forbear, and heal me Lord: for why, thou know my ^
bones do quake for fear.


But Lord how long will thou delay, to cure my misery?

Oh save me not for my deserts, but for thy mercies sake.

Or who shall worship thee (O Lord) in the infernal pit?

All the night long I wash my bed, with tears of my complaint.

For fear of those that be my foes, and would my soul subvert.

For why? the Lord has hard the voice, of my complaint and cry.

But it received at my hand, and took it in good part.

And suddenly confound the^ al, to their rebuke and shame.
Domine deus meus in te speraui. Psalm.vii.
T. S.
David being falsely accused by Chus, one of Saules kinsme^, he calls god to
be his defe^der, to who^ he commends his innocence: First showing that his
conscience did not accuse him of any evil toward Saul. Next, that it
couched gods glory to award sentence against the wicked. And so entering into
the consideration of gods mercyes and promises, he waxes hold, and derideth
the vain enterprises of his enemies, threatnyng that it shall fall on their
own necks, that which they have purposed for others.

Sing this as the third psalm.

Save me from the^ that me pursue, and eke deliver me.

While there is none to succor me, and rid me out of thrall.

Or else if I be found in faut, or gilty in the sight:

Which me pursued most cruelly, and hated me causeles:

Unto the earth, and also lay, mine honor in the dust.

Perform thy kingdom promised to me which wrong sustain.

If thou declare for love of the^, thy self as Lord and king.

According to my rightousnes, and mine integrity.
The second part.



That does preserve all those that be, of pure and perfect heart.

So that he feleth his mighty hand, even every day and hour.

He whets his sword, his bow he be^ds, aiming where he may hit.

For them that do me persecute, whilst he does mischief warpe.

And of his mischief once conceived, yet brings forth naught at last.

But he shall fall into the pit, that he digde up for other.

And all the mischief that he wrought shall fall upon his head.

And with my song praise will the name, of him, that is most hie.
Domine Deus noster. Psalm.viij.
T.S
The Prophet considering thexcellent liberality, and fatherly providence of
God toward man, whom he made as it were a god over all his works: does not
only give great thanks, but is astonished with thadmiration of the same, as
one nothing able to compass such great mercyes, and so ends.

Sing this as the third Psalm.

Whose fame surmount in dignity above the heavens clear.

For in these babes thy might is seen, thy graces they disclose.

The sun, the moon, and all the stars in order as they stand:

Or what is man's posterity, that thou do it consider?

And thou have crowned him also with glory and dignity.

And at his fete have set al things, that he should keep the^ under.



How famous and how wonderful, are thy works through ye world?
Confitebor tibi domine. Psalm.ix.
T. S.
After he had given thanks to god, for the sundry victories that he had sent
him against his enemies, and also proved by manifold experience, how ready god
was at hand in all his troubles: ^e being now likewise in danger of new
enemies, desires god to help him according to his wont, and destroy the
malicious arrogancy of his adversaries.

Sing this as the third Psalm

And speak of al thy wondrous works and the^ declare always

And make my songs extol thy name above the starry sky.

They fall down, flat and are destroyed by thy great force and might
Thou have revenged al my wrong, my grief and al my grudge:


That afterward, the memory of them cannot be found

thou have their fame with the^ defaced, through all the world so wide.

And in the seat of equity true judgment will maintain.

And so will yield with equity, to every man his right.

He is in all adversity their refuge and their rest.

For thok forsakest not their suit, in their necessity.

Publish among al nations, his noble acts and will.

Forgetting not the afflicted heart, that seeks to him for rest.
The second part.

Which from the gates of death are wont to raise me up again.

And that in thy salvation (Lord) my soul might still rejoice.

And in the net that they did set, their own fete fast are snarde.

When as ye se the wicked man lie trapt in his own warke.

And all the people of the world, that God will not remember.

The pacient people never look for help of God in vain.

And let the Heathen folk receive their judgment in thy sight.

That they may know assuredly, they be but mortal men.
Vt quid domine. Psalm.x.
T.S
He complayneth of the fraud, rapine, tyranny, and of all kinds of wrong,
which worldly men use, assigning the cause thereof, which was, that wicked men
being as it were dronken with worldy prosperity, and therefore setting a part
all fear and reverence toward god, think they may do all things without
controlyng. Therefore he calls upon god to send some remedy these desperate
evils. And at length comfort him self with hope of delyueraunce.

Sing this as the third Psalm.

And kepest close thy cou^tenau^ce from us this troublous time?

Let them be taken in the craft that they them selves conspire.

So does the wicked praise him self, and does the Lord despite.

Nay, nay, there is no God (says he) for thus he thinks in heart.

And with a blast does puff against, such as would him correct.

And why? for all adversity to him is very strange.

Under his to ung does mischief sit, and travel all the while,

Against the poor that pass him by, his cruel eyes are bent.

If he may snare them in his net, to spoil poor simple me^.



His countenance is cast aside, he does it not behold.

Lift up thy hand, forget not Lord, the poor that be oppressed.

To hear the wicked in their hearts say, tush thou carest not for it?



That they with their iniquity, may perish altogether.

And he will chase the Heathen folk, out of his land each one.

Their hearts thou will confirm until, thine ears to hear be pressed

That they may be no more oppressed, with men of worldly might.
In Domino confido, Psalm.xi.
T.S
This Psalm conteyneth two parts. In the first David shows how hard
assaults of temptations he sustained, and in how great anguish of mind he was,
when Saul did persecute him. Then next he reioyseth that God sent him succor
in his necessity, declaring his justice, as well in governing the good and the
wicked men, as the whole world.

Sing this as the third Psalm

Flee hence as fast as any foul, and hide you in your hill?

to shote in secret and to hurt ye sound and harmles breast.

Alas the just and rightuous man, what evil has he wrought?

And in the heavens has his seat, of royal majesty:
The poor and simple man's estate, considers in his mind:
And searches out full narowly, the manners of mankind.

But in his heart he does abhor, al such as mischief muse.

Fire and brimstone, and whirlwindes thick, appointed for their pain.

And to the just and upright men, shows forth his pleasant face.
Saluum me fac Deus. Psalm.xii.
T. S
The prophet learning the miserable estate of the people, and the decay of all
good order, desires God spedely to send succor to his children: Then
co^forting himself and others, with the assurance of gods help: he commends
the constant verity that God observes in keeping his promises, concluding that
when all orders are most corrupted, then will God deliver his.

Sing this as the third Psalm.

And faith and truth from worldly men, is parted clean away.

For every man bethinketh how, to flatter, lie and feign.

to speak proud words and make great brags, y^ lord soon cut the^ out.

our tongs are ours, we ought to speak, what lord shall us control?

Arise will I now (says the lord) and them restore to rest.

And has no less then seven times, in fire been purifide.

And save us now and evermore, from this il kind of men.

When vanity with mortal men, so highly is extold.
Vsquequo domine. Psalm. xiii,
T. S
David, as it were ouercommen with sundry and new afflictions, flies to God,
as his only refuge, and so at the length being encouraged through gods
promises, he conceiueth most sure confidence against the extreme horrors of
death.

Sing this as the third psalm.

How long wilt you thy visage hide, as though you were offended?

How long eke shall my deadly foe, thus triumph over me?

Lighten mine eyes least that I sleep, as one by death possessed.

Least they also that hate my soul, rejoice to see me quayle.

In thy relief and saving health, right glad shall be my heart.

Because he has heard my request, and granted my wishyng.
Dixit insipiens. psalm.xiiii.
T. S.
He describes the p^ruerse nature of men, which were so grown to
licentiousnes, that god was brought to utter contempt for the which thing
although he was greatly grieved: yet being persuaded that God would send some
present remedy, he comfort himself and others.

^ THere is no God as folish men, affirm in their ^ mad mode: their drifts are
al corrupt and vain ^ not one of them does good. The Lord beheld from heaven
hit, the ^ whole race of mankind, and saw not one that sought in deed, the ^
living God to find.


That in the world did any good: I say there was not one.

Eating my people eue^ as bread, not one to seek Gods will?

For god does love the righteous men, and will maintain them al.

Because they put their trust in God, and call upon his name.

The promise made to Israel, from out of Sion hill?

Then Jacob shall therein rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.
Domine quis habitabit. Psalm.xv.
T. S
This Psalm teaches on what condition God did choose the Jews for his
peculiar people, and wherefore he placed his Temple among them, which was to
thentent, that they be living uprightly and godly, might witness that they were
his special and holy people.

Sing this as the third psalm.

Or whom will thou receive to dwell, in thy most holy hill?

Whose heart does think ye very truth, whose tongue speaks no deceit.

Nor willingly does move false tales, which might empeyr ye same

But those that love and fear the Lord, he makes much of them.

Although he make his covenant so, that he does lose thereby:

Ne for to hurt the innocent, does brybe or else purloyne.

Shall never perish in this world, nor in the world to come.
Conserua me domine. Psalm.xvi.
T. S.
David prays to God for succor, not for his works, but for his faythes
sake, protestyng that he hates al Idolatry, taking God only for his comfort
and felicity: who suffers his to lack nothing.

Sing this as the.xiiii. Psalm.

Thou art my God, and of my goods, O lord, you have no need.

And namely to the faithful flock, in virtue that excel.

To offer to the Idols Gods, alas it is to bad.

I will not touch, nor yet thereof my lips shall make report.

And thou art he that do maintain, my rent, my lot, my chance.

Mine heritage assignd to me, does please me wondrous well.

For by his means my secret thoughts, do teach me every night.

For he does stand on my right hand, therefore I shall not fall.

My flesh and body rest in hope, when I this thing consider.

Nor yet will give thine holy one, corruption for to see.

Of perfect joy are in thy face, and power for evermore.
Exaudi domine iustitiam meam. Psalm.xvii.
T. S
Here he complayneth unto God of the cruel pride and arrogance of Saul and the
rest of his enmies, who thus raged without any cause given on his part:
therefore he desires God to revenge his innocence and deliver him. This Psalm
ought diligently to be noted of such as receive evil, for well doing.

Sing this as the xiiii. Psalm

and hear ye prayer yt I put forth, with lips that do not feign.

And let thine eyes behold and clear, this my simplicity.

That I have spoken with my tongue, that was not in my mind.

For love of thy most holy word, I have refrayned still.

That from the way wherein I walk, my steps may never swerue

The^ hear my prayer and way right well, the words yt I have said.

Declare thy strength on them yt spurn, against thy majesty.

And under covert of thy wings, defend me secretly.
The second part.

And from my foes that go about, my soul for to destroy.

that in their pride they do not spare, to speak they care not what

And musing mischief in their minds, to cast me to the ground.

Or lurkyng like a Lions whelpe, within some secret place.

Save you my soul from the evil man, and with thy sword him smite:

Which now so long time reigned have, and keep us in their bands.

That have no hope nor part of joy, but in this present life.
Thou of thy store their bellies filst, with pleasures to their mind:
Their children have enough and leave, to theirs the rest behind.

So when I wake, I shall be full, with thine image and grace.
Diligam te domine. Psalm.xviii.
T. S
This Psalm is the fir^^e beginning of David's salutation and thanks giving in
the entering into his kingdom, wherein he extolleth, and praises most highlye,
the marvelous mercies and grace of God, who has both preserved and defended
him: he sets forth the image of Christ's kingdom, painted in his kingdom:
that the faithful may be assured, that Christ shall always conquer and
overcome by the unspeakable power of his father, though all the whole world
should say there against.

^ O God my strength and fortitude, of force I must ^ love thee: thou art my
castle and defense in my ^ necessity. My God, my rock, in who^ I trust, ye
worker of my wealth ^ my refuge, buckler, and my shield, the horn of al my
health.


Then fro my foes I am right sure, that I shall be preserved.

The flowing waves of wickedness, did put me in great fear.

And for my death there was preparde, a deadly trapping net.

And he forth with did hear my plaint, out of his holy place.

Yea the foundation of the mount, of Basan for to shake.

and from his mouth came kindled coals, of hot consuming fire.

And underneath his feet he cast, the darkness of the sky.

and on the wings of all the winds, came flying al abroad.
The second part.

With waters black and ayrie clouds environed he was.

the^ clouds consume, and in their stead, come hailes and coals of fire.

And with his often lightenings, he puttes them in great fear.

The springs and the foundations, of all the world appear.

and plucked me out of waters great, that would me ouerflow.

Yea from such foes as were to strong, for me to deal withal.

But yet the Lord was my defense, my succor and relief.

And kept me safe, because he had a favor unto me.

And to the cleannes of my hands, he gave me my reward.

And have not wauered wickedly, against my Lord my God.
The third part.

His statutes and commandments, I cast not out fro me.

And did refrain from wickedness, and sin in any case.

And to the cleannes of my hands, appearing in his sight.

and with ye good and virtuous me^, right vertuosly wilt do,

And thou will use the wicked men, as wicked men deserve.

And do bring down y^ countenance, of them that look full hye.

The Lord my God will make also, my darkness to be light.

By thee I scale and ouerleape, the strength of any wall.

He is a sure defense to such, as in his faith abide.

Or else who is omnipotent, saving our God alone?
The fourth part.

That all the ways wherein I walk, did evermore keep clean.

And for my surety brought me forth, into an open place.

To break in sunder bars of brass, he gave my arms ye might.

Thy love and familiarity, does still increase my power.

So that my feet shall never slip, nor stumble at a balke.

And from the field do not return, til they be al destroyde.

For at my foot they fall down flat, I strike them all so sore.

That they be al scattred abroad, that up against me rise.

and all my foes thou do divide, in sunder with thy stroke.

Yea to the Lord they called for help, yet heard he not their grief.
The fyft part.

And sweep them out like filthy clay, that sticks in the street.

and thou do of the heathen folk, appoint me to be head.

And at the first obey my word, whereas mine own will swerue.

But wander wide out of their ways, and hide them out of sight

That is my rock and saving health, praised be he always.

And with his holy word subdude, the people unto me.

That cruel and ungodly were, and up against me rose.

and sing out praises to thy name, among the gentiles al.

To David thine anointed king, and to his seed for ay.
Coeli enarrant gloriam dei. psalm.xix.
T. S.
To the intent he might move the faithful to a deper consideration of gods
glory, he fetteth before their eyes the most exquisite workmanship of the
heavens, with their proportion and ornaments. And afterward calls them to the
law wherein God has reveled him self more familiarly to his chosen people. The
which peculiar grace by comme^dyng the law, he sets forth more at large, and
at the end, he concludes with a prayer.

Sing this as the.xiiii Psalm.

The glory of God omnipotent, his works and what they are.

The nights which likewise their race ru^, ye self same things expres


In them the Lord made for the sun, a place of great renome:

And as a valiant champion, who for to get a pryse:
With joy does have to take in hand, some noble enterprise,

Nothing can hide it from his heat, but he will find it out.

Converting souls and making wise, the simple and obscure?

His precept pure, and gives light, to eyes that be full blind.

The judgments of the Lord are trne, and righteous altogether

The honey and the honey comb, are not so sweet as they.

and in performance of the same, there shall be great reward.

Then cle^se my soul from secret sins, which are in me most ryfe.

And then shall I be innocent, and great offenses flee.

For my redeiner and my strength, O Lord thou art alone.
Exaudiat te dominus. Psalm.xx.
T. S
A prayer of the people unto God: that it would please him to hear their king,
and receive his sacrifice, which he offered before ^e went to battle against
the Ammonites, declaring how that the Heathen put their trust in horses and
chariots, but they trust only in ye name of the Lord their god. Wherefore the
other shall fall, but the Lord will save the king and his people.


The majesty of Jacobs God, defend thee from al il.

And so in Sio^ stablish thee, and make thee strong in deed.

And so receive right thankfully, thy burnt offerings echone.

And al thy counsel and deuyse, full well perform may he.

Unto the Lord which thy requests, fulfilled has always.

And send him health by his right hand, out of his holy place.

But we remember God our Lord, that keeps promise just.


Domine in virtute. Psalm.xxi.
T. S.
David in the parson of the people prayseth God for the victory which he gave
them against the Sirians and Ammonites. 1. Sam. x.xi. wherein he had the rich
crown of the king of Ammon, set upon his head. ii. Sam. xii. and was endued
with the manifold belessinges of God, and contrariwise his enemies destroyed.

^ O Lord how joyful is ye king, in thy strength, ^ and thy power: how
vehemently does he re- ^ joyce, in thee his Savior? For thou have given unto
him his god. ^ ly hearts desire: to him nothing have you denide of that he did
require


And thou have set upon his head, a crown of perfect gold.

To have long life, yea such a life, as ever should endure.

Great worship and great honor both, thou have upon him laid.

And with thy chereful countenance wilt comfort him always.

Therefore his goodness and his grace, will not that he shall quail.

Find out thy foes, and let them feel, the power of thy right hand.

Thine anget shall destroy them all, and fire shall them consume.

And from the number of thy folk, their seed shall end and cease.

Yet did they fail and had no power, for to perform the same.

And charge thy vow strings redily, against thine enmies face.

So shall we sing right solempnly, praising thy might and power.
Deus deus meus respice. psalm.xxii.
T. S.
David complains himself to be brought into such extremities that he is like
a man desperate and past al hope, after declares whereof, he recouereth himself
from the bottomless pit of temptations. And under his own person, he sets
forth the signre of Christ, whom he did forsee in the spirit of prophecy. So
this psalm after two sorts does declare that prophecy of Esaias: he was taken
forth of prison and judgment.

Sing this as the.xxi. psalm.

and helpest not when I do make, my great complaint and cry?

I cease not all the night, and yet thou hear not at al.

Thou art the comfort and the joy, and glory of Israel.

and when they put their trust in thee, so did thou them deliver.

And for the faith they had in thee, they were not put to shame.

An outcast whom the people scorn, with all the spite they can.

They gren, they mow, they nod their heds, and in this wise they say

Let him redeem and help him now, his power if he will prove.

Thou did preserve me still in hope, while I did suck her breast.

Since I was in my mothers womb, thou have been ever my God.
The second part.

Since I have none to be my help, my succor and relief.

Yea bulls so fat, as though they had, in Basan field been fed.

Much like a Lio^ roryng out, and rampyng for his pray.

My heart does in my body melt, like wax against the heat.

Unto my jaws, and I am brought, to dust of death at last.

Conspire against me cursedly, they pearce my hands and feet.

Yet still upon me they do look, and still they me behold.

And for my coat they did cast lots, to who^ it might befall.

But rather since you art my strength, to help me Lord make speed.

And keep my soul, thy darling dear, from dogs y^ would devour,
The third part.

And from the horns of Unicorns, Lord safely me deliver.

and in thy church shall praise the name, of thee the living Lord.

and with all reverence possible, thou seed of Israel worship him.

His countenance, when they do call, but grants to their cry.

Thy praise, and keep my promise made, for setting forth thy name.

To know ye lord, shall praise his name, their hearts shall live for ever.

The Heathen folk shall worship him, before his blessed face.

And he shall be their governor, and king for evermore.

And in his presence worship him, and bow their knees full low.

My seed seel serve and praise his name, while any world shall last.

His justice, and his righteousness, and all his works of wonder.
Dominus regit me. Psalm.xxiij.
VV. VV.
Because the Prophet had proved the great mercyes of God at diverse times, and
in sundry manners: he ga^hereth a certain assurance, fully perswadyng him
self that God will continue the very same goodness toward him for ever.

Sing this as the.xxi. psalm.

How can I then lack any thing, whereof I stand in need?

And after drives me to the streams, which run most pleasantly

Conducting me in his right paths, eue^ for his own names sake.

For with thy rod and shepherdes crook, I am comforted still

Thou have my head with baulme refresht, my cup does ouerflo.

And in the house of God will I my life for ever spend.
Another by Thomas Sternhold.

In pastors fair, with waters calm, he sets me for to feed.

To walk in paths of righteousness, for his most holy name.

Thy rod, thy staff does comfort me, and thou art with me still.

Thou shall (O Lord) fill full my cup, and eke annoint my head.

That in thy house for evermore, my dwelling place shall be.
Domini est terra. psalm.xxiiii.
I. H.
Because the grace of God was then to be uttered in the temple, more glorious
then before it had been in the tabernacle, David gives it a more glorious
title, and with exclamation sets forth the honor thereof, stirring us to the
consideration of the eternal mansions prepared for us in the heavens: whereof
this was a shadow and figure.

Sing this as th x. xxi. Psalm.

yea his is all the world, and all that therein do endure.

And laid a low the liquid floods to flow beneath y^ la^d.

Or pass into thy holy place, there to continue still?

His soul not set on vanity, who has not sworn no guile.

And God his God and savior, shall yield to him his right.

As Jacob did the Israelite, in that time of his race.

For there shall enter in thereby, the king of glorious state.

The mighty Lord, in battayles stout, and trial of the sword.

For there shall enter in thereby, the king of glorious state.

The kingdom and the royalltie, of glorious state is his.
Ad te domine leuaui. Psalm.xxv.
T. S.
The Prophet touched with the consideration of his sins, and also grieved with
the cruel malice of his enemies, prays to God most fervently to have his
sins forgeuen, especially such as he had committed in his youth. He begins
every verse according to the Ebrue letters two or three except.

^ I Lift mine heart to thee, my God and guide most ^ just, now suffer me to
take no shame, for in ^ thee do I trust. Let not my foes rejoice, nor make a
scorn of me, ^ and let them not be overthrown that put their trust in thee.

But shame shall them befall, which harm them wrongfully:


Thou art my God and savior, on thee I wayt always.

And eke thy pity plentiful, for they have been for ever.

Remember not how ignorant, I have been of thy truth:
Nor after my deserts, let me thy mercy find,
But of thine own beningnity, Lord have me in thy mind.

Therefore the Lord will sinners teach, and such as go aside.

He will direct in all his ways the lowly and the meke,

To them that keep his testament, the witness of his troth.
The second part.

To grant me pardon for my sin, for it is wo^drous great.

To lead his life in such away, as he does best accept.

His sede and his posterity, inherit shall the land.

And unto them he does declare, his will and testament.

That plucked my feet out of the snare, of sin and ignorance.

For I am poor and desolate, and comfortles alone.

Bring me out of this misery, necessity and need.

Remit my sin and mine offense, and make me clean again.

Pursuing me with deadly hate, that feign would live in peace.

And let me not be overthrown, because I trust in the.

Because I look as one of thine, that you should me defend.

I mean thy chosen Israel, from al their pain and grief.
Iudica me domine. Psalm.xxvi.
I. H.
David oppressed with many injuries, findyng no help in the world, called for
aid from God: and assured of his integrity toward Saul, desires God to be
his judge, and to defend his innocence, causeles afflicted. Finally he makes
mention of his sacrifice which he will offer for his deliverance, and
desires to be in the company of the faithful in the congregation of God,
which he was banished by Saul, promising integrity of life, and open praises
and thanks geuyng.

Sing this as the.xviii. psalm.

I trust in god, and hope that he, will strength me to remain,

As men do prove their gold with fire, my reaynes and heart epsy.

For of thy truth I tread the trace, and will do al my days.

To come in house I do refuse, with the deceitful train.

I do not once to them resort, that hurtful things devise:

Then to thy alter I make speed, to offer there in sight.

And so declare how wondrous ways, thou have ben good to me.

I have delight and would be nere, whereas thy grace does dwell.

Nor yet my life amongst those me^, that seek much blood to spil.

And their right hand with wre^ch and wile, for bribes does pluck and pull.

Have mercy Lord and me defend, so that I do not swerue.

Wherefore to God will I give praise, in all the peoples sight.
Dominus illuminatio. Psalm.xxvi.
I H.
David makes this Psalm being delivered from great perils as appears by the
praises and thanks giving annexed: Wherein we may see the constant faith of
David against the assaults of al enemies, and also thend wherefore he desires
to live and to be delivered, one ly to worship God in his congregation. Hereby
he promises him self assurance, though father and mother forsake him, he
teaches this to be the only way, to see the good things in the land of the
living, and after his example he exhorts to faith and to attend upon the
Lord.

Sing this as the.xviii. psalm,

Since god does give me strength and might, why should I be afraid

And think to eat me up at length, the^ selves have caught the fall.

In battle pight if they will try, I trust in God for aid.

For which I pray and will desire, til he to me apply.

To see the beauty of his face, and view his temple well.

And keep me secret by his side, as on a rock most sure.

My foes to foil and clean deface, that compass me about.

With Psalms and songs I will apply, to laud the Lord always.
The second part.

Have mercy (Lord) on me oppressed, and send me help with all.

Then seek my face say thou to me, Lord I will seek thy face.

Thou art my help still to this day, be still my God and guide.

And then the Lord him self yet took, of me the cure and charge.

For fear of such as watch for me, to trap me if they might.

For they surmise against me still, false witness to depose.

The Lord gods good grace shall it se, in life that ay shall last

And he shall ease and strength thy heart, if thou in him do trust.
Ad te domine clamabo. Psalm.xxviii.
I. H.
Being in great fear and pensiuenes to see God dishonored by the wicked men,
he desires to be rid of them, and cries for vengeance against them, and at
length assures him self, that God has herd his prayer, unto whose tuition he
commends all the faithful.

Sing this as the.xxi. Psalm.

Neglect me not, least I be like, to them that go to grane.

When I lift up my hands unto, thy holy arc most hye.

That speak right fair unto their friends, and think full il in heart.

And after their inventions, let them receive their mede.

Therefore will he them and their sede, destroy for evermore.

My voice, my prayer, and my complaint, that heard so willingly.

My hope, my help, my hearts relief, my song shall him confess.

The health and the salvation, of his elect by Christ.

Increase the^ Lord, and rule their hearts, that they may never swerue.
Afferte domino. psalm.xxix.
T. S.
An excellent Psalm, wherein the Prophet exhorts the very princes and
rulers of the world, which otherwise for the most part think there is no
God, at the least to fear him for the thunders and tempests, for fear whereat
all creatures tremble. And though there by God threatens sinners, yet is he
always mercyful to his, and moves them thereby to praise his name.

Sing this as the xxi. Psalm.

Give ye all praise, honor and strength, unto the living Lord.

Worship him in his majesty, within his holy throne.

He does prepare the thunder clappes, and gouernes all the sease.

It is most mighty in effect, and much magnificent.

The Cedre trees of Libanus, which are most hye and strong.

Not only trees but mountains great, whereon the trees ar borne.



Then in his temple every man, his glory does proclaim.

So shall he raygne, as Lord and king, for ever and for aye.

The Lord will bless his chosen folk, with everlasting peace.
Exaltab^ te domine. Psalm.xxx.
I. H.
When David should have dedicated his house to the Lord, he fell so extreme
sick, that he was without all hope of life, and therefore after his recovery,
he renders thanks to God, exhorting others to the like, and to learn by his
example, that God is rather merciful the^ severe and rigorous toward his
children, and also that the fall from prosperity is sodeyne. This done, he
retourneth to prayer, promising to praise God for ever.

^ ALl laud and praise, with heart and voice (O Lord) ^ I give to thee: which
did not make my foes ^ rejoice, but have exalted me. O Lord my God to thee I
cryde, ^ in all my pain and grief, thou gave an ear, and did provide ^ to
ease me with relief.


Thou did revive when strength did lack, and kept me from the grave.

In memory of his majesty, rejoice with one accord.

But in his favor and his grace, always does life remain.
Though gripes of grief, and panges full sore, shall lodge with us al night:
The Lord to joy shall us restore, before the day be light.

Tush, I am sure to feel none il, this wealth shall not decay.

But when thou turned away thy face, my mind was sore dismayed.

My God with plaints I did apply, and prayed both day and night.

Does dust declare thy majesty, or yet thy truth does praise?

Do not this simple soul forsake, of help I thee require.

The mourning weed thou tookst me fro, and madst me to rejoice.

My Lord my God, to thee will I, give laud and thanks always.
In te domine speraui. Psalm.xxxi. 1.
Hop.
David delivered from some great danger, in the deserte of Maon or else where,
first he rehearses what meditation he had by the power of faith when death was
before his eyes, his enemies being ready to take him: then he adioyneth the
favor of God always to be ready to those that fear him. Finally he exhorts
all the faithful to trust in God and to love him, because he preserves and
strengthens them, as they may see by his example.

Sing this as the. 18. Psalm

As thou art just deliver me, and set me quite from blame.

Be thou my rock, and house of stone, my fence in time of need.

For thy names sake be thou my guide, and lead me in thy power.

Thou art my strength, and al my care, is for thy might and aid.

For why? thou have redeemed it (O Lord) thou God most true.

When they on trifles set their heart, my trust is in the Lord.

Thou see when ought would me annoy, and know my soul full well.

But thou have set me out of band to walk abrod at large.
The second part.

Mine eyes wax dim, my might does fail, my womb for woe does ache

My strength is gone, and through disdain, my bones corrupt and wast.

My neighbors and my kinsmen borne, to se me are afraid.

As small effect in me they find, as in a broken pot.

How they conspird and went about, to take my life away.

For I confess and still have said, thou art my Lord and God.

Defend me from the wrathes and rage, of the^ that me withstand.

And save me Lord, for thy goodness, thy mercy and thy grace.
The third part.

But let the wicked bear their shame, and in the grave to fall.

That fear and trust in thee therefore, before the sons of men.

Within thy place thou shall the^ hide, from all the strife of toungs.

Me to defend with watch and ward, as in a town of war.

Lo, I was clean cast out of sight, yet hardst thou my request.

And to the proud he will repay, according to their pride.

For sure the Lord will take your part, since ye on him do trust.
Beati quorum remissi sunt. Psalm.xxxii.
T. S.
David punished with grievous sickness for his sins, counts them happy to
whom God does not imputs their transgressions. And after that he had confessed
his s^nnes and obtained pardon, he exhorts the wicked men to live godly, and
the good to rejoice.

Sing this as the.xxx. Psalm

And he whose sin and wretchedness, is hid and also covered.

Which in his heart has hid no guile, nor fraud is found therein.

My bones did wear and wast away, with daily moan and plaint.

That al my blood and humors moist, to drynes did convert.

The thou (O Lord) did me forgive, and al my sins pass over.

So that the floudes of waters great, shall have no power on him.

Thou art my refuge and my joy, and thou do rid me out.

And will thee guide as I my self, have learnde by proof and sight.

Whose mouth with out a rain or bit, from harm thou can not rule.

But unto him that trustes in God, his goodness shall remain.

And ye of pure and perfect heart, be glad and eke rejoice.
Exultate iusti in domino. Psalm.xxxiii.
IH.
He exhorts good men to praise God, for that he has not only created all
things, and by his providence governs the same: but also is faithful in his
promises. He understands man's heart, and scatters the counsel of the
wicked. So that no man ca^ be preserved by any creature or man's strength: but
they that put their confidence in his mercy, shall be preserved from all
aduecsitie.

Sing this as the.xxx. Psalm.

That upright me^ with tha^kful voice, should praise ye god of might

With lute and instrument among, that sounds with ten strings.



And with his gifts he does delight, the earth throughout of fill.

Their hosts and powers every chone, his breath to pass has brought.

And hid them in the depth to be, as in an house of store.

Ye that inhabit in each cost, dread him and stand in awe.

what he does will is brought to pass, with full effect in deed.

He does defeat the multitude, of their devise and thought.

The motions of his mind and will, take place in every age.
The second part.

whom he does chose of mere accord, to take them as his own.



For he alone does know the thought, and working of the same.

The man that of his might does boast, shall fall for all his strength.

The strength of horse shall not prevail, the rider to preserve.

With such as fear him to offend, and on his goodness trust.

And if that dearth the land oppress, in hunger them to feade.

He is the shield us to defend, and drive al darts away.

For why? in his most holy name, we hope and much delight.

As we always with one accord, do only trust in thee.
Benedicam domino. Psalm.xxxiiii.
T. S.
After David had escaped Achis, according as it is written in the. 1. Sam. 21.
whom in this title he calls Abimelech (which was a general name to all the
kings of the Philistines) he prayseth God for his deliuerau^ce, provoking all
others by his example to trust in God to fear and serve him, who defends the
godly with his angels, and utterly destroys the wicked in their sins.

Sing this as the.xxx Psalm.

And eke my mouth for evermore, shall speak unto his prays

That humble me^ and mortified, may hear and so rejoice.

And let us now exalt his name, together with one accord.

And me delivered incontinent, from al my fear and pain.

Their countenance shall not be dashed, they need it not to fear.

Who did him hear without delay, and rid him out of thrall.

To save al such as fear the Lord, that nothing them deface.

O happy man that makes him, his only stay and trust.

For they that fear the living Lord, are sure to lack nothing.

But as for them that fear the Lord, no lack shall be to such.
The second part.

I shall you teach the perfect way, how you the Lord should fear.



Inquire for peace and quietness, and follow it with speed.

His ears likewise do hear the plaint, of the poor innocent.

And cut away the memory, that should of them remain.

That out of pain and misery, forth with he lets the^ go.

He sautes also the sorrowful, the meke and poor in spirit.

But out of al adversities, the Lord does them deliver.

That not so much as one of them, does perish or decay.

and such as hate ye righteous man, shall soon be brought to naught.

and who that put their trust in him, nothing shall the^ confound.
Iudice domine. psalm.xxxv.
I. H
So long as Saul was enemy to David, al y^ had any authority under him, to
flatter their king, did also most cruelly persecute David: against whom he
prays God to plead and to avenge his cause, that they may be taken in their
nets and snares, which they laid for him, and his innocce^y may be declared.
And y^ the innocent which takes part we him, may rejoice and praise the name
of the Lord that thus delivers his servant. And so he promises to speak
forth the justice of the Lord, and to magnify his name all the days of his life.

^ LOrd plead my cause against my foes, con- ^ found their force and might:
Fight on my ^ part, against all those, that seek with me to fight. Lay hand
up- ^ pon thy spear and shield, thy self in armor dress: stand up for me ^
and fight the field, to help me from distress.


That thou unto my soul do say: lo I thy help at hand.

let the^ turn back and fly with shame, ye think to work me il.

And that the aungel of our God, their might away may thrust.

And send thine aungel with thy might, to persecute them al.

And for no cause have digd a cause, to take my soul therein.

Let them be trapt in their own snare, and in their mischief fall.

That in the lord I may rejoice, and in his saving health.

O Lord though they do seem full gay, what man is lik to thee?
The second part.

and rid the poor from wicked me^, that spoil and do the^ wrong.

And to accuse me they devise, of that I never knew.

That they should pay my good with il, my soul does sore co^plain

With fasting I did faint full sore, to pray I was not slack.

As one that makes woeful cheer, about his mothers grave.

Yea abject slaves at me did toye, with mocks and checks full stout.

At me do grin with great disdain, and pluck their mouth aside.

Oh rid my soul mine only dear, out of these Lions claws.

And where as most of people be, there will I show they praise.

Nor yet to wink or turn their eye, that causeles me assault.
The third part.

They still consult and would betray, al those that peace ensue.

Well, well, say they, our eye does see, ye thing that we desire.

Be not far of, nor me forsake, as men that fail their friend.

Revenge my cause my Lord my God, and aid me with they might

and let not them their pride express, nor triumph over me.

Nor give them cause to say on hye, we have our will of him.

and pay the^ home with spite and blame, that brag at me with scorn.

and they al times with heart and voice, shall praise ye lord and say:

To see his servants prosper well, that is his pleasant sight.

Unto the Lord my God will I, sing lauds with thanks always.
Dixit iniustus. Psalm.xxxvi.
I. H.
David grievously vexed by the wicked, does complain of their malice and
wickedness. Then he turns to consider the unspeakable goodness of God toward al
creatures. But specially toward his children, that by faith there of he may
be comforted and assured of his deliverance by this ordinary course of gods
work, who in the end destroys the wicked, and saves the just.

Sing this as the. xxxv. psalm.

That of ye Lord he has no trust, his fear is set apart.

So long til he deserve the hate of God and eke of man.

Yet at no hand will he be taught, which way he may do well.

No wicked ways does he refuse, nor nothing that is il.

So does thy truth it self extend unto the cloudy sky.

Thy judgments like to seas most deep, thou sauest both man and beast

In trust whereof as in thy wings, the sons of men shall dwell.

Of al delight they shall be sped, and take thereof their fill.

And in they light we are full sure, the lastyng light to see.

Thy righteousness declare and show, to men of upright heart.

Nor let the wicked me assail, to throw me out of place.

They shall be ouerthrown withal, and never rise again.
Noli emulari. Psalm.xxxvii.
VV. VV.
Because the godly should not wonder to see wicked men prosper in this world:
the prophet shows that all things shall be granted according to their
hearts desire to them that love and fear God, and they that do the contrary,
although they seem to flourish for a time, shall at length perish.

Sing this as the. xxxv Psalm.

Nor yet envy such as to il, have bent and set their will.

So shall their great prosperity, soon pass, fade, and decay.

So shall thou have ye land as thine, and there sure food shall find.

Or else can wish in all the world, thou needst it not to crave.

And thou shall see with patience, the effect both sure and just.

So that ye sun eue^ at noone days, shall not shine half so bright

Not shrinking for ye prosperous state, of lewd and wicked men.

Their wicked steps avoid and fly, and follow not their guise.

But such as trust in him are sure, the land for to posses.

No not so much as house or place, where once he did remayn.
The second part.

In rest and peace they shall rejoice, for naught shall the^ withstand

They gnash their teeth at him, as me^, which do his bane desire.

for why he sees their term approach, when they shall sigh and morn.

To overthrow and kill ye poor, as they ye right way went.

likewise the bow shall break to shiuers, wherein they put their trust.

The^ al these lewd and worldy men's rich pomp and heaped store.

Where contrary he does preserve, the humble men and low.

And will give them inheritance, which never shall decay.

When other shall be hungerbit, they shall be clad and fed.

shall quail, yea melt eue^ as la^bs grease, or smoke that flies abroad.
The third part.

Whereas the just by liberal gifts, makes many glad and fain.

And they whom he does curse likewise, shall perish in his rage.

To every thing he takes in hand, he sends good addres.

Because the lord stretches out his hand, at need and does not fail.

The just man left, or else his sede, to beg for misery.

His children and posterity, receive of God their meede.

So God shall grant thee long to have, in earth a dwelling place

That he preserues the^ evermore, but stroyes the wicked race.

Having as Lords al thing therein, in their own power and hand

His tongue does talk to edify, with truth and equity.

So that where ever he goes or walks, his foot ca^ never flyde.

By all means seeking him to kill, if he fall in his net.
The fourth part.

Though men against him sentence give, god would him yet defend.

The earth to rule, and thou shall see, destroid these wicked men.

Flourishing in all wealth and store, as does the Laurel tree.

the^ I him soght, but could scarce find, ye place where dwelt such one

For the just man shall have at length, great joy with rest and peace.

God will cut of their budding race, and rich posterity.

Who in their trouble sends the^ aid, of his mere grace, and love.

And still will save them whilst that they, in him do put their trust.
Domine ne in furore. Psalm.xxxviii.
I. H.
David lying sick of some grievous ^isease, acknowlegeth himself to be
chastised of the lord for his sins, and therefore prays God to turn away
his wrath, he vttexeth ye greatness of his grief by many words and
circumstances, as wounded with the arrows of Gods ire, forsaken of his
friends, evil entreated of his enemies, but in the end with firm confidence,
be commends his cause to God, and hops for spedy help at his hand.

Sing this as the. xxxv Psalm.

Ne in thy heavy wrath O lord, correct me I desire.


And all this is by reason of, thy wrath that I am in:
Nor any rest is in my bones, by reason of my sin.

As greater lode the^ I can bear, they lie me sore upon.

Which al through mine own folishnes, betideth unto me.
And I in careful wise am brought, in trouble and distres:






And eke my kinsmen far a way, are me departed fro.

To do me hurt, spoke lies, and thought on treason all the day.
The second part.




This did I crave that they my foes, triumph not over me:

And truly I poor wretch am set, in place a woeful wight:
And eke my griefful heaviness, is ever in my sight.

And while I for my sinful deeds, my sorrows do express:

And they that hate me wrongfully, in number hugely grow.

Because that good and honest things, I do ensue always.


Dixi custodiam. psalm.xxxix.
I. H
David utters with what great grief and bitterness of mind he was driven to
these outrageous complaints of his infirmities, for he confesses that when he
had determined silence, that he brast forth yet into words that he would not,
through the greatness of his grief. Then he re^erseth certain requests which
taste of infirmity of man, and mireth with them many prayers, but al to show a
mind wonderfully troubled, that it may plainly appear how he did strive
mightily against death and desperation.

Sing this as the.xxxv. psalm.

I will take heed al times that I, offend not in my tongue.

Not once to whisper all the while, the wicked are in sight.

Yea from good talk I did refrain, but sore against my will.

Which did increase, and stir the fire, at last these words brast out

So that I may be certified, how long my life shall last.

Mine age is nothing unto thee, so vain is every man.

In getting goods, and cannot tell, who shall the same enjoy.

Of truth my help does hang on thee, I nothing else require*
The second part.

And make me not a scorn to fools, that nothing understand.

Because I know it was thy work, my patience for to prove.

I faint and pine away for fear, of thy most heavy hand.

As does a cloth ye mothes have fret, so vain a thing is man.

I soiourne like a stranger here, as did my fathers al.

Before I go away from hence, and shall be seen no more.
Expectans expectaui. Psalm.xl.
I. H.
David delivered from great danger, does magnify and praise the grace of God
for his deliverance, and commends his providence toward al mankind. Then
does he promise to give himself wholly to God service, and so declare how God is
truly worshipped. Afterward he gives thanks and prayseth God, and having
complained of his enemies, with good courage, he calls for aid and succor.

Sing this as the. xxxv Psalm.

At length to me he did accord, my voice and cry to hear.

And on a rock he set my feet, and he did guide my way.

And sing new songs of thanks alwayse, unto the Lord our God.

Then they unto the Lord will flee, and trust upon his aid.

That with the proud does take no part, nor such as lie and feign.

Thy favor toward us exceedes, al things that ever was.

To such a ceckening they do rise, thereof no end I know.

With sacrifice to purge their sin, thou do no man require.

But thou O lord have open made, mine ears to hear withal.

For in the volume of thy book, thus it is said of me.

For in my heart thy law I find, fast placed there to dwell.

behold my tongue no time does cease, O Lord you know full well.
The second part.

But I declare and have expressed, thy truth and saving health.

The trust that in thy truth I find, to all the church I show.
For I with mischiefs many one, am sore beset about:
My sins increase and so come on, I cannot spy them out.

My heart does faint for very dread, that I almost am dead.

Make have with aid to succor me, O Lord at my desire.

Drive back my foes and the^ defaine, that wish and would me il.

Always at me they rail and cry, fie on him, fie for shame.

That those that love thy saving health, may say to god be praise.

Yet thou O lord wilt me restore, to health full well I know.

Wherefore my God as thou art just, with me no time delay.
Beatus qui intelligit. psalm.xli.
T. S.
David being grievously afflicted, blesses them that pity his case, and
co^plaineth of the treason of his a wne friends and familiars, as came to pass
in Judas. Ioh.xv. After he feelyng the great mercies of god, gently chastising
him, and not suffering his enemies to triumph against him, gives most hearty
thanks unto God.

^ THe man is blessed that careful is, the nedy to ^ consider: for in ye season
perilous, the lord will ^ him deliver. The Lord will make him safe and sound and
happy ^ in the land: And he will not deliver him, into his enmies hand.


And thou O Lord wilt turn to health, his sickness and his sore.

And heal my soul which is full woe, that I offended thee.

When shall he die that al his name, may vanish quite away?

But in their hearts mischief they hatch, and to their mates it tell.

And cast their fetches how to trap me with some mortal harm.

He is so low that without doubt, rise can he not again.

Who at my table ate my bread, the same for me laid wait.

That I may render unto them, the things they have deserved.

when that mine enmies have no cause to triumph over me.

And in thy presence place assignd, where I shall dwell for aye.

Even so be it Lord will I say, even so be it therefore.
Quemadmodum desiderat. Psalm.xlii.
I. H.
The prophet grievously complains, that being letred by his persecutours, he
could not be present in the congregation of gods people: protesting that
although he was separate in body from them: yet his heart was thither
affectioned. And last of al he shows yt he was not so far ouerco^men with these
sorrows and thoughts, but yt he continually put his co^fide^ce in ye Lord.

Sing this as the.xxxv. psalm

So does my soul desire always, with the Lord to remain

Oh when shall. I come and appear, in presence of his sight?

When wicked men cry out so fast, where now is god thy guide?

Therefore my soul as at pits brinke, is most heavy and sad.
When I did march in good array, furnished with my train:
Unto the temple was our way, with so^gs and hearts most feign.

Trust still in God, for him to praise, I hold it ever best.
By him have I succor at need, against al pain and grief:
He is my God, which with all speed, will have to send relief.

The land of Jordan, and record the little hill Hermon.

The flouddes of evil that do fall, run over me with noyce.

Likewise by night I did not cease, the living God to praise.

O lord thou art my guide and stay, my rock, and my defense.
Why do I then in pensiuenes, hanging the head thus walk:
while that mine enmie me oppres, and vex me with their talk?

when they cry out with stubburn hearts, where is thy God, thy Lord?

with thoughts why do thy self assail, so sore within my breast?

To give him thanks with laud and praise, for health restord to thee.
Iudica me deus. Psalm.xliii.
T. S.
He prays to be delivered from them which conspire with Absolon, to the end
he might joyfully praise God, in his holy congregation.


From wicked and deceitsul me^, O Lord deliver me.

And why walk I so heavily, oppressed with my foe?

Which may conduct me to thy hill, and to thy dwelling place.

And on my harp give thanks to thee, O god my god most dear.

Still trust in God, for him to praise, I hold it always best.
By him I have deliverance, against al pains and grief:
He is my God, which does always, at need send me relief.
Deus auribus nostris. psalm.xliiii.
T. S.
A most earnest prayer made in the name of the faithful, when they are
afflicted by their enemies, for sustanig the quarrel of gods word, according to
ye exposition of S. Paul. Romansviii.

^ Our ears have heard our fathers tell, and reave- ^ rently record: the
wondrous works, ye you have ^ done in alder time (O lord.) How you did cast ye
ge^tils out, and stroidst the^ ^ with strong hand, pla^ti^g our fathers in their
place and gave to the^ their la^d.


But by thy hand, thy arm and grace, because you louedst them best.







Our enmies robbed, and spoild our goods, when we were sparst abroad.

Amongst the heathen every where, scattred we do remain.

For profit none thou had thereby, no gayn at al was sought.

And those that round about us dwell, at us do grinne and mock.
The second part.

They mock, they scorn, and nod their heds, where ever they go or walk.

Yea so I blush, that all my face, with red is covered then.

That death it is to se their wro^ges, their threatenings, and their cries.



And covered us with shade of death, and great adversity.



As sheep unto the shambles sent, right so they deal with us.



Our belly like as it were glude, unto the ground cleaues fast.

He thee beseech for thy goodness, to rescue us with speed.
Eructauit. Psalm.xlv.
I H.
The majesty of Solomon, his honor, strength, beauty, riches, and power are
praised, and also his marriage with the Egyptian bayng an heathen woman is
blessed, if that she can renounce her people, and the love of her country, and
give her self wholly to her husband. Under the which figure, the wonderful
majesty, and the increase of the kingdom of Christ, and the Church his
spouse, now taken of the gentiles, is described.

Sing this as the. xxv. psalm.

The praise that I shall show therein, pertains to the king.

As is the pen of any Scribe, that uses fast to write.

For God has blessed thee with gifts, for ever to endure.

With honor, glory, and renoume, thy person pure is dect.

And thy right hand shall thee instruct, in works of dreadful might.

That folk shall fall and knele to thee, yea, al thy foes, O king.

Because the scepter of thy realm, does righteousness mayntaine.

God, even thy God, has pointed thee, with joy above the rest.

When thou do from thy palace pass, therein to make thee glad.

At thy right hand, the queen does stand, in gold, and garments gay.
The second part.

Thou must forget thy kindred al, and fathers house most dear.

For why? he is the Lord thy God, and thou must worship him.

And all the welthy of the land, shall make their suit to thee.

Within his closet, she does sit, al dect in beaten gold.

With virgins fair, on her to weight, she comes to the king.

Into the palace of the king, and there do they abide.

Thou shall have sons, who^ thou may set, as princes in all lands.

The people shall give thanks to thee, for evermore, O Lord.
Deus noster refugium. Psalm.xlvi.I.
Hop.
A song of thanks geuyng, for the deliverance of Jerusalem, after Senacherib
with his army was driven away, or some other like sudden, and marvelous
deliverance, by the myghly hand of God. Whereby the Prophet commendyng this
great benefit, does exhort the faithful, to give them selves wholly into the
hand of God, doubtyng nothing, but that under his protection, they shall be safe
against all the assaults of their enemies.

^ THe Lord is our defense and aid, the strength ^ whereby we stand: when we
with woe are much ^ dismayed, he is our help at hand. Though thearth remove, we
^ will not fear, though hills so high and stepe: be thrust and hurled ^ here
and there, within the sea so deep.


And though it over flow the shore, and beat down mighty hills.

To fresh the city of our God, and wash his holy place.

Al things against her that rebel, the Lord will truly stay.

The earth does melt, and not appear, when god puts forth his voice.

Our hope of health, with all our heart, on Jacobs God does lie.

What wonders he himself has wrought, throughout the earth abrod.

Their bows he brake, and spears each one, their Charets bre^t with fire.

Among the Heathen high and low, and all the earth throughout

On Jacobs God, do we depend, and on his mighty power.
Omnes gentes. Psalm.xlvii.
I H.
The Prophet exhorts all people, to the worship of ye true and ever living
Got, commendyng the mercyes of God, toward the posterity of Jacob: and after
prophecieth of the kingdom of Christ in this time of the Gospel.

Sing this as the.xlv. Psalm

Be glad, and sing unto the Lord, with sweet and pleasant voice.

A mighty king he is truly, in all the earth extold.

And underneath our feet he shall, the nations make to fall,

The flouryng worship of Jacob, his well-beloved one.

The Lord goes up above the sky, with trompets royal voice.

For God is king of all the earth, al skilful praises sing.

The princes of the people have, them joined every one.

Us with a buckler does defend, the earth continually.
Magnus dominus. Psalm.xlviii.
A notable deliverance of Jerusalem, from the hands of many kings is
mentioned, for the which thanks are given to God, and the estate of that
City is praised, that has god so presently al all times ready to defend them:
this Psalm seems to be made in the time of Achaz, Iosaphat, Asa, or Ezechia,
for in their times chiefly, was the City by forayne Princes assaulted.

Sing this as the. xlvi Psalm.

Within the city of our Lord, upon his holy hill.

The City of the mighty king, on her northside does stand.

For lo, the kings were gathered, and together eke were gone?

Astonished much and suddenly, were driven back with fear.

As does a woman, when she shall go travail by and by.

So they were stayed, and even as, we heard our fathers speak:

Yea, in the city, which our Lord, for ever will uphold.

For which we do al times attend, within thy holy place.

And thy right hand, O Lord, is full, of righteousness always.
Let, for thy judgments, Sion mount, fulfilled be with joys:
And eke of Judah, grant, O Lord, the daughter to rejoice.

And tell the towers, that thereupon, are builded in a row.

That ye may tell thereof to them, that after shall be here.

Yea and unto the death also, our guider shall he be.
Audite haec omnes. Psalm.xlix.
T. S.
The holy ghost calls all men to the consideration of man's life, showing,
them not to be most happy, that are most wealthy, and therefore not to be
feared: but contrariwise, he lyfteth up our minds, to consider, how all things
are ruled by Gods providence: who, as he judges these worldly misers to
everlasting torments: so does he preserve his, and will reward them in the
day of the resurrection. 1. These. 1.

Sing this as the.xiv. psalm.

Both high, and low, both rich, and poor, ye in ye world do dwell.

In understanding shall my heart, his study exercise.

And open al my doubtful speech, in meter on my harp.

Or else my foes, which at my heels, are pressed, my life to spoil?

And they, which of their treasures great, the^ selves do brag, and boast:

Or that can give a price to God, sufficient for him.



And being ded, strangers posses, their goods, their re^ts, their lands.

To make their name right great in earth, for ever to endure.

But shall at length taste of deaths cup, as well as ye brute beasts.
The second part.

Their children yet approve their talk, and in like sin remain.

Death shall the^ eat, and in that day, the just shall Lordship have.
Their image and their royal port, shall fade and quite decay:
When as from house, to pit they pas, with woe, and weal away.

Because he will of his good grace, my soul receive again.

Although the glory of his house, increases more and more.

His glory will not follow him, his pomp will take her leave.

And others likewise flatter him, saying, al is well done.

Yet must he needs at length give place, and be brought to deaths fold.

But like brute beast so does he live, which turn to dust and powder.
Deus deorum. psalm.L.
VV. VV.
He prophecieth how God will call all nations by the Gospel, and require no
other Sacrifices of his people, but confession of his benefits, and thanks
giving, and how he detesteth all such as seem zealous of ceremonies, and not of
the pure word of god only.

^ THe mighty God, theternal has thus spoke: ^ and all the world, he will call
and provoke: ^ even from the East, and so forth to the West, from toward Sion ^
which place him likes best, God will appear in beauty most excellent.


Devouring fire, shall go before his face
A great tempest, shall round about him trace.

To judge his folk, with equity and right.

My peace they keep, their gifts do not dissemble.

For God is judge, of al things more and les.

List Israel, I will thee naught conceal
Thy God, thy God, am I and will not blame thee.


Goats of thy fold, or calfe of thy stal.

On thousand hills, cattle are mine own goods.

Al beasts ar mine, which hau^t the filds and fou^tains.

For all is mine, that in the world does dwell.

Or drink the blood, of Goats and of the flocks?

And pay thy vows, unto God everliving.

Then will I help, and thou shall honor me.

Why do thou preach, my laws and hestes abrod,
Seeing thou have them with thy mouth abused.

My words I say, thou do reject and hate.

Thou runnest with him, and so your pray do seek,
And art al one, with baudes and ruffians eke.

And how thy tongue, deceives it is a wonder.

And how to put, thy mothers son to shame.

Thou did me judge, because I stayed so long
Like to thy self, yet though I keep long scilence
Once shall thou feel, of thy wrongs just recompense.

And fear not when he threatens with his word
Least without help, I spoil you as a pray.

Says the Lord God, and he that walks this trace
I will him teach, Gods saving health to embrace.
An other of the same by.I. H.
^ THe god of gods, the lord has called the earth ^ by name, from where the son
does rise unto ^ the setting of the same. From Sto^ his fair place, his glory
bright and ^ clear, The perfect beuty of his grace, from thence it did appear.


Before him shall the fire wast, and tempest round about.

He will call forth to judge and try, his folk he does devise.

Which are in hand and league with me, my law to love and fear.

That God is just, and al must bide, the judgment of the Lord.

I am thy God, thy help at need, thou can it not deny.

Thou offrest daily unto me, much more then I do lack.

Or else so much desire to feed, on goats out of thy fold?

And thousa^ds more, of nete and kine, yt run wild in the hills.
The second part.

And beasts that in the field do lie, are subject to my might.

Since that the earth with her great store, and al therein is mine.

Or such a swetenes do I find, the blood of goats to drink?

And see thou pay thy vows always, unto the God most hye.

And I will sure deliver thee: that thou may praise my name.

And yet their works are foul and vain, to the^ the Lord will say:

Why does thy talk my law allow, thy deeds deny the same?

My word the which thou do pretend, is cast behind thy back.

With him thou runnest and do agree, likewise to thrive by stelth.

Thou likest it well, and waxest bold, to use that life most vile.

Thy tongue is taught to craft and lie, and does still use the same

With slander thou would needs defile, thy mothers son most dear.

Thou go on still, and so do think, that I am like to thee.

Thy faults in order I will set, and open al thy sin.

Least when I plage you in mine ire, your help be far to find.

Does please me well, and he shall se, to walk in godly ways.
i. Miserere mei deus. Psalm.li.
VV.VV.
When David was rebuked by the Prophet nathan for his great offenses, he did
not only acknowledge the same to God, with protestation of his natural
corruption and iniquirie: But also left a memorial thereof to his posterity.
Therefore first he desires God to forgive his sins, and renew in him his holy
spirit: with promise that he will not be unmindful of those great graces.
Finally fearing least God would punish the whole Church for his fault: He
requires that he would rather increase his graces toward the same.

^ O Lord consider my distres, And now with ^ speed some pity take: My sins
deface, my ^ fautes redress, good Lord, for thy great mercyes sake. Wash me (O
^ Lord) and make me clean, From this unjust and sinful act: and purify ^ yet
once again, my heinous crime and bloody fact.




And if I were therefore condemned, yet were thy judgment just and right.

Yea of my mother so borne was, and yet vile wretch remain therein.

Therefore thy wisdom from above, thou have reueld me to convert.

And if you wash away my spot, the snow in whitenes shall I pass

And y^ my strength may now amend, which you have swagd for my trespass.

And purge my sins I thee desire, which do in number pass the sa^d.

Thy co^sta^t spirit in me let rest, which may these raging enmies kill.
The second part.

Take not from me thy spirit and grace, which may from dangers me defend.

And let me thy fre spirit retain, which unto thee may stir my mind.

And me^ that are likewise brought low, by mine ensample shall flee sin.

My heart and tongue shall the^ accord, to sing thy mercies and justice.

And the^ my mouth shall testify, thy wo^drous works and praise always.

But thou estemest the^ of no price, and therein pleasure take you none.

And to speak truth it is the best, and of al sacrifice the effect.

And on Jerusalem thy grace, build up the walls, and love it still.

yea calves and many other things, upon thine altar will we lay.
An other of the same by.
T. N.
Sing this as the lame^tation.
Have mercy on me, God, after thy great abounding grace:
After thy mercies multitude, do thou my sins deface.
Yet wash me more from mine offense, and cleanse me from my sin:
For I beknow my fautes, and still my sin is in mine eyne.
Against thee, thee alone, I have offended in this case:
And euel have I done before the presence of thy face.
That in the things that thou do say, upright thou may be tried.
And eke in iudgyng that the dome may pass upon thy side.
Behold in wickedness my kind, and shape I did receive:
And lo, my sinful mother eke, in sin did me conceive.
But Lo the truth in inward parts, is pleasant unto thee:
And secrets of thy wisdom thou, reveled have to me.
With Hysope, Lord, be sprincle me, I shall be cleansed so:
yea wash thou me, and so I shall, be whiter then the snow.
Of joy and gladness make thou me, to hear the pleasing voice:
That so the broosed bones which you, have broken may rejoice.
From the beholding of my sins, Lord turn away thy face:
And al my deeds of wickedness, do utterly deface.
O God create in me a heart, unspotted in thy sight:
And eke within my bowels Lord, renew a stable spirit.
Ne cast me from thy sight, nor take thy holy spirit away:
The comfort of thy saving help, give me again I pray.
With thy free spirit establish me, and I will teach therefore
Sinners thy ways, and wicked shall be turned unto thy lore.
The second part.
O God that art God of my health, from blood deliver me:
That praises of thy righteousness, my to^g may sing to thee.
My lips that yet fast closed be, do thou, O Lord unloose:
The praises of thy majesty, my mouth shall so disclose.
I would have offered sacrifice, if that had pleased thee:
But pleased with burnt offerings: I know thou will not be.
A troubled spirit is sacrifice, deliteful in Gods eyes:
A broken and an humbled heart, God, thou will not despise.
In thy good will deal gently Lord, to Sion, and with all:
Grant that of thy Jerusalem, vpreard may be the wall.
Burnt offerings, gifts and sacrifice, of justice in that day:
Thou shall accept, and calves they shall, upon thine altar lay.
Quid gloriaris. Psalm.lii.
I. H.
David deseribeth the arrogant tyranny of his adversary Doeg, Saules chief
shephearde, who by false surmyses caused Achimeleco with the rest of the
Priests to be slain. David prophecyeth his vestruction, and encourages the
faithful to put their confidence in God, whose judgments are most sharp
against his adversaries. And finally he renders thanks to God for his
delyueraunce. In this Psalm is lively set forth the kingdom of Antichrist.

^ WHy do thou tyrant boast abrod, thy wicked works ^ to praise? do
thou not know there is a God, whose mercies last ^ always? Why does thy mind
yet still devise, such wicked wiles to ^ warpe? Thy tongue untrue in forging lies,
is like a rasour sharp.


Thou have more lust false tales to find, then bring ye truth to light

Thy lips have learnd ye flattering style, O false deceitful tongue.

Thy seed root out from of the ground, and so shall thee deface.

And in reproach of thee withal, cry out with one accord.

But of his goods his God did make, and trust his corrupt sense.

For why? my trust al times has been, upon the living God.

I will set forth thy name always, wherein thy saints rejoice.
Dixit insipiens. Psalm.liii.
T. N.
The Prophet describes the crooked nature, the cruelty and punishment of the
wicked, when they look not for it, and desires the deliverance of the godly
that they may rejoice together.

Sing this as the. xlvi Psalm.

That there is any God at al, has utterly denide.

among them al there is not one, of good that works ought

To see if any were that would, be wise and seek for God.

There is not one does any good, there is not one at al.

My people as they feed on bread? the lord they call not on.

Where as there was no cause at al, why they should be afraid.

Thou have confounded them, for they rejected are of God.

Thy promise made to Israel, from out of Sion hill.

Then Jacob shall therein rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.
Deus in nomine. Psalm.liiii.
I. H.
David brought into great danger by reason of Ziphtins, calls upon the name
of God to destroy his enemies, promising sacrifice and free offerings for their
deliverance.

Sing this as the. xivi Psalm.

Unto the strength Lord of the same, I do my cause betake.

Bow down thy self to me and hear, the words y^ I do say.

Which have not God before their eyes, they seek my soul to spil

with the^ by whom my soul is stayed, the Lord does ever stand.

and with thy truth destroy my foes, with their own snare and bait

And praise thy name for therein still, great comfort I do take.

And now mine eye with joy does see, on them my hearts desire.
Exaudi deus. psalm.lv.
I. H
David being in great heaviness and distres, complains of the cruelty of
Saul, and of the falshod of his familiiar acquaintance, uttering most ardent
affections to move the Lord to pity him. After being assured of deliverance,
he sets forth the grace of god as though he had already obtained his request.

Sing this as the. xxxv Psalm.

And when it thee I call and cry, hide not thy self away.

with plaints I pray full sore oppressed, great grief does me constrain

And so the wicked sort likewise, to vex me have delyght.

So in their hasty wrath and ire, they do pursue me still.

The terrors and the bread of death, do work me much unrest.

Such horror whelmeth me with all, that I no shift can make.

Of some fair dove? that I may flee, and rest me from these things

And I would hide my self and stay, in some great wilderness.

That I were quite and over past, these blastes of boystrous wind

For I have spied their city full, of rapine, strife and wrong.

In midst of her is mischief stout, and sorrow eke withal.

And in the streets there does remain, al crafty fraud and guile.
The second part.

From open enmies check and blame, some where I could me hide

And did my secret counsel hear, as my familiar friend.

And we together often did walk within the house of God.

For mischief rayneth in their hal, and parlour where they dwell.

The Lord does hear me by and by, and he does succor me.

When I so instantly have cride, he does not say me nay.

Although the number be full great, that would against me stand.

Will hear when I to him complain, and punish them full sore.

For why? they will not God obey, nor do not fear the Lord.

Of friendship to neglect the bands, they pass or care no whit.

although his words were smoth as oil, they cut as sharp as swords.

For in no wise will he accord, the just in thral to see.

He will no guileful man permit, to live out half his days.

I shall depend thy grace upon, with all my heart and lust.
Miserere. psalm.lvi.
I. H.
David being brought to Achis the king of Gath, 2. Sa. 21. 12. co^plaineth of
his enmies demau^ death succor, puts his trust in God, and his promises, and
promises to perform his vows which he had taken upon him. Whereof this was
the effect to praise God in his Church.

Sing this as the Lamentation.

He fyghteth with me day by day, and troubles me each hour.

To fight against me many rise, O thou most high of might.

I trust in thee alone for aid, by thee will I abide.

I do not care at al assayes, what flesh can do to me.

And all the counsel that they take, is how to work me il.

They spy my paths and snares have tried, to take my life away.

for in his wrath he does not let, to throw whole kingdo^s down

Reserve them in a glass by thee, and write them in thy book:

I well perceive it by that same, that God does take my part.

With joy will I declare abroad, the promise of the Lord.

The Lord he is my help and stay, I do not care for man.

And I O Lord al times to thee, will offer thanks and praise.

That I before thee may ascend, with such as live in light.
Miserere. Psalm.lvii.
I. H.
David being in the desert of Ziph, where the inhabitants did betray him, and
at length in the same cave with Saul. Calls most earnestly unto God with
full confidence that he will perform his promise and take his cause in hand:
also that he will show his glory in the heavens and the earth against his cruel
enemies. Therefore does he render laud and praise.

Sing this as the. 44 Psalm.

For why my soul does her betake, unto the help of thee.

Til mischief malice and like things, be gone and over past.

I mean the God that will stand by, the cause I have in hand.

That to devour me have assayd, his mercy truth and might.

And with such wicked men I dwell, that freat like flames of fire:

they wound and cut with their quick tongue, like swords and weapons kene.

Exalt thy praise on earth abroad, thy majesty and might.

wherein they think my soul to snare, but they are fallen in it.

My heart I say does well accord, to sing his laud and praise.

For I my self before the day, will rise, rejoice and sing.

And show his praise that does excel, in Heathen lands abroad.

His truth is high as any star, that stands in the sky.

Extol thy praise on earth abroad, thy majesty and might.
Si vere vtique. Psalm.lviii.
I. H.
He describes the malice of his enemies, the flatterers of Saul, who both
secretly and openly sought his destruction, from who^ he appealeth to gods
iudgemennt, showing that the just shall rejoice when they see the punishment of
the wicked to the glory of God.

Sing this as the. 68 Psalm.

be al your judgments true and just, not knowi^g need or might

and where ye should true justice use, your hands to brybes are bent.

and from their mothers womb always, have used craft and lies.

Yea like the adder that is deaf, and fast does stop his ear.

No though he were the chief of choice, and did therein excel.

the tuskes ye in their great chawbones, like Lio^s whelps ha^g out.

The shafts that they do shoute in have, let the^ be broke in flight.

As one before his time that fell, and never saw the Sun.

The storms of anger waxing strong, shall take the^ ere their know

and they shall wash their fete in blond, of the^ that him forsake.

And that a God in earth does dwell, that justice does regard.
Eripe me. psalm.lix.
I. H.
David being in great danger of Saul, who sent to stay him in his bed,
prays unto god, declares his innocence, and their fury, desiring god to
destroy al those that sin of malicious wickedness. Whom though he keep a live
for a time to exercise his people, yet in the end us will consume them in his
wrath, that he may be known to be the god of Jacob to ye worlds end, for this
he sings praises to god assured of his mercies.

^ SEnd aid and save me from my foes, O lord I pray to thee ^ defend and keep
me from all those that rise and strive with me (O ^ Lord) preserve me from
those men, whose doings are not good, and ^ set me sure and safe from them,
that thursteth after blood.


yea for no fault that I did make, I never did them il.

Arise and save me from their snare, and see what they entend.

And pity none that does rebel, and in their mischief stands.

And all the city clean throughout, from place to place they run.

they greed my death and the^ would say, what? none does hear our words.

The Heathen folk thou shall deryde, and mock the^ to their face.

My God he is my help at hand, a fort of fence to me.

That I may see my foes in case, such as my heart does will

But with thy strength drive the^ abroad, and so consume the^ al.

Their wicked oaths with lies and wrong, let all the world deride.

that me^ may know throughout ye world, ye Jacobs god does reign

Throughout y^ streets in every place, they run about and spy.

Nor find an house wherein they may, be bold to put their head.

For thou art my defense and God, at need in all assayes.

Thou art my fort, my fence and aid, a loving God to me:
Deus repulset psalm.lx.
I. H.
David being king over Judah, and having had many victories, shows by evident
signs y^ God elected him king, assuring the people that God will prosper them,
if they approve the same. After he prays unto God to finish that that he has
begone.

Sing this as the. 59. Psalm.

such great displeasure you did take, return to us O God.

the hurt thereof O Lord restore, for it does bow and quake

And thou have given unto us a drink of deadly wine.

That they may triumph in the same, because they word is true.

that they they help at hand we may have, O Lord grant this to me.

I will divide Siche^ by pace, and mete out Succothes vale.

Ephraim the strength of al my land, my law does Judah guide.

And thou Palestine oughtst to seek, for favor me unto.

Or who to Edom will me guide, so that I go not wrong?

Our wars in hand, you would not take, nor walk among our hosts.

the help that hosts of men can give, it is but al in vain.

He will tread down and put to flight, al those that us withstand.
Exaudi Deus. Psalm.lxi.
I. H.
Whether that he were in danger of the Ammonites, or being pursued of Absolon:
Here be crtet^ to be heard and delivered, and confirmed in his kingdom, he
promises perpetual praises.

^ REgard (O Lord) for I complain, and make my ^ suit to thee, let not my
words return in vain, ^ but give an ear to me, from of the coasts and
utmost parts of all the ^ earth abroad, in grief and anguish of my heart I cry
to thee (O God.)


thou art my hope, my fort, and tower, my fence against my foes.

Under thy wings I know right well, I shall be safe and sure.

With goodly gifts will he reward, al them that fear his name.

That he from age to age shall reign, for evermore always.

O let thy mercy, truth and grace, defend him from decay.

That al my vows I may fulfill, and daily pay the same.
Nonne deo subiecta. psalm.lxii.
I. H.
David declares by his example, and by ye nature of god, ye he must trust in
god alone, and thereunto exhorts al people, seeing ye al is vanity, and without
god al goes to naught, al and we are always taught ye God only is of power to
save, and that he rewards man according to bys works.

Sing this as the. 6^ Psalm.

for why wy health and hope to speed, does whole on him depend

He is my stay that no pretense, shall make me much dismayed.

For as a rotten hedge ye be, and like a tottering wall.

Ye love to lie, with mouth ye praise, and yet your heart does curse.

From al il feats me to defend, none but him I require.

He does support me that no power, can move me out of place.

My fort, my strength, my stay, my wealth, God is mine only trust

Pour out your hearts to him and say, our trust is in the Lord.

With things most vain do the^ compare, for they ca^ keep no weight

though goods well got, flow in wc wealth, set not your hearts thereon

He spoke it often, I heard it well, that god alone does al.

So that al sorts with thee shall find, according to their deed.
Deus deus meus. psalm.lxiii.
T. S.
David after he had been in great danger by Saul, in the deserte Ziph, made
this Psalm: wherein he gives thanks to God for his wonderful deliverance, in
whose mercies he trusted, eue^ in the midst of his miseries: prophesying the
destruction of gods enemies, and contra rywise happenes to al them that trust
in the Lord. 1. Sam. iii

Sing this as the. 44 Psalm.

For why? my soul and body both, does thirst of thee to taste
And in this barre^ wilderness, where waters there are none:
my flesh is partcht for thought of thee, for thee I wish alone

As I was wont it to behold, within thy temple bright.

My lips therefore shall give to thee, due honor, laud, and praise.

And in thy name I shall lift up, my hands when I do pray.

my mouth therefore, shall sing such so^gs, as are for thee most mete.





The hungry foxes which do run, their pray to seek at need.

For liers mouths shall the^ be stopped, which have ye truth disturbde
Exaudi deus vocem meam. psalm lxiiii.
l. H
David prays against the false reporters and slaunderere, he declares their
punishment and destruction, to the comfort of the just, and the glory of God.

Sing this as the. 18. Psalm.

and rid my life and soul from fear, of foes that threat to slay.

And from the frowning face of them, that al il feats do work.

They shoot abroad their arrows kene, I mean most bitter words

The just unware to strike by craft, they care or fear no whit.

To use deceyt let us not dread, what, who can it espy?

They al co^sult what feats to use, each does invent his part.

God with his dart shall sure assail, and wound the^ every one.

That they which then behold their fall, shall wonder at y^ same.

and praise his witty works and tell, what he to pas has brought.

so shall they joy with mind and voice, whose heart is pure and right.
Te decet hymnus. Psalm.lxv.
I. H.
A praise and thankesgeuing unto God by the faithful, who are signified by Sion
and Jerusalem, for the chusinge, preservation and governance of them, and for
plentiful blessings powered forth upon all the earth.

Sing this as the.xxx. psalm.

their vows to thee they do maintain, and their behests fulfill.

Thy people al both far and near, with trust shall come to thee.

But Lord forgive our great misdedes, and purge us from our syn.

Thy house and temple he shall use, with pleasures, that excel.

The hope of all the earth abroad, and the sea costs likewise.

thou make ye mountains strong and stout, to stand in every shower.

Thou do restrain the peoples rage, and rule them at thy will.

which morn and even in great mirth, do pass with praise to thee.

Then with thy drops thou do apply, and much increase her store

The seed and corn which men do sow, for he does guide ye thing

Thy drops to her thou do distill, and bles her fruit withal.

Thy clouds distill her dew apace, great plenty they do drop.

The little hills shall joy therein, much fruit in them shall spring.

The valies with corn shall so excede, that men shall sing for mirth
Iubilate deo omnis terra. psalm.lxvi.
I. H.
He provoke al men to praise the Lord and to consider his works, rehersing
two things most wonderful. He sets forth the power of God to affray the
rebels, and shows how God has delivered Israel from great bondage and
afflictions, he promises to give sacrifice and provoke al men to hear what
god has done for him, and to praise his name.

Sing this as the 68. Psalm.

Extol his might with heart and voice, give glory to the same.

thy foes for fear do seek to thee, full sore against their heart

The laud thereof the world about, is showed and set abroad.

mark well ye wo^drous works y^ he, for man to pas has brought.

On foot to pas both fair and dry, whereof their hearts were glad.

Al such as would him disobey, by him shall be controld.

With joyful voice declare abroad, and sing unto his praise.

He stays our fete, so that no strife, can make us slip or fall.

As workmen do when they desire, to have their metals tryde.

And there with chains and fetters strong, to lie in bondage fast.
The second part.

Though we through fire and water ren, of very grief and pain.

And bring us out into a place, to live in wealth and rest.

And there I will my self apply, my vows to thee to pay.

The vows I say which I did make, in dolor of my heart.

No other sacrifice shall be, of bullockes goats and lambs.

What he for my poor soul has done, to you I will record.

And thou my tongue make speed apace, to praise him by and by

Or if I have delight to sin, God will not hear my voice.

My prayer he does well regard, and grants my desire.

Nor yet his mercy from me shut, which I do ever find.
Deus misereatur nostri. Psalm.lxvii.
I. H.
A sweet prayer for all the faithful to obtain the favor of God, and to be
lightened with his countenance, to the end that his way and judgments may be
known throughout the earth. A rejoicing that God is the governor of all
nations.

Sing this as the.xxx. psalm.

To show to us do thou accord, the brightness of thy face.

And all the nations on a row, may see thy saving health.

O let the people al abrod, extol and laud the same.

For you with truth and right do guide, the nations of ye earth.

Oh let the people al abrod, extol and laud the same.

And then our God, the God of peace, shall bles us eke with al.
God shall us bles, I say, and then both far and near
The folk throughout the earth always, of him shall stand in fear.
Exurgat deus. Psalm.lxviii.
T. S.
In this Psalm David sets forth as in a glass, the wonderful mercies of
God toward his people, who by all means, and most strange sorts declares
him: self to them. And therefore Gods church by reason of his promises, graces
and victories, does excel without comparison all worldly things: he exhorts
therefore all men to praise God for ever.

^ LEt god arise, and the^ his foes, will turn themselves to ^ flight: His
enmies the^ will run abrod, and scatter ^ out of sight: and as the fire does
melt the wax, and wind blow ^ smoke away: so in the presence of the Lord, the
wicked shall decay.


They shall be glad and merry al, and cheareful in their voice.

Extol this name of Iah our God, and him do magnifye.

That father is of fatherles, and judge of widows case.

He brings bondmen out of thral, and rebels to distres.

And brought the^ through ye wilderness, which was both wide and long:

The mount Sinai shoke in such sort, as it would cleave a su^der

And if so be it baren waxt, by thee it was refresht.

And for the poor thou do provide, of thine especial grace.
The second part.

When as his people triumphs make, and purchase brute and fame.

And women which remain at home, shall help to part the spoil.

Whose wings and feathers, seem to have silver and gold above.

Then shall it be like Salmon hill, as white as any snow.

Yet Sion Gods most holy hill, does far excel in grace.

This hill of Sion God does love, and there will dwell for ever.

The Lord also in Sinai, is present them among.

Which in times past thy chosen flock, in prison kept and thral.
Thou madst them tribute for to pay, and such as did repine
Thou did subdue, that they might dwell, in thy temple divine.

From day to day, he is the God, of our health and solace.
The third part.

He is the God by whom we escape, al dangers, death and pain.

Of those that in their wickedness, continually do walk.

And al mine own as I have done, from danger of the deep.

And dogs shall have their tongs embrud, with licking of the same.

And how thou go as God and king, into thy holy place.

And in the midst the damsels play, with timbrel and with taber.

And Jacobs whole posterity, give thanks with one accord.

With Zabulon and Neptalim, which dweld about the coast.

The thing that thou have wrought in us, for ever to endure.

For thine unto Ierusalme, sure promise made by word.
The fourth part.
Yea and strange kings to us subdued, shall do like in those days:
I mean to thee they shall present, their gifts of laud and praise.

And cause them tribute pay, and daunt, al such as love to fight.

The Mores most black shall stretch their hands, unto their lord and king.

Sing Psalms to God with one consent, thereto let al accord.

Yet by the fearful thunder claps, me^ may well know his might.

Whose might and power does far extend, above the cloudy sky.

The God of Israel gives us strength, praised be God therefore.
Saluum me fac domine. Psalm.lxix.
I. H.
The complaints, prayers, ferunt zeal, and great anguishe of David is set
forth as a figure of Christ, and all his members: the malicious cruelty of
thenemies, and their punishment, also where Judas and such traitors are
accursed. Then gathered he courage in his affliction and offers praises unto
God, which are more acceptable then all Sacrifices: whereof all the afflicted
may take comfort. Finally be does provoke all creatures to praises,
prophesying of the kingdom of Christ, and the buildyng of Judah, where all the
faithful and their seed shall dwell for ever.

^ Save me, O God and that with speed, the waters flow ^ full fast. So ni my soul
do they proceed, that I ^ am sore aghast. I stick full deep in filthe and clay,
whereas I feel no ^ ground: I fall into such floods, I say, that I am like be
dround.


With loking up my sight does fail, for help to God on hie.

In number sure they are no les, then hears are on my head.

They do compel me to restore, the things I never had.

And all the same that I commit, to thee is known full well.

Let no man doubt or shrink away, for ought that chances me.

In spite of thee they would me make, to hide my face for shame.

And as a stranger they me call, my face they will not know.

Their cheks and tau^ts at thee to hear, my very heart does grutch.
The second part.

Yet in my teeth this gear is cast, they pas not thereupon.

Then they anon will it pervert, thereof they jest and talk.

They have me ever in their tongue, of me they talk and prate.

To seek which way to work me spite, of me they sing and rhyme.

For thy great truth thou will always, se^d down thine aid to me.

From such as owe me wrath and ire, and from the waters deep.

And that the pit should me confound, and shut me in her power.

And as thy mercy is most dear, Lord, have me in thy mind.

I am oppressed on every side, in have give ear I say.

Because of their great tyranny, acquit me from my foes.
The third part.

For those that seek and work the same, thou see the^ al full well.

But find no friends to ease my smart, to comfort me, not one.

And gave me in my thirst withal, strong vinegar to drink.

And when they think full well to fare, then trap them in the gin.

Bow down their back and do them bynd, in thraldom for to be.

Let thy displeasure in thine ire, take hold upon them al.
As desert dry their house disgrace, their offering eke expel.

If thou do strike the man to tame, on him they lay full sore:

Then let them heap up mischief still, since they are al pervert:

And dash them clean, out of the book, of life, of hope, of trust:
That for their names they never look, in number of the just.
The fourth part.

Thy help shall give me such relief, that al shall be redrest.

I will extol the same always, with hearty thanks among.

The^ either Ox, or Calfe can be, that has both hoof and horn.

Al ye that seek the Lord, behold, your life for aye shall dure.

His prisuners are to him full dear, he does them not disdain.

His praise they shall declare and show, with all that live in them.


Her servant sede shall keep the same, al ages out of mind:

Deus in adiutorium. Psalm.lxx.
I. H.
He prays to be right spedely delivered, as in the.lx. Psalms. Then he
desires the shame of his enemies, and the joyful comfort of all those that
seek the Lord.

Sing this as the. 72. Psalm.

(O Lord of hosts) with have and speed, help, help I thee desire.

Rebuke the^ back with blame to fall, that think and wish me il.

And at my harm do laugh and cry, so, so there goes the game.

Which only trust and seek to thee, and to thy saving health.

Al glory honor, laud and praise, be given to thee (O Lord.)

Thou art my stay and help therefore, make speed and be not slack.
In te domine speraui. Psalm.lxxi.
I. H.
He prays in faith astablished by the word of the promise and confirmed by
the work of God, from his youth, he desires now to be delivered from the
wicked and cruel man: (meaning) his son Absolon and his confederacy, and he
promises to be myndefull and thankful for the same.

Sing this as the. lxix psalm.
MY Lord my God in all distres, my hope is whole in thee,
Then let no shame my soul oppres, nor once take hold on me.

Give ear and to my suite accord, and send me help at need.

Thy promise is to help always, thou art my fence and fort.

From folk unjust and eke from them, that cruelly devour.

Yea from my youth I had a lust, still to depend on thee.

wherefore I will thee praise with mirth, both evening and morn.

But thou art now and still have been, my fence, and aid so strong.

and eke my tongue shall not be slack, to honor thee alwayse.

and when my strength does wast away, do not my soul forsake.

and they against me do conspire, that for my soul laid wayt.
The second part.

Dispatch him quite, for to his aid, I wis there comes none.

But that in time of grief thou may, in have give help to me.

Oppres the^ with rebukes also, that feign would work me strife.

Still more and more each time and tide, I will set forth thy praise.

But of thy benefits, O Lord, I know no count nor end.

The saving health of thee alone, to show and set abrod.

Therefore thy wonders to declare, I have great mind and will.

Forsake me not unto mine age, and til my head be gray.

and that our sede thy power may know, hereafter many a year.

Thy works are wonderful in deed, oh, who is like to thee?

yea thou did help and me restore, and tokest me from the grave.

yea, thou do make al grief to cease, and comforts me again.

My harp shall sound thy laud always (O Isreal's holy king)

and eke my soul will much rejoice, for thou have made me free.

For grief and shame do the^ confound, that sought to work me ill.
Deus iudicium tuum. Psalm.lxxii.
I. H.
He prays that the kingdom of God by Christ may come under the parson of
Solomon, under whom shall be ryghteousnes, peace and felicity, unto whom all
kings, and all nations shall do homage, whose name and power shall endure for
ever.

^ LOrd give thy judgments to the king, therein ^ instruct him well: And with
his son that ^ Princely thing, Lord let thy justice dwell, that he may govern
up ^ ryghtly, and rule thy folk a right: and so defend through equity, ^ the
poor that have no might.


And eke let little hills apply, in justice to increase.

And eke destroy for evermore, al those that do them wrong.

So long as sun does shine by day, or else the moon by night

And like to drops that lay the dust, and fresh the land vnsowen.

Until the moon shall leave to prime, wast, change, and to increase.

and from the floods within the land, through all the earth about.

and al his enmies that rebel, the earth and dust shall lick.

The kings of Sabe and Arabie, give many a costly thing.

And all the people of the world, shall serve him at his hand.

And eke the simple folk that have no help of man at al.

He does preserve them evermore, and bringes their souls to rest.

And eke the blood that they shall bleed, is precious in his sight.

He shall be honored as a king, and daily be extold.

That it like Cedre trees shall stand, in Libanus full long.

In plenty it shall far excede, and spring as grene as gras.

And think the^ happy through y^ same, al folk shall bles his might

For he does every wondrous thing, yea he him self alone.

That all the earth may praise the same, Amen, Amen say I.
Quam bonus deus. Psalm.lxxiii.
T. S.
The Prophet teaches by his example, that neither the worldly prosperity of
the ungodly, nor yet the affliction of the good, ought to discourage Gods
children: but rather ought to move us to consider our fathers providence, and
to cause us to reverence gods judgments, for as much as the wicked vanishe a
way like smoke, and the godly enter into life everlasting, in hope whereof he
resigneth him self into Gods hands.

Sing this as the.xliiii. psalm.

And to al such as safely keep, their conscience pure and well*

And or I wist eue^ at a pinch, my steps a wrye ga^ glyde.

That wicked me^ al things should have, without turmoyle or pain

Their bodies are both stout and strong, and ever in good plyte.

And with the rest they take no part, of plague or punishment.

And are even wrapped as in a robe, with rapine and disdain.

And as for worldly goods they have, more the^ ca^ wish their heart.

Which they have done to simple men, and ever pride among.

And prate they do on worldly things, no wight they do esteem.

And almost drink the self same cup, and follow the same rate.
The second part.

These worldly things since wicked me^, be Lords of sea and land?

Rewarded well with worldly goods, and live in rest and peace.

And wash my hands with innocents, and cleanse my heart in vain?

And every morning from my youth, sustain rebuke and shame?

But that I should thy children judge, as folk unfortunate.

But yet the labor was to great, for me to take in hand.

I understood right perfectly, the end of al these men.

And at thy pleasure and thy will, thou do them al deface.

They are destroyed, dispatched, consumde, and dead so horribly.

Their famous names in all men's sight, shall ebb and pas away.
The third part.





And in the earth there is nothing, like thee that I can love.

For of my heart God is the strength, my portion eke for ever.

And those that trust in any thing, saving in thee alone.

In God alone I put my trust, his wonders will I tell.
Vt quid deus. Psalm.lxxiiii.
I. H.
The faithful complain of the destruction of the Church and true religion
under the name of Sion and the altars destroyed: And trusting in the might and
free mercyes of God, by his covenant they require help and succor for the
glory of Gods holy name, the salvation of his poor afflicted servants, and
the confusion of his proud enemies.

Sing this as the.72. Psalm.

Why does thine anger kindle thus, at thine own pastor sheep?

The which you have redemd and brought, from bondage sore and strong.

Thy pleasant place, thy mount Sio^, where thou wast wo^t to dwell.

Which now at pleasure rob and wast, within thy holy place.

They set as signs on every wall, their banners splayd abrod.

So shine the bills and swords of these, within the temples now.

With axes, ha^mers, villes and swords, they beat the^ down at once.

The house appointed to thy name, they race down to the soil.

Then burnt they up in every part, Gods houses through the la^d.

To tell when this our plage should end, among us there is none.

Shall they always blaspheme thy name, and rail on thee so long?

O pluck it out and be not slack, to give thy foes a rappe.
The second part.

Yea thy good grace throughout y^ world, for our good help has seen.

And thou did break the serpents head, that be therein did dye.

and gave the^ to the folks to eat, that in the deserts dwell.

And eke thy hand does make likewise, deep rivers to be dry.

Thou setst to serve us with their shine, the light and eke the Sun.

Both so^mer heates, and winter frosts, thy hand has found the^ out

And how the folish folk are set, to rail upon thy name,

Forget not always in thy power, the poor that much do rue.

Al sad and dark, for worn and old, our realm as now does stand.

But let the poor and nedy aye, give praise unto thy name.

Remember how that thou blasphemd, art by the folish one.

Is more and more encreast of those, that hate thee spitefully.
Confitebimur tibi deus, Psalm.lxxv.
N
The faithful do praise the name of the Lord, which shall come to judge at y^
time appointed, when the wicked shall be put to confusion, and drink the cup of
his wrath, their prayer shall be abated, and the righteous shall be exalted to
honor.

Sing this as the.44. Psalm.

Fith thy name is so nere, declare thy wo^drous works will we

The earth is weak and al therein, but I her pillars stay.

And unto the ungodly ones, set not your horns so hye.

And see that you do with stiff neck, not speak presumptuously.

Nor from forsaken wilderness, protection does proceed.

He puts down the one, and sets, another in the throne.

And all the mighty wine therein, himself does power abroad.

The wicked of the earth shall drink, and suck them every whit.

And will not cease to celebrate, his praise for evermore.

But then the horns of righteous men, shall be exalted hye.
Gloria patri.
To father son, and holy ghost, all glory be therefore:
As in beginning was is now, and shall be evermore.
In Judea. psalm.lxxvi.
I. H.
This psalm sets forth the power of God and care for the defense of his
people in Jerusalem, in y^ destruction of the army Senacherib, and exhorts y^
faithful to be thankful for the same.

Sing this as the.69 Psalm.

His name is great in Israel, a people of his own.

In Sion eke he has delight, to make his dwelling place.

and brake the ray to overthrow, in battle on the field.

Then in the strongest of the world, that rob on mountains hye.

through me^ of war no help can be, themselves they could not keep.

as half in sleep their charets stood, no horsman once does move.

To bide thy sight and does not dread, when you art in thy wrath.

Then all the earth full sore afraid, in silence shall be found.

To save thafflicted of the land, on earth that are full weak.

Hereafter Lord do thou restrain, their wrath and threats always

Bring gifts al ye that dwell abroad, for dreadful sure is he.

And full of terror is his sight, to all the kings on earth.
Voce mea ad dominum. Psalm.lxxvii.
I. H.
The prophet in the name of the church, reherseth the greatness of his
affliction, and his grievous temptation, whereby he was driven to this end to
consider his former conversation, and the continual course of gods works in
the preservation of his servants: and so he confirms his faith against these
temptations.

^ I With my voice to God do cry, with heart ^ and hearty cheer: my voice to God
I lift ^ on high, and he my suit does hear. In time of grief I sought to ^
God, by night no rest I took: but stretched my hands to him abroad, ^ my soul
comfort forsook.


I spoke, but could not make an end, my breath was stopped so sore.

With fear am I so sore oppressed, my speech does me forsake.

The times and ages that are past, full many years agone.

And with my heart much talk I find, my sprits does search to know.

So that henceforth no time he shall, be friendly unto us.

Or is his promise now delayed, and does his truth decay?

Or shall his wrath increase so whote, his mercy to withhold?

Gods mighty hand can help all this, and change it when he lust.
The second part.

Of al his wonders past and gone, I gladly will record.

To tell his factes I will not spare, and eke his counsel wise.

what one has strength to match y^ might, of thee O Lord our God?

and so do make the people know, thy virtue and thy power.

The sons of Jacob that descend, and Joseph's sede from harm.

and they for fear aside did flee, the depthes on tremblyng fell.

The thunder in the air did crack, their shafts abroad did fly.

With flashes great made men afraid, the earth did quake and move.

Yet none can there thy steps espy, nor know thy pathe to keep.

through Moses and through Aaro^s hand, you did them safely guide
Attendite populi. psalm.lxxviii.
T. S.
He shows how God of his mercy chose his church of the posterity of
Abraham, casting in their teeth the stubburne rebellion of their fathers, that
their children might not only understand, that God of his free mercies made
his covenant with their ancestors, but also seeing them so malicious and
perverse, might be ashamed, and so turn wholly to God In this psalm the holy
ghost has comprehended as it were y^ sum of al gods benefits, to the intent
the ignorant and gros people might see in few words the effect of the whole
histories.

^ ATtend my people to my law, and to my words incline: ^ My mouth shall speak
strange parables, and sentences deuyne. ^ Which we our selves have heard and
learnd, even of our fathers old, ^ and which for our instruction, our fathers
have us told.


who should gods power to their race praise, and al his works of wonder

Willing our fathers should the same, unto their children give.

Should have the knowledge of the law, and teach their sede also

And not forget to keep his laws, and his precepts in love.

and would not frame their wicked hearts, to know their god aright.

Shooting their darts the day of war, and yet they took the foil?

Nor yet would walk or lead their lives, according to his trade.

and al his works most magnifique, which he declared still.
The second part.

In Egypt land within the field, that called is Thaneos.

And made the water stand as still, as does an heap of stones.

And in the night when dark it was, with fire he gave the^ light.

As plentiful as when the depes, do flow up to the brinke.

Of such a boundance that no floudes, to them might be compard,

And styred him that is most high, to wrath in wilderness.

Requiring such a kind of meat, as served to their lust.

What? can this God prepare for us, a feast in wilderness?

But can he now give to his folk, both biead and fless also.

So did his indignation, on Israel proceed.
The third part

Could always help and succor them, in their necessity.







Yet more and more they did desire, to serve their lusts and wills.



For all the wonders that he wrought, they would him not believe

Their years did wast and pas away, with terrors and with pain



and with their tongs and in their hearts, dissembled every word.
The fourth part.

Nor yet to keep or to perform, the covenant that was made.

That he forgave them their misdedes, and would not the^ destroy
Yea many a time he turned his wrath, and did himself advise:
and would not suffer al his whole displeasure to arise.

that passes away and cannot well, return by his own kind.

How did they move and stir their Lord, to plage the^ with his stroke?

prescribing to the holy Lord, what things they would have done

Delivered them out of the bonds, of the fierce enemy.

In Egypt and the wonder that, he did in Zoan field.

that no man might receive his drink, at river nor at flood.

and filled their countries full of frogs, which should their Lord destroy
The fyft part

and all the labor of their hands, he gave to the grasshopper.

and not so much as wild fig trees, but he consumde with frost.

and al their flocks and herds like wise, with thunderbolts full hot.

Displeasure, wrath, and evil spirits, to trouble them among.

But gave unto the pestilence, the man and eke the beast.

and all the chief of men and beasts, within the tents of Ham.

and carried them through wilderness, even like a flock of sheep.

Where as their foes with rage of sea, were overwhelmed al.

Even to the mount which he had got, by his strong arm and hand.

and in the tents he set their tribes, of Israel to abide.

And would not keep his testament, nor yet obey his will.

Much like a bow that would not bend, but slip and start away.
The syxt part.

And with their Idols vehemently, provoked him to ire.

The naughtines of Israel, he did so much detest.

Right conversant with earthly me^, even as his dwelling place.

And gave the honor of his Arc, into his enmies hand.



And not a widow left a live, their death for to bemone.

Or like a valiant man of war, refreshed after wine.

and put them then unto a shame, that was perpetual.

as for the trybe of Ephraim, he would in no wise choose.

Even the noble mount Sion, which he did love so well.

Like as the earth which he has made, for ever to endure.

Which he took up and brought away, eue^ from the folds of sheep.

To feed his people of Israel, and his inheritance.

and prudently with all his power, did govern them in deed.
Deus venerunt gentes. Psalm.lxxix.
I. H.
The Israelites complain to God for the great calamity and oppression that
they suffered when Antiochus destroyed their temple and city Jerusalem, desiring
gods aid against his raging tyranny, least gods name and religion should be
contemned among the Heathen, which should see them thus forsaken and perish.

Sing this as the.77. Psalm.

Jerusalem an heap is made, thy temple they defoyle.

the flesh of the^ that do thee fear, the beasts devour and wast

So that there is not one of them, to lay their dead in grave.

the enmies at us jest and mock, which dwell our coasts about.

and show thy wrath as hot as fire, thy folk for to consume?

al realms which call not on thy name, consume and overthrow.

His habitation and his land, they have left wast and void.

and aid us Lord in all assaults, for we are weak and low.

Wey not our works, our sins deface, for honor of thy name

In thy reproach rejoice and say, where is their God become?
Require (O Lord) as thou see good, before our eyes in sight:
Of al these folk thy servants blood, which they spilt in despite.

Of such as are in prison cast, sustayning irons strong.
Thy force and strength to celebrate, Lord set them out of band:
Which unto death are destinate, and in their enmies hand.

Into their laps with seven fold, repay again the same.

and teach al ages for to keep, for thee like praise in store.
Qui regis Israel. psalm.lxxx.
I. H
A lamentable prayer to God to help the miseries of the church, desiring him
to consider their first estate, when his favor shined toward them, to the
intent that he might finish that work that he had begone.

Sing this as the.67. psalm.

which leadest Joseph like a sheep, and do him watch and feed.

Show forth thy self and do not let, send down thy beams of light

To show thy power do thou begin, come help us Lord arise.

Show us the brightness of thy face, and then full safe are we.

Against thy folk in anger swel, and wilt not hear them pray?

And drink the tears that they do weep, in measure full and great.

And that our foes do love of life, they laugh and jest it out.

Show forth to us thy joyful face, and we full safe shall be.

The Heathen folk thou did expel, and then did plant it here.

That it did grow and spring apace, and fill the land at last.

And eke the Ceders, high and stout, with branches of the same

That all the folk that pass thereby, the vine may spoil and wast
The second part.

The furious beasts out of the field, devour it al about.

Behold, and with thy help sustayn, this poor vineyard of thine.

The same which thou did love so well, O Lord do not forget.

And through the frowning of thy face, we perish in thine ire.

and with ye son of man whom thou, to thee have made so strong.

Then will we never fall from thee, but call upon thy name.

Behold us with a pleasant face, and then full safe are we.
Exultate Deo. psalm.lxxxi.
I. H.
An exhortation to praise God both in heart and voice for his benefits, and to
worship him only: God condemns their ingratitude, and shows what great
benefits they have lost through their own malice.

^ BE light and glad in God rejoice, which is our ^ strength and stay: be
joyful and lift up your voice ^ to Jacobs God I say. Prepare your instruments
most mete, some joy- ^ full Psalm to sing, strike up with harp and lute so
sweet, on every ^ pleasant stryng.


As it is used to be done, at any solemn feast.

A law that must be kept full well, which Jacobs god has made.

That as a witness al his sede, should still observe the same.

where as the speech which he had heard, he did not understand.

And from ye furnace quit him free, from burning brick of clay.

And I did answer thee withal, in thunder secretly.

whereas the goodness of the Lord, with muttering you did move:

Regard and mark my words full well, if thou will cleave to me.
The second part.

Nor in no wise to bow or serve, a strange and forrayne God.

Then ask of me abundantly, and I will give it thee.

Nor Israel would not obey, but did me quite forsake.

To walk in their own counsels still, themselves they might pervert.

And eke that Israel would regard, to walk within my way.

And turn my hand upon al those, that would them overthrow.

But of his folk the time and age, should flourish ever still:

and make the rock with honey drop, that they their fills should eat
Deus stetit in Synagoga Psalm.lxxxii.
I. H.
The prophet declaring god to be present amongst the judges and maiestrates,
reproves their parciality and unrighteousness, and exhorts them to do justice
but seeing no amendment, be desires god to undertake the matter, and execute
justice himself.

Sing this as the.77 Psalm.

To plead the cause of truth and right, with judges of y^ land.

and have respect for love of mede, the wicked to regard?

and when the poor man does contend, in judgment justly speak

And rid the nedy from the claws, of tyrants force and might.

They will not see or ought discern, but still in darkness walk.
For lo, eue^ now the time is come, that al things fall to naught:
And likewise laws both al and some, for gayn ar sold and bought.

and children to the most of might, for love I did you call.

O tyraunts, I shall you destroy, and pluck you quyte away.

For why? al nations are thine own, to take them as thy right.
Deus quis similis. Psalm.lxxxiii.
I. H.
The people of Israel pray unto the Lord to deliver them from their enemies,
both at home and far of, which imagined nothing but their destruction: and
they desire that all such wicked people may, according as God was accustomed,
be stricken with the stormye tempests of Gods wrath, that they may know that
the Lord is most hye upon the earth.

Sing this as the.77. Psalm.

Withhold not Lord thy self so long, nor make no more delay.

And those y^ bear an hate to the: hold up their heads on hie.

For thine elect to lie in wayt, their council does conspire

So that the name of Israel, may utterly decay.

against the Lord to take a part, they are in league and band.

The Hagarens and Moabites, with diverse othermore.

The Philistines against thee rise, with them that dwell at Tire.

And does become a fence and aid, to Lots posterity.

as to Cicer and to Iabin, beside the broke Kison.

That they like dung on earth did lie, and that in open sight.
The second part.

as Zebah and Zalmana were, the kings of Madian.

Posses and take into our hand, the fair houses of God.

Or like as chafe which men do cast, with winds to fle away.

and as the flame does quite consume, the mountains and the hills:

and of thy stormy wind and shower, Lord make them al afraid.

That it may cause them to enquire, and learn to seek thy name.

and in rebuke and obliquie, to perish eke with all.

and that alone thou do excel, and reign throughout the world.
Quam dilecta tabernacula. Psalm.lxxxiiii.
I. H.
David driven forth of his country desires most arde^tly to come again to the
Tabernacle of the Lord, and the assemble of the saints, to praise God:
pronouncyng them blessed that may so do. Then he prayseth the courage of the
people, that pass through the wilderness to assemble them selves in Sion.
Finally with praise of this matter and confidence of gods goodness be ends the
Psalm.

Sing this as the.67 Psalm.

The Tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they be.

My heart does lust, my flesh also, in thee the living God.

And eke the swalow has a nest, wherein to keep her young.

O Lord of hosts thou art I say, my God and eke my king.

For they al times thy factes do tell, and ever give thee praise.

which to thy house do mind the way, and seek it in their heart.

That as a spring it al appears, and thou their pits do fill.

and so the God of Gods at last, in Sion they do se.

and let it through thine ears proceed, O Jacobs God I say.

Regard I say, behold the face, of thine anointed dear.

Then other where to keep or stay, a thousand days beside.

Then in the tents of wickedness, to settle mine abode.

and no good thing shall he withold, from them that purely live.

That is persuaded in his breast, to trust al times in thee.
Benedixisti domine. Psalm.lxxxv.
I H.
Because God withdrew not his rods from his Church after the return from
Babylon, first they put him in mind of their deliverance, to thentent that he
should not leave the work of his grace imperfect: next they complayn of their
long affliction: And thirdly they rejoice in hope of felicity promised, for
their deliuerau^ce was a figure of Christ's kingdom, under which should be
perfect felicity.

Sing this as the.81. psalm.

For thou restoredst Jacobs sede, from thraldom out of band.

and thou did hide thy peoples sin, full close thou coueredst it.

and so did turn thee from thy rage, with them to be at one.

Put al thy wrath from us apart, and angry cease to be.

and shall thy wrath it self extend, upon al ages thus?

and al thy folk may evermore, be glad and joy in thee?

Show forth to us and do not spare, thine aid and saving health.

and to his saints, that never they return to folishnes.

whereby great glory in our land, shall dwell, and flourish there.

and peace also, justice kis with great, and there they shall embrace.

So righteousness shall show her face, and look from heaven hye

and through y^ costs of al our la^d, the earth her fruits shall bring.

He shall direct his steps also, and keep them in the way.
Inclina domine aurem. Psalm.lxxxvi.
I. H.
David sore afflicted and forsaken of all, prays fervently for deliverance:
sometimes rebearsing his miseries, sometimes the mercyes received, desiryng
also to be instructed of the Lord, that he may fear him also and glorify his
name. He complayneth also of his adversaries, and requires to be delivered
from them.

Sing this as the.81. Psalm.

With grievous pain and grief oppressed, full poor, and weak am I.

and save thy servant, O my Lord, that puts his trust in thee.

For through the day I do not cease, on thee to cry and call.

For unto thee Lord I extol, and lift my soul and mind.

And eke thy mercy plentiful, to all that call on thee.

Mark well the words that I do say, and al my prayers hear.

For why? I know and well do prove, thou aunswerest me again.

and none can do as thou alone, the like has not been hard.

Before thy face on knees will fall, and glorify thy name.

Thou workest wonders still in sight, for thou art God alone.

O join my heart to thee so nigh, that it thy name may dread.

and glorify thy name always, for ever through the world.

Thou setst my soul at liberty, out of the lower hell.

They seek my soul, and in no wise, will have thee in their sight.

Thy goodness is full great, and eke, thy truth no measure has.

O help and save thine own servant, thy handmayds son am I.

And be ashamde because Lord thou do help and comfort me.
Fundamenta eius. Psalm.lxxxvii.
I. H.
The holy ghost promises that the condition of the Church, which was a misery
after the captivity of Babylon, should be restored to great excellency, so that
there should be nothing more comfortable, then to be nombred among the members
thereof.

Sing this as the.81. Psalm.

Upon the holy hills full sure, it can no time time decay.

He loved them more then all the rest, of Jacobs tents beside.

Great things I say, are said of thee, thou city of our God.

and Babylon shall eke apply, and learn to know my name.

a people old full long ago, were borne and there did rise.

Have there sprung up, and the hye God, has founded fast the same.

Of syon that the chief of al, had his beginning there.

My fountaynes and my pleasant springs, are compast al in thee.
Domine deus salutis Psalm.lxxxviii.
I. H.
A grievous complaint of the faithful, sore afflicted by sickness, persecution
and adversity: being as it were left of God without any consolation: yet he
calls on God by faith, and strives against desperation, complainyng him
self to be forsaken of al yearthly help.

^ LOrd God of health the hope and stay thou art alone ^ to me, I call and cry
throughout the day, and all the ^ night to thee. O let my prayers sone asce^d,
unto thy sight on high, ^ incline thine ear (O Lord entend) and harken to my
cry.


My life and breath almost does yield, and draws nigh to hell.

And made as one, among those men, that have no strength at al.

It were more easy for me to be, with them the which are slain.

The which the hand has cut away, and thou regardst the^ not.

In places dark, and al obscure, and in the depth of it.

And al thy storms against me rise, my soul to vex and try.

I am shut up in prison fast, and can come forth no more.

Throughout the day, my hands also, to thee I stretch abrod.

Shall dead to life again repair, and praise thee for the same?

Or shall with them that are destroyed, thy truth her honor have?

Or there shall they thy justice know, where al things are forgot?

My prayer eke ere it be day, shall come before thy face.

And now, O Lord, why do thou hide, thy face away from me?

Thy terrors which do vex me il, with troubled mind I bear.

Thy terrors eke, do not assuage, but me oppres with all.

And al at once with streams full stout, beset me on each side.

Yea and mine old acquaintance al, out of my sight are gone.
Misericordias domini. Psalm.lxxxix.
I. H.
With many words does the Prophet praise the name of God, for his Testament
and covenant that he had made between him and his elect by Jesus Christ the
son of David: Then does he complain of the great ruin, and desolation of
the kingdom of David, so that to the outward apperaunce, the promise was
broken. Finally he prays to be delivered from his afflictions, making mention
of the shortness of man's life, and confirming him self by Gods promises.

Sing this as the.67. Psalm.

and with my mouth from age to age, thy truth I will declare.

In that thou do the heavens stay, thy truth appears plain.

My servant David to persuade, I swore and did protest.

and still uphold thy throne always, from age to age to last.

Thy saints within thy Church on earth, thy faith and truth record.

among the sons of all the Gods, what one is like our God?

and over all that dwell about, in terror to be had.

On every side most mighty Lord, thy truth is seen to be.

and when the waves thereof arise, you makst the^ calm and still.

Yea thou thy foes with mighty arm, have scattred al abrod.
The second part.

The world withal that is therein, thou fou^dest with thy hand.

Both Tabor mount and eke Hermo^, rejoice and praise thy name

The strength of thy right hand each hour, thou liftest up on hye.

Mercy and truth are still with thee, and go before thy face.

For in the favor of thy sight, they walk full safe abrod.

and through thy rightousnes have they a pleasant fame and noyce.

Thy goodness eke that has us stayde, shall lift our horn on hye.

The holy one of Israel, he is our guide and king.

and thus the^ did thou say to them, thy mind to make the^ know.

and set up him whom I elect, among the folk to me.
The third part.

and with my holy oil anoint, him king of all the route.

and with mine arm also I will, him strengthen and sustain.

Ne yet the sons of wickedness, of him shall have no power.

and those that hate him I will plage, and strike the^ with my might.

And in my name his horn eke shall, be lifted up on hye.

and eke the running floudes shall he, embrace with his right hand.

My father, and (my God thou art) my rock of health and stay.

His might, and honor, I shall make, above al worldly kings.

My faithful covenant to fulfill, my mercy I will hold.

So that his seat shall still remain, while heaven does endure.
The fourth part.

and of my judgments have none awe, nor will not them observe.

and set al my commandments light, and will not keep my trade.

and so with scourging for their sin, when that they do offend.

Nor handle him with craftines, and so my truth forgo.

No word the which my lips have told, shall alter or be broke.

With David I shall keep promise, to him I will not ly.

as does the sun it shall remain, for ever in my sight.

a faithful witness from on hye, so shall his kingdom last.

Yea thou art wroth with thine elect, thine own anointed dear.

and down upon the ground also, have cast his royal crown.
The fifte part.

Thou beatest eke his bulwarks down, and breakst the^ to the ground.

and so is made a mock and scorn, to all that dwell about.

and al his foes that him devour, lo thou have made to joy.

To him in war no victory, thou geuest nor vpperhand.

By thee is overthrown and cast, full low upon the earth.

and raised of him an il report, with shame and great disprayse.

and shall thine anger still always, as fire consume and burn?

why have thou made the sons of me^, as things in vain to wast?

Or from the hand of hell his soul, shall he deliver free?

which by thy truth and vprightnes, to David thou have sworn?

The railing of thy people al, borne in my breast have I.

The steps of thine anointed one, they cease not to defame.

Through sky and earth in all the costs. Amen, Amen, I say.
Domine refugium. Psalm.xc.
I. H.
Moses in his prayer sets before us the eternal favor of God toward his,
who are neither admonished by the breuity of their life, nor by his plages to
be thankful. Therefore Moses prays God to turn their hearts, and continue
his mercyes toward them and their posterity for ever.

Sing this as the.78. Psalm.

In all times past, yea so long sense, as cannot be expressed.

From age to age and always still, for ever thou art God.

and then thou say again return, again ye sons of men.

as yesterday it does appear, or as a watch one night.

al as a sleep and like the grass, whose bewty sone does fade.

and is cut down, ere it be night, al withered dead and dry.

and of thy fervent wrath and fume, we are full sore afraid.

Our privy faults, yea eke our thought, thy cou^tenau^ce does espy.

Our years consume as words or blast, and are not called again.

If one see fourscore, surely then, we count him wondrous old.

Is nothing else but painful grief, and we as blastes are gone.

Or in his heart, who does y^ fear, according to thy wrath?

That then we may our hearts apply, true wisdom to attain.

Show favor to thy servant now, and help the^ at their need.

al times so long as life does last, in heart rejoice shall we,

and for the years wherein full sore, affliction we have had?

and show unto their children dear, thy glory and thy might.

Confirm the works we take in hand, Lord prosper them to us.
Qui habitat. Psalm.xci.
I. H.
Here is described in what assurance he lives that puts his whole trust in
God, and commits him self wholly to his protection in all te^pracio^s, A
promise of God to those that love him, know him, and trust in him to deliver
them, and give them immor^^^ glory.

Sing this as the.69. Psalm.

In shadow of the mightiest grace, at rest shall keep him well.

My God is he, in him will I, my whole affiaunce stay.

And from that deadly plage and care, whereof thou art afraid.

His faith and truth thy fe^ce shall be, as sure as shield and spear.

Of all the shafts that fly by day, nor terrors of the night.

Nor yet of that which does destroy, and at noone days does wast.

Ten thousand eke at thy right hand, and yet shall thou be fre.

That even like to their desert, the wicked have reward.

and in the highest I put my trust, my sure defense is he.

Nor yet the plage shall once come nere, thy house where you do dwell

That still in all thy ways they shall, preserve and prosper thee.

So that thy foot shall never chance, to spurn at any stone.

And tread upon the Lions young, with dragons stout and strong.

and him defend because that he, does know my name a right.

and from his grief take him will I, in glory for to live.

The goodness of my saving health, I will declare to him.
Bonum est confiteri. Psalm.xcii.
I. H.
This Psalm was made to be song on the Saboth, to stir up the people to
acknowledge God and to praise him in his works: The Prophet reioyseth therein.
But the wicked is not able to consider, that the ungodly when he his most
flourishing, shall most spedely perish. In thend is discribed the felicity of
the just, planted in the house of God to praise the Lord.

Sing this as the.88. Psalm.

and to thine name (O thou most hye,) to sing in one accord.

and eke declare his truth abrod, when it does draw to night.

With all the mirth you can invent, of instruments most mete.

and I have joy, in heart and voice, thy handy works to see.

So depely are thy counsels set, that none can try them out.

and al such fools are nothing fit, to understand this thing.

They when they flourish in their il, for ever shall be wast.

In every time eternally, both now and evermore.

How all that work iniquity, shall perish and decay.

With fresh and new prepared oil, thine oynted king am I

Of all that up against me rise, mine ear shall hear y^ same.

And as the Ceders multiply, in Lybanus that grow.

within his courts they spring apace, and flourish al abrod.

And pleasau^tly both bud and spring, with boughs and branches grene.

He is my rock, my hope, and trust, in him there is none il.
Dominus regnauit. Psalm.xciii.
I. H.
He prayseth the power of God in the creation of the world, and beats down
all people which lift them up against his majesty, and provoke to consider
his promises.

Sing this as the.77. Psalm.

and he to show his strength and main, has girt himself with might.

No might can make it move or fade, at stay it does endure.

Beyond al time that can be thought, thou have been evermore.

The floudes (I say) did enterprise, and lifted up their voice.

The Lord is strong and more of might, for he on hye does dwell.

For just and true they shall it take, al times withouten end.
Deus vltionum. psalm.xciiii.
I. H.
He prays unto God against the violence and arrogance of tyraunts. Then does
he comfort the afflicted by the good issue of their affections, as he felt in
himself, and did see in others, and by the ruin of the wicked, whom the Lord
will destroy.

Sing this as the.78 psalm.

Since vengeance does to thee belong, declare that al may see.

Reward the proud and men of might, according to their pride.

How long shall wicked men I say, thus triumph and rejoice?

Shall they rejoice which be so stout, whose works are ever il?

against thy people they do rage, still daily more and more.

They slay the children fatherles, and none does put them by.

Can Jacobs God this understand? tush no he cannot see.

(ye fools) among the multitude, at length begin to learn.

He made y^ eyne, al things must then, before his sight appear.

Shall he not then your deeds detect, how can ye escape his hand?

The Lord I say men's thoughts does frame, and finds the^ but vain

And through correction do procure, to teach him in thy law.

When wicked men shall be suppressed, and fall into the pit.

His heritage whom he did choose, he will no time forsake.

That al may follow her with speed, that are of upright heart.

Or who shall rid me from their hand, y^ wicked works maintain?

My soul and life had now been laid, almost as low as hell:

Thy goodness Lord did so provide, to stay me up withal.

Then Lord thy goodness did me touch, and that did ease my mind

which with pretense instede of law, much mischief do commit?

and in their counsels they are ryfe, to shed the giltles blood

He is my God, to him I flee, he is my strength and rock.
And he shall cause their mischiefs al, themselves for to annoy:
and in their malice they shall fall, our God shall them destroy.
Venite exultemus. psalm.xcv.
I. H.
An carnest exhortation to praise God for the government of the world, and the
election of his church. An admonition not to follow the rebellion of the
oldfathers, that tempted God in the wilderness: For the which they might not
enter into the land of promise.

^ O Come let us lift up our voice, and sing un- ^ to the Lord, in him our
rock of health ^ rejoice, let us with one accord. Yea let us come before his
face, to ^ give him thanks and praise, in syngyng Psalms unto his grace, let ^
us be glad always.


A king above al gods throughout, in all the world abroad.

The tops of hills that are so stepe, he has them in his hand.

The earth and all that therein is, his hand has made of naught.

and knele to him with one accord, the which has made us al.

We are his folk, he does us feed, his sheep and he our guide.

as ye with grudging many a year, provoked me in desert.

my wo^drous works when they did see, yet still they would me move

They err in heart and not believe, they have not known my way.

That they should never tread the path, to enter to my rest.
Cantate domino. Psalm.xcvi.
I. H.
An exhortation both to the Jews and Gentiles to praise god for his mercy. And
this specially ought to be referred to the kingdom of Christ.

Sing this as the.77* psalm.

Sing unto him with one accord, al people on the earth.

Declare and show from day to day, salvation by the same.

To show his wonders do not spare, in all the world throughout.

and he is to be dread of right, above al Gods I say.

But yet our God he is the Lord, that has the heavens made.

Both power and might likewise excel, within his holy (...).

Al might and worship eke I say, ascribe unto the Lord.

And eke into his courts do go: with gifts unto the same.

Let all the people of the world, be fearful at his sight.

Yea, he has set the earth so fast, that it did never move.

To judge the nations every one, with equity and right.

The sea with all that is therein, shall shoot and make a noyce.

The wood and every tree shall sing, with gladness and with mirth.

when he shall justly judge the world, and rule his folk with right.
Dominus regnauit. psalm.xcvii.
I. H
The prophet exhorts al to rejoice for the coming of the kingdom of Christ,
dreadful to the rebels and Idolaters, and joyful to the just, whom he
exhorts to innocence, to rejoicing, and thanks geuyng.

Sing this as the.9^. Psalm.

and eke the yles which joyful mirth, may triu^ph and rejoice.

yea right and justice ever dwell, and bide about his seat.

Which shall his foes and enmies burn, abroad in every place.

whereat the earth did look and gase, with dread and deadly fear.

they fled before that rulers might, which gideth all the world.

That all the world may see and know, the glory of our God.

and eke to those that glory much, dome pictures to maintain.

Shall feel the power of the Lord, and down to him shall fall.

For at thy judgments they shall sing, and make a pleasant noyce.

And art exalted wondrously, above each other God.

For he does keep the souls of his, from such as would them spil.

Great joy, with gladness, mirth and lust, to them of upright heart.

Be thankful eke with heart and voice, and mindful of the same.
Cantate domino. Psalm.xcviii.
I. H.
An earnest exhortation to al creatures to praise the Lord for his power,
mercy, tidelity in the promise by Christ, by whom he has communicated his
salvation to al nations.

Sing this as the.95. Psalm.

for he has wrought throughout y^ world, his wonders great and strong
with his right hand full worthily, he does his foes devour:
And get himself the victory, with his own arm and power.

The Lord does eke his justice show, in all the Heathens sight

That all the earth has seen right well, the goodness of the Lord.

Give thanks to God, sing and rejoice, to him with joy and mirth.

Rejoice before the Lord our king, with trumpets and with shalmes

The earth like wise let it begin, with all that therein dwell.

and eke the mountains and the hills, before the Lord his face.

and rule the people mightily, with justice and with right.
Dominus regnauit. psalm.xcix.
I. H.
He commends the power, equity, and excellency of the kingdom of god by
Christ, over ye Jew and Ge^tils, and provoke the^ to magnify ye fame and to
serve ye lord, following the example of the ancient fathers, Moses, Aaron,
Samuel, who calling upon God were hard in their prayers

Sing this as the.95. Psalm.

Yea he on Cherubin does sit, though al ye world would rore

above al folk he does excel, and he aloft is set.

and let them magnify the same, that holy is and pure.

thou rightly rulest every thing, in Jacob through thy might.

His footestoole worship ye likewise, for he is holy to.

when they did pray he heard the^ well, and gave the^ answer al.

to keep such laws as he did make, and pointed them until.

Thy mercy did on them appear, their deeds did not maintayn.

For why our God throughout the world, is holy ever still.
2 Iubilate deo omnis terra. psalm.
C.
He exhorts al to serve the lord who has made us, and enter into his courts
and assemblies to praise his name.

^ AL people yt on earth do dwell, sing to ye Lord with chereful ^ voice: him
serve with fear, his praise forth tell, come ye before him and rejoice


We are his folk he does us feed, and for his sheep he does us take.

praise, laud, and bles his name always, for it is semely so to do.

His truth at al times firmly stood, and shall from age to age endure
Another of the same.

Serve him and come before his sight, with singing and with mirth

Not we our selves, for we are his, own folk and pasture sheep.

Within his courts set forth his praise, and laud his holy name.

from age to age throughout the world, his truth does still remain
Misericordiam and iudicium. psalm.Ci.
N.
David discrybeth what gouerhme^t he will observe in his house and kingdom. He
will punish and correct by rotyng out the wick^d, and cheryshing the godly
persons.

Sing this as the.81 psalm.

and wisely do in perfect way, until thou come to me.


I hate their work that fall away, it shall not cleave to me:


The lofty heart I cannot bear, nor him that looks hy.

In perfect way who works shall, be servant unto me:

and in my presence he shall not, remain that lies does tell.

That I may from Gods city cut, the wicked workers band.
Domine exaudi orationem. psalm.Cii.
I. H.
It seems that this prayer was appointed to the faithful to pray in the
captivity of Babylon. A consolation for the buildinge of the church: Whereof
follows the praise of god to be published unto al posterityes The conversion
of the Gentiles: And the stability of the church

Sing this as the.67. Psalm.


Incline thine ears to me, make have, to hear me when I call:


and withers as the grass, that I forget to eat my bread.


And as an Owl in desert is, lo I am such a one:


And they y^ do against me rage, against me they have sworn

and mingled have my drink with tears, yt fro mine eyes have stild.

For thou have lifted me aloft, and cast me down again.

and I am withered like y^ gras, that soon away does fade.

And thy remembrance ever does, abide from race to race.
The second part.

The time of mercy, now the time, foreset is come to end.

and on the dust thereof they have, compassion in their sprite.

and all the kings on earth shall dread, thy glory and thy fame

and then when he most nobly in, his glory shall appear.

When he shall not disdayn unto, their prayer to attend.

The people yet uncreated, the Lords renome shall spread.

and out of heaven has the Lord, beheld the earth also.

and that he might deliver those, that damned are to dye.

And in Jerusalem set forth, the praises of the same.

Shall be assembled for to do, their service to the Lord.
The third part

and shorter he did cut my days, thus I therefore did say.

Thy years endure eternally, from age to age for aye.

and lord y^ heavens are y^ work, which thine own hands have made.

and they shall al in time wax old, even as a garment will.
Thou as a garment shall the^ change, and changed shall they be


and in thy sight their happy seed, for ever shall stand sure.
1 Benedic anima mea. psalm.Ciii.
T. S
This is a Psalm most excellent, wherein the Prophet does provoke men and
angels, and al creatures to praise the Lord for his fatherly mercies, and
deliverance of his people from al evils for his providence ever al things and
the preservation of the faithful.

^ MY soul give laud unto the Lord, my sprite shall do the ^ same: and all the
secrets of my heart praise ye his holy name. Give ^ thanks to God for all his
gifts, show not thy self unkind, and suffer not ^ his benefits to slyp out of
thy mind.


For all thy weak and frail disease, and heald thee of thy pain.

His mercy and compassion both, he did extend to thee.

Like as the Egle casts her vil, whereby her age renueth.

So that their sufferings and their wro^gs, are turned to the best.

His counsels and his valiant acts, the Israelites did know.

The slowest to conceive a wrath, and rediest to forgive.

Nor kepes our faults in memory, for all our sinful life.

Nor after our iniquities, he does not us reward.

So is his goodness much more large, to them that do him love.

as far as is the sun rising, full distant from his fall.
The second part.

Like pity bears the Lord to such, as worship him in fear:

how weak and frail our nature is, and how we be but dust.

Or like the flower right fair in field, that fades full soon away.

and make that after their assaults, such blossoms have no place.

their childrens children do receive his righteousness at hand.

and not forget to do the thing, that he does them require.

And by his power imperial, he gouernes all the world.

Which to obey and do his will, immediately accord.

Which ready are to execute, his pleasure and his will.

My heart, my mind, and eke my soul, praise ye also the same.
Benedic anima mea. psalm.Ciiii.
VV. K
An excellent Psalm to praise God for the creation of the world, and the
governance of the same by his marvelous providence: where in the Prophet
prays against the wicked, who are occasions that God diminishes his
blessings.

^ MY soul praise the Lord, speak good of his ^ name: O Lord our great God,
how do thou ^ appear, so passing in glory that great is thy fame: honor
and ma- ^ iestie in thee shine most clear, with light as a robe thou have thee
^ beclad: whereby all the earth thy greatness may see, the heavens in ^ such sort
thou also have spread, that it to a curtayne compared may be.


Which as his charet are made him to bear:
And there with much swiftnes, his course does endure
Upon the wings riding of wind in the air.

and lyghtnings to serve, we see also pressed,
His will to accomplish they run to and fro,
To save or consume things as seems him best.

that it once to move, none have shall such power.

which by his own nature, the hills would devour.

and so give due place, thy word to obey.
And at the voice of thunder, so fearful they be,
yt in their great raging, they have soon away

If thou do but speak, thy word they fulfill:
So like wise the valleis, most quickly descend,
where thou the^ apointest, remain they do still.

So as in their rage, not that pass they can,
For God has appointed they shall not return,
the earth to destroy more, which made was for man.
The second part.

which run do full swift, among the huge hills:

and beasts of the mountains, thereof drink their fills.

The fowls of the air, abide shall and dwell:
Who moved by nature, to hoppe here and there,
among the grene branches, their songs shall excel.

the earth with his works, are wholly repleate:

but grass does provide them, and herb for ma^s meat

His face to refresh, and heart to make strong:

which trees he does nourish, that grow up so long.

In fur trees the storkes remayn and abide:

And eke the rocks stony for conies to hyde.

The days from the nyghtes thereby to discern:
And by the discendyng also of the Sun,
The cold from heat always, thereby we do learn.

Then crepe forth do al, the beasts of the wood.

But yet it is thou (Lord) which give them food.

To couch in their dens, then are they full feign.

Til night come and call him, to take rest again.
The third part.

with wisdom full great, they are in deed wrought,
So that the whole world, of thy praise does sound,
and as for thy riches, they pass al men's thought.

Where things y^ crepe, swarm, and beasts of each sort.

The whale huge and m^strous, there also does sport.

And thou in due time, full well do them feed.

They gather full gladly, those things which they need,
Thou openest thine hand, and they find such grace,
That they with good things, are filled we see:

For if thou their breath take, vile dust the^ they be.

al things to appoint, and what shall ensue:
Then are they created, as thou have decreed,
and do by thy goodness, the dry earth renew.

Who may in his works, by right well rejoice.

and likewise the mountains, to smoke at his voice.

So long as I live, my God praise will I.

I will rejoice in him, to him will I cry.

and eke the perverse, them root out with shame:
But as for my soul, now let it still desire,
and say with the faithful, praise ye the Lords name.
Confitemini domino. Psalm.Cv.
N.
He prayseth the singular goodness of God, who has of all the people of the
world chosen a peculier people to him self, and having chosen them, never
^^aseth to do them good, even for his promise sake.

Sing this as the.95. Psalm.

among y^ people eke declare, his works, to spread his fame.

And talk of all the wo^drous works, y^ he has wrought always.

and let the heart also rejoice, of them that seek the Lord.

and seek his face continually, and presence of his sight.

Ne let the judgments of his mouth, out of your mind depart.

Ye his elect, the children that of Jacob do proceed.

and his most rightful judgments are, through all the earth abrod.

He has remembered evermore, to thousands of degrees.
The second part.

and faithful oath which he has sworn, to Isaac also.

and for eternal covenant, to Israel for ay.

The lot of your inheritance, wherein your sede shall live.

Yea very small, and in the land, they then but strangers were.

and while fro sundry kingdoms they, did wander al abrod.

But even the great and mighty kings, reproved for their sake.

Ne do the Prophets any harm, that do pertayne to me.

But he against their time of need, had sent a man before.
The third part.



The mighty word of God the Lord, his faulties truth did try.

The ruler of the people then, did freely let him pas.

and of his substance made him have, the rule and all the stay.

and wisdoms lore his ancient men, might teach to understand.

and Jacob in the land of Ham, did live a stranger tho.

and over al their enemies, in strength he made them grow.

and did his servant wrongfully, abuse with false deceit.
The fourth part.

He did command to go to them, his message to disclose.

and wonders in the land of Ham, then did they work also.

and unto his commission, they did not disobey.



and all the quarters of their land, were filled with crauling life.

and fiery flames within their land, he sent unto their pain.

and all the trees within their coasts, down did he overthrow.


The fifte part.

yea the beginning and first fruit, of al their strength and might.

and in the number of their tribes, no feeble one there was.

For terror and the fear of them, was fallen upon their heart.

and fire he sent to give them light, when night had hid the day.

and fully with the bread of heaven, their hunger he represt.

and in the dry and parched grounds, like rivers ran about.

Which to his servant Abraham, he plighted long ago.

Out of the cruel land, where they, had lived in great anoy.

The labors of the people eke, they took into their hands.

and faithfully obey his laws, praise ye the Lord therefore.
Confitemini domino. Psalm.cvi.
N.
The people dispersed under Antiochus do magnify the goodness of God among the
just and repentaunt: Desiring to be brought again into the land by Gods
merciful visitation. And after the manifold meruayles of God wrought in their
deliueraunc^ forth of Egypt and the great ingratitude of the people rehearsed,
they do pray and desire to be gathered from among the Heathen to the intent
they may praise the name of the God of Israel.

Sing this as the.95. Psalm.




And with thy saving health (O Lord) vouchsafe to visit me:

And with thy peoples joy I may, a joyful mind posses:
and may with thine inheritance, a glorying heart expres.

We have committed wickedness, and l^udly we have done.

Our fathers, though they saw them al, yet did not understand.
Nor they thy mercyes multitude, did kep^ in thankful mind:
But at the sea, yea the red sea, rebelled most unkind.

That he might make his power known, and spread abrod with fame.

and as in wilderness, so through, the deep he did them guide.

and from the enmies hand he did, deliver them also.
The second part.



and for his counsel and his will, they did neglect to wayt.

and in the desert tempted God, the stay of al their trust.

But wasting leannes therewithal, into their soul he gave.

Aaron the holy of the Lord, so did they envy much.

and al Abirams company, did cover in that hour.

and wasting flame did the^ burn up, the wicked in his ire.

and there the molten image they, did worship of the same.
Into the likeness of a calfe, that fedeth on the grass:


Which many great and mighty things, in Egypt la^d had wrought.
The third part.

and by the red sea dreadful things, performed long agone.

To bring destruction on them al, he purposd in his mind.
Had not his chosen Moses stood, before them in the break:
To turn his wrath, least he on the^, with slaughter should him wreke.

yea and the works that he had spoke, they did no whit believe.

Nor to the voice of God the Lord, they gave a harkning mind.

Them to destroy in wilderness, ere they should see the land.

and through the countries of the world, to scatter them abrod.

and eat the offerings of the dead, so they forsook him tho.

and in his so inkindly wrath, the plage upon them broke.

and judgment he did execute, and then the plage did stay.
The fourth part.

and from thenceforth so compted is, from race to race for aye.

Yea so far fourth that Moses was, then punished for their sake.

his lips spoke unadvisedly, his feauor was so great.



To feends their sons and daughters they, did offer up and stay.


Whom they to Canaan Idols then, offered with wicked hand,
and so with blood of innocents, defiled was the land.

and with their own inventions, a whoryng did they stray.

and even his own inheritance, therefore he did abhor.

and made their foes their Lords who^ they, were forced to obey.
The fifte part.

And they were humbly made to stoop, as subjects to their hand.

But with their councels they to wrath, provoked him evermore.
Therefore they by their wickedness, were brought full low to ly,


and by his mercyes multitude, repented him therefore.

That led the^ captive from their la^d, when erst they were their foes.

and from among the heathen folk, Lord gather us away.
That we may spread the noble praise, of thy most holy name,
That we may glory in thy praise, and soundyng of thy fame.

Let all the people say Amen, praise ye the Lord therefore.
Confitemini domino. Psalm.Cvii.
VV. K.
The Prophet extorteth all those that are redeemed by the Lord, and gathered
unto him, to give thanks for this mercif^l providence of God, governing all
things at his good pleasure, sendyng good and evil, prosperity and
adversity, to bring men unto him. Therefore, as the righteous thereat rejoice,
so shall the wicked have their mouths stopped.

Sing this as the.9^. Psalm.

And that his mercy has none end, al mortal men may see.

and show how they from foes were freed, and how he wrought y^ same.

From East to West, from North to South, his hand did find the^ out.

and found no city where to dwell, that serve might for their stay.

That fayntnes did the^ sore assault, and eke their souls anoyde.

who did remove their troubles state, according as they prayed.

That they might to a city go, and there also abide.

and show the wonders that he does, before the sons of men.

The hungry soul with goodness fed, and did the^ eke acquaynt.

Fast bound to taste such troublous storms, as iron chains do threat.
The second part.

Esteming light his councels high, which do so far excel.

and none was found so much to help, whereby to get relief.

who did remove their troublous state, according as they prayed.

Bursting with force the iron bands, which did before the^ lade.

and show the wonders that he does, before the sons of men.

The iron bars he smote in two, nothing could him withstand.

But heap on mo to those they have, because they do offend.

whereby death had them almost caught, as they full truly tried.

who did remove their troublous state, according as they prayed.

and brought them from those dangers deep, wherein they were before.
The third part.

and show the wonders that he does, before the sons of men.

and speak of al his wondrous works with glad and joyful cheer.

Their marcha^dise through fearful floods, to co^pas and to end.

and in the dangerous deep the same, most marvelous they se.

and stirs up the surges so, as naught can them assuage.

and plunging down the depth until their souls consume with pain.

as men with fear of wit bereft, or had of sense no feel.

Who did remove their troublous state, according as they prayed.

So yt the great waves from their rage, are brought to rest and peace.

and are by him in haue^ brought, which they so feign would have.
The fourth part.

and show the wonders that he does, before the sons of men.

and where the elders do convent, let them there do the same.

and dries up (...) it were dust, the springing well and bourne.

When on their sins which dwell therein, he does just ve^geau^ce take.

With pleasant springs of water clear, though none before were there.

That they a city may them build, to dwell in for their use.

To yield them fruits of such increase, as none may seem to want.

Who does also their brute beasts make, by numbers great to grow.

and minish do through many plagues, that compass them about:

and likewise caused them to err, within the wilderness.

and often times does his train augme^t, much like a flock of sheep.

Whereas the wicked and perverse, with grief shall stop their voice.

For certainly such shall perceive, the kindness of the Lord
Paratum cor meum. Psalm.Cviii.
N.
This Psalm^ is composed of two other Psalms before, the seven and fifty, and
the sixty. The matter here contained, is, that David gives him self with heart
and voice to praise the Lord, and assures him self of the promise of God,
concerning his kingdom over Israel, and his power against other nations, who
though he seem for to forsake us for a time, yet he alone in the end will cast
down^ our enemies.

Sing this as the.95. Psalm.

I will advance my voice in song, and giving praise also.

And in the morning I my self, right early will awake.

and I among the Heathen folk, will sing, O Lord, to thee.

and eke thy truth does reach the clouds, within the lofty sky.

and Lord display upon the earth, thy glory al abrod

Help, O my God, with thy right hand, and harken unto me.

Sichem I shall divide, and mete, the vale of Sucoth ground.

My head strength Ephraim, and law shall Judah give for me.

Upon the land of Palestine, in triumph will I go.

Or who by whom to Edom land, conveyed shall I be?

and thou O Lord, which with our host, did not go forth to fight?

For all the help of man is vain, and can no whit avail.

He shall subdue our enemies, yea he shall tread them down.
Deus laudem tuam. Psalm.Cix.
N.
David being falsely accused by flatterers unto Saul, prays God to keep him
and to destroy his enemies. And under them he speaks of Judas the traitor
unto Jesus Christ, and of all the like enemies of the children of God: And
desires to be delivered, that his enemies may know the works of God. The^
does be promise to give praises unto God.

Sing this as the.65. psalm.

O God, even thou I say that art, the God of al my praise.

and they with false and lying tongue, have spoken unto me.

without al cause of my desert, against me did they fight.



at his right hand eke suffer thou, his hateful foe to stand.

And let the prayer that he makes, be turned into sin.



wandering out of the wasted place, where erst they have been fed.

and let the strangers spoil the fruits, of al his toil before.

That on his children fatherles, will let their mercy fall.
The second part.

Their name out blotted in the age, that after shall succeed.

and let thou not his mothers sin, be done away at al.

That from the earth their memory, he may cut clean away.

The troubled man, and sought to slay, the woeful hearted wight.

and as he did not blessing love, it shall be far him fro.

Into his bowels, and like oil, into his bones befall.

and as a gyrdle wherewith he shall gyrded be always.

yea and of those that euel speak, against my soul also.

after thy name deliver me, for good thy mercyes be.

and eke within my payned breast, my heart is wounded sore.

and as the grasshopper so I am shaken of and fade.

and al her fatnes has my flesh, enforced ben to leese.

and they that did upon me look, did shake their heds at me

according to thy mercy Lord, save and deliver me.

and that you thou have done it, Lord, so shall they understand.

They shall arise and come to shame, thy servant shall rejoice.

and with confusion as a cloak, eke couerd let them be.

and I among the multitude, his praises will record.

To save him from the men that would, condemn his soul to die.
Dixit dominus domino. Psalm.Cx.
N.
David prophecieth of the power and everlasting kingdom given to Christ and of
his priesthood, which should put an end to the priesthood of Leuy.

Sing this ad the.68. Psalm.

Til I have made thy foes a stool, whereon thy feet shall stand.

Amid thy mortal foes be thou, the ruler in their sight.
And in the day on which they raygne, and power they shall see:

yea with a holy worshipping, then shall they offer al,
Thy birthes dew is the dew that does, from womb of morning fall.

By thorder of Melchisedech, thou art a priest for ay.

Shall wou^d for thee the stately kings, upon his wrathful day.

and over diverse countries shall, in sonder smite the head.
And he shall drink out of the broke, that runs in the way:
Therefore he shall lift up on hye, his royal head that day.
Confitebor tibi domine. Psalm.cxi.
N.
He gives thanks to the Lord for his merciful works toward his Church,
and declares wherein true wisdom and right knowledge consists.

^ WIth heart I do accord to praise and laud the Lord ^ In presence of the just:
For great his works ^ are found. To search them such are bound, as do him love
and trust. ^ His works are glorious, also his righteousness, it does endure for
^ ever, his wondrous works he would, we still remember should, his ^ mercy
fails never.


He has up for them laid, for this they shall well find,
He will them have in mind, and keep them, as he said,

By lightning and by thunders, when he the Heathens land:
Did give into their hand, where they beheld his wonders.

Whereto his statutes tend:
For ever to endure, which equity does end:
Redemption he gave, his people for to save.

But always to prevail, his holy name be feared.

The Lord fear and obey, such as his laws do keep:
shall knowledge have full deep, his praise shall last for aye.
Beatus vir. psalm.Cxii.
VV. K.
He praises the felicity of them that fear God, and condemns the cursed
state of the con^emners of God.

Sing this as the Pater noster.

and that his laws does love in deed:
His sede on earth God will vpreare:
And bles such as from him proceed,
His house with good he will fulfill:
His rightousnes endure shall still

In trouble joy, in darkness light:
Compassion is in his eyes,
And mercy always in his sight:

He does by judgment things expend.

For in remembrance had is he:

Who in the Lord sure hope does see.

For he shall see his foes down cast.

his righteousness shall still remayn,
And his estate with praise abide,
Though that the wicked man disdain,

And so consume his state to see.
Laudate pueri. Psalm.Cxiii.
VV. K.
An exhortation to praise the Lord for his providence in that, that contrary to
the course of nature he works in his church.

^ YE children which do serve the Lord, praise ^ ye his name with one accord,
yea blessed ^ be always his name: who from the rising of the sun, till it
return ^ where it begun, is to be praised with great fame. The ^ Lord al
peoples does surmount, as for his glory we may count, ^ above the heavens hye
to be: With God the Lord who may compare, ^ whose dwellings in the heavens are,
of such great power ^ and force is he.


Things to behold both here below
And also in heaven above,

and eke the poor, which help none saw
His only mercy did him move:

with princes of great dignity:
That rule his people with great fame,

And with great joy her fruit to rear:
Therefore praise ye his holy name.
In exitu Israel. psalm.Cxiiii.
VV. VV.
How the Israelites were delivered out of Egypt, and of the wonderful miracles
that God showed at that time, which put us in remembrance of gods great
mercies toward his children, and of our unthankfulness for the same.

Sing this as the.67. Psalm.

and Jacobs house the strangers left, and in the same train went

So did the Israelites declare, his kingdom, power and might.

The roaring streams of Iordans flood, reculed backwardly.

And as ye sely trembling lambs, their tops did beat and shake

Ye rollyng waves of Iordans flood, why ran ye back wardly?

Why did your tops as tremblyng lambs for fear quiver and quake:

Before the face of Jacobs God, fear ye both sea and land.

and from the stony flint does make, gush out ye fountains clear.
Non nobis domine. psalm.Cxv.
N
A prayer of the faithful, oppressed by Idolatrous tirants, against whom they
desire that God would succor the^:for as much as there is no comparison between
him and their false GOD, or Idols, trusting most constantly that God will
preserve them in this their need, seeing that he has adopted, and received them
to his favor: promising finally, that they will not be unmindful, of so great
a benefit, if it would please God to hear their prayer, and deliver them by
his omnipotent power.

Sing this as the.78. psalm.

Both for the mercy and the truth, that are in thee always.





and noses eke they formed have, and do not smell withal.

a throat they have, yet through ye same, they make no sound to blow





On Isreal's and Aarons house, his blessyng he will show.

Even he will bless them every one, the great and eke the small.

To you and to the children that, shall follow of your race.

Which both the heaven and the earth, has made and set in stay.

The earth unto the sons of men, he gave of free accord.

Nor any that into the place, of silence do go down:

Sound ye the praises of the Lord, praise ye the Lord I say.
Dilexi quoniam. psalm.Cxvi.
N
David being in great danger of Sau^l in the desert of Mammom, perceuing y^
great and (...) love of God toward him, magnyfyeth such great mercies, and
protesteed that he will be thankful for the same.

Sing this as the.94. Psalm.

when in my days I called on him, he bowed his ear to me.

when pains of hell me caught, and when I woe and sorrow found.

Deliver thou my soul O Lord, I do thee humbly pray:

and in our God compassion, does plentifully flow.

I was in woeful misery, and he relieuedme.

For largely lo the Lord to thee, his bounty has expressed.

My moisted eine from mourneful tears, my sliding fete from fall:

I did believe, therefore I spoke, for I was troubled sore.

what shall I pay the Lord for all, his benefits to me?

and on the Lords name I will call, when I my prayer make.

yea, even at this present time, in all his peoples sight.

The death of al his holy ones, what ever men do deem.

Son of thy handmaid, thou have broke, the bonds of my distres.

And I will call upon the name, of God the Lord always.

yea even at this present time, in all his peoples sight.

O thou Jerusalem I say, wherefore the Lord praise ye.
Laudate dominum. psalm.Cxvii.
N.
He exhorts the gentiles to praise god, because he has accomplished as well to
them as the Jews, the promise of life everlasting by Jesus Christ.

Sing this as the.98. psalm.
O Al ye nations of the world, praise ye the Lord always:
and al ye people every where, set forth his noble praise.
For great his kindness is to us, his truth endures for ay:
wherefore praise ye the Lord our God, praise ye the Lord I say.
Confitemini domin^. Psalm.Cxviii.
M.
David rejected of Saul and of the people, at the time appointed obtained the
kingdom, for the which he bids all them that fear the Lord, to be
thankful, and under his person, in all this was Christ lively setforth, who
should be of his people rejected.

Sing this as the.98 Psalm.

Because his mercy does endure, for ever toward thee.

Now let the house of Aaron say, his mercy dures for ay.

The mercy of the Lord our God, endures still for ay.

Which lovingly hard me at large, my suit was not denide.

Nor fear what man can do to me, when God stands me about.

Therefore I shall see my desire, upon mine enemy.

Or to put confidence in kings, or princes in our need.

But in the name of God shall I, mine enemies confound.

but through ye Lords most mighty name, I shall work their decay

I que^cht their thorns that were on fire, and will destroy ye same.

But through the Lord I found such help, yt they were va^quisht al

He is become for me in deed, a savior most strong.

He causes voice of joy and health, in rightrous men's dwellings

His has the preeminence, his force is as it was.

the lord his might and wo^drous power, his works and what they are

But has not given me over yet, to death as ye may see.

That I may enter into them, the Lords praise to confess.

But good and righteous men always, shall enter into it.

And art become most lovingly, a savior unto me.

Is now become the corner stone, and chiefly to be used.

and it is marvelous to behold, with eyes that noble act.

Let us be glad and joy therein, in heart, in mind, and thought.

Blessed be he that comes to us, in the name of the Lord.

Your sacrifice to the altar, and give thanks to the Lord.

thou art my God and I will praise, thy mercy toward me.

Because his mercy does endure, for ever toward thee.
Beati immaculati. Psalm.Cxix.
VV. VV.
In this Psalm is contained an exquisite art, and a wonderful veheme^cy in
setting forth the praises of gods law: wherein y^ prophet cannot satisfy
himself, nor sufficiently express the affection which he bears theru^to:
adding moreover many notable complaints and consolations, wherefore it is mete
that all the faithful have it always both in heart and mouth, and in the Ebrue
every viii. verses beg in with one letter of the Alphabet.

^ BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in mind and heart: ^ whose lives
and conversation, from gods laws never start. 2. Blessed are ^ they that give
themselves, his statutes to observe: sekyng the Lord, ^ with all their heart, and
never from him swerue.


which steadfastly walk, in his paths, without any wandryng.

Thy noble and divine precepts, we learn and keep in deed,

That I might both in heart and voice, thy laws keep and confess

and bend my mind always to muse, on thy sacred decrees.

When I shall learn thy judgments just, and like wise prove ye same

Forsake me not for ever Lord, but show thy grace and might.
BETH The second part.

If that he mark and keep thy word, and therein his time spend

Oh never suffer me O Lord, from thy precepts to slide.

That I might not at any time, offend thy godly will.

Thy statutes of most worthy fame, O Lord teach me therefore.

The judgments al which did proceed, from thy mouth full of might.

then al ye treasures of ye earth, which worldlings make their mede

As at a mark so will I aim, thy ways how I may walk.

That nothing can me so far blind, that I thy words forget.
GIMEL The third part

Thy holy word then will I keep, both in my heart and tongue.

that of thy law and marvelous works, I may have y^ clear sight.

Thy word therefore to me disclose, my footesteps for to clear.

But seeks to know thy judgments hye, and what may please thee best.

and cursed are such as do not, thy hestes attend upon.

For I have kept thy covenants, with zeal as hoate as fire.

but the^ thy servant thought how he, thy statutes might not break

They serve instead of counselors, my matters for to pas.
DALETH The.iiii. part.
I Am alas as brought to grave, and almost turned to dust:
Restore therefore my life again, as thy promise is just.

Here now eftsoon and me instruct, thy laws to love and fear.

Thy works then will I meditate, and lay them up in store.

According to thy word therefore, have Lord to send relief.

and that I may learn thee to love, thy holy law me send.

I set thy judgment me before, which keep me safe and sound.

Let me therefore have no rebuke, nor check in any case,

when thou have set my heart at large, and rid me out of thral.
HE The fyft part.

and it to keep even to the end, my heart will I incline.

With heart and mind, and al my might, I will it keep I say.

None other pleasure do I wish, nor greater thing desire.

And from al filthy avarice, Lord shield me with thy grace.

Gene me the spirit of life and power, to walk thy ways aright.

Which am thy servant and do love, and fear nothing but thee.

For thou do judge with equity, and therein do excel.

Lord strengthen me so with thy grace, that it perform I may.
VAV The syxt part.

Thy saving health let me enjoy, according to thy word.

For in thy faithful promises, stands my comfort and trust.

For in thy judgments wonderful, my hope does stand and rest.

Yea til this world shall be dissolved, thy law will I observe.

Because I sought how for to keep, thy precepts and thy read.

Eue^ before kings I will them blase, and shrink no whit for shame.

which evermore I have loved best, and so will love them still.

and practice thy commandments, in will, in deed, and thought.
ZAIN The.vii. part.

For therein have I put my trust, and confidence for ever.

For were my life not by thy word, my life would soon me fail.

yet would I not thy law forsake, as he that were forelorne

Whereby I felt the joy surmount, my grief an hundred fold.

thy law forsook and did procure, thy judgment who know when?

When I among the strangers dwelt, and thoughts began me assalt.

as for thy law also I kept, and ever will it keep.

I did embrace and also keep, with reverence and with fear.
HETH The.viii. part.

I have decreed and promised, thy law to keep always.

as thou therefore have promised, Lord grant me of thy grace,

Which to thy statutes caused me, my feet straight to convert.

But hastily thy laws to keep, I did my self beware.

yet would I not thy law forget, nor from thee go astray.

That even at midnight will I rise, thy name to magnify.

and neither will for love nor dread, from thy commandments start

Oh teach me how I may obey, thy statutes and thy will.
TETH The.ix. part.

For of thy grace in sundry sorts, have I thy servant felt.

For certainly believe I do, that thy precepts are pure.

But now I keep thy holy word, and make it al my stay.

Thy ordinances how to keep, therefore (O lord) teach me.

yet thy commandments still observe, with all my heart will I.

But in thy law do I delight, and nothing seek but that.

For as a guide to learn thy laws, thy rods did me direct.

Then thousands great of silver and gold, or ought that can be told:
IOD The.x. part.

grant knowledge likewise how to learn to put thy laws in ure

Because I have learned by thy word to put my trust in thee.

So when you did correct me Lord, the cause just needs be must.

as thou to me thy servant hetest, so from al il me shend.

For joy and consolation both, thy laws to me does give.

But as for me thy hestes to know, I will my self employ.

and such as do thy covenants know, and them alone desire.

That no confusion come to me, whereby I should be shent.
CAPH The, xi. part.

and for thy words sake still I trust, my hearts desire to have.

Oh when will thou me comfort Lord, why do you thus delay?

yet will I not out of my heart, let thy commandment siyde.

That on my foes which me torment, thy vengeance you wilt power?

Thus contrary against thy law, my hurt they do procure.

To thee therefore I do complain, that thou might me releue.

yet by thy statutes I abode, and therein succor found.

and so shall I thy couenaunts keep, til death my life expel.
LAMED. The.xii. part.

and shall for all eternity, fast graven there endure.

whose ground work thou have laid so sure, as no tou^g ca^ expres.

according to thy ordinance, for all things thee reuere.

Long time ere now in my distres, I had been brought to naught.

By them thou have my life restord, when I was at last cast.

Save me therefore, for to thy laws, mine ears and heart incline.

But I the while considered, thy notable works and great.

But thy commandment and thy word, beyond al end extend.
MEM. The.xiii. part.

all the day long my whole devise, is only on thy saw.

For still I keep it as a thing, of most excellency.

Because I do thy couenaunts keep, and them to others tell.

and al because to keep thy laws, I held it ay best read.

Because that I continually, thy word might keep I say.

For why? thou have taught me thereby, to live godly and well.

Doubtless no honey in my mouth, feel ought so sweet I may.

al wicked and ungodly ways, in every kind or rate.
NVN. The.xiiii. part.

And to my paths, where ever I go, it is a flaming light.

That I will keep thy judgments just, and them in life expres.

O Lord as thou have promised, so me to life restore.

accept, and teach me how I may, after thy judgments live.

Yet do I not thy law forget, nor it to keep will fail.

Yet did I not from thy precepts, once swerue or go astray.

and why? for therein I delight, and set my whole courage.

Even so likewise unto the end, I will continue still.
SAMECH. The.xv. part.

But as for thy law and precepts, I loved them ever best.

Therefore have I thy promises, looked for with patience.

For the commaundeme^ts will I keep, of God my Lord alone.

Nor let my hope abuse me so, that through distrust I quayle.

and in thy statutes pleasure take, will I both night and day.

For naught avails their subtility, their counsel is but weak.

Therefore can I as thy statutes, love nothing half so well.

For when I see thy judgments, strayt I am as one astound.
AIN. The.xvi. part.

Resign me not to the^ that would, oppres me with their might,

That proud me^ give me not ye foil, which rage as they were wood.

And eke thy righteous promise Lord, whereby thou will me save.

Thy statutes of most excellence, teach me also to know.

How by thy statutes I may know, best what to take in hand.

Thy law likewise they have tra^sgrest, and none against the^ said.

Or jewels fine which are estemd, most costly to be sold.

Al crafty and malicious ways, I do abhor therefore.
PE. The.xvii. part.

My soul therefore does keep the^ sure, when they are tried and found.

and very idiots understand, when they it read or hear

That I might guide my life thereby, I sought what thing it me^t.

As thou art wont to behold such, as thy name fear and love.

and never let iniquity, thy servant overthrow.

Thy precepts then I will observe, and put them eke in ure.

Let shine on me, and by thy law, teach me what to eschew.

when I behold how wicked men, thy law keep never a del.
ZADE. The.xviii. part.

And when thou do se^te^ce pronounce, you art a righteous judge.

and such as thou have in thy law, commanded us straytly.

To see my foes thy words forget, for ought that I do may.

and I thy servant nothing more, do love or yet esteem.

Yet do I not thy hestes forget, nor shrink away from thee.

also thy law is truth it self, most constant and most pure.

yet do I still of thy precepts, delight to hear and know.

Then teach them me, for even in them, my life lies up in store.
KOPH. The.xix. part.

That thy commandment to observe, I may fully accord.

Save me therefore and I will keep, thy precept and thy hest.

Because that I have in thy word, my confidence whole plight.

That by devising of thy word, I might some comfort take.

as thou wast wont so judge me Lord, least life me should forsake.

which from thy law are far gone back, and strayd from it leudly.

and al thy precepts true they are, then help I thee desire.

That they remain for evermore, thou have them grounded so.
RESH. The.xx. part.

Deliver me, for of thy law, I ever take fast hold.

From death as thou have promised, Lord keep me and defend.

whereby they might thy statutes know, they enter not the trace.

and as thou have me judged ere now, so let me life obtain.

yet from thy laws I never shronke, nor went a wry therefore.

Because they keep no whit thy word, nor yet seek to know thee.

as thou art good and gracious Lord, restore my life again.

Thy righteous judgments are also, most true and decay never.
SCHIN. The.xxi. part.

But al in vain, for of thy word, the fear did my heart touch.

Then he that of rich spoils and pray, great store and plenty had.

For why? thy holy law do I, above al things love best.

Thy rightuous acts and wonderful, so cause me to rejoice.

Nor danger shall their quiet state, impeire or once remove.

And therefore have I done those things, which you did me command.

So much my love to them was bent, that naught else I required.

For all the things that I have done, are present in thy sight.
TAV. The.xxii. part.

and as thou have me promise made, so teach me thee to fear.

and grant me Lord deliverance, for so is thy promise.

when thou thy statutes have me taught, wherein stands al comfort.

Gods famous acts and noble laws, are just and perfect al.

For thy co^maundeme^ts to observe, chose^, O Lord, I have.

and in thy law and nothing else, I do delight alone.

and of thy judgments merciful, let me thy favor try.

Oh seek me, for I have not failed, thy commaundmentes to keep.
Ad dominum cum tribularer. Psalm.Cxx.
S. T.
The prayer of David being now banished among the barbarious people of Arabia,
by the false reports of enuions flatterers. And therefore be lamenteth his long
abode among those infidels, who were given to all kind of wickedness and
contention.

^ IN trouble and in thral, unto the Lord I call: ^ and he does me comfort:
deliver me (I say) from ^ liars lips always, and tongue of false report.


Getst thou thus for to styng.
Thou false and flattering liar?

No les then arrows kene,
Of whote consuming fire.

Within these tents so blake,
Which kedars are by name:
By whom the flock elect,
And al of Isaackes sect,
Are put to open shame.

I came a peace to make,
And set a quiet life:

Causeles I was controld,
By the^ that would have strife.
Leuaui oculos meos. Psalm.Cxxi.
VV VV.
The Prophet showed by his own example that the faithful ought to look for
all their succor of God alone, who will govern and give good success to al
their godly enterprises.

^ I Lift mine eyes to Sion hill, from whence I do attend, ^ that succor God
me send. The mighty God me succor will, which ^ heaven and earth framed, and al
things therein named.


And will thee safely keep:
For he will never sleep.

No sleep at al can him catch?
But his eyes shall ever watch,

The Lord eke does thee cover,
As at thy right hand ever.

Nor the moon not half so bright.
Shall with cold thee hurt by night.

And will thy life sure save:
And thou also shall have.

Where ever thou go in or out,
God will thy things bring about.
Letatus sum. Psalm.Cxxii.
VV. K.
David reioyseth in y^ name of the faithful, y^ God has accomplished his
promise, and placed his Arc in Sio^, for the which he gives thanks, and
prays for the prosperity of the Church.

^ I Did in heart rejoice, to hear the peoples ^ voice, in offering so
willingly: For let us up ^ say they, and in y^ lords house pray, thus spoke ye
folk full loui^gly. Our fete ^ y^ wa^dred wide, shall in thy gates abide, O you
Jerusalem full fair: which ^ art so semely set, much like a city net, ye like
whereof is not else where.


The tribes of God the Lord,
Are thither bent their way to take:
So God before did tell,
That there his Israel,
Their prayers should together make.

And that for this respect.
To set forth justice orderly.
Which thrones right to maintain,
To David's house perteyne,
His folk to judge accordingly.

For Ierusalems peace
Thy friends God prosper myghtely.

And prosper thee throughout
Thy places eke continually.

For my poor brethrens sake,
That comfort have by means of thee.

Thy wealth for to procure,
So much always as lies in me.
Ad te leuaui oculos. Psalm.Cxxiii.
T. S.
A prayer of the faithful, which are afflicted by the wicked worldlynges and
contemners of God.

Sing this as the.23. psalm.

Eue^ as the servant lifts his, his masters hands to see.

So we behold the Lord our God, til he do us forgive.

For we be filled and over commen, with hatred and despite.

Do make of us their mocking stock, the proud do us despise.
Nisi quia dominus. Psalm.Cxxiiij.
VV VV.
The people of God, being delivered out of a great danger, acknowledge not to
have escaped by their own power, but through the favor of God, and show in how
great peril they were.

^ NOw Israel may say and that truly, If that the ^ Lord had not our cause
mainteind: If that the ^ Lord had not our right susteynd: When all the world
against us furiously, ^ made their vprors, and said we should al dye.


And swalowed quick, for ought that we could deem,
Such was their rage, as we might well esteem.

So had they now, our life even brought to thral.

Had long a go, over whelmde us in the deep,

From bloody teeth, and their most cruel voice.
Which as a pray to eat us would rejoice.

Escapes as way: right so it fares with us:
Broke are their nets, and we have escaped thus.

His name has saved us from these wicked men.
Qui confidunt. Psalm.Cxxv.
VV. K.
He describes the assurance of the faithful in their afflictions, and
desires their wealth, and the destruction of the wicked.

^ SVch as in God the Lord do trust, as mount Sion ^ shall firmly stand, and be
removed at no hand, the Lord ^ will count the^ right and just. So that they
shall be sure, for ever to endure.


Jerusalem about do close,
So will the Lord be unto those
Who on his godly will do wayt
Such are to him so dear
They never need to fear:

By making wicked men his rod,
Least they through grief forsake their God,
It shall not as their lot still be.

Whose hearts are true and right.

By crooked ways which they out sought
The Lord will surely bring to naught
With works they shall abide,
But peace with Israel,
For evermore shall dwell.
Another of the same by. R. VV.
Sing this as the ten Commandments.
THose that do put their co^fide^ce, upon the Lord our God only,
And fly to him for his defense, in all their need and misery,
Their faith is sure, firm to endure, grounded on Christ ye corner stone,
Moved with no il but stands still, steadfast like to the mount Sion
And as about Jerusalem, the mighty hills do it compass,
So that no enemies comes them, to hurt that town in any case
So God in deed in every need, his faithful people does defend,
Standing the^ by assuredly, from this time forth world without end.
Right wise and good is our Lord God, and will not suffer certainly:
The sinners and vngodlyes rod, to tarry upon his family,
Least they also from God should go, falling to sin and wickedness,
O lord defend, world without end, thy christian flock through thy goodness.
O Lord do good to Christians al, that steadfast in thy word abide,
Such as willingly from God fall, and to false doctrine daily slide,
Such will the Lord scatter abrod, with Hipocrites thrown down to hell
God will the^ se^d pains without end, but Lord grant peace to Israel.
Glory to God the father al might, and to the son our Savior,
And to y^ holy ghost whose light, shine in our hearts and us succor.
That the right way from day to day, we may walk and him glorify,
With hearts desire all that are here, worship the Lord and say. Amen.
In conuertendo. Psalm.Cxxvi.
VV. K.
This Psalm was made after the return of the people from Babylon, and shows
that the mean of their deliverance was weunderfull, after the seventy years
of captivity forespoken by Iere. 25. 12. and. 29. 10.

^ WHen that the Lord again his Sion had forth ^ brought, from bondage great,
and also servitude ^ extreme, his work was such, as did surmou^t ma^s heart and
thought, ^ so that we were much like to the^ yt use to dream, our mouths were
^ with laughter filled the^, and eke our tongues did show us joyful me^.

The Heathen folk, were forced then, this to confess,
How that the Lord, for them also great things had done.

Wherefore to joy, we have good cause as we begone.

As to deserts, they flowyng rivers send.

a time will come, when they shall reap in mirth and joy.

For that their foes, full often times did them annoy.
But their return, with joy they shall sure see,
Their sheaues home bring, and not impeired be.
Nisi dominus. Psalm.Cxxvii.
VV. VV.
It is not man's wit to labor but the free goodness of God that gives riches,
preserves towns and countries, grants nourishement and children.

Sing this as the Pater noster.

And thereunto do set his hand
What men do build it can not stand,
Likewise in vain men undertake,
Cities and holds to watch and ward
Except the Lord be their safeguard.

And so at night go late to bed,
Fedyng full hardly with brown bread
yet were your labor lost and worn
But they whom God does love and keep
Receive al things with quiet sleep.

That men have heirs to enjoy their land
It is the gift of Gods own hand
For God him self does multiply
Of his great liberality,
The blessyng of posterity:

They grow in strength and actiuenes,
In person, and in comelines,
So that a shaft shot with courage,
Of one that has a most strong arm,
Flies not so swift, nor does like arm.

Furnished with such artilery:
For when in peril he shall be,
Such one shall never shake nor shiuer,
when that he pleads before the judge:
Against his foes which bear him grudge.
Beati omnes qui timent. psalm.cxxviii.
T. S
He describes the prosperous estate of them that be married in the fear of
god, joining with all the promises of gods blessings to al them that live in
this honorable estate, according to his commandments.

Sing this as the.137. Psalm.



Thy children stand like Olive plants, thy table round about.



And likewise grace on Israel, prosperity and peace.
Sepe expugnauerunt psalm.Cxxix.
N
He admonishes the church to rejoice, though it have been afflicted in all
ages, for God will deliver it and the enemies, for all their glorious show, shall
suddenly be destroyed.

Sing this as the.137 Psalm.

Often they assailed me from my youth, yet never they prevailed





Nor he can fill his lap that goes, to gleane upon the land.

Nor say we bless you in the name, of God the Lord at al.
Deprofundis clamaui. psalm.cxxx.
VV. VV.
An effectuons prayer of him that for his sins had sustained great
afflictions, and notwithstanding he fully trusts, and assures himself to
obtain mercy and forgeuenes of his sins, and at length deliverance from al
evils.

^ LOrd to thee I make my moan, when dangers ^ me oppres: I call, I sigh,
plain, and groan. ^ trusting to find reles. Hear now O lord my request, for it
is full due ^ time: and let thine ears aye be pressed, unto this prayer mine.


Who shall then escape and say, I can my self excuse?

that we with hearts most careful, should fear before thy face.

For his promise is most just, and I hope therein still.

More then they that watch and ward, to see the daunyng day.

He is that God of mercy, that his deliver must.

And al such as surely have their confidence in him.
Domine non est. psalm.Cxxxi.
M.
David charged with ambition and gredy desire to raygne, protests his
humility and modesty before God, and teaches al men what they should do.

Sing this as the ^amentation.
O Lord I am not puffed in mind, I have no scorneful eye:
I do not exercise my self, in things that he to hye.
But as a child that wayned is, even from his mothers breast:
So have I Lord behaved my self, in silence and in rest.
O Israel trust in the Lord, let him be all thy stay:
From this time for evermore, from age to age I say.
Memento domine. psalm.cxxxii.
M
The faithful grounding on Gods promise made unto David, desires that be would
establish the same, both as touching the posterity and the buildyng of the
temple, to pray there as was fore spoken.

^ REmember David's troubles Lord, how to the ^ Lord he swore: and vowed a vow
to Jacobs ^ God, to keep for evermore. I will not come within my house, nor ^
clyme up to my bed: nor let my temples take their rest, or the eyes ^ in my head.


An house for Jacobs God to be, an habitation.

and in y^ fields and forests there, these voices first were found.

before his fotestoole to fall down, upon our knees in fear

both thou and the ark of thy strength, ye presence of thy grace

Let al thy saints and holy men, sing al with ioyfulnes.

The face of thine anointed Lord, or turn thy face away.
The second part.

Saying: the fruit of thy body, upon thy seat shall sit.

then shall their sons for ever sit, upon thy princely throne.



and I will satisfy with bread, the nedy that be there.

and al her saints shall sing for joy, of my protection.

For I have there ordaind for mine, a lantern bright and good.

But I will cause his crown to shine, more fresh then heretofore.
Ecce quam bonum. psalm.cxxxiii.
VV. VV
This psalm conteyneth the commendation of godly and brotherly amity which for
the excellency thereof is compared to the most precious oil, wherewith the
priests only and instruments of the tabernacle were anointed. Exodus.xxx.

Sing this as the.137 Psalm.

Brethren together for to hold, the band of amity?

which on the sacrificers head, by Gods precept was spent.
It wet not Aarons head alone, but drentch his beard throughout:
and finally it did run down, his rich attire about.

and Sion with his silver drops, the fields with fruit does fill:

Whose hearts and minds without al guile, this knot do keep and hold
Ecce nunc. psalm.cxxxiiii.
VV. K
He exhorts the Levites that watch in the temple to praise the Lord.

^ BEhold and have regard, ye servants of the ^ Lord: which in his house by
night do watch ^ praise him with one accord.


And give the Lord his praises due, his benefits embrace.

Does Sion bles and will conserve, for evermore the same.
Laudate nomen. Psalm.Cxxxv.
M.
He exhorts all the faithful of what estate so ever they be, to praise God for
his merueilous works, and specially for his graces toward his people, wherein
he has declared his majesty, to the confusion of al Idolaters and their Idols.

^ O Praise the Lord praise him, praise him, ^ praise him with one accord: O
praise him still ^ all ye that be the servants of the Lord. O praise him ye
that ^ stand and be, in the house of the Lord: ye of his court and of his ^
house praise him with one accord.


It is a comely and good thing, always to do the same.

So has he chosen Israel, his treasure for to be.

He is in deed above al gods, most easy to entreat.

In heaven, in earth, and in y^ sea, which he has framd of naught

he brings forth the winds also, he made nothing in vain.

he spared there no living thing, the man nor yet the beast.

On Pharao thy cursed king, and his severe servants.

He slew the great and mightiest, and chiefest of their kings.

He slew also the kingdoms all, that were of Canaan.

To Israel his own people, an heritage to be.

Throughout al generations, that are or ever shall:

and to his servants he will show, favor in time of need.

Of silver and of gold be they, the work even of men's hands.



and likewise those that trust in them, or think they be ought worth

and ye that be of Aarons house, praise him with one accord.

and all that stand in awe of him, praise him with one accord.

Which dwells in Jerusalem, praise him with one accord.
Confitemini. psalm.cxxxvi.
N
A most earnest exhortation to give thanks unto God for the creation and
governance of all things which stands in in confessing that he gives us al
of his mere liberality.

^ PRaise ye the Lord for he is good, for his mercy endures ^ for ever: give
praise unto the god of gods ^ for his mercy endures for ever. Give praise unto
the lord of Lords, ^ for his mercy endures for ever: which only does great
wonders work, ^ for his mercy endures for ever.
























Super flumina in Babilonis. psalm.cxxxvii.
VV. VV.
The people of god in their banishment, seeing gods true religion decay, lived
in great anguish and sorrow of heart, the which grief the Caldeans did so little
pitye, that they rather increased the same daily with taunts, reproaches, and
blasphemies against god, wherefore ye Israelites desire god to punish the
Edomites, who provoked the Babilonians against the^ (and moved by the spirit of
god) prophecy the destruction of Babilo^, where they were handled so ^^rannously.

^ WHen as we sat in Babylon, the rivers round about ^ and in remembrance of
Sion, the tears for grief ^ brast out. We ha^gd our harps and instruments, the
willow trees upon, for ^ in that place men for their use, had planted many one.


Now let us hear your Ebrue songs, and pleasant melody.

The praises of our loving God, thus under a strange king?

Then let my fingers quite forget, the warblyng harp to guide.

If that I joy before I see, thy full deliverance past.

That Edoms sons against us made, when they razde our City.
Remember Lord their cruel words, when as with one accord:
they cride on sack and raze their walls, in despite of their Lord.

and happy shall that man be called, that our revenge has wrought.

to dash their bones against hard stones, which lie ye streets among.
Confitebor tibi. psalm.Cxxxviii.
N
David with great courage prayseth the goodness of god toward him: which is so
great, that it is known to foreign princes, who shall praise the Lord together
with him. And he is assared to have like comfort of god in the time following,
as he has had heretofore.

Sing this as the.47. Psalm.

Even in the presence of the Gods, I will advance thy praise

and praised in my thankful mouth, thy holy name shall be
Even for thy loving kyndnes sake, and for thy truth withal:
For thou thy name have by thy word, advanced over al.

The power of increased strength, within my soul to grow.

For they of thy most holy mouth, have heard the mighty word.

Because the glory of the Lord, it is excedyng great.

But he contemnyng knows a far, the proud and lofty wight.

Renewed by thee O my Lord, thou will stretch out thy hand.
Upon the wrath of al my foes, and saved shall I be:
By thy right hand. The Lord God will, perform his work to me

Forsake me not y^ am the work, which thine own hand did make.
Domine probasti. psalm.cxxxix.
N
David to cleanse his heart from al hipocrisy, shows that there is nothing so
hyd, which god sees not: which he confirms by the creation of man. After
declaryng his zeal and fear of god, he protests to be enemy to al them that
comtemne god.

Sing this as the.137 Psalm.



and by familiar custom art, acquainted with my ways.



It is so hye that I the same, cannot attain until.

Or whether shall I flee away, thy presence to escape fro?

In hell if I lie down below, even there you do appear.

Even there where are y^ farthest parts, where flowing se a does slide:

and thy right hand shall hold me fast, and make me to abide.

Lo even also the darkest night, about me shall be light.

To thee the darkness and the light, are both alyke always.

When I within my mothers womb, enclosed was by thee.

they works are marvelous, right well my soul does know y^ same

I have been made, and in the earth beneath I shapen was.

were written al (naught was before) that after fashion took.

and of them al how passing great, the endless numbers be?

and whenever I awake, yet am I still with thee.

Even those O God to whom depart, depart from me I say.

Those that are lifted up in vain, being enemies to thee.

Contend not I against them al, against thee that arise:



and in thy way O God my guide, for ever lead thou me.
Eripe me. Psalm.Cxl.
N
David co^playneth of the cruelty, falshod, and injuries of his enemies,
against which he prays unto the Lord, and assures himself of his help and
succor. Wherefore he provoke the just to praise him and to assure themselves
of his tuition.

Sing this as the Lamentation.



Like serpents, underneath their lips, is adders poison set.

Free from the cruel man that means, to cause my steps to slide.

with cords in my path way, and gins for me eke have they set.

Hear me O Lord, oh hear the voice, wherewith I pray and moan.

My head in day of battle has, been couerd still by thee.

Perform not his wicked thought least, with pride be set on fire.

Lord let the mischief of their lips, upon themselves befall.

and in deep pits, so as they may, not rise out of the same.

and evil to destruction still, shall hunt the cruel wight.


Domine clamaui. psalm.cxli.
N
David being grievously persecuted under Saul, only flies unto God to bane
succor, desiryng him to bridle his affections, that he may patiently abide,
til god take vengeance of his enemies.

^ O Lord upon thee do I call, Lord have thee ^ unto me: and harken Lord unto my
voice, ^ when I do cry to thee. 2 As insence let my prayers be, directed in
thine ^ eyes, and the vplifting of my hands, as euenyng sacrifice.


and also of my moving lips, O Lord keep thou the door.

With il men of their delicates, Lord let me eat no part.

Let him reprove me, and the same, a precious oil shall be.
Such smiting shall not break my head, the time shall shortly fall:
when I shall in their misery, make prayers for them al.

Then shall they hear my words, for the^ they have a pleasant taste.

as he that heweth wood, or he, that diggeth up the ground.

In thee is al my trust, let not, my soul forsaken he.

and from the subtle grennes of them, that wicked workers are.

while I do by thy help escape, the dangers of them al.
Voce mea ad. Psalm.Cxlij.
N.
David neither ast onied with fear, nor carried with anger, nor forced by
desperation, would kill Saul, but with a quiet mind, directed his earnest
prayer unto God who did preserve him.

Sing this as the.14. psalm.

and with my streamed voice unto the Lord God prayed I.

and in the presence of the Lord, my trouble did declare.

In way where I did walk, a snare they slyly laid for me.

al refuge failed me, and for my soul none cared tho.

Thou in the land of living art, my portion and my part.

From them that do me persecute, for me to strong they be.

when thou art good to me the just, shall prease me round about.
Domine exaudi. Psalm.Cxliij.
N.
An earnest prayer for remission of sins, acknowledging that the enemies did
cruelly persecute him by Gods just judgment. He desires to be restored to
grace, to be governed by his holy spirit, that he may spend the rest of his
life in the true fear and service of God.

Sing this as the.141 Psalm.

Lord in thy native truth, and in thy justice answer me.

For justified be in thy sight, not one that lives shall.

and laid me in the dark, like them, that dead are long agone.

and in me was a troubled heart, amassed and afflight.

yea in the works I meditate, that thy hands have creat.

My soul desires after thee, as do the thirsty lands.

Else shall I be like them that down, into the pit to go.

For in thee is my trust, show me the way that I shall got.

From al mine enemies, for I have hidden me with thee.

Let thy good spirit unto the land, of mercy me convey.

and out of trouble bring my soul, even for thy justice sake.

That do oppress my soul, for I thy servant am, and shall.
Benedictus dominuus. Psalm.Cxliiij.
N.
David prayseth y^ Lord we great affection and humility for his kingdom
restored, and for his victories obtained, yet calling for help, and the
destruction of the wicked ^promising to acknowledge the same with songs of
praises, and declares wherein the felicity of any people consists.

Sing this as the.141 Psalm.

The Lord that does my fingers frame, to battle by his might.

In him I trust my people he, subdues to me to yield.

Or son of man that upon him, thou think in such wise?



And scatter the^, thine arrows shote, consume the^ with the same.

Take me from waters great, from hand of strangers make me free.

and their right hand is a right hand, of falshod and deceit.

On viole and on instrument, ten stringed unto thee.

Unto his servant David help, from hurtful sword he bryngs.

and their right hand is a right hand, of guile and suttelty.

Our daughters as carved cornerstones, like to a palace fair.

Our sheep bring thousa^ds, in our strets, ten thousa^ds may abou^d.

There be no going out, no cry, within our streets be made.

yea blessed all the people are, whose God is God the Lord.
Exaltabo te deus. Psalm.Cxlv.
N.
This Psalm was made when the kingdom of David flourished. Wherein he
describes the wonderful providence of God, as well in gouernyng man, as in
preseruyng all the rest of his creatures. He prayseth God for his justice and
mercy, but specially for his loving kindness toward those that call upon him,
that fear him and love him.

^ THee will I laud my God and king, and bless ^ thy name for aye: 2 For ever
will I praise ^ thy name and bless the day by day. 3 Great is the Lord most
worthy ^ praise, his greatness none can reach, 4 From race to race they ^ shall
thy works praise and thy power preach.


and meditate upon thy works, most wonderful, O Lord.

and I to publish al abrod, thy greatness will not spare.

and I aloud thy righteousness, in singing shall repeat.

Of great abounding mercy and to anger he is slow.




And of his mighty kingdom eke, to spread the glorious praise:

And thy dominion through each age, endures without decay:



al things whatsoever does live, with gifts of thy good will.



and he will hear the^ when they cry, and save them al he will.

But he them all that wicked are, will utterly subvert.

al flesh to praise his holy name, for ever shall accord.
Lauda anima mea. Psalm.Cxlvi.
I. H.
David showing the great desire, he had to praise God, teaches that none
should put their trust in men, but in God alone: who is almighty and delivers
thafflicted, nourishes the poor, sets prisoners at liberty, comfort
the satherles, widows, and the strangers, and rangneth king for ever.

Sing this as the.2 137 Psalm.

While breath and life prolo^g my days, my to^g no time shall cease
Trust not in worldly princes the^, though they abound in wealth:
Nor in the sons of mortal me^, in who^ there is no health.

and then the counsels of their heart, decay and perish al.

and he whose hope does not decay, but on the Lord is stayed.

which does his word and promise keep, in truth and ever shall.

The poor and hungry he does feed, and lose the fetters strong.

The Lord I say, does love the right, and just man evermore.

And quyt the widow from distres, and il men's ways subvert.

In time of al posterity, for ever to remain.
Laudate dominum. Psalm.Cxlvii.
N.
The Prophet prayseth the bounty, wisdom, power, suffice and providence of
God upon al his creatures. But specially upon his Church, which he gathers
together after their dispersion, declaring his word, and judgment so unto
them, as he has done to no other people.

^ PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good unto our God to ^ sing: For it is
pleasant and to praise, it is a ^ comely thing. 2 The Lord his own Jerusalem,
he builds up alone, ^ and the dispersed of Israel, does gather into one.






and to our God upon the harp, advance your singing voice.

and on the mountains he does make, the gras to grow again.



and such as do attend upon, his mercies shyning light.



Does settle peace, and with y^ flower, of wheat he fills thee.

and eke the word with spedy course, and swyftly run about.



His wind he makes to blow, and the^, y^ waters flow amayn:

his statutes and his judgments he, geues Israel to know.

his secret judgments, ye therefore, praise ye the Lord alone.
Laudate dominum. Psalm.Cxlviij.
I. P.
He provoke al creatures to praise the Lord in heaven, in earth, and in all
places, specially for the power that he has given to his people Israel, who^
he has taken so nere unto him.

^ GEuelaud unto the Lord, from heaven, that is so hye: Praise ^ him in deed
and word, Above the starry sky. And also ye, his angels ^ al, armies royal
praise him with glee.


Which are so clear and bright,
The same in you be done
He glistring stars of light,

He heavens fair,

His laud express.

Al formed as we se:
At his voice did appear
Al things in their degree
Which he set fast
To them he made
A law and trade
For ay to last.

In earth ye Dragons fell
Al deep do ye the same,
For it becomes you well

Fire, hayle Ise Snow,
And storms that blow
At his decree.

And trees that fruteful are:
The Ceders great and tal:
His worthy praise declare.

Hea birds flying
And worms crepyng
That on earth dwell.

With all their pompous train,
Princes and al Judges,
That in the world remain
Exalte his name.

Old men and babes,
Do ye the same.

To be most excellent
Whose praise is far above
The earth and firmament.

Exalte with bliss,
The borne of his
And help them al
His Saints al shall forth tell
His praise and worthynes
The children of Israel,
Each one both more and les.

That with good will
His words fulfill,
And him obey.
Cantate dominum. Psalm.Cxlix.
N.
An exhortation to the Church to praise the Lord for his victory and conquest
that he gives his saints against all man's power.


and let the praise of him be herd, his holy saints among.

And let the sede of Sion eke, be joyful in their king.

and with the timbrel and the harp, sing praises of the same.

and by deliverance he will raise, the meke to glory great.

and now aloud upon their beds, advance their singing voice.

And in their hands eke let them bear, a double edged sword.



This honor al his saints shall have, praise ye the Lord therefore.
Laudate dominum. Psalm.CL.
N.
An exhortation to praise the Lord without sease by all manner of ways, for all
his mighty and wonderful works.


And praise him in y^ firmament, y^ shows his power on hye.

according to his excellency, of greatness give him praise.

Praise him upon the viole and, upon the harp also.



To praise the name of God the Lord, agree with one accord.
The end of the Psalms of David in meter.
An exhortation unto the praise of God, to be song before Morning Prayer.
T. Becon.
Sing this an the.100 Psalm.
Praise the Lord, O ye Gentiles al,
which has brought you into his light,
O praise him al people mortal, as it is most worthy and right.
For he is full determined, on us to pour out his mercy:
And the Lords truth be ye assured, abides perpetually:
Glory be to God the father, and to Jesus Christ his true son:
With the holy Ghost in like manner, now and at every season.
An exhortation unto the praise of God to be song before Evening prayer.
T. Be.
BEhold now give head such as be,
the Lords servant faithful and true,
Come praise ye Lord every degree, with such songs as to him are due.
O ye that stand in the Lords house, even in our own Gods mansion:
Praise ye the Lord so bounteous, which works our salvation.
Lift up your hands in his holy place, yea and that in the time of night:
Praise y^ Lord, which gives al grace, for he is a Lord of great might:
The^ shall ye Lord out of Sio^, which made heaven and earth by his power:
Give to you, and your nation, his blessing, mercy and favor.
Glory be to God the father etc.
The.x. Commandments of almighty God.
Exodus.xx. VV. VV.

^ AEtend my people and give ear, of ferly things ^ I will thee tell: see that
my words in mind ^ thou bear, and to my precepts listen well.


Which have thee brought from careful thral
And eke reclaimed from Pharos rod,
Make thee no Gods on them to call.

In heaven, or earth to worship it:
For I thy God by reuengyng,
With grievous plagues this sin will smit.

Abuse it not after thy will:
For so thou might sone purchase blame,
And in his wrath he would thee spil.

And brought al things to perfect end:
So thou and thine that day take rest,
That to Gods hestes ye may attend.

As Gods commandments do pretend,
That thou long days, and good may live,
In earth, where God a place does lend.





His wife, or ought that he calth mine
His field, his Ox, his Ass, his slave,
Or any thing which is not thine.
A Prayer.
Thy spirit of grace grant us (O Lord)
To keep these laws our hearts restore
And cause us al with one accord
To magnify the name therefore.
For of our selves no strength we have,
To keep these laws after thy will:
Thy might therefore (O Christ) we crave,
That we in thee may them fulfill
Lord for thy names sake grant us this,
Thou art our strength, oh Savior Christ:
Of thee to speed, how should we mis,
In whom our treasure does consist.
To thee for evermore be praise,
With thy father in respect:
and with thy holy spirit always,
The comforter of thine elect.
The Lords Prayer.
D. Cox.
^ Our father which in heaven art. And makst us al ^ one brotherhod, to call
upon thee with one heart. ^ Our heavenly father and our God: grant we pray not
with lips ^ alone, but with the hearts deep sigh and groan.

Thy blessed name be sanctified,
Thy holy word might us inflame
In holy life for to abide,
To magnify thy holy name.
From al errors defend and keep,
The little flock of thy poor sheep.
Thy kingdom come even at this hour,
and henceforth euerlastyngly:
Thine holy ghost into us pour:
With all his gifts most plenteously,
From Satan's rage and filthy band,
Defend us with thy mighty hand.
Thy will be done with diligence,
Like as in heaven in earth also:
In trouble grant us patience,
Thee to obey in wealth and woe,
Let not flesh, blood, or any il,
Prevail against thy holy will.
Give us this day our daily bread,
And al other good gifts of thine,
Keep us from war and from bloodshed:
Also from sickness, dearth and pine,
That we may live in quietness,
Without al gredy carefulnes.
Forgive us our offenses al,
Releue our careful conscience,
As we forgive both great and small
Which unto us have done offense
Prepare us Lord for to serve thee
In perfect love and unity.
O Lord into temptation,
Lead us not when the fiend does rage,
To withstand his invasion,
Give power and strength to every age.
Arm and make strong thy feeble host
With faith and with thy holy ghost.
O Lord from euel deliver us,
The days and times are dangerous
From everlasting death save us,
And in our last need comfort us,
A blessed end to us bequeth
Into thy hands our souls receive.
For thou (O Lord) art king of kings
And thou have power over al
Thy glory shines in all things:
In the wide world universal.
Amen, let it be done (O Lord)
That we have prayed with one accord.
The.xii. Articles of the Christian Faith.
^ AL my belief, and confidence, Is in the Lord of ^ might, the father which al
things has made the ^ day and eke the night, the heavens and the firmament,
and also many ^ a star, the earth: and all that is therein, which pass ma^s
reason far.

And in like manner I believe, in Christ our Lord his son:
Coequal with the deity, and man in flesh and bone.
Conceived by the holy ghost, his word does me assure:
and of his mother Mary borne, yet she a Virgin pure.
Because mankind to Satan was, for sin in bo^d and thral,
He came and offered up him self, to death to save us al.
And suffering most grievous pain, then Pilate being judge:
Was crucified on the cross, and thereat did not grudge.
And so he died in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit,
His body then was buried, as is our use and rite.
His spirit did after this desce^d, into the lower parts,
To the^ y^ long in darkness were, the true light of their hearts.
And in the third day of his death, he rose to life again:
To thend he might be glorified, out of al grief and pain.
Ascendyng to the heavens hye, to fit in glory still:
On Gods right hand, his father dear, according to his will.
Until the day of judgment come, when he shall come again:
With angels power, yet of that day, we al be uncertain.
To judge al people rightuously, who^ he has dearly bought,
The living and the dead also, which he has made of naught.
And in the holy spirit of God, my faith to satisfy:
The third person in Trinity, believe I steadfastly.
The holy and catholic church, that gods word does maintain:
and holy scripture does allow, which Satan does disdain.
And also I do trust to have, by Jesus Christ his death:
Release and pardon of my sins, and that only by faith.
What time al flesh shall rise again, before the Lord of might:
and see him with their bodily eyes, which now do give the^ light.
And then shall Christ our fauior, the sheep and Goats deuyde:
and give life everlastingly, to those whom he has tryde.
Which is the realm celestial, in glory for to rest:
With all the holy company, of saints and Angels bleft.
Which serve the Lord omnipotent, obediently each hour:
To whom be al dominion, and praise for evermore.
A prayer unto the holy Ghost to be song before the Sermon.
Sing this as the.11^ Psalm.
COme holy sprite the god of might, comforter of us al:
teach us to know thy word aright, yt we do never fall.
O holy Ghost visit our coast, defend us with thy shield
Against al sin and wickedness, Lord help us win the field.
Lord keep our Queen and her counsel, and give them will and might
To persevere in thy gospel, which can put sin to flight.
O Lord that geuest thy holy word, send preachers ple^tuously:
That in the same we may accord, and therein live and die.
O holy sprite direct aright, the preachers of thy word:
that you by them may cut down sin, as it were with a sword.
Depart not from those pastors pure, but aid them at al need:
which break to us ye bread of life, where on our souls do feed
O blessed spirit of truth keep us, in peace and unity:
Keep us from sects and errors al, and from al papistry.
Convert al those that are our foes, and bring the^ to thy light:
that they and we may al agree, and praise thee day and night.
O Lord increase our faith in us, and love so to abound:
that man and wife be void of strife, and neighbors about us round.
In our time give thy peace O Lord, to nations far and nigh:
and teach the^ al thy holy word, that we may sing to thee.
All Glory to the Trinity, that is of myghtes most:
The living Father and the Son, and eke the holy Ghost.
As it has been in all the time, that has been heretofore:
As it is now and so shall be, hence forth for evermore.
Da pacem Domine.
E. G.
^ Give peace in these our days O Lord, great ^ dangers are now at hand,
thine enemies with ^ one accord, Christ's name in every land: seek to deface,
root out and ^ race, thy true right worship in deed, be thou the stay, Lord we
thee ^ pray, thou helpst alone in all need.

Give us that peace which we do lack,
Through misbelief and il life:
Thy word to offer thou do not slack,
Which we unkindly gainstriue.
With fire and sword, this healthful word.
Some persecute and oppress:
Some with the mouth, confess the truth,
Without sincere godliness.
Give peace and us thy spirit down send,
With grief and repentance true:
Do pearce our hearts our lives to amend,
And by faith Christ renew.
That fear and dread, war and bloodshed.
Through thy sweet mercy and grace:
May from us slide, thy truth may bide,
And shine in every place.
The complaint of a Sinner who craves of Christ to be kept under his mercy.
^ WHere righteousness does say, Lord for my sinful ^ part: in wrath thou
should me pay, vengeance ^ for my desert: I can it not deny, but needs I
must confess, how ^ that continually, thy laws I do transgres: thy laws I do
transgres.

But if it be thy will, with sinners to contend:
Then all thy flock shall spil, and be lost without end
For who lives here so right, that rightly he can say:
He synneth not in thy sight, full often and every day?
Thy Scripture plain telth me, y^ rightuous man offe^deth
seven times a day to thee, whereon thy wrath depends.
So that the rightous man, does walk in no such path
But he falth now or than, in danger of thy wrath.
Then since the case so stands, y^ even the man rightwise:
Faith often in sinful bands, whereby thy wrath may rise.
Lord I that am unjust, and righteousness none have:
Whereto then shall I trust, my sinful soul to save.
But truly to that post, whereto I cleave and shall:
Which is thy mercy most, Lord let thy mercy fall.
And mitigate thy mood, or else we perish al:
The price of this thy blood, wherein mercy I call.
Thy scripture does declare, no drop of blood in thee:
but that thou did not spare, to shed each drop for me
Now let those drops most sweet, so moist my heart so dry
that I with sin replete, may live, and sin may dye.
That being mortifye, this sin of mine in me
I may be sanctified, by grace of thine in thee.
So that I never fall, into such mortal sin:
That my foes infernal, rejoice my death therein.
But vouchsafe me to keep, from those infernal foes:
and from that lake so deep, whereas no mercy grows
And I shall sing the songs, confirmed with the just:
That unto thee belongs, which art my only trust.
The Lamentation.
Through perfect repentance y^ sinner has a sure trust in god that his sins
shall be washed away in Christ's blood.

^ O Lord in thee is al my trust, give ear unto my ^ woeful cry, refuse me not
that am unjust, but ^ bowing down thy heavenly eye, behold how I do still
lament, my ^ sins wherein I do offend: O Lord for them shall I be shent, sith
^ thee to please I do intend?

No no, not so thy will is bent,
To deal with sinners in thine ire:
But when in heart they shall repent,
thou grau^tst with speed their just desire
To thee therefore still shall I cry,
To wash away my sinful crime:
Thy blood O Lord is not yet dry,
But that it may help me in time.
Have thee O Lord, have thee I say,
To pour on me the gifts on grace:
That when this life must flit away,
In heaven with thee I may have place.
Where thou do reign eternally,
with god which once did down thee se^d
Where angels sing continually,
To thee be praise world without end.
A thanks geuyng after the receiuyng of the Lords supper.
Sing this as the.37. Psalm.
THe Lord be thanked for his gifts and mercy evermore:
that he does show unto his saints, to him be laud therefore.
Our tongues cannot so praise y^ Lord, as he does right deserve:
Our hearts cannot of him so think, as he does us preserve
His benefits they be so great, to us that be but sin:
That at our hands for recompense, there is no hope to win.
O synful flesh that thou should have, such mercies of the Lord:
Thou do deserve more worthily, of him to be abhord.
Naught else but sin and wretchedness, does rest within our hearts:
And stubburnly against the Lord, we daily play our parts.
The sun above in firmament, that is to us a light:
Does show it self more clean and pure, then we be in his sight.
The heavens above and al therein, more holy are then we:
They serve the Lord in their estate, each one in his degree.
They do not strive for mastership, nor flacke their office set:
but fear the Lord and do his will, hate is to them no let.
Also the earth and al therein, of God it is in aw:
It does observe the formers will, by skilful natures law.
The sea and all that is therein, does bend when God does beck
The sprites beneth do tremble al, and fear his wrathful check.
But we alas for whom al these, were made the^ for to rule:
Do not so know or love the Lord, as does the Ox or mult.
A saw he gave for us to know, what was his holy will:
He would us good, but we would not, avoid the thing is il.
Not one of us that seeks out, the Lord of life to please:
Nor do y^ thing that might us join, our Christ and quiet ease.
Thus we are al his enemies, we can it not deny:
and he again of his good will, would not that we should die
Therefore when remedy was none, to bring us unto life:
the son of God our flesh he took, to mend our mortal strife.
And all the law of God our Lord, he did it full obey:
and for our sins upon the cross, his blood our dets did pay
And y^ we should not yet forget, what good he to us wrought
A sign he left our eyes to tell, that he our bodies bought.
In bread and wine here visible, unto thine eyes and taste:
his mercies great thou may record, if that his sprite you have.
As once the corn did live and grow, and was cut down with sith
and threshed out with many stripes, out from his husk to drive
And as the mil with violence, did tear it out so small:
and made it like to earthly dust, not sparyng it at al.
And as the oven with fire whote, did close it up in heat:
and all this done that I have said, that it should be our meat
So was the Lord in his ripe age, cut down by cruel death:
his soul he gave in torments great, and yielded up his breath.
Because that he to us might be, an everlasting bread:
with much reproach and trouble great, on earth his life he led
And as the grapes in pleasant time, are pressed very sore:
and plucked down when they be ripe, not let to grow no more
Because the iuyse that in them is, as comfortable drink:
He might receive and joyful be, when sorrows make us shrink
So christ's blood out pressed was, with nails and eke with spear:
The iuise whereof does save al those, that rightly do him fear.
And as the corns by unity, into one loaf is knit:
So is the Lord and his whole church, though he in heaven sit.
As many grapes make but one wine, so should we be but one,
In faith and love, in Christ above, and unto Christ alone.
Leading a life without all strife, in quiet rest and peace:
From envy and from malice both, our hearts and tongues to cease.
Which if we do, then shall we show, that we his chosen be:
By faith in him to lead a life, as always willed he.
And that we may so do in deed, God send us al his grace:
Then after death we shall be sure, with him to have a place.
Robert Wisdom.
^ Preserve us Lord by thy dear word, from Turk ^ and Pope defend us Lord,
which both would ^ thrust out of his throne, our Lord Jesus Christ thy dear
son.

Lord Jesus Christ show forth thy might,
That thou art Lord of Lords by right:
Thy poor afflicted flock defend,
That they may praise thee without end.
God holy Ghost our comfortor,
Be our Patron, help, and succor:
Give us one mind, and perfect peace,
All gifts of grace in us increase.
Thou living God, in persons three,
Thy name be praised in unity.
In all our need so us defend:
That we may praise thee, world without end.
A form of Prayer to be used in private houses, every morning and euenyng.
Morning prayer.
ALmighty God and most merciful father, we do not present our selves here
before thy majesty, trusting in our own merits or worthiness, but in thy
manifold mercies, which have promised to hear our prayers, and grant our
requests, which we shall make to thee in y^ name of thy beloved son Jesus Christ
our Lord: who has also commanded us to assemble our selves together in his
name, with full assurance that he will not only be amongst us, but also be our
mediator and advocate toward thy majesty, that we may obtain all things
which shall seem expedient to thy blessed will for our necessities: therefore we
beseech thee most merciful Father, to turn thy loving countenance toward us,
and impute not unto us our manifold sins and offenses, whereby we justly
deserve thy wrath and sharp punishment, but rather receive us to thy mercy for
Jesus Christ's sake, accepting his death and passion as a just recompense for
all our offenses, in whom only thou art pleased, and through whom thou can
not be offended with us. And seeing that of thy great mercies we have quietly
passed this night, grant (O heavenly Father) that we may bestow this day wholly
in thy service, so that al our thoughts words, and deeds, may redou^d to the
glory of thy name, and good ensample to al men, who seeing our good works, may
glorify thee our heavenly father. And for as much as of thy mere favor and
^oue, thou have not only created us to thine own similitude and lykenes, but
also have chosen us to be heirs with thy dear Son Jesus Christ of that
immortal kingdom which thou preparedst for us before the beginning of ye world,
we beseech thee to increase our faith and knowledge, and to lighten our hearts
with thy holy sprite, that we may in y^ mean time, live in godly conversation
and integrity of life, knowing that Idolaters, adulterers, covetous men,
co^tentious persons, drunkards, gluttons, and such like, shall not inherit the
kingdom of God.

And because thou have commanded us to pray one for an other, we do not only
make request (O Lord) for our selves, and them that thou have already called to
the true vnderdandyng of thy heavenly will: but for all people and nations of
the world, who as they know by thy wonderful works, that thou art God over al:
so they may be instructed by thy holy spirit, to believe in thee their only
Savior and redemer. But for as much as they cannot believe except they hear,
nor cannot hear, but by preaching, and none can preach except they be sent:
therefore (O Lord) raise up faithful distributers of thy mysteries, who setting
apart al worldly respects, may both in their life and doctrine only seek thy
glory. Contrarily confound Satan, Antichrist, with all hyrelinges, whom thou
have already cast of into a reprobate sense, that they may not by sects,
schisms, heresies, and errors, disquiete thy little flock. And because (O
Lord) we be fallen into the latter days and dangerous times, wherein
ignorance has gotten the upper hand, and Satan by his ministers seek by all
means to quench the light of thy Gospel, we beseech thee to maintain thy
cause against those rauenyng wolves, and strengthen al thy servants whom they
keep in prison and bondage. Let not thy long suffryng be an occasion, either
to increase their tyranny, or to discourage thy children, neither yet let our
sins and wickedness be a hynderaunce to thy mercies, but with speed (O Lord)
consider these great miseries. For thy people Israel many times by their
sins provoked thine anger, and thou punishedst them by thy just judgment,
yet though their sins were never so grievous, if they once returned from
their iniquity, thou receyuedst them to mercy. We therefore most wretched
sinners, be wayle our manifold sins, and earnestly repent us for our former
wyckednes and ungodly behavior toward thee: and where as we cannot of our
selves purchase thy pardon, yet we humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake,
to show thy mercies upon us, and receive us again to thy favor. Grant us
dear father these our requests and al other things necessary for us, and thy
whole church according to thy promise in Jesus Christ our lord. In whose name
we beseech thee as he has taught us, saying. Our father. etc.

A prayer to be said before meals.
ALl things depend upon thy providence (O Lord) to receive at thy hands due
sustenance in time convenient, thou geuest to them and they gather it, thou
openest thy hand, and they are satisfied with all good things. O heavenly
father which art the fountain and full treasure of al goodness, we beseech thee
to show thy mercies upon us thy children, and sanctify these gyfts which we
receive of thy merciful liberality, grant us grace to use them soberly and
purely according to thy blessed will, so that hereby we may acknowledge thee
to be the author and geuer of all good things, and above al, that we may
remember continually, to seek the spiritual fo^^e of thy word, wherewith our
souls may be nourished everlastingly, through our savior Christ: who is the
true bread of life, which came down from heaven, of whom whosoever eats, shall
live for ever, and reign with him in glory world without end So be it.

A thanks geuyng after meals.
LEt all nations magnify the Lord, let all people rejoice, in praising and
extollyng his great mercies. For his fatherly kyndnes is plentifully showed
forth upon us, and the truth of his promise endures for ever.

We render thanks unto thee (O Lord God) for the manifold benefits, which
we continually receive at thy bountiful hand, not only for that it has
pleased thee to frede us, in this present life, geuyng unto us all things
necessary for the same: but especially because thou have of thy free mercies
fashioned us a new, into an assured hope of a far better life, the which thou
have declared unto us by thy holy Gospel. Therefore we humbly beseech thee (O
heavenly father) that thou will not suffer our affections to be so entangled
or rooted in these earthly and corruptible things, but that we may always have
our minds dyrected to thee on high, continually watchyng for the coming of
our Lord and Savior Christ, what time he shall appear for our full redemption.
To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, for ever and
ever. So be it.

Another thanks geuyng before meals.
Eternal and euerlyuing God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of thy most
singular love which thou bear to mankind, have appointed to his
sustenaunce, not only the fruits of the earth, but also the fowls of the
air, the beasts of the earth, and fishes of the sea, and have commanded thy
benefits to be received, as from thy hands with thanks giving, assuring thy
children by the mouth of thy Apostle, that to the clean al things are clean,
as the creatures which be sanctif^d by thy word and by prayer: grant unto us
so moderately to use these thy gifts present, that the bodies being refreshed,
the souls may be more able to proceed in all good works, to the praise of thy
holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

Our Father which art in heaven. etc.

Another.
THe eyes of all things do look up and trust in thee (O Lord) thou geuest them
meat in due season, thou openest thy hand, and fillest with thy blessing every
living creature: good Lord bless us and al thy gifts, which we receive of thy
large liberality, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it. Our father. etc.

Another thanks giving after meat.
GLory, praise, and honor be unto thee, most merciful and omnipotent father,
who of thine infinite goodness, have created man to to thine own image and
similitude: who also have fed, and daily fedest of thy most bountiful hand all
living creatures: grant unto us, that as thou have nourished these our mortal
bodies with corporal food, so thou would replenishe our souls with the
perfect knowledge of the lively word of thy beloved son Jesus, to who^ be
praise, glory and honor for ever. So be it.

God save the church universal, our Queen and Realm: God comfort all them that
be comfortles. Lord increase our faith. O Lord for Christ thy sons sake, be
merciful to the common wealths, where thy Gospel is truly preached, and
harbor granted to the afflicted members of Christ's body, and illuminate
according to thy good pleasure al nations with the brightness of thy word. So be
it.

Another.
THe God of glory and peace, who has created, redeemed, and presently fed us,
be blessed for ever and ever. So be it.

The God of all power, who has called from death, that great pastor of the
sheep, our Lord Jesus, comfort and defend the flock which he has redeemed by
the blood of the eternal testament, increase the number of true preachers:
repres the rage of obstinate tirants, mitigate and lighte^ the hearts of the
ignorant, relieve the pains of such as be afflicted, but especially of those
y^ suffer for ye testimony of his truth, and finally confound Satan by the
power of our lord Jesus Christ. Ame^

Evening prayer.
O Lord God fatherr ^^^rlasting and full of pity, we acknowledge and confess,
that we be not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much les to present our
selves before thy majesty, with confidence that thou will hear our prayers,
and grant our requests, if we consider our own deservings: for our
consciences do accuse us, and our sins witness against us, and we know that
thou art an upright judge, which do not iustifye the sinners and wicked
men, but punishest the faults of al such as transgress thy commandments.
Yet most merciful father, since it has pleased thee to command us to call
on thee in all our troubles and adversities, promising even then to help us,
when we feel our selves (as it were) swalowed up of death and desperation, we
utterly renounce al worldly confidence, and flee to thy soueraign bou^tie, as
our only stay and refuge: beseching thee not to call to remembrance our
manifold sins and wickedness, whereby we continually provoke thy wrath and
indignation against us: neither our negligence and unkindness, which have
neither worthily esteemed, nor in our lives sufficiently expressed the sweet
comfort of thy gospel reveled unto us: but rather to accept the obedience and
death of thy son Jesus Christ, who by offering up his body in sacrifice once
for all, has made a sufficient recompense for all our sins. Have mercy
therefore upon us (O Lord) and forgive us our offenses. Teach us by thy holy
Spirit, that we may ryghtly way them, and earnestly repent for the same. And
so much the rather (O Lord) because that the reprobate and such as thou have
forsaken, cannot praise thee, nor call upon thy name, but the repenting heart,
the sorrowful mind, the conscience oppressed, hungring and thirsting for thy
grace, shall ever set forth thy praise and glory. And albeit we be but worms
and dust, yet thou art our creator, and we be the work of thy hands: yea, thou
art our father, and we thy children, thou art our shepeheard, and we thy
flock, thou art our redemer, and we the people whom thou have bought: thou art
our God, and we thine inheritance. Correct us not therefore in thine anger (O
Lord) neither according to our deserts punish us, but mercifully chastise us
with a fatherly affection, that all the world may know, that at what time
soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom of his heart, thou will put away his wickedness out of thy remembrance, as thou have promised by
thy holy Prophet.

Finally, for as much as it has pleased thee to make the night for man to rest
in, as thou have ordained him the day to travel, grant (O dear father) that
we may so take our bodily rest, that our souls may continually watch, for the
time that our Lord Jesus Christ shall appear for our deliverance out of this
mortal life, and in the mean season that we, not ouercomen by any fantasies,
dreams, or other temptations, may fully set our minds upon thee, love thee,
fear thee, and rest in thee: furthermore, that our sleep be not excessive or
over much after the insatiable desires of our flesh, but only sufficient to
content our weak nature, that we may be better disposed to live in all godly
conversation to the glory of thy holy name, and profit of our brethren So be
it.

A Godly prayer to be said at al times.
HOnor and praise, be given to thee (O Lord God almighty) most dear father of
heaven for all thy mercies and loving kindness showed unto us, in yt it has
pleased thy gracious goodness freely and of thine own accord, to elect and chose
us to salvation before the beginning of the world, and even like continual
thanks be given to thee for creating us after thine own image, for redeming us
with the precious blood of thy dear son, when we were utterly lost, for
sanctifying us with thy holy spirit in the revelation and knowledge of thy holy
word, for helping and succoryng us, in all our needs and necessities, for saving
us from al dangers of body and soul, for comforting us so fatherly in all our
tribulatio^s, and persecutions, for sparing us so long, and giving us so large
a time of repentance. These benefits (O most merciful father) like as we
knowledge to have received them of thy only goodness, even so we beseech thee,
for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake: to grant us always thy holy spirit,
whereby we may continually grow in tha^kfulnes toward thee, to be led into al
truth, and comforted in all our adversities. O Lord, strengthen our faith,
kindle it more in feruentnes and love toward thee (and our neighbors) for
thy sake. Suffer us not most dear Father, to receive thy word any more in
vain: but grant us always the assistau^ce of thy grace and holy spirit, that
in heart word and deed we may sanctify and do worship to thy name. Help to
amplify and increase (...) and whatsoever thou sendest, we may be hartly well
content with thy good pleasure and will: Let us not lack the thing (O Father)
without the which we ca^ not serve thee, but bless thou so all the works of
our hands, that we may have sufficient, and not to be chargeable but rather
helpeful unto others: be merciful (O Lord) to our offenses, and seeing our det
is great, which thou have forgiven us in Jesus Christ, make us to love thee and
our neighbors so much ye more. Be thou our father, our captain and defender:
in all temptations hold thou us by thy merciful hand, that we may be delivered
from al inconveniences, and end our lives in the sa^ctifying and honor of thy
holy name through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. So be it. Let thy
mighty hand and out stretched arm (O Lord) be still our defense, thy mercy and
loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear son our salvation, thy true an holy
word our instruction, thy grace and holy spirit our comfort and consolation
unto the end and in the end. So be it.

O Lord increase our faith.
A Confession for all estates and times.
O Eternal God and most merciful father we confess and acknowledge, here
before thy divine majesty, that wear miserable sinners, conceived and borne in
sin and iniquity, so that in us there is no goodness. For the flesh evermore
rebelleth against the spirit, whereby we continually transgres thy holy
precepts and co^maundeme^ts, and so purchase to our selves through thy just
judgment, death and damnation: Notwithstanding (O heavenly father) for as much
as we are displeased with our selves for the sins that we have committed
against thee, and do unfeignedly repent us of the same: we most humbly beseech
thee, for Jesus Christ's sake, to show thy mercy upon us, to forgive us al our
sins, and to increase thy holy spirit in us y^, we acknowledging from the
botom of our hearts, our own unrighteousness, may from he^ceforth not only
mortify our sinful lusts and affections, but also bring forth such fruits, as
may be agreeable to thy most blessed will, not for the worthiness thereof, but for
y^ merits of thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ our only savior, whom you
have already given an oblatio^ and offering for our sins: and for whose sake,
we are certainly persuaded, y^ thou will deny us nothing, yt we shall ask in
his name, according to thy will. For thy spirit does assure our consciences,
that thou art our merciful father, and so love us thy children through him,
that nothing is able to remove thy heavenly grace and favor from us: to the
thee therefore (O father) with the son and the holy ghost be al honor and
glory world without end. So be it.

A Prayer to be said before a man begin his work.
O Lord God most merciful father and Savior, seeing it has pleased thee to
co^mau^d us to traueil, that we may releue our need: we beseech thee of thy
grace, so to bless our labor, yt thy blessing may extend unto us, without the
which we are not able to continue: and that this great favor may be a witness
unto us of thy bountifulnes and assistance, so that thereby we may know the
fatherly care that you have over us. Moreover, O Lord, we beseech thee that thou
would strengthen us with thine holy spirit, that we may faithfully trauail
in our estate and vocation without fraud or deceit: and that we may endeavor
our selves to follow thine holy ordinances, rather the^ to seek to satisfy our
gredy affections or desire to gain. And if it please thee, O Lord, to prosper
our labor, give us a mind also to help the^ that have need, according to
that ability that, thou of thy mercy shall give us: and knowing that al good
things come of thee, grant that we may humble our selves to our neighbors,
and not by any means lift our selves up above them, which have not received
so liberal a portion as of thy mercy thou have given unto us. And if it please
thee to try and exercise us by greater pouertye, and need, then our flesh
would desire that thou would, yet, O Lord, grant us grace to know that
thou will nourish us continually through thy bou^tiful liberality, that we be
not so tempted that we fall into distrust: but that we may patiently wayt til
thou fill us not only with corporal graces and benefits, but chiefly with thine
heavenly and spiritual treasures, to the intent that we may always have more
ample occasion to give thee thanks, and so wholly to rest upon thy mercyes.
Hear us, O Lord of mercy, through Jesus Christ thy son our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church.
ALmighty God and most merciful father, we humbly submit our selves, and fall
down before thy majesty, beseching thee from the botom of our hearts, that this
sede of thy word now sown amongst us, may take such deep root, that neither
ye burning heat of persecution cause it to wither, neither the thorny cares of
this life do choke it, but that as sede sown in good ground, it may bring
forth thirty, sixty, and an hundredth fold, as thy heavenly wisdom has
appointed. And because we have need continually to crave many things at thy
hands, we humbly beseech thee (O heavenly father) to grant us thy holy spirit,
to direct our petitio^s, that they may proceed from such a fervent mind, as may
be agreeable to thy most blessed will. And seeing that our infirmity is able to
do nothing without thy help, and that thou art not ignorant with how many
and great temptations, we poor wretches are on every side enclosed and
compassed: Let thy strength, O Lord, sustain our weakness, that we (...)
defended with the force of thy grace, may be safely perserued against al
assaults of Satan: who goes about continually like a roaring Lion, seking to
devour us. Increase our faith, O merciful father, that we do not swerve at any
time from thy heavenly word: but augment in us hope and love, with a careful
keeping of al thy commandments: that no hardness of heart, no Ipocrisie, no
concupiscence of the eyes, nor inticements of the world, do draw us away from
thy obedience. And seeing we live now in these most perilous times: let thy
fatherly providence defend us against the violence of al our enemies, which do
seek by almeanes to oppres thy truth. Furthermore for as much as by thy holy
Apostle we be taught, to make our prayers and supplications for all men: We pray
not only for our selves here present, but beseech thee also, to reduce al such
as be yet ignorant, from the miserable captivity of blindness and error, to
the pure understanding, and knowledge of thy heavenly truth: that we al with
one consent and unity of minds, may worship thee our only God and savior.
And that al Pastors, sheep heardes and Ministers, to whom thou have committed
the dispensation of thy holy word, and charge of thy chosen people, may both in
their life and (...) be found faithful, setting only before their eyes thy
glory: and (...) by them al poor sheep, which wander and go astray, may be
gathered and brought home to thy fold. Moreover because the hearts of rulers are
in thy hands, we beseech thee to direct, and govern the hearts of al kings,
princes and maiestrates, to whom thou have committed the sword: especially (O
Lord) according to our bounden duty we beseech thee to maintain and increase
the honorable estate of ye Queens majesty, and al her most noble counselors,
and maiestrates, and all the whole body of this common weal. Let thy fatherly
favor so preserve them, and thy holy spirit so govern their hearts, that they
may in such sort execute their office, that thy religion may be purely
maintained, manners reformed, and sin punished, according to the precise rule of
thy holy word. And for that we be al members of the mistical body of Jesus
Christ, we make our requests unto thee (O heavenly father) for all such as are
afflicted with any kind of cross or tribulation, as war, plague, famine,
sickness, poverty, imprisonment, persecution, banishment, or any other kind of
the rods, whether it be calamity of body, or vexation of mind: that it would
please thee, to give them patience and constancy, til thou send them full
deliverance of al their troubles. Root out from hence (O Lord) al ravening
wolves, which, to fill their bellies, seek to destroy thy flock. And show thy
great mercyes upon those our brethren in other countries, which are persecuted,
cast into prison, and daily condemned to death for ye testimony of thy truth.
And though they be utterly destitute of al ma^s aid, yet let thy sweet comfort
never depart from them: but so inflame their hearts with thy holy spirit, that
they may boldly and cherefully abide such trial, as thy godly wisdom shall
appoint. So that at length as well by their death, as by their life, the kingdom
of thy dear son Jesus Christ, may increase and shine through all the world. In
whose name we make our humble peticio^s unto thee as he has taught us. Our
Father which art in heaven hallowed by thy. etc.

FINIS.
A Table both for the number of the whole Psalms, and also in what leaf, you
may find every of them.
Psalm. A. Fol.
30 ALl laud and praise. 49 49 All people her. 59 78 Attend my people to my.
106 82 Amid the prease. 114
B.
81 Be light and glad. 113 119 Blessed are they. 158 128 Blessed art thou. 175
134 Behold and have. 178 142 Before the Lord. 187 144 Blessed be the. 188
D.
83 Do not O God re. 15
E.
127 Except the Lord. 174
G.
29 Give to the Lord ye. 48 37 Grudge not to see. 58 48 Great is the Lord. 70
54 God save me for thy. 80 105 Give praises unto. 140 107 Give thanks unto.
145 148 Give laud unto. 192
H.
12 Help Lord, for. 32 13 How loug wilt. 32 51 Have mercy on. 77 56 Have mercy
Lord. 82 67 Have mercy on us. 91 73 How ever it be, yet. 100 84 How pleasant
is. 116 91 He that within. 125
I.
5 Incline thine ears. 25 11 I trust in God. 31 20 In trouble and adversity.
40 25 I lift my heart. 44 34 I will give laud. 54 39 I said I will look. 61 40 I
waited long and. 62 43 Judge and revenge. 66 77 I with my voice. 105 92 It is a
thing both. 126 100 In God the Lord. 133 101 I mercy will and. 133 109 In
specheles scilence. 148 116 I love the Lord. 155 120 In trouble and in. 168 121
I lift mine eyes. 169 122 I did in heart. 170
L.
6 Lord in thy wrath reprove me not. 26 16 Lord keep me for. 35 26 Lord be my
judge. 46 35 Lord plead my cause. 35 42 Like as the heart. 65 68 Let God arise.
92 72 Lord give thy judge. 99 86 Lord how thine ear. 104 88 Lord God of health.
106 130 Lord to thee I. 176 140 Lord save me. 185 143 Lord hear my. 187
M.
23 My sheperd is the. 43 45 My heart does now. 67 62 My soul to God. 87 71 My
Lord, my God. 97 103 My soul give. 135 104 My soul praise. 137 146 My soul
praise. 193
N.
115 Not unto us. 154 124 Now Israel. 171
O.
3 O Lord how are my. 24 4 O God that art my. 25 7 O Lord my God. 27 8 O God
our Lord, how. 28 15 O Lord within thy taber. 33 17 O Lord give ear. 35 18 O
God my strength. 36 21 O Lord how joyful. 40 22 O God my God. 41 31 O Lord I
put my. 50 44 Our ears have heard 66 51 O Lord consider my. 74 55 O God give
ear. 80 60 O Lord thou did. 86 63 O God my God. 88 64 O Lord unto my voice.
89 70 O God to me take. 97 79 O Lord the Gentiles. 111 94 O Lord thou do. 12
95 O come let us. 128 98 O sing ye now. 131 102 O hear my prayer 133 108 O God
my heart. 147 117 O all the nations. 156 118 O give ye thanks. 136 123 O Lord
that. 171 109 Of this Israel. 175 130 O Lord I am not. 176 133 O how happy
a. (*) 178 135 O praise the Lord. 179 139 O Lord thou haste. 184 141 O Lord
upon thee. 186
P. (*)
38 Put me not to rebuke. 60 106 Praise ye the Lord. 142 136 Praise ye the
Lord. 181 147 Praise ye the Lord. 191
R. (*)
61 Regard O Lord for. 87 132 Remember David's. 177
S.
59 Send aid and save. 84 69 Save O God. (*) 94 96 Sing ye with. 129 125 Such
as in God. 172
T.
1 The man is blessed. 22 14 There is no God. (*) 33 19 The heavens and the. 39
24 The earth is all. 44 27 The Lord is both. 47 28 Thou art O Lord. 84 32 The
man is blessed. 52 36 The wicked with. (*) 57 41 The man is blessed. 46 46 The
Lord is our. 69 50 The mighty God. 72 50 The God of Gods. 74 53 The foolish
man. 79 57 Take pity for thy. (*) 83 65 Thy praise alone. 89 76 To all that
now. 104 80 Thou Lord that Israel. 111 85 Thou haste been. 117 87 That City
shall. 119 89 To sing the mor. (*) 121 90 Thou Lord haste. 124 93 The Lord as
king. 127 97The Lord does raygne. 130 99 The Lord does raygne. 132 110 The
Lord did. (*) 150 112 The man is blessed. 151 125 Those that do put. 172 138
Thee will I praise. 183 145 Thee will I laud. 189
V.
75 Unto the God we. 103
W. (*)
2 Why did the Gentiles. 23 9 With heart and mouth. 29 16 What is the cause. 35
52 Why do thou tyrant. 78 74 Why art thou Lord. 102 111 With heart I do.
(*) 150 114 When Israel by. 153 126 When that the Lord. 173 137 When as we
sat in Babi. 182
Y.
33 Ye ryghteous in the. 52 47 Ye people all. 70 58 Ye rulers that. (*) 84 66
Ye men on earth. 90 113 Ye children, which. 152 150 Yield unto the. 194
These follow after the Psalms.
Praise the Lord ye. Behold now give. (*) Attend my people. Our father
which art. All my belefe. Come holy spirit. (*) Give peace in these. Where
ryghteousnes does. O Lord in thee is all my. (*) Preserve us Lord. The Lord
be thanked. Also certain Godly Prayers.
These ye shall have in the beginning of the Book.
VEni creator spiritus. Venite exultemus. Te Deum laudamus. (*) Benedicite.
Benedictus dominus. Magnificat anima. (*) Nunc dimittis. The Lamentation of a.
The humble suit of a sinner. Quicunque vult. (*) The Pater noster. The ten
Commandments.
Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Marrins.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, per septennium.


