The Book of Faulconrie or HauKING, FOR THE ONLY DE light and pleasure of all
Noblemen and Gentlemen: Collected out of the best aucthors, asvvell Italians as
Frenchmen, and some English practices withal concerning Faulconrie, the
contents whereof are to be seen in the next page following. By George
Turberuile Gentleman.

NOCET EMPTA DOLOR VOLVPTAS.

depiction of three men with falcon and dogs.

Imprinted at London for Christopher Barker, at the sign of the Grasshopper in
Paul's Churchyard. Anno. 1575.

The Contents of the Book.
A description of all kinds of Hawks that are in use, and their properties.
The reclayming, imping, mevving, and fleyng, both the field and river of the
same Hawks. Their diseases and cures, and all such special points as in any
wise appertain to that most excellent and Gentlemanlike quality. Also a
littell treatise translated out of the Italian tongue, touching the diseases
happening to Spaniels, with their cures.
To the right Honorable, my very good Lord, Ambrose, Earl of Warwick, Baron
Lisle, Master of her Majesty's Ordinance, Knight of the most honorable order
of the Garter, and of her highness privy Counsel: George Turberuile wishes
increase of honor, with all good fortune.
RIght Honorable, if a man ought of duty to offer gretest recompense where he
lies most deeply indetted, and that all services are due to those, from whom
we receive our only countenance and aid: Truly of force then must J yield all
my endeavors and service to your Honor, and my good Lady Warwike, (the duty
reserved to my great Lord and Master) toward the requital of the least part
of your Honorable goodness, whom J have ever though J know and confess
far to base for your worthy mind and calling: yet for that it best fitteth a
melancholic head, surcharged with pensive and sullen humors, my earnest suit
must be for good acceptance at your honors hands, and withal, to crave that it
may boldly pass under the shield and safety of your guard, the better to
brook the hateful encounter of swelling envy, a common foe to such, as either
seek by well doing, to win good will from equals, or by painful writing, to
purchase praise from Peers. The device is none of mine, but a collection out
of sundry Authors, as well Italians, as French, from whom J have gathered some
chief points of Falconrie, to pleasure my Country men withal: In part for
that I never found hitherto any book treating of the same matter, in part,
because J know sundry Gentlemen (my great friends) deeply addicted to that
commendable sport of hawking, whom if I may find as grateful, as I have framed
my self painful, I have the hoped hire of my travel, and they assured to
bestow no more on me for my forepassed industry, than they are to receive
from me for their after courtesy. So as there does rest no more upon my hands
at this time, but to entreat your Honor to bestow your good liking, and lawful
favor upon it, and me: For which as I have always been by desert bound, so
will I by frank good will, rest most ready to the expense of my dutiful
service upon your noble line and house, during the remainder of my life:
wishing unto your Honor, and my very good Lady, (Lady Countess Warwick)
all good success and fortune, with maintenance and increase of your Honorable
state and present felicity.

Your Honors most bounden Orator George Turberuile.

In commendation of Hawking
George Turberuile.

I Deem that no man doubts, but games and al our chief delights,
Were first deuisde to dau^t the dumps of pe^siue payned sprights.
To clear the clouds of drowping cares, and mists of mournful mind,
And banish bale, that heavy hearts in cheerlesse chains did bind.
And more than that, to further health, by moving to and froe,
That in our lumpish lustlesse limbs, no dire disease might groe:
Which otherwise (set sport aside, and sweet delightful glee)
In idle bodies breeds of force, as we by proof do see,
Not much unlike the standing lakes, in durtie dampish grounds,
Where water has no power to pass, most noisome filth aboundes.
If games were thus found out at first, for mind and bodies ease,
As Well to quit that one of griefs, as the other of disease:
Why then? of force it follow must, that those delights are chief,
And most to be imbraste, that lend to either part relief.
Which if be so, I need not blush; or deem it my disgrace,
If Hawks and Spanels I prefer, and set in hiest place.
For truly no devise delights, the mind of man so much,
No game so gladsome to the limbs, there is no pleasure such,
No Physic fitter to remove the dregs of direful pain,
And to restore to former life, the feeble force again.
Of Spanels first I mean to speak, for they begin the glee,
Who being once uncoupled, when they feel their collers free,
In roysting wise about they raunge, with cheerful chappes to ground,
To see where in the champion may, some lurking foul be found.
A sport to view them stir their sternes, in hunting to and fro,
And to behold how nature does her power in Spanels sho:
Who scour the fields with wo^drous skill, and deal in cunning sort,
As though indeed they had conspirde, to make their master sport.
What merier music can you crave? what note but half so good?
As when the Spanels cross the run, of Feasants in the wood?
Or light upon the little Poutes, where they have lately been?
Assuredly no better glee, is either heard or seen.
So as by Hawks does pleasure grow, unto the gazing eye,
And dogs delight the listening ears, before the hawks do fly.
What dolt so dull but takes delight, when once the Spanell springs
The fearful foul, and when the hawke lies long upon her wings?
What sense so sad, what mind so mazde, but settes his sorrows by,
When once the Falcon free begins, to scud amid the sky?
To turn and wind a bird by sleight, and eke at last to slay
With strong encounter, doves and duckes, and every other pray?
The pretty Partridge, Rayles and Quayles, that haunt the open field?
And from her mountey to enforce the Hearon haught to yield?
By binding with her close in clouds, in manner out of sight?
For noble Peers and cheifest States, a passing pleasant flight?
So small a bird, so large a foul, at such a lofty gate,
To reach and rappe, and force to fall, it is a game of state.
No fellow to the flight at Brook, that game is full of glee,
It is a sport the stowping of, a roysting Hawke to see.
And if she miss, to mark her how she then gettes up amain,
For best advantage, to eneaw the springing foul again.
Who if be landed as it ought, then is it sure to die.
Or if she slip, a joy to see, the Hawke at randon fly,
And so for head to slay the foul, a noble sport to view,
In my conceyt no pleasure like to Hawks, I tell you true.
It settes the senses all to work, there may none idle be,
The tung it lures, the legs they leap, the eye beholdes the glee:
The ears are busied eke to hear, the calling Spanels quest,
Do tell me then what sense it is, that respite has to rest?
And more than that, the heart it leapes, and laughes for joy to think
How such a slender hawke should cause, so huge a foul to shrink.
This kind of sport does banish vice, and vile devises quight,
When other games do foster faults, and breed but base delight.
No idle thought can harbor well within the Falconers brain,
For though his sportes right pleasant be, yet are they mixed with pain.
The toil he takes to find the foul, his greedy lust to slay,
The foul once found cuts off co^ceits, and drives il thoughts away.
He lures, he leapes, he calls, he cries, he joys, he waxes sad,
and frames his mood, according as his hawke does well or bad.
Dame Venus harbors not in holtes, no Cupide haunts the hills,
Diana dwelles in open place, with bow her game she killes.
In wooddes no wanton Goddess woonnes: in Cities soiournes sin,
There vice in vawts and dungeon dwelles, the lecher lurks within.
Dianas train does love the laundes, they long abroad to rome,
But bawdie Venus ympes embrace, the loitring life at home.
To dice, to dance, to coll, to kiss, to card the time away,
To prate, to prancke, to bowl, to bowse, and ripple out the day.
To check at Chesse, to heave at Maw, at Macke to pass the time,
At Coses, or at Saunt to sit, or set their rest at Prime.
Both Ticktacke and the Irish game, are sportes but made to spend,
I wot not I, to what avail those trifling games do tend,
Unless to force a man to chaufe, to chide, to sweat, to swear,
To brawle, to ban, to curse, and God in thousand parts to tear.
At cockepit some their pleasures place, to wager wealth away,
Where Falkners only force the fields, to hear their spanels bay.
What greater glee can man desire, than by his cunning skill,
So to reclaim a haggarde hawke, as she the foul shall kill.
To make and man her in such sort, as tossing out a train,
Or but the lewre, when she is at large, to whoup her in again?
Where birds, and beasts, and each thing else, their fredom so embrace,
As let them loose, they will be thralde no more in any case.
What finer feate than so to ympe a feather, as in view,
A man would swear it were the old, and not set on anew?
When hawks are hurt and broosde, by rash encounter in the skies,
What better skill, than for their harms a powder to devise,
To dry the blood within the bulcke, and make his Mummie so,
As no Physician greater Art, on pacients can bestow?
To cure the crampe, and eke the cray, the stone that lies within,
The Philanders, the Frounce, the Gout, the Panthas, and the pin,
The Rye, the Rhewme, the Canker, and both lice and mytes to mar,
And all such worms, as with your hawks do wage continual war:
To make her mewe when time requires, to bowse and eke to bath.
By cunning skill to cause her cast, such glit as breeds her skath.
To cut her hoodes, to shape her guess, her tyrets, and her line,
With Belles, and Bewets, Veruels eke, to make the Falcon fine:
Believe me is no common skill, no bare or base devise,
But meet, for civil courtly men, that are reputed wise.
Which if be so, then yield me thanks, that beat my busy brow,
And took this toil for thine avail, to teach thee when and how
To work this practice and device. Accept the Printers pain,
Who shows thee sundry shapes of hawks, though little to his gain.
Both he and I can do no more, than offer our good will,
And all to further thy delight, and add unto thy skill.
Which if we do, we have the hire, of both our meanings than,
You cannot do a better deed than thank the painful man.
George Turberuile.

The Induction or proeme to this discourse, and treatise of Hawking.
WE find this a general rule and observation, and do hold it for good, in
all Arts and Sciences, wherein men do travel and busy them selves, either to
the benefit of others, or to their own pryuate pleasure, and humores, in the
beginning of their works to lay down the subject of that whereof they mean
to treat, which in very deed is nothing else, but the ground and matter
which does move them to write: which does not only fall out in all liberal
sciences, and studies greatly accounted and reverenced of the learned of all
ages, but also in the base and grosser trades of men, daily practiced with the
hand. As when the Goldsmithe does determine with him self by curious and
cunning art, to fashion a Jewel of any price and value, he is driven to make
choice of his metal, either gold or silver, whereon to bestow the
excellency of his art, which cannot be named by a more fit or convenient
term, than to be called the Subject of his science. Likewise here mine
Author, in this treatise, and book of Falconrie, following the accustomed
order of the learned, and common practice of such as do write, has laid
down a Hawke, the Subject of his devise, of which he is determined at large to
speak, with full show and declaration of the true nature and properties of
all Hawks, as also such other matter as is incident, and appertayning in any
respect to that skill, of all other gentlemanly sportes and practices, the
most pleasant and commendable. But before he does adventure too deal specially
of any matter concerning Falconrie, to give the Reader a perfect and absolute
understanding, both of his conceit, and of the knowledge of the thing, he
thinks it not besides his purpose, but a matter most necessary to the
attaynment of his devise, to frame a general division of all Hawks and Birds
of pray, racking (as it were) and dividing that one entyre and general name
of a Hawke into many members and parts, the better thereby to display the true
nature, quality, and condition of a Hawke, as also the skill of Falconrie: for
the whole being laid out into his members and parts, it shall be the more
easy to come to the notyce of that, whereof he is resolved to write, whose
nature and substance is included in his particular members. Wherefore mine
Author following that order and prescribed rule of knowledge, has used this
method, setting down to the view of the reader, in the very entry and
proeme of his work, a manifest and general division of Hawks, the better to
decypher the special nature, of each one Hawke in his own proper kind, which
otherwise were very hard to do, by mean of confusion of sundry names and
terms, as also, the number of birds of pray.

A general division of Hawks, and Birds of pray, after the opinion of one
Francesco Sforzino Vycentino, an Italyan Gentleman Falconer.
First (says he) you shall understand, that of Hawks, that do live by
pray, and are in knowledge and use of men, there are nine kinds.

1 The Egle. 2 The Mylyon. 3 The Gerfalcon. 4 The Falcon. 5 The Merlyn. 6 The
Hobbye. 7 The Gosehawke. 8 The Sparowhawke. 9 The Matagasse.
This Hawke whom I term a Matagasse, after the French is in the Italian
tongue, called, Regestola Falconera, and among the Germa^s, Thornkretzera,
Hawke not in use with us, and in troth of sle^der regard and estimation in
nature. Yet nevertheless, both to follow mine Author, and to make my division
perfect, I hold it needful to reckon that kind of Hawke among the rest: and
in the latter end of the first part of this treatise, I will briefly describe
you his nature, which is no less base than strange.

You must note, that all these kind of Hawks, have their Tyercelles, which
are the male birds and cocks of every sort and gender: And further, that
the female of all birds of pray and rauyne, is ever more huge than the male,
more ventrous, hardy, and watchful, but of such birds as do not live by
rauyne and pray, the male is more large than the female.

A second or subdiuision.
Moreover, you shall know, that those nine sorts of hawks, may again be
divided into two kinds, and either differing from the other in condition.

For some of them do pray upon the foul, by stouping down from their wings,
and so seazing on the foul with their foot, do break in sunder with their
beakes, the neck bone, being of more force and strength in that part, than in
the foot or talons. And this sort of Hawks, do never use to plume or tire
upon the foul whom they have seized, until such time as they perceive it to
leave busking and bating in the foot: of which kind and quality are, 1 The
Egle. 2 The Mylyon. 3 The Gerfalcon. 4 The Falcon. 5 The Merlyn. 6 The Hobbye.
7 The Matagasse.


Now that other sort which I speak of, do slay their pray and game by main
force of wing, at randon and before head, not stowping at all from their wings,
as the other hawks do, whom I made mention of before. And these hawks have
their chief force and strength in the foot, and not in the beak, and
therefore no sooner do seize upon the pray, but presently they give them selves
to plume and tire thereon. Of this sort are 1 The Gossehawke. 2 The Tiercle of
the Gossehawke. 3 The Sparowhawke.


Thus far have I made a general division of all kinds of Hawks that do
live by pray, and again (as you see) have divided those kynds into two parts.
Wherefore now do I purpose to deal more specially in the matter, and more
particularly to proceed to the natures of every of them, to yield you a more
perfect knowledge, and light therein.

Of the names of Hawks of pray.
AL Hawks and birds of pray, be comprysed, and included, under these two
names.

1 Aetos. or, 2 Hierax.
which is to say, 1 Aquila. or, 2 Accipiter.
which is ye, 1 Eagle. or 2 Falcon.


These two kinds do serve to fly the pray, for man's pleasure and pastime,
of which only hawks, my purpose is to treat and speak in this discourse here
following.

For all hawks and birds of pray, do not serve the Falconers use, but only
such as are hardy and free of metal, able to fly the field and river. And
therefore those only kinds shall be the Subject of my book, and not those
base, bastardly refuse hawks, which are somewhat in name, and nothing in deed.

As the Greeks would, that Hierax, and the Latyns that Accipiter, which is a
special term to one hawke and bird of pray, should give the general name
and title to all Hawks and birds of pray, because of his excellency: So in
like manner, the Frenchmen of our age, have ordained that the Falcon, which is
a term peculiar and proper to one kind of bird of pray, shall give general
name and appellation to all hawks, and birds of pray, what so ever they be,
because the Falcon does pass all other hawks in boldness and courtesy, and
is most familiar to man, of all other birds of pray. And thereof it
proceeds, that we say, the Falcon Gentle, the Haggart Falcon, the Falcon
Sacre, and so likewise of the other hawks, calling them all by the name of
Falcon.

Moreover, as the Falcon, which is a special name of one kind of hawks, has
given name to all other hawks and birds of pray. So has it bestowed the name
and title of a Falconer, to every one of what state or calling soever he be,
that does deal with any kind of Hawks: and the term of Falconrie, to the
art, profession, and knowledge of luring and manning those birds of pray, by
which singular skyll, they are made to flee all other fowls, as well those
fowls of air, as of the land and river. Which in my conceit, deserves no
slender commendation and praise, being a matter almost quite against the laws
of nature and kind, for one foul so artificially to undertake and so cruelly
to murder another, and having achieved his enterprise, with greedy and
willing mind, to repair to man again, having the whole scope of the heavens,
and the circuit of the earth at their pleasure to range and peruse: and to
yield them selves in such frank manner to the prison and custody of man,
being by kind set free and at liberty to pray, and dispose them selves.
Such and so great is the singular skill of man, when by art he is resolved,
to alter the prescribed order of nature, which by industry and pain we see is
brought to pass and effect.

Of the kinds of Eagles.
Having divided all those birds of pray and rauine, which serve to Falconrie
and Hawking, into Eagles and Falcons, I mean first of al to decypher you the
Eagle and Vulture, whom some have thought to be comprised under the kind of an
Eagle. And so consequently after that, to speak of Falcons which are birds of
pray, serving to the use and mystery of Hawking, and taking their names of the
Falcon.

Aristotle was of opinion, that there was six kynds of Eagles, which are named
by him, according as it pleased the inhabitants of Greece to inform him.

Pliny in making the same division of Eagles, has varied in that point
altogether from Aristotle, as touching the names and terms of Eagles, for that
they were of diverse countries, and did write in several languages. But for
that I mean in this book only to speak of those kinds of Eagles which
serve to Falconrie, I will deal but with two sorts of Eagles, for at these
days we have the use and experience but of the brown Eagle, which is the
Eagle Royal, and the black Eagle, the other kinds being of a base and
slender courage, as no Falconer will pain him self to lure them, or manne
them for use or pleasure.

First of the brown or yellowe Eagle.
depiction of brown or yellow eagle

THe brown or yellow Egle after Aristotle's opinion is called in Greek Guyseon,
which does signify in the French tongue (kindly and no bastard borne) because
it is of all other kynds of Eagles the true and right Eagle, and he does call
him by ye greek word Chrisaitos, by reason of his golden mayle, and in Latin
he is termed Stellaris, and Herodus. This is that Eagle whom we call the Egle
royal, king of birds, and sometimes the bird of Jupiter, and that Egle,
which ought to be taken and accounted the principal best, being more huge and
large than the rest, and besides more rare and dainty to be seen. For she
does haunt most commonly the tops of high and craggie mountains, and does
there pray upon all sorts of fowls, as also Hares, Kyddes Gotes, and such
other like wild, and savage beasts of the field.

This Eagle does live always solitary and alone, unless happily she have
her brood with her, whom she does conducte and guide from place to place, the
better to instruct them how to kill their pray, and feed them selves. But no
sooner has she made the^ perfect, and thoroughly scooled them therein, but
presently she chaseth them out of that coaste, and does abandon them the place
where they were eyred, and will in no wise brook them to abide near her, to
the end (that the country where she discloseth) and makes her Eyrie, be not
unfurnished of convenient pray, which by the number and excessive store of
Eagles, might otherwise be spoiled and made bare. For it is very likely, that
if her brood and increase should there make stay, being so huge birds, and
of so great rauyne, there would in short space lack pray for her self, and
by mean thereof breed her to a farther evil and mischief: for the avoiding
of which, this provident and careful foul does presently force her brood to
depart into some other part and region.

This Egle may with ease be discerned from the Vulture, because this Eagle
Royal, being brown or yellowe maylde, has not her arms or feet in any
condition covered with plume, as the Vulture has.

True it is, that the arm of the Eagle is short, yellow mayld and all beset
with scales, the pounces large, her beak black, long, and crooked at the
top. The train of the Egle Royal, as also the train of the slender black
Egle, is short and stiff at the point, even as the train of the Vulture is.

The Egle is always of one self hugeness, in respect of her nature, and it
can not be said, in that she is an Eagle, that she is either larger or lesser,
at any one time or other, unless you will give her the surname and addition of
black, yellowe, or some other such proper name and term, which does alter her
according to her accydentes, but nothing at all in regard of her substance and
nature. And were it not that she is so massy a foul, and not portable on the
fiste (as in troth she is exceeding huge) and besides, it is so hard and
difficulte a matter, to provide her pray and food, Princes, and puissant
states, would more usually have her, and hawke with her, for their solace and
pleasure, than they now do. But by reason she is so huge and ventrous, she
might happily offer force and violence to the eyes and face of her keeper, if at
any time she should conceive displeasure against him. And for this cause in
chief, the Egle is not in use, as other meaner hawks and of less force be in
these days.

He that will have the Egle to be good and tractable, must devise to take her
an Eyesse in the Eyrie, mannyng and accustoming her among hounds and
greyhoundes, to the end that when he goes and addresseth him to the field,
the Egle soaring aloft over the hounds starting the game, Fox, Hare, Got, or
such like beasts of the wood, she making her downeco^me, and stouping from
her wings, may so stay and seize upon the game, until the dogs come in and
procure the fall thereof. A man may feed her with any kind of flesh, and
chiefly of such game and pray as she slays in the field by flight.

Tawnye, or brown mayle in an Eagle, deep and hollow eyes, specially if she
be bred in the weast parts of the world, is an assured sign of her
goodness: for the tawnye Egle is ever found good in proof.

Also the witness on the head of an Eagle, or on her back, is a singular
token of an excellent Eagle.

That Eagle, that when she flees from the fiste of her keeper will either flee
upon the man, soaring round about him, or light on the ground, and take the
stand, is by all probability and conjecture, no inward Eagle, but a fugitive,
and a rangler.

At what time the Egle, displayes her train in her flight, and makes a turn
in her mountie, it is a very great sign that she determines to fly on head
and gadde: the next remedy for which mischief is to throw her out her
meat, and lure her with as loud a voice as you possible may. And if it be so
that she then stoop not to that which is cast out unto her, then either has
she over gorged her self, or otherwise she is to hye and too full of flesh. A
mean to avoid this inconvenience, is to sow the feathers of her train
together, to the end she may not spread them abroad, nor use the benefit of
her train feathers in her flight. Or else another way is, to deplume and make
bare her tuell and fundament so as it may appear, and then certainly for
fear of the cold air she will not adventure to mount so hie: but feeling
her train feathers fast sowed together, she will stand in awe of other
Eagles, whom by the mean of that device and practice, she shall in no wise be
able to avoid.

When the Eagle makes a short turn upon her keeper in her flight, and flies
not out aforehead, that is one principal good token that she will not away.

It has been said, that an Eagle is of force to arest and cause a woulfe to
stay, and will take him, with the aid and assistance of dogs, making into
her rescue, and that it has been seen and experimented. But for my part I
find the odds of them so great, as I leave the belief of it to the reader,
not recyting it as a troth, but a thing written, to show the great hardiness
and undaunted nature of the Eagle.

It is reported that the men of the country where the Eagle eyreth, knowing
thereof, and intending to bereave her young brood, do arm and well furnish
their heads, for fear least the Eagle do offer them force and violence. And
if so they show the old breeder one of her chickens, or tie it to the bough of
a tree near the place where she builds, she will call and cause the damme to
repair thither by continual cleping, who finds her, and pitying her cries,
will bring it so much provision and pray, as he that comes to take her from
the eyrie, shall there daily be sped of as much flesh and provision as will
very reasonably serve him and six others. For the old Eagle will convey
thither Hares, Conies, fowls, and such other like vittell, and viandes, for
the supplye of her necessity.

The Eagle does not commonly use to pray near unto his eyrie, but to kill her
provision abroad as far off as she may. And if so it happen, she leave any
flesh after she is full gorged, that does she reserve carefully for the next
day, to the end that if foul weather should happily grow to hinder her
flight, yet she might be stored of sufficient pray for the day following,
without any further travel.

An Eagle does not forsake or change her Eyrie all her life time, but of
custom does yearly return and make repair to one self place, and there
builds most assuredly, by mean where of it has been noted and observed in
time past, that an Egle does live very many years. Before her old age, her
beak waxes so exceeding long and crooked at the top, as she is much hindered
thereby of her feeding: in sort as she dies not of disease or by extremetie of
age, but only by reason she can not possible use the benefit of her beak,
being accrewde and grown to such an exceeding length and disproportion.
Whereof comes the proverb as I take it. Aquilae senectus the age of an
Eagle, which is properly applied to men that do live only by drink, as old
men are wont to do.

The Eagle does ever wage war with the little Roytelet, whom the French men
do so term, for that this foul is thought to be a little king among birds,
as the Etimologie of the word does seem to importe, the Latins likewise they
call him Regulus, and the Germans a Goldhenlyne. The occasion and chief
ground of this controversy betwixt the Eagle and the Goldhenlyne, is (by the
report of Aristotle) only upon the name, for that she is called the king of
birds, of which title and pre-eminence the Eagle would willingly bereave her.

Again there is one other kind of little foul whom Aristotle calls a Sitta,
the Latins Reptitatrix or Scandulaca, and the Frenchmen Grimpereau, that does
ye Egle very great outrage and offense. For no sooner perceives she the Eagle
to be absent from the eyrie, but presently in great dispite she breaks all
her eggs in pieces.

This little foul is called. In French. Roytelet. These two being in a manner
ye lest birds of all other, are the gretest and deadliest enemies to the Egle
and do contend with her upon points of principality and rule. In Latin.
Regulus. In the German tongue. Goldhenlyne. That other. In Greek. Sitta. In
Latin. Scandulaca. In French. Grimpereau.

When I said before, that the Eagle royal was of a yellow mayle, I meant
nothing else by that speech, but that the Eagle was maylde, of the very
color of a Deares hair, which is in deed not yellowe, but brown or tawnie.
And albeit Aristotle for his pleasure, termed it by the Greek word,
Chrisaitos, which is as much in effect, as to say, the golden Egle: yet must it
not therefore be concluded, that this Eagle is of a right golden mayle, but of
a more brown or tawnie mayle, than the other kind of Eagle is.

The Paynters, and Statuaries of Rome, have disguised this Egle in their
portraytours, for every man knows, that it is far otherwise, than they have
drawn it.

As well the brown Eagles as the black, are skynned and uncased, as the
Vultures be, and their skynnes sent to the furryers and pellytours of France,
with their wings, heads, and talons, and even of the same very color, as I
have here set it down, and declared it unto you.

Of the black Eagle.
depiction of black eagle

I Have signified unto, you that there are only two sorts of Eagles which
serve for Falconrie, which are the yellow or tawnie Eagle, whom I have
hitherto treated of, and the black Eagle whom I must now decypher unto you.

Aristotle does term the black Eagle Melauratus, and Lagophanos, because she
takes the Hare: and this Eagle the Latins call Pulla, Fuluia, Leporaria, and
Valeria, the odds and difference betwixt these two Eagles is easy to be
found, for this black Eagle is less than the Eagle royal, which is the
yellow and tawnie Eagle, and the black Eagle does as much differ from the
yellowe Eagle, as the black Mylion does from the Mylion Royal.

Pliny has placed this black Eagle in the first order and rank of Eagles,
as one that would willingly prefer her before all other kinds of Eagles. And
here Aristotle has set her but in the third order and place.

The black Eagle (says he) being less huge and corpulent than the other, is
of far more force and excellency.

Moreover he affirms that the Eagles do tower up and mount so hye, of
purpose for prospect, and to see from far. And by reason that their sight is
so clear and perfect, men have reported them of all others, to be the only
birds that do participate with the divine nature.

Moreover, for the fear the Eagle has of her excellent eyes, she makes not
her stowping from her gate at once, and rashly, as other kind of long winged
hawks do, but by little and little.

The Hare is a pray in whom she takes great pleasure, yet when she finds
the Hare running, she offers not forth with to seize on him upon the
mountain, but can forbear and stay her time, until he be on the plain
champion, and then seazing on him, she presently caryeth him not away, but does
first make trial and experience of him, poysing and weying him in her pounces,
and after that lifting up the silly beast, does bear him clean away, and
prays on him at her best will and pleasure.

Now as touching the Vultures, and first of the large ash colored or black
Vulture.
depiction of black vulture

THere are two sorts of Vultures, to wit, the ash mayld, or black Vulture,
and the brown or whitish Vulture. First will I speak of the black or
ashmaylde Vulture, who is in deed more huge than the brown, for the
ashe-coloured Vulture is the most large bird of pray that is to be found,
and the female Vulture more large than the male, even as it falls out by
experience in all kinds of birds of pray and rauyne.

The Greeks, they call the Vulture Gips, and the Latins Vulture.

This Hawke is a passenger in Egypt, more known by her coat and case than
otherwise, because the furryers do use their skynnes for stomackgers, to guard
and defend the breast against the force of fervent cold.

All other birds of pray do differ from the Vulture, in that they are
destitute and void of plumage under their wings, whereas the Vultures be
there vested and covered with an excellent fine down. Their skin is thick
like a Goats skin, and namely you shall find under their gorge, a certain
patche of the breadth of your hand, where the plume is somewhat inclining to a red, like the hair of a Calf, for that kind of plume has not a web
fashioned, as other feathers are usually shapte and proportioned, but are like
unto the down which is to be found on either side the neck, and on the upper
part of the plye and bent of the wyng, in which parts the down is so white,
that it glistereth and is as soft as silk.

The Vultures have this one point special, and peculiar to them selves, in
that they are rough legged, a thing that happens not to any other kind of
Eagles or birds of pray.

Of the less Vulture, which is the brown or whitish Vulture.
depiction of brown or whitish vulture

THe brown or whitishe Vulture, does differ from the black maylde Vulture,
in that he is somewhat less, than the black Vulture is, having the plumage
of her throat or gorge, of her back, the feathers under the belly near the
pannell, and of the whole body tawnie, or brown of color: but the brayle
feathers, and of the train, like to those of the black maylde Vulture: which
induces some to think that there is no difference at all betwixt these two
kinds, save that the one is male, and that other female, in the same gender
and kind. But this is most certain and assured, that with Noble personages you
shall see as well the one kind as the other. Either sort has a short train in
regard of ye largeness of their wings, which is not the nature and shape of
other birds of rauine and pray, save only that foul whom the French term
( Piscuerd,) the Italians, Pigozo, and in our mother speech I may call the
Woodwall.

You shall ever find the Vultures rough, and heary legged, which is an evident
sign that they frotte and rub them against the rocks, where their chief
abode and stay is. And further you shall note that the brown or blancke
Vultures are more rare and dayntie to be seen, than the black or ashemaylde
be.

Again this is peculiar to them in their kind, that the feathers on their
heads be short in respect of the Eagles feathers, which has bin some cause,
that they have been thought to be balde and without plume, though in very
deed it be nothing so.

The Vulture that is ashecoloured or black maylde, has short arms all
beset with plume, even to the very Talons, which is a special note among all
those birds of rauine, only peculiar to them, and not to any other foul,
having crooked Talo^s, unless it be the Owl, who is roughlegged, even in
sort as these Vultures be.

To discern the brown from ye ashemayled Vulture, you must note, that the
brown Vulture has her neck feathers very straight and long, much like to
those that the Cock has or the Stare. In regard of those feathers on her
back, sides, and the corner of the plye of her wings, which are little and
slender, in manner of scales, but the breaste feathers as also those on the
back, and the covert feathers of the train, are to the red Vulture read,
and to the black Vulture black, and to both kinds very large, by mean of
their hugeness they can not be upon their wings, nor rise from the stand
without some advantage.

A man shall seldom see them upon the playnes, and champion of Italy,
Almanie, and France, unless happily sometime in the winter, for then they
rangle and wander into every part, for at that time in chief they abandone
and forsake the tops of the stately and high mountains, to avoid the
extremity of cold, and do take their passage into more hot regions and
countries, where the clymate does better serve their purpose, and better agree
with their nature.

The Vultures at the most, do not disclose above two or three chickens or
young birds, and it is a very hard matter and almost impossible for any man
to rob their eyrie, for that most commonly they buyld in some hanging cliffe
whether there is very hard and dangerous access. They may be nourished and
fed with tripes, offell, and inwardes of beasts. And because they do
vsuallye haunte the fields of purpose to devour the offell and refuse parts
of such beasts as men have slaughtered and slain, and such like carrion,
some men are of opinion, that they do presage and betoken great murder and
bloody spoil of men that are in arms.

The opinion of William Tardiffe a Frencheman, concerning the division of
birds of pray, and other things woorthe the observation.
Birds of pray (says he) which we use in Falconrie, be of three kinds, The
Eagle, The Falcon, The Goshawke.


Of Eagles there are two kinds, the one is absolutely called the Eagle, the
other Zimiech. Aquila, Zimiech.


A red mayle in an Eagle, and deep eyes, specially if the be bred in the
west mountains, (as is before said) is one special sign of her goodness.

Whiteness upon the head or back of an Eagle, betokens the excellency of
the Eagle, which in the Arabian tongue is termed, Zimiach, in the Syrian
language. (...), in the Greek. Philadelph among the Latins. Mylyon.


The Eagle must ever be taken when she is in the eyrie, for her condition is to
wax afterward very bold and outrageous. It is said, that when the Eagle
begins to grow to lyking, near cawking or calling time, she commonly
flies with other Eagles, bearing with them to their stand where they use to
pray, a piece of Arsenicke, otherwise called Orpiment, which does delay and
mortify their lust and desire.

The Eagle will seize upon the Goshawke and any other foul of rauine, or pray
yt does fly with Iesses, making sure account that it is a fit pray for her.
And for that only cause and none other, coueteth to apprehend and take them in
their flight, for when they are wild and ramage, using the deserts, she
offers them not any such violence.

A mean to avoid the Eagle, when a man is determined to fly with his hawke,
is to pluck of the hawks Iesses before she fly, for otherwise let her do
her best, she shall not escape the Eagle.

That Eagle, which is the kindly and right Eagle in deed, will slaye the Hare,
the Fox, and such like beasts of the Forest and field.

The Eagle called Zimiech, will kill the Crane, and other less fowls.

A devise and remedy for you, when the Eagle does moleste and hinder your game
in hawking.
Find the means to get an Eagle, and seele up her eyes, but yet in such
sort, as she may have a little sight to aspire and clyme to her mowntee,
into whose tuell and fundamente conueye a little Assa fetida, and sow up the
place. Then tie to her legs, either a wing, a piece of flesh, or a red
clothe, which the other Eagles may conjecture to be flesh, and so let her
fly. For then will she in her flyghte, for her own safety and assurance,
pull down all the other Eagles from their stately gate and pitche, which
otherwise she would never do, were it not for the pain of that which is
conveyed into her tuell.

Now will I lay you down the report of Frauncis Sforzino Vicentino, an
Italian, as touching the division and nature of Eagles, and so proceed to the
Falcon.
depiction of eagle

THere are two sorts of Eagles, that is to say, the huge and royal Eagle,
which is the Haggart or Passenger.

And a less Eagle, which is a base and bastard Eagle in respect of the other.

The right Eagle is bredde in the highest clyues of Leuante, and specially in
those of Cyprus. They are as large as a wild Goose, and more. Some of them are
of a brown mayle, and some other of a spotted mayle, their gorges and breasts
are full of straked lines, tending to read, they have long heads, great
beakes, and very much crooked, strong arms, and roughe large stretchers, in a
manner as great as the palm of a man's hand, boysteous talons, and a
reasonable long train.

These Eagles, in the main field will take the Hare, and by force hold him,
and carrye him in the air as they flee, until they espy some rock or other
fit stand, where they may pray upon him. In like sort they take other
beasts, and sundry times do roue and rangle abroad to beat and seize on
Gotes, Kyddes, and Fawnes. They are in use and price with sundry noble men, as
has been reported unto me credibly.

The great Turk of all other Princes, does most use to flee with the Eagle,
and does give his Falconers in charge, to man and lure them, as they do the
Goshawke: and being thoroughly manned, has a cast of Eagles at one time, upon
one pearche betwixt two of his people into the field, when they are there,
they flee both together, the one at the mowntee, a very stately pitche, and
the other more base and low, and that Eagle that does fly the base pitche,
is taught to make a great noise as she roueth too and fro, over the Foreste,
not much unlike the questing or calling of a dog, by mean of which sudden
cry and noise, diverse times there issue out of the couerte, some wild and
savage beasts, which are no sooner discryed by that high fleeing Eagle, but
suddenly she bateth of her pitche, and stoupeth from her wings, and at the
downecome either seazeth or rifleth some one of them, slaying them by force,
until the dogs may make in to her reskewe. And thus betwixt the Eagle and
curres, the pray is taken not without the great pleasure and lyking of that
mighty Prince the Turk. You may guess of the excellency of this gallante
pastime, if it be true, as it is vouched by report. Herein I can affirm
nothing of my self, but do follow mine author, from whom I collected this
kind of hawking, and ambolde to make recytall of it in this place, both for
the hugeness of the foul, as also the strangeness of the practice.

All these kinds of Eagles, have their Tyercelles or male birds, of whom
some huge, some of myddle syse, and other some less, which are called
Bastard Eagles, not had in any account.

Thus (as you see) have I laid down to your vewe and judgments, the kinds
and sorts of Eagles, with their proper descriptions due to them, and other
points incident to their natures: and have stayed more about the matter, than
needed, in mine own opinion, being a foul so little in use with us, but I
have done it as well to make my division perfectly, as also to decipher that,
which every one perhaps has not read, as touching the natural inclination
of this royal bird, who for that she is Queen and chief of all hawks,
deserves some larger discourse than the rest, which are in nature more base,
though in use more familiar and ordinary.

Of the Falcon, and how many sorts of Falcons there are.
depiction of falcon

THere are seven kinds of Falcons, and among them all for her noblesse and
hardy courage, and withal the francknesse of her mettell, I may, and do mean
to place the Falcon Gentle in chief.

1 This Falcon is called the Falcon Gentle, for her gentle and courteous
condition and fashions. In heart and courage she is valiant, ventrous, strong,
and good to brook both heat and cold, as to whom there comes no weather
amiss at any time, whereas the most part of other Hawks, either are lightly
offended with the one or the other, and must have a hand kept upon them
accordingly, or otherwise, there is no great pleasure to be taken in them.

The Haggart Falcon. 2 The second is the Haggart Falcon, which is otherwise
termed the Peregrine Falcon. The Haggart is an excellent good byrd, but (as my
Author affirms) very choice, and tender to endure hard weather: but in mine
own conceyte she is in nature far otherwise. And my reason is this, that
she should be better able to endure cold than the Falcon Gentle, because she
does come from forayne parts a stranger, and a passenger, and does win all
her pray and meat at the hardest by main wing, and does ariue in those parts
where she is taken when the fowls do come in great flocks, which is the
very hardest part of the year. Moreover being a whote Hawke by kind, she
should the better sustain the force of weather, and that she is a whot Hawke
of nature, may be gathered by her flying so high a pitche, which I take to be,
for that in the higher parts, she finds the colder air, for ye middle Region
is more cold, than the rest, because thither comes no reflection. And again,
she meweth with more expedition (if she once begin to cast her feathers) than
the other Falcons do. But these points of controversy I leave to the learned,
and such as have the experience of the matter.

The Barberie, or Tartaret Falcon. 3 The third is that Falcon which is called
the Tartaret, or Barbary Falcon, whom they do chiefly use in Barbary, and
most account of.

The Gerfalcon. 4 The fourth is the Gerfalcon, which is general, and common
enough, as well in France, as in other places.

The Sacre. 5 The fifte, is the Falcon Sacre.

The Laner. 6 The sixte, the Laner, common as well in France, as in other
Regions.

The Tunician. 7 The seventh is the Tunician Falcon. These seven kinds of
Falcons, are al hardy and good, according to the pray that belongs to their
force and nature. For they are diverse in nature, and of several plumes, and
besides that, disclosed and eyried in diverse countries. Wherefore, I mean to
touch every one of their natures, and to declare you, whereunto each is
inclined, according as they are ma^ned, and governed, and first of all I will
treat of the Falcon Gentle.

But before I speak of the Falcon Gentle, I will somewhat touch the Etimologie
of the name, and lay down the opinions of two learned men, and ancient
writers as touching that matter.

First Suidas a Greek Author does affirm that Falco which in our mother
speech does import a Falcon, is a general name to all Hawks of pray and
rauine, as Accipiter is in Latin, and (...) in Greek.

Festus, he is of opinion, that the Falcon is so named, because of her pownces
and crooked Talons, which do bend like unto a sith, or sickle, which in Latin
is called Falx.

But wherehence soever the name is derived, this is most assured, that of all
other birds of pray, the Falcon is most excellent and the very prince of all
other Hawks, both for her goodness of wing, and great hardiness and courage.

Of the Falcon gentle and her property.
depiction of falcon

THe Falcon Gentle, by nature does love to flee the Hearon every way, and is a
very good Hearoner as well from her wings at the down come, as from the fiste,
and aforehead, and will flee all other kinds of greater fowls, as those which
are termed birds of Paradise, fowls more large than the Hearon. Moreover she
is good to flee the shoueler a foul like the Hearon, but somewhat less, the
wild Goose, and such other like fowls, and therefore is excellent at the
River or Brook. If you take the Falcon gentle an eyesse, you may boldly flee
the Crane with her, but if she be not an eyesse, she will never be so hardy as
to venture on the Crane. And therefore being an eyesse, and never seeing, nor
knowing any other less foul than the Crane. If you cast her off to the Crane,
she forthwith thinks it to be a foul fit for her, and by mean thereof
flees the Crane very well, and becomes a very good Crane fleer, for Hawks
commonly prove either cowards, or hardy after that they are first quarred.

An Observation.
IF a man do well, he should never take the Falcons out of the eyrie, till
time they be full summed, and hard penned, or if he do happily commit that
error, he should not man her, but presently cause her to be conveyed and
placed in an eyrie, that most does resemble the eyrie of a Hawke, if he may
conveniently come by any such, and there breed her, and feed her with good
fleash, such as is the fleash of Pullets, Chickens, Pigeons, and such like, for
otherwise her wings will not grow to any perfection, and her legs and other
parts would quickly be broken and wax crooked, and her train feathers, and
for the most part, all her long feathers and flagges be full of taints.

The good shape of a Falcon.
THat you may the better make choice of your Falcon, and know a good Falcon
from a refuse, I will describe you the perfect shape of a right good Falcon,
such a one as is very like to be good, though many times we see, that in
proof, the most likely things to show, and to the eye, become in proof, the
worste and of least regard.

The shape of a good Falcon therefore is, first to have wide nares, high and
large eyeliddes, a great black eye, a round head somewhat full on the top,
a short thick beak blewe as azure, a reasonable high neck, barbe feathers
under the clappe of the beak, a good large breaste, round, fleshy, strong,
hard, and stiff bended. And that is the true cause, why the Falcon does
greatly affye in her breaste, and strikes with it, and gageth it most at her
encounter. And by mean she is very strong armed, she uses the more freely
also to stryke a foul with her pownces and talons. Moreover she must be
broad shouldered, she must have slender sails, full sides, long and great
thighs, she must be strong and short armed, large footed, with the sear of
the foot soft, and all one for hew with the sear of the beak and nares,
black pownces, long wings and crossing the train, which train ought to be
short, and apt to bend and bow to every side. For in the train of a hawk
does consist a great help, when she flies. And therefore (as well as for
beauty) if a train feather or covert feather be broken, or bruised, we do
covet to ympe them again, or set them to right, because it may be the less
hinderaunce to the hawke in her flighte.

You must note that those very Falcons, that are of one kind and sort, have
very great difference and odds betwixt them, and are called by diverse names,
according to the time that a man begins to deal with them, and does
undertake them, according to the places where they haunte, and according to the
countries whence they come.

They are divided into Mewed hawks, Rammage hawks, Sore hawks, and Eyesses,
into large hawks, mean hawks, and slender hawks, all which are of diverse
and several plumes and mayles, according to the diversity of the regions.
Also they are of diverse prices, according to the goodness and estimation of
them. Again, some are black Falcons, some russet Falcons, some other blancke
Falcons: some of which are river Hawks, to slaye the foul at the brook, and
other some field hawks, to fly the land, and there to kill the Fesant,
Partridge, and such like fowls. Thus you see how diverse and many they be,
according to their outward accidents, and yet in nature, all Falcons.
Therefore, because I am to treat of every kind several, I will not longer
hold you in this place, with description of the Falcon Gentle, but hereafter
when I write in another place of the diseases, cures and the manning of these
hawks, I will as near I may, let pass nothing, that shall belong in any
respect unto the Falco^, but that in one place or other you shall find it.

Of the names of a Falcon, according to hirage and taking.
THe first name and term that they bestow on a Falcon, is an Eyesse, and
this name does last as long as she is in the eyrie, and for that she is taken
from the eyrie.

Those Falcons are tedious, and do use to cry very much, in their feeding
they are troublesome, and paynfull to be entered: but being once well entered
and quarred, they leave a great part of that vice, and do prove very good to
the Heaton, and to the river, and all other kinds of foul. They are hardy,
and naturally full of good metal.

2 The second name is a ramage Falcon, and so she is called when she has
departed and left the eyrie, that name does last, and she is called a ramage
hawke, May, June, Iulie, and August. These Falcons are hard to be ma^ned by
reason of the heat, and for that they can ill brook hunger, or to stand
empty panneld: but who so can use them with patience and judgment, shall
find them passing good, for that they are without fault.

3 Thirdly they are called sore Hawks, from the end of August, to the last
of September, October, and November.

Those hawks are of good disposition, they will do very well, and are in
their prime and full pride for beawtie and goodness. Nevertheless those
first plumes that they have, when they forsake the eyrie, those do they keep
one whole year, before they cast or mew them, and that kind of feather, is
called the Sore feather. According to the diversity of these terms, and
times, these Hawks do become better and better to be manned and kept.

4 The fourth speech and term that is bestowed on them (as my Italian Author
does call them) is, that they are termed Marzaroli, and so are they called
from January, February, March, April, until the midst of May. I have no
proper english phrase for them, but they are very tedious and paynefull, and
the reason is, for that they must be kept on the fiste all that space. Diverse of
them are great baters, and therefore not very greedy of meat or hungry, they
are but badde Hawks much subject to Filanders, and the worms: who looks to
win credit or good by keeping them, must be of good experience and no less
patience.

5 Fifthly, they are called (Entermewers) or Hawks of the first cote, that is
from the middle of May, till June, July, August, September, October, November,
December.

Those Hawks are called Entermewers, for that they cast the old, and have new
feathers, and they prove very good, and hardy Hawks, but no great trust is to
be given them, for that they are giddy headed, and sickle: wherefore he that
looks to have good, or credit by keeping of them, must be very circumspect,
and regard their natures very well, and must keep a good hard hand on them,
and must make his fiste their pearche, and never in a manner let them be
from the fiste.

Besides, in those seven kinds of Falcons, which I spoke of in the first
division, there are included sundry sorts termed according to the Countries
and places where they are eyried and whence they come, the special names and
properties of all which, I hold it not so needful to discourse upon,
speaking fully and sufficiently of those seven kinds of Falcons in their
times and places, as they shall offer them selves in order unto me to be
deciphered unto the Reader, to whose good judgment and industry I mean to
refer and leave sundry things which I leave unspoken of, for that there is
no man that is desirous of skill, but, may with ease and will with diligence,
(I doubt not) flee over to those very Authors in French and Italian, from
whence I have made this brief collection, where he shall be assured to find
things more at large set out: but the effect (unless I be deceived) comprysed
in these few pages of paper, as well concerning the kinds of Hawks, as also
their mannyng, luring, flightes, mewing, diseases and cures in every condition,
as (I trust) to the pleasure and profit of the gentle and willing reader.
Wherefore I will now proceed to the Haggart Falcon, a most excellent bird, if
her nature and property be observed in dew manner.

Of the Haggart Falcon, and why she is called the Peregrine, or Haggart.
I Have many times studied with my self, for what cause the Haggart Falcons,
the most excellent birds of all other Falcons, have been termed Haggart or
Peregrin Hawks. And at first was of opinion that men so called them, for that
they are brought unto us, from far and forayne countries, and are in deed
mere strangers in Italy, and (as a man may call them) trauaylers. And this I
know for truth, they are not disclosed or eyred in Italy, and besides that
there are few in Italy, that do take them at any time, but the greatest store
of them are brought and conveyed thither from forayne regions^ but if they
should be termed Peregrine or Haggart Falcons, for this only cause, and only
in respect hereof and nothing else, then might we as well bestow that name also
upon all other Falcons, that are not bredde in Italy, as upon the Tunician and
other Hawks that are passengers. Wherefore I am of opinion, that for three
causes principally and in chief, they are called Haggart, or Peregrine Falcons.

1 First, because a man can not find, nor ever yet did any man Christian or
Heathen, find their eyrie in any Region, so as it may well be thought, that
for that occasion they have achieved and gotten that name and term of
Peregrine or Haggart Falcons, as if a man, would call them Pilgrims or
Forayners.

2 The second cause is, because these Falcons do rangle and wander more than
any other sort of Falcons are wont to do, seeking out more strange and
uncouth countries, which in deed may give them that title of Haggart and
Peregrine Hawks, for their excellency, because they do seek so many strange
and forayne coasts, and do rangle so far abroad.

3 The third and last cause, I do think, may be their beauty and
excellency, because this word ( Peregrino) or Peregrine, does many times
importe an honorable and choice matter, had in great regard: but it skilleth
not much which of these three alleged is the true cause, we will not stand
upon the nyce point, for that a good Falconer, ought much more to regard the
searchyng out of the true nature and property of Hawks, than to have so great
and special respect unto their names and terms.

Wherefore I conclude, that these Haggart Falcons are not of Italy, but
transported and brought thither from forayne places, as namely from Alexandria,
Cyprus and Candie. And yet this is for certain, that in Italy there are taken
of these Haggart Falcons, as in the dominion of the renowned Duke of Ferrara,
and in the country near Rauenna, being brought thither by force of weather
and wind. And by that means there are none of those Haggarts found eyesses,
but they are all either soar Hawks, or mewed Haggarts.

Of shape and proportion they are like the other Falcons, and are of three
sorts, as touching their making, and moulde, that is to say, large, little, or
Falcons of a middle sise. Some of them are long shapte, some short trussed
Falcons, some larger, some less.

They are ordinarily of four mayles, either blancke, russet, brown, or turtle
maylde, and some pure white maylde, without any jot or spotte of any other
color, but those a man shall ver seldom see. And for that cause I mean not
to say much of that kind of mayled Falcons, but will deal with such as are
more ordinary in use.

Of the good shape of a Haggarte Falcon.
depiction of haggart falcon

A Good and right Haggart Falcon ought to have her head of a darcke or blancke
plume, flat on the top, with a white wreath or garlande enuironing her
head, a large blew bending beak, wide nares, a great, full, black eye, hie,
stately neck, large breast, broad shouldred, a great feather, in color like
the feather of a Turtle, log vanes and sails, but sle^der shapte, long train,
hie thighs, and white on the inside, I mean her pendant feathers, short, and
great armed, large wide foot, with slender stretchers and talons, and the same
to be either pale white maylde, or pale blewysh, tending somewhat to azure.
These are generally, the most assured tokens of an excellent Haggart Falcon.

How to know a Haggart by her fleing.
A Good skillful Falconer, will quickly discern a good Haggarte Falcon, from a
slight Falcon, though he be far of, by the stirring of her wings. For that a
Haggart Falcon uses not a thick stroke, but stirs her wing by leisure and
seldom, and gets up to her mountee, without any great making out. And
although perhaps she be not so large as the slight or sore Falcon, yet to
seeming and show she is more large, which happens by mean of her sails,
which in very deed are of greater scope and compass than the slight Falcons
are. Contrariwise, the slight Falcon she uses a more short and quicker stroke
with her wing, than the Haggart does, and does not deal so leasurely. There
are besides this one difference, sundry other, betwixt these two kinds of
Falcons, which in this place, I will deliver you, for that you shall the better
judge the odds betwixt them, being both very good Falcons, and the best of all
other, both for field and river.

The difference and odds betwixt the Haggart, and the Falcon Gentle.
FOr that diverse have delight to know the difference betwixt the Falcon Gentle
and the Haggart, I will here show you certain special points concerning the
difference of them both. First the Haggarte is a larger hawke than the Falcon
gentle, and a longer armed Hawke, with a reasonable large foot, and her talons
more long than the Falcon gentles are, a high neck and a long, a fair
seasoned head, and a more long beak than the other has.

1 The beam feathers of the Haggart, as she is in her flight, are longer than
the Falcon gentles, her train somewhat larger, the Haggart has a flat
thighe, but the Falcon gentle a round thighe.

2 The Haggart will lie longer on her wings than the Falcon gentle, and has a
more deliberate and leasurely stroke than the other Falcon has, as I said
before.

3 From the fiste, it is reported by some, that the Falcon gentle does fly
more speedely than the Haggarte, but at a long flight the Haggarte is far the
better of both, and does excel all other kind of Hawks both for good wing,
and maynteynance of her flighte. Which is a perfect proof of a very good back.

4 The Falcon gentle is more hasty and whote in all her doings than the
Haggarte, and is thought more rash and outrageous of nature than the Haggart
is. And when they flee together, the Falcon gentle will make her stowping and
downecome more unadvisedly, and will use the greater haste to be at her pitche
again than the other, and missing the foul at the stowping, the Falcon gentle
is in the greater chafe, and will presently flee on head at the check, so as
many times she is hard to come by again. Whereas the Haggarte is more
deliberate and better advised, which proceeds in my opinion, for that she
better knows the advantage of her flight, than the Falcon gentle, because she
has been forced often to pray for her self, and has not been subject to the
order of any keeper, neither has had any hand kept upon her, to make her eger
and greedy of the pray, more than naturally she is accustomed to flee at her
seasons, to gorge her self, which she does both advisedly and to great
advantage.

5 The Haggarte Falcon is taken in Candie, Rhodes, and many other places, of
that Sea which is called Archipelagus, or the Iegean Sea.

6 The best sort of those Haggart Falcons, have their beakes of the color of
Azure.

7 Those of Cyprus which are small Hawks and of a russet mayle, they are the
most hardy and ventrous Hawks of all others.

Much more might be said, as touching the Haggarte and Falcon gentle, but, for
that the Hawks are daily in hand and vewe, and because I have a larger field
to ear, which is, to lay you down the mannyng of them, and such things as
are more necessary to a good Falconer. I leave it, and will proceed to the
next kind of Falcon, which is the Tartaret or Barbary Falcon. As touching
whose name and nature I mean to deliver you, what I have gathered as well out
of the French copy, as also borrowed from the Italian, whom I do much reverence
as well for his language, as for his rare and deep devise in all things
wherein he does deal. ()

Of the Barbary Falcon.
depiction of Barbary falcon

THe Barbary or Tartaret Falcon, is a hawke not very common in any country,
and she is called a passenger or passebie, even as the Haggart Falcon is.

They are not full so large as the Haggart Falcon, though some me^ do write
otherwise of them, they are red plumed under the wing, strong armed with long
talons and stretchers. They are very ventrous upon all kinds of fowls, and
will fly at any game that the Haggart does. With this Tartarot, or Barbary
Falcon, and the Haggart also, you may flee all May and June, for they are
Hawks, that are very slack in mewyng at the first, but when they once
begin, they mew and shed their feathers very fast.

For what cause this Falcon is called a Barbary or Tartaret Falcon.
THese kind of Falcons are called Barberie Falcons, for that most commonly
they make their passage through Barbary and Tunyse, where they are taken more
often than in any other place: As namely in the Isles of Leuant, Candie, Cypres
and Rhodes, where these Hawks do more frequent, and use than in any other
Region, and the Country men will sooner take them, by endeavor if they may,
than any Hawks that are eyreed in their country. And truly I do not think,
that in any other place there are so many good Craneslayers, as there are to be
had in the I Will of Candie. The reason of it is, for that the Nobility and
states of the country, are much more inclined to keep those kind of Hawks
that will kill the Crane, than any other people are elsewhere, and they do
enure and make their Falcons to that kind of game, more than to any other
foul. And surely you shall there have excellent good hawks.

Thus much it has pleased mine Author to write, of and in commendacio^ of the
Barbary Falcon: but here with us in England, I never saw or heard of the
proof of those Hawks, to be so good or excellent, as by his report I find
them. Sundry other kinds of Falcons prove better with us here, as namely the
Falcon gentle, the Haggarte, and such like, which either are passengers, or
brought to us from other countries. The Barbary Hawke is much less than
either the Falcon Gentle, or the Haggart, and therefore I will only follow
mine Author as touching his praise, and so proceed to the next kind of
Falcons, delyuering you both the opinion of the Italian and French Gentlemen
therein.

Of the Gerfalcon.
depiction of gyrfalcon

THe Gerfalcon is a bird of great force, a very fair hawke, specially being
mewed, she is strong armed, she has large stretchers and singles, she is
fierce and hardy of nature, by mean whereof she is the more difficult and
hard to be reclaymed. A Gerfalcon will look to have a gentle hand kept on
her, and her keeper to be courteous and full of patience. The Gerfalcon is a
gallant hawke to behold, more huge than any other kind of Falcon, her eyes
and her head are like the Haggart Falcon. She has a great bending beak, large
nares, a mayle like unto a Laner, very long sails, and sharp poynted, a
train much like the Laner, a large foot, marble feared, blanke, russet, and
brown plumed as other Falcons be, more beautiful to the eye than any other
kind of Falcon.

These kind of hawks are made to flee from the fiste to the Heron, Crane,
Goose, Bustarde, and such other like fowls. When they are mewed, they do
very much resemble the Laner, they do not change the marble sear of the
foot. Their Tiercels (whom we call Ierkyns) are had in great price, they are
brought from Leuant, Cypres, Candy, and Alexandria by Merchantes.

The Gerfalcons by report, do most commonly eyree in the parts of Prussia,
and upon the borders of Russia, and some of them come from the confines and
mountains of Norway. But most commonly they are taken about Almayne Passebyes
(as we term them) or passengers.

With the Gerfalcon you may naturally flee all kinds of fowls, as I have
already written of the Haggart, and the Barbary Falcon.

Let it not discourage or amaze you, that the Gerfalcon is so hard to be
reclaymed and manned, for the fierceness and hardiness of their nature is the
only cause thereof, but in the end being once won, they prove excellent
good hawks.

They will sit very vpryght and stately on the fiste. Their beakes are
blewe, and so are the seares of their legs and feet, their pounces and
talons are very long, and in troth, they will lightly refuse to flee at
nothing.

At my being in Moscouia, I saw sundry Gerfalcons, very fair and huge
hawks, and of all other kinds of hawks, that only bird is there had in
account and regard, and is of greater price than any other. The reason
whereof I learned of certain English Merchauntes my country men, who told
me, that the Emperors Majesty Iuan Vazilniche, did use to flee the Raven with
a cast of Gerfalcons, and took no slender pleasure and delight therein.

The Raven truly is a monstrous strong flight, by mean she is of so great
force and wight of wing, and withal does use to make so many turns in the
air, as you shall see no other foul do the like. Yet nevertheless, as they
told me, they had seen a cast of Gerfalcons beat her in such wise, as she
has been forced to take the stand, and to pearche in a Pyne or Fyrre tree for
her succor and safety. But that shifte little preuayles, for no sooner is she
pearched, but presently by commandment of the Emperor, each Muscouite
drawing his hatchet from his back (without which took they never travel in
that country) bestows his force to the felling the tree, which is lightly
done by mean of many hands, and the tenderness of the timber, the hawks
all that while lying upon their wings looking for their game: who finding the
tree to fail her, at the fall is driven to trust her wings again, and so by
a fresh flight and new encounter, does yield exceeding pleasure to his
Majesty and such as are in the field, and in fine, is slain by her mighty
adversaries the Gerfalcons, who most greedily do seize upon her, as their
kind has taught them to do. I imagine the flight to be very strong, and
truly the pastime and pleasure can not be small, but a game fit for such a
mighty Prince as his Majesty is. Thus much of the Gerfalcon.

Of the Sacre.
THere be three kinds of Sacres, the first is called Sephe, after the
Babylonians and Assyrians, that kind of Sacre is found in Egypt, and in the
weast parts, and in Babylon. She will slay the Hare and such like.

The second kind is called Semy, she kylles the Choughe, as her proper game
wherein she taken the greatest pleasure.

The third is called Hynair or the Peleryn Sacre, after the Egyptians and
Assyrians.

She is called a Peleryn or Haggart, for that her eyree is not known, and
because yearly she makes her passage toward Judea, or Media, she is taken
in the Isles of Leuant, Cypres, Candye, and Rhodes. And therefore some think
she comes out of Russia, and Tartaria, and also from the great Sea. That
Sacre that is taken an entermewer, is the best hawke,

The Sacre is of all hawks the most laboursome, and best able to brook her
flight. She is also peacible and very tractable, and a hawke that can best
away with course and gross diet.

The pray of the Sacre are great fowls, the Heron, the Goose, the Crane,
Bytor, and withal the small beasts of the field and forest.

It is well to be seen, that the Sacre is a hawk somewhat larger than the
Haggart falcon, of a rustie and ragged plume like the Kyte, the sear of her
beak and foot like the Laner, her pou^ces but short, nevertheless, she is of
great force, and hardy to all kind of foul, as I have already reported of
the Haggart and Barbary Falcons, but not so ventrous and free to flee the
Crane, or such like game as the Haggart Falcon is.

This Sacre is a passenger, even as the haggart Falcon is. No man is able truly
to say, where she eireeth or discloseth, but at the Rhodes they say they come
from the parts of Russia, and Tartaria, and the Ocean Sea. These Sacres are
taken in great number in the Isles of Leuant, Candle, Cypres, and Rhodes, and
sundry other Islands of the Ocean sea. But I must needs confess to you, that
the Sacre is more disposed to the field a great deal than to the brook. As
to flee the wild Goose, the Byttor, the Feasant, the Partridge, and all such
like fowls. And is nothing so dainty of her diet, or to be kept, as the long
winged hawks are.

The Sacre is much like the Falcon Gentle for largeness, and the Haggart for
hardiness, and is a passenger as the Haggarte is.

She is a Hawke chiefly to flee the kite, and yet may be made and manned, to
flee the field, and slay other game of the field as the Falcon does.

The Noble men that take pleasure in the Sacre, to make a flight with her at
the kite, do use this order and device, to bring the kite down from her
mountee, for that in the heat of the day she does use to sore and flee of an
exceeding height in the clouds, to take the comfort of the cold and fresh
air, that is in the middle region: They tie a fox tail to the leg of a
Mallard or Ducke, whom they cause to be borne on the fiste of some one
Falconer, and do so let the ducke flee in the midst of a plain, whom as soon as the kite descries from her pitche, she presently bateth of her gate, and
makes her stoupyng to the ground, and there gazeth and wo^dreth at the
strangeness and the shape of this foul; then do they cast of the Sacre to
the kyte, who forthwith trusting to the goodness of her wing, gets up to
her pitche, as hie as possible she may, by making often turns and wrenches in
the air, where it is a very pleasant sport to behold the bickring that is
betwixt them in the air, specially if it be in a plain, where no trees or
groves are, to hinder the sight of the matter, and the day fair and not
windy, for then will the Kite and Sacre sore so hie, as they will flee clean
out of sight. But that serves not the Kytes purpose and turn, for the Sacre
nevertheless does conquer her in the encounter, beating her to the ground by
mean of the sundry stoupings and down comes that she makes upon her.

They flee with the Sacre at two sorts of Kytes, that is, to the Kite royal,
which is called by the French man, the ( Mylan Royal) and at one other kind
of Kyte, called the Black Kyte, (the Mylan Noyer) which is far the more
nimble bird of the two, and does more busily trouble the Hawk in her flight
than the other does, by mean she is the less of the two, and uses her wings
far better. Of al Hawks, this kind of Hawke has the longest train. We call
the Tyercell of the Sacre, the Sacret, which is the male bird, and the Sacre
the female, betwixt whom there is no odds more than in the quantity and
proportion. For commonly among birds of pray, the male is less than the
female. The Sacre is called in Latin Buteo, and the Sacret Subuter.

Of the Laner.
depiction of Lanner falcon

THe Laner is a hawke common in all countries, specially in France and other
places elsewhere, for voluntarily she makes her eyree, and builds in high
trees and Forestes, and commonly in Crows nestes or in the high rocks and
clyffes near the sea, according as the country is for the purpose.

The Haggart is somewhat less than the Falcon gentle, fair plumed when she is
an entermewer, but of shorter talons than any other kind of Falcon. And some
hold opinion that those Laners that have the largest and best seasoned heads,
and the sear of ye foot azure or bluish, be the eyesses or soar hawks,
they are the best and choysest Laners.

With this hawke may you fly the river, as well with the Laner as the Laneret,
for they are both good, and likewise may you use them to other kinds of
flightes, and specially to the field to kill the Partridge, the Feasant, the
Hare, the Choffe, the Dawe, and al such sort of lesser foul.

The Laner is not over dainty of her feeding, but can better brook gross and
course vittailes, than any Falcon else can do.

Mewed Laners and Sacres, are hardely known from the soar hawks, because
they do not change their plume. By these three signs you shall best know the
Laner.

They are more blanke hawks than any other, they have less beakes than the
rest, and are less armed and pounced than other Falcons be.

Out of the Italian Author.
THE Laners do commonly eyree in the Alps that divide Italy from Almayne:
some of them are reasonable hawks, some of a middle suit, and some less.
Their heads are white, and flat aloft, black, and large eyed, slender nares,
short beak and thick, and lesser than the Haggart Falcons, or the Falcon
gentle.

They are marble or russet maylde, the breast feathers white, full of russet
spots, the points and extremities of their feathers full of round white
drops. Their sails and train long, they are short legged, with a foot
somewhat less than the Falcons, marble seered: but being mewed, they change
the seere of the foot to a yelowe.

These Hawks will brook to flee long on their wings after their manner, and
when they epsy one that goes abroad with a Sparowhawke to the ^^elde, they
presently follow and cover the Spaniels, so as no sooner is the Sparowhawke cast
of to ye Partridge, but if she miss or come short of her game, the Laner
stoupeth with great nimblenesse of wing, and either kills the foul, or
otherwise enforces it to stoop and fall amid the flight to the ground.

You shall never lightly see a Laner lie upon the wings, after she has flien
to mark, but after one stoupyng she makes a point, and then does awayte for
the foul after the manner of a Gosehawke: for if she miss at the first
downecome, or kill not in the foot, she is by nature so slothful and dull, as
she will seek the advantage, to her greatest ease: and therefore does commonly
use upon the questing and call of the Spanels, to attend very diligently, and
so to pray at her pleasure.

They are highly esteemed in France, and (as they say) there made to the
river, and there do they use to flee with a cast or leashe of Laners to the
brook, and sometimes with the Laners and Lanerets together, and sometimes do
flee the field with the Laner: but in Italy they do not use this kind of
Hawke at all. With us in England this kind of Hawke is in price, but accounted
very slothful, and hard mettelde, so as unless you keep a very hard hand
upon her, she will do little good, clean contrary to the nature of a Falcon
gentle, who for one good usage will show a treble courtesy, and the better she
is rewarded the better will she flee: but use the Laner well, and she makes
slender account thereof, but becomes slothful, and unapt to flee either
field or river.

Of the Tunician Falcon.
depiction of Tunisian falcon

THe Tunician is a Falcon even much of the nature of a Laner, yet somewhat
less than the Laner, but very like her in plume and foot, always more
sluggish and heavy in her flight, and yet more creese than the Laner, and she
has a large round head.

The cause why she is called a Tunycian.
THis Falcon is termed a Tunycian, for that ordinarily and most usually she is
found to eyree in Barbary, even as I have reported to you, that the Laner
does in France and otherwhere. And because Tunyce is the head and chief City
in all Barbary, and the Prince and state there, commorant and most abiding,
holding the court there, and do most chiefly use to flee with these kind of
Falcons of all others, they are most chiefly termed Tunycians.

The Tunycian may also be called a Punycian Falcon, for that which we read of
the wars Punicke, against the Carthaginenses, being maintained against the
inhabitants of that place, where now is situated Tunyce.

The Tunycian is large, approaching near the nature of a Laner, and very like
in plume and mayle, and not unlike, for the sear of her foot, but somewhat
less, and of a long flight: her head is large and round.

They are excellent good for the river, and will lie well upon their wings,
and fly the field well, as I have said before of the Laner. They do
naturally take pleasure to strike and seize upon the Hare, and all other kind
of pray whatsoever.

This kind of Falcons is not so ordinary or common, in all parts and regions
as other hawks are, save only in Barbary and Tunyce.

Of the Merlyn.
depiction of merlin falcon

THere is a kind of Falcon that is called a Merlyn. These Merlyns are very
much like the Haggart falcon in plume, in sear of the foot, in beak and
talons. So as there seems to be no odds or difference at al betwixt them,
save only in the bigness, for she has like demeanure, like plume, and very
like conditions to the Falcon, and in her kind is of like courage, and
there-must be kept as choycely and as daintily as the Falcon.

Assuredly diverse of these Merlyns become passing good hawks and very
skillful, their property by nature is to kill Thrusshes, Larkes, and
Partridges. They flee with greater fierceness and more hotely than any other
hawke of pray. They are of greater pleasure, and full of courage, but a man
must make greater care, and take good heed to them, for they are such busy
and unruly things with their beaks, as diverse times they eat of their own
feet and talons very unnaturally, so as they dye of it. And this is the
reason and true cause, that sildome or never shall you see a mewed or
entermewed Merlyn. For that in the mewe they do spoil themselves, as I have
before declared.

My Italyan Author has these words, both of the shape and in commendation of
the Merlyn.

The Merlyn is (says he) of the shape of a Falcon, less than the Sparowhawke,
more nimble and wight of wing than any other hawke, she does kill all such game
and pray as the Sparowhawke does use to slay, specially small byrds, namely
Larks, Sparowes, and such like, all which she does pursue with exceeding
cruelty and courage.

She is reported to be a hawke of the fiste and not of the lure, albeit a man
may if he will, make her to the lure also. She is a very ventrous hawke and
hardy: by this we may conjecture it: For though she be little bigger than a
Piegon, yet notwithstanding, she will hazard her self to flee the Partridge,
the Quayle, and such other like fowls, more large than her self, and will
pursue them in so cruel manner, as sundry times she follows them, even to the
villages and towns, whether the silly birds do flee for aid and rescue, from
their natural foe the hawke.

The Merlin is the only hawke of al others in whom (as mine Author affirms)
there is no difference betwixt the male and female, but yet by experience we
find it otherwise, for the female is ye larger bird of the two, and more big
than ye other in sight.

Some are of opinion, that Lydos, Hierax, in greek, and Leuis accipiter in
Latin, is our Merlyn of whom we speak, and that those birds of pray whom
Aristotle terms ( Leaves) to our judgment should be the Merlyns, because they
are the less hawks of all others that are to be found.

Of the Hobbye.
depiction of hobby falcon

OF all birds of pray that belong to the Falconers use, I know none less
than the Hobbye unless it be the Merlyn.

The Hobbye is a hawke of the lure, and not of the fist: also she is of the
number of those hawks that are hye fleeing and tower hawks, as the Falcon,
the Laner, and the Sacre be. If a man be disposed to describe the Hobbye, he
can not do better, nor deal more artificially, than to match her for shape
with the Sacre. For in good faith there is but small difference or inequality
betwixt them, save that the Sacre is far the huger bird.

The property of the Hobbie in all countries and regions, where they are
eyreed, or otherwise brought is to soar and flee upon the hountesmen and
Falconers, and so to follow them very watchfully, to the end that when they
spring or put up any small birds, she may sloupe from her wings, and seize on
them as on her pray. And this is so ordinary a hawke, and the practice that I
speak of so general, as there is not the simplest bower or peasant but does
know it. I can make no fitter nor more apt comparison, than to resemble the
frye and small fish of the sea, being had in chase by the huger sort of fish
desirous to devour them: to the small fowls and birds of the air, pursued by
the Hobbye.

For as soon as the silly fish that is chased by the Delphin and such like, do
perceive their safety to be nothing in the Element of water, where, by God and
nature they are allotted to live, eftsone have they their recourse to the air
to save them selves, chosing rather to lie at the mercy of the ravening sea
fowls, soaring upon the water, than to yield them selves in pray to their
natural adversaries the fish. Even so the Hobbies perceiving the huntesmen or
Falconers in the field so hunt the poor Leueret, or flee ye Partridge, do
forthwith accompany them, soring upon them, in hope to encounter some one small
bird or other, whom ye hounds or spanels shall by fortune put up, and spring by
ranging ye field. Then the Larkes and such like small fowls, whose nature is
not to branch or take the tree, but altogether to live upon ye ground, finding
themselves pursued by the hounds and spanels, to begile the^, are enforst to
trust to their wings, and to take the air, and being there, finding themselves
molested by ye Falconers and Hobbies, do make their choice and election to
become a pray rather to the dogs, or seek mercy among the horse legs, and so
to be surprised alive, than to affie in the courtesy of the cruel Hobbies, and
to be taken in their cruel talons, where they are most assured to dye the
death.

The Hobby is so nimble and wight of wing, that she dares encounter the Crow,
and to give souse for souse, and blow for blow with him in the air.

This is a natural and special trick that she does use, espying the
Falconers in the field she does follow them, and attend on them, but it is
but for a certain space, as though in very deed she had her lymites and
bounds prescribed her, and appointed how far she should flee. For as soon as she leaves them, she presently scoureth along the side of some grove or
high wood, where she does ordinarily use to perch and take the stand.

The Hobbye has a blew beak, but the sear of her beak and legs is
yellowe. The crynet or little black feathers under her eyes be very black,
so as most commonly they continue and proceed from the beak to the temples
or ear burres, and in like manner, is there an other black streake that
descends to either side of her gorge. As touching the top of the head, it is
betwixt black and yellowe, but has two white seames upon the neck. The
plumes under the gorge and about the brows, are reddishe, without spot or
drop. The plumes under the belly (or as I may best term them) the breast
feathers, are broune for the most part, and yet poudered with white spots,
as Ermynes. All the back, the train and the wyngs are black aloft, she has
no great scales upon her legs, unless it be a few that begin behind the
three stretchers and pouncies, which are very large in respect of her short
legs. Her brayle feathers are engouted twixte red and black. The pendant
feathers (which are those behind the thigh) are of a rustie and smokie vernish
complexion. When a man sees her sore aloft in the air, he will judge her under
the wings, that her plumage and down, as well of her wings as betwixt her
legs, is russet and reddishe mayled.

There are two fowls, whereof the one is called ( Ian le blancke) which I take
to be the Harrohen or capped Kyte, and the other ( Blanch queue) the ring
tail, who do always flee with her for company, beating and sousing the
Larkes, and if happily they spy the Hobbye encountering the Lark, whom they
put and force so her wings, it is a pleasure to behold the game that is
betwixt this cast of bussardes and the hawke. For their desire and intent is to
bereave the sillye Hobbye her pray: but she being nimble and wight of wing,
encountreth with them, entercepting the Lark from them, manger their might and
sundry times they buckle so together, as you shall see them come tu^bling down
both yfeare, one fast griping and seized on the other.

Some would have that this Hobby of whom I write, should be that bird whom
Aristotle calls Hipotriorchis, and the Latins Subuteo: but I am not of that
mind, but that it should rather be the Sacret whom Aristotle does mean. But
let the learned reader judge the controversy, I am to lay down their natures
and properties, and not to decyde any matter of controversy which in deed
does belong to the curious Falconer, and not to him that does embrace more the
sport, than the diversity and odds of speech, which in every art a man
shall be assured to find. Let it suffice if I give the Reader to understand
the nature of every hawke now adays in use, and withal (according to my
promise and meaning) do let him know the mean to fly with them both the
fyelde and brook, as also to do him to wit, how to Mewe, Ympe, and cure
them being diseased. These are the special points, and such as deserve thanks
from me, and commendation from him. I will proceed in the description of the
nature of this hawke, according to the opinion of the Italian.

The Italians opinion of the Hobbye.
THe Hobbies are more large than the Merlyns, and for beak, eyes, plume, and
foot, they very much resemble the Falcon. They will lie upon their wings
reasonably well, following me^, and spanels, fleing upon them many turns, to the
end that when any Partridge or Quayle is sprung, they may the better stoop
from their wings, and so seize on the foul, which sundry times they do.

These kind of hawks are used of such as go with nets, and spanels. The
order of which game is this.

The dogs they range the field to spryng the foul, and the Hobbies they
accustom to flee alofte over the^, soring in the air, whom the sellie birds
espying at that advantage, and fearyng this conspiracy (as it were) betwixt
the dogs and Hawks, for their undoing and confusion, dare in no wise
commit themselves to their wings, but do lie as close and flat on the ground,
as they possible may do, and so are taken in the nets.

some Gentlemen have made report, and for truth assured me, that the
(Emperor Ferdinando) of famous memory, did give his Falconers in charge to
keep and reclayme sundry Hobbies. And his Majesty diverse times for
recreation, would take his horse, and into the fields, with a Hobbie on his
fiste, holding in his right hand a long sle^der pole, or reed seven foot in
length, on the top whereof there was conveyed by sleight, a strong line, with
a sliding knotte: And, when happily his Majesty had espied a larcke on the
ground, he would forthwith hold up, and advance his Hobbie, to the vewe of the
sellie bird, whom as soon as the larcke saw, she would in nowise dare to
spryng, but lie as still as a stone, flat upon the earth, so fearful they are
of the Hobbie in chief of al other Hawks: then would the Emperor at his good
leisure and great pleasure, with his long pole, and the sliding line, take the
sellie foul, and draw her up unto him, and truly took no small delight in
this kind of pastime, and would cause his Falconers to do likewise, who by
this devise took many birds, and in this sort would they Hawke from the
beginning of September, to the end of October.

This practice did somewhat resemble, and draw to the nature of our devise, in
daring of larckes, which we use at these days, but (in my judgment) nothing
so ready and fit as our pastime and ginne which we have, which is a very
good sport and full of delight, to see the fearful nature of the silly
Larcke, with the great awe and subjection that the Hobbie has her in, by the
law of kind: for assuredly there is no other Hawke, no not the hugest, whom
the larcke does so much fear as ye Hobbie which may manifestly appear by this
that I have written, as also by daily experience and practice in that behalf.

Of the Goshawke, after the opinion of William Tardiff a Frenchman.
depiction of goshawk

A general division of Goshawkes, whom the French men call Autour.
THere are (says he) five kinds of Autours or Goshawkes, speaking of the
Goshawke in the largest name and nature, comprysed in that word, Autour.

The first and most noble kind, is the female Goshawke, which is with us
most ordinarily in use.

The second is named a demi Autour, or Goshawke, as it were a kind betwixt two
other sorts, and that is a spare slender hawke and of little regard, in
respect of any good she will do.

The third is the Tyercle which is the male, or cock to the Goshawke, who
does slay the Partridge, and is not of sufficient force to kill the Crane. He
is termed a Tyerclet, for that there are most commonly disclosed three birds
in one self eyree, two Hawks, and one Tiercell.

The fourth kind of Autour is ye Sparowhawke, whose nature is to kill all kind
of pray that the Goshawke does, save only the larger sort of fowls.

The fifth kind is called ( Sabech) whom the Egiptians term ( Baydach) which
does very much resemble the Sparowhawke, but is less than the Sparowhawke, and
has a very blewe eye.

There are sundry sorts of Goshawkes, and those brought and conveyed out of
sundry forayne parts and regions, but among the^ all, that Goshawke that is
bred and eyreed in Armenia, and Persia, is the principal best hawke, and then
next to her in goodness, the hawke of Greece, and lastly that of Afrike.

The hawke of Armenia has her eyes green, but ye best of yt kind is she that
has black eyes, and black plumes on her back.

The hawke of Persia is large, well plumed, clear and deep eyed, with hangyng
and pendant eyleddes and brows.

The hawke of Greece has a great head, well seasoned, a strong neck, and is
reasonable well plumed.

the Goshawke of Afrike, has black eyes in her soarage, but being a mewed
hawke, her eyes become reddish and fiery.

At what times Hawks begin to fall to liking, which is at Cawking time, all
birds of pray do assemble themselves with the Goshawke, and do flock
together. As namely the Falcon, the Sacre, and such other that live on pray
and rauine.

And hereof it proceeds that the Goshawkes become so diverse in goodness,
force, and hardiness, according to the diversity of their choice, and cawkyng.

The best Goshawke ought to be weighty, and a heavy bird, as those of great
Armenia be.

In Syria they make choice of their Hawks, by the Massynes and poyse of them,
and do esteem ye most weighty Hawke for the best: as for the mayle and
conditions they do little regard or prize.

The blancke Goshawke is the largest, the fairest, and most apt and easy to
be reclaymed, and withal the strongest of all Hawks of that sort, for she
can kill the Crane. And by reason she is eyreed in a very hie and lofty place,
and ca^ best endure the cold, which is most frife in the middle region of the
air, therefore is she good to flee all fowls of that sort and condition.

The Goshawke that does incline and tend to a black maile, and that has
superfluous plumes on her head, reachyng down her front or forehead, like a
peruque, or borrowed hair, that is a very fair Hawke for beauty, but nothing
strong.

The good proportion and shape of a Goshawke.
SHe ought to have a small head, her face long and straight like the Vultur or
Eagle, a large wind pipe or throat, great eyes, deep set, and the apple or
middle part of the eye black, nares, ears, back and feet, large and
blancke, a black long beak, long neck, big breast, hard flesh, long
thighs, fleshie, and distant one from the other, the bone of the leg and
knee short, long and large pounces, and talons.

The shape from the stern or train, to the breast forward, ought to grow to a
roundenesse. The feathers of the thighs toward the train should be large,
and the train feathers, short, soft, and somewhat tending to an iron mayle.

The brayle feathers ought to be, like the breast feathers, and the covert
feathers of the train, should be spotted, and full of black rondels, but the
color of the very extremitrie and point of every train feather, ought to be
black streaked. Of mayle and color, the best is the red, somewhat tending to
black or plain grieseld.

The signs of a good Goshawke, are haughty courage, desire and greedy lust
to feed, often tyring and plucking of her meat, suddayne snatching of her
food upon the fiste, good enduing, and great force in assayling her game.

The sign of boldness in a Goshawke is this, tie her in an open light
place, and after a while darcken and obscure it, by shutting some window or
such like device, then touch her upon the suddayne at unawares, if she then
iumpe, and leppe to the fiste without fear or astonishment, that is an assured
sign of hardiness in a Goshawke.

The token of force in a Goshawke, is this, tie diverse Goshawkes in sundry
places of one self chamber or mewe, and that Hawke that does s^ise and mewte
hiest and farthest of from her, undoubtedly is the stro^gest Hawke, for that
one point declares and argues a good strong back in the Hawke.

A token of goodness and excellency in those demie Gosshawkes, whom my Author
does term ( petite Autours) is to have large and clear eyes, a small head,
long neck, low and close plume or down, hard flesh, a green seere of her
foot, large stretchers and not gowtie or fleshie, quick enduyng, large
panell, and able to slyse far from her when she mewteth. The point of the
beak to be black is a very good sign.

The ill shape of Goshawkes.
ALbeit there be a general rule, that ( contraria contrarijs dinoscuntur)
which is that one contrary is known sufficiently by the other, and therefore
having made you full show of the good shape of Goshawkes, the ill proportion
will easily thereby fall out and be descerned of it self without any farther
travail, yet nevertheless followyng mine Author, I think it not amiss to
decypher you the ill form of a Goshawke: which is, to have a great head, a
short neck, to be thick and gross plumed, soft fleshed, short thighed,
long armed, short talons, tawnie hewed, tending to black, and hard and rough
under the foot.

A Goshawke that when she is loose in the house, flees as though she were at
large and liberty, breakyng out of a mewe having great gross feathers, eyes
as red as blood, that is evermore batyng, and being set on the perch,
offreth to flee at the face of a man, such a Hawke if she be kept low in
flesh can not be borne on the fiste, if she be hie and full of flesh, she will
not then abide with her keeper, but rangle and gadde: wherefore of such Hawks
there is no account to be made at all.

A fearful Goshawke is hardly to be reclaymed and manned, for the fear she
has will always cause her to refuse the fiste and lure, and make her check,
and not willingly repair to any devise wherewith she is called and rappelde,
after her flight: which is a very great inconvenience in a Goshawke, and no
small hindrance to the sport of him that shall happen to have such a
fearful Hawke: for commonly unless they be first fond of the keeper, and
in love with the call, they will not flee their game to the likyng of their
owner, and the tediousness in coming by them again after the flight, does
breed forgetfulness of the pastime, how good and delectable soever it were
before.

That Goshawke, that has pendant plumes over her eyes, and (as they say in the
Country) whose feathers hang in her light, the white of whose eye is very
watrishe and blancke, that is read maylde, or bright tawnie, has the most
assured token that may be of ill conditions, and is not like to be well
coming. But if happily such a Hawke fall once to be good, she will then prove
a passing Hawke.

Sometimes (though very seldom) do we see a Goshawke of badde shape and in
condition clean contrary to those signs that ought to be looked for in a good
Goshauke, prove light, lusty, able to hold out and maintain her flight, and
such a one as will very well slay the greater sort of fowls.

The Goshawkes pray, is the Fezant, the Malard, the wild Goose, the Hare and
Conie: besides all which she will strike ventrouslie, and seize on a Kidde or
Goat, and keep him play so long, as the dogs at length shall come in to
assyste her and further the fall of it, which does manifestly decypher the
great inestimable courage, and valor of the Hawke.

Out of the French I have collected this concerning the Goshawke.
SOme men have thought, and been of this resolute mind, that the (Autour) or
Goshawke has been of the kind of a Vultur, for the affinity and nearenesse of
their terms and names: for (Autour) in the French, is that Hawke whom we call
the Goshawke, and (Vantour) is the Vultur, which two terms, as you see, draw
very near to one speech.

Some other have been of opinion that betwixt ye Goshawke and Sparowhawke, is
no odds or difference in nature, save only in respect of the hugeness of that
one, and the slenderness of the other: but my purpose is to treat of the
Goshawke severally from the Sparowhawke, and so to proceed to the Sparowhawke,
of whom I will write, according to the French and Italian Authors, in a
several chapter by it self, to avoid the confusion, which otherwise might
happen in that behalf.

The Goshawke is ever more regarded than her Tiercell, for the males, or cocks
among Hawks and birds of pray, do make evident proof and show to the eye,
of their difference from the femals and Hawks.

Again we may with ease discern the Goshawke from her Tyercell, for that she
is far larger, tha^ the Tiercell of her kind.

The Falconers and Ostregers, have to these two sorts, added a third kind (as
I said before) whom they term the Demygoshawke, as a bird indifferent,
betwixt the other two.

Both kinds of them are more hie, and longer armed than either the Falcon, or
Gerfalcon: they are Hawks of the fiste, and (as we call them) round winged
Hawks, quite contrary to those I wrote of before, all which are Hawks of
the lure, and long winged Hawks, otherwise called Tower Hawks.

The Hawke (I mean the female) is uery much like the Egle in mayle, and if we
may make bold to compare the less with ye larger, she has a more stately
high neck than the Egle, and of a more read or iron mayle, the grownde of her
plume and down tending to a red color.

Those Goshawkes that are of Slauonia, are good at all manner of game, large,
hardy, and fair plumed, their toungs black, and their nares great and wide.

There are Goshawkes, whom the Italians call, Alpisani, or hawks of the Alps,
which are much used in Lombardie, and Tuscane, they are more thick than they
are long, fierce and hardy.

But those Goshawkes that our Ostregers have now adays, are chiefly conveyed
out of Almayne, having their eyes and the fear of the beak as also of their
feet and legs, yellow, contrary to the Gerfalcon, whose fear is blew and
azure.

Their traynes are garnished with large drops or spots, crossing the
feather, party black, and party gray, as also the plumes of the neck and
head, are more toward a russet, and powdered with black, but those of the
thighe and under the belly or pannell, are otherwise marked, for they are not
full so yellowe, having round drops on them, not much unlike those that are
on the Peacockes train.

The Goshawkes of Almaine are not very fair though they be large Hawks,
read mayled, and yet not hardy.

There are sundry of them good in their soarage, but being once mewed prove
nothing worth: there be diverse of the^ taken in the forest of Arde, and in
sundry places of Almaine. The Greeks have called the Goshawke Hierax, the
Latins Accipiter stellaris, and the Italians, Astuy.

Thus much have I collected out of another French Author, as necessarily
belonging to the description of the nature of a Goshawke, because you shall see
the several opinions of sundry writers, and gather to your own use, what
shall occur and thwarte best with your liking, for it is not the mayle and
plume of the Hawke that I so greatly regard, or do mean to stand upon, as the
making, reclayming, diseases, and cures of the said Hawks, each one after
their proper nature and quality, if so my health will give me leave to run
mine authors through advisedly, according to my meaning and resolution, at what
time I first undertook this collection.

Out of the Italian concerning the Goshawkes and their kinds.
THere are sundie sorts of Goshawkes, according to the diversity of places
and regions. There be Hawks of Armenia, Slauonia, Sardinia, Calament, of the
Alps, which they use in Lombardie, Tuscan, Marca, and Puglia, some other of
Russia, Friuli, Almania, and othersome of Lombardie, all which I will briefly
touch unto you, and not long dwell in the matter, having out of my french
authors already deciphered the natures of the most part of them.

First of al there are Goshawkes, called Armenia Hawks, much differing from
the Goshawke, in sort as almost, they have no resemblance at all to the other
kinds of Goshawkes. They are very fair and huge, the mayle of them is blancke,
as sundry haggart Falcons be, they flee with great courage and life, all
greater sort of fowls.

There are others eyried in Slauonia and Dalmacia, and thence are they termed
Slauon Goshawkes, which indeed are good for any thing a man will employ them
unto. Very fair and hardy Hawks, large footed, very well penned, their down
and plumage excellent fine, their tungs black, and their nares large and wide.

Those of Sardinia are nothing like the other Hawks, they are brown, and
russet plumed, final Hawks, hard and not small footed, and nothing ventrous.

Those of Calament are short trussed Hawks, and large, blancke seared on the
foot, those flee the greater fowls exceeding well.

The Goshawkes of the Alps, and of Calabria, are in a manner more large than
they are long, very proud, and hardy Hawks.

The Goshawkes of Lombardie are not very large, brown mayld, and cowardly
kytes to do any good.

The Goshawke of Russia and Sarmatia, is a large and huge Hawke, the most part
of them are blancke Hawks, and taken up of great Princes and noble states,
they are apt and able to do any thing that may be looked for from Hawks of
that kind. My self have seen great store of them in the City of Mosqua,
which is the chief dukedom of all Russia. The Moscouits and Tartarians do
use to flee with those Goshawkes at the brook, and there do beat up the foul
with y^e drum, without which you shall seldom see a Boyaron (as they term
them) which is a Gentleman, ride at any time. And one special thing which I
noted among them was, that as well Moscouites, as Tartares, do use to bear
their Hawks on the right fiste, which is clean contrary to our manner and
guise here in England, or in any other Region that I have heard or seen, save
only in those North parts, no reason I can yield for it, but that, each
country for the most part has his fashion.

Those of Friuli, are good Hawks, and large, but not so fair as the Slauon
Hawks.

Note this, that a good Goshawke ought to be littell, and broad shouldred,
large brested, very round and fleshly, having a long thigh, a short leg or
arm, and the same great, and a large foot, and not gowty but slender.
Contrariwise the Tiercell should be large, for it is a common saying.

A little Hawke, and a large Tiercell, is ever best.

All Goshawkes are by nature greedye, and catching of whom some we use to flee
the river, and fresh brooks, and some the Sea, and othersome again the field,
and never or very seldom the river or brook.

The first sort for the most part do pray upon Duckes, Geese, Hearons,
Shouelers, and such like foul, as do usually haunt, and live in the Sea and
rivers. And those diverse times do seize and take their pray upon the suddayne
at unawares, by fleeing low near the ground, and stealing upon the foul.

The other, after a while that they have used to flee the field, do pray on
Pigeons, Pullets, Hens, and Partridges. And being once mewed hawks, and past
their soarage, they will take the stand upon some tree, and finding either
Patridge, Fezant, Pullet, Hen, or such other like foul, they make their
stowping so fiercely and in such great have, and do flee them so far before
head and at randon, mayntayning, and making good their flight, as in the end
they kill them, and do pray upon them.

Of the Goshawkes, those that be ventrous, and hardy, will kill the Hare, and
having kilde him, diverse times, they swallow in for have great bones, and do
put them over very well, and endue them safely without any hurt at all.

Those that are the river Goshawkes, and do haunte the water, and brooks, are
commonly the most hardy and ventrous Hawks of all that kind, and do at the
river of their own inclination and nature fall to kill the great fowls of
the River, of which I have before made recital and mention.

Truly the Goshawke is very much to be regarded for her hardy metal and
courage, for that therein she is not inferior to any kind of Hawke, but
rather more fearce and eger. And again to be kept with greater care, for that
she is more choice and daynty, and does look to have a more nice hard kept
on her, than any other kind of Falcon or Hawke, unless it be y^e Sparowhawke,
which is all one in a manner in nature with the Goshawke, and of whom I purpose
now to write.

Of the Sparovvhawke out of the french Authors.
depiction of sparrowhawk

I Will now write somewhat of the Sparhawke, for that she is in her kind, and
for that game that her strength will give her leave to kill, a very good Hawke,
and much used in France, And besides, he that knows well how to man,
reclayme, and flee with the Sparhawke, may easily know how to keep, and deal
with all other Hawks. Moreover it is a Hawke, that serves both winter and
somer, with great pleasure, and the game that she flees is ordinary, and
common to be had, and she will generally flee at all kind of game, more than
ye Falcon, or than any other kind of Hawke will. And the winter Sparhawke, if
she prove good, will kill the Pie, the Iaye, the chough, the Woodcocke, the
Thrush, the black Bird, the Veylfare, and sundry other sorts of birds.

The diversity of Sparhawkes according to their times and ages.
1 THe Eyasse hawke, is she that is taken in the eyree.

2 The brancher, is she that follows the old Hawke, from branch to branch,
and tree to tree, which is also termed a ramage Hawke.

3 The Sore Hawke, is she that has flien, and prayed for her, and is taken
before she mewe.

4 The fourth kind, is that Hawke, that is mewed, and has cast her soar
feathers.

The good shape and proportion of a Sparhawke.
SParhawkes are of diverse ploumes, some are small plumed, and blanke Hawks,
othersome of a larger feather, which are not so good in our opinion as for
their shape. The Hawke that is well shapt is large and short, with a slender
head, large, and broad shouldred, big armed, large and wide footed, and
black maylde, with a good great beak, her eyes somewhat hollow, and deep
set, blanke eye liddes, the sear of her beak twixt green and white, a hie
big neck, long wings, reaching quite athwart the body of the Hawke, so as
the point of the wing meet with the top of the train very near, and that
her train be not ouerlong, but of a reasonable broad feather, sharp pownces,
small and black, and evermore well disposed to feed hungerly and with great
appetite.

The Nyasse Hawke is good, and will come to the fist very well, and not lightly
soar away, or be lost.

The Sore Hawke is hard to be manned, but will prone good, if she will once
brook company, this Hawke, for that she has prayed for her self, is very
ventrous and hardy.

The best Sparowhawke, is that Hawke whom we call the brauncher.

What kinds of Sparowhawkes there are.
THere are Sparowhawkes, whom the Italians call ( diventimiglia) which are
large and long Hawks, with a great beak, large foot, and with thirteen
feathers in the train. Those Hawks are excellent to flee any kind of game.

There are other called Slauon Hawks, good for all purposes, and full of
hardiness, long and large Hawks, having a great long beak, and black breast
feathers.

There are others of Calabria not very large, but of great courage, plumed
like the Quayle, that will do according as they are taught and manned.

There be sparowhawkes eyreed in Corsica and brought from Sardinia, small
Hawks, brown or canuas maylde, that will flee very well.

Those of Almania are very slender, and nothing good.

The Hawks of Verona and Vicentia, are of mean size, and many of them do
prove to be good Hawks.

There be Sparohawkes called Alpisani, of the Alps, that are large, wight of
wing, and ventrous to flee any kind of foul.

There are others eyreed in ye bale of Sabbia, of a reasonable lise, russet
maylde, entermedled with golden spots, or drops, like the turtle, those be
very good to flee great fowls.

There is one other kind of Sparowhawkes, eyreed in Bergamasca, in a vallie
called the Black vale, near the confines of Voltolina, slender Hawks, brown
mayld, good to be manned and reclaymed, and those are the principallest of all
other Sparowhawkes.

I do not here in this place deal exactly of the mayles, and plumes of these
kind of hawks, in part for that the hawks are of sundry and several
plumes, according to the diversity of countries and regions, where they are
eyreed: and part, for that the hawks themselves are so ordinary in use, as it
were to be esteemed but a superfluous labor, to waste much time therein, in
penning of that, which is (in the opinion of men) of no great importance. My
chief care and industry (if health allow me leave, and sickness too much
offend not my ease) shall consist in the reclayming and ma^ning of all these
kinds of hawks, according to their natures and properties, and in displaying
the means to flee with them, and to keep them, both for the field and
brook. And after that, in declaration of their diseases, ordinarily incidente
unto their kinds, and the best remedies for the same, which (I doubt not)
are the only and chiefest points that the discrete and learned reader will
accept from me, and such as will most stand him in stead that does mean
to deal with hawks. Wherefore I thus make the Epiloge and conclusion of the
first part of my treatise and collection, wherein are contained all the kinds,
names, and the causes of those names, of all such Hawks and birds of pray as
are most in use, and regarded among noble men and gentlemen at these days,
craving the Reader to bestow no less good liking upon the translation and
collection hereof (if it in any part deserve it) than I have employed
travail and pains in the true search and examination of the same, both out of
the French and Italian Authors, where I must confess, I have not translated
Verbatim, and by word of line what I found (for then had I not dealt so
exactly as I now have done, for that I found sundry things not so well
agreeing to our humors and use,) but have taken my pleasure of them, in making
choice of the chiefest matter, which did occur in them, hoping, that the
more my pains have bin the less shall be mine offense, and the greater the
liking of the Reader, and the better his acceptaunce: which if I find, both I
for my travail, shall think my self sufficiently guerdoned, and the careful
Printer deem both his cost and charge well employed, being meante, to the
benefyte and pleasure of his native countrymen, whose avail he chiefly
respects herein, and not any great advantage that shall privately fall out
to him.

Of the Matagasse.
THough the Matagasse be a Hawke of none account, or price, neither with us in
any use, yet nevertheless, for that in my division I made recital of her
name, according to the French Author, from whence, I collected sundry of those
points and documents, appertayning to Falconrie: I think it not beside my
purpose, briefly to describe here unto you, though I must needs confess,
that where the Hawke is to so slender value, the definition, or rather
description of her nature and name must be thought of no great regard.

The shape of her is this.

She is beaked and headded like the Falcon, her plume is of two colors, her
breast white, her eye, beak, and foot black, a long black train, her
flagges and long feathers partly black, and white, and the color of those
feathers she changes not, though she mewe never so often.

Her feeding is upon Rattes, Squirrells, and Lisards, and sometimes upon
certain birds she does use to pray, whom she does intrappe and deceive by
flight, for this is her devise.

She will stand at pearche upon some tree or post, and there make an exceeding
lamentable cry, and exclamation, such as birds are wont to do, being
wronged, or in hazard of mischief, and all to make other fowls believe and
think that she is very much distressed, and stands needful of aid,
whereupon the credulous sellie birds do flock together presently at her call
and voice, at what time if any happen to approach near her, she out of hand
seazeth on them, and deuoureth them, (ungrateful subtle foul) in requital
of their simplicity and pains.

These hawks are in no account with us, but poor simple fellows and
peasantes sometimes do make them to the fiste, and being reclaymed after their
unskillful manner, do bear them hooded, as Falconers do their other kinds of
hawks whom they make to greater purposes.

Here I end of this foul, because I neither account her worth the name of
a hawke, in whom there rests no valor or hardiness, ne yet deserving to
have any more written of her property and nature, more than that she was in
mine Author specified, as a member of my division, and there reputed in the
number of long winged hawks. For truly it is not the property of any other
hawke, by such devise and cowardly wile to come by their pray, but they love
to win it by main force of wings at randon, as the round wynged hawks do,
or by free stowping as the hawks of the Tower do most commonly use, as the
Falcon, Gerfalcon, Sacre, Merlyn, and such like, which do lie upon their
wing, roding in the air, and ruff the foul, or kill it at the encounter.

I cannot say, that at any time I have seen this kind of hawke, neither in
any book read of her nature and disposition, as I have here made mention of
it, save only in my authur, who writing of Falconrie, was so bold as to
rank her among other hawks, of greater account and valewe, and in Gesner,
where he treats of all kind of birds and fowls, where, I remember well, I
have read of the name and nature of the Matagasse, and there have seen her
proportion and shape set down in colors, such as I have before declared
you in this chapter. and, in my judgment, no odds or difference to be
found, betwixt Gesnerus description, and mine authors, in that behalf. ()

The Second part or book, of this collection of Falconrie.
Certain special points, necessary for a Falconer, or Ostreger, collected
out of the Italian Author.
depiction of man with falcon

Having made you sufficient show in the former part of this book, and
collectio^, of all kinds of hawks serving to Falconrie, it shall not be amiss
to deliver you some special and necessary rules, due to a good Falconer.

First, it is behooueful for a Falconer to be very diligent and inquisitiue
to learn and mark the qualitye and mettell of his hawks, and to know which
hawke he shall flee withal early, and with which late, because all hawks are
not disposed or mettelde alike. Wherefore, the first and special observation
is, to note the natural inclination and disposition of his hawks in that
behalf.

Then next is it necessary for him to be fond over his hawke, patte^t, and
withal careful to keep her clean out of lise, mytes, and all such other
diseases, as I shall hereafter treat of in the latter part of this
collection, with such remedies, as I shall lay down for every grief. And of
the two, he must rather keep his hawke hye, and full of flesh, than poor
and low. Besides that, this is one general rule, which by experience you
shall find to be most true, that all kinds of hawks are more subject to
infirmities, being poor and low, than when they are lusty and full in flesh.

Every night, after he has fleen with his hawke the day, either at the
field, or brook, he must give his hawke casting, somewhyles plumage, some
other while pellets of Cotton, or such like, and again, sometimes some one
medicine or other, according as by her casting, or mewte, he shall perceive her
to stand needful thereof, which point I will more at large describe, in
another place proper and peculiar to that matter.

Every night, he must not forgette to make the place very clean under the
pearche, so as he may both find the casting of his hawke, and be certainly
assured whither she has already cast or not, whereby he may the better judge
and discern her state. For by the casting is found, whither the hawke do
need either upward, or downward scowrings, or stones, or any such like
remedy.

He must remember every evening to tie out his hawke a weathering, save only
in such days, as she has bathed before, for because then the taking
ouermuche moisture, will breed her a thousand evils and inconveniences. For
such euenings as she has bathed the day, she ought of right to be placed in
some warm chamber on a pearche, with a candle burning by her, where she must
sit vnhooded, if so she be gentle, and not rammage, to the end she may trick
her self, and rejoice by enoyling her after the water, before she flee again.

Every morning early he must not forgette to set her out to wether her, where
if she have not already cast, she may cast, and there keep her hooded,
till such time as she go to the field.

In feeding his hawke, he must beware of giving her two sorts of meat at
one time, to gorge her withal, neither must he give her such flesh, as has
any evil savor, and is not sweet, but must respect to allow her wholesome
meats, for breeding ill diseases. For Hawks are dayntie birds, in their
kind, and the more to be considered of, when they are in hand, under a
Falconers keeping and usage, because they were wont to pray for themselves at
liberty, and therein follow such law and order, as nature had prescribed
them, but being restrained, the course of kind is quite altered in them, and
therefore the greater art and regard to be used for them. Art must supply the
restraintes of kind, by cunning.

He must beware, if happily he have occasion of necessary business, at his
departure from home, not to leave his hawke tied on a pearche of any great
heyght from the ground, for fear of bating and hanging by the heels, for
then either will she cast her gorge, or otherwise spoil her self: but she
must be placed on a low block, or stone, and if there be mo hawks than one,
they must be sundred so far one from the other, as they may not approach or
reach one the other, neither with beak, talons, or otherwise, because their
nature is to byte, and buckle together, if they come within reach.

When he addresseth him to make his flighte with his Falcon, it is behoouefull
for him to have all her fellow Falconers, or such as have hawks in the field,
to set down their hawks on the ground, to be in the more readiness to
assiste him in his purpose, and to tie them sure, for fear of ill accidents
that may befall them.

And again, at the river, he must skillful to land his foul so placing the
residue of his company, and their hawks, as they may flee eke without any
encounter, which is not only the loss of the foul, and hinderance to their
sport, but also the ruin and spoil of their hawks on both parts. He must
be careful that his hawke keep her gate, and flee it good, so as in no wise
he pluck her not down, nor make her bate of her pitche.

He must always be assured to have mummy in powder in his bag in a
readiness, whatsoever should happen, with such other medicines as I shall
hereafter treat of, for that it may so fall out, as his hawke may receive a
broose at the encounter of a foul. Moreover he must not be unfurnished of
Aloes washed, Cloves, Nutmugges, Saffron, casting, cryance, and such like
necessary implementes. And he must remember that his Aloes be shining and
clear, for then is it of the best sort of Aloes.

Lastely he must be able to make his lures, hooddes, of all sorts, Iesses,
bucts, and other needful furniture for his hawke, and must not be without
store thereof to allow his betters and states in the field, if happily they
want any such devises. He cannot well be without his coping yrons, to cope his
hawks beak if it be ouergrowen, which will be a hinderance to her feeding,
and to cope her pownces and talons, if need be. He must have his cauterizing
buttons, and other iron or silver tools, to cauterize or burn his hawks if
cause require such cure. For having all these necessaries, and doing as I have
and will tell you, all his game shall succeed and sort well, and he be assured
for ye most part of good pastime in ye field, when other ignorant gromes shall
both lack sport, and loose their hawks, the greatest corsie yt may happen to
a gentleman yt loves ye game.

Let these few aduertisementes and instructions suffice in this place, if
other wynts necessary not recited here, be remembered at the full in any other
part of this book, I crave but thanks for my pains, and courtesy at the
Falconers hands, for whose learning and pleasure I partly and chiefly wrote
this collection.

The first instruction is, how to make a Falcon and other hawks fleeing, after
the opinion of Ian de Franchiers.
FIrst, let your hawke be taken on the fiste, and hoodded, then let her be
watched three days and nights, before you vnhoode her, and feed her always
hooded in an easy rufter hoode. At the end of three days you may vnhoode
her, and feed her vnhooded, and when she is fed, hoode her again, so that
she be not vnhooded (but when you feed her) until she know her meat: then
when she begins to be acquainted with you, hoode her and vnhood her
oftentimes, to the end she may the better abide the hoode. But use her gently,
and be pacient with her at the first, and to the end your hawke may be the
better manned, and the sooner reclaimed, you shall do well to bear her commonly
in places where most people do frequent, and where most exercises are used. And
when she is well manned, make her come a little to the fiste for her meat. And
when you have showed her the perch or stock, and tied her upon it, put with
her upon the said pearche or stock some Pullet, or other quick foul as
often as you may, and let her feed thereon at pleasure until she be
reasonably gorged, and do in like manner upon the lewer until she know it
perfectly. Afterward you may give her more liberty, and lewer her with a
cryance, lewring her twice a day further and further of. And when she is
thoroughly lewred, you shall teach her to flee upon you, until she know both
how to get to her gate, and to flee rownde upon you. Then shall you cast her
out some quick foul, and when she has stowped and seized upon it, you
shall suffer her to plume it and to foot it at her pleasure, giving her a
reasonable gorge thereon, as is before said, and continewing always to reward
her upon the said lewer, in such sort, that she never find the lewer without
some reward tied upon it, and by that means she will always love the lewer
and her keeper well, and will not lightly rangle or be lost. Thus you may
continue her forty days, or thereaboutes, and then you may flee with her safe
enough. But before you so do, let her be skowred and bathed, and fed with
clean meat, and well washed, gyuing her casting every night, even as men use
to give fleing hawks.

The manner of fleyng with hawks, as well to the field as to the River, and
first to the River, according as Martine teaches.
YOu must understand that the river hawke ought to be let into the wind, and
above her pray to get the vauntage of her gate, and to be at her pitche:
then shall you make in toward the pray. And when they are got up to their
full pitche, run upon the foul, and land them, laying them out from of the
water, and if you fail in doing thereof, then you should take down your hawke
with some pullete, Pigeon. or other quick foul, to teach, and the better to
win such hawks as are but lately entered, until they know their pray and
their fleing perfectly. ()

To fly at the Hearon according to Martine.
depiction of men, one on horseback, with dogs and birds

THere is another manner of fleing which is called the flight at the Hearon,
this is the noblest flight of all others. For the Hawke ought to be well
lewred and well trained to get up to an high gate, and therewithal she must
well know a quick foul, and such a Falcon as is apt to flee, the Hearon
should not be flowen with, to any other kind of foul but only to the Hearon
most commonly. For as much as amongst all other flights, there is no such
mountey made, nor such force used as in the flight at the Hearon, and
therefore reason would that such Falcons should not be flowen withal or
inured to any meaner or less pray than the Hearon. For if a Hawke be a good
Hearoner, it is sufficient, and if after your Hawke have flowen the Hearon,
you should let her flee any other sleighter foul or pray, She will lightly (by
your own default) become a slugge and take disdain, in such sort that (where
before she was a good Hearoner) she will be so no more, and will turn to her
own ease, so that she will never care to flee the Hearon. For as much as she
will give her self to pray upon foul that is more easy to reach, and will
forget or forslow her valiant hardiness, the which is much to be lamented if
a man have once a good Hearoner, and do so spill her. Nevertheless you may
flee with the Sacre all manner of foul more easily than with any other kind of
Hawke, because she is alike common to all foul, even so is she hard to be
made, and of a hard and dull capacity, but despair not therefore, for in the
end they prove good if the Falconer take such pains with them as he ought to
do.

For the flight to the field as Master Ame Cassian teaches.
SOme kind of Hawks there be which are made for the field. For as much as
there be some men which delight more to have Hawks for the field than for the
river, the Hawks which are good to flee the field, are first entered by the
Spaniels, and as well accustomed to know them by the hear and proportion, as
they know their pray by the feather and flight, and secondarily they are also
entered by customary knowledge of their pray, and therefore it is not lightly
possible that this kind of pastime should be perfectly handled, unless the
dogs and Hawks be so well aquainted and known one to the other, that each
of them do love others, for although naturally the Hawke be hardly entered to
become familiar with the dogs, and will not lightly nor at the first love
them, yet maruayle you not thereat, for in the end all field Hawks will love
them, and become familiar with them, but to bring that to pass, you must
continually bear your Hawke amongst Spanyels, and aquaint her with them, that
she may the better abide them, and that being done, the oftener that your
Hawke flee the field, the truer you shall find mine opinion: and surely you
may easily have good Hawks to the field, if you keep them in good order and
diet as reason requires, giving them upon their first, second, and third pray,
a reasonable good gorge, and afterward you may withdraw and abate your reward
by little and little, to make your Hawke the easlyer forget it, for by that
means you shall make your Hawke know her live foul the better, if you
reward her with the head and brains of the foul taken, and so of every one
which she shall slay, until you would give her a gorge, at time and hour
convenient, and by that means, you may have a good field Hawke unless the
fault be your own.

Other flights to the field called great flights.
THere is yet another kind of flight to the field which is called the great
flight, as to the Cranes, wild Geese, Bustarde, Bird of Paradise, Bittors,
Shouelers, Hearons, and many other such like, and these you may flee from the
fiste, which is properly termed the Source. Nevertheless in this kind of
Hawking which is called the great flighte, the Falcons or other Hawks cannot
well accomplish their flight, at the Crane, Bustard or such like, unless they
have the help of some Spanyell or such dog, well inured and taught for that
purpose with your Hawke. For as much as great flights require pleasant aid and
assistance, yea and that with great diligence.

Advertisement given by Master Martine to make a Hawke bold and hardy, and to
love her pray.
IF you would have your Hawke hardy, keep her oftentimes all day long upon
your fiste, and feed her with Pullets flesh early in the morning as much as
shall be sufficient for a beaching, that done set her abroad in the Sun,
with water before her, to the end she may bathe when she will, and bowze, as
naturally they are inclined to do, and it does them singular great pleasure,
for bowzing may oftentimes preserve them from sickness, and yet sometimes a
Hawke bowzeth after some disease whereof she has long languished, and dies,
or else she is thereby recured: for after such a disease, bowzing does either
cure her or quite dispatch her. Now when you have done as is before said
(whether she bathe or not) you shall take your Hawke upon your fiste, and so
keep her on the fiste until you go to bed, and when you go to bed set a
candle before her, which may last all the night, and in the morning (if she
did bath) you shall set her in the Sun for one hour until she be well
wetherd, and then afterward (if she did not bathe) take wine and water, and
therewith bespout her well with your mouth three hours after, setting her in
the Sun again, and (for lack of Sunneshyne) before the fire, until she be
very well dried, and if you be well assured that she is thoroughly enseamed
clean, and has bin well manned by the space of thirty or forty days, then
may you flee the field with her, and if you perceive that she have good
desire to flee, let her flee, and if she kill any thing, give her a good gorge
thereupon, but if she kill nothing, then feed her with the leg or the wing
of an Hen or a Pullet, washed in clean running water, keeping her still
upon the fiste as is before said: and the next day flee with her again, and
if she kill any thing, give her her reward, and keep her in this order until
she be perfectly entered and quarred: but then you must have discretion, for
sometimes by this order you may bring her low, in such sort that she should
not easily be recovered to make her flight strongly. Yet Martine says the
contrary, but if an Hawke be very hard and stubborn to her keeper in her
flight, then let her be well spowted again with luke warm water, and so set
abroad all night in the open air. In the morning let her be set either in the
Sun or before the fire, where when she has well proyned her you may go
flee with her, and if she kill and flee well, then keep her in this order and
tune, for else she may take sundry evil toys. And this precepte serves as
well for them that desire to have good Hawks for the field as otherwise: and
if you would have your Hawks love their pray, take Cynamon and Sugercandie,
of each a like quantity, and make thereof a powder, and when your Hawke has
killed any thing, and that you come to reward her, sprinkle some of that
powder upon the part wherewith you reward her, and it shall make her love
that kind of pray the better ever afterward.

How a man should use an Eyasse Hawke.
IF you have Eyasse Hawks, you shall feed them most with Pultrie, Beef, or
Gotes flesh: and this is done to keep them from ill toys: and when they be
well lewred and trained, then bear them upon the fiste hooded, and ordered in
all points according to the rule prescribed before in the first Chapter, and
after xxx. or xl. days past, bring them to the flighte, and the first,
second, and third flight, you may be fond over them, abating your favor
afterward by little and little, until they be brought in perfect tune,
spowting them oftentimes with wine and water. For (as Martine says) some
Eyasse Hawks will not much bathe them. Nevertheless you ought therein also
to use discretion, for by often bathing or spowting, you may bring your Hawke
very low, in such sort that she should have more need of a good gorge,
than of bathing, or spowting, and especially such Hawks as are fierce of
nature, and will not often bathe of themselves.

A consideration of the diversity of Hawks natures, according to Martine.
THere are some sorts of Falcons which have this diversity of nature, that
some of the^ well fly well being high and full of flesh, and some other flee
best when they are kept low. Wherefore a Falconer should have especial
consideration thereunto, for Falcons are fit for all flightes, as is before
said, but the blanke Falcons are of one nature, and the blewe Falcons of
another, and the Falcon of the reddish plume has also her properties diverse
from the rest. Nevertheless to speak as I have found, of all other Hawks
the blancke Falcon is best. And both by reason and experience I find that
she would be kept higher and in better plight than other Hawks, for you
shall see the blancke Falcon keeping a like hand upon her and other Falcons
prove higher and in better plight when she is fleeyng than any other Hawke.
And the reason is, because she is very gentle, and with more ease manned than
any other kind of Falcon, and loves her keeper better, so that thereby she
keeps hirselfe higher and in better plighte than such Hawks, as bate much
and are froward of condition. ()

How to seele a Sparowhauke and to make her fleing according to Guillam Tardif.
depiction of sparrowhawk

A Sparowhawke newly taken should be thus used, take a needle thredded with
untwisted threde, and (casting your Hawke) take her by the beak and put the
needle through her eye lidde, not right against the sight of the eye, but
somewhat nearer to the beak, because she may see backewardes. And you must
take good heed, that you hurt not the web, which is under the eyelydde, or
on the inside thereof. Then put your needle also through that other eyelydde,
drawing the ends of the thredde together, tie them over the beak, not with a
straight knotte, but cut off the thredes ends near to the knotte, and twiste
them together in such sort, that the eyeliddes may be raised so vpwardes,
that the hawke may not see at all, and when the threade shall wax loose or
untied, then the hawke may see somewhat backwardes, which is the cause that
the thredde is put nearer to the beak. For a Sparowhawke should see somewhat
backewards, and a Falcon forwards. The reason is, that if the Sparowhawke should
see forewardes, she would beat of her feathers, or break them when she bateth
upon the fiste, and seeing the company of men, or such like, she would bate to
much.

But to trim your Sparowhawke in her rightes, she must have Iesses of
lether, the which must have knottes at the end, and they should be half a
foot long, or thereabout, at the least a shaftmete between the hose of the
Iesse, and the knotte at the end, whereby you tie the hawke.

She should also have two good belles, whereby she may be the better heard.
For commonly when a Sparowhawke takes any pray, she will carry it into some
thick bushe to feed thereon, in such sort, that she cannot lightly be
either heard or seen, and whiles she plumeth it, the plumage does oftentimes
cover both her eyes, or one of them, then to take away the said plumage, she
straineth with one of her feet, and thereby her belles discover her. Therefore
if she had but one bell, she might happen to scratte with that foot which
lacks the bell, and so should not be heard. The Sparowhawkes which are
wonted to be hooded, and which will gently brook it, are much better than
they which will not be hooded. For they bate less, and are with more ease
borne in the rain, or any evil weather. For being hooded, the Falconer may
hyde and cover them with his cloak, which he cannot do to the other.
Furthermore they shall be able to flee better and more strongly, that are good
weather hawks, for they shall be less bruised, than a hawke which is not
hooded, which will weary her self with bating, and withal a man may the
better flee with the^ at advantage, because they bate not, but only when you
would have them to flee, whereby they have the greater courage, and also a man
may bear them in all places, without bating or beating themselves out of
breath.

How a man should manne a Sparowhavvke, and make her fleing.
FOr as much as Sparowhawkes are of sundry sorts of plumes, and sundry
shapes and proportions, there are also sundry manners of manning them and
making them, and there is much less pains to be taken with some one, than
with some other. For the more eager and sharper set that a Sparowhawke is,
the sooner shall you win her, and man her.

First, to win her to feed, rub her feet with warm flesh, chirping and
whistling to her, and sometimes present the flesh unto her beak, and if she
will not yet feed, rub her feet with a quick bird, and the bird will
cry, and if the Sparowhawke do seize it with her feet, it is a token that
she will feed. Then tear off the skin and feathers of the birds breaste,
and offer it to the hawks beak, and she will taste thereof. For a
Sparowhawke which feeds immediately after she be taken, does show that she
is eager, and has good appetite. And you may give her as much more at
evening, yea and sometimes in the day time, so that she be not gorged first,
but that she have put over her meat. When she is thus well entered, and will
feed when you chirpe or whistle to her, then may you hoode her with an hoode
that is large and deep enough, so that it neither hurt nor touch her eyes,
When she will endure to be hooded and vnhooded, without bating, and that she
will feed hooded, then must you abate her meals, giving her less meat, and
feed her betimes in the morning, when she has endewed, (that is to say, when
she shall have put over her meat, so as there remains nothing in her gorge)
then may you give her a beaching in the day time, taking off, and putting on
again her hoode, to make her the more eager. For it will not be amiss, to
give her a bitte or two of meat every time that you hoode her. When it is
evening, then suppe her up, giving her the head or brains of a Hen or
Pullette, until the morning. And if you perceive that she is becomme very
eager, then loose the threade wherewith she is seeled, but let it be night
first, and that she have seen backewardes, as before said. If she may
abide company, yet watch her all that night that you vnseele her, to the
end she may also be accustomed to hear people speak, and be acquaynted
with them, and when you hoode her again, give her two or three bittes of
meat. In the morning betimes, put a bird in her foot, whom if she seize
hardily, and plume thereon eagerly, then may you boldly take off her hoode,
but if she bate then, hoode her again, and watch her until she be
thoroughly won and manned: but if she feed well before company, and become
familiar and quyete before them, watch her no loger, but keep her on the
fiste some part of the night amongst company, making her to plume, giving
her now and then a bytte or two of flesh, and putting her hoode on and off
therewithal. When you go to bed, set your hawke near to your beds
headde, upon some trestle or stool, that you may wake her often in the night.
Then rise before day, and take her upon your fiste, and off with her hoode,
that she may see the people about her, and when she beholds them, put a
quick bird in her foot, as before said. When she feeds thereupon, hoode her
again, giving her the rest of your bird hooded, and when it is further forth
day, you may look whether she have any thing in her gorge, or not. If she
have nothing above, give her some little beaching, and beache her oftentimes
before company, hooding and vnhooding her. But at night she should be always
vnhooded, that she may see people, and become acquainted with them, giving her
to feed of a Hen or Pullet. To heal ye places where she was seeled, to the
end she may see the better, when you go to bed, hold her in a dark
corner, and spirte a little water upon her head, that she may frote her eyes
against the pynions of her wings. Then in the morning when she perceyueth the
day light, and has warm meat ready upon your fiste, and is clean loosed
that she may see both before and behind her, and seems to be familiar and
bold amongst people, then may you make her as before said. But remember that
you give her no plumage that day, in which you have given her washed meat,
yea and allow her no plumage until she be well manned. For until she be
thoroughly manned, she will not dare to cast. Then if you would thoroughly man
your Sparowhawke, and keep her eagre, take her early in the morning upon your
fiste, and go into some place where no body shall interrupt you, where first
cause her to plume with her beak upon some quick bird, then vnseaze her, and
set her upon some thing, and reach her your hand, and show her your siste,
giving her a bitte or two thereof. And if she come thereunto willingly, then
call her again morning and evening, further and further of, but ever before
company, to acquaynt her the better with them, fastening a long line or cryance
unto her limbs: if it be fair weather, and that the Sun shine, you should
then proffer her the water, to the end she may bathe her. Provided always
in so doing that she be sound, well manned, and that she be not poor, nor
gorged. For bathing is a thing which makes a hawke familiar and lusty, But
remember yt always after she have bathed, you give her some live bird to
feed on, and always when you call her or feed her, you must chirpe with
your mouth, or whistle, to the end she may becomme acquainted with your
whistle, and come thereunto. You must feed her amongst horses and dogs, to
make her also the better acquainted with them. If she have flowen, and you
would set her in the Sun to weather, set her upon the ground on some
coodgell or truncheon, making her fast, and she will always love the better
to sit upon the ground. After she has bathed, if you perceive your
Sparowhawke lusty, you may flee with her the next day toward the evening,
but first you must have reclaymed her to come out of a tree, and called her
to you sitting on horse back, being always provided of some Pigeon, or other
quick thing, to take her down the more easily. For before a man flee with a
Sparowhawke, she should be thoroughly well reclaimed, by watching, carrying,
feeding, and pluming before people, that she love her keepers fiste, and his
countenance, that she can abide both horses and dogs, that she be clean
within, as well skowred with washed meat, as also with plumage, and thaf she
be sharp set, and well coming, as well from the pearche, as from of the
ground, or out of a tree. ()

The mean to make a Sparowhawke fleeing.
depiction of sparrowhawk

First, he that would flee with a Sparowhawke lately reclaymed, must flee
in an evening somewhat before Sunnesette: For at that time she will be most
eager and sharpest set. Secondarily, the heat of the Sun (if one should
flee in the morning) does much trouble the hawke, and rayseth and stirs
her courage, making her proud and ramage. So that she leeseth the eagerness
of her appetite, and remembers it not, thinking on nothing else but to soar
and gadde abroad, whereby she may be easily lost. Furthermore, toward the
evening she cannot soar so far away from you, (although she should soar) as
she would do in the heat of the day, because the night will enforce her to go
to the perch and stand. Also to enter your Sparowhawke, it shall be best to
seek out some champaygne country, far from the wooddes, and let her be
vnhooded when the Spaniels be uncoupled, then if the Partridge spring, and she
bate, cast her off, if they spring near you. And if she kill, reward her (upon
the ground) of the head, brains, neck, and breaste of the Partridge. When
she has fed, take it from her, and vnseaze her, and get upon your horse a
good way from her. Then whistle and call her, and if she come unto you,
reward her better. Above all things, you must take good heed that she fail
not her first flyghte at great birds, least she turn tail, and accustom
her self to smaller game. But if she be once well entered at great game, you
may quickly make her flee Larkes and small birds. If you find that she have
most mind to flee Larkes, let her flee them, and reward her on them. For
there is no flyghte pleasaunter than the flyghte of the Sparowhawke at the
Lark. And for as much as the flesh and blood of Larkes is hot and
burning, it shall be good when you flee the Lark, to give your hawke washte
meat twyce in a week, and plumage very often. But give her no plumage that
day that she has washte meat, nor the day that she batheth. When there is
a knotte of good company met together, and every man has his Sparowhawke,
if one of the^ see his Sparowhawke flee when another is also from the fiste,
there begins the pastime, and yet they may flee together. But it is a
pleasure to take a Lark lowering, or clyming. Or if a Sparowhawke have beaten
down a Lark, or that ye Lark be slipte from her, This flight is not used in
England, neither did I ever hear of it before.
and gotten up towering as high as a man may behold, and then an other
Sparowhawke clime after her, get so high that by often taynting her, so as the
Lark is constrained to stowpe to the ground, and the hawke in the tail of
her. Then the Lark had rather flee for succoure between the legs of the men
and the horses, than to fall in the tallauntes of her natural enemy: yet
commonly she is there taken also. He that would learn to make a Falcon
well, let him begin with a Hobbie, and he that would make the Gerfalcon
flying, let him acquaynte himself with the Merlyne. But he that can keep and
make a Sparowhawke well, shall also be able to keep a Goshawke, for by the one
that other is learned.

To take lyme from of a hawks feathers.
TO remove the lyme from a hawke, take dry and fine sand and clean ashes
mingled together, put them upon the place which is lymed, and suffer it so
one night. Afterward you shall beat well together three yolks of eggs, and
with a feather you shall lay them upon the said places, and suffer the^ so
two nights. Then take as much larde as a plumme. and as much butter with it,
melt them both together, and anoynte the said places, and suffer the hawke so
one other night. Then on the morrow wash her with warm water, and wype her
with a clean lynnen clothe, until you have wyped of all the lyme, which by
this devise will easily be removed.

How to right and make straight bruised feathers.
IF you would make sound a bruised feather, then temper yt place which is
bruised, in warm water, and when the web thereof is well softened, and becomme
tender with the hot water, set it as even as you can out of the water.
Afterward take a great stalk of a Colewoorte, and warm it well upon the
coals, or in the flame: then cleave it in sunder, and within the clyfte put
the bruised feather, strayning the two sides of the Colewoorte stalk together,
until it have brought the bruised feather into his former estate. The stalk
of the herb called Brionie, has the same virtue.

To right and mende a feather broken on the one side, and to ympe a broosed
feather.
TAke a slender long needle, lay it in Vineager, or salt water, that it may
ruste and so hold the better within the feather: Afterward threade it with
untwisted threade, and draw it through both ends of the bruised places, then
draw it back by the threade, until it may draw that one part to that other,
so as the web may be close joined together: and suffer not your hawke to
flee, nor to use her wings, until it be closed and strong again. But if it
were broken on both sides, cut it off, and take a square ymping needle, like
unto a Glouers needle, lay it in Vineager and salt water, and thruste it into
both the ends of the web, until you have brought them together: then give
your hawke rest until the needle be rusted in that web. For a feather that
is broken or bruised within the quyll, take another quill that is lesser, that
it may go into the broken or bruised quyll, then cut off the feather in that
place, and the stalk of the quyll being put into the old quill, force the
end of the feather into the new quill that is cut: Afterward join
together the two pieces, with the quill that is so put in, covering the place
where it is so joined, with Cotton or small down feathers, with glewe or
Semonde, or if you would not ympe it, glewe it in with Semonde or Rosen and
wax molten together. If the feather be dropte away clean, then put in
another of like syze and color. For to bind in a feather that were slipped
out of the pynion, take flexe small chopped, and myngled with the yolke of an
egg well beaten, put them together upon a lynnen clothe, which is very near
worn, with the which you shall bind on both sides the place where the
feather slypped, or else anoint that place with Myrre and Goats blood myngled
together. To make a feather come again, which is cast and lost by bruise or
otherwise, and especially in the train of an hawke, take oil of Walnuttes,
and oil of Bays, as much of that one as that other, myngle them together,
and drop them into the place where the feather grew, and it shall put out a
new feather speedely. ()

How to bear and make a Falcon.
depiction of falcon

A Falcon lately taken, should be seeled in such sort, that when the
seeling begins to slacken, the Falcon may see forwards, to see the meat
before her. For she is better content when she sees the meat plainly
before her, than if she saw it sidewayes, or looking back. And she should
not be seeled too straight, neither yet ought the threede wherewith she is
seeled, be ouerstreyght bownde or knitte above her head, but twysted and
twyrled togythers. A hawke newly taken, should have new furniture, as new
Iesses, Leasse, and Bewettes, all of good leather, and the Iesses mayled, and
the Lease made with a button at the end. The must you have a little rownde
stycke hanging in a little string, with the which you shall oftentimes stroke
and handle your Falcon. For the more she is handled, the better she will be
manned, and becomme the gentler, and the more familiar: and also if you should
stroke or handle her with your hand, you might chance to catch a knappe of
her beak now and then. She must have two good belles, to the end she may
the better be found and heard, when she stirs or scratteth. She must have
a hoode of good leather, well made and fashioned, well raised and bossed
against her eyes, deep, and yet straight enough beneathe, that it may the
better abide on her head, and yet never hurt her. So must you also a little
cope her beak, and tallans, but not so much that you make them bleed.

How you shall manne a Falcon, and bring her out of her ramagenesse.
SOme say, that the soar Falcon which has been tymely taken, and has
already passed the seas, is both the best Falco^, and also the hardest to be
won and ma^ned. Wherefore observing the order which is before rehearsed, you
must feed such a Falco^ with good and warm metes (as pigeo^s, and such like
quick birds) until she be full gorged twice a day for three days. For you
must not break her of her accustomed diet all at once, and being lately
taken, she will more willingly feed on warm meats, than any thing else.
When you feed her, you must whoope and lewre as you do when you call a hawke,
that she may know when you will give her meat. You must vnhoode her
gently, gyuing her two or three byttes, and putting on her hoode again, you
must give her as much more. But take heed that she be well and close
seeled, three days being passed, if you perceive her to be eager and greedy
of meat, and that she feeds with good appetite, then begin to abate her
her meat, that is to say, give her but little at once, and often, so that
she have not much above at one time, until it be evening, and bear her
late upon your fiste before you go to bed, setting her upon a trestle or
stool very near you, so that you may wake her often in the night.
Afterward you should take her on your fiste again before day, with some
quycke bird or such like meat: and when you have observed this order with
her two or three nyghtes, and that you perceive she begins to be much
better fellow than she was wont, and that she seems to begin to be
reclaymed, and feeds eagerly upon good meat, then begin to change her
dyete, gyuing her often, and little at ones, the heart of an Hog or a Sheep.
In the evening when it begins to be late, (without casting of her) let her
seeling threade a little loose, spowting water on her face, that she may
Ieouke the less, and watching her all the night, hold her upon your fiste
vnhooded. But if she see any thing that muslike her, and make semblaunte to be
afearde, then let her be carried into some dark place, where you have no
more but light to hoode her again. And afterward give her some beaching of
good meat, and let her be watched diverse nyghtes together, until she be
reclaimed and Ieouke upon the fiste by day time, although to let her Ieouke
also sometimes in the night, is a thing which makes her the sooner manned.
In the morning by break of the day, let her have some warm meat to
begin with. And because there be sundry Falcons of sundry sorts and
conditions, (as some mewed at large in the wooddes, some other taken at stand,
where they have long used, and some other taken soar hawks, (whereof we now
treat) whither they be Sorehawkes, mewed or Nyasse, yet are they of sundry
natures and properties, and therefore they must be diversely governed and
entered, which is the cause that it is hard to give general rules. For those
which are gentle, easy to be reclaymed, and of a good kind and nature,
ought also to be the more favored, and the more gently handled. But when your
hawke is brought to the point before rehearsed, as well for the hooding, as
also for her eagerness to feed, if you perceive that she begin to be
acquaynted therewith, you may vnhoode her by day time, far from company,
first gyuing her a bytte or two of good meat. Afterward hoode her again
gently, gyuing her a little meat again hooded. Above all things, you must
beware to hoode or vnhoode her in any place, where she may be frayed, for
that were able to mar her at the first. When she begins to be
acquaynted with company, if you perceive that she be eager or sharp set,
vnhoode her, and give her a bitte or two of meat, holding her right against
your face and countenance. For that will cause her to dread no company. And
when it is night, cut the thredde wherewith she is seeled, and you shall not
need to watch her, if you perceive her bold enough amongst company. But
yet let her be set upon a trestle by you, that you may awake her two or
three times in the night, and take her on your fiste before day. For
ouerwatching of a hawke is not good, as long as a man may reclayme her
otherwise. And if by such good gouernmente, and by dealing curteousely with
her, and keeping her from sudden fear, you perceive that she begin to be
acquaynted with you, and to know you assuredly, and that she feeds eagerly,
and sticks to her meat before company, then give her washte meat, and
beache her in the morning, so that she may always have somewhat in her
gorge: which meat you shall lay in clear water half a day, and you shall
cause her to feed in company, giving her in the morning about Sun rising
the wing of a Hen or Pullette, and at evening, hooding her again, take the
foot of a Conie or an Hare, which is cut off above the ioynte, and flaye
it, stripping away the claws also, and temper and steep the skin in fair
water, (pressing and wringing it a little) the which you shall give her with
the ioynte of the pynion of a Hens wing. You must take good heed, how you
give your hawke any feathers, until she be thoroughly reclaimed. For until
she be thoroughly won and reclaymed, she dares not cast upon the fiste.
And on the fiste you must bear her continually, till she be thoroughly
manned. But when she makes semblante to cast, vnhoode her gently by the
tassell of the hoode. You may give her two days washte meat, and the third
day plumage, according as she is clean or foul within. And when she has
cast, then hoode her again, gyuing her nothing to feed on, until she gleame
after her casting. But when she has cast and gleamed, then give her a
beaching of hot meat, in company gyuing her two or three byttes at once:
and at evening make her plume a Hens wing in company also. When you find
her well reclaymed, and thoroughly manned, and eager, and sharp set, then it
is time to feed her upon the lewer. And you must mark whither the feathers
of your hawks casting be foul or slymie, and whither the slyme thereof be
yellowe or not. For if they be, you must be very circumspect to make her
clean with washte meat and casting, and if she be clean within, then give
her not so strong castings, as Hares feet, or Connyes feet: but give her the
pynions of an old Hens wing, or the plumage that is to be taken thereupon,
or the neck bone chopped four or five times between the joints, washed, and
steeped in fair water. To make an end of this chapter, it is certain, that
it requires more time to win and to watch a Falcon once mewed in the
woodde, than one which is taken sore at passage. And likewise it is harder to
win a hawke taken at stand, when she has long time been accustomed, than it
is to make a hawke which has been handled before. ()

How to lure a Falcon lately manned.
depiction of falcon

BEfore you show the lewre to a Falcon newly reclaymed, you must consider three
things, First, that she be well assured and boldened in company, well
acquainted also with Dogs and with Horses. Secondarily that she be sharp
set and eager, having regard to the hour of the morning or evening when you
will lewre her. And the third consideration is, that she be clean within, the
lewre must be well garnished with meat on both sides, and you must be apart in
some secret place when you would give her the length of the lease. You must
first vnhood her, giving her a bit or twain upon the lewre, as she sits on
your fiste, afterward take the lewre from her, and hide it that she see it
not, and when she is vnseazed, cast the lewre so near her that she may catch
it within the length of her lease, and if she do seize upon it, then shall you
use the voice and accustomed speech of a Falconer unto his Hawke, and feed
her upon the lewre on the ground, gyuing her thereupon the warm thigh of an
Hen or Pullet, and the heart also. When you have so lewred her at evening,
give her but a little meat, and let her be lewred so timely, that when she is
therewith accustomed, you may give her plumage and a Iuk of a joint.
Afterward, and in the morning betimes, take her on your fiste, and when she
has cast and gleamed, give her a little beaching of good warm meat.
Afterward when the day is further forwards, and that it is time to feed
her, take a Criance and tie it to her lease, and go into some fair pleasant
meadowe, and give her a bitte or two upon the lewre, as before said, then
vnseaze her, and if you perceive that she be sharp set, and have seized upon
the lewre eagrely, then give her to hold unto some man which may let her off
to the lewre, then shall you unwind the Criance, and draw it after you a good
way, and he which holds the Hawke must hold his right hand on the tassell
of the Hawks hood in a readiness, that he may vnhood her as soon as you
begin to lewre, and if she come well to the lewre, and stoop upon it roundly,
and seize it eagerly, let her feed two or three bittes upon it, and then
vnseaze her, and take her from off the lewre, and hood her, and then deliver
her again to him which held her, and go further off and lewre her, feeding
her always upon the lewre on the ground: and using the familiar voice of
Falconers as they cry when they lewre. And thus you shall lewre her every day
further and further off, until she be well taught to come to the lewre, and
to take it eagrely.

Afterward let her be lewred in company, having regard that neither Dogs
nor other thing come in suddaynly to fray her, and when you take her up from
the ground, hood her upon the lewre, and when you have well and often lewred
her on foot, then use to lewre her on Horseback: the which you shall the
easlyer win her too, if when you lewre her on foot, you cause some on
Horseback to come near you, that she may see them, and cause them to come
near her when she feeds upon the lewre, causing them also to turn and
toss their Horses about her, but let their Horses be ruly, least they should
upon the suddayne affright her.

Furthermore the better to acquaint her with horses, and that she may the
better know them, carry your Falcon (whiles she feeds) on high upon the
lewre near unto some man on Horseback, or get your self up on Horseback,
and reward her upon the lewre amongst horsemen, and when she is well
accustomed to them and well acquaynted with them, making no resemblance to
fear them, you may then lewre her on horseback in this manner: He which
holds her to let her come to the lewre must be on foot, and you where you
lewre shall be on Horseback, and when you call and cast the lewre about your
head, then he which holds her, shall take off her hood by the tassell, and
you the mean while shall call and lure in the counningest wise you can, as
Falconers use to do: and if she sear eagerly upon the lewre, and fear neither
people nor horses, then take off the lewring line or Creance, and lewre her
loose further and further off. And to make a Falcon come which is but newly
reclaymed, and to make her come in company of another Hawke, there must be two
to hold a cast of Falcons, and two which shall lewre them, but he which
holds the Falcon that is but lately lewred, shall not let her come so soon
as the other shall do: then shall the lewre be thrown out unto the Falcon
which is but lately lewred, and when she is fallen thervppon, her keeper shall
carry her upon the lewre, to feed amongst the other make Hawks. This being
done twice or thrice, she will follow them and love them: and if you would
have her love dogs which is most necessary, you must call dogs about you
when you feed her, or give her tyring or plumage.

How you shall bathe your Hawke being but lately reclaymed, how you shall make
her fleing, and to hate the cherke.
WHen your Falcon is well lewred as well on horseback as on foot, and that she
is ready to be cast off, and has been well rewarded upon the lewre, and is
now altogether reclaymed from her ramage toys, and when she is also somewhat
recovered of the pain and travail which you have put her unto in making and
reclaiming her, and be yet in good plight, and have her thighs ploompe and
well brawned, then offer her water to bathe her, spy out a fair day when the
weather is clear and temperate, then take a basyn so deep that your Hawke may
stand therein up to the thighs, and fill it with water, and set it in some
secret place: afterward your Hawke being lewred and well rewarded in the
morning with warm meat, bear her up unto some high place, or bank, and
there hold her in the sun until she have endued her gorge, taking off her
hood, that she may proyne and pick her self: that being done, hood her
again, and set her near to the basin, afterward taking off her hood again
(if she will) let her leap down into the basin or upon the grass by it, and
to make her know the water, flappe therein with a little wand, and let her
bathe therein as long as she list: when she comes out of the water, take some
meat in thy hand and proffer it unto her, and be well ware that she come not
out before thou proffer her thy fiste to give her a bit or twain, then take
her up and hold her in the Sun, and she will pick and proyne her on your
fiste, or upon your: knee if she will not bathe her in a basyn, then proffer
her to bathe in river water at some foord. Bathing gives an Hawke great
courage, much boldness, and eager appetite: that day that she batheth, give
her nowasht meat. To make a new lewred Falcon, and to make her vpwardes, the
morrow after she has bathed, get on horseback in the morning or in the
evening, when she is sharp set, and choose out some field or pasture, where
fewest dooues or choughes be, then take your lewre well garnished on both
sides, and having vnhooded your Hawke, give her a bit or twain upon the
lewre, then taking it away from her, hood her again, then going fair and
softly against the wind, vnhood her: and before she bate or find any check in
her eye, whistle her from off your fiste fair and gently, and when she flies
about, (trotting forwards with your horse) cast our your lewre, and suffer her
not long to flee about you at the first. Continue this both morning and evening
for a few days, and if you perceive that your Hawke have no great list to
flee about you, nor to stoop to the lewre, and that she makes no semblaunce
to love other Hawks, then must you make her flee with one which loves other
Hawks, and which will not gadde out to any change or check: and that must
first be done at the partridge, for they flee not far before an Hawke: and if
your Falcon have flowen, and return to you twice or thrice, cast out the
lewre unto her, and reward her upon your Horseback, and afterward feed her
up, on the lewre upon the ground with good hot meat, to make her resolute
in her fleing, and that she may return to you with the better will, and if
the foul which you flew unto be killed by any other Hawke, let your Hawke
feed with the other Hawke, and when she is so rewarded a little, take her off,
and feed her upon the lewre.

If you flee to the river with your Falcon, and that the flight be fair and
likely to be landed, stay, and draw under the wind, and taking off your Hawks
hood, cast her off with the rest. When you would have your Hawke prove upwards
and a high flying Hawke, you must let her flee with a very high fleeing Hawke,
but see that your Hawke be well taught to hold in the head, and that she love
well to flee with the other Hawks, and if the foul be in a poole, or on a
pit or plash, you must first cast off the high fleeing Hawke, and he which
holds your new lewred Hawke, shall do well to get him under the wind, and
when he sees his vantage let him vnhood her, and if she bate then it is to
get up to the other Hawke. Then let him cast her off and she will climb
against the wind right unto the high fleeing Hawke, and before she weery
hirselfe too much with climbing to reach or cover that other Hawke, lay out
the foul, when the high fleeing Hawke shall be at her pitch, and lay them out
behind her, if she kill the foul, then give your Hawke reward of the Heart
and the breast with the other Hawks. If your Hawke go out to any check, and
kill a Dooue or a Crow, or any other check and feed upon it, or have fed
upon it before you come at her, seem not roughly to rebuke her at first, but
take her down to the lewre, giving her a bit of meat, and hood her up, and
flee not with her in two or three days after, but when you do flee, flee as
near as you can where there be no check, but if by no means you can keep
her from checking and going out, then for your last remedy, do as follows.
If your Hawke have killed a cheek, and you come to her before she have fed
thereon, take the gall of a Hen, and anoynte therewith the breast of the
cheek which she has killed, when she has plumed it and is come to the
blood, and let her feed but little thereon, least you make her sick, for she
will surely cast it again, yea though she should not cast it, yet would she
have small lust to flee at such a foul again, but will hate and loath the
meat thereof, or put any bitter thing therevppon, as powder of mirre, or young
small woormes cut in gobbets, but take heed that the bitterness be not over
strong, and if that the bitter taste have discouraged the Hawke, then weate her
meat in sugared water. Some put on two pair of belles upon their Hawks
legs, or stitch together their principal long feathers of their wings, and
also it shall be good when she goes from cheek, to cast her out the lewre, or
to lay out an hurt foul before her which she may kill. ()

How to flee the Hearon.
depiction of men, one on horseback, with dogs and birds

TO make your Falcon a good Hearoner, you must set her very sharp, and have a
live Hearon, whereof you shall make your Hawke a quarrey in this sort. In the
morning when it shall be time to feed your Hawke, if you perceive that she be
very sharp set, go to a meadow, and let the Hearon go after that you have
bruised both his feet and his bill, and hide your self behind some bush: and
then he which holds the Hawke shall vnhood her, the which shall be under the
wind. And if your Hawke will not flee at the Hearon, cast out your lewre the
which you shall hold in a readiness therefore: but if she do seize on the
Hare, make her a quarrey thereon, giving her first the Heart, and when she has
eaten it, give the Hearon to him which held the Hawke before, who retiring
back a little shall lewre, tossing the Hearon about his head, holding her by
one of the legs or wings: then do you vnhood your Hawke again, and let her
flee to him which lewreth sowith the Hearon, and let him not cast it out unto
her but stay until she take and seize it in his hand as he lewreth with it:
then despoyle the breast of the Hearon and let your Hawke feed upon it, and
take ye marrow of the bone in the Hearons wing, and give it your Hawke: and in
this doing two or three days you shall nowsel your Hawke thereunto and make
her love the Hearon, the which you shall also bring the sooner to pass, if at
ye first you inure her with a make Hawke a good Hearoner. Then having found the
Hearon at siege, you must get you with your Falcon up into some high place,
into the wind, and let him which has the Hearoner (that is the male Hawke) put
up the Hearon, and when he has cast off his Hawke to her, let him mark
whether the Hearon do mount or not, for if she mount, then cast not off your
Hawke, nor vnhood her not, but if the Hearon seem to be discomfited, and that
she fall down into the water, and that the make Hawke do stoop her, then
vnhood your young Hawke, and advance her: if she bate to be gone, let her flee
to it.

How a man shall make his Hawke to love other Hawks, when she hates to flee
with them.
THere are some Falcons which will not flee with other Hawks, but draw
backward, and stir not: some other will crabbe with every Hawke, and flee of
purpose to crabbe with them: some Falcon hates to sit or to flee with
another Hawke, either for doubt and fear which she has of them, or else for
because she loves the^ not. That hawke which hates other Hawks does crabbe
with them, and she which fears them, does flee from them. For remedy
hereof you must have a gentle Lanner, which may be set on a pearche with
that Hawke which hates others, but far enough off, and by day light, then
give each of them a bitte of meat as you pass by them, and set them nearer
and nearer, and when they be near one to another, put meat between them
that both of them may feed upon it. Then if the Falcon make no semblant to
crabbe with the Laner, you shall gorge her up at night with good meat, and set
her abroad in the frost or cold upon a pearche, if she be high and in good
plight able to abide it, and so shall you let her sit three or four
hours. In the mean time hold your Lanner near to the fire, and afterward
take her upon your fiste, then let another bring you your Falcon hooded, and
hold her close between your side and the Lanner, and when she feels the
warmth of the Lanner, she will draw to her, and hug to her for the heat,
and let them stand so together without ieouking (either the one or the
other) until you see that the Falcon do greatly desire to ieouke, then
vnhoode her fair and softely, and let it be in such a place as she see not,
but let her sit so all the night upon your fiste. And when day appears, you
must set them on the pearche that one near to the other, yet so as they cannot
one reach to another: That being done two or three nights together, let
them both be set abroad the third night in the cold, so near that they may
sit close together on the pearche, and when you see them sit close that one to
that other for warmth, then vnhood them, and afterward feed them, pearche
them, and lewre them both together, and take pain to find the advantage.

How you shall enseame a Hawke, or give her castings, skourings. etc.
SOme Falcons be harder to enseame, than some others are, for the longer that a
Falcon has been in the hand, the harder she is to be enseamed: and an old
mewed Falcon of the wood, which has mewed but one cote in the Falconers
hands, is much easyer to be enseamed, than a younger Falcon which has been
longer in the Falconers hands: the reason is, because a Hawke which prays
for her self, does feed cleaner, and better, according to her nature, and
upon more wholesome meats, than she does when she is in man's hands, so that
it is no marvel though she be not so foul within when she is at her own
diet, as when another man feeds her. For a Hawke which is in our keeping
does feed gredily both on skin, feathers and all that commes to hand.
Neither is she mewed with so clean and wholesome feeding, nor does endue her
meat so well, nor has such open ayree at times convenient as a Hawke which
is at large to pray for her self. When you draw your Hawke out of the mewe, if
she be greasy (the which you shall know by her thighs if they be round
and fat, and also by her body if she be full in the hand, and that her flesh
be round as high as her breast bone) and if she be well mewed, and have all
her feathers full sommed, then give her when she would feed in the Morning a
bitte or two of hot meat, and at night give her but a little, unless it be
very cold, and if she feed well without constreynt or forcing thereunto, then
give her washed meat thus prepared: take the wings of a Hen or Pullet for her
dinner, and wash them in two waters, and if you give her Hares flesh or Beef,
let it be washed in three waters, on the morrow give her the leg of a Hen
very hot, and at noone meat temperately warm, a good gorge, then let her
fast until it be late in the evening, and if she have put over her meat and
that there be nothing left in her gorge, then give her a little warm meat, as
you did in the morning, and let her thus be dietted until it be time to give
her plumage, the which you shall know by three tokens, the first is, that
feeling the end of the pinion of the Hawks wing, you shall feel the flesh as
it were tenderer, and softer than it was before she eat washed meat: the
second, if her mewtes be clean and white, and that the black of the mewt be
right black and not mingled with any other foul thing or color: the third
token is, if she be very sharp set and do plume eagerly, you may give her
casting either of a Hares foot or a Coonnies foot, or of the small feathers,
which are on the joint of the pinion of an old Hens wing: take then the
forefoote of a Hare, and beat it with the back of a knife until the bones
and claws do fall out, because the small bones may mouldre and be all to
frushed to pieces, the which you shall afterward cut and lay it in fair
fresh water, then wring it, and give her it at two morsells, and when you set
her on the pearche, sweep clean underneath it that you may see whether the
mewte be full of strakes or skins or not, and whether it be full of slime
and ordure or not, and if it be, then continue this kind of casting three or
four nights together with washed meat as is before said, and if you perceive
the feathers disgested and soft, and that her casting be great and full of
ordure, then take the neck of an old Hen, and cut it all along between
the joints; and lay the joints in clear cold water, and give it to your Falcon
without any other thing: and this is done because it bears down before it
into the pannell, the meat which is upon the joints, and there in the pannell
the flesh co^sumeth and the bones remain sharp and pricking, which break the
kelles and skins, and the gross ordure, and bear them with them: and give
her so three nights together, giving her by day washed meat as is before
rehearsed, and afterward give her casting or plumage again, according as her
state does require. And think it not strange that a Falcon which is to be
enseamed, is sometimes a fortenight or more before she will take casting:
neither yet that some Falcons will easiyer be enseamed in a month, than some
other in five weeks, according as they be stronger or weaker of nature, and
fed with cleaner or fowler meats, or according as they have bin shorter or
longer time in men's hands and keeping. When you have drawn your Falcon out
of the mewe, and that her principal feathers be full sommed, or that she have
some yet in the quill, do not give her washed meat, but quick birds, and good
gorges thereof, and set her as much as may be in open places, for otherwise
her feathers may chance to shrink in the quill, and come to nothing.

To enter or make a Hawke, after the fashion of Lombardy.
WHen a Sparowhawke is ma^ned and reclaymed, then give her nine or ten traynes
at the least, and when she kills, feed her up always, and let the Quayle
wherewithal you train her, have a feather pulled out of each wing, and cast
off the Sparowhawke to her a far off, so often yt she will recover the Quayle
far off, and then cast her out a Quayle which has her full wings, afterward
you may flee the wild Quayle with her: and evermore when she does kill, feed
her up with a full gorge: the Almaines are of opinion that the tercell of the
Goshawke is more weighty and more valiant than the Hawke, both to Partridge
and Feasant. If you would make a Sparowhawke to the Pie, then dismember the
Pie, and cast her on the ground to the Hawke, and feed her upon her with a
hot meal, as with a Finche or such like bird, and use that order with her
twice or thrice, and afterward you may cast up a Pie to your Hawke that is
seeled, being dismembered as beforesayd, and let her kill her, and feed her
upon her, also you may take a feather or two out of the Pyes wing, and set her
up in some tree, and let your Hawke kill her there, and make her as good reward
as you can thereof, and this being thus used, you may flee with your Hawke to
the wild Pie, but ever remember that in making these trayns your Pie be
disme^bred that is to say, her bill and her tallents cut off, or so tied and
abated that she may not spoil or hurt your Hawke. Goshawkes and Tercells of
Goshawkes are better when they are taken haggards of a Cote or two Cotes out of
the wood, than they are when they be Sorehawkes, but then they must be kept
with more delicate feed then the Soarehawkes, for they are made dangerous.
For as much as in the wooddes they did commonly pray upon warm meats, and
therewithal they are sooner lost than Sorehawkes be, by reason they remember
their eyree, but they should not be above one or two Cotes at the most. ()

To enseame a Falcon and to make her.
depiction of falcon

TAke your Falcon and use her as you use the Goshawke in manner before declared,
saving that when you feed her you shall call and lewre as if you called her to
the lewre: and every day you shall proffer her water, and every night give her
casting accordingly as you shall see that she endeweth: and take off her hood
often times amongst company, and to the end she shall not bate, hold alwais the
hood by the tassell in your hand ready. And in the evening when daylight
begins to fail, take off her hood amongst company of people by the
candlelight until she rowze and mewte, and then set her on ye perch and not
before, and set light before her, and when she is well woonne to know the
fiste, then begin to make her know the lewre, and so by little and little
reclayme her, until you may call her loose without criance. Every Falcon has
need of a make Hawke to teach her to hold in the head, and especially the
haggart Falcon, the which may be peradventure an haggart of two or three cotes,
and yet shall be the better Hearoner: but if a haggart mewed will not hold in
the head, then cut off some part of her two principalles in each wing, the
long feather and that which is next to it, and that shall force her to hold in.
You must also feate her beak and cope her reasonably. They always give their
Hawks tyring both morning and evening, but the Falconers of the East parts are
of a contrary opinion and say that it weakeneth a Hawks back. If you would
make your Hawke upwards or high flying, then after she is reclaymed and lewred
and ready coming, when you lewre her and that she comes toward you, stop
ye lewre upon her and let her pass by you, and when she retourneth toward you
throw her out the lewre, and make much of her, and do thus oftentimes until
you may suffer her to flee longer about you and to get up higher, the which
you must do in a plain field where no wood or trees are: and if she get up to
any pitch, then let her flee a turn or two of iollity, and when she is at the
highest and right over you, throw her forth the lewre, or a Pigeon or Pullet,
and give her a good gorge thereon, making the most of her that you can devise,
and take heed that you cast not your lewre into the water, least she should
thereby be rebuked. And when she is at her gate, if percase she gadde out after
some check, and kill it, then take the pray from her angerly, and beat her
therewith about the head, and hoode her up without any reward: and hereby she
will the less delyght to rake out after a check. When your hawke has killed
a foul, take it out of her foot, and cast her up again, and when she is
right over you, cast out the lewre, and feed her up upon it, to make her love
the lewer the better. But at the beginning reward her and feed her well upon
the quarrey, and that shall encourage her and keep her from going out to the
check. When she is well in blood, and well quarried, then let her flee with
other hawks, until she be well acquainted and inured.

If you would make your hawke to the Crane, take a Nyasse Falcon gentle, and in
entering of her let her kill the greatest foul that you can find. Her lewre
should also be a cou^terfayte Crane. And when you would make her fleeing,
let her flee from the fiste, and succor her quickly. For you must have
dogs made for the purpose, which may help and succoure her sooner than a
man can do. And let such dogs feed always with your hawke, to make them
the better acquaynted. If you would make a Falcon to the Hare, her lewre
should be then a Hares skin stuffed with straw, and when she is well lewred,
and that you would enter her, tie the said Hares skin to the end of a
cryance, and fasten it to your saddle pommell, and when you galloppe, it will
be like unto a running Hare. Then vnhoode your hawke, and cry, Back with the
Greyhoundes, back with the Greyhoundes. And when your hawke comes to seize
the said Hares skin, let go your cryance, and suffer her to take it, and
reward her well upon it, and make the most of her that you can devise. And when
you go about to enter her ye second time, let not slyppe your cryance at the
first, but rather pull it from her by force, and afterward let her seize
upon it, and so by little and little you shall teach her to beat it and stowpe
at it. For so must she do at a wild Hare. And you must feed her always
amongst the dogs, and when she is well nousled and entered in this manner,
take a live Hare, and break one of her hinder legs, and let her go in some
fair place amongst your dogs, and your Falcon will stowpe her and ruff
her, until the dogs may take her. Then take her from the dogs, and cast
her out unto the hawke, and cry back, back.

If you would make your hawke fleing to the Partridge, or Feasant, when she is
reclaimed and made, then every time that you lewre her, cast your lewre into
some low tree or bushe, that she may learn to take the tree, or the stand.
And if she take the stand before she epsy the lewre, let her stand a
while. And after draw the lewre out before her, and cry, Lo bird, lo, Hey lo
bird, hey lo, and reward her well. For in this manner she will learn to take
stand. But feed her always on the ground, and in some thick place, for in
such places she must encounter with the Feasant at pearche. And at the first
flee with her at Feasant, or Partridge that be young, to give her the
advantage, and afterward at the old. If a Falcon will not take stand, but
will keep her on wing, then must you flee with her in plain places, where
you may always see her upon you. Sacres and Laners will commonly take stand
both in a tree, and on the ground, but the Falcon Gentle takes stand more
willingly upon the ground. And when you draw a hawke out of the mewe, bear
her not much in hot weather, for fear least by much bating in heat, she
may get the Pantyse. But if there be no remedy, then keep her always
hooded, and take as good heed to her as you can. If your hawke be coye and
dangerous, then give her salt with her meat, I mean a dram of the Salt
called Sal Inde, or Sal geme, or Salis albi pulueri-Zati, and give her water,
for she shall have need thereof. And make her Ieouke all night in pain, and
in a moist or cold place, and so shall she watch most of the night, and
thereby her grease and pride will be abated. Sacres must be nowsled and entered
as soon as they be manned, for else they are very hard to be entered. Draw
your hawke out of the mewe twenty days before you enseame her. If a Falcon
trusse and carrye, to remedy the same, you must cope her tallantes, her
powlse, and her petie single. Never reward your hawke upon river foul, but
reward her, and make much of her upon the lewre, to the end she may the
better know it and esteem it. The Souldane flees to the Crane, wild Goose,
and Bustarde, with three or four hawks at once (or more) from the fiste, yea
and those of all kind of hawks also, as Sacres, Gerfalcons, peregrine
Falcons, and Vilanes. And afterward a man may make them flee to the mowntie.
You should flee to the Crane before Sun rising, for she is sluggishe and
slowthfull, and you may cast off to her a cast or a lease of Falcons, or you
may hawke to her with the Goshawke from the fiste without dogs. Wild geese
are flowen to in the same manner. And if you have dogs to help and succor
your hawks, see that they be stanche and gentle, and well made for the
purpose, and a Greyhounde will be most readily made thereunto. You shall flee
but once in a day at the Crane, and thereupon reward her liberally, and make
as much of her as you can. The Vyllaine should be let flee down the
wind. The Almaines do flee at the Pie with a lease or two cast of Falcons
at once, and they make them to mownte and to stowpe, as they do at the River.
But this must be in a plain, where there be no trees nor woodde, but little
shrubbes and bushes. If you use to give your hawke a brekefast or beaching very
timely in ye morning, it will make her eager to flee at such time as will be
convenient for her to flee. And especially a Falcon, which you would have
high fleeing, and those should not be highly kept, but should be fed nine
days together before Sun rising, and at night late in the fresh or cool
of the evening. So shall you make them high fleeing, and by that means they
will every day get gate higher and higher, so yt they be flowen with evermore
in the plain champaygne. The Falcon gentle is commonly better inward when she
has mewed, than in her soarage. The Falcon will kill the Hearne naturally, if
she be a peregrine Falcon, and yet you shall do well to give them traynes. A
Falcon may flee ten flightes at river in one day, if the season be not extreme,
and that is the most that you shall flee with her. The Falcons which are
river hawks, should always be borne upon the fiste. A hawke shall have forty
castings before she be perfectly made. For a hawke which has not casting
every night, will be surcharged with abundance and superfluity of humors, the
which do (from the stomach) so ouerflow their brain, that they cannot flee
so high as else they would do. And therefore all hawks should have casting
every night naturally, if you would have them sound and clean: and it is
good to give them tyring or plumage at night, especially field hawks, but not
river hawks, for weakening their backs. And every third day you shall
present them to the water at the longest. Touch your hawks feathers as little
as you can, for much handling will make them out of order. The Vyllaine and
the Lanerette may be set upon the stone incontinently, as soon as they be
made. When your hawke has flowen or bated, feed her not as long as she
pants, or blows, nor until she be in breath again. For if you should it
is perilous to bring her into the disease called Astma, and (in a hawke) the
Pantise. If a hawke (either Falcon or other) chance to be out of heart, and
discouraged, (which happens oftentimes) then take such pains with her that
she may kill some pray, and feed her up upon it with a full gorge even as
long as she will eat, and the same night set her abroad, that she may
Ieouke in the open air at her own pleasure: and on the morrow take her and
feed her with small birds to enseame her, neither more nor less than you
would do with an hawke that were new drawn out of the mewe. If a Falcon or
other hawke will not seize or gorge, take the quill of a wild Gooses feather,
and tie it under her long single, and she will seize and grype. And when she
begins to feaze, take away the said quyll, and she will seize long
afterward. If you cannot give covert to your Falcon, or your Goshawke, then
cast her off with the Sun in her back. All hawks may be made flee at ye
sowrce or spring. But in what sort soever you flee with your Goshawke, let
her have the Sun in her back.

To flee all manner of fowls.
ALl trains of Partridge, Rookes, Crows, and Choughs, should be seeled.
Now to enter your hawke at any of them, make a little pytte or hole in the
ground, and put your train therein. Then cover the hole with a little
board, the which you shall fasten to a small cryaunce or cord, and that you
shall hold in your hand to draw away when you list. The^ you shall make as
though you uncoupled your spanels to hunte and put up the game, and you shall
carry your hawke vnhooded. And when you perceive that your hawke looks that
way where you have laid the train, then draw of the board, and cause the
train to spring as though the spanels had sprung it. And if your hawke do take
it, let her feed thereon her fill upon the ground: And thus must you do
sundry times. If you would have a good hawke, then nowsel her young, for so
will she increase her force by little and little, and in the end, she will
ouercomme both Feasaunte and Partridge, etc. And when she has killed, let
her grype and seize the pray at her pleasure. And let her also plume
thereupon as long as she will, and evermore let her be rewarded upon the
ground. And when she is well nowsled, then reward her never but upon the
cocks of all prays, because that will make her love that pray the better.
And when she kills a hen of any kind, let her no more but plume upon
it, and give her but the heart, and the brain at the most, because she shall
not love to flee the Hen so well as the Cock. It is much better to nousel
hawks at young fowls, than at the old. For most commonly if a young hawke be
let flee at old game, she will turn tail, and cowardly give it over,
unless you do as before is declared. If you would nousel or enter a haggarde,
then do not enter her or set her in blood upon a young pray, or inure her
thereto. For then she would not afterward pass much for old game. And
likewise for the same consideration you shall not nousel nor enter a mewed
hawke at young game.

For the Goshawke all fowls generally are good traynes, as Crane, Bustarde,
Hearne, wild Goose, River foul, Cormorantes, Choughes, Rookes, Kyghtes, and
all other foul that haunt Ryuers or plashes.

How to make a train or flight for the Goshawke.
Set one of the said fowls upon the water, and between you and the water,
let there be some small shrubbes or bushes, so as the Goshawke may have
couerte to take the stand if need be, as also to keep her out of sight of
the foul, for her advantage. Then advance your fiste, so as the hawke may
discrie the foul. After which you may hold it lower again, and so cast off
the hawke. And if so be yt she seize the foul, let her feed thereon at her
pleasure on the ground. To make your Goshawke to the brook, let her flee
those traynes before said, as I have told you. But when you see the hawke
approach the foul, and to be within danger, then strike up your drum before
such time as ye foul do epsy your Goshawke. For if she once see the hawke
before she spring, she will by no means willingly forsake the brook, but
fall to dyuing and ducking, a defense which nature has provided and taught
the^.

Thus must you deal with the Goshawke to the brook, but if you will flee
with her to the Hare and Lyueret, (which is a game that the Goshawke does
much delyghte to kill and pray on) then must you breeche her, and at no time
let her flee without that devise, for fear least she spoil her self. For the
Hare is of some force, and in striving to escape from her, will force her to
stretche her arms, and open her self to wide, which is the utter undoing of
your hawke. The Sparowhawkes do use to kill the foul at the Sowrce or Souse,
as the Goshawkes do, which nature has taught them, (for that being round
winged hawks,) if they dealt not upon the advantage, the foul might easily
slip from them, and escape their danger. But so great is the courtesy of
kind, as she ever seeks to recompense any defect of hirs, with some other
better benefit, or at least such as shall serve the turn. Thus have you the
French Falconers opinions laid down, as touching the fleeing with each kind
of hawke, or at least, the greatest part of them. For the knowledge to flee
with the Falcon, serves for all Tower hawks, and the Goshawke for the round
winged hawks. ()

To manne, hoode, and reclayme a hawke, after the opinion of the Italian
Falconer.
depiction of man with falcon

HE that will furnishe his hawke accordingly, must have Iesses and Bewettes of
good leather, and shrill belles, according to the hugeness or condition of his
hawke. So must he also have a hoode for her: and therewithal he must
oftentimes hoode and vnhoode her, in such sort that she be not afraid
thereof, nor of her keeper when he handles her. In nine nights he should
not suffer her to iouke at all, nor to come on any perch, but should keep
her continually so long upon his fist. And when he will call her, let him
observe this order: Set the Falcon upon the perch and vnhoode her, then show
her your fiste with some meat in it, and call her so long till she come to it.
And when she comes feed her, and reward her as pleasauntly as you can: But
if she come not, give her nothing at all until she be very sharp set. And
this order must you keep with your Hawke seven or eight days together.

When you would lure her, give her unto some other man to hold, and call her
with a lure well garnished with meat on both sides, as you called her to your
fist. After you have used that manner of calling six days or thereaboutes,
cause her to be held further from you, and cast the lure about your head, and
throwing it out upon the ground a little from you: And if she come to it
roundly, then feed her and reward her bountifully. And whiles your hawke is
upon the lewre, go about her fair and softly, lewring and crying: woe ho ho,
as Falconers use. And when you have thus done by the space of certain days,
take your lewre garnished as before said, and every day call her to you as
far as she may well hear and perceive you: and let her be loose from all
her furniture, that is without either loins or cryaunce: and if she come so
far off to you, then feed and reward her well, and stop her in her feeding
oftentimes, for that will make her come the better: but take heed that you
hurt her not in so doing. You shall also sometimes call her on horseback. And
when you have used her thus a month, or until she come well and roundly, and
that she be familiar with the man without any strangeness or coyness, then
may you stop the lewre upon her, and make her flee upon you. But before you do
so, it shall be meet to bathe her, least when she is at liberty she rangle to
seek water, and so you might leese your Hawke: and every seven or eight days,
your Hawke should be set to the water, for the nature of them so requires.
When you have thus manned, reclaymed, and lewred your Falcon, go out with her
into the fields and whistle her of your fyst, standing still to see what she
will do, and whether she will rake out or not. But if she flee round upon you,
as a good Hawke should flee, then let her flee a turn or two: which done,
throw her out the lewre, and let her foot a hen or a pullet, and kill it,
and feed her well therevppon. Vnhoode her often as you bear her, and cease
not so to do until she have endewed and mewted sufficiently.

When your Falcon is thus made and manned, go abroad with her every morning
when the weather is fair and calm, and choose a place for her to flee in,
where there is some narrow brook or plashe of water. And when you cast her
off, go into the wind so far that the foul may not descrie you. And when
she is cast off, and begins to recover her gate, make you then toward the
brook where the foul lie, always wyling and making your Hawke to lean in
upon you. And when you perceive that she is at a reasonable pitche, then (her
head being in,) lay out the foul, and land it if you can, and if you cannot,
take down your Hawke, and let her kill some train, as thus. Take with you a
Ducke, and slip one of her wing feathers, and having thrust it through her
nares, throw it out unto your Hawke, and cast it as high as you can right
underneath your Hawke, that she may the better know your hand, and you. And
remember that you never flee a young Hawke without some quick thing carried into
the field with you, that if she fail at first to kill the wild foul, you may
yet make her kill that train which you bring with you. And this you shall do
for a certain time, until your Hawke be well entered and quarreyed, and that
she know a quarreyor sufficiently. Some other Falcons there be of a contrary
nature, which will require great skill to find their properties. And the same
being known, you may keep them high or poor, according to their conditions.
So shall you do more good with them, than if you have no respect to the
diversity of their nature: for then you should commit great errors, and
seldom make good Hawks. You may train Hawks in this wise. First you shall
feed your Hawke well upon a foul of the same kind that you would train her
withal, or have her flee to. And you shall do so until you have acquainted
your Hawke with that kind of foul, the which you may do in this sort. Take
that foul that you will make the train of, and set it on foot with meat
tied upon the back of it, and go so near it that the Hawke may see it: and
when she sees it, let her seize thereupon, and foot the foul and kill it. Or
you may thus do better: Take a Cryance, and tie the foul (which has the meat
tied on her back) by the beak, and cause one to stand close which may hold
the same Cryance. Then vnhoode your Hawke, and stand a far off, and let him
draw the foul and stir it with his Cryance, until your Hawke may see it
stir. And if she foot it, then may you afterward make her this other kind
of train. Take a quick foul which can flee, and when you have half seeled it,
and cast it out, let your hawke flee to it, and if she kill it, reward and feed
her up well upon it. ()

To keep and make Sparhawkes.
depiction of sparrowhawk

IF you would know how to feed and man Sparrowhawkes that be taken tender
penned out of their eyree, it is meet that you keep them in a fresh and
sweet place, and give them as much as they will eat, of small birds, as
Sparrowes, Martlets, and such like. And also you may give them other flesh, but
see that it be sweet, clean, and good, shred into small pellets upon a clean
trencher. When they begin to wax full somed, give them Sparrowes, and other
small birds whole, that they may learn to plume, foot, and tire: and set
them a Basin of clean water in a heap of sand, that they may bathe therein
and proine and pick their feathers. They that be thus dealt withal do not
know how to pray and therefore you must enter them by traynes in this manner.
Take a young chicke^ which is of color and plume like a Feasant or Partrich,
and cast it out before your Sparhawke. But if she flee not unto it, nor do
foot it, then strip the skin upon the head of the chicken until it bleed, and
she will lightly seize it, thinking that it is flesh to feed upon. Then feed
her upon it well, and thus you shall use her until she will seize a chicken of
hirself. When she will take a chicken of hirself, go into some fair close or
meadow where nothing may be to interrupt you, and take a young chicken and throw
it up unto your hawke until she flee to it and foot it: then feed her up
thereupon, and coy her as much as you can devise: For Nyasse Sparhawkes are
much more dangerous and coy than others be. When your Sparhawke will foot a
chicken well as before said, then you may train her thus. Cause some of your
servants or others to stand close in some ditche or other privy corner, with
a live chicken in his hand: and stand your self with your Sparhawke upon
your fist a little distance from him: then cry and speak as you would speak,
and cry to your Spaniels when they range the field. And when you think that
your Sparhawke looks that way as he that has the train stands, let him
cast up the chicken, as high as he can, and let your Sparhawke flee thereat,
and seize it. That done, reward her, and feed her thereupon, making much of
her, and cheering her evermore among. Thus shall you do twice a day. When you
have thus trained her, mount on your horseback, and give her like traynes in
the field as before said. Then set her sharp against an evening, and go out to
seek some game: and if you find, seek to make her one flight at advantage,
and let her flee but once, and suppe her up upon the pray. Thus in four or
five days at the beginning I would have you let her flee but one flight in a
day, rewarding her well always when she kills any thing, to the end she may
know her game the better, and take the greater delight therein, until she be
thoroughly nousled. To keep your Sparhawke in good order, rise early in the
morning, and taking her upon your fyst, tappe her on the train with your two
forefingers, and stroke on her wings that she may mantle and warble, and
advance her self bolt upright and delicately upon your fyst. Sometimes also
take off her hoode, and put it on again fair and softly, for rebuking her.
When you have kept her two hours upon the fist, then set her in the Sun to
weather her half an hour: that being done call her to your fist with meat,
and whistle to her often, and chirpe with your lips, that she may learn to
know that voice when you call her, and when she comes reward her well. Thus
you should use her daily, until she come well to the fyst: remembering always
that you deal with her as gently and as amiably as you can devise. When she is
well manned, and well coming, try if she covet not the water to bathe her.
And if she do bathe, then may you afterward flee with her: But first get on
horseback, and call her from off the ground with a Cryance, for fear least
she should think strange to come to you on horseback: and if she come well
to you from the ground, being on horsbacke, then may you boldly flee with her.
But remember always to epsy some flight with advantage at the first, for
discouraging of your Hawke: For if she be once well nousled and entered, you may
afterward he the bolder how and when to flee with her.

The manner to feed a Sparhawke.
TO feed a Sparhawke orderly, you should give her good meats, as thighs of
Chickens and Pullettes, young Sparrowes, Martelettes and other small birds.
Also sheep hearts, or Lambs hearts: all these be excellent meat for a
Sparhawke. And those you must give them clean and hot, if it be possible:
for with hot meats you shall keep her always in best plighte, and least
danger to abate. And to prevent diseases, you shall give her every night
casting of Cotton or Lint, or such like. And yet some are of opinion, that it
is not best to give a Sparhawke casting so often: But by their leave, I think
it meet: and my reason is, that when you give her casting, you shall always
perceive the disposition of her gorge and pannell from time to time, by the
signs which you shall see upon the casting, and in it: As sometimes it will
be white, sometimes black, sometimes yellow, sometimes green, and of other
colors: and by this means knowing the infirmity of your Hawke, you may the
better provide remedy for the same. Therefore I think it best to give a
Sparhawke casting, and it shall not be amiss to put therein sometimes a whole
Cloue, in a pellet of Cotton, which is a tried medicine to draw evil humors
from a Hawks head: Or sometimes you may put a chyue of Saffron in her
casting. And above all things, give her water once in three or four days: For
Sparhawkes do much covet the water, and it is the best thing (with other
good diet) that can be, to keep a Sparhawke always sound and in good case.

Of feeding a Hawke.
TAke heed that you feed not your Hawke with two sorts of meat at once, for
that is perilous. Forasmuch as the substaunces of them being diverse, they
strive in disgestion or endewing, and breed evil humors and worms in a
Hawke, and sill her with wind. And beware also that you feed not your Hawke
with flesh of beasts that be old, nor that be hurt or taynted: For such
meats are hard to endewe, and full of venom and corruption, breeding
diseases. Beware also that you give not your Hawke the flesh of a brood
hen. And it shall not be amiss sometimes to change your Hawks meat and
feeding.

Gooseflesh (if you use it oftentimes) will breed many flegmatike humors in a
hawke, and the cray in her pannell.

The flesh of a young Calfe is good for a gorge or two: but if you give it
oftener, These fedings are for the most part contrary to our english order in
Falconrie.
it ingendreth phlegm and cold humors in the head, and breadeth lise in her.
The heart is much better for common feeding than the rest.

The flesh of a Ram goat, a female goat, or a gelded goat, is good to set up a
hawke. But some are of opinion that it breeds the gout, and moist watrie
humors, and opilations in the gorge.

Mutton is not good, for it breeds humors in the head, as the Rye and such
like: it dries up and enflames a Hawke, and makes her hose sit close to her
legs.

Lambs flesh, and the flesh of a Kidde, is good given with Goats milk,
especially when your hawke is poor, and has been hardly dealt withal.

Hares flesh, or Conies flesh, either cold or hot, is very good to endew,
and sound meat for a Hawke: but take heed that you give her none of the
brains, nor any of the hairs or bones, for they are perilous, and breed
worms in the gorge and in the guts.

Cattes flesh is unwholesome, and hard to be indewed, and breeds perilous
worms, and stops a Hawke in the gorge, and marreth her wind.

Rattes flesh is good and wholesome: it consumes choler, helps to loose
the head, gives good appetite and disgestion.

Dogs flesh is good and very sound, and very meet for those kind of
Falcons, which are whote Hawks of nature.

Woolues flesh is naught, and contrary to a Hawks nature.

This feeding we use not.
The flesh of a Fox (as my Author affirms) is wholesome and sets up a
hawke.

If your Hawke happen to sit abroad in the cold air, and especially in the
night, give her small birds to feed upon, because they are hot of nature and
comfort much: but beware that you use it not continually, for it will make her
too stately, and cause her forget you, in such sort, that you shall hardly
reclayme her from her coyness.

To feed with river foul and such like, there are some of them good, and some
bad, as I will breefly declare.

Some hold opinion, that the bones and blood of a Bargander, Moorehen, and such
like, may be given to an hawk: but that the skin, flesh, or feathers of them
are not good, because they breed evil humors.

The flesh of a Ducke or of a Crane (as they report) is good and wholesome.

The flesh of a Partriche is most excellent when a Hawke is sick and diseased.

The flesh of a wild Goose, or of a flecked Crow, is good: but you must give
your Hawke but little thereof, and none at al of their blood: for it is salt,
brackish, and of an evil nourishment.

The flesh of these flesh Crows, and of the Wagtayles (a Dishwasher as we
term them, in Latin called Motacilla) and the Cormorant, is of evil
nourishment and disgestion.

The flesh of a white Storke, and also of the black Storke, called
(Saracinessa) is evil of nourishment, and hard to be endewed, and stinking.

The flesh of the Bitter, and Sea Coote, is good and sound, especially when
the Sea Coote does feed and scour her with sand, it is good to enseame and
breath a hawke: although naturally all water fowls are cold of complexion,
moist and hard of disgestion.

The flesh of the white Heron, otherwise called the Shoueler, and of the blew
or ash colored Heron, is of good disgestion and nourishes well.

The flesh of Finches, hedge Sparrowes, and such like, are in manner all one:
and you must beware that you give not your hawke too much of them at once.

The Cuckoes flesh is indifferent good for a hawke.

The flesh of a Hearon royal, that is to say the gray Hearon, is reasonable
good, according to the opinion of many ancient Falconers: but Ptholomeus king
of Egypt does allege the contrary, saying, that naturally all fowls which
live upon fish, frogs, or snakes, and such like venomous worms, are evil of
disgestion, and that their blood breeds opilations and evil humors,
although they seem to delight hawks to feed on them for their delicate
sweetness and taste.

The flesh of the red Haro^ is good: but you must give but little of it.

The flesh of the Swan, and many other kinds of water fowls to long here to
be rehearsed, are to be used according to the time and circumstances of
occasion.

The flesh of Sea Crows, and Ravens, Cormorants, and such like, are of a
brackishe blood, and therefore you may now and then give your hawke a gorge
thereof: but you must not use it often.

The flesh of ravening birds, as Kightes, Puttocks, Harpies, Eagles, Eyrons,
and such like, all these are very contrary to the nature of Falcons, and are
stinking, of evil disgestion, and chollericke. Their blood and brains are
worst of all, for they breed perilous worms.

The flesh of all birds which feed upon seeds, as Feasants, Pertriche,
Quayles, and such like, are the best that can be, especially when a falcon or
any other Hawke is sick.

Doves flesh is excellent, either when a hawke is sick, or to mew withal: for
it makes a hawke to mewe well and quickly.

Pullets flesh, and Chickens flesh, is good at all times, and always in
season, as the flesh of that fair foul Bella Donna is.

To man and make a Hawke: and first of a Niasse Falcon.
depiction of Niasse falcon

THere are three sorts of Falcons. viz. Niasses, Sorehawkes, and Hawks, taken
praying for themselves at large, which our Falconers call ramage or slight
Falcons. And I am of opinion that they are all made after one sort, and are
manned much a like. But by mine advice no man shall much assure himself in a
Niasse, because over and besides that (for the most part) they prove not well,
they do also require great pains and attendance with extreme patience, to
make them kill and stoop a foul well, or to flee a high pitche. Nevertheless
if any man will needs be doing with them, he should first make a Niasse to
the Hearon from the fist, I mean both the blew and read Hearon, and to such
other great fowls. For as much as the Niasse hawks are naturally good
seazers, bold, and hardy birds. And after they be well in blood, and entered in
fleeing to those fowls from the fyst, then may you make them to the River,
going into some fair large field, whereas there may be either some wild
Pecockes, flesh Crows, or some other great foul, bearing your Falcon on your
fist: loose her hood in a readiness, drawing as near the foul as you can,
and the first foul or bird that springs, vnhoode her and let her flee from
the fyst to the same foul, because they may draw your Hawke vpwardes. And
when she is at a great gate, or at a reasonable pitche, then throw her out a
Ducke, or a Mallarde seeled with a feather through the nares. And if she kill
it, then reward her well, and feed her upon it with as much favor as you
can devise, always lewring and crying to her to comfort and encourage her.

Of Ramage Falcons.
IF a falconer chance to recover a Ramage Hawke which was never handled
before, let him immediately seele her, and therewithal let him even then also
put on her Iesses, the which must be of Shameuse leather, or soft Calves
leather, or such other leather as may be gentle and plyaunte to her leg.
At the end thereof it shall not be amiss to set two Veiuelles of Silver,
the one thereof may have the arms of the King, or Queen whom you serve, and
the other a Scutcheon of your own arms. For as much as when they flee out, if
they chance to be taken up, they may the sooner be returned again and
restored to their owners, the which must then remember to reward the taker up
of his Hawke liberally. You shall also put her on a a pair of good Belles with
two propre bewets: Being thus furnished, you shall go about to man her,
handling her often gently, and both to avoid the sharpness of her beak, as
also the better to rebuke her from biting and nipping: you shall have a
straight smooth stick, as big as your finger, and half a foot long or
more, with the which you shall gently stroke your hawke about the pinions of her
wings, and so downwardes thwart all her train. And if she chance to knappe or
byte at the stick, let her bite hardly, for that will rebuke her thereof,
whereas your hand being twitched away fearfully, would make her proceed the
more eagerly. To man her well you must watch all the night, and keep her on
your fiste: and you must teach her to feed seeled: and having a great and
easy rufterhoode, you must hoode and vnhoode her oftentimes seeled as she
is, handling her gently about the head, and coying her always when you
vnhoode her, to the end she take no disdain or displeasure against her
keeper. And also make her to plume and tire sometimes upon a wing, and keep
her so on the fist day and night without perching of her, until she be weary,
and suffer you to hoode her gentely and stir not: and correct her of her
ramage toys, especially of snapping and biting, stroking her evermore as
before said with your stick. But if it happen (as it does sometimes) that
your chance be to have a Falcon so ramage and shrewde metteld that she will
not leave her snapping and biting, then take a cloue of Garlike clean pilled,
or a little Aloes Cycatrina, and when she byteth or snappeth at your hand or
stick, offer her the Garlike or Aloes, and let her bite it: for either the
strong sent of the Garlike, or the bitter taste of the Aloes, will quickly
make her leave her biting and snapping.

To use a Hawke to the hoode.
IT happens oftentimes that Falconers have Hawks which come from Cyprus,
Candya, Alexandria, and other far countries, the which having been in the
hands of such as could not well skill of them, become coye and very
untoward to be hooded, and will hardly be woonne to abide the Hoode by any
means. In this case you must first seele your Hawke, and being seeled, you
must fit her with a large easy Hoode: and hoode and vnhoode her often
therewith, watching her a night or two, and handling her oftentimes about
the head as before said, until she have forgotten that fault. And when she
once does leave it, you may unseal her in an Evening by Candle light,
handling her still softly with your hand about the head, hooding and
vnhooding her oftentimes, until she will well abide the Hoode and brook to
be handled. And here I think good to express mine opinion, that he which
takes in hand to be a Falconer, ought first to be very pacient, and
therewythall to take syngular delyght in an Hawke, so that he may seem to be
in love (as it were naturally) with his Hawke, even that a man would say, it
were a thing bredde so in the bone as it could never be rooted out of the
flesh. For such a man with never so little pain and industrye, will become
an excellent Falconer: but he which takes not that delyght in his Hawke, but
does rather exercise it for a pomp and boast, than upon a natural instinct:
or being a poor manne, does use it to get his living, such a man in mine
opinion shall seldom prove a perfect Falconer, but a marrehawke, and shall
bear the bag after a right Falconer. To turn to my purpose, when your Hawke
being so seeled, does feed well, and will abide the Hoode, and to be
handled, without stryking or biting at your hand: then in an Evening by
Candlelyght you shall vnseele her, and with your finger and a little spyttle,
annoynte the place where the seeling threade was drawn thorough. And when you
have hooded her, take her on your fyste, and hold her so all night until
day appear again, doing off her Hoode oftentimes, and handling her gently
with your hand, strokyng her softly about the wyngs and the body, hooding
and vnhooding of her, and giving her sometimes to feed, a morsel or twain,
or sometimes tyring or plumage. But above all things, you must watch her on
the fyste, so many nights together, without setting her down on any
pearche, that she may be weary, and suffer you to hoode and handle her
gently without any manner of resistaunce, and until she have altogether left
and forgotten her stryking and biting at your hand: but some Hawks will be
long before they leave that fault, as the more coy or ramage that they be, the
longer they will retain those ill tatches, and will not peradventure be woonne
from them in three, four, or five days. When she is well reclaymed from it,
then you may let her sit upon a pearche to rest her. But every night you
shall do well to keep her on the fyste three or four hours, handling her,
and strokyng her gently, and causing her to tire or to plume, always making of
her, and hooding and vnhooding her oftentimes as before said. And the like
may you do also by day light, but in a Chamber a part, where she may see
no great light until she feed surely and eagerly without dread.

To make your Hawke know your voice.
IF your hawke be thus in four or five days manned, so that she begin to
feed eagerly and boldly, then you shall first begin to make her know
your whistle, or the chirping of your mouth: and afterward your voice, in
this manner. Take a quick Pullette, and going into some secret place, where
your Hawke may well perceive the foul, and yet see no great open light, let
her plume and feed upon it, as she sits upon your fyst: then chyrke with
your voice, and use those other soundes which Falconers do to their Hawks: and
feed her so hooding her gently: then afterward you may let her plume a little
upon some wing, being still hooded, as well to loose her in the head, and to
make her cast water, as also to teach her the better how to sit on the
fyste. The feeding for a Falcon shall be Pullettes, not very old, Calves
hearts, wethers hearts, and hogs hearts, and to give her a convenient gorge,
to the end she may the better digest both the gross substance, and the
slimie matter. But if your Falcon be not eager or sharp set, then shall you do
well to wash her meat sometimes in fair water, and some other whiles in
urine, wringing it a little and then feeding her therewith, for one, two, or
three gorges, and that not continually: but respecting a day or two between,
and that is referred to the discretion of the good Falconer. For this is done
somewhat to abate a Hawke and to enseame her. It shall not be amiss also in
the morning when she is empty both in the gorge and panel, to convey into her
a little Sugercandie, to the quantity of a small nutte, for that dissoluing in
her, will make her the better to endure, and will both break the gross
substance, and digest the glitte in her, and also will make her eager, as
shall be further said hereafter.

How to make a hawke know her feeding.
WHen your Hawke feeds eagerly, and knows your whistle and your voice, then
may you teach her to know her feeding, and to bate at it in this wise. You
should with your right hand show her meat, crying and lewring to her aloude,
and if she bate or strike at it, then must you quickly and handsomely let her
foot it and feed on it for three or four bittes: and do thus oftentimes, to
the end she may the better know her feeding. And afterward feed her, and
give her every night (without intermission) some casting either of feathers,
or of cotton, with two Cloves, sometimes cut in four pieces, and put into the
casting, or a little Aloes wrapped up in the Cotton, according as the Falconer
shall see that it is requisite. For such castings make a Hawke clean and
eager. ()

To make a Falcon bold and ventrous.
depiction of falcon

WHen a Falcon has learned to feed, and to know the call of her keeper: then
to make her hardy, you shall suffer her to plume a pullet or good great chicke^.
And you shall go into some close place, where she may not see overmuch light, as
before said, where loosing her hoode in a readiness, you must have a live
pullet in your hand, and kneling on the ground, lewring and crying alowde unto
her, make her plume and pull the pullet a little. Then with your teeth drawing the
strings, vnhoode her softly, suffering her to plume and pluck it with her beak
twice or thrice more, cast out the pullet upon the ground before her. Then
must you with raising or holding down your fiste, encourage her until she
leap down upon the pullet, and seize it. Then when she begins to break it
and to take blood, you shall lewre and cry alowde unto her, and encourage her
by all the means yt you can, feding her upon the ground. And therwithal you
shall take her up gently and nymbly with the pullet in her foot, whereon let
her plume, and feed now and then a little. Then hoode her gently, and at
last give her tyring of a wing or a foot of the said pullet.

To make a Falcon know the lewre.
AFter that your Falcon has twice or thrice thus killed a pullet in some
secret place, the^ must you make her know ye lewre in this wise. Fasten a
pullet unto your lewre, and go a part. Then give your Falcon to hold unto some
other man, who may draw loose ye strings of her hoode in a readiness. And when
you are gone a little back from him, take your lewre at half ye length of ye
string, and cast it about your head once or twice, lewring with your voice
also. Then let yt other vnhoode your hawke, whiles you throw out ye lewre not
far from your hawke, lewring and crying still unto her. And if your hawke do
stoop to ye lewre, and seize ye pullet, suffer her to plume her, coying her,
and lewring still with your voice. Then let her feed on the pullet upon the
lewre, and afterward take her upon your fiste together with her meat, and
hoode her, suffering her to plume and tire, as is before said.

How to call your Falcon loose, and at large.
WHen your Falcon has come well three or four times unto the lewre in some
secret place, as well to a live pullet as to a dead, then shall you go
abroad into some fair meadow, where are no trees, and fastening a quick pullet
unto ye lewre, give your hawke to hold unto another man. The^ tying also a
cryance unto your hawks lease, cause that other which holds your hawke to
make ready her hoode, and give her a little bytte of meat on his fiste,
chirping and cheering her with his voice: Even therwithall do you go abacke four
or five paces or more, lewring twice or thrice, let him which holds the
hawke, do off her hoode, then do you take the lewre at length of the string,
and cast it about your head, crying and lewring alowde, throwing it upon ye
ground: and if your hawke stoop at the pullet, suffer her to break it, and
feed her upon ye lewre, casting her to eat the brains and the heart of the
pullet with the lewre also, always crying and lewring. And this order shall
you observe daily further and further off, until she be well lewred, entered,
and manned.

How to call a Falcon, that will come loose.
WHen your Falcon will come a far off unto the lewre, and stoop to it being
thrown out, without any coyness or ramagenesse, then setting her sharp, you
shall get on horseback in a morning, and go into some fair plain field, and
as near as you can, where there is no wood nor trees, there giving your hawke
unto some other man to hold (which must also be on horseback.) Put your
cryance to your hawke in such wise, that she may not tangle her self therewith
in coming to ye lewre. The^ drawing back a little as much as you think
meet, give a sign to him yt holdeeth ye hawke, to make ready her hoode, and
let him hold up his fist on height. Then lewre you three or four times as loud
as you ca^, always casting ye lewr about your head, whereunto for ye first time
I would have a Pullette fastened still. And while you so do, let him which
holds your hawke, pluck of her hoode, and if she come straight to the lewre,
forbear until she come within eight or ten paces of you, then cast it unto
her. And if she take the lewre, let her plume thereupon, and lewre you still
with your voice, lighting of your horse, and draw near to your hawke fair and
softely, lewring and crying unto her, and so feed her as before said. But after
that she be called two or three days to ye lewre on horseback with a cryance,
or more or less, according to ye towardness or untowardness of the hawke, if
she come roundely a bow shot from you, you may then go out in a morning,
having set her reasonably sharp for the purpose, and call her loose on
horseback, yt is without either lease or cryance, but loose, and in company.
And if she come to you, feed her upon the lewre, as beforesayde, lewring still
unto her, to make her acquainted with your voice. And the next day you may
call her to the dry lewre, without a Pullette, or any thing upon it. And when
she is come to the lewre, cast her out a quick Pullette, breaking first the
feet and legs thereof, and let her kill it upon the lewre, and feed her up.

To make a Falcon fleeing.
WHen your hawke will come, and stoop to the lewre roundly and without any
ramagenes, the^ if she be a haggard, you must put her on a pair of great
lewring bells, and the like shall you do also to a soarehawke. And so much the
greater ought your bells to be, by how much more you see your hawke
gyddyheaded, or like to rake out at cheek. For it ca^ be no hurt to clogge her
with great bells at ye first, until her conditions be known and well perceived.
That being done, and having also set her sharp, go one morning on horseback
into some fair large field, without wood or trees, if it be possible, and having
your hawke upon your fist, consider of ye wind, and ride you up into ye wind,
or toward that way as the wind blows, half a bow shot. And having
loosened your hawks hoode, whystle softely, as it were to provoke your hawke
to flee. Whereupon she will begin to bate, or at least to flappe with her
flagges and sails, and to advance her self upon your fist. Then suffer her
until she rowse or mewte, and when she has done either of them, vnhoode her,
and let her flee with her head into the wind. For thereby she shall be the
better able to get up on wing, and to get into the wind. Then will your Falcon
naturally clyme vpwardes, rouing and fleing round. Therefore when you see that
she has flowen two or three times, you shall cry and lewre with your voice,
and cast the lewre about your head, whereunto first tie a pullette, as before
said, and if your Falcon come in, when she approaches near you, the^ cast out
ye lewre into the wind, and if she stoop to it, reward her as before.

To make a Falcon leave the stand on the ground.
IF your Falcon at first when she flees from the fiste, will not get up, but
take stand on the ground, as the most part of soar Falcons do commonly, you
shall not yet therefore be discouraged, nor out of hope, but rather making
toward her with your horse, and threatening of her, seem to fear with your
wande, and drive her from the stand, until she flee a turn or two. Then
take her down to the lewre, and feed her. But if so chance yt your hawke
will not leave that fault of taking the stand, then must you seek to find
out some Choughe, Starling, or some such birds, making ready your hawks
hoode, draw as near them as you may, until they rise. Then vnhoode your
hawke, and no doubt if she will flee them, they will train her well upwards.
Then must you have in a readiness a Ducke seeled, as before said, and so as
she may not see but backewardes, because she may thereby mownte the higher
And holding her fast by one of the wings, near unto the body, in your right
hand, and lewring with your voice to make your Falcon turn the head,
forbear till she be at a reasonable pitche, then running under her, cast up
your Ducke toward her, that she may perceive it, and that the Ducke may be to
her in steed of a train. And if she strike her, or stoop her, or trusse
her, then suffer her to kill it, and reward her upon it, taking out one of her
legs, or both, if need require, feed her up with a reasonable gorge. This
being done once or twice, or oftener, according to the occasion, your hawke
will leave the stand, and delight to keep her on wing, and become also the
more obedient and loving.

To make the Falcon to the River.
WHen your Falcon is accustomed to flee for it, and will lie upon you at a
great gate, or at a reasonable pitche, and will come and hold in the head at
your voice and lewring, then may you go to the River, where you shall find any
foul, and there shall it behooue you to use such policy, that you may cover
the foul, and get your hawke to a good gate, above the foul. And when her
head is in, then lay out the foul, and cry, Hey gar, gar, gar. And if your
Falcon do stoop them, and enewe them once or twice, then quickly thrust your
hand in your hawking bag, and make her a train with a Ducke seeled. And if
your hawke do either trusse or stoop it, succoure your hawke immediately,
crossing the Duckes wings, and let your hawke plume. etc. I am of opinion,
that for the first or second time that you show your hawke a foul, it shall
not be best to show her great foul, but rather small foul, as the
Dapchicke, or such like. For if you show them the greatest fowls at the
first, it often happens that they slyppe from the hawke up the wind, and
the hawke cannot recover them, (but raketh out after,) whereby the Falconer is
feign to trotte farther than he would, yea and sometimes also he leeseth his
hawke. Wherefore in my judgment it were better at the first to be merry and
wise.

To make a hawke inward at the River, when she raketh out.
IF it chance that your hawke rake out with a foul, and cannot recover it,
and in the end gives it over, and comes in again directly upon the man, then
shall you do well to cast her out a seeled Ducke. And if she stoop it, or
trusse it, cross the wings, and suffer her to take her pleasure, rewarding her,
and giving her the heart, brains, tongue, and liver, with a leg or two,
according as you see occasion. And for default of a quick Ducke, take her
down to the dry lewre, and let her plume a pullette, and feed her upon it.
Thus doing, your hawke will learn to give over a foul that rakes out, and
hearing the keeper lewre, she will learn the better to hold in the head,
and to make back again to the River.

To make a flight for a Haggarde.
HE that would make a flight for a Haggarde, he shall do well in my conceyte,
to flee where there be no Crows, Choughes, or such like, for the first two or
three flights, because she shall take none occasion to rake out after such
cheek. And it shall be good also, that you let her not flee out on head too far
at the first, but run after her, and cry to her ( VVhyloe, whyloe) make her
turn head. And when she is come in, take her down with the lewre, unto the
which I would have a quick pullette fastened, as before said. And you shall
suffer her to tire, plume, and feed as before, etc. It happens oftentimes,
yt a Haggard through her gadding moore and gallantnesse of mind, does ra^gle
out from her keeper, more tha^ upon any other cause. Then shall you clogge her
with greater lewring bells, and make her a train or two with a ducke seeled, to
teach her hold in, and know the man. You shall not need to train a Haggard
so often as a Soarehawke, because they have been accustomed to pray for
themselves, and do by experience know one foul from an other. But they do
much better remember either the rebukes, or cherishings which are made to
them, than Soarehawkes do: and therefore it behooves to use more care and heed
about a Haggarde, than a soar Falcon, and above all things to take her often
down with the dry lewre, and to let her take her pleasure of her reward.
And (as Falconers term it) to be ever well in blood. For otherwise she will
not long be at your commandment, but make you follow her. ()

How to make your Falcon kill her foul at the first.
depiction of falcon

WHen a Soar Faulcon, or a Haggard is well lewred, and flies a good gate, or
a reasonable pitch, and stoupeth well, then shall you first cast off a well
quarried or make Hawke, and let her stoop a foul upon a brook or a plashe,
and watch her until she put it to the plunge: then take down your make Hawke,
and reward her, and hood her up, setting her a little way off by the flight,
that you may use her help afterward if need be. This being done, take your
young hawke which is not yet entered, and going up the wind half a boweshotte,
or thereabouts, loose her hood, and softly whistle her off the fiste, until
she have rowsed or mewted, then let her flee with her head into the wind,
having first given fhew to your company that they be in a readiness against
the Hawke be at a good gate, and to show water, and lay out the foul. This
order being observed, and running and crying as Falconers use to do, hawke on
your Faulcon, and give her leave to get up, and when she is at a reasonable
pitch, and covering the foul, give a sign to your companions that they draw
near to the water, and all at once make in upon the foul on all sides the
brook (as Falconers term it) to land her: then if your Falcon stoop and
strike or trusse it, run in apace to help her, and crossing the fowls wings,
let your Hawke take her pleasure on it, feeding her as custom is: but if so
chance that she cannot slay it at the first stouping, then you must give
your Hawke respite and time to recover her gate: And when she is at her gate
again, and her head in, then lay out the foul again as before said, until
you may land it at the last, always remembering that as soon as she seize it,
you succor her quickly and reward her according to order. True it is that to
be assured, you shall do well always to have a quick Mallard or Ducke in the
Hawking bag whenever you would make a flight: and if your Hawke kill not
the foul which is stouped (as often happens by many overthwart cha^ces) then
may you quickly have recourse to the hawking bag, and feeling your live Ducke
(your Hawke being at her pitche and her head in) you may throw her up to your
Hawke, and reward her etc. For this order shall alwais maintain your hawke to be
inwards, and in good life, and blood.

How to do when your river Hawke will take stand in a tree.
IF you have a Falcon which (as soon as she has once or twice stouped and
endewed a foul) will take stand on a tree, you must as much as may be, eschew
to flee in places where trees be, and you must have two or three live traynes,
and give them to sundry Falconers, placing them all of purpose, some here,
some there: and when your Hawke has stouped and would go to stand, then
let him unto whom the Hawke does most bend, cast out his train ducke,
seeled, and if the Falcon slay her, then reward her etc. And by this means she
will leave that fault, but if in this doing twice or thrice, she will not leave
that trick, then the best counsel I can give you, is to rid your hands of
such a kight.

To make a Hawke fond of the Lewre.
WHen your Hawke is well quarried, and flees well to the river, and flees a
great gate, or a reasonable pitch, then shall you do well also to make her fond
of the lewre: for when a Hawke has stouped once, twice or thrice, you shall do
well to take her down with the lewre, and to let her kill a Pullet and feed
her upon it: yea the higher fleeing that a Hawke is, the more need to take
her down the oftener with the lewre, and to regard that you ouerflee her not:
For if it happen that a foul being often stouped, will not spring again, but
will rather fall to diuing (which Falconers call the ploonge) then must you
take her with dogs, or kill her with Hawking poles, or use some such other
devise, and be feign to take down your Falcon with the lewre, and give her ye
foul upon the lewre, feeding and rewarding her with as much delight as you can
to make her fond of the lewre. It happens oftentimes, that many Falcons will
hardly become fond of the lewre, through the great desire they have to kill
their foul. To help that, I think it not sufficient only to keep her from
often killing, but sometimes you must also take the quarrey out of her foot
as soon as she has fed upon alittle of the brains, and hood her up, then
giving her unto another to hold: go from her a bowshotte, and call her to the
lewre, and so feed and reward her well upon the lewre with the foul that she
killed, and this order will make her fond of the lewre.

How to help a Hawke when she is froward and coy through the pride of grease.
SOmetimes a Falcon will become very proud and disdaynefull by being over high
kept, in sort that she shall not need to be fed nor rewarded according as
they feed when they pray of themselves at large: and although she flee and
kill, yet as soon as she has plumed a little, let her keeper take a sheep
heart cold, or the leg of a Pullet, and whiles the Hawke is busy in pluming,
let the Falconer convey the heart of the Sheep, or the Pullets leg into some
part of the body of the foul, that it may take some taste of it: and when the
Hawke has eaten the brains, heart, and tongue of the foul, then let him take
that forth and call his Hawke with it unto the fist, let him feed her
therewith, and give her a little of the feathers in the neck of the said
foul, to scowre her and make her cast.

When a Falcon will not hold in the head.
IF a Falcon use to rake out after check or otherwise, and lean out so far,
as neither for whouping, lewring, or for casting the Hawks glove about your
head, she will come in again to the flight, but rather still more and more gad
out, and so flee away: in this case you must follow after her, lewring and
whouping a good, proffering her to the lewre, to make her put in her head
again: and if she do turn and come to ye lewre, then feed and reward her,
etc. And do not fail in any wise to be fond of her, when she comes to the
lewre, because she may thereby the better learn to know your voice, and to come
to the lewre another time. Holding this order (especially with soar Hawks or
Hawks of the first Cote) they will learn to hold in at the voice or sight of
the lewre, yea and that with such readiness as it will breed admiration in
all them that behold it, to see the excellency of art, what it is able by
cunning to atchieue, which truly does appear in nothing more than in
Hawking.

How to keep a Hawke high fleeing.
WHen a Hawke is well made to the river, you should not flee with her above
two flights in a morning, but feed her up although she kill not: but if she
be a stately high fleeing Hawke, you should not in any wise flee her above one
flight in a Forenoone, for it will bring her down, and make her fall off her
stately pitche by often fleeing, and becoming greedy and hot of the quarrey.
When a good high fleeing Hawke being whistled, or cast off the fiste, does
gather upwards to a great gate, you must have regard to continue her therein,
fleeing with her upon broad waters and open Rivers, eschuing little brooks
and gullets, and such places as lie near under covert, where there be trees,
shrubbes, and bushes, in such sort that it will be very hard to land a foul
hansomly from them, at least not without help of dogs and great clapping and
a do. Yea sometimes eake you must of force alight from off your Horse, all
which things are able to mar a high fleeing Hawke. For as much as crying,
clapping of hands, noise, bawling of dogs, and alighting on foot, and
furthermore when a Hawke cannot see the water under her, al these things do
teach her to forget her kindly fleeing, and to play the Kite, houering and
winding as the Kite does in the air, without any show of state: and in twice
or thrice doing so, she abateth her gate, and marreth her fleing. Therefore let
the Falconer take good heed to that consideration, and keep his Hawke always
as high fleeing as he can, suffering her but seldom to kill and not to stoop,
beyond twice or thrice at the most, and even when she is at the highest, let
him take her down with the lewre: where when she has plumed and broken the
foul alittle, let him feed her up, and by that means he shall maintain his
Falcon high fleeing, and inward, and very fond of the lewre. Here I will not
deny but that if she kill every day, although she stoop from a very high
gate, yet if she be not rebuked or hurt therewith, she will doubtless become
every day higher fleeing tha^ other, mary therwithall she will so much forget
the lewre, as the more you show it her, the more she will bend from it, and
flee out on head, from her keeper: and oftentimes will teach you hot poasting
iourneys. Wherefore above all things, the high fleeing Hawke should be made
inwards, and (as we term it) fond of the lewre, because it is no less praise
worthy in a high fleeing Falcon to make in and turn head at ye second or third
toss of the lewre, and when she powers down like a stone upon it, than if
she had killed: nay rather such are more esteemed than the other. And so is ye
Falconer more praise worthy which does win his Hawke thereunto. For to come
unto the lewre is a thing taught by art and industry, but to kill a foul is
the natural property of a Hawke.

To make a high fleeing Hawke upwards.
IT happens oftentimes that a Hawke (although she be naturally high fleeing)
will yet be long before she be made upwards, but will fish and play the
slugge: for when she should get up to cover the foul, she will stoop before
the foul be put out, the which may proceed through two causes. First it
may be that she is too sharp set, and the second cause may be that she is
flowen withal out of time, either too soon or too late. So that when you see
a Falcon use those evil tatches without apparent cause, you shall do well to
cast her out a dead foul or a dead Pullet for a dead quarrey (as Falconers
term it,) and to hood her up without any reward, to the end she may take
none encourageme^t to use those vile tricks: for there is no greater spoil to
an high fleeing Hawke, than when she kills a foul from a base and low
pitche, and so much the greater is the loss of her by how much the more, she
does use those vile buzardly parts. Therefore by my best experience, I praise
that order, to throw her out a dead quarrey and hood her up: then afterward
within half an hour, call her to the lewre, and feed her, and do this as
often as she uses to fish or to play the base slugge on that fashion, and to
find whether it proceed of being too sharp set, or of fleeing out of time,
the Falconer shall do well with all diligence to note the natural disposition
of his Hawks: as, which will flee being high and in good plight, and which
best, when she is kept low, which will flee best when she is set most sharp
and eager, and which contrary, and which in a mean between both, which
early at Sunnerising, and which when the Sun is two hours high or more,
which sooner, and which later in an evening. For the natures of Falcons are
very diverse and sundry, in such sort as to flee with a hawke at her best
hour and time, and to flee with her out of that time, is a thing which will
show as great difference, as between an excellent good Hawke and a Kight.
Therefore let the Falconer have especial regard thereunto, setting his Hawks
to flee according to their natures and dispositions, and keeping them always in
good order. And here it is to be noted, yt all Hawks as well Sorehawkes, as
mewed hawks and haggards, should be set out in the evening two or three
hours, some more and some less, having convenient regard to their nature, as
it is stronger or weaker: and in the morning also, accordingly as they cast,
hooding them first and then setting them abroad a weathering, until you get
up an Horseback to go to field, and so your Hawks will always be well
weathered and in good order These be the best means and observations which I
can set down for River Hawks, which if it succeed well to you, then shall
you stand assured of your sport, and I of my desire.

To make a Falcon to the Hearon.
NOw to teach you to make a flight at ye Hearon: although it be the most
noblest and stately flight that is, and pleasant to behold, yet is there no
such art or industry therein as in the other flights. For the Hawke flees
the Hearon: moved by nature, as against her proper foe: but to the river she
flees as taught by the industry and diligence of the Falconer. Then must it
needs follow, that (such Falconers as have flowen at the River, when the end
of the month of February or the beginning of March is come, a time when
Hearnes begin to make their passage,) if you will make those Falcons to that
flight, you must cease fleeing at the River with them any longer: but you must
pull them down and make them light, the which you shall do by feeding them
with no wild meats, but the hearts and flesh of Lambs, Calves, and chickens,
and calling of them to the lewre with other make Falcons, that is to say, a
cast at once, to the end they may accustom and aquaint themselves one with
another, and so may the better flee the Hearon by helping one another, and by
succouring each other. Herin you must take good heed so to acquaint them that
they crabbe not together, for so would they do when they come to the flight,
whereby they might be in peril to be spoiled or killed. When your Falcons be
skowred and clean, so as being sharp set, they may be called hungry Hawks,
or (as Faulconers term the^) eagre Hawks, you must get a live Hearon, upon
the upper part of whose bill or truncke you must convey the joint of a reed or
Cane, so as she may not hurt the hawke therewith: that being done, tie the
Hearon in a Criance, then setting her upon the ground, vnhood your Hawke, to
the end that when she espieth the Hearon she may flee her: and if she do so,
make in apace to succor her, and let her plume, and take blood of it, allowing
her ye brains, the marrowe of the bones with the Heart altogether: (the
Italians call it Soppa.) Having thus laid it upon your hawking glove, give it
your Hawk: and afterward rippe the breast of the Hearne, and let your hawk
feed thereon until she be well gorged. This being done, hoode her up, upon the
Hearon, suffering her plume thereon with all the favor that may be: then take
her upon your fist, and let her tire a little upon the foot or pynion of
the wing. But if a Falconer have not store of Hearons to train withal (as
often as it happens, by mean the foul is rare and dayntie) then may he do
thus: When he has armed or cased the Hearons tronke with a cane or reed, as
beforesayd, he may take a piece of a Calves skin, or such other like, as long as
the neck of a Heron, and beginning at the head continuing to the shulders and
body of the hearon, let him sew it in proportion and shape of a sheath, that it
may arm the Hearons neck and head: and afterward with a pensill, pen and
ink, or such other device, let him paint it as like as he can to the neck and
head of an Heron, with feathers and every thing to the purpose. Then let him set
the counterfeat Hearon upon the ground, as before said: and when the Hawk
does flee it and foot it, he must have a quick young Pigeon, the which he
must hansomly convey under the Hearons wyng, and let the Hawk plume and feed
thereon, reserving the Hearon safe for an other time, and to make train again
with it the next day. Then having thereupon rewarded your Hawk, and coyed
her sufficiently, you may go the next day into a meadowe, or other
convenient place, with your Falcon on your fyst: and giving the Hearon armed,
as beforesayde, to some other which may hold it under his arm a good way
off from the Hawke, as half an Arrowe shoot or more: Then your Hawke being
vnhooded, give sign unto him to throw up ye Hearon on high, and if your Hawke
seize it, reward and feed her with a Pigeon as beforesayd, dealing familiarly
with her, and the third day you may do again in like manner, causing him that
holds the train to hide himself as close as he can, and to cast out the
Hearon as far from him as he may All these being done, and the Hawke having
thus often taken her train to your liking, you may the fourth day in a fair
field, put out the Hearon without Criance or arming her at all: and when she is
up of a reasonable height, you may cast off your Hawke, who if she bind with
the Hearon and bring it down, the^ make in apace to reskew her, thrusting the
Hearo^s bill into the ground, break his wings and legs that the Hawke may
the more easily foot and plume it Then reward her as bountifully as you can
with the brains, the marrowe of the bones and the heart as is before declared
(making her the Italia^ Soppa) many use to make a train another way which does
not mislike me, and that is this: they cause one to climb a tree with the
Hearon, and from thence he casts her out to the Hawke, and then they let
their Hawks flee as before said. But as touching these traynes, it behooves
that the Falconer be of good Judgment, as also in diverse other things. For
even as the Hawke does flee them with better or worse list and life, so
behooves it that the traynes provided be stronger or weaker accordingly. ()

To make your Hawke flee the wild Hearon.
depiction of hawk

WHen your Hawke will kill a train lustely and boldly, then may you go into
the field to find a wild Hearon at siege, and when you have found her, win in
as nigh to her as you can, and go with your Hawke under the wind, where having
first loosed her hood in a readiness, as soon as the Hearon leaves the
siege, off with her hood, and let her flee: and if she climb to the Hearon,
and beat her so that she bring her down, run in apace to reskewe her,
thrusting the Hearons bil into the ground, and breaking her wings and legs,
(as is aforesaid) feed her and reward her upon your hawking glove, in manner
before declared. But if your hawke should fail to beat down the Hearon, or
do give him over, then shall you flee the Hearon no more with her, unless it
be with some other make Hawke, which is well entered and in good fleeing. And
thereby the unskillful Hawke seeing that other Hawke flee at the Hearon and
bind with her, will take courage and flee eake with that other make Hawke
either little or much, and if they kill the Hearon, then should they be fed
and rewarded together while the quarry is hot, making them an Italian Soppa as
before said. And by this means the coward Hawke may be made bold and perfect.
But if it chance that any lusty roysting Hawk will flee the Hearon of her self
without train, or ye Shoueler, the Falconer, should let her foot it, plume,
and break it until she find blood, and should give her the Soppa, as
Falconers do term it, for so they will become much bolder and the better
Hearoners also. But he that will work surely to enter his Hawke at the Hearon,
let him help her by any practice or means that he can devise: and these be
the means and precepts to make a Falcon a good Hearoner. ()

Of such Hawks as flee from the fiste, and first of the Sacre.
depiction of hawk or falcon

YOu must understand that all sorts of Falcons are made too the Lewre after
one self manner, but they are not hawked with all alike: for the Sacres,
Lanners, Gerfalcons, Millions, and Merlins, do not flee the river, unless
happily the Laners do, which as I understand do flee the river in France: but
they flee not single, but sundry Lanners at one time, more than a cast or a
leasse of them at once, and so peradventure do the Gerfalcon and the Million.
Whereof although there be few in this country which are made or flowen
withal, yet will I not spare to write what I have learned of them by heresay,
beginning with the Sacre. I say that they are flowen withal from the fiste, in
a plain field where there are fewest blocks, or stubbes, or such other
impedime^ts, but that a man may gallop freely: men hawke with them to the
Hearon, the Kight, and such like, as also at Feasant, Partridge, Quayle, and
sometimes at the Hare, but with more than one single Hawke atonce as I said
before. And in Cyprus they hawke with them to the Crane with the help of the
peregrine Falcon in this order: When they have found the Crane, the Falconer
does loose his Hawks hood in a readiness (I mean the Peregrine Falcon) and
drawing as near to the Crane as he can under the wind, when she rises, he
quickly vnhoodeth his Hawke and lets her flee, and after her they cast off a
cast or a lease of Sacres, which follow the peregrine Falcon, that leads them
as the more weighty and valiant Hawke: and because the Crane strives not at
the encounter in defense as ye Hearon does, but always flees right forthwards,
therefore the Peregrine Falcon does seize upon the Crane, and buckling with
her two or three bounds, the Sacres make in and beat her down to the ground
until the Falconers come in to reskew their Hawks, who speedely thrusting the
Cranes bill into the ground, do eftsoone break her wings and legs (as they
do the Hearnes,) because they do Hawks most wrong with their legs and feet:
which being done, they reward and feed all their Hawks upon the Crane,
making them an Italian Soppa upon their hawking glove, of the brains, marrow,
and the heart, but giving the peregrine a greater reward than the Sacres, (yet
with discretion) they reward them all together. Those peregrine Falcons which
are good for the Crane, are much esteemed in Cyprus of great states, and so
much the more, by how much they are more rare and passing in perfection. But
here amongste us this flight is not used, as well for that we have no such
ordinary store of Cranes, as also because our fields are not so plain and
free without fuel as theirs are in Cyprus. This is the order in Cyprus, but
in France, the chief use of the Sacre, is to kill the Kite as I have touched,
and partly made you show in the description of the Sacre, in the former part of
this collection. But by this ye see, Every country has his custom. ()

How to flee with the Lanner from the fiste.
depiction of Lanner falcon

LAners are much esteemed in France, for they flee with them (a cast or more
at once) to the River also. And because they are hawks (which mainteyne long
flightes,) they tire a foul in such sort, that with dogs and hawking poles
they kill many, and by that means they spoil more with a Laner, than with a
better hawke. Thus much I have heard by credible reports. These Laners are
flowen withal at Partridge also and Feasant, and some say that many of them
prove very good therefore. But in Italy they use no such fleing, peradventure
because there is no great skill in it. If you would flee with a Laner, you
must keep her marvelous short and sharp set. For they are of the same
nature that a Sacre, and that one (in manner) is made even as that other is:
and because they keep their eastings long, by reason they are hard metteld
hawks, you shall not give them casting of cotton, but of towe, or knottes of
hemp, or the shauing of a Hasell wande. And if you give them any Cotton
casting, yet put the towe or knottes of Hemp on the outside of it, and so
because they take small pleasure therein, they will cast the sooner. Let this
suffice to be said of these kinds of hawks, because they are ordinary, and
their natures too well known of all men.

To hawke with the Gerfalcon and the Mylion.
I Will speak some few words of the Gerfalcon and the Milion, which are all
(in manner) of one nature, as ye hawks last rehearsed, and are made to the
lewre in the self same manner. These hawks (as far as I have understood) do
not flee the River, but always from the fist they flee the Hearons, Shouelers,
and the Kight with the forked tail, and at such other flightes. In going up
to their gate, they hold not that course or way which other Falcons do. For
they clyme up upon the train, when they find any foul, and as soon as they
have reached her, they pluck her down, if not at the first, yet at the second
or third encounter. They are fed and rewarded as other Falcons are: they are
very crafty of nature, and covet to keep their castings long through sloth.
Therefore you shall not give them casting of Cotton, but of Towe, Hasell, or
hard things, as you shall do the Sacre and Laner. And you must keep them
likewise very eager and sharp set. It is a hawke that is flowen withal by
great states, and Princes most commonly. And therefore I will write no more of
it, as one that have no great practice thereof.

To flee with the Merlyne at the Partridge.
IF you will flee with the Merlyne at Partridge, choose the female, which is
the larger, for they only will prove good thereunto. And in trayning or making
the Jack, you should but loose your time. When you have made the female
Merlyne to the lewre, in manner before described, and that she will likewise
abide the hoode, you must make her a train with a Partridge, if you can get
any, if not, then with some other live bird, in such order as has been set
down to train other hawks. And if she foot and kill it, then reward her,
suffering her to take her pleasure on it, etc. This being done, you may
strayghtwaies flee with her the wild Partridge: and if she take it at the
first flight (which seldom happens) or if she flee it to mark and take it
at the second flight, being retryued by the Spanels, feed her up upon it
with a reasonable gorge, cheering her with your voice, in such sort, that she
may know the same. But if she prove not hardy at the first train, then you
shall do well to prove her with another train, before you flee with her at the
wild game. But if at the second train she prove not hardy, it is a token
that she is cowardly, and nothing worth. ()

To flee with the Merlyne at the Lark and Lenet.
depiction of merlin falcon

I Like it well that men flee with a cast of Merlynes at once at the Lark or
ye Lenet. For over and besides that they of themselves love company, and to
flee together, they do also give greater pleasure or delyght to the lookers on.
For now that one (at the stouping) strikes the bird, and then that other at
her down come: and when that one clymeth to the mowntie above the Lark, then
that other lies low for her best advantage, which is most delectable to
behold. Yea and sometimes the poor birds becomme so fearful, that they
shrowde themselves in the houses and chambers of such as dwell near the
fields. So that both the bird and the hawke are oftentimes taken both
together by the countryman. And therefore it shall not be amiss to tie unto
their Iesses or Bewets some vervile, bearing the arms of their owner and
master (as if they were Falcons) to the end they may be restored unto the^.
But to return to my purpose, I say that when the Merlynes are thoroughly
manned, and made gentle, you may carry them into the field, where having found
a Lark or a Lenet, (making loose her hoode) you must go as near as you can
into ye wind to the bird. And as soon as the bird rises from the ground,
vnhoode your cast of Merlines, and cast them to flee until they have beaten
down the Lark or Lenet, and let them feed on her for their labor
indifferently. But heerewithall note that there is a kind of Larkes, (called
cut Larkes) which do not mount as the long spurde field Lark does, but
flee forheade before the Merlyn. In any case let them not flee such Larkes, for
neither will they make you like pastime, nor yet ca^ you flee them without
danger of leesing your Merlynes.

Of the time to mewe a Falcon.
Let us now speak of the order how to mewe hawks, and of the Mewes. First
to speak of Falcons, they may be flowen withal until Saint Georges day,
that is about the myddest of April. Then set them down. And you must
diligently mark, whyther they have any lyse or not. And if they have, pepper
them to kill the said lyse, and skowre them before you cast them into the
mewe. That being done, you may put them into the mewe. There are two sundry
sorts of mewing, that is to say, mewing loose at large, or at the Stock: and
I will first speak of this last kind of mewing.

Of mewing at the Stock, or the Stone.
THe place wherein you should mew a hawke at the stock, should be a low
parler or chamber upon the ground, far from any noise or concourse of
people, and situate toward the North or Northeast. Place therein a table of a
convenient length, for the number of your Falcons, and let it be five or six
foot broad at the least, with little thin bordes or planckes all along
the sides and ends, nailed on four fingers high. And let this table be
set on trestles of two foot high, or three foot high from the ground, and
fill these tables with great Sand which has pretty little round pebble and
gravel stones in it: in midst whereof you may place some great free stones
a Cubite high, made like unto a pillar, flat in the bottom, and plain and
smooth above, growing by peccemeale less and less unto the top of them.
Whereunto let your hawks be tied, either Falcon, Gerfalcon, Myllion, or
Merlyne. Then take a small cord of the bigness of a bowstring, or little
more, put it through a ring, and bind it about the stone, in such sort that
the ring or swyvle may go round about the stone, without any stop or let:
And thereunto tie the lease of a Falcon, which may so stand upon the said stone
being set in the sand. But you must have regard, that (if you mewe more
Falcons than one at once in one room) you set your stones one so far from
another, that when your hawks bate, they may not reach one another for
crabbing. The great stones are set, for that a Falcon feeling the freshness
and coolenes of the stone, will delight to sit still upon it, and the little
grauel stones are, because a hawke will ofte^tymes swallow them to cool her
within, and will keep them some times two or three hours, or more within
her. The sand also is necessary, because when they bate, they shall not mar
their feathers, and also because thereby their mewtes are the eassier cleansed,
and to be removed from them. The little cord or bend with the ring on it,
are tied about the stone, because the Falcon bating this way and that way, she
shall never twinde nor tangle, because the ring follows her still. All day
your Falcons should be hooded upon the stone, unless it be when they would
feed, for then only you must take them on ye fiste, until they have fed. At
night off with their hoodes, and because sometimes inconveniences do happen by
night, the Falconer may do well to have his bed in the mewe, that he may the
sooner and in time help or redress any thing that shall happen amiss amongst
his hawks.

Of mewing at large.
IF you would mewe your Falcon at liberty and at large, then must you mew but
one at once in one room, and yet if the circuit of your mewe be great and
capable enough, there may two, three, or four Falcons be mewed therein well
enough (with divisions.) The scope for one Falcon must be twelve foot
square, and as much in height, or thereabout, with two windows a foot and
half broad, or two foot broad at the most. Whereof that one should open
toward the North, whereby ye mewe may always receive fresh cold air, and
ye other toward the East, for ye heat and comfort of the Sun. And each of
these windows should have his close casementes on ye out side, to shut when
you list, either one or both of them, according as occasion serves. If your
hawke be a madbraine Kite, and a great bater, then should it be best that this
mewe or chamber were on ye ground, which if be so, you must cover the ground
with gross sand four fingers thick, and thereupon set a stone in such
sort as before said, because Falcons do covet to stand upon a stone. And
therwithall you must make her two handsome perches, near to each window
one, that sitting on that one, she may have the comfort of the Sun, and on
that other, the fresh of the cool air, and every week, or at least every
fortnyght, you must set her a latten basin, or a vessel of ston or eartheo,
and at evening fill it with water, that your hawke may to the water, if she
desire it. And if she do bathe therein, then take it away the night
following, and have regard that your basin, pan, or such other vessel be
of such byggenesse and depth, that a hawke may therein commodiously bathe at
ease. Your mewe must also have a Portall, wherein there may be a little hole
bilowe to convey in the devise whereon their meat is served, called amongst
Falconers, the Hacke. And that must be made on this fashion. Take a piece of
thick boorde, a foot and half long, and a foot broad, or thereaboutes,
under the which fasten two little trestles three or four fingers high.
Let them be fast pynned or nailed to. Then with an awger or a pearcer,
boar two holes one each side thereof, and through each of these put a
short cord of the byggenesse of a bowestring, with the ends downewarde,
through the holes and knottes fast knitte on them under the button of the
board, so strayghte knytte, that you cannot raise the cord above the boorde
more than a fingers breadth, or theraboutes. And when you would give your
hawks meat, take a little stick somewhat longer than the Hacke, and as big
as your finger, but let it be of strong woodde, as Crabtree, Holly, or such
like. And upon that stick bind your hawks meat, and put the ends of ye
stick under the cords, upon the Hacke, and so convey it into the mewe to your
hawks, because ye hawke shall not trusse or dragge her meat away into ye mew,
but may feed there. And as soon as she has gorged her and fed, take it away
again. And it is to be understood, yt if you mew more tha^ one hawk single,
then must you have for every hawk her several Hacke. And it shall be good to
keep one set hour in feeding your hawke, for so shall they mew sooner and
better: and thus may you mewe hawks (loose and at large.) But unless it be a
Falcon which is so hot and madbrayned, that you are forced to mewe her so at
large. In mine opinion it shall be better to mewe at the Stock or Stone, as
before said, or else to mewe them at the Grate (as we call it.) For in that
kind of mewing we take our hawks on the fiste every day, and so may see in
what plight and state they be. And if they be sick, or fallen into any
infirmity, then may you give them such medicines as shall be declared in the
next division, the which cannot be done when you mewe at large. And therefore
I commend the mewing at the Grate, because many times our hap is to have
Haggardes, or Passengers, or Lentrers, the which have flowen either to the
River, or prayed for themselves. So that it shall be needful to bear them
often and every morning in the cool air, until midde Iulie, or more, or
less, according as you shall see them ramage and coy, yea and to call them to
the lewre, and to ride abroad with them also sometimes an hour or two, in
the fresh air. And it shall be a thing most necessary for a haggarde or a
hawke that has prayed for her self, either more or less. This I have
observed in mine own experience, and me thinks it an advertisement worthy
the noting unto all Falconers. Sundry Gentlemen do use to mewe their hawks on
the pearche, which truly I can most commend, as well for that they are then
assured to be clean fed, as also to be daily perused for lise, worms, and
other diseases, whereto they are by nature subject. ()

How to mew Marlins.
depiction of merlin falcon

MArlins are also worth the mewyng, if they be hardy, and have flowen well
in their soreage. For although some men be of opinion, that a mewed Marline is
seldom good, and that they are not possible to be mewed: yet have I had
Marlins that (being good in their soreage) have proved much better when they
were mewed. So that I would wish him that has a good Marlyn, to mew her: for
surely if you can mew them, they will prove better and better. Some men in the
mew do use to cast meal about their Marlyns, because they should not eat
their feet: but as well because they may eat their feet howsoever they were
mewed, if that were their property: as also because in those that I have
mewed, I have found no such cruelty used toward themselves: therefore I count
it but a fable, nor will give any other rules in the matter, than such as I
have prescribed already for the mewing of Falcons, and such like long winged
hawks.

Of Goshawkes.
YOu shall not need to show any other game to a Goshawke for her first
entering, than a Partridge, because in learning to flee the Partridge they prove
most excellent. And the first year you shall do best to flee them to the
field, and not to the covert, for so will they learn to hold out, (and not
to turn tail) in the midst of their flight. And when they be mewed Hawks,
you may make them do what you will: and understand you, that you shall not
need to take such pain, nor to use such art in making of a Goshawke which is
taken a brauncher, as with a Nyasse, for she will always know of her self
what to do. Yea and it shall be rather better to let her be a little rammage
still, than to man her over much. Her feeding would be good and hot meats.
And if you would instruct her to kill great fowls, make her traynes thereof,
as I have showed in the treaty of Falcons. And if you would have her continue
at those flightes, then you must not let her flee any lesser fowls, for that
would quickly mar her. If you would make her to flee with a Spanell or Dog
to help and assiste her, then feed your Goshawke with great fowls, as
Cranes, Wildegeese, and such like, and give your Dog flesh tied under the
wings of such fowls, when you train your Hawke with them, and let your Dog
be rewarded with the said flesh, when you reward your hawke upon the train:
and always acquaint the Dog and the Hawke well together. And this order you
shall observe for a month, or until your dog will thoroughly know his duty.
And evermore keep your dog tied up: for if you let him go loose, it will
mar him if he were the best that ever was. And never give him reward of
flesh, but when he makes in at such fowls to rescue the Hawke. Call your
Goshawke to none other thing than to your fist. Yet sometimes you may take her
down with a dead Pullet, or such like. And oftentimes spowte good wine upon
your Hawks Sear, observing the order to set her to the water, as is before
rehearsed in the treatise of Falcons. Evermore note that a Goshawke (for that
she is dainty) would be cured with sweet things ministered in all such
receytes as you shall give her. ()

To make fleeing the Goshawke, either Niasse or Ramage.
depiction of goshawk

YOu shall first observe many things already written of other kinds of
Hawks: as to seele and watch your hawke, win her to feed, to the hoode, and
to the fyst, and diverse other such points which should be but tedious to
rehearse. Therefore let me write of the order how to make a flight with a
Goshawke, either Niasse or Ramage, the which is very hard to do well. And
for my part I would not counsel any man to trouble himself much with them.
But if any man have a Niasse or Ramage Goshawke, whereof he would see the
proof, let him man her, and make her to the fist: then let him enter her first
to young Partridges, until it be November. In which time the fields are rydde
clean, and become empty, and the trees bare of leaves: then may you enter her
to the old Rewen, setting her short and eager. And if she kill at first, or
second flight, feed her up for three or four times with the Partridge which
she has killed: by that means I have seen some of them come to good
perfection.

To make the Sore Goshawke or the Haggard Goshawke.
YOur Sore Goshawkes, or your Haggardes, shall be trimmed with Iesses, Bewets
and Belles, as soon as they come to your hands: and you shall by all means
make them abide the hoode well, the which will be best brought to pass,
keeping them seeled, and hooding and vnhooding them oftentimes, and teaching
them to feed on the fyst three or four days, more or less until they leave
their ramagenesse and coyness, and become gentle: that being done, vnseele
them at night by candlelight, causing them to plume or tire upon a wing or
leg of a Pullet, and use your Hawks gently, and deal the best with them
that you can devise, until you have thoroughly manned and woonne them, and that
in secret places where they may not see much light, setting them upon a
Pearche, and using all diligence to make them iumpe to the fist by little and
little, until at last they will come three or four yeardes from you, and
feeding them most with the legs of Pullets or Calves hearts: then you may go
into a Garden, or into a Close abroad, and causing them to feed first a bit or
two upon your fist, with their hoodes on, and afterward as much with their
hoodes off, cast them down fair and softly to some Pearche, and make them come
from it to your fist either much or little, with calling and chirping to them,
saying: Towe, Towe, or Stowe, Stowe, as Falconers use, and when they come feed
them, crying and calling still to make them acquainted with your voice. The
next day you may call them with a Cryance, setting them upon a Pearche until
they come unto you further off, feeding and rewarding them liberally to make
them love you. And when they come to the fist redily and without checking or
ramagenesse, then lay a little from you a dead Pullet upon the ground, the
hawke sitting upon the Perch, and calling and chirping to her, if she come and
seize the Pullet, let her plume her and feed a bit or two thereon, walking
about her until you may without danger or moving of her, come near and take
her upon your fist, and so feed her: That being done, let her tire and plume.
Here I must advertise you that the wing of a Pullet cold, is not good feeding
for a Hawke: for it will make a Hawke sick: But the legs either hot or
cold may be given. And likewise you shall mark that I would have you cast out
a Pullet to a Goshawke dead and not alive: for these kind of Hawks are much
enclyned of nature to play the Poulters. So that if you should use to throw
the^ out live poultrie, it might make them sometimes when they flee turn tail
to the Partridge, and seize the Pullets or Chickens which they shall see in
husbandmens yardes and backsydes when they flee. Or in like manner when they are
set to bathe at length of their loins, the which would not only mar them,
and make them full of ill properties, but also might cause the ignorant people
(as women and boys) to kill them in stead of a Puttocke. When you have thus
called your Goshawke abroad two or three days until she be well cunning, you
shall take her on your fist, and get up on horseback with her, and so ryding
with her the space of an hour or there aboutes, vnhoode and hoode her
sometimes, and give her a bitte or two of meat in the presence and sight of
your Spaniels, because she shall not be afearde of them. That being done, set
her on a tree with a little short Cryance tied to her loins, and going seven
or eight yeardes from her on horseback, call her to your fist with such voice
and words, as Falconers use: and if she come, give her two or three bittes for
reward, and cast her up again to the tree, then throw out the dead Pullet
eight or ten yeardes from her. If she flee to it and seize it, let her feed
three or four bittes upon it, ryding the mean while about her on horseback,
and rating back your Spaniels, because they shall not rebuke her at first, and
so make her ever after fearful of dogs. Then alight off your horse, gently
take her upon your fyst, feed her, and when you have so done, hoode her and
let her plume or tire. Here I will say for mine own opinion, that a dead
Partridge, or a counterfeyte Partridge, made with the very plumage, wings and
tail of a Partridge, were much better to throw out unto your Goshawke,
because it would make her both know Partridge the better, and poultrie the
less.

To make a Goshawke flee to the Partridge.
depiction of goshawk

WHen your Goshawke is thus manned and cunning, then may you go into the field
with her, carrying with you a train Partridge if need be: and vnhooding your
Hawke, bear her as quietly as you can: you may let her plume or tire a
little to make her eagre. And if the Partridge spring let her flee: if she
mark one or two or more on the ground, then go to her fair and softly, and
manacing her with your hand, or with a wande, cause her to take Pearche on
some tree thereby. Then if you can retryue the Partridge with your Spaniels, as
soon as it springs, you must cry Howit, Howit: and if she flee it to the
mark again, you must put her to a tree, and retryue it the second time,
crying when it springs as before said And if she kill it, feed her up with
it: but if so chance that the Spaniels should take it, as oftentimes hot
Spaniels light upon the Partridge, being either flowen out of breath, or
otherwise surcharged with fear: then alight from your Horse quickly, and
taking it from the Spaniell, cast it out to your Hawke crying, ( ware Hawke
ware) and let her feed her fill on it. The next day you shall not flee with
her, because having fed and rewarded her with bloody meat, she will not so
soon be in good case to flee again. For such meat is not so easily indewed
by a Hawke, as the leg of a Chicken or such like. Using her thus three or
four times, she will be well in blood, and become well fleeing at this
pleasant field flight.

How to help a Hawke that turns tail to tail, and gives over her game.
IT happens oftentimes, that when you have let your Goshawke flee at a
Partridge, she will neither kill it, nor flee it ot mark, but turns tail to
tail, as Falconers term it: that is when she has flowen it a bowshot or
more, she gives it over, and takes a tree. Then shall you call in your
Spaniels to the retryfe, that way that your Hawke flewe the Partridge. And the
Falconer drawing himself that way, may cast her out a quick Partridge which
he shall carry for such purposes in his Hawking bag, in such sort as the
Hawke may see it, and think that it is the same which she flewe. And so
crying when you cast it out, ware Hawke ware, make her seize it and feed her
upon it, that she may be encouraged thereby to flee out with a Partridge. The
day following you shall not flee with her, as is before said, but prepare her
against the third day and set her sharp: and if then also your Goshawke give
over, serve her with a quick Partridge again. But if she do it the third
time, I would not wish you to trouble your self any longer with such a
vile Buzarde, but rid your hands of her, for sure it is great odds that
she will never prove good. And yet if any man will try his Hawke to the
vttermoste, then let him make her flee a Partridge which is flowne to the
mark with some other well entered Hawke, at the first or second flight. And
if she kill that, let him feed and reward her well, using her to such
flightes three or four times, and so peradventure she may learn to hold
out, and maintain her flight the better.

When a Goshawke will not flee at all.
FOrasmuch as the Goshawkes which are taken in September, or October, do not
know their pray so well as they which are taken later, since they have not
prayed so long as those old, it happens many times that when they are made
to the first, and brought even to the point to flee, if you let them flee at a
Partridge, they take a tree and will not flee at all. To redress that, you
shall go into a plain field where are no trees, with a quick Partridge, the
which you shall give to some of your company, your self shall ride up and
down half an hour with your hawke upon your fist vnhooded: and then drawing
near to your companion which has the Partridge, when you come within ten or
twelve paces of him, let him privily cast out the Partridge, and let your Hawke
flee at it: which done, reward and feed her well thereupon. If peradventure
your Goshawke have need of more such traynes, then you may continue it three or
four times, until she be well in blood with such flightes. But surely such
Hawks are not greatly to be regarded. The same that is said of Goshawkes, is
to be understood also of Tercels. And always remember that the next day after
you have rewarded and fed your Hawke upon the foul or bird that she
kills, feed her the next day with sheep heart, or Hens legs betymes
in the morning, to bring her in order again to flee.

To make a Goshawke flee quickly.
SOre Goshawkes (especially Niasses) are commonly very fond of the man, and
therefore should be flowne with a little more ramage, and before they be
thoroughly reclaymed, for else oftentimes within two or three strokes with their
wings, they will give over the foul that they flee, and return straight
again to their keeper. Therefore remember to flee with them as soon as you
can, and that until they be perfectlye nousled and in blood. They must also
be set in places where they see not many folk, for fear they become very
fond of the manne: But when they have flowne, and have killed twice or thrice,
then set them where people and Dogs frequent, the which shall be
necessary, to prevent the inconvenience which might happen, when they are at
mark near to a house, or upon a high way, if then they should be
discouraged with sudden sight of any person that went by. And yet by this
advertisement of fleeyng quickly with a Sore Goshawke or a Niasse, I might make
some Falconer learn a worse mischief, if by fleeing over soon with his
Hawke, he should pull her down, or make her poor, the which would cause
her to become fearful and cowardlye, and to give over a Partridge, as I have
seen diverse, that although they were at the first very toward Hawks, yet
after they have been once pulled down, they have lost their courage and
goodness. And therefore by what means soever a Goshawke or Tercell shall
become poor, it shall be the Falconers part first to set her up again,
before he flee with her, unless it be some Goshawke (whereof there are but
few) which will not flee when she is hie, and in good plight. Then the
Falconer may somewhat bate her flesh, and pinche her with scouring, washed
meat and such like devises: But let him always rather keep his Hawke in such
wise, that she may flee when she is lusty: and therewithal let him set her
abroad (when it is not over cold) betymes in the morning for one hour or
twain. For being so weathered, when she has flowne a Partridge to the
mark, she will not away, until it be retryued by the Spaniels.

That a Goshawke being a good Partridger, be not flowen with to the Feasant.
IF your Goshawke be once a good Partridger, beware that you let her not flee
the Poute, or the Feasant, for the Feasant flees not so long a flight as the
Partridge does. And therefore the Goshawke being naturally more ravenous and
desirous of pray than any other Hawke, would more delight to flee a short
flight to the Feasant, and will care less to hold out at a Partridge. True it
is that some are good for both, but those are very rare: And therefore you
must have consideration thereof, as also to keep them in good order with
fleeing, bathing, weathering, tyring, pluming, and diverse other points of
Falconrie, the which do serve also for Tercels as well as for Goshawkes.

How to use a haggard Goshawke.
THe traynes which you use to give Sore Goshawkes and Niasses, are not so
requisite for a haggarde. For the Sorehawkes and Niasses when they are made to
the fist, and to seize a Pullet upon the ground, will then abide and never
sore away, and may immediately be flowen withal at a Partridge, so that you
bear a live train Partridge with you to serve her if need be, as has been
heretofore declared in entering of other hawks. And the principal point of
consideration is, that you encourage any Hawke well at the first. In fleeing
with a Goshawke, it happens oftentimes that fleeing in the Snow, and killing
their pray upon the ground, they fill their Belles with Snow, so that the
Falconer cannot tell where to find them. At such times then, fasten a Bell
upon the two covert feathers of your Hawks Stearne or Train, and that aloft
near to her rumpe. For so do the Falconers of Dalmatia use at all times of
the year to flee with their Hawks. And it is a good mean to know at all
times where, and what is become of your Hawke.

To flee with a Goshawke to the River.
depiction of goshawk

Now I have (in mine own judgment) set down as much as is necessary, to
make a Goshawke perfect in killing of a Partridge or any other field flight: I
will also declare how you may flee to the River with a Goshawke, and how you
may kill great fowls with her. A Goshawke (but no Tercell) may flee to the
River at Mallacde, Ducke, Goose, Hearon, and such like, whether it be because
she proves not to the field, or for any other delight that she or her keeper
has to the River. And you shall hold this order in making her, the which
doubtless shall bring her to perfection: For Goshawkes do more willingly flee
such flightes than at any other. And yet is there great difference seen in
the proof of them: for some of them prove much hardyer and better than some
other do. Well, the Falconer shall first make his Goshawke to the fist, in
such sort as I have prescribed, when I taught to flee them unto the field.
Then must he carry her into the field without Belles, with a live Ducke
given unto one of his Companions. And the Falconer must have with him a little
Drum or Taberde fastened to the Pommell of his Saddle, together with the
sinewe of an Ox leg dried, which shall serve him to strike upon his
Drumselet or Taberde: and causing his Companion to hide himself in a ditche,
There has been used a kind of flight with a Goshawke, called the flight made
to the beck, and it is like to this, but it is much surer and better.
or pit, with the Ducke tied to a Cryaunce, his Hawke being vnhooded upon
his fyst, he shall draw toward his companion which stands so hid in
covert. And when he is near him within two or three paces, or little more,
he shall strike upon his Tabarde twice or thrice: and his Companion hearing
him, shall throw out the Ducke aloft. And let the Falconer cast off his
Goshawke to it, and if she take it at the Sowrce, let him reward her and
feed her with a reasonable gorge, making her all the cheer that may be: then
let him take her upon his fyst and hoode her, suffering her to plume or to tire
upon a wing or a leg of the Ducke. The next day he shall not flee with her,
as before I have admonished. But the third day he may go again in like manner
with his Companion, or else may seek some water pashet or pit where
wyldefowle lie, as Teales or such like. Provided always that he seek the
advantage of his flighte, where the Banckes be high: For the higher that the
banks be, the better he may come to make his flight: and in such a place, he
and his Companion, one on the one side, that other on the other, may ride
fair and softly until they find foul, and yet put them not up. When they
have found them, both of them shall draw back along by the Bancke, and the
Hawke being vnhooded, they shall trotte both of them right upon the foul
with their Horses. When they be near them, he which has the Tabarde shall
beat it, so that the Foul may rise, and then he may let flee his Hawke:
and if she take any of them at Sowrce, let him make in to her a pace, and
cross the Fowls wings, so that she may foot it and plume it at her
pleasure, rewarding her as before.etc. And the better to encourage her when he
has hooded her, let him set her upon the Foul, and let her plume it her
fill, and after let him take her on his fist, and give her a wing or a leg of
the Foul to tire on: And the next day let him not flee.etc. And when his Hawke
is thoroughly nousled and in blood, then he may flee twice in a day or oftener
with her, rewarding her as before is expressed. Using his Hawke thus, he shall
so well encourage her, that he may flee the oftener with her at his pleasure.

Of fleeing the Wildegoose and Crane with a Goshauke.
SOme delight to flee Wildegeese and Cranes with a Goshawke, and such other
great flightes. And the train must be made in this wise: When the hawke is
made to the fist as before said, let him go on foot abroad into the field
with his Goshawke on his fist, carrying with him a Wildegoose, or a tame Goose
of the color of a Wildegoose, tied by the tail with a Cryaunce. And having
set her on the ground eight or ten Paces from him, let him vnhoode the
Hawke, and twitche the Goose with the Cryaunce until he, make it stir and
flicker with the wings. Then if his Goshawke bate at it, cast her off, and
run in to succor her, so that the Goose beat her not with her wings, for
discouraging her. And if he have store of traynes, then he shall reward and
feed her on the brains, heart, and thyghe of that which he trained
withal. But if he have no store, then it shall be needful to save that for
another train. This done, let him closely convey a Pygeon under the wing of
the train, and reward his hawke therewith, as has been heretofore
declared in the traynes to the Hearon. And the next day let her not flee,
but set her down, etc. The third day he may give her another train,
somewhat further off. And the third train he shall give it her on horseback,
fifty or three score paces off at the least, or so far off as he may come
in to succoure his hawke in time. His hawke being thus trained and entered, he
may ride out with his hawke (without belles, because the Geese shall not rise
before the Falconer have brought his hawke to the vauntage) then with his
Tabard to beat it up, and so forth, whereof I have told before. And having
found any wild geese, he shall show them to his hawke, who being naturally
moved, will make from the fiste to them, and will flee low by the ground,
until she come near them. Then the Falconer shall ride after apace, and
strike upon his Tabarde, until he raise the Wildegeese. And if his hawke
seize any of them at Source, he shall quickly succoure her, and reward her,
etc. But for as much as Wildegeese will rise as soon as they see any body.
Therefore the Falconer must teach his hawke to take the advantage, which is
thus done: As soon as he has found them a far off, let him alyghte from
his horse, and carrye his hawke vnhooded behind his horse, stawking toward
them, until he have gotten reasonably near them, holding down his hawke
couerte under the horse neck or body, in such sort, that she may find
the Geese. Then the Falconer shall run in apace, and strike upon his
Tabarde, to raise the Geese. And if she kill any of them, reward her, etc.
Using his hawke in this order, she may be made to kill two or three, or more,
in a day. And in like manner may she be made to the Crane. And in like
sort may he creep to flee at foul which lie upon pyttes, or pondes. First
showing them to his hawke, and letting her draw to them, and then running in
to put them up with his Tabarde. But the Falconer must take heed, that as
long as he may find great flightes, he flee not at smaller foul, to the
end his hawke may continewe the more boldly to flee great flightes. For a man
may soon make a hawke a cowarde and a slugge. Yet some there be, (but those
are very rare) which fleeing at all kinds of fowls, becomme still hardyer
and hardyer, and better and better. Now having written sufficiently of such
flightes, I will pass over to teach the means to mewe a Goshawke.

To mewe a Goshawke.
WHen you have flowen either with Goshawke or Tercell, foare, or haggarde,
until March, give her some good quarrey in her foot, and foreseing that she
be clean from lyse, cut off the buttons of her Iesses, and throw her into
the mewe, the which may be a room either bylowe, or on the ground, set
toward the North if it be possible. And as for the bygnesse, so that it be
not too little, let it be as large as you will, and let the pearches therein
be lyned with Canuas or Cotton, so that the hawke hurt not her feet
therevppon: for thereby she might catch either the gowte, or the pynne. Let
the mewe also have a window toward the East, and another toward the North, to
take fresh air, and the comfort of the Sun. You shall also provide in the
same mewe, a Basin or other vessel for water, and every three days at the
most, change and shifte the water. And feed your hawke either with Pygeons,
or with Quayles, or else with hot flesh of a Weather or gelded Goat, for
that will make her mewe well and quickly.

To draw the Goshawke out of the Mewe.
ABout the beginning of October, if you perceive your Goshawke fair mewed, and
hard penned, then give her either chickens, or Lambs hearts, and Calves
hearts, by the space of.xx. days together, to skowre her and to make her slise
out the slymie substance and glytte out of her pannell, and to enseame her (as
Falconers term it.) That being done, one evening you may draw her out of the
mewe, and new furnish her with Iesses, Bells, and Bewets, and of all other
things that shall be needful. And when you have seeled her, keep her so seeled
two or three days, until she will be gently hooded. And thereof a Falconer
ought to have a special regard. For commonly all mewed hawks are as coy to
be hooded, as when they were first taken. But when you have woonne her to abide
the hoode gently, then in an evening by candle light you may vnseele her, and
the next day you may go about to show her the fiste and the glove. And as I
have before advised you to deal with Haggardes, or hawks new taken from the
Cage, you shall not forget to let her tire and plume morning and evening,
giving her sometimes in the morning, when her gorge is empty, a little Sugar Candy, for that will help her maruelously to endewe. Sometimes also when she
is empty in gorge, and panell, you shall give her skowrings of Aloes Cicotryne,
Cloves, and Stauesaker, wrapped in a little piece of Cotto^ or in Towe, or
lynen cloth. But hereof shall be written more plainly in the treatise of
medicines.

To make a mewed Goshawke fleeing.
WHen the Falconer shall perceive his Goshawke to feed eagerly, and perceyueth
by his judgment that she is enseamed, and that he may boldly flee with
her: then let him go into the field, and finding Partridge, if the hawke
bate at them of her own accord, it is a token, that she is empty, and
ready to flee: but if she bate not, then does it betoken the contrary.
Therefore in such case feed her still with washte meats, and things
convenient, as long as you shall think requisite. For doubtless if she be once
thoroughly enseamed and ready, she will flee of her own accord. And then if
she kill, feed and reward her as has been before declared. But if she flee
to the mark with a Partridge, then you must retriue it, and serve her as is
also before expressed. ()

How to keep Nyasse Sparowhawkes.
depiction of sparrowhawk

SParowhawkes are to be considered of as all other kinds of hawks are,
according to their age and disposition. Some of them are named Nyasses, some
Braunchers, some Soarehawkes, and some mewed hawks: Some also Haggards, being
mewed in the woodde, they are called Nyasses, which are taken in the eyree.
Branchers are those, that having forsaken the eyree, are fed by the old
hawke upon the boughs and branches near about the eyree, and thereupon they
are called Branchers: afterward they are called Soarehawkes. They are called
Soarehawkes, because when they have forsaken the woodde, and begin to pray
for themselves, they flee up aloft upon pleasure, which with us Falconers is
called soring. Mewed hawks are all hawks that have once or more shifted their
feathers: and Haggards are they which pray for themselves, and do also mewe
themselves either in the woodde, or otherwise at large. To begin with the
Nyasse, which is of greatest difficulty to bring unto any perfection, you
must first feed her in some fresh cool chamber or parler upon the ground.
And ye same chamber should have two windows not very large, whereof that one
should open toward the North, and that other toward the East, to take the
fresh cool air, or the comfort of the Sun at her pleasure. These windows
must be open, barred ouerthwarte with lathes, or thin bordes, so thick that
neither your hawks may get out, nor your Catte may come in. And in this
chambee cast and strewe Vine leaves, and other fresh leaves. For it
refreshes a hawke maruellousely to rest upon them. And for the same
consideration it shall not be amiss, to set two or three great free
stones in the chamber, whereupon the Hawks may sit cool and fresh. You
must also have two or three pearches lyned or covered, one a little higher
than another, so that the hawke as she grows huger and huger, may flee from
one pearche to another, and never hurt her feet. And when she is full sommed,
so as she can flee, then will it be meet and most necessary to set some
large basin, or other vessel full of water, that she may bathe her at
pleasure therein. For that is not only very wholesome for her body, but also
will make her put out her feathers ye better, and the faster. And you shall do
well to shifte her water every three days. You shall feed her with young
Sparrowes, Martelettes, and young Pygeons, and sometimes with Sheep hearts:
and whiles she is very young and little, you should cut her meat, and
shredde it in small pellettes upon a trencher, or a clean board for the
purpose, setting it so near her, that she may reach it with her beak, and
feed. Thus you shall feed her twice, or more every day, even as you shall
see her endewe it, or (as Falconers say) put it over. Beware that you give
her not gorge upon gorge, for that will make her cast her gorge. But when she
is full sommed, and flees about, then you shall do better to give her whole
birds, and sometimes to feed her upon your fiste, suffering her to kill and
strain the live birds in your hand: Yea and sometimes to put quycke birds
into the chamber to her, that she may learn to know them, to foot them,
and to kill them: and let her feed upon them her self in your presence.
For that shall be very good, as well to nowsel her, as also to make her leave
that vile condition which commonly all Nyasses have, which is, to carry and
hyde their pray in some hedge or ditche, or secret place: and therein they
will sit very close for being heard, when they hear or perceive their
keeper to seek them. Whereupon their keepers are oftentimes evil troubled and
displeased. And also it shall not be amiss, every morning to go into the said
chamber, and to call them to the fiste, whistling and chirping with your mouth,
for by yt means you shall both manne them thoroughly, and also you shall gain
the time which you should else spend afterward, in making them when they were
ready to be drawn out of the said chamber.

To reclayme and make the Nyasse Sparowhawke.
WHen your Nyasse Sparowhawke has put forth all her feathers, and is full
sommed, then shall you take her out of the chamber, and furnishe her with
belles, bewets, Iesses, and lines. And by my counsel you shall also feel her
at the first, to make her gentle to abide the hoode, which is contrary to
her nature, and to make her tractable to be handled, using her favorably and
lovingly always: and at the first with a hoode which is too great and
large, to hoode and vnhoode her oftentimes, stroking her head softely with
your hand, until she will stand still, and abide the hoode gently. Then in
an evening by light of a candle you shall vnseele her, gyuing her somewhat to
tire upon, handling her and stroking her feathers gently, sometimes hooding and
vnhooding her. And because Nyasse Sparowhawkes are seldom made perfect and good
without great pains and diligence, therefore observe these things, and use
them accordingly, if you will have a good Nyasse hawke.

To train a Nyasse Sparowhawke.
WHen your Nyasse is well won to the hoode, and to the fiste, let her kill
small birds upon your fiste, then call her two or three days together,
until she will come far off. Then you must take a quycke Pygeon tied by
one foot with a Cryaunce, and stir it until your hawke will bate at it, and
seize it, though not far off, yet as you may, and help her at the first,
least the Pygeon struggling with her, be too strong, and discourage her. Then
let her plume her and foot her, and feed her thereupon with as much favor
as you may, and whistle to her, to make her know your whystle, until she
have taken a reasonable gorge. Then hoode her up, and let her plume or tire a
little afterward. They day following you shall call her to the fiste, and
show her a live Pygeon, so near that she may reach at it with her beak.
Then cast it out before her, until she flee it, and take it.

That done, reward her, etc. Again you shall another time throw out a
chicken before her, and if she take and foot it, reward her, etc.
Afterward you shall cause one to hide himself close in a ditch or pit, and
throw her out a Pigeon or Pullet, if she take it, reward her and feed her up
with the brains, heart, and a leg or a wing, whistling, chirping, and
speaking to her to encourage her: and this order you shall observe awhile, still
serving her with greater and greater traynes: for by that means you shall give
her courage to flee, yea if it were at a Feasant, for that chickens are some of
them not much unlike a Feasant poult. As also using her to great chickins,
she will never covet to carry as she would do if you trained her with smaller
birds, which is a thing worthy the observation, as you shall find by
experience. And when you have given her sufficient trains of chicken and such
like, you shall one day set her sharp, then take a Quayle tied in a Criance,
and in a plain meadowe: First show her unto your Sparowhawke, then throw it up
aloft and cast your Hawke off handsomely after her, and if she take it, reward
her with the brains to nousse and encourage her, but feed her with the leg
of a chicken or Pullet, and deal daintely with her. The next time you may
train her with a Quayle without a criance, the which having a leg broken,
and two feathers plucked out of each wing, give it to another which may closely
throw it out to her, and feed her up therevppon with a good gorge. Being thus
oftentimes trained, you may ride out into the fields about nine of the clock,
where calling your sparowhawke to your fiste and giving her a bitte or two of
meat, go with your Spaniels to seek some Beauie of young Quayles, aduauncing
your fiste aloft, that your Hawke may see them when they spring, and let her
flee with advantage at the first. If she kill, reward and feed her, etc. but
if she miss, or that you find no yo^g Quayles, then serve her with a train of
a Quayle as is often before said.

How to hawke with a Sparowhawke being made.
WHen your Sparowhawke is once made, you may go freely into the field: and if
you find any young Quail let her slay thereat with as much advantage as you
can: and if she take it, reward and feed her etc. Remember that at first
entering of your Hawke you hold your fiste aloft always, as well because your
Hawke may see the game spring, as also that she may learn to have an eye to
the Dogs, the which you shall always cause to hunt on your right hand when
they raunge, but especially when they quest and call, to the end you may the
better and at more advantage cast off your Hawke when you let her flee. And
when your Sparowhawke does know her game and how to flee, then may you flee
more than one flight in a forenoone or an afternoon, so that always you give
her some small reward at every flight that she kills. And because it behooves
much always to encourage your Hawke, and to keep her well nousled, you
shall do well ever to carry a live Quayle with you, that if you find none, or
flee and miss, you may therewith train or serve your Hawke accordingly: and
you may cause it so to be cast out unto her, that she will think it is sprung
with the Spanells. As also I would wish you evermore to keep alive the second
Quail that you shall take, and keep it in your hawking bag, so as if need
be, it may serve you at night or at any time to reward your Hawke with: for
keeping your Hawke in this order, she can never lightly be discouraged. And
when your Hawke is thoroughly entered and perfectly well in fleeing, and well
nousled, then you shall hold your hand low, whereas before you held it aloft.
For your Hawke being much quicker sighted tha^ you are, she will sooner see the
game spring also, and bate at the whurre, as we term it: then before the
Hawke can reeouer your fiste, the game is flowen far off to her great
disadvantage: yea although you should let her go when she bateth, yet shall she
not flee with such advantage as you might let her flee when she and you both
spied the game spring at once. He therefore that will be a perfect keeper of a
Sparowhawke or such like, must have a quick eye, and a good consideration and
regard to the Spanells, keeping them still as near as he can upon his right
hand, and hold his hand low, because his Hawke shall not bate at the game
before he see it. And also it shall not be good to be over near the Dogs,
but rather a little above them, that you may let your Hawke flee coasting at
the vantage when the game springs, and always to be quick of eye and nimble
of hand, for he that is not so, nor regards the aduauntages of a flight,
shall hinder his Hawke whereas he might further and help her.

How to make a Sparowhawke, being either Sorehavvke, ramage, or mevved Hawke.
NOw I have spoken at large of Nyasse Sparowhawkes, it were meet that I should
set down some instructions also concerning Ramage Hawks, and such as are
taken when they have prayed for themselves. And yet in effect the same precepts
that serve for a Nyasse, will serve also for ramage Hawks and mewed Hawks.
But yet they, (I mean ramage and mewed Hawks) require not so much pain to
make them know their game nor to enter them, because they have been practiced
in praying for themselves, and the Nyasses are altogether ignorant and simple:
so that the Nyasses must be taught to know their game, in a manner, even as
they are taught by the breeder in the wood, the which (as I have heard old
Falconers tell) when her young Hawks go out of the nest and can hoppe or flecke
from one bough to another, comes in with some pray unto them, and calling
them altogether, she flees aloft and lets the bird fall amongst them, so that
which soever of them catches it with her tale^ts, feeds upon it for that
meal, and then returns the old Hawke for some pray, until she have fed
them all and taught them to foot their pray And therefore when a man has
them Nyasse which never were taught so by the breeder, he must practice as near
as he can like the old Hawke, to teach them to foot and to kill their pray
and to know it, the which you shall not be troubled with in a soar rammage or
metred Hawke. For they which bear those names, have learnt to pray for
themselves: and most of all the mewed haggard Hawks, for they are thoroughly
nousled and trained therein, yea and most commonly they have learnt such
conditions, that with all the pains we can take, few of them can be brought
to any good perfection. But he which has a Haggard Sparowhawke, must above
all things take pains in weyning her from that vile fault of carrying, and that
shall he do by serving her often with great Pullets, and other great traynes
the which she cannot carry, and thereby, she will learn to abide upon the
quarrey. Also they which delight in Haggards, must take great heed that they
offend them not, but rather coye them as much as they can with all devises of
favor and cherishing, for they will remember favor or injury much better than
any other kind of Hawke. And of the same condition are Lentmers for the most
part, the which are called with us March Hawks, or Lentmers, because they are
taken in Lent with lime or such like means. And the Italians call them
Marzarolli, because they are taken in March or thereabouts: so that the
Etymology of the name proceeds all upon one cause, and they are called so
whether they be Soar Hawks or mewed hawks. Neither is there any great
difference between them and haggards for evil conditions, but the Lentmers are
more subject to moist humors, and especially in the head, and therefore you
must plie them with casting and skowring, as shall be more at large declared
in the treatise of medicines.

Certain observations for an ostreger in keeping of a Goshawke.
depiction of man with falcon

MAny times it happens yt a Goshawke or a Tercell which was good in her
Sorage, does become nothing so toward or good when she is mewed: and that
proceeds because in her soarage she was not cherished to make her take
delight in her flight: for in a manner all the skill of a Falconer or Ostreger
consists in coying and delicate usage of his Hawke, and so cherishing her,
that she may take pride and pleasure in her flight. Therefore I would not
think it amiss if he had always at the first entering of his Goshawke or
Tercell, a train Partridge in his bag, to serve her with, when need does
require, and so he shall win her love. And therewithal let him mark these
observations, to keep his Hawke in good tewne always. First let him consider
that naturally all Goshawkes are full of moist humors, and especially in the
head: and therefore let him plie them with tiring, and plumage, both morning and
evening, for that will open them in the Head, and make them cast water thereat.
Let the Goshawkes tiring be the rumpe of a beef, or ye uppermost joint of a
wing which we call the pinion, or a chickens leg, given by the fire or in the
warm Sun. This will not only keep your Hawke open in the head, but also
keeps her in exercise and use and from slothfulness, which might mar her
and utterly spoil her.

It is good also to give her every night casting either of feathers or of
cotton, and then in the morning to mark whether it be wrought round or not,
whether it be sweet or not, whether it be moist or dry, and of what color
the water is that drops out of the casting, for thereby he shall judge in
what case his Hawke is. He should also have regard to her mewtes, to see
whether they be clean or not, and therevppon he may give medecines
accordingly, as shall be hereafter declared. For the infirmity of a Hawke being
once known, it is the more easily cured. He has also to consider the season:
for in the winter and cold weather, he must set his Hawke or Tercell warm,
in some place where fire is made: he must roll the perch with cotton or some
such like thing, and the perch must be set far from the wall that his Hawke
hurt not her feathers when she bateth: but if it be not cold, he may set her
every morning in some place where the Sun has power for an hour or two.

Remember that no Hens or pultrie come near yt place where your Hawke shall
perch, and especially in Lent when Hens have young chickens commonly
following them.

Remember also in the spring to offer your Hawke to the water every week, for
else she will soar away when she flees, and make you seek her.

If your Hawke bathe her at any time of her own accord after her flight, go
presently to the next house with her, (if it be in Winter or cold weather) and
weather her by a fire with her back to the fire, and not her gorge, for that
would make her sick. And likewise dry your Hawke if you have carried her in
the Rain. Let a good Falconer or Ostreger always keep his Hawke lusty and
high, and yet keep her in such tewne that she may flee best when she is high:
for doubtless the plucking down of a Hawke does mar her and make her
cowardly. Above all things an Ostreger must be patient and never chollerique.

A good Ostreger must also keep his Hawke clean, and her feathers whole, and
if a feather be broken or bruised, he must ympe it presently, as shall be
taught herafter also in this book, and therefore he must have his ymping
needles, his Semond, and such other things about him evermore in a readiness.
()

Certain observations concerning Sparowhawkes.
depiction of sparrowhawk

SEt your Sparowhawke every morning abroad in the Sun two hours or near
there aboutes, and set her in the water twice in a week at the least, and
especially Nyasses, for they covet ye water more tha^ the rest. Soar
Sparowhawkes would not be flowen withal too soon in a morning, for they soar
willingly. Take your Sparowhawke from the perch always with somewhat in your
hand, to make her love you and be fond of you, for that is a thing of no
small importance and consideration. As also to make your Sparowhawke foot
great fowls, to the end the may not learn nor be accustomed to carrein. And
as touching mewing of a Sparowhawke, some use to put their Sparowhawke in the
mew as soon as they leave fleeing with her, cutting off both her bewettes,
lines, and the knottes of her Iesses, and leave her in the mewe until she be
clean mewed. But if you will have her to flee at Partridge, Quayle, or Feasant
poult, then you must draw her in the beginning of April, and bear her on
the fiste till she be clean and thoroughly enseamed. Some other keep their
Sparowhawkes on the perch until March, and then throw her into the mewe
being peppered for lyse if she have any. Her mewe should be a chamber aloft
from the ground eight or nine foot long, and five or six foot broad, with
two windows, to the East and the North, as is before declared in the
description of the mewe for a Goshawke: and set her perches and al other things
even as for a Goshawke, saving that the mewe must have one little window to
convey in her meat at. And your Sparowhawke being thus provided of her mewe,
go in to her in May in an evening by candlelight, and taking her softly, give
her to thy companion to hold, until thou have pulled out all her train
feathers one after another, holding the principal feather with thy one hand
(which Falconers do call the covert feather) and plucking out the other
feathers with that other hand, for so shall thou do her least hurt: and this
shall make her mewe the faster, if thou feed her with hot meat and birds,
and always keep an hour certain to give her her meat. Some will set water
in the mewe by their Sparowhawke continually, shifting and renewing the water
every second or third day. Some set water before a Sparowhawke in the mewe but
once in a fortnight, and then take it away again within.xxiiij. hours after
they have set it there. Some will never set water before their Sparowhawkes at
all when they mewe them, saying that Sparowhawkes are very hot, and pluck out
their own feathers for extreme heat, and that therefore water is not to be
given or allowed them, because it kills and delayeth the heat in them, which
should further their mewing. I like that opinion: But for mine own part and
experience, I would leave the extremities and take the mean. And I would
think it best to set water before a Sparowhawke in the mewe, once in xiiij.
days at the least, or oftener, if ye Hawke seem to have need, the which you
shall easily perceive, if she have any feathers or down that stand staring up
on her back, and when she sits always as though she would rowze, or is
twitching at her feathers with her beak, then set her water: but to set it by
her continually, does foreslowe her mewing: and too keep it always from her,
does make her that she meweth not her feathers so clean or so gallantly, as
when she may have water once in a fortnight. As touching remedies for Hawks
that be slow of mewing, it shall be set down in the treatise of medicines in
this book also. ()

The third part, or Book, of this collection of Falconrie.
depiction of man with falcon

BEfore I deal with diseases of Hawks, and cures due to the same, (which is
the subject of this third, and latter part of my Collection of Falconrie) I
hold it very necessary, and of importance, as well to the attaynement of the
cause of each particular disease, as also the devise of remedy for each kind
of mischief, to speak somewhat of the complexions of Falcons, under whose
name and nature (you know) in the beginning of this Book of Falconrie, I have
comprised all other Hawks, in regard that the Falcon is chief, and the
Queen of all other Hawks: nothing doubting at all, but that diverse will muze
at the name and term of the complexion of a Hawke, as though indeed there
were no such matter, led thereunto by their gross conceyte and blinded
imagination, for that they can not in their opinions judge so easily of the
natures of Hawks, as they can of the complexions of men, whose clearenesse and
thinness of skin bewrayes their inclination and complexion, whereas Hawks
are not in any condition so to be deemed and judged, by mean of their plumes:
which indeed is far otherwise, for, as in man the natural complexion is
truly discerned by the skin, so is the natural disposition and constitution
of a Hawke by her cote and plume: which I adventure not to report of my
self, for that it strives so much with common sense and ordinary capacity,
but do follow mine Author, and thereupon am emboldned to auow it, not blushing
to lay you down his speeches, as touching this matter, though not in the
French Phrase, wherein he wrote it, but in the English ydiome, into which I
have translated it.

Artelowch mine Author, writing of the complexions of Falcons, in his treatise
of Falconrie, medicines, and cures, and such like matter, reports, and eke
advises

That the black Falcons are melancholicke, and therefore should of right be
phisicked with hot and moist medicines, by mean of their complexion, which is
cold and dry, as with Aloes, pepper, Cocks flesh, Pigeons, Sparowes, Gotes
flesh, and such like.

That the blancke Falcons are flegmaticke, and to be Phisicked with hot and
dry medicines, because of their phlegm, which is cold and moist, as with
Cinnamon, Cloves, Silermont, and Cardamomum, Gotes flesh, Choghs and such like.

The russet Falcons be of sanguine and choleric complexio^, mixed
indifferently, and therefore to be phisicked with cold medicines, moderately
moist, and dry:

As with Myrtells, Cassia Fistula, Tamarinds, Vinegar, Pullets, Lambs flesh,
and such like.

Having spoken thus much of the complexions of Hawks, a matter not long to be
stood upon, I will refer you over to the Italian Authors, as touching the
diseases and cures, whose judgments I do very well allow, and in many points
prefer beyond the French Falconers, for that they seem to be the more
reasonable men, and less given to frivolous inventions. Yet nevertheless in
the last part hereof, you shall at your pleasure, peruse the French Falconers
also, for that I would have you to want nothing that may be to your better
knowledge and furtherance in Falconrie.

Of the diseases and cures of Hawks. The opinion of master Francesco Sforzino
Vicentino, an Italian Gentleman Falconer.
IT does belong to a good and skillful Falconer, not alone to know all kinds
of Hawks, and to have the cunning how to reclayme, keep slay, ympe, and mewe
the said Hawks, with sundry other like matters incident and appertayning to
Falconrie: but it is very necessary and behouefull for him to have knowledge
and good experience in their diseases and cures: for that they are birds
subject to sundry maladies and accidents, the cure of all which does rest in
the careful keeper. Wherefore having (unless I flatter my self) in the
former parts of this collection, performed my promise, made in the very entry
and beginning of this book, as touching Hawks, and other matters belonging to
the mystery and skill of Falconrie: it is only left now, and I rest charged,
with their diseases and cures, to decipher unto you the mean to know the
maladies, as also a method to recover them: wherein if happily any man desire
a more ample discourse, of ye natures and original causes of those diseases,
tha^ herein I shall bewray, let him know and bethink himself yt I am neither
profound Philosopher nor learned phisitio^ by profession, but yt in these I
deal as a Falconer, manifesting and making show of cures proper and peculiar
to every disease, wherwt I cold ever yet find a Hawk charged, and such as may
light upon any kind of Hawke, by misfortune and casualtie. And as touching
remedies for their mischeefes, I mean to speak of very few which I have not
sundry times approved with very good success, wherefore I say, yt Hawks may be
diseased and imperfect, either in body or feathers, which I intend and mean,
when they are unable by any evil aceide^t to perform their parts and duties
in any condition, as not to be able to flee, or strayn ye pray with their
pownces, or any such like actio^, which by nature they ought to perform.

In body they are diseased, either by some outward cause, as by a stripe, or
bruise: or else by some hidden and inward evil, as by corrupt and contagious
humors, proceeding either of too great heat and moisture of ye head, or
otherwise overmuch drought and siccitie of ye Liver and inward parts, from
which proceeds many times, the Pantas, and shortness of breath, and other
perilous evils, whereof I mean to write in their peculiar places hereafter.

Again, Hawks are accustomed to be ill affected and diseased (as I may term
it) in their feathers, for yt diverse times being sound of body, and in perfect
state of health, yet they cannot flee or stir their wings, by mean of some
broken or sliued feathers, and especially ye flagges, long feathers, or sacels,
which sundry times are broken either in ye quill, being bloody feathers, or
near the top or point of the feather: the remedy for which mischief and
evil accide^t, I will reserve to the last part of this treatise, as a matter
meetest for yt place. But because the mischiefs and diseases that grow within
the bodies of Hawks, may best be discerned and known by their excrement, and
by that which comes from them, as namely, by ye casting and muet of a Hawke.
Therefore I account it most expedient, to have good judgment, to distinguish
and know the diversity and difference thereof, the better to come by the true
knowledge of the diseases, whereby, there may in good time be had a convenient
remedy for the evil. Wherefore let us first speak of their castings.

How to know the health and disease of a Hawke by her casting.
FAlconers do use to give two sorts of casting to their hauks, either plumage,
or cotton and because most commonly they give ye Falco pellets of cotto^ for
her casting, I will first speak thereof.

You must make choice of fine, soft, white cotto, and thereof fashion and frame
your casting as big as a great nutte, and at evening co^uey it into her gorge,
after you have inpt her: and in ye morning betimes make dilligent search to find
it, to peruse it in what manner ye hawk has rolled, and cast it, because
thereby you shall perceive her good or evil state: for if she cast it, round,
white, not loathsome in smell, and not very moist or waterish, it is a manifest
token yt she is sound. But otherwise, if she roll not her casting well, but
cast it long, not white, stinking, very moist and slimie, it does argue, yt
she is full of diseases, as I shall more specially declare unto you eftsone. You
must observe this, yt these castings do import and betoke^ ye greater evil, by
how much more they do resemble ye muet of a hawk in color and smell. For by
yt, they do make show yt your hawk does abound with too much evil humor.
Wherefore you must ye more diligently mark it, and wring it betwixt your
fingers, to see, how much, and what kind of moisture does drop from ye casting,
and withal note the smell and color thereof. But now it is high time to
proceed to a more special declaration of those castings, yt you may be perfect
in each co^ditio^.

Of naughty castings.
IF your hawks casting be long, not wrought round, and be full of water, how
much more long and moist it is, Black caesting.
so much more it betokens the hawk to be diseased. And again if so it be
black, and stinking, so much the more the hawke is in evil case and state.
Al, and every of these signs, do yield a show and proof, that the hawk has
bin foul fed, and with corrupt flesh. Wherefore, to remedy this mischief,
you must feed her with hot Birds, as Swallows, Sparrowes, young Doves and
such like, giving them alive, or as soon as they are killed.

But if it so happen, for all this care and good intendaunce, that the casting
continue at one self stay, and be like evil in show, then must you needs
give your Hawke a skowring, according to art, such as I will teach you to make
hereafter.

Green casting.
If your Hawks casting be green, it is a sign that she is ill affected and
diseased in the Liver, the cure whereof I will refer to a peculiar Chapter
for the same evil. But know nevertheless, that Hawks, when they are ramage,
diverse times do cast such like green castings as I speak of, and make such
muets, by reason of some wild foul that they have killed, and prayed upon at
their own pleasure, or otherwise have had the same given them by Falconers. And
a man neade not greatly force thereof, for that with good feeding, they will
lightly be recovered, and rid of this disease.

Yellowish black casting.
When the casting happens to be yellowish black, and very moist and slimie,
it argues your Hawke to be stuffed with evil humors, proceeding of too great
heat, or of immoderate and ouergreat flights, or too much bating. For
recovery of which evil, you must as speedily as you may, bestow good
feeding upon your Hawke, and cool her, by washing her meat in good fresh
water, as endive water, or such like, as shall best please the fancy of the
Falconer, allowing her besides, one or two, or more castings of cotton: into
which you must convey very excellent good Mummy beaten into powder, and
otherwhile among incense, used in like manner. But if it so fall out, that your
Hawke continue her ill casting, for all this remedy it shall not be amiss, for
twice or thrice to give her this kind of casting, or upward scowring every
other day.

Take Aloes washed, and beaten to powder, one scruple, powder of Cloves four
graynes, of Cubebes beaten to powder three graynes: all which being well
confected, and made in mixture, enwrappe in a piece of cotton, and give your
Hawk being empty and having no meat above or in her pannell. And I nothing
doubt, but using this order which I prescribe you, your hawke shall recover in
short space. In any case you must be circumspect and heedefull, having a hawke
thus diseased, to mark diligently whither she do mend or pair, whether she
wax hye, or abate her flesh. For that according as she shall do any of these,
it shall be necessary for you, either to augment or decrease your skowring, and
her feeding. And believe me, I know this by experience, that sundry hawks do
perish more by being over poor and low brought, through negligence of ill
keepers, that make slender regard of them, tha^ by the extremity of the
disease. This shall be sufficient as touching castings of Cotton, which (as I
said before) were peculiar to Falcons.

Falconers are accustomed to give their hawks casting of plumage, sometimes
being empty above, Casting of plumage.
and eake in feeding to suffer the^ to take feathers, but specially to
Sparowhawkes. They give them io^^es of wings of small birds, and Quails, when
they have fed them, tearing them out with their teeth, and plucking away the
longest feathers, and so give it.

These castings, in the morning being wrought round, and cast without any ill
savor or slinke, do make evident show that the hawke is sound: and how
much more round and sweet they are, the better token of the hawks good
state. But contrariwise, if the casting be long, slimie, and rammish in smell,
with some small parts of the flesh vndisgested, cleaving to the same, and
withal frothie, having a kind of foam sticking on it, all these things
together, and every one special by it self, do importe the disease of the
hawke, and make full show of her ill state. And therefore that she stands
nedeful of a good skowring, and good intendance, as I said before.

The way to know in what tune hawks are, by their mewting.
WIth that help and light that I have already given you, by the hawks
casting, if you diligently observe the mewte, you shall easily prognosticate
and foresee her evil, and any such disease as your hawke is affected with.
The good mewte.
For if the mewte be white, and not ouerthicke, nor ouercleare, and besides not
having any black spotte in it, or at the least but little, it is an euidente
proof that the hawke is excellently in tune, and not diseased. But if it be
white, and very thick in the midst, well it may importe health, but it
argues the hawke to be ouergrosse, and too full of grease. And therefore it
shall be needful to cure that mischief, by gyuing her liquide and moist
meat, as the heart of a Calfe, Lamb, or such like. And for one or two
mornings, to allow her (being empty and having nothing above to put over) a
quantity of sugar Candy, which will skowre her, and make her slyse, or else a
gutte of a chicken well washed, of a convenient length and size, full of good
oil Olive, well clarified in water, in such sort as hereafter I shall
instruct you.

It is easily found, when a hawke is ouergreasie, and not enseamed, by her
mewte, when it is white with some black in it, which evil is easily
removed, by gyuing her hot Sparowes, and young Pygeons.

The evil mewte.
But if her mewte be white, entermedled with red, yellowe, gray, or such like
color, it is a sign that the hawke is very ill and diseased, and moreover yt
she stands needful of a skowring, as of Mummy purified and beaten to powder,
wrapping it in cotton, or some such like matter, to set the gorge and stomach
of your hawke in tune again, and other inward parts, as hereafter I shall
make further show of in a place meet for yt speech and discourse. Assuredly,
when you see your hawks mewte so full of diverse colors, it is very necessary
for you to respect her cure, and to endeavor your self to remedy that
mischefe, or otherwise she must needs perish under your hand, for that those
are very deadely signs and proofs of the ill state of your hawk. The white
and yellowe mewte.


The white mewte, having a greater part of yellowe in it, than of any other
color, does evidently make show, that the Hawke is surcharged with
choleric humors, caused and engendered by ouer-greate flyghtes, when you
flee with your hawke in the heat of the day, as also of ouermuche bating.
Which evil you may provide for and eschew, by gyuing your hawks meat
washed in cold waters, as Buglosse, Endyue, Bourage, and such like wholesome
cold waters, very medicinable for that mischief, always remembering to
strain the hawks meat, and wring it in a lynnen cloth, after you have washed
it in the waters aforesaid.

And if this fall not out in proof to your contentmente, then if you can give
your hawke a quantity of Agaricke in a skowring, for the space of one morning
or two, not suffering her to flee, or do any thing, but do set her down. There
is no question, but by the care and diligence of such a keeper, your hawke
shall quickly recover.

The mewte of a hawke, which is very black, The black mewte.
declares her liver to be infected, and is the most deadely sign of all
others. For if it continewe three or four days, most assuredly the hawke
will pecke over the perch, and dye. But if it be so but once, and no more, it
greatly skylles not. For then may it proceed of one of these two causes:
either for that the hawke in pluming and tyring on the foul, has taken of the
blood or guts of the pray, which is a matter of nothing: or else because
she has been gorged with filthye meat. In this case, it behooues you to
respect her, and to allow her good warm flesh, and a cotton casting, with
Mummy, or the powder of Cloves and Nutmegges, with a small quantity of Ginger,
to set her stomach in tune again.

A green mewte is also a sign of an infected and corrupt liver, and happily
of some Apostume, The green mewte.
unless she make that kind of mewte upon this occasion, that she has been
gorged with some wild and rammish meat, or her self be a rammage hawke: for
then this rule does not hold. You must look to this evil as soon and with
as great speed as you possible may, feeding her with meat all powdered with
Mummie prepared, if she will take it with her flesh, as diverse hawks will do
of themselves: but if not, then must it be given her in a casting, or some
skowring, continuing it in this manner, sometimes after one fashion, sometimes
after another, until you find the mewte to be changed from the badde color
to the better. But when this mischief does proceed, and continewe long space,
then shall you be feign to bestow on her a skowring of Agaricke, to rydde
those evil and noisome humors which do offend your hawke, and after that
another skowring of Incense, beaten into powder, to recomfort her.

The mewte that is vndisgested, and tending to read.
The mewte that is not perfectly digested, tending to read, and that is full of
small woormes, like unto flesh, not perfectly digested and endewed, gyues
manifest proof, either that the hawke is not well in her gorge, or else that
she has been fed with ill and corrupt meats, cold and stinking, and
unwholesome for a hawke.

This evil may be cured and helped, with good warm meats: and besides that,
with skowrings of Woormeseede enwrapped and conveyed into Cotton, or Lynte. And
it shall not be amiss to give her a skowring of powder of Cloves, Nutmegges,
and Ginger, which does maruelously strengthen, and set the gorge in time.

Of the dark sanguine mewte.
The dark sanguine mewte, with a black in it, is the most deadely sign of all
other, and I do not remember that ever I saw Hawke make that kind of mewte, but
she died. Yet nevertheless a man ought not therefore in that case to give over
his hawke, and to despair of her, but rather to allow her of that receyte and
medicine, which earste Iherom Cornerus, that noble man, and cunning Falconer
made, or else that which was devised by Signor Manolus the Greek, which I
have many times experime^ted in Falcons, not without good success, and great
commendation. And therefore hereafter I will lay it down for your better
knowledge and practice, as the excellent devises of most skillful men in
Falconrie.

And yet for all this, it may be, that a hawke does make the like mewte that I
wrote of, by mean of tyring on a foul, and taking the blood of it, and of
the raynes and guts, which if do happen, it is a matter not to be regarded.

I have sundry times seen the mewte of a hawke greye, The greye mewte.
like milk when it is turned and waxen sour, which truly is a deadly token,
and sign of great danger. Yet it shall not be amiss, to use the receyte
which I lately spoke of, devised by those Gentlemen Falconers aforesaid.

By this which I have spoken, as touching the mewtes of hawks, it may be
gathered how greatly it does import, and how behoouefull it is for a
Falconer, or Ostreger, for the better cure of his hawks, to peruse every
morning with great care the mewte of his hawks. For that it does greatly
concern the good health and state of them, to find out at the first their
indisposition and diseases, before they be too deeply rooted and confirmed in
them, when truly it will prove a very hard and difficult matter to remove
the evil.

But now I account it high time to proceed, and descend to the knowledge
and particular cure of the ordinary evils and diseases, which do plague and
pester hawks. In which discourse, to observe some method and order, I will
speak generally of all infirmities and ill accidents happening to the bodies
of hawks, as namely of the Fever, and so consequently of every special
disease that belongs to each particular member of a hawke, as well those
that are within the body, as without: And besides all these, of the gorge,
guts, and liver, of the stripes and bruses that happen to hawks: and lastly
of their feathers, and other evils. Laying down to your view in the latter
part hereof, such instruments and tools, as Falconer do use to cauterize
their hawks withal, with such other ordinary remedies, as they do commonly
bestow upon their diseased and sick Hawks. ()

Of the Fever or Ague, wherewith Hawks are wont be molested and troubled.
I Have noted and observed, that the Fever happens unto Hawks, by reason of
some small cold, and heat ensewing the same. And verily in mine opinion, it
does much resemble the Tertian, wherewith we our selves are daily vexed. You
may easily guess this grief, when you see your hawke shake and tremble, and
presently after hold her wings close under her train, slouping down with her
head to groundewarde. And besides all these tokens, you have one more, which
is, that your hawke will have her barbe feathers under her beak staring, and
out of order, and sometimes eake she will-refuse her meat. And if happily you
touch her with your hand, you shall feel sensibly the extremity of heat
that does surcharge her. All, or the most part of these signs, do evidently
argue your hawke to be troubled with a Fever, a very dangerous grief, but
not altogether deadely, for that I have seen many hawks recured of this
disease. Wherefore all your care must be, to cool and refreshe her, because in
deed the Fever is nothing else but an inordinate heat. In this case, her
feeding must be, either the leg of a chicken, or a young Pygeon, or some
other small foul, but Sparrowes last of all, for they are not to be allowed
in the beginning of the disease, for their great heat. And you must remember
to wash her meat in the water of Buglosse, or Endive, or in a mucillage of
Psillin, in ye juice of Cowcumbers or Mellons, and afterward dry it in a
cloth, and so give it her to feed on. Moreover you must (if you do well) bathe
the perch, and also her legs in the Summer with Plantaine water, (or for
want of ye water, with ye very juice of it) with Lettice water, or Nightshade
water, and sometimes among with the juice of Henbane, Lettice water, Nenuphar,
Howsleeke, and such other cooling devises, to delay her inordinate heat and
inflammation, setting her in some out place where the air is fresh, but not
where she may take the air to much, for yt may breed a further inconvenience.
If your sick hawke be very low brought in state, you must allow her a gorge
twice a day, but with discretion and judgment, not giving her ouermuche at one
time. And if so the Fever cease not by these practices aforesaid, it shall be
well done to give your Falcon of excellent good Reubarbe, finely beaten to
powder, two scrouples, in a Cotton casting, to purge and skowre her choler,
which is the very original ground of her fever. There are some that do will
and prescribe, yt you must let your Falco^ blood in the thygh, which albeit I
have not experimented, yet does it stand with reason, that it may do good, if
you can finely do it: but it were much better in mine opinion, to open the
vain under her right wing, because that would chiefly refrigerate and cool
the liver out of hand, and so by a co^seque^t ye whole body throughout.

This order aforesaid is to be used, if ye fever be a hot fever wherewith
your hawke is molested. But if it happen to be a cold fever, which you shall
perceive, by that your hawke will be extreme cold, if you touch her. Her eyes
look not of their woonted hew, and besides all this, she seldom mewteth,
and that with great pain.

Then you must set her in some warm place, and after her fit of cold is
past, she must be gently borne on ye fist. Besides, when ye fever has left
her, for yt time you should let her flee a little: it will do her great good.
Look yt her meat wherewith you feed her, be hot flesh, as Sparrowes, (which
in this cold fever are very well to be allowed, though in ye hot agew I told
you they were hurtful) pullets, Pigeons, and such like hot fowls, the flesh of
whom you must wash in wine, wherein have bin boiled these hot things
following, as Sage, Min^s, Pelamountaine, Cloves, Cynamo^, and such other sweet
comfortable devises. Besides you may give your hawke the foresaid flesh, if it
please you, with honey, and a little powder of Dill, Fenel, and Comin meddled
together. But specially you must observe this rule, and remember it well, not
to give your hawke gorge upon gorge: and again, if your hawke be hye in flesh
when this disease takes her, she must be fed but little and seldom, although
in deed it be very good at all times, howsoever she be affected, to keep a
reasonable hand upon her, as touching her diet, whither she be diseased or in
perfect state. For of over great gorges, and too full and liberal a hand, do
proceed a thousand mischiefs and diseases to a hawke, as experience does daily
instruct us, both to the great pains of those silly birds, and the great
grief and cost of the unskillful keeper, whose purpose and meaning perhaps,
is by giving his hawke liberally, to have her flee lustily, and to continue in
perfect health and state, whereas in trothe nothing does so much offend a
hawke, as too great a gorge. As in all other things, so in this likewise, The
mean is best.

Some Falconers do prescribe this method for cure of ye fever in a hawke,
which I do not greatly commend or allow. They will you to take Reubarbe,
Musk, Sugar candy, and the juice of Motherwoorte, and making a pylle of those
things aforesaid, to give it your hawke, feeding her afterward with
Sparowes, or young Rattes, which are very hot meat.

Other some appoynte a paste or myxture to be made, as bygge as a nutte, of
these things following, which being stieped a space in Vyneger, must be given
her, not dealing with her in six hours after, at the least. They take to the
composition of this paste, Aloes, Musk, and the fat of a Hen, egall
portions, giving it the hawke in manner aforesaid.

The signs that they give to know the Fever, are the wrything of the hawks
train, the coldenesse of her foot, and oftentimes the casting of her gorge.
But the first rules and remedies do satisfy me sufficiently, without these,
because I find in them some more reason: yet do not think it amiss, to
set down diverse men's opinions, because every man may make his choice: for
what likes one, perhaps, contents not another.

Of diseases of the head, and first of the Apoplexye, or falling evil.
Having in purpose to treat of the diseases, wherewith hawks those fillie
birds are vexed in their heads, I must do you to know, that under the name
and term of the head, I do not only comprise that part that contains the
brain, but also the ears, eyes, beak, or clappe, nares, and mouth of the
hawke: all which parts are subject to sundry diseases and evils. But first of
all, I mean to speak of the chiefest, and most principal part of all the
rest, and of such maladies as light upon the brain, and after that, of such
as happen to the external and outward parts of the hawks head. Among all
which infirmities and griefs, I account the Apoplexy (whom the Italians call
Gozza) the greatest and most perilous, as the which does ordinarily cause and
bring sudden death.

This mischief does commonly befall hawks, by mean of too much grease, and
store of blood, for that at that time there does happily break some one vain
or other in ye brain, which does fill some co^cauitie or hollow Cell of the
brain with blood, in which Celles (as the learned do imagine and affirm) the
Animal spirits are inge^dred, and have their beginning. Without which Animal
spirits, no living creature can either have sense or moving. Whereupon it
does follow of very necessity, and by a mere consequent, that the passage of
those spirits being shut up, and intercluded, the creature, whatsoever it
be, must dye.

Again, it may happen, for that the hawke has been set too long in the
heat of the Sun, for by that occasion there may be so much humiditie and
moist humor drawn up into the brain, as may engender this evil, and
procure this mischief in the hawke.

Moreover it may chance, by making a long flight at a Fesant, or Partridge, in
the heat of the day, by mean of which the hawke has surcharged her self
with ouermuche travail. Wherefore it shall be behoouefull and necessary, so
to use the matter with care and diligence, as it may be foreseen, that hawks
incur not this adventure and evil. Whereupon, for that hawks in the mewe,
are accustomed to gather much grease, it shall be good, for the space of
fifteen or twenty days before the drawing of them out of the mewe, to feed
them with lyquide and slypper flesh, such as may lightly be put over, and
pass through them. As namely, with the hearts of Calves, Lambs, or Goats,
washed in luke warm water, and afterward dried in a lynnen clothe, before you
give it your hawke.

Likewise may you boldly feed your hawks before they are drawn out of the
mewe, with small pullettes, and young Sparrowes. When you have thus done, and
observed this order of feeding them, when the time is come to draw them out of
the mewe, you must remember to draw them very orderly, and after that to
continewe the same kind of feeding, and to keep the same hand upon them,
for other twenty days space at the least, to skowre and disburden your
hawks of that slyme and glytte, which does surcharge them, having them
always for the most part on the fiste, and especially at night. Neither
shall it be evil to skowre them, (or as our Ostregers and Falconers do term
it) to enseame them, by gyuing them a quantity of washed Aloes, allowing a
Falcon as much as the byggenesse of a Bean, beaten into powder, wrapped in
Cotton, and so to make her a skowring thereof, and besides to give her Sugar
Candy, two or three mornings. But in any condition you must beware not to use
Aloes vnwashte, because thereof are bredde sundry ill accidents in hawks. And
for that occasion is it prescribed you, to use Aloes wash, to avoid that
undoubted evil, which would otherwise happen.

Moreover, I have happily, and with good success approved this remedy. I
have given so much larder, or butter, as I could well convey into my hawks
throat, when she has been empty above, having first prepared the larde or
butter, by washing it seven, eight, or more times in clear water, and
afterward letting it soke in Rose water a space, and lastely by putting unto
it of the best Sugar that I could get, or Sugar Candy beaten to powder.
And my order was, ever to give this skowring every seventh or eight day. And
this is not alone to be used to hawks in the mewe, but also to such as are
kept on the pearche and stock. But if it so fall out, that by these devises
and skowrings you cannot make your hawke have a stomach and gredie appetite to
feed, it shall not be evil to pysse upon her meat, and having dried it in
part again, to give her a gorge sufficient, so much as may serve her, and as
she will take. For the more liquide and slypper flesh you give her, the sooner
will she be enseymed. And by this means do Falconers preserve their hawks
from the falling evil, and sudden mischief, and besides that from sundry
other perilous accidents, that do follow those silly birds.

Of the Apostumes of the head.
FAlcons, Goshawkes, and other birds of pray, are wont to be much combred
and molested with the swelling of the head, and the Apostume thereof, a very
grievous evil, occasioned by abundance of evil humors, and the heat of ye
head. It is discerned by ye swelling of ye hawks eyes, by the moisture which
sundry times issues, and distilleth from the ears, and often eake by evil
sauoure, and smell of the Apostume. Also it may be perceived by the small
desire the hawke has to move or advance her self by the wresting of her
head, and the little regard she has to tire and pull the flesh that she
feeds on, as though in deed tyring were very paynefull to her, and by that
she is scarce able to open her clappe, and beaten after her accustomed manner.

Against this most perilous evil, it shall be very necessary first of all to
skowre your hawke thoroughly, and after that the head in chief.

As touching the general skowring, I can commend and allow you to give her
three or four mornings, when she has no meat to put over, a pyll as bygge
as a nut of Butter washed seven or eight times in fresh water, and steeped well
in Rose water, myngling it afterward with Hoonie of Roses, and very good
sugar, holding your hawke on the fiste, till she make one or two mewtes. Which
being done, to disburde^ and skowre the head, it shall be excellent well done
to take of Rewe seed four drammes, Aloes Epaticke two drammes, Saffron one
scruple, reducing and forcing all these to fine powder, and with a quantity
convenient of honey of Roses, to make a pyll of that bygnesse and syze, as may
well be conveyed into the hawks beak, by which her brain may be purged
and skowred, thrusting the pyll so deep into her throat, as you may well see,
holding her a space after it upon the fiste. And that done, setting her down
on the pearche, in a conueniente place, for a time, and two hours after, to
feed her at her accustomed time with good hot meat.

But if happily there be any of the corruption and filthe in the hawks ear,
it shall be very necessary, carefully with an instrument of silver, or other
good metal for the nones, that the one end be sharp poynted and edged, of
purpose to apply lynte, and on the other end hollow, and fashioned like unto
the ear of a hawke, to clenze and remove the filth that furreth the hawks
ear. And with that end, whereon the lynte or bombaste is, to skowre it very
dayntity, and presently upon the same, to infuse and drop in a quantity of
Oil of sweet Almondes, fresh and luke warm, and after the same to convey
into the ear a little lynt or bombast, to keep in the Oil, till such time
she be dressed again, to the end the Oil may supple and mollify the
filthe, so as it may easily be removed, and clenzed. And this order must you
observe and continue, until the Apostume be resolved and thoroughly ripe. But if
it so fall out, that the Apostume will not come to maturation, or ripe, in
sort as it may grow to suppuration, and be mundified in manner aforesaid,
but will rest at one stay in the head of the hawke: then must you be feign
to come to cauterize the head aloft, and bestow a button there, to cause the
humor to breathe, and to bring the corrupt matter thither, remembering after
this fire and cauterie to remove the escare, by bestowing on it for the space
of eight or nine days, butter, by which you shall easily remove the cruste or
escare, which is made by the fire.

You must not forget, if it be so as your hawke be so weak, as she is unable,
or so froward, as she will not feed and tire upon her meat which you give
her, then to cut it in small pellettes, and so give it her, either by fair
means or foul, not leaving to use it so, if it be possible, as she may
receive it willingly, and feed her self, because it may the better nourishe
her. For this is one undoubted rule, that when a hawke does refuse to feed and
tire, she is very unlusty, and diseased, and not one among a hundredth of them,
that does recover. And for mine own part, in all my time, I have recovered
but one Falcon being so diseased, and that by the mean and cure aforesaid,
and by using the cauterie.

Let this suffice, as touching this monstrous accident, for I mean to
refer you to another place for the cauterie and fire, which you shall use to
hawks, where I will speak specially thereof. Only gyuing you this caveat
before you go, that this evil of the head, is infectious, and will pass from
one hawke to another, as the maungie does among Spanels, or any such
contagious disease. Wherefore it shall be very good to sequester and sunder
the hawke that is thus affected, from your other hawks, for avoiding of the
same evil.

Of the distillation and swelling of a hawks head, and also of her eyes and
nares.
Hawks are accustomed to have a certain distillation or Catarre in their
heads, because, when they are hard fleen withal, and set in great heates, by
long and paynefull flyghts, they easily take cold upon the same, either
through some unhappy storms of weather, or great winds, or by reason of the
extreme cold of winter, and chiefly when they are full of gross and naughty
humors.

Of this Catarre or distillation, sundry times there grow a thousand
mischiefs to those poor birds, and specially the swelling of the head, with
a kind of dropping humor, which is the cause many times, that the hawks eyes
becomme less, and are contracted in a manner together. Beside which
inconvenience, the nares also becomme to be stufte and stopped with excessive
excrement, that descends from the brain. All which evil accidents do
require, and stand needful of several cures, before they can be removed,
and the hawks enjoy their accustomed health.

Wherefore first of all, it shall be necessary to skowre your hawke, being
thus affected and diseased, with butter prepared in manner aforesaid, or with
Oil Olyue, prepared after that fashion, as I shall instruct you in the chapter
of the Pantas.

I have, in the Catarre of Falcons, (as also of other hawks,) diverse times
used with great good fortune and success, to give them of Agaricke two
scruples, of Cynamon finely beaten, of the juice of Lyquerisse, of either one
scruple, being made also into powder, and with a quantity of Honey of Roses,
to make all those things aforesaid into a pyll, as bygge as a Bean, for the
largest sort of hawke, and for other less hawks, half as bygge. And this
was I accustomed to give my Falcon, and other hawks in the morning, having
nothing above in their gorges, holding my hawke on the fiste, until such time
the medicine began to work, because she should not cast the skowring,
(which then would do her no pleasure at all) and after three hours, then to
feed her with some good meat. You must remember, and note this very well,
that if your hawke to whom you give this skowring, be greasy, and full of
flesh, you may boldly give it her two or three mornings. But if she be
poor, and low, then once or twice to allow this skowring will very well
suffice her. For there is ever respect to be had of the state of a hawke, when
any upward or downewarde skowring is given them, for otherwise it will do them
greater mischief, than pleasure.

But when you perceive your hawks head to swell, and her eyes to be full of
dropping humors, and to wax less than naturally they were accustomed to be,
by mean of the swelling of her head: It shall be good, having given her this
general skowring, that I have spoken of, to skowre the head alone, and purge
it with some devise, to force her snyte and snuff, as me^ do accustom to
sneze: and to force her thereunto, you may take Pepper, Cloves, and Mustard
seed, of each one a like quantity, making them all into very fine powder, as
is possible, and then with a whistle of silver, or other like metal, (yea
though it be but a quill, it will serve the turn) being applied upon her
nares, to blow it into her nares as strongly as you may, to make it pierce
(...) further in. And besides that, you may rub and frotte the palate of
your Hawke with the said powder, and not feed her after it, until such time
she have left snyting and snuffing. If you continewe this practice three or
four days, your Hawke shall recover assuredly.

To discharge the head of a hawke, that is stuffed with ill humor, Senauza,
which the Apothecaries do sellin the winter, I have found a very excellent
thing, and of great force, gyuing of it the byggenesse of a Bean unto my
hawke, being empty, and having nothing above. And withal I was accustomed to
rub the palate of her mouth, forcyng also some part of the powder to
ascend up into the head, by the hole that goes to the brain: and after I
had so done, would cast my hawke to the pearche, vnhooding her. Which was no
sooner done, but you should see her cast a world of slymie filthe and
moist humor, and snyse at her nares as fast.

But if it be so, that the abundance of humors in the head, by none of these
aforsayde remedies will be removed, applying them never so often, nor ye
mischief cease to vex your hawke which you shall easily discern by her
slymie castings, and the abundaunce of filthe that will issewe at her nares:
then must you of force be driven ve^trously to flee to the actual cauterie,
and with an iron button heat in the fire, to cauterize her upon the head,
using no less judgment and discretion therein, than the dayntinesse of the
place requires, regarding the bone of the hawks head, which is not very
strong, or hard. And before you do use the cauterie, it is necessary to cut
away those feathers, that are growing about the place where you mean to bestow
your fire.

If with this monstrous moystnesse of your hawks head, there be joined a
swelling, or the dropping of her eyes: in that case I do think it best, to
bestow your button upon her head, just betwixt her eyes, observing the same
order that I have already prescribed you.

When the nares of your hawke are stufte with filthe, and surcharged with such
distillation from the head, as I have spoken of: after a convenient skowring,
then shall it be good to take Pepper and Mustarde seed beaten into fine
powder, and putting it in a clean lynnen clothe, to stype it a space in the
strongest Vyneger you can get: and that done, to bestow some few drops
thereof upon her nares, so as they may enter and pierce her nares. For truly
this devise will so scowre and dry up the humor, as it will do great
pleasure. But if so with these remedies and means you cannot resolve it, then
must you be feign to use the cauterie, not aloft upon the head, but round about
the nares, giving her a little touch with the fire, somewhat below the nares,
to make them more large, always using the matter so carefully, as you touch
not the root or (poret) of her nares. When you have in this manner bestowed
your fire, and actual cauterie, until such time the pain do cease, and the
escarre fall away, (which is nothing else but the crust that is grown there,
by mean of the fire,) you must anoint the place with fresh butter, and after
that you have so done, then proceed to the cure of it with the powder of
Masticke, or Olibanum.

This is a very good remedy for the swelling in the head of a Hawke. Take
Stauesacre, a quantity of Pepper, and a little Aloes Epaticke, beat these
said things into fine powder, and put them into the water of Rue, where when
it has bin steeped a space in the said licoure, with a little bombast or lint,
bath your Hawks nares twice a day, and you shall find it ease your Hawke
greatly, and rid a great part of the filthy matter that breadeth the
stoppage in her head. If all these remedies which I have alleged generally,
nor any one special medicine will prevail, as I said before: then must you
repose your chief trust in the cauterie, which must be done either on the head
with a cauterizing button, or about the nares with a nedle, or sharp iron,
fire hot, or some golden or silver instrument, of purpose made, applying
after the fire, for the removing of the Escare, and the cure of the same, the
remedies aforesaid.

Of the giddiness and shaking of a Hawks head.
THere does diverse times happen unto Falcons, and other Hawks, a mischief,
whose nature is, to cause the Hawke to shake her head continually, so as at no
time she can hold it still or steadie, but is ever moving it to one side or
other, holding her eyes close shut withal. This disease is called Soda, which
in english we may term ye Megrim or a kind of Palsy, by mean the head is in
continual moving.

The cure.
This evil may proceed, either by the fowlenesse of the panell, or of a
corrupt and naughty liver. The remedy for it is this, whichu I hae found very
good, and wherewith I have cured my hawke in times past. You must give your
sick hawk a casting of cotton, in which you shall enwrappe of Aloes Epaticke
one scruple, of Cloves two graynes, making these into powder, before you give
it: then two hours after the taking of this skowring, feed your Hawke with a
young Pigeon, or a hot Pullets leg, using this self same order three or
four mornings one after another.

One other remedy for it is this. Take as much unwashed Larde as the top of
your little finger, with a quantity of Peper, and a little Aloes Epaticke,
beat these two last into powder, and convey them into the Larde, which done,
thrust them into your hawks throat, holding her on your fiste a space after
it: then tie her on the perch in the sun, and there let her stay til she cast
both the skowring, and the slimie matter which is in her gorge. And this
medicine may you use every third day once, feeding your Hawke with hot
meats, as Pigeo^s, and young Sparowes, and every time you give her this
skowring, convey into her a little Aloes, which is an excellent thing to skowre
her, and quitte her of this disease.

If these receytes and skowrings yield no remedy, then must you to the actual
cauterie, shearing away the plumes about that part of the head where you will
apply your fire, ever respecting the bone, and burning nothing but the very
skin, to let the mischief breath, removing the escare, and doing the cure
after the escare removed, as is before said. Let this suffice for this
monstrous mischief, which killes many Hawks: yet have I cured my Hawks
twice, by these remedies in my time.

Of the Cataract in the eyes of a Hawke.
BEsides those other evils, there is a Cataract which does light upon the eyes
of a Hawke, whom we may term a suffusion, a mischief not easily removed,
and diverse times impossible to be recured, as namely when it is grown too
thick, and ouerlong has bin suffered in the eye, without seeking remedy for
it: but if it be not confirmed, then may it well be remedied, and I my self
have cured sundry Hawks affected with this evil.

This evil accident does happen, by mean of gross humors in the head,
which are wont to dim and darken the sight, and sometimes clean to put out
the Hawks eye without redemption.

It may be, that the hood is the cause and ground of this disease, for I
never in my life remember that I saw any other byrd or foul troubled with it
but only the Falcon: and perhaps, it lights on her, in chief, for that of all
other, she is most used to the hoode, and to be almost at no time vnhooded.

You must therefore have an eye, The Curre.
and especial regard to this inconvenience, at ye first, by giving one or two
mornings a skowring of Aloes, or of Agaricke, to skowre your Hawke withal,
because if you should adventure upon any sharp or hard painful medicine,
applying it to the eye of your Hawke, it would perhaps cause a great repair
of evil humors and accidents to the place diseased.

When you have given this skowring of Aloes, or Agaricke, to remove the matter
from the eye, you must use a powder made of washed Aloes, finely beaten, one
scruple, and of Sugar candye two scruples, blowing of this powder into your
Hawks eyes three or four times in a day, with the Pipe or quill aforesaid.
This is the gentlest, and most sovereign medicine that you can apply to the
eye in this case. and whilst you do minister this receyte, it shall be good
sometimes to bath the eye with the urine of a little boy.

If by these medicines aforesaid, the web of the eye will not be removed, we
must be driven to use a stronger receyte, which is this.

Another remedy.
Take a new laid egg, and roast him so long until the white of him become
like milk. When you have so done, put it into a fine white linen cloth, and
strain it so much and so long, until you see issue through your strayner a
clear green water, whereof you shall now and then infuse a drop or two into
the hurt eye, using it so three or four times in the day at the least, until
you see your Hawke amend of her mischief, and wax sound.

Last of all, if these things avail not to the cure, I do commend and allow
above all the rest, that you take the juice of Celendyne roots, making them
clean from the earth that does use to hang to the moors: then scrape away
the outmost rynde and pill of the root, and use the juice to your Hawke. Truly
I have found this to be of singular force and virtue in the like accident.

It shall not be amiss, in this and such like affections and ill passions of
the eye of a Hawke, to bath her eyes often with rose water, wherein have been
boiled the seads of Fenygreke. But you must remember, that this water or
colirie, be somewhat warm when you use it, because the eye is so noble, and so
sensible a member, as it can ill brook things either ouerhote or ouercolde,
but must have them moderately hot or cold. This devise may you use to bath
your hawks eye withal, until such time she be recovered, feeding her mean
while with good meats, and such as are light of digestion.

Hawks are of so noble and excellent a nature, as the most part of medicines
that you do apply to the hurtes and cures of men, you may boldly bestow on
Hawks, as things very wholesome for them, as by their working will be most
evidently seen and perceived: yet must there be a discretion used, in the
administration of these said receytes, having always a regard unto the weak
and delicate nature of Hawks, in respect of men: and therefore ye quantities
of every thing must be allowed and given accordingly.

It happens diverse times, that through the Catarre, and pain of the head and
eyes, there lights upon the ears of a Hawke so mortal and deadly an
apostume, as seldom when, though there be great care used about the cure,
she may be brought to perfect state, or recovered. And this proceeds,
because the mischief lies so near a neighbor to the brain, as before it
can break or be cleansed outwardly, it causes the Hawke to perish. Besides
that, it is very hard to apply medicines in that place: but if the Hawke be of
so strong a nature, that she brook the breathing and rupture of this disease,
which you shall perceive by the quitture and filth that does issue from her
cares, give her this remedy, which is a very noble receyte, and approved of me
often times, as well in men, as in Hawks, to my great commendation and glory.

Take honey of Roses, and oil of eggs, The Cure.
incorporate them together, and power twice or thrice a day into the ears of
your Hawke, some few drops of it hot: and if you find by the abundance of
filth, that there needs great abstersion, you may add thereunto a quantity
of Sarcacoll beaten into powder.

The wine of Pomegranats is a most excellent remedy in this mischief,
confected with those things aforesaid.

Butter well coyled and beaten in a mortar of lead, one hour at the least, and
afterward powered into the Hawks ears reasonable hot, twice or thrice aday,
is a very good remedy.

Of such evils as happen to Hawks in their chappes and mouths.
THe chappes, and mouth of a Hawke is subject to sundry diseases, and in ye
Hawks mouth, there are wont to grow certain white pieces of flesh, and
sometimes tending somewhat too black, which do hinder the Hawke from her
feeding, by mean whereof without any other evident cause, she becomes lean,
and low. Wherefore it shall be very necessary to look into her mouth
sometimes, both in the Palate, and under the tongue, because that many times,
there especially, do grow up certain pieces of flesh like in shape to a
grain of Peper, sometimes less, sometimes bigger than a Peper grayn, which it
shall be necessary to cut away, either with a pair of cysers, if you may
commodiously do it, or with Roch Alome burnt, or with a drop of Oil of
Brimston, applied upon a little cotton, with an iron unto the place, taking
away the corrupt flesh. You must mundifie the place with honey of Roses, and
bombast or lynt, until you see the quick flesh underneath it, then
afterward, unto the honey of Roses, you may apply and add, a little powder of
Masticke, or incense to consolidate the wound, washing it sometimes among with
white wine.

Moreover, and besides this, there is wont to happen unto Hawks in the mouth,
a certain frownce or impedimente, which does hinder their feading, as the
other pieces of flesh do, of which I have spoken before. This frownce may be
very well perceived and discerned with the eye, and will appear also, by the
feeding of the Hawke.

Diverse times this kind of evil is cured with honey of Roses, and with the
powder of nutshels, bound in a piece of linen cloth, well bathed and styped
together, and thrust under the whote ymbers, until it may be brought unto
fine powder: this may you continue twice a day, as long as shall be needful.

But if this will not serve the turn, it shall be very necessary to mortify
and kill the frownce with Aquae fortis, such as goldsmiths do use to part their
mettalls withal, having respect not to touch it any where, saving only upon the
frownce, and part diseased, for that it will fret the good and sound fleashe.
After you have mortified the frownce or canker with Aquae fortis, as I have
told you, then must you mundifie and consolidate it with honey of Roses, which
will cure it out of hand.

Also it is very good, to apply this receyte following in the cure of the
frownce, whom the Italians call Zaruoli.

Take a clean Skillet, whereunto put good white wine, a quantity of
Verdigrece, well beaten to powder, of Roche Alome like quantity, one ownce of
honey, and a few dry Rose leaves, boil all these things together to the
consumption of half the wine: then strain it, and with the strayning hereof,
twice or thrice a day, bath the frownce with a little lint or bombast, tied on
the top of an instrumente for the purpose. But you must well regard whether
the flesh be good or no, and with a tool fit for it to search and cut
away the dead flesh, for otherwise it will do little pleasure, and the Hawke
should be assured to suffer great pains, and yet to dye at last. Having
mundifyed the wound with the receyte aforesaid, bathe it only with Honey of
Roses, and it will dispatche the Cure.

Take Verdegrece a quantity, bind it in a linen clothe, The Cure.
stype it one day and one night in Rose water, or Plantine water, or common
water, not having the rest, and afterward wash the frownce therewith, until
they be mortified, which you shall well perceive by the quick flesh that
will grow under: then apply Honye of Roses in the end of the cure, and it
shall do your Hawke great good.

Egiptiacum is an excellent thing to cure and kill the frownce in a Hawke,
which is none other thing, but a very Canker, such as men are plagued withal.
Wherefore, Another.
take Verdegrece, Roch Alome, of either two ownces, Honey of Roses one ownce,
water of Plantaine, wine of Pomegranats, of either two ownces, and a half, set
them on a soft burning fire, always stirring them with a stick, or wodden
splatter, until it turn to the thickness of honey: then take a little of it,
and mingle with a quantity of Plantaine water, and you shall find this the most
excellent remedy, as well for the frownce in a Hawke, as also for the Canker in
the mouth of a man. Thus much is necessary to be used, when the frounce does
happen unto a Hawk by some apostheme of ye head, engendered by a corrupt liver,
or some other inward part. But many times it so falls out, that the beak of
a Hawke is hindered and offended with this kind of evil, and not the mouth so
much: in such sort, as the Hawke cannot well feed, by mean this mischief
does so fret and eat the horn of her chappe and beak. For remedy of that,
you must take a sharp knife, and pare away, as much of the beak as is
corrupted: but if the malady or frownce have eaten very far under the horn
of the beak, it is not sufficient to cut it away with a sharp knife, as far
as the canker has eaten, but you must afterward anoint the place with honey
of Roses, twice or thrice: and in so doing the Hawke shall recover and do well,
for the honey of Roses will both mundifie and incarne.

Sometimes a Hawks beak or clappe does ouergrowe so much, as it is very
necessary to cope it with an iron, and afterward to sharpen the beak with a
knife, taking away so much as is needeful for the better feeding of your Hawke,
but in any wise you must not meddle with the nether clappe, because that does
not commonly grow so fast, nor so far as to hinder your Hawks feeding.
Wherefore that part is to be favored. Let this suffice as touching ye diseases
of ye Hawks mouth, and the frownce, because there is no canker or frownce so
ill, but being taken in time, with these receites, it will be recured assuredly.

Of the Pantas.
ONe special disease among others that be lurking and secret within the breast
and covert parts of a Hawke, is the Pantas, a very dangerous evil, and
familiar to Hawks: for lightly few escape, that are once encombred with this
infirmity.

This mischief proceeds, when the lungs and those breathing members by
excessive heat are ouerdried, and baked, in such sort, as they cannot by any
means freely draw the air to them, nor yet utter it well being once
received, for the better cooling of the heart, whose bellows the lungs are, by
nature ordained for that special purpose and office, whereby the heart wareth
inflamed, and by a necessary consequente, the Hawke of force must perish.

Beside that, the humiditie and moisture of the head distilling from above,
upon those breathing parts, and there increased, and waxen thick, is wont
also to be a great furtheraunce to this mischief, and breed difficulty of
breathing. Wherefore it shall be very necessary, to regard it at the first,
before the disease have taken too deep root: for that then (for any thing I
know) there is no remedy in the world to be had for this Pantas, which is
commonly termed Asina.

You may judge of the beginning of this grief, and know it by this. Your
Hawke laboreth much in the panell, moving her train often up and down, at
each motion of her panell, and cannot many times mewte or slise: and when she
does slise, she drops fast by her, and makes a small round burnt mewte:
these are apparent proofs, that she has the Pantas growing on her.

Again, you may perceive it by the more violent motion of her gorge than
custom was, but the other are the most assured signs that you can desire and
infallible. Moreover, when your Hawke does often times open and close her
clappes and beak, then is the disease very near confirmed. And look how
much the more she does it, the more is the Pantas rooted on her, and then is
the cure desperate, and not to be hoped for.

The cure of the Pantas.
The best remedy that ever I could find for the Pantas, was to scowre the
Hawke with good oil olive, well washed in sundry waters, so long, until it
became clear and white.

The way to wash Oil.
My accustomed manner of washing it was, to put it in an ^arthen pot, that had
a little hole in the very bottom of it of purpose made round, whereby it
might the better be stopte with the top of my finger: then do I convey into
this pot that quantity of Oil, which I mean to wash in it, and with
clear water do there coil it together with a wodden splatter, or a spone,
that the water waxes somewhat dark with it: after which removing my finger,
the water passes away by the hole, the Oil remaining behind, and swimming
aloft, as it is the nature of it to do. And thus do I six, seven, or eight
times, so long, until I perceive the Oil to have no filthe left in it at
all. Then of this Oil thus prepared, I bestow upon my Hawke that has the
Pantas, filling therewith a chickens gutte washed very clean, of an ynche long
and somewhat more for a Falcon and Goshawke: but for other less Hawks, of a
less length, fast knit at both ends with a thread, to the end the Oil may
not issue out, which gutte I convey into the Hawks throat, after she has
cast, and is empty above and in the pannell both, holding her on the fiste
till she make a mewte: and one hour after she has left mewting, then I feed
her with some slipper flesh, as the heart of a Calfe, or a Pullets leg,
refusing to use old Pigeons and Sparowes, because they are over hot meat,
unless happily the Hawke were very low and poor, but being hie and full of
flesh, those other meats aforesaid, are not alone wholesome, and sufficient
for her, but they will be much better, being washed in water of Buglosse, and
wroong dry in a linen cloth, and then minged with the powder of Sugar candy,
using this order six or eight days or more, every other day till my Hawke
recover: giving her every third or fourth day, a cotton casting with Cubebes
and Cloves, to scowre and discharge her of such moist humors as destilleth from
her head, which sometimes (as I have said before) is the chief and original
ground of this disease.

Besides this remedy, there is one other very good, and that is butter, and
Larde, well slised, and washed in sundry waters, till they become very clean,
and white, which you may keep in Rose water, until you have occasion to use
it.

Of these being thus prepared and conserved, you may take as you have need,
for every skowring such a quantity, as will serve to make a pill or pellet,
so great as you may well convey into your Hawks throat, using it in manner
and time aforesaid: giving her now and then among that skowring of Cubebes and
Cloves, as well for the reason already alleged, as also because of her
liquide meat and slipper feeding upon those hearts, so bathed and stieped in
water. For Cubebes and Cloves will greatly comfort the stomach and gorge of
your Hawke.

I have found by experience that Oil of sweet Almonds is of wondrous
efficacy in the cure of this disease, giving it in a chickens gutte as
aforesaid.

If these remedies which I have showed, do not prevail, nor perform the
perfect cure of your diseased hawke, ne yet do make her mewte, which happened
at no time to me in all my experience and practice. But when there is no
remedy to be had at all, I can well allow the use of Agaricke with a cotton
casting, because Agaricke is of great force to cause a Hawke to slise But if
for all this, the grief do daily proceed and increace, then do I think good
that you bestow a Cauterie upon your Hawks head, betwixt her eyes, and eake
at her nares, specially if there be any imperfection in the^. Some me^ are of
opinion, yt for ye cure of the Pantas you should give your hawk two inches of
a Lucerts tail, newly cut off, conueying it into your Hawks gorge, and
afterward setting her in some dark place, till the have cast, and then to
give her gotes milk, with the blood of a Dove. Othersome writers do will and
advise to let the Hawke blood in the neck.

But I for my part, have neither tried the one, nor the other, if I shall tell
you the troth of the matter, because I do not at all like of these devises:
but do assure you, that with those other remedies and receytes, which I have
taught you in this Chapter of the Pantas, (I mean, the skowrings, and the
cawterie,) I have done very much good, and recovered my Hawks of this
disease, and therefore do recommend you to them, as undoubted experiments.

Betony reduced into the form of an Electuarie with honey, is a very good
remedy for this grief, as well in men, as in Hawks.

One other remedy which I find in an Italian Author, is this. Take Mummy,
Rhewbarbe, Saffron, and Sugar candye, make all these into powder, giving it to
your Hawke, for the space of eight days at least in a chickins skin, if she
will take it, if not, force it into her. And while you minister this medicine
unto her, all that time let her not be borne on the fiste: and withal among
sometimes, give washed fresh butter with sugar candye, and sometimes a cotton
casting with incense within it. But I do more commend, to give her bole
Armoniacke, in a pill with honey.

These remedies no doubt, are very good and sovereign against the Pantas of a
Hawke. Make you choice of them, but let the Cawterie be the last refuge, for
that is an extremity. Remember this rule of Physic, that ever it is best to
begin with the weakest: for if they will profit and do sufficient good, in vain
it were to charge nature with the strongest receytes, which are rough, and
churlish in working.

Of the infirmity and disease in the gorge of a Hawke, when she does cast her
gorge.
Sundry are the diseases that Hawks are pestred withal, by mean of the
indisposition of the gorge, when yt part is out of tune: among which the most
ordinary and perilous is the casting of the gorge, when a Hawke does cast
her meat undigested, in the self same form she received it* or else
corrupted, and of a loathsome sauoure, both which they do many times.

If she cast it clean, and not stinking, but of good smell, there is no great
fear of the matter, nor any great danger: because it may proceed by mean
some small bone is crossed and turned in the gorge of the Hawke, which does
cause her to cast it again for her more ease and quiet: Wherefore in this case
it shall be good for the more surety, and to know the worst of the accident
that may happen thereby, to bear your Hawke to the water, or to offer her a
basin of water, to try whether she will bowze or no. For by bowzing, besides
the good that she shall receive by it, you shall have evident proof and
undoubted show of her disease, and that in deed she is sick, and does
stand in need of Physic: but if she bowze not at all, it argues her to
be in good time.

These accidents are wont to happen by mean of over much moisture and
humiditie, and through excessive rotten humors, engendered in the gorge.

Wherefore if the Hawke cast her meat well savoring, and of good color,
neither stinking to smell, nor loathsome to vewe, and do bowze after it, it
shall be good to heat and comfort the gorge, with the powder of Nutmegges and
Cloves, with a quantity of Musk, all enwrapped in a piece of fine cotton, or
bombast, giving it to the hawke when she is empty paneld, as custom is to do,
holding her on the fiste, until she put over her said casting into her gorge.
Then two hours after she has cast it again, it shall be very necessary to
feed her with young Doves, giving but half a gorge, or somewhat less at a
time: and at night when he suppes her, to let her plume a little, and if
the Hawke will bowze, to give her leave to do it, for truly it will be very
wholesome for her. By this means, I promise you, I have recovered sundry sieke
Hawks, and chiefly Sparowhawkes.

I have over and besides this, used with great good success, good Rose water,
altered with a quantity of powder of Cloves, and musk, preparing it after this
manner:

I have taken Rose water two ownces, powder of Cloves two scruples, of fine
Musk five grains: and of this have I given my Hawke five ownces, or there
about, after that as my Hawke has bin either poor or hie in state, holding
her on the fiste, until she has made a mewte.

This medicine will bring her to a good apetite, a sweet breath, and will
besides all these scowre very well.

But if that which she does east, be corrupted and stinking: over and besides
the aforesaid remedies, which indeed are excellent good, I can allow well
that you take the root of Celidonie, or Celondine, removing away the upper
rynde and pill off the root, until it look read, and drop again, then to
infuse it in a quantity of luke warm water, stirring the root up and down
in the water, to cause it to receive the effect and quality of the Celydonie
the more. Of which root you must (after you have so done) convey a pellet as
big as a bean for the huger sort of Hawks, into the beak of your Hawke,
thrusting it down with your forefinger into the very gorge of her, to the end
it may the better descend into your Hawke. Besides this, it is very good to
open her beak, and convey into her one spoonefull of the water aforesaid, not
all at once, but at twice or thrice, closing fast her clappes again, because
she may the better keep it, and not cast it up presently.

This being done, keep her a space upon the fiste, until the root and
licoure be well settled in her gorge. After which, cast her on the pearche,
in such a place, where is no resort, either of people, dogs, chickens,
cattes, or other such like things, to the end you may the better discern
her skowring: and besides, that she may have the less cause to bate. There
let her stand, until she has cast all the root which she received, and
that the water has made her mewte and slise sufficiently, which will do her
very great good. Then after two hours it shall be well, to give her a young
Ratte or Mouse, newly stripped out of the skin hot, and for lack thereof, a
young Pigeon, whom you shall kill, by throwing her forcibly against the
ground, with the raines downward, because the blood may gather together, and
stand: whereof feed your Hawke, giving her the heart also, and the reins
thereof, without any more allowance of any of the Pigeons flesh. When she
has dispatched and rydde this beaching of the Pigeons heart and blood, or of
the young Ratte, then give her in like manner the like quantity, only of the
dead dove: only twice a day to a Sparowhawke, but to a Falcon or Goshawke,
four or five beachings in one day, ever observing the self same order that I
have prescribed you.

The next morning you may, if need be, in a little lint, or flax, or such
like devise, give a skowring of incense or Olibanum, I mean, the leaves of it
broosed in your hand, as small as is possible, gyuing her but a small gorge, to
the end, that toward the evening, you may allow her a reasonable supper.

By this usage and order have I cured sundry Hawks of mine own, and other
men's.

You must note, yt when these remedies aforesaid, do not profit, nor do the
feate, and that the Hawke does cast her, more than twice, then is it a
desperate case, and so much the worse, if the Hawke be low and poor, for
then in that case have I seen very few or none recured.

Nevertheless, I have sometimes seen a marvel wrought in this case, by
making the greater kind of Hawks, as Falcons, Gerfalcons and such like, drunk
with a sponfull or two of strong Malmesie, conveyed by force into her gorge:
but to ye lesser Hawks you must not give so much of the Malmesie, but in
less quantity. Which done, they have bin placed upon a bed or a cusshen,
for on the perch they cannot stand, being drowsy, but will lie as things in
a trance, for the space of a quarter of an hour, and many never recover
themselves again, but if happily any do after they are thus dealt withal,
recover and slise, and scour away their medicine, no question that Hawke shall
thoroughly recover: then is it good to give her of the bloody parts of a Pigeon
used in that manner as I foreshewed you, but this dangerous medicine is not to
be given, but in desperate cases.

Of diverse accidents that happen to Hawks, by means of fowlenesse of the
gorge, and indisposition thereof.
IT happens sometimes that a Hawke can hardly put over her meat which may be
discerned by this, when in the morning she has of her supper above. This
misfortune chances partly by reason her meat was ouerdrie, and (as we may
say) so hard baked in the gorge, as she could not put it over, and partly
again, for that the Hawke cannot endue sufficiently, neither yet does fill in
the pannell as she ought to do.

In the first case, I have helped diverse with gyuing the Hawke water at will,
to bowze her pleasure, bathing besides her feet and pearche with fresh cold
water: which not serving the turn, I have thruste my forefinger into her
gorge, and so helped it along, and sometimes my little finger, or a wax candle:
and by that means have caused her to fill in the ventricle sooner than
otherwise she would have done. The weakness of which part diverse times is a
cause that the hawke does not well endew, nor fill in the Panell.

Somewhiles again I have used, and chiefly to Falcons, to give a skowring in
Cotton of powder of Mummie, prepared of Cloves and Nutmegs, rolling aloft upon
the cotton a little lynte of Flax, because they should the sooner cast it. And
by this means have recovered them presently.

When a hawke does endew but slowly, and has by yt means small lust to her
meat, you must thus do, to make her more eger and sharp, wrappe her meat in
the feed of Nasturciu^, or watercrassies, and so cause her to take it. But
this must be used only in winter, by reason that kind of seed is very hot.

The meat being thus used, will bring her to be very sharp set, and cause
her to be well breathed, and besides make her lusty, for in deed it is a
medicine very excellent, and of infinite virtue.

Besides, sometimes the gorge is so out of tune, as it is the cause that the
hawke at her accustomed hour does not cast, but retayneth her casting within
her. Whereupon it behooues some art to be used to make her cast. The next
remedy for yt (as I have said already) is to give the root of Celendine,
prepared in form aforesaid.

Moreover Mustard seed, otherwise called Senvye seed, is an excellent and a
present remedy for yt mischief, being conveyed into ye hawks throat, of ye
bigness of a bean, to ye huger sort of hawks: but to ye lesser hawks a less
quantity ought to be given: and besides yt, one grain of Cloves, with a little
pure Aloes well washed, albeit yt will somewhat vex and wrong ye hawk in this ease

But above all other, do I commend and prefer a skowring conveyed into a
little cotton casting, that is made of the powder of Aloes Epaticke washed, of
Cloves, Nutmegges and Ginger, of each of these equal portions, rolling the
cotton in a little Tow or Flax, making it as hard with your hand as you may,
and then rolling it in ye powder of Cloves, and forcing it down the hawks
throat: and presently you shall see your hawke cast it up with the old
casting which she had before. This, besides the benefit of that, will comfort
greatly and stre^gthen the gorge, and skowre the head of all such evil
humors, as are there, surcharging the same. The use of this devise now and
then, will be very necessary and beneficial to your hawks without doubt.

If your hawke will not cast, take Aloes, Pepper, powder of Cloves, and honey
of Roses, making of all these a long pyll, and as bygge as a casting, give it
your hawke, and she shall presently cast upon the taking of it.

Of woormes, that molest and trouble hawks out of measure.
Now do I hold it high time, and the place very convenient to write of such
kinds of woormes, as do trouble and vex ye poor hawke, as her mortal
enemies, which after a sort do depend of the gorge, through whose weakness
there are engendered gross and viscuous humors in the bowelles of a hawke,
where being weakly wrought by default of natural heat, the humor conuertes
into small woormes a quarter of an ynche long, and more.

You may perceive these woormes to plague and trouble your hawke, when you see
her cast her gorge, when her breath stynckes, when she trembles and wrytheth
her train, when she croakes in the night, offreth with her beak to her
pannell, when her mewte is not clean, white, nor in such abundance as it
ought to be. And besides all this, when your Hawke keeps at one stay, and
is low of flesh continually.

In this case it behooues you to destroy these woormes either with a skowring
of washed Aloes Epaticke, Mustard sede, and Agaricke, of each one egal portions,
using to give it as I have taught you before. Or else, by ministering the powder
of ye Gall of a Bore pygg^ (...) in the smoke: or if these fail, to give the
powder of Hearts horn being dried.

White Dittander, Hiera pigra minore, (for there are sundry kinds of it) of
each two dra^mes, Aloes Epaticke well washed three drammes, Agaricke, Saffron,
of each one dram, being all incorporate with Hoonie of Roses, is an excellent
remedy against the woormes. You must keep it well, and give Falcons,
Goshawkes, and such like, the bygnesse of a bean, but to Sparowhawkes, and
the lesser sort of hawks, as much as a pease, in form of a pill, thrusting it
down your hawks throat, keeping her after it a space on ye fist, till she have
slised and mewted her medcine, feding her afterward with good meat after your
wo^ted manner. And this shall recover her, and kill the worms.

For the same disease it is very good, to give a skowring of white Dittander,
Aloes Epaticke well washed, Cubebes four or five, a few flakes of Saffron
enwrapped in a morsel of flesh, to cause the hawke the better to take it.

This receyte, no doubt, will both make the hawke to slyse and mewte, and
withal recover her. For it is an approved remedy against the woormes, and
specially when the hawke does wrythe and wrest her train.

Again, take Rheuponticum, Sugar Candy, filings of iron, of each like
quantity, of these, with juice of Woormewood, frame pills, and co^ueying them
into the skin of a chicken, give your hawke one pill at a time, and it shall
do her pleasure.

Of the Filanders.
NOw I am entered in speech of worms, I think it good to write somewhat of ye
Filanders, to give both knowledge and cure of them. Albeit these worms do not
all depend of the gorge, for their natural place and being is near the
raynes of a hawke, where they be enwrapped in a certain thin net or
skin, several by themselves, apart from either gut or gorge.

These Filanders (as the very name does import,) are small as threedes, and one
quarter of an ynche long, a^^ more proper and peculiar to Falcons, than to any
other hawke or foul. And this makes me to think, ye they are naturally
allowed ye Falcon, because in deed they do not at al times vex and trouble
the hawks, but now and then, and specially when ye hawke is poor, and low of
flesh. But if she be hie and lusty, then by reason of ye abundance of
nourishment and food yt they receive from ye hawke, they molest her not at
all, but rather do her good: and my reason is this. I cannot be induced to
think that nature (who does use to make nothing but to some end and purpose)
has produced and placed those Filanders in that part of the Falco^ for naught,
or to hurt the hawke. But how and in what sort they pleasure or profit the
hawke, I could never yet reach by conjecture.

When they are troubled and grieved with the Filanders, you shall first
discern it by the poverty of the hawks, by ruffling their traynes, and by
certain twytches and startes that they will make, strayning the fiste or
pearche with their pownce, and lastly by their crooking in the night time,
which kind of noise they utter, when the Filanders prick and gripe them
within. For when they want their sustenance, which they can by no means
have, when the hawks are low and poor, then do they endeavor to rende and
break that slender net wherein they are naturally enclosed, to yssewe out
to seek their vittayles some other where. And many times it happens, that,
not seeing to it in time, and at the first, they pass through their web,
and crall up as high as the very heart, and other principal parts of the
Hawke, whereof it must needs consequently follow, that she perishes
without redemption.

I have sometimes seen this pestilent woorme by piercing and breaking the bed
wherein nature has laid them, ascend up so high, as they came forth, and
appeared at the Hawks beak and mouth.

Wherefore it shall be necessary to respect the cure of these Fylanders, not
by killing them (as you would do other woormes, (for then happily being
dead, and rotting in that place, from whence they can not pass away with the
Hawks mewte, they would there corrupt and breed a filthy Apostume in her)
but the way that you must take: is, by making the^ droncke with some medicine
to entertayne them, in such sort, as they may not offend or grype the hawke.

The best remedy that can be devised for it, is to take a Garlic head,
pysling from the cloves thereof the vtmoste find: which done, you shall with
some small iron tool, or bookine hette in the fire, pierce the cloves, and
make certain holes in them. And afterward steeping them in Oil at least
three days, give your Falcon one of them down her throat: for the cloue of
Garlic used in this manner as I tell you, will so inrage and astonne the
Filanders, that for thirty or forty days after they will not at al molest your
hawke. Whereupon some Falconers, when their Falcons be low and poor, once in a
month do of ordinary give them a Cloue of Garlic, for fear of the
Filanders, to prevent the woorste, and truly to good effect. And for that
very purpose and cause, are seldom or never without Garlic stieped in Oil,
where yt longer they lie, ye better, and more medicinable they are.

Thus must you deal with those Filanders, that lie in the raynes. But there is
one other kind of Filanders, lying in the guts, or pannell of a hawke, which
are long, small, and white worms, as though they had dropped out of ye raines of
ye hawke. If you will destroy those Filanders, you must take Aloes Epaticke,
fylings of iron, Nutmegges, and so much Honey, as will serve to frame a pyll,
which pyll you shall give your hawke in ye morning, as soon as she has east,
holding her on ye fiste for ye space of an hour after. Then cast her on ye
perch, and when you guess her to have slysed her pill, and mewted it clean,
then feed her with good hot meat.

There are besides these, yet one other sort of Filanders in the guts of a
hawke also, which cause a hawke to cast her gorge as soon as she has fed,
and do make her strong breathed: for them provide this remedy.

Take Aloes Epaticke, and Wormwood made into very small powder, temper the
powder with Oil of bitter Almondes: and that done, annoynte therewith the
flanckes and sides of your hawke. And if you like not the Oil, for gresing
your Falco^s feathers and plumes, compounde those said pouders with Vinegar at
the fire: but it is certain that the Oil is the better far of both, and
more proper to this disease.

If you can, give your hawke Oil of bitter Almonds, and not disquiet her
gorge, and after it bestow ye other cure upon her, with the anointing her as I
have taught you* you shall find it the most perfect remedy, yt may be against
those Filanders, that lodge in the guts and bowels of your hawke.

Of the disease of the Liver.
THe liver of a hawke is oftentimes inflamed by overmuch bating and travail,
as it happens not seldom to Falcons brought from far and forrayne parts by
ship: and again, when they be impacient and bedlam in the mewe, or when
they flee surcharged with ouergreat bells. For the ouerbelling of a Falco^, puts
her to a greater pain and trouble, than needs. By these and such like
occasions, hawks become hot lyuered. Again sometimes it happens by mean of
an Apostume, which is engendered either by some prick of a thorn, or the
stripe of an other hawks pownce, by crabbing with her. For when they have such a
stripe or prick, ye skin is broken outwardly, but ye blood remaining corrupt
within, enge^dreth ye apostume. Many times this disease of the liver proceeds
of some broose against the ground, or in a tree, or the encounter with
another foul.

You shall perceive this disease of the inflammation of ye liver, when your
hawke stands melancholy, casts not at her accustomed and woonted hours, by
her foul castings, by her stynking and ill colored mewtes, (whereof I spoke
before) by her laboring thick in the panell, and by feeling of her: For her
pulse does beat as the pulse of a man that has a fever. Moreover her mewt is
as black as any incke. The disease is the most pestilent and dangerous of all
others.

If the heat of her liver proceed of too much bating, or broyling with her
self, you may easily cure her with four or five good lyquide and cooling
gorges, as to feed her with the leg of a Pullette, or the heart of a Veale,
bathed in water of Buglosse, Bowrage, Hearts tongue, and such like waters.

Moreover it is very sovereign, to wash her meat in the juice of Heubane, or
else (that which does much more refreshe the hawke) to take a little larde
or Bacon, without the rynde, and well washte and conserved in good Rose water,
and last of all rolled in powder of Sugar Candy. With this receyt more than
with any other, am I accustomed to recomfort and refreshe my hawke, when she is
sick of her liver. Notwithstanding the other medicines are very wholesome and
good. And specially, good fresh butter, or Oil washte and prepared, as I
taught you in the former chapter.

But when the mischief of the liver is engendered by some prick of a thorn,
or the crabbing with some other hawks or foul, as diverse times it happens
to the Falcon, by encounter with a Hearon, when they bind together in the
air. In this extremity, Mummie purified, made to powder, is very good. You
must roll your hawks meat in this Mummie prepared three or four times, and
so give it your hawke: and if she refuse to take it of her self, then convey
it into her by force, with a Cotton casting, four or five days one after an
other.

If she be ill affected in her liver, by a broose against ye ground or against
a tree, or by encounter with some other foul, then take Rewbarbe of the best
one scruple, dry it upon a hot iron pan, until it may be made into fine
powder, of that give in a canuas casting, the weight of two grains of wheat
to your larger sort of hawks, but for the less hawke ye one half will
suffice. After she has taken this casting, if she be hye in flesh, then two
hours after feed her with a Pullets leg, washed in one of those cooling
waters, but if she be low and poor, with good hot meat. Thus must you continue
four or five days, giving one day the casting with Rewbarbe, and another day with
the Mu^my aforesaid. Truly without doubt your hawke shall recover if you follow
this method, unless the liver be removed out of his place, which sometimes
does happen by somegreat broose or strain. And you shall know it by a
continual hardness, which you shall feel in the hawks panell, and by her
yellowe mewtes.

For this inconvenience there is no remedy in ye world to be had, although you
would try all yt medicines yt are to be used to hawks, you shall profit
nothing. It must needs follow, that wtin five days your hawke peke of ye
perch. It is not curable.

Giordanus, an excellent Falconer, for ye indisposition and heat of the liver,
wills you to take half an ownce of Soldanel, and one ownce of Iroes, which
is flower de Luce. You must beat these into fine powder, and convey it into
your casting, and so give it your hawke. Withal at night he wills you, when
your hawke has put over, and well skowred her filth, feed her with good
meat, washed in these cooling waters following.

Take water of Endive, Maydenheare, Cycorie, and Buglosse: in these waters may
you wash your hawks meat, as also her casting, if it please you, wrapping in
ye casting ye powder aforesaid. For what with the help of the one and the
other, no doubt you shall see a very good effect.

Moreover the said Giordanus says, yt Gerfalcons are of al other ye hottest
hawks, and therefore to maintain and keep the^ sound he does advise to wash
their castings in this water following.

Take Endive water, Maydenheare, otherwise called Capillus Veneris, the water
of Scabiosa, of either two ownces, one dram of choice Rewbarbe, of the best
Agarick one scruple, put these in infusion, where after they have bin infused
seven hours, wash your Hawks casting in it. This order use ever, when your
Gerfalcon is out of tune, and it shall greatly pleasure her.

Of diseases that happen to Hawks feet, and first as touching the swelling of
a Hawks foot.
Sometimes the arm and foot of a Hawke does swell, by means of ill humors
that descend and drop down, through weakness of the foot or arm, through
ouergreat trauail and toil, through age, by reason of some blow or broose
received long before.

This mischief may easily be discerned as well by vewe of eye as touch of
hand: for besides that you shall plainly perceive it in sight, you may feel a
very great heat in the member, so as sometimes the hawke is unable to stand
on her legs, for pain and anguish thereof. Wherefore it is necessary to
look to it with all care that may be, and so use the matter, as the humor
breed not the gout, or the pin, which oftentimes happens to those poor
birds, to their great and continual plague.

The way to cure it, is to give the humor a vent by launsing it, and after that
to recomfort the member by often annoynting it with the white of an Egg,
Vinegar, and Rose water, well beaten and coyled together, or else with very
good old Oil of Olives, such as you can come by out of a Bottell wherein Oil
has been long time kept: for those drops that hardly come out of the
Bottel, are far better than any new fresh Oil, and are more medicinable in
this case.

Moreover besides the ceasing the pain, to delay the swelling, you shall find
it very excellent good, to take the powder of Acacia, and terra Sigillata, of
either four drammes, incorporating them with vinegar, the white of an Egg,
Rose water, and the juice of Nightshade, as much as will suffice to make this
unguent soft and delicate, and with this receyte to annoint the hawks foot or
arm oftentimes for a space: for this unguent no question, will both take away
the immoderate ache and pain, as also mollify and delay the swelling, and so
restore your hawk to her former plight again.

An other approved medicine is, to annoint the swelling of your hawks foot
with Olium Petroleum, (which is the oil of a Rock) and with Oil of white
Lillies, taking of each of these like quantity, the blood of a Pigeon, and the
tallow of a candle, heating all these together a little at the fire. This
unguent will thoroughly resolve the mischief, or at the least, by resolving the
thinnest humors, bring it to that pass, as you shall see the grossest parts
well digested, which you shall perceive by the whiteness and hardness thereof.
Then must you make an issue, by launcing finely with a knife the skin of the
hurt place, and afterward anoint it for certain days with the unguent
aforesaid, and it shall recover.

Besides this, a very good remedy for the swelling in a hawks foot, after a
rupture made, is to use this cerotte that follows. Take Gum Arabicke,
Armoniacke, Sagapeum, a gum so called, of either two drammes, Greek Pitch,
and ship Pitche, of each a reasonable quantity, Powder of Masticke three
ounces, of Oil of Juniper, or of the Fur tree, new wax as much as will
suffice to make a Cerot, according to Art: dissolve your gumms in Vinegar,
which done, spread of this upon a pleggat of linen cloth, applying it
handsomely both within the foot and without, making certain holes wherthrough
to convey the hawks stretchers or talons: Always remembering if the swollen
part be broken before the application of your Cerot, to mundifie and cleanse the
water and slime that is in the wound, and so every two or three days to
change and renew your Cerot.

The virtue of it is to desiccat, comfort and mundifie the filth and quitture
that is in the hurt member, whereby the hurt must of force be recovered.

Of the Gowte in a Hawke.
MAny times for all the care and remedies aforesaid, the gowte does befall a
Hawke, which is none other thing than a hard tumor and swelling, full of
corruption about the joints of a Hawks foot and stretchers, which disease
is very painful and offensive, by mean whereof the Hawke cannot pray. Truly
the Gowte is an incurable evil, and may be termed a ( nunquaem sanus.) Let
falconers, and writors say what they list, I for my part, can this much assure
you, that in all my life, I was never able by any devise to cure the Gowte
confyrmed, whether it were for want of cunning in me, or by reason of the
malignitie of the disease, which does rebel and scorn any remedy that
shall be applied unto it. Yet notwithstanding, because it shall not seem,
that I do it upon sloth, and for desire to be silent, I will lay down some
one remedy or two used by diverse Falconers, though often times to small
purpose or success.

Some for the Gowte, do use to take the Pills of wild Apples or Crabbes,
wild and sour Sloes, the rind of an Ash, or the Keys that grow upon the
Ash beaten into small powder, mingling it with half a pound of old Oil
Olive, all which they put into a Glass Bottell: or other vessel of Glass,
close stopte with Paste, or such like devise, so as no breathe may issue
forth of the Vessel, which done, they cover it in Sand in the Sun, or in
Horse dung, for the space of forty days, and after that, they streyne it
altogyther, so as the virtue of the ingredience may be incorporated with the
Oil. With this forsooth they annoint the place, hoping to resolve and cure the
Gowte, which I could never do upon any Hawke of mine.

Other some do accustom to annoint the Gowte in a Hawke, with the milk or
juice of Selendine, and the marrow of a Bacon hog, and taking a piece of
linen clothe, do bath the member every third day, with the strongest Vinegar
they can get, and do cause their Hawke to stand upon all this, for remedy of
the Gowte.

Again, there are, that with the juice of Selendine, Vinegar, and Honey, do
vaunte they have made an unguent, wherewith they have done great woonders. But
because by experience I could never find these to prevail in the cure of the
gout, I leave to speak or write in commendation of the same, putting you out
of all hope for recovery of the same.

Of the Pin in the Hawks foot, a disease much like the corn in the foot of
a man. The Italians term them Chiodetti.
THere is yet one other evil which happens in the foot of a hawke, by mean
of matter that powers down, in a manner as hard to be cured as the Gout, and
as combersome to the fillie hawke as the Gout, for by reason of the Pyn she is
neither well able to foot her pray, to feed her self, nor yet to stand sure
upon her Pearche.

The Pynne is a swelling disease, that does resemble sharp nails, rising up
in the bottom or palm of the Hawks foot: and by reason it does so much in
shape resemble a nail, by mean of the sharpness thereof, those swellings are
called by the Falconers of Italy Chiodetti, as a man would term them in
English, small nails, of which very few Hawks can be recured.

Yet for remedy of this disease, some do advise to open the vain of the leg, a
thing not only frivolous to talk of, and a very old woman's fable, or
Cantorburie tale, but also very perilous to be put in practice. For truly
neither will I my self at any time practice it, ne yet advise others to do it.
I can more commend, that you mollify and make soft the said Pyn with strong
Vinegar, the best that may be gotten, which done, pare it till the blood follow
after: then to bring it to maturation, and to ripen it, apply handsomely upon
it in a linen plegget, a quantity of unguent made of juice of Lemmons, one
ounce and a half of hens greese, three drammes powder of Masticke, leaves of
Bittonie, and Frankensense, or Olibanum, a reasonable portion, and so much new
wax as will serve the purpose.

Besides this, I do use to boil in good white wine, all these things
together, Wax, Oil of bitter Almondes, of each like quantity, a little Sage,
Frankinsense, Rewe, Rosemarie, to the consumption of three parts, then
pounding well all these with Turpentine and yellowe Wax, I make an unguent of
excellent virtue and operation. And if by these remedies aforesaid, the Pynne
become to be soft, and forgo his hardness, then does it behoue you, to cut
it out from the root, as low as is possible, and to dry it up with
Agrippa, an unguent so called, and with Gratia dei, mingling these two together
by equal portions, as much of the one as of the other.

Over and besides all these, the plaster that is called Emplastrum Sacrum, and
Isis, whom the Apothecaries do so term, are of singular virtue, because they
do mollify, and desiccate the wound or disease. I cannot remember, that
above twice, I could ever do any good upon my Hawks herewith (nor with any
other remedy) and therefore I will leave to make any further recital hereof.

There be some ventrous Falconers, that will with a cauterizing iron go about
to root and burn out the Pin, which I will at no time endeavor to do,
doubting least thereby I shall shrink my Hawks sinews, and spoil my Hawke,
by means they are so near neighbors to the Heart.

Of the breaking of a Pounce, or Cley of your Hawke.
Seeing that I have begone to write, and decipher you the mischiefs that do
happen to Hawks feet, it shall not be beside my purpose, nor amiss, to say
somewhat of the cure of their Pounces and Talons, when either by stryking the
foul, or by any other accident, they break clean off, or riue in sunder.

Wherefore when your Hawke happens to have this mischief, the part of the
pounce, or the whole pounce being broken away, you must apply unto it the
bladder of the gall of a Hen, using the matter so as it may get into the
broken Talon, bynding it so handsomely and artificially to the Hawks foot, as
the gall may not issue out, nor fall away from the place. This devise will
stop the blood, cease the pain, and within four or five days, fasten and
harden the horn of the Pounce, so as the Hawke shall be able to flee: and if
she be a falcon, she shall strike or ruff a Ducke as before her hurt.

And to the end your Hawke tear it not away with her beak, it shall be
necessary either to clappe her on a hoode with a false beak made unto it, or
to fasten to her hoode a piece of leather artificially, so long and large as
may serve the turn, to arm her beak, so as in time her Pounce, if it be
but broken, may wax hole again: or if it be clean ryued away, a new may
grow in the place again.

Let this suffice as touching the breaking or ryuing of the Pounce of a Hawke.

When the thigh or leg of a Hawke is out of joint.
BY some outward accident, many times the thighe or leg of a Hawke is become
out of joint: wherefore it shall be very necessary in this case, as soon as
is possible, to set it in his right and natural place again, to the end that
no matter nor flux of humor descend or distill, to hinder the setting of it
in joint again, which must needs ensue if it be not regarded in time. Which
done, set the Hawke in some such place, where she shall have no occasion to
bate or broyle with her self, but be at the greatest quiet and rest she
may, applying medicines that have virtue to desiccate and strengthen the hurt
member, which you shall do, by bathing a Linen plegget, or a plegget of Flax
in the white of an Egg, Oil of Roses, and Turpentine, with two drammes of
Saenguis Draconis, and of Aloes incorporated together, and bynding it about
the thigh or leg which is out of joint, and fastening over and above the said
plegget a slender roller of linen cloth, to conserve and keep it the more
firmly and stayedly in the place where you would have it to remain. Using
the matter thus ten days together, shifting and renewing the medicine every
two days once, to the end the plegget wax not over dry and stiff to the
hurt member.

I can like very well withal, if before you apply this said medicine, you
bathe well the thigh or leg of the Hawke with a reasonable warm lotion or
bath, made of Wine, Roses dried, Myrrh, Sage, Comfrey, Camomill, and
Rosemarie: for these will warm and comfort the nerves and sinews, and withal
dry up such flux of humor, as shall pour down upon the lame and broosed
member.

When a Hawke has broken a thigh or a leg.
IF by any mishap your Hawke have broken an arm or a leg, as sundry times
Falcons that are foul slayers do use to do, by some strype, or encounter at
the Brook with a strong foul, you must with all care and speed, set right
the broken bones in their natural place again: which done, deplume and
pluck away the feathers from the member that is hurt, round about the wound.

Then take Bole Armoniake Aloes Epatick of the best, Saenguis Draconis,
Of each a reasonable quantity, made into fine powder. After that take of
Bean flower, Barley flower, Linsede flower,
Of each one dram. Then take of Oil of Dill, Oil of Roses,
Of each two drammes. Then take The white of an Egg, The mucillage of
Fenegreke, The mucillage of Linseede, The mucillage of Hollihock,
So much of these as will serve too make a plaster according to art.
When you have made this plaster, spread a portion of it thin, upon Flax
or Linte well towsed, applying it upon the rupture and broken place, with as
great cunning and care as you can: you can not use it too daintily, when you
apply it, because of the tenderness of the hurt. This done, bind it with a
fine Linen roller to stay the plaster. Then make fine splets of Timber, all
of one length, thin as may be, and in fashion like the scales of a Sword
scabbarde, whom you must enwrappe in Lynt for broosing the member. These
splets bestow orderly about your Hawks leg or thighe on every side,
bynding them with the Linen rollers or fillets artificially, but neither so
loosely as the bones may slip out of their place, ne yet so straightly, but
that the hurt member may receive his natural nourishment and comfort. For
otherwise it would be mortified, and the use of it lost.

This ligature and rolling of the member, must be continued at the least.xxx.
days, for that the bone cannot close again firmly under one Months space.
Yet can I wish, that you unbind your rollers, and change your medicine,
twice at the least in the first fiftene days, dealing so daintily as the bones
may not sunder thereby. And by mean thereof will your medicine, and the
ligature, work the better effect.

Lastly, it shall not be amiss, after you have thus done, to use for three or
four days this lotion or water, to bath your hawks leg, to strengthen and
comfort the place.

Take Roche Alom one dram, Roses dried, the pyll or rind of Pomgranets, and
Frankinsense, of each a small quantity, white Wine as much as will suffice:
wherein you must boil these things aforesaid, to the consumption of half the
wine, with this lotion, bath your hawks thighe and leg, plucking away the
feathers as aforesaid. And this shall comfort the member, so as no flux of
humors shall repair to the place.

Besides all this, you must not forget, during the time of this cure, to keep
your diseased Hawke removed from all noise and access of people: and if this
misfortune befall her in the Winter time, you must set her warm.

Moreover, it shall be good and necessary in the beginning of your cure, to
give your hawke, 1 Aloes washed, or 2 Agarick in Trocysckes
to scour her, to the end there grow no inflammations. And withal to feed
her with good meat, the better to mainteyne her in state during the cure.

It will be good for you to use the help of some Apothecarie for the
confection of the plaster, as also for your lotion or bathe: for the more
artificially it is made, the better effect it will take. Truly it does stand
with good reason, that it will recure your Hawke, the receyte is so good. All
the care must be in the dainty handling of the broken member, and in rolling
and spleting it orderly.

Of stripes and brooses in a hawke.
Hawks are wont diverse times to receive stripes and blows by other fowls,
as the Falcon by encounter with a Heron, and sometimes by some other accident,
as by carrying her in a hawks bag upon occasion, or by rashing into bushes and
thorns, or such like hurtful places.

These strypes and hurtes either are simple hurtes (as they are termed) that is
to say in the skin and flesh of a Hawke only, or else compoundes, as when a
nerve and sinewe is pricked, or cut in sunder.

The simple wounds and hurtes are of slender or no danger at all, and will
be recured lightly again, either with the juice of Orgium, or a bathe and
lotion made of Masticke, Aloes, and Myrrh, two drammes, Pympernell, Comfrey,
and Sage, of either a handefull and a half, of Agresta clear and good, six
pounds, putting all these things aforesaid, Agresta.
into a stone Vessel made very clean, or else into an earthen pot, there
suffering it to boil so long with a close cover upon it, until two third
parts of the Agresta be wasted and consumed. Then strayning it very well,
adding unto it one ounce of powder of Myrtils. This may you reserve to use as a
blessed and sovereign medicine.

There is yet one other notable medicine, devised by master Frederick Zorzi,
and oftentimes approved by me, with very good success.

Take good Aloes, Myrrh, Olibanum, and Saenguis Draeconis, of either one
dram, of fine Graynes one scruple: beat all these into powder, and infuse
them in two ounces of Aqua vitae, for the space of twelve hours: then after
strain it very well, and of this use to the hurtes of your Hawks head, and
also to her shoulders, if they receive any broose or stripe.

But in any condition I cannot allow the use of Oil of Roses, in hurtes of
the head, as it seems, that the said Author would have it.

If your Hawks skin of her thigh or hinder parts be broken, fretted away,
or hurt by bearing her in a close Canuas bag, or such like, you may easily
recover her with this devise. The leaves of dried Sage beaten to powder, or the
powder of Olibanum, or Masticke, bathing the hurt with white wine, when you
mean to apply the powder, and in two or three days you shall see it
recovered.

But if the stripe be joined and matched with the offense of any nerve or
sinewe, then will it be a harder matter to cure, for that the hurt is of
greater importance and danger, for then is it wont to be full of pain, and
to cause inflammation. Wherefore in this case, the best remedy that can be
devised is, excellent good Oil powered reasonable hot into the hurt, taking
away the feathers first that are about the wound, and using this bathe about
the member where the hurt is.

Take Roche Alome one dram, dried Roses, ryndes of Pomegranettes, and Myrrh,
of each a quantity, boiling all these in good odoriferous white Wine to the
consumption of half.

No question this will greatly comfort the wound, and hinder the flux of
humors, that otherwise would flow down to the place, and breed an Apostume.

Much more might be said of stripes and brooses of hawks, but I do leave you
over to the learned Physicians, and skillful Surgeons, because I will not
ouerwearie you with tedious circumstaunces: accounting it sufficient for me,
to have laid down the cures for most ordinary hurtes, which do ryfest
happen to Hawks, and of such as have times past by fortune come to my hands.
If you covet to have greater store of medicines, for the cure of any member or
hurt part of your Hawke, I advise you that have skill in the Italian tongue, to
flee over to Messier Frederigo Giorgi, his practice, plainly and excellently
set down in his book of Falconrie, from whence I have collected sundry
things. But as touching these hurtes and strypes of Hawks, I have not borrowed
much of him, but have in this part of my collection, more used the brief
cure of Francesco Sforzino Vicentino, that excellent Italian Gentleman Falconer.

Of Hawks Life.
Having hitherunto spoken of such diseases and greefes, as for the most part
Hawks are troubled withal within their bodies: now remains that in few
speeches I show you a remedy for vermin and Life, a particular passion and
affection that lights on the skin of a Hawke, and specially about her
head, the plie of her wings, and her train: for in deed these Life and Mytes
do chiefly reign and lodge in those three parts of the Hawks more than in
any other.

Falconers do use to rid these vile worms and Life in the Winter time, by
taking of pepper beaten to powder two drams, of warm water one pound, or as
much as will suffice, mingling the Pepper and water well together, and then to
pepper (as we term it) or wash all her feathers with the said lotion or
bathe, and specially those parts of the Hawke whereof I spoke before, where
the Mites and Life do most haunte: which done, they set the Hawke on a perch,
with her train and back to the Sun ward, holding in their hands a small
stick one handful long, on the top whereof they fasten a piece of wax,
either red, or green, and with that, (while the Hawke does weather her) they
take away the Life and Mytes crawling upon the feathers, so as before the Hawke
be thoroughly dried and weathered, what with the wax, and their own dropping
away, there will not be a vermin left about the hawke. For the Pepper and water
does so much disease them, as they are enforced to leave their accustomed
lodgings: then the heat of the Sun, or fire, helps to make them show
themselves: and the wax by cleaving to them, utterly and clearly riddes the
hawke of them.

I have seen some Falconers add unto the Pepper and water, a quantity of
Stauesagre, as an enemy to the life and mytes, by mean of strength and force
that is in it: and I take it to be very necessary to be added in this medicin
to the Pepper, for the better dispatch of those vile vermines, which do so much
vex and annoy the hawke, as she can by no means keep her self in good state,
whilst she is incombred with them.

You must remember to pepper your hawke in this manner, as I have showed you, in
a very warm sunnie day, when there is no wind at all blowing in the Sky.
But if by fortune you be enforced to do it in another time, when the weather
is cold, and the Sun not shining, then must you set your hawke by the fire
to weather her, and dry her feathers: but neither must the fire be over hot,
nor the gorge of your Hawke toward the fire, whereof I have given you
advertisement before, in those precepts which are to be observed of a good
Falconer. For if you set her with the gorge to the fire, no doubt, she will
receive no small harm and inconvenience thereby, and for the most part death
ensues of it.

In the Summer time you may dispatch your hawke of the Life and Mites with
Auripigmentu^ beaten into very fine powder, bestowing and sifting it betwixt
the hawks feathers with your fingers, and specially in those places where they
do most usually haunt, always having regard that none of the powder come
into your hawks eyes for offending her. And after the bestowing of this
powder, you must in no wise bespowt her with water (as some do use to do) to
the great hurt and mischief of those poor birds. For the bathing or spowting
her with water, is a mean to make the powder to frette away, and consume the
Hawks feathers.

Some other affirm, that Mynt leaves boiled in water, to the consumption of a
third part, bathing the Hawke therewith somewhat warm, will dispatch the Lise
and Mytes, but for my part, I never approved this medicine, and therefore can
say little of it.

Let these suffice as touching the peppering of lousy hawks, for of all other
plagues that befall the Hawke, I account this the least, because they may most
easily be destroyed, as daily experience does teach us: and yet the remedies
for them good to be known, because you shall seldom or never buy a Hawke from
the Cage that is not lousy, or set your Hawke on a Perch where a lousy Hawke
has stood, and she shall be assured to be never a lowse the worse for it.

Of misfortunes that happen to Hawks in the mew. And first of all, of their
laying eggs in the mew.
IN the mew Hawks are subject to sundry accidents. Among all which (to pass
over the gresinesse and excessive glitte, that they are surcharged withal,
having somewhat touched that matter in the Chapter of the Gout) the greatest
mishap that may be is, when Hawks fall to laying eggs, and to be with egg in
the mewe. For in very deed this is a great mischief, and diverse times does
kill the hawke.

You shall first perceive it by the creaking and crying that they use in the
mewe sometimes, and otherwhiles on the perch, albeit now and then they do it
for egernesse and apetite, when they are sharp set: which as it is easily
found, so is it as quickly remedied.

A man shall know when they fall to lyking and laying, by this, from the neck
of the Hawke, down to the very middle of her train, there is upon the
feather, a certain thing like the flower of Branne, of a pale and ashie color.

And because this accident happens by mean of too much daintiness, and
lustful pride of the Hawke, it shall be good to keep her low, and to hold a
hard hand over her, pinching her of her feeding, giving her liquide and moist
flesh, from the middle of April, to the end of May, which is the only time
to be feared of all the year for this matter. When the Hawke does leave her
croaking and crying in the mewe, it is a manifest proof that she is with Egg,
which you shall know, both by her grossnesse and filling in the pannell, as
also by her idle standing without list to feed. And if happily the Eggs be
grown any thing great within her, you shall hardly hinder her, but that she
will lay them. Therefore (as I tell you) it shall be good in time to look unto
it, keeping her low in April and May. And in those months to minister unto
her, Aloes Epaticke washed, a quantity of Saffron lapped in Bombast or Cotton,
whereupon convey a little Flax or Towe, and make a casting or scouring of it,
thrusting it down her throat into her gorge, the Hawke being both empty
panneld, and having no meat above to put over, keeping her on the fist after
it, till such time the scouring be in her gorge. Of this and such like
scourings may you give your hawke every third or fourth day, for four or five
times, feeding her with liquid meats, such as will lightly be indewed. And
using this order, no doubt your hawke shall do well.

Again it is very good against the same mischief, to cause your Hawke in
four or five byttes of meat, to take a quantity of Saffron in chyues, using
her after the manner and form aforesaid.

Moreover it is a very good way, to delay and kill the list and lyking of a
Sparhawke, to feed her for three, four, or more days, if you think good,
with liquid meats washed in water, wherein the great pills of Ornus have been
infused for the spare of eight or ten days, being finely cut to pieces. But it
should be far better, if you cause those rindes and pills to be boiled in
water, so long until they become soft and tender, and then to wash your
Hawks meat therein.

If your Hawke be with Egg (as they term it) so as you may perceive and
feel the eggs within her, besides those foresaid remedies, it shall be good
to annoint her tuell with oil Olife: which being done, convey in thy
forefinger at her tuell, as finely as thou can, to feel the eggs, which if
thou once feel, gripe thy Hawks pannell softly for hurting her, forcing
downwards the egg toward thy finger in her tuell, and if it be possible so
bring it away clean, and rid thy hawke of it: but if thou can not do it,
break it even there right, and afterward bestow a clyster upon thy hawke of
things lenitiue, to make her mewt and slise well: for by this mean (as my
Italian Author does inform me) thou shall discharge thy hawke of this
mischief, and bring her to be in perfect state again.

To cause a Hawke to mewe fast and well.
SOmetimes it so falls out, that Hawks do not mewe in time, so as they may
be flowen with in the pleasant time of the year, nor be drawn when other
Falconers do accustom to draw their hawks, but they come so late as the
year is far spent, and small pleasure to be taken in keeping or fleeing
with them, for which a man is sometimes driven of force to use devise to
further the matter, and to practice to make her mew sooner than her accustomed
manner is to mew of her self. Wherefore to make a hawke mewe timely, the surest
and best way is to cast her off into a good mewe for the purpose, (made in
manner as I have taught you before) and there to allow her of the best hot
meats that may be had, as Quayles, Pigeons, and Sparrowes, and now and then
among, to set her in the mewe some vessel, large and deep, conveniently
filled with water, wherein your hawke may bowse and bath at her pleasure.

But if this ordinary kind of good and kindly mewing will not serve the
turn, (which seldom, or never almost happens to Goshawkes, for that by this
former fashion and usage they do use to mewe very well and orderly) then (as I
said) it behooves to assist and further nature by Art and Physic, to cause
a Hawke to mewe tymely.

To help in this case, those kyrnelles or small nuttes, which are growing
under the throat of a Weather, are very good (as mine Author affyrmeth) using
them every third day, for thrice, or thereaboutes, allowing a Sparrowhawke
three or four of them at once, being both empty gorged and panneld. But you
may give a Falcon six or more at one time, holding the hawke on the fist, till
she begin to slise and mewte, and after that a space feed her with good hot
meat, always remembering, that if the hawke do loath the taking of them, (as
happily she will) or do not very well brook them after she has taken them,
then that you give her respite betwixt times, for three or four days
together, to the end she may not find her self cloyed with them.

If at the end of eight days she begin to cast any feather, then may you
into the mewe with her, without more a do: but if not, then must you fall to
giving her of those glandulous kirnels of the Weather again, once or twice
more: for using it in this order the second time, without question, within
six or seven days she will cast the back feathers, or her sarcels or
flagges: the^ must you throw her into the mew, giving her water to bath, for
she will very much covet the water, and you shall see her within two or
three days so bare and in a manner clean without feathers, as she will not be
able for lack of them, to flee to her ordinary stand or perch. Wherefore I
can commend, and advise you to have some low perch and stand for her in the
mewe, whereunto she may iumpe when she has cast her feathers, so as she is
unable to flee. Especially remembering to feed her all that while she is so
without feathers, twice in a day, allowing her such and so much meat, as she
can endew, and make away with. For all that time will she covet great gorges,
and rid great store of meat, until she have recovered her cote again. And
to restrain her, or keep a hard hand upon her, having mewed her feathers,
and being now at point to put forth new in their places, will breed her
feathers to be full of tayntes, and ill favored, and besides that her
sarcelles and principalls will not be so long and large as they ought to be, by
means whereof she will not be able to flee so well as she was accustomed.

Some others, to cause a hawke to mewe speedely, do will you to enwrappe her
meat in the powder of a Frogge, dried in an Oven, or Furnace.

Other some, in the powder of a Cuttell bone, taking of the powder of this
fish bone, to the weight of a penny. But these practices and devises I did
never approve, and therefore do commit them to the discretion of the Reader.

Of accidents that happen and light upon a hawks feathers, and first, how to
use the matter, when a feather cannot be imped.
Diverse and sundry times it so falls out, that a hawks feather being
drawn out of the wyng or train, by violence and force, the hole closes up,
and shuttes after it presently, in such sort, as a new feather can by no
means grow and spring up in the place, to serve the hawks turn and use
again.

For remedy hereof, some do will a man to make the hole again, where it was
before, and to open it a fresh, with a Barlye grain, dried so as it be not
burnte. Then after that, to keep it open, that it run not together again,
you must frame a small pellette of Larde, or boiled Hoonie, which being
conveyed into the hole, will there abide, until such time as the shooting
out of the new feather do remove it, and displace it.

Some other time it happens a feather to be broken in the quill, so near the
wing, as it is not possible to ympe it again: then do they use, (to make the
quill to fall and drop away without pain to the Hawke) this devise. They
annoynte the place with the blood of a young Ratte, which will cause the
broken quyll to come away. After which, to keep the hole pen, they use the
help aforesaid, with the Barley corn.

These two cures, I never tried, because it was never my hap, (I thank
fortune) to stand needful of the practice. But truly I like neither of them
so well, as I can greatly commend them.

Otherwhile it chances, through the hurt of a Hawks wing, that one or two
of her Flagges, long feathers, or Sarcelles, are broosed, and thereby both put
her to great pains, and eake hinder her fleeing. Wherefore, it shall be in
this case very necessary, as soon as it happens, to look and vewe the wing
well, whither there be any blood, much or little, in the quill that is
broosed, in manner aforesaid: which if be so, it shall be needful to pierce it
with a sharp needle, or such like instrumente, to give the blood yssewe,
before such time as it be congealed and waxen hard. And after that, to
annoynte the broose (and especially, where the black blood is) with old
larde, and restie Bacon.

Moreover, it shall be very good to cease the pain, to pour upon the hurt
place, three or four drops of good Oil of Roses, somewhat hot, which
having used for the space of three or four days, it shall not be amiss, to
bathe it with Aqua vitae, to dry and resolve it. If you use this mean in the
beginning, when the hurt is first taken, no doubt, it will breed resolution.

But if by negligence or otherwise, it be foreslacked at first, so as the
broosed Sarcell, or other feather grow out of order, and cross the next
feather to it in fleeing, and by that mean be a hinderance to the Hawke, and
a pain, it shall be good to cut it off in the quill. And to the end there
may grow another second feather in the place of that, which is so spoiled and
cut off, it shall be well done, to make the quill to drop away. To bring that
to pass, first of all wipe well the blood congealed and corrupted within the
place, and after that, fill it with Aqua vitae, of the best that may be
gotten, and deal so artificially, as the Aqua vitae may stay, and not drop
out of the place. Which must be done, by stopping the hole with wax, or such
like devise. This Aqua vitae, by mean of the heat of it, will cause the quill
to fall away within eight days, or little more, by mean whereof there may
shoot out a new feather.

The way and manner, how to ympe a Havvkes feather, howsoever it be broken or
broosed.
Sometimes it so falls out, that the feathers of a hawks wing, or train,
be broken, whereupon it is both necessary and needful, to set other
like in their steades. Which fear, we term, the ymping of a hawks feather.

This may be done in four several manners and fashions, after that the feather
is broken.

For first, in the greater and huger sort of hawks, The first way to ympe a
Hawke.
if a feather be broken one fingers breadth, or thereaboutes, within the
quill, then your next remedy is, to sheare it off with a pair of Syssers, or
sheares, to the end it may not cleeue or ryue any further. Then having
prepared a like feather to the same, of some other Hawke or foul, resembling
the broken feather: you must cut the quyll of it, and so force it together,
as it may enter the broken quyll of the Hawks feather, annoynting it before
you thruste it in, or seem to place it for good and all, in the gummie fat
of a fygge, the yolcke of an egg, or some kind of Semonde made of purpose,
thrusting it very directly into the truncke and quill of the broken feather,
and as we may term it, graffing the one in the other. And to the end it
may have the better hold, and the faster stay, it shall not be amysse, to
ciynte, or nail them fast together, with the point of a Partridge feather,
taking the very top of it, and strypping away the feathers on either side
the web: and after that, making a small hole with a slender needle, so as it
pass through both the quilles, as well that which stycketh fast in the
hawks wing, as the other borrowed and adopted feather, drawing through the hole
made with the needle, the point of the Partridges feather, to fill up the hole
again. Which done, cut it off close by the web finely on either side, and
so will it stand very handsomely, fast, and almost not to be discerned, but
to be the hawks natural feather.

The second manner of ymping.
But if a Sarcell, a Flagge, or a Train feather be broken, or slyued amydde
the quyll, so as another feather ymped in him after the manner aforesaid, can
well take no hold, or stand sure: Then shall it be necessary to take a
Iunyper stick, or such like dry timber, and thereof to make a small sharp
pegge, so as it may enter the quyll, which done, dip the one end of it in
Glewe, Semonde, or the slyme of the fish, whom my Author terms a Colpisce,
the Germans a Leymefische, (a fish, as Gesnerus reports, so soft and
tender, as being sodde, or fried, he falls all to a gellie, or glewe, for
which cause he is detested greatly, and bannished all men's tables.) He is
headded like an Ape, and for that occasion (called of diverse, Marmotum, as we
may interpret it, a Marmoset, or an Ape.) In the slyme (I say) of this fish,
dip your Juniper stick thrusting it into the broken quill, remembering to
place it so aptly, as it may be without the quill, of just size to answer ye
length of ye feather when it was sound and unbroken. Then do put ye other end
likewise in the glue, or Semond, co^ueying it by force into ye quil of the
fether which you have gotten, so close as the one quill touch the other
directly. After all this, fasten and clynte both ye quils to ye Juniper pegge,
with a Partridge his feather, as before. And if it were so, as the quill were
slyued or rent, pierce it through with a needle and threede, and with the
thread bind it hard to the stick, on both sides the quil, and it will hold
very fast, and serve the hawks turn in her flight in stead of a natural
feather.

If a sarcell, or other feathers be broken above the quyll, The third manner
of ymping.
toward the point of ye feathers two or three fingers breadth, you must cut it
off with a sharp penknife, aslope, and (as they say) a swashe, and then take
another like feather to the same, cutting it in like manner, as you did the
other, so as it may fit with ye same feather, both for length and cut.
Which done, with an ymping needle said in Vyneger and salt, so close them
together, as they may be thought to be one feather.

The last manner of ymping is, The fourth and last manner of ymping
when a feather is not quyte broken off, but broosed, and (as it were) but
markte, so as it can not be helped and righted again with warm water. In
this case it shall be better, rather to cut away the feathers, only to
cut the nether part of the web, just over against the broosed place,
leaving the upper part whole and vntouchte: then to take a long slender
needle, like a Glouers needle, and to threede it, and having so done, to
thruste the eye of the needle being threeded, into the greater part of the
feather toward the quyll, forcing the point of it so hard with a thymbell,
as it may be clean hid in the feather, and no part of it to be seen.
After that, joining both sides of the broosed feather together, where you
cut the web, draw the threede as hard and as streyghte as you can
possible, so as the point of the needle, by pulling of the threede that
hangs out, may so far enter the upper part of the feather, as it may be
half on the quyll side, and the other half on the point of the broosed
feather, which will strengthen the feathers maruelously. This done, cut off
the threede, which was for none other purpose put there, but to draw the point
of the needle back into the upper part of the feather.

How to ympe the train of a havvke, being all broken, and never a feather
whole or sound.
Many times it so fortunes, as the train of a hawke is quite spoiled, and no
one feather left to serve the turn. Wherefore it shall be necessary in this
case, to set your hawke a new train, which is done after this manner.

You must take a piece of paper as bygge as your hand, in the myddle whereof
you must slytte a hole, through which convey the hawks train being broken,
up to the very rumpe of her, drawing back through the said slytte of the
paper, all the brayles and small feathers of the train that grow about the
hawks tewell, both above and beneath, so as there appear none at all, but the
long feathers, upon which you mean to work your feate. Then cut off
those long train feathers with a fine penknife, beginning from the first,
second, third, fourth, fifte, and so on the other side of the train in like
manner, and you must cut them off aslope, sidewayes, toward the top of the
truncke or quill, until you come to the two covert feathers, which two you
must cut directly, and not sloping, as you did ye rest. So as when you have
done, the train of ye hawke may be in shape like the pypes of a pair of
Organes. Then take the train of a mewed Iay, (if it be possible, because they
are the fairest feathers being mewed) setting in every quyll of the hawks
train, one feather of the Iaye, orderly, the first feather of the Iaye, in the
first quill of the Sparowhawke, and so consequently. And if the Iayes feather
will not enter the hawks quill, then must you cut it a little, and broosing
it with your finger, force it into the cut quill, anointing the end of the
borrowed feather in the fat of a sigge, the yolcke of an egg, or such like
stuff, and so placing it right and directly with the hawks feather. Having
set one feather in this order aforesaid, on the one side of the hawks train,
pass over to the other first feather of the other side, and do in like
manner, always placing and ymping them so, as in length, and each condition
else, they may agree fully with the natural feather of the hawke: and so from
one to the other, until you come to the two covert feathers, which you must
set last of all the rest, and those in so good order, as your eye may judge
them to be excellently ymped by the just length and syze of them. After all
this, take away your paper, and with a knife wette in a little spittell, go
over all the ymped feathers, putting ye knife betwixt every quyll, close by ye
rump of your hawke, and so go along the feather, to cut away all such small
feathers, as shall be out of order, by mean of the ymping and cutting of the
feather in the train of your hawke. Which done feather by feather, set your
hawke first on your fiste, and so after a space on the perch, that she may
trick her self, and right and enoyle her feathers with her beak.

Here will I not omit to remember every good Falconer, that he have in his
house, and in a readiness about him at all times, his ymping needles, and
such like necessary implementes, to serve the turn withal, and to lend his
companions, if they need. For it shall redounde to his credit greatly, and by
means thereof he shall be accounted a gallant Gentleman, and a good fellow.

Now in mine own opinion, I have discoursed sufficientlye of all diseases, and
made you privy to the Italians order of phisicking his hawke, which I can
very well commend, as greatly agreeable to reason. Yet nevertheless in this
last part, you shall for your greater store of remedies, and better knowledge,
have the French Falconers manner of dealing with their hawks set down. But
before I do that, I will write somewhat to instruct you how to prepare your
Mummie, a very necessary thing to be learned, and without the which you
ought to be at no time, if you mean to keep hawks, and to have them in good
order and tune.

The way and mean to prepare Mummie for Falcons, and other birds of pray,
and when and how it ought to be given.
SYthence that in these receytes for hawks diseased and sick, I have diverse
times made mention of Mummy, and of other medicines appropriate and peculiar to
sundry griefs, here I think it not amiss, to lay down the mean, how to
prepare it for the use and benefit of all Falconers, that shall have occasion
to imploye it to any sick hawke: For that in cure of a broose, I take it to be
the most ready and exquisite way to recover the hurt hawke again.

Mummie is prepared in this manner.
First, you must take Nutmegges, in number four, Cloves, Ginger, and Cynamon,
of either half an ownce, Saffron one dram, reducing all these to fine
powder. Boil them in an earthen pot well glazed, and covered close with a
reasonable quantity of good Malmesie, to the co^sumption of a third part: then
take Mummie three ownces, or four, or so much as shall content you, beating it
to powder, and putting it into a lynnen cloth, so bound, as it may by no
means ifsew out of ye same. Hang it so by a string fastened to a stick, as it
may not reach the bottom of the pot, but as it may be infused in ye very
middle of the Malmesie, which you must cause to boil again at a soft fire, so
long until there be a co^sumption of another third part. Which done, take it
from ye fire, and let ye Mummie, being so bound in ye lyne^ cloth, rest for ye
space of four or five hours, to the end the virtue of those pouders may pierce
and enter the Mummie, which by this mean will become very perfect. And having
done all this, keep the Mu^mie out of the sun and wind in ye shade, in the
self same cloth wherein it was infused, until it be perfectly dry again, and
the use it in powder at your need, either strewing it upon your hawks meat,
or gyuing it in and casting of Cotton, as I have taught you before.

There is a kind of pill or past, devised by that noble Gentleman, Hierom
Cornarus of famous memory, for sick Falcons which have lost their appetite,
and day by day become megre and low, making a black mewte, of full of flesh
undigested, which is prepared in this manner following.

Take Saffron, Agaricke, Cubebes, Frankinsense, Rewe, Cloves, Cinamom, fine
Aloes, of either two scruples, two Nutmegs, choice Mummy, Rewbarbe of the best,
of either one dram, and the fifte part of the marrowe of a Beef, or Veale,
as much as will suffice to make a mixture of these powders aforesaid: of al
which you must make a pill or paste, giving thereof to the huger sort of
Hawks as much as a Bean in a pill, in manner aforesaid.

This is a very good receyte, but not so good as this vnderwritte^, which is
devised by ( Messer Manoli) the Falconer to the renowned Signor Bartelmewe
Aluiano, and practiced upon his Falcons, being sick, and ill affected in
their gorges. He was wont to take Triacle, Hiera Pigra, Cassea Lignea, Cloves,
Cinamom, Aloes, Galenga, Agaricke of the best, Sirup of Roses, confection of
Hamech, Diacatholicon, Benedicta, of either one scruple, choice Rewbarbe, Mummy
washed and purified, of each two scruples, of Nutmegge three drammes, beating to
powder those things that are to be beaten in powder, and incorporating all
with honey of Roses, making thereof a pill or paste, which he would keep to
serve his turn at need, whereof he would give his huger Hawks the quantity
of half a Bean, and to lesser Hawks, a lesser quantity, in form of a pill,
being empty both in gorge and pannell. And truly, this would work a
marvelous effect upon his sick Hawks: and if you use the same, no doubt you
shall find great pleasure in it.

Of the cauterising instruments and tools, vvherevvith Falconers do sear
their Havvkes in desperate cures, when nothing else will serve the turn but
fire, the last refuge of all others.
depiction of instruments and tools

Having sundry times in my collection of Falconrie, spoken of cawterie, to be
bestowed upon Hawks, according to the diversity of their diseases and hurts,
it shall be very needful for me here in the later end of my third book, to
set down the proportion and shape of the yrons, which are proper to yt matter,
and manner of cure, being a very necessary thing for every good Falconer to have
those yrons about him continually to serve his turn.

Wherefore I say, that the cawterising yrons, are made in four manners, and
bear four several kinds of shapes, as by their peculiar pictures and
portraitures may be seen.

A) does serve to cauterise ye head of a hawk, because it is round, and
somewhat plain on the top.

B) shall seerue to cawterise ye nares, without danger or hurt to ye little
stert yt grows up in the middle of the nares, for that it is round, and hollow
at the top.

C) is a cawterising button to burn or sear the head of a Hawke, and with
that other device on the back side, to cut the skin under the nares if need
be.

D) is often times used to cawterise and enlarge the nares of a Hawke, and
therefore is made so small and sharp at the point, ye better to enter ye nares.

Of these tools and instruments, it behoues you to have larger, and lesser,
according to the variety and proportion of your Hawks, for that ye Falcon and
Goshawkes head being more huge than the Sparowhawkes, it shall not be good,
nor convenient to cawterise the^ all with one self iron, of one bigness, but to
shift your tool, according to the quality of the Hawke.

Over and besides all these tools aforesaid, a Falconer must have his pair of
knives, one straight poynted, the other bending at the top, a splatter, his
coping yrons, a pair of Sizers, and a Surgeons instrument, to serve his use in
all diseases of a Hawke, about her beak and pownces.

Thus much I account sufficient as touching Hawks, and birds of pray, so as
now there remains nothing more, but the French Falconers opinion of diseases
and cures, and lastly, one small treatise and very necessary discourse, as
touching the diseases that happen to Spanells, with the cure of the said
mischiefs, which shall be the very last part of all this collection of
Falconrie.

Though I like the Italian Gentleman very well, for his singular skill and
judgment in Falconrie, yet nevertheless, because I find sundry things very
good and necessary in the French practisioners, which may stand you in
stead, (as well for manning and lewring, as also curing your diseased hawks)
for whose only benefit I undertook the collection of this my book. And
partly, for that the French Gentleman shall not grow jealous of me, that I
skorne his skill, in regard of the learned and delicate Italian, waying them
both indifferently, if I find them both to deserve like due commendation and
praise: I have here offered to your view and judgments sundry French men's
opinions, and inventions, as touching this Art of Falconrie, craving you to
judge the best, both of them and me: of them your neighbors for their first
inventions: and of me your country man, for my late collection: whose pains
bestowed herein, shall be nothing but a pleasure, if I may find my self
guerdoned with good liking and deserved thanks from you. And so I commit you
over to the discourse it self, without any farther circumstaunce or
protestation.

How to keep and maintain all manner of Hawks in health, good plight and
liking.
TO keep Falcons and all manner of birds of pray in health, the chief
Falconers say, yt they must never have a great gorge given the^, specially of
gross meats, as Beef, Porke, and such other yt are hard to be put over and
endewed. Moreover you must beware in any wise that ye feed them not with the
flesh of any beast that has lately gone to rutte, for yt will kill them, and
ye shall not perceive how. I find by experience, that the giving of great
gorges, and the feeding of them with such sorts of flesh, (specially cold,)
does destroy and surfit more Hawks than all other mischaunces that can happen
to them. And therefore I warn all Falconers to beware how they ouergorge
their Hawks: and if they be driven to feed them with gross flesh for want of
better, let it be well soaked in clean water, and afterward sufficiently well
wroong. It must be done in Summer with cold water, and in Winter with suke
warm water, and it must not be wroong too much with the hand: for the
massinesse of the flesh, and the loocenesse of the water, will cause them to
put over and to indew the sooner and more spedily. And it will cause them to
have the larger panels, whereby they shall the better scowre themselves
downward of the glitte, and gross humors. And this is to be understood of
all gross flesh wherewith ye shall be feign sometimes to feed your Hawks:
but not of any other feeding that is light and of good digestion. For ye must
have discretion to reward your Hawke now and then with some good live and warm
meat, or else she may be brought too low. Nevertheless the serving of
your Hawks with washed meat (as is said before) is the way to keep them in
health.

Of Aloes Cicotrina, wherewith you must make scowrings for your Hawks.
I Tell you further, that to maintain your Hawks in good plight, and to
keep them from all diseases, you must every fifteen days, give the^ ye
mountena^ce of a bean of Aloes Cicotrine, which must be put into them,
wrapped up in a little of the flesh, or of the skin of a Hen, to the intent
that the taste of the Aloes which is very bitter, be not felt of them. And when
your Hawke has swallowed it down, bear her upon your fiste, the better to
cause her to keep that which is given her, which done, let her afterward cast
up the water and slime which she has in her body: and take up the rest of the
Aloes again which she has cast, and let it not be lost, for it is good and
will serve for another time. Then set your Hawke in the Sun or against the
fire hooded, and feed her not till two hours after, at which time you shall
give her a reasonable gorge of some live bird or foul. And the said medicine
must be given in the morning after that the Hawke has cast.

Of common pills that are given to Hawks for laxatiue medicines or downewarde
scowrings.
Nevertheless in stead of the said Aloes, ye may at your discretion use
common pills, such as Potecaries give men to make them loosebodyed. And many
are of opinion, that they be much better tha^ that other of Aloes: for the
pills drive downward and scowre more strongly and with greater effect. Yet
notwithstanding, ye may use either of those two, making the^ at your pleasure.
Of the said pills you shall give your Hawke one or two, after as the quantity
of them is, and when she has taken them, set her by a fire, or in the Sun,
and feed her not for the space of two hours after, at which time ye shall
give her some quick and live thing to feed upon: For the taking of the
pills will set all her body out of temper and tune. And so ye shall keep your
Hawks in good plight, state and health.

Another way to scovvre by medicine.
Stauesaker is called Fila^der, because it loves a man, and will cliue to him
like the burre.
TAke Aloes Cicotrine, and grains of Filander, otherwise called Stauesaker, and
Cassia Fistula, as much of the one as of the other, to the mountenance of a
bean, together, and when ye have beaten it into powder put it into a Hens
gut of an inch long, tied fast at both ends: then convey it into her in the
morning, so as she may put it over, and that must be after she has cast, if
she had any casting at al. Then set your Hawk by the fire or in the Sun, and
feed her with a quick chicken, or some other live warm meat two hours
after, as is said before: and so your Hawks shall be kept in good plight and
state. And it is to be noted that you must not give so much to a Goshawke, for
they be not of so strong and churlish nature and mettell as other Hawks are:
and much less to a Sparowhawke, because she is not able to brook so strong a
medicine, as the Goshawke is. And therefore you must bear in mind that your
giving of the said things to your Hawks must be according to their natures
and strengths, by the good discretion of such as through their noble
disposition do place their care, pleasure, and minds, upon such things.

To make a Hawke cast when she keeps it too long.
FOrasmuch as Hawks do sometimes keep their casting too long and cannot put
it up: or else it may now and then fall out that a man knows not whether they
have any casting or no: in such cases, you must give your Hawke a little Aloes,
and then she will cast it together with the slime and filth that hindered the
casting of it. And for want of Aloes, give her the mountenance of a bean of
the root of Celendine in two or three pellets, and it will ease her out of
hand. And to further the matter, it shall not be amiss to give her one
spoonefull of water, wherein the Celendine roots have bin stieped some space:
for the bitterness thereof will force her to cast.

Of the bathing of Havvkes.
IF you mind to keep your Hawks in tune and state to flee well, you must make
them bath oftentimes, and you must set water by the^, though they list not to
bathe. For sometimes a Hawke is desirous to bowze and take of the water by
reason of some chance, or for some heat of her body, or of her liver: and
then is water good and auaylable to set her again in good plight and health:
which thing you shall lightly perciue by that, that the Hawke will make
countenance of more cheer and rejoice more. When your Hawke is bathed
(whether it be Goshawke or Falcon,) let her be thoroughly well wetherd at the
fire of in the Sun. And if she happen to be washed, or sowst with rain, or
otherwise, let her be thoroughly weatherd as is said before, least she surfeit by
cold, specially when she commes from the field and from her fleeing. For then
is she commonly marrde for lack of good order, and looking too, in so much that
thereupon insew the Pantas, and other diseases. And therefore when the Falconer
perceyueth the time to be dangerous for his Hawke to take such manner of cold,
as in winter time after her flight, or by taking wet in flying: he must first
weather her well at the fire or in the Sun, and then give her five cloves of
Maces in her casting, and that will heat her again.

To keep Hawks from inconveniences which they take of themselves, or which
happen to them unawares.
FVrthermore, to preserve Hawks from mischiefs which they take lightly by
cold or otherwise: when ye have bathed and wetherd them, beware of setting them
in cold and moist places, but choose some warm and dry place, and with some
clothe roll the perch or billet that they stand on. For diverse times when
Hawks have beaten and broosed them selves at the encounter, with great toil
in the field or at the river, they be so tired, and take cold so lightly, and
do so chafe their feet, that if ye should set them down in that plight, upon
a stand of stone or wood, their legs and feet would swell, by reason of the
humors that would fall down and distill from ye higher parts, and by that mean
breed gowtes, as happens in me^ by like disorder. For such diseases light
not to men nor yet to Hawks, but for want of good heed and looking too when
they have distempered themselves by any immoderate exercise. When such
diseases light upon poor Birds, they be hard to be cured, unless a man have
very good skill to order them, and to provide remedy for them.

How men should make their Hawks to tire every day.
I Say further, that the good Falconers and such as have a care to use their
Hawks well, and to keep them in health, must make them to tire toward the
euenings before they let them iouke. When your Hawke has put over and endued,
afterward in giving her casting, you may well at your discretion give her (if
you list) a little Aloes Cicotrine in her casting, or else some common pill,
and that does greatly scowre the head, and do her much good. And that must be
done either once a week, or twice in three weeks: and the said medicine is
given diverse times by such as like not to give their Hawks tiring.
Nevertheless I say that tiring in the morning after the Hawke has cast, is
very good. And if the tyring be of plumage, keep her from eating of feathers
(as well as you may) for fear least she take casting before the evening: for
toward night it is no danger, for then of common course she is to have
casting. Let her tire against the Sun, snyting and sewing her beak a little
at your discretion, after as you find your Hawke low and poor, until you
intend to go to your pastime. I have known many Falconers that never make
their Hawks to tire, saying that it is but a custom, and needelesse: but I
say the contrary. For inasmuche as the Hawke is exercised by reasonable tyring,
she becomes the helthyer and the lighter both of body and of head, by all
moderate exercises, yea and she is the better in state also as you may
perceive. And I believe that the opinion of such as say so, proceeds of
nothing but of sloth and of small love which they have to their Hawks.
Therefore forget not to make your Hawke to tire against the Sun in the
morning: for it riddeth them the better of the watery humors that descend out of
their heads, if either before the doing of it or after, you set them upon a
perch against the Sun, that they may trick and enoyle themselves at their
pleasure. This done, ye may set them in their accustomed places. And because
some Falconers are so slothful (as is said before) that they will not make
their Hawks to tire, and othersome have not leisure always to do it: in stead
of tyring, I will give them a remedy that follows to ease them of their
watery humors which they have in their heads for want of tiring. Take Agarike
beaten into powder, and Ierapigra, with a little Saffron, and make a pill of it
as big as a bean, and put a third part less of Ierapigra than of Agaricke
to bind your powder together. Let that pill so made be put into her wrapped in
Cotton, toward evening when she has endued her gorge and is empty, making
her to receive it three or four days together. And you may use this medicine
from mooneth to mooneth at your discresion: And by the opinion of all
Falconers, ye may give this pill for all unknown and hidden diseases, for
which you know none other remedy.

Another receyt to keep and mayntaine your Hawks in good health.
IF you intend to keep and maintain your Falcons and all other Hawks in
health, take Germander, Pelamountayne, Basil, Grimelsede, and Broom flowers,
of each of them half an ownce: of I sop, of Saxifrage, of Polepodie, and of
Horsemintes, of each of them a quarter of an ownce: of Nutmegges, a quarter of
an ownce: of Cucubes, Borage, Mu^my, Mogewort, Sage, of the four kinds of
Miraholans, Indorum, Kebulorum, Beliricorum, and Embelicorum, of each of them
half an ownce: of Saffron an ownce, and of Aloes Cicotrine the fifth part of
an ownce. All these things confect to a powder, and at every eygth day or at
every twelfth day give your Hawks the quantity of a bean of it with their
meat. And if they will not take it so, put it in a Hens gutte tied at both
ends, or else after some other means, so as ye cause them to receive it down.
And if they cast up the flesh again by force of the powder, let it no more be
given them with flesh, but in the foresaid manner of the gutte, and let them
stand empty one hour after. And according as you see your Hawke disposed,
make her to use this medicine, to skowre her of the evil humors that are in
her body, bred of feeding upon naughty flesh, which ingendreth such humors and
causes many diseases in Hawks.

That the diseases which Hawks have in their heads, do commonly come of
giving them too great gorges, and of foul feeding: the mean of know it.
THe chief Falconers say and agree, that the diseases in Hawks heads do most
commonly breed of giving them too great gorges, especially of gross and ill
flesh. For when a Hawke has too full a gorge, she cannot well put it over and
indue it, whereupon it falls to corrupting and stinking in her gorge by
lying too long there, and specially, more in a Hawke that is low and poor
than in one that is high, and full of flesh, insomuch that she is forced to
cast it all stinking. And if she happen to put it over so stinking, it
atteynteth and rotteth her panell, by means whereof the fume and stinch ascend
up to her head, and there close and stuff up her ears, and the passages of
her pipes and head, so as the humors which were wont, cannot pass away as
they were accustomed, by reason whereof the head swells inordinately. For the
humor seeks issue and vent either at the ears, or at the nares, or at the
throat: for want whereof the Hawke falls in danger of death if she have not
speedy remedy. And to discern this disease of the head, the Hawke will sniffe
often, and shet her eyes toward night, and sometimes shet eft the one and eft
the other eye, and make as though she iowked with worse cheer than she was
wont to do: and then must you beware that she swell not between the eye and
the beak. And if she do, then cauterize her in that manner that is set down
hereafter. Whenever the humor makes a show to sew out at the Hawks ears, at
her nares, or at her throat, then is she in peril of death, if she be not
helped presently.

The remedy of the said disease.
YOu must take the larde of Bakon that is not restie, nor over old, and of
the fattest of it make slyces, as it were to larde Partridges, and such small
birds, and let them steep in fresh cold water a whole night, changing the
water three or four times. Then take the marowe of beef well picked, and
sugar once boiled and clarified, and of those three things being each of like
quantity, with the quantity of a little bean of Saffron in powder, well
mingled together, make pills of the bigness of a bean, and give them to your
hawke, causing some body to cast her, and opening her beak by force, if she
will not take them otherwise. This done, set her by the fire, or in the Sun,
and anon ye shall see how she will skowre and slyse by casting upward and
downwarde the gross humors wherewith her body is ouercharged. And when she
has muted well three or four times, let her be taken from the fire, or out of
the Sun, and set upon her pearche in her accustomed place, and let her not be
fed till two hours after, and then allow her of a chicken or mutton but
half a gorge. Let her be thus dealt withal three days together, making her
to tire every day against the sun both morning and evening. And four five or
six days after, give her every day a cloue of Mace in her casting, and she
shall recover.

When the three days are paste, wherein you have so scowred her, take a little
pepper beaten into very fine powlder, and mingling it with vinegar in a sawcer,
open her beak, and rub the roof of her chappe therewith, and likewise put a
drop or twain of it into her nares, and set her by the fire or in the Sun,
and you shall see how mightily it will open her head. Howbeit you must not give
this medicine to a Hawke that is very poor, for she will not be able to
brook it. And within an hour or two after, feed her with a chickens leg: and
after let her have twice a day at her hours a reasonable gorge, and let the
said powlder be given her no more but once.

In stead of this powlder, some give this medicine following, which you may
give also if you think good: that is to wit, a little Stauesacre, howbeit
that it is very strong, if there be not skill used to delay the strength of it.
Wherefore if you mind to give your Hawke of it, give her not past three or
four graynes of it wrapped in a cloth or in lint, which you must break
afterward and beat into powlder. Then take a little clean water in a dishe,
and put your powlder in it, and mingling it together in manner of a Sirop, put
three or four drops of it into your Hawks nares, and set her in the Sun
or by the fire as is said before, if it be cold. That done, then by Martins
advice take pitche if you will, to the mountenance of a bean, which you must
warm betwixt your hands, and afterward clean it to the roof of her beak,
rubbing it over with a little of the powlder of Stauesacre and Pepper, till
she feel the pitche well upon her Palate: and by and by in laboring to shake
off the said pitche and water from her Palate, she will cast: and let her
cast her fill till she be thoroughly scowred. And when ye think she is
scowred sufficiently, take away the said pitche if it be not fallen off
already, and set your Hawke to the fire, or in the Sun as is said in the
medicine of the Pepper, and feed her with some good meat one hour after.

And to recomfort your Hawke after all these medicines, ye may give her
four or five Cloves of Mace as is said before, after as the bigness of them
is, which you must first brooze a little, and put into her casting. For the
Cloves so given are singularly good for Hawks against all Rheumes and humors
of the head, so that it makes them to have a good breath and keeps it from
stinking, by setting their whole bodies in a temperate heat. And the Cloves
being so given every eight day, is enough to keep a Hawke from all rhewmatike
diseases of the head, and from all other diseases that come of cold.

Of a confirmed Rewme that comes of cold.
NOw that I have spoken of the disease of the head which comes oftentimes of
gyuing too great a gorge or of foul feeding, I will speak of the Rhewme or
pose which breeds of the coldness of the brain, and upper part of the
head. The Hawks that have this disease, endure such pain as they cannot
hold open their eyes. And of this disease spring many other griefs, as the
pin and the web in the eye, whereby they lose their sight: and sometimes
they lose their sight without having the pin and web in their eyes.
Besides that, there follows the hawe in their eyes as in the eyes of a Horse,
and sometimes also the pip in their tungs, and another disease which is called
the Efforcyllons in the French tongue (I know not what English term to
bestow upon it.) And moreover the swelling of the roof of their palate
which is called the Vuila, an ill disease, whereof breeds the Cancre. All
these diseases are very dangerous and put Hawks in great hazard, if there be
not skill to remedy them betimes. And Master Ame Cassyan says that such
diseases breed of flewme which is in the bodies of Hawks, as I said before of
the other Rhewme: and that fleume comes of setting them in moist and cold
places. Also sometime it comes of bringing them home cold and wet out of the
fields, and of setting them down upon their pearches without drying or
warming them at the fire or in the Sun.

The remedy of those diseases is first and foremost to cawterise them in manner
following. Fashion a little iron with a round head like a peaze, (which is
called a button) and make it in manner read whote in the fire, but yet not
ouerwhote: (for iron is very violent if it be too much het.) Cauterise her
therewith on the top of her head, because the grief and disease is there
grounded. Cause your Hawke to be well cast, that you may cawterize her at
your ease, and pleasure, for you must beware of burning her too deep, and
therefore that ye may be sure to do it well, mayle your Hawke fast, and pull
off a few of her feathers. As Soon as you have done so, take another iron with
a point as sharp as the tooth of a comb, and put it in the fire as before
said, and therewith pierce her nares in ye mids. The^ two or three days
after, take another flat iron of a finger broad, heat likewise red whote, and
cauterise your Hawke again therewith handsomely as it were between the eye lid
and the horn of the beak, and do it with the sharper side of the iron: not
that the iron ought indeed to have any edge, but rather by all reason to be
blunt. And take good heed that the fire touch another the ball of her eye nor
her nares, and therefore see that ye guard her eye with a wet cloute to keep it
from the smoke. All such manner of fires must be given toward the evening,
before Hawks are supped, when they are empty, for otherwise ye handling of
them would make them cast their gorges. When all is done as it should be, half
gorge your Hawke, or somewhat less with warm meat. And the same day make
provision of such Snayles as are among vines, or among Fenill, and such as
have gray shelles, they are the best, for men are wont to eat of them. Steep
five or six of them in the milk of an Ass, or of a Got, or else (for want
of that) in woman's milk, and let it be done in a good large glass well
covered, that they creep not out.

The next morning break the shelles, and wash them in new milk as it comes
from the Cow: then give four or five of those Snayles to your Hawke, after
that they be of bigness. And as soon as that is done, set her against a fire
or the Sun, and remove her not away till she have muted four or five times.
And if she can abide the heat well, let her alone still, for it does her much
good. After noone feed her with a Hens leg or with some small birds, or with
a Ratte or a Mouse, which are best of all, and then set her in a warm place
and give her not too great a gorge. When evening commes, that she has endued
and put over her meat, take five or six Cloves of Mace, broken asunder, and
wrapped in a piece of flesh or a pellet of cotton, and make her to receive it
by fair means, or foul, by opening her beak, and conueying it into her.
Continue this medicine four or five days, and your Hawke shall recover.
Afterward make her to tire evening and morning and let her feeding be styped in
milk as is said before of the Snayles, for the milk scowreth her body within,
and is very nutritive, and will quickly bring her to be hie, and in flesh
again.

Another medicine that Mallopin gives in stead of the other aforesaid.
TAke the powlder of Saffron and Camomill, of each the mountenance of a little
peaze, and when ye have mingled the^ together, put thereto Larde that is
neither restie, nor over salted, and steep them a night and a day in three or
four changes of water, and then wash the Larde thoroughly in fair licoure.
That done, take Sugar clarified, and the Maree of a Beef. Of the things
aforesaid, take as much of the one, as of the other, so as you may make five
or six balls of the bigness of a Bean. Then myngle the said mixtures, and
the powders together, and every morning give your hawke one of the balls, till
all be spente: and as is said before, set your hawke by the fire, or in the
Sun, and feed her not by the space of an hour or twain after: at which
time you shall give her either a Hens leg, or some small birds, or a Rat,
or some Myce. And in the morning, when she has well indewed, give her four or
five cloves of Maces lapped in a little flesh, or in the skin of a Hen, or
in pellettes of Cotton. And so may you cauterize her before the said medicin,
after the manner that I have showed before in the former receyte of the Snayles,
so you draw her meat in Milk, or in fresh butter.

For the disease of the ears, which comes of the Rhewme and cold.
SOmetimes there happens another disease to hawks, by reason of moisture of
the head, which is called the disease of the ears, because there issue out
certain humors by them. And ye shall know the disease by this, that the hawke
will often times wrythe her head back, and makes not so good cheer, as she
should do, and is more unlusty. Wherefore search and peruse her ears, and
you shall find the disease there. The remedy whereof, by Master Ame Cassians
devise, is this.

Take a little long iron, round at the end as a peaze, and Oil of sweet
Almonds, or for lack of that, Oil of Roses, which is much better, if you
can come by it. Then heat your iron in the fire, neither glowing red, nor very
hot, and put it into the Oil, and of that oil so heat with the iron, drop
a little into your hawks ears, putting the iron a little into them, that they
be not stopped. For then of such inconvenience happens oftentimes the Canker
to the brain, which is incurable, and kills the hawke. And beware of
thrusting the iron to far in, or of being too hot, for else you may kill
her. You must continue the ministering of this Oil, four or five days,
always wiping away the humors gently, that yssewe out of her ears, and
always respecting her casting, whither it be clean or no. And if you list to
skowre her with a common pyll or twain, they will ease her head maruelously
well, and do her exceeding much good: or if you do it with the said balls
of Larde, Sugar, and Marow of Beef, it is good likewise, for you may use
either ye one or ye other at your pleasure.

Of the disease of the eylyddes, which comes of the rewme and cold.
ANother disease happens to Hawks, in the eyelyddes, which causes a
swelling under the the eylydde, between the eye and the fear of ye beak (we
have no proper speech for it) if ye remedy it not betymes, it will swell
round about: and thereof comes the Hawe in the eye, which will ouergrow the
eye, and stop it. And assure your self it is a sign of death, if it grow
too long. For I have seen many dye of it in my time, for lack of remedy. Now
by Master Ame Cassyans opinion, the remedy is this. Heat the little round
iron that I spoke of before, and cauterize her with it softly upon her head, as
is said for ye Rewme. Likewise with ye other cutting iron sear her between
the eye and the beak. Also pierce her nares with the little iron, and
afterward give her the medicine of the Snayles, after the manner aforesaid,
four or five days together. And for want of that medicine, you may use the
other, of Larde, Sugar, and the Marow of Beef mingled with the powder of
Saffron and Camomill.

Of the Hawe in the eye, which comes of moisture, and cold, and how it
happens.
Moreover sometimes there grows a great disease in their eyes, which is named
the Hawe, and comes after the same manner that it comes in horses: namely,
sometime by a blow, or a stripe, sometime by a disease in the head, and most
commonly by hurting of the eye with the streyghtnesse of the hoode, or by some
other misfortune, which cannot sometimes be eschewed. And you shall discern
the coming of this disease, by seeing a little filme growing up from the
bending of her beak, and covering her eye by little and little. And this filme
is somewhat black before, and is called the Hawe, which puts out the eye, if
it once ouergrowe the ball of it. To remedy the same, take a little needle yt
is very sharp poynted, and fine threeded with a silk threede, and therewith
take up the Hawe handsomely, and cut it with a little slicer, as horse-leaches
do too horses, but beware that you cut it not too much, for hurting of the
eye, which you must wash with Rose water three days together. In these cures
of diseases that grow in the eyes, there must be great care used, for fear of
a greater mischief, because of the dayntinesse of the place.

Of a blow given to the eye, or of some other mischaunce.
SOmetime the eyes of hawks are hurt by some mishappe, some stripe, or
otherwise, as I said before. Against such unlooked for mischaunces, Master Ame
Cassyan gives clear Fenell water, and Rose water, as much of the one as of the
other, and therewith washes ye eye twyce or thrice aday. Master Malopin in his
book of the Prince, Arondell in French, is Hirundo, a Swallowe, otherwise
called Chelidon.
wills to take the juice of Celondine, otherwise called, Herb Arondell, or
Swallows herb, and to convey it into the eye. And if it be not to be had
green, to take it dry, and to beat it into powder, and to blow it into her
eye with a quill, and this shall recure the hawke.

Of the Filme in the eye, which some call the Veroll, or the Pin and web.
THere is another disease in the eye, called a Filme, which comes sometimes
of disease in the head, and of Rhewmes that distill into the eyes, and
sometimes of standing too long, or too close hooded, which happens through the
fault and negligence of such as have the bearing and oversight of them. For
the remedy heerof, Master Martin says, that ye must take Celondine, and
bray it, putting thereto Hoonie and fresh butter, and of each of those three
give your hawke a like portion with a hot gorge, and moreover put the powder
of Pepper and Aloes in her eye. Or else (as says Master Ame Cassian) you
must give her the foresaid medicine of Larde, Sugar, and Marow of Beef,
three or four days together, to skowre her, setting her by a fire, or in the
Sun, and feeding her after it with some live foul, and keeping her out of
the wind, and from standing cold, or moist. After she is so skowred, if ye
see that the web show it self much, cauterize her upon the upper part of
her head, and likewise a little between the eye and the beak, after the manner
aforesaid. When all this is done, squirte a little Rose water into her eye,
and if need be, minister thereto the powder or the juice of Celondine,
otherwise called Herb Arondell, as is said before. This disease of the Pin
and web, is of some men called the Veroll, for the remedying whereof, they
burn the shell of a Tortoyse in a new pot, and beat it into fine powder,
which they serce through a fine cloth. Then take they a Cockle of the sea,
which is fashioned like a Heart, and burning it thoroughly in the fire, make it
into fine powder, and serce it likewise. And finally they take Sugar Candy in
powder. These three powders myxte together in equal portions, they use to put
into their hawks eyes till they be whole.

Master Michelin tells of one other receyte for the said disease, which is
this. Make a little hole in the top of an egg, and power out the white of it:
then coil clear Rose water, and Sanguis draconis, well together, and fill up
your egg with them, and stir them thoroughly with a small stick. Afterward
wrappe up your egg in paste, and stop up the hole of it, that nothing get
out: which done, set it so clozed in the fire, till the paste become black and
read at the taking it from the fire. Then take out that which is within it,
and beat it into powder, and serce it through a fine cloth: and of that powder
you may use to put in your hawks eye till it be cured, washing her eye now
and then with water of Fenell, and of Roses.

Master Mallopin makes another medicine for the same disease, which is this.
Take the dung of a Lyzart, (which is called a Provincial) and beat it into
powder, with Sugar Ca^die, somewhat more in quantity than the other, mingling
the^ both together. He says, that this powder is much better than all the
others, whereof you may use as is said before, conueying into your hawks eye
water of Roses, and of Fenell.

For the disease that breeds in hawks beakes, commonly called Formica.
Diverse times there grows a disease upon the horn of hawks beakes, which
eats and fretteth the beak from the head. Master Ame says, it is a woorme
that eats the horn of the beak within, by reason whereof the Hawke is in
great danger, if she be not helped in time. Ye shall perceive it by this,
that the horn of the beak waxes rugged, and the beak begins to ryue and
cliue from her head. Master Ame Cassian gives this answer and remedy
thereunto. Take the gall of an Ore, (or of a Bull, which is better than of an
Ox) and alltoo beat it, and break it in a dishe, and put thereto the powder
of Aloes Cicotrine, and myngle them well together. Then noynte the horn of
your hawks clappe or beak therewith, and the very place where the Formica
grows, twyce adaye. But beware that you touch neither her eyes, nor her
nares. And continewe your so doing, till she be thoroughly cured, and let her
be bathed with Orpiment and Pepper, to keep her from vermin and Mytes.

For the disease that breeds in the Nares of Hawks.
ANother disease bredeth in Hawks nares, so as they swell exceedingly: and
sometime upon the horn of the beak there ryseth a cruste, at ye removing
whereof the flesh is found to be raw underneath the clappe, insomuche that
diverse times they loose ye one half of their beak. Master Ame Cassian says,
yt the hawke has small Mites in her head, which creep down alo^gst her
beak, and entering in at her nares, do bread ye said disease: and that ye hawke
feeling them, and being molested therewith, thrusts her talants into her
nares. Or else it happens sometimes, that a cast of hawks do buckle and crab
together, and thereof breeds the said disease. Master Ame Cassian provides
for it this remedy following. Here is left out the manner of cauterizing a
hawks nares* because the Italian has set it down.
Make little matches of paper, of the bygnesse of the tag of a point, and let
your hawke be cast handsomely, and set your matches on fire with a candle, and
sear your hawke upon the place swollen, taking good head that you do it not
too roughly. Which being done, annoint it the next morning with a little Hens
grease, and so will it heal well, and her beak and nares will not be stuffed,
but remain open. Nevertheless ye must be feign sometimes to touch her with
an iron, which is more dangerous than the other.

The disease called the Frownce, which breeds within hawks beakes, and in
their tongues.
THe Frownce proceeds of moist and cold humors, which descend from the
hawks head to their palate, and ye root of ye tongue. And of yt cold, is
engendered in ye tongue ye Frownce, otherwise called (of the French me^ ye
Barbillons, or Sourchelons.) by means of which they loose their appetite, and
cannot close their clap, whereof they oftentimes dye: and that disease is named
ye Eagles bane. For as I reported to you in ye first part of this collection,
the Eagle seldom when dies of age, but only by mean her beak does
ouergrowe, so as she cannot feed and gorge her self. Ye may perceive this
disease by loss of her appetite to feed. And to know it the better, open your
hawks beak, and look on her tongue, whither it be swollen or no: And if
there appear not that disease, open her beak again within a while after, and
see if there be any likelyhoode of it, and so may ye easily discrie the
mischief. For remedy whereof the said Master Mallopin says, that you must
take Oil of sweet Almondes, or Oil Olyue washed in four or five waters, and
with that Oil annoint her throat and her tongue three or four times a day with
a feather, for five or six days together. And if your hawke cannot feed,
let her meat be cut and shredde into very small pellets. This done, open
her beak gently, and make her to receive it down, by conueying a small stycke
into her throat, gyuing her not paste half a gorge at a time, and that must
be either of Mutton, or of some live foul, Hen, Chicken, or such like:
five or six days after, open her beak handsomely again, and with a pair of
sharp Sissers, cut off the typpes of the Barbillons, till the blood
follow, but yet beware of cutting away too much. After this, annoynte and
moysten well her throat with syrope of Mulberies, called of the Apothecaries
Diamoron, and then annoynte her with Oil of sweet Almondes, or with Oil
Olyue, till she be recured.

Of the disease called by the French men, Escorchillons, a kind of frownce or
Canker.
Escorcer in French, is to rippe off the rind or skin of any thing, of which
word this disease seems to be deryued.
SOmetimes there happens a disease to hawks, which is called the
Escorchillons, a hard disease to be discerned. It breeds commonly of a
Rhewme, confirmed in the head, from whence spring many other diseases,
(whereof I have made mention in the Chapter of Rhewmes in the head, and of the
disease called (the Barbillons,) which breeds in Hawks tongues,) as the
Pyppe does, the disease of the palate, and the Canker, which are very
dangerous diseases and deadely. If ye will know the Escorchillons, let your
hawke be cast handsomely, and open her beak, and force down her tongue with
your fingers end, so as you may see her windepype, and a little beneath her
windepype ye shall find the Escorchillons, like three or four sharp pricks
growing one against another, that sometimes the Hawke cannot cast, by mean
thereof. And that is a perfect way to know this evil. Furthermore, in the
same place, and on either side of the windepype, ye shall find two small
stertes of deshe, which are natural to all Hawks. But at the lower end of
them do grow up many little pricks, which are the cause that a Hawke can
not well cast in the morning, insomuche that sometimes she is feign to cast
her casting by peecemele, and not whole. And that is another assurance of the
said disease, which may be well cured and remedied both together.

The remedy which Ame Cassyan gives for this disease, is set forth in the
former Chapter by Master Mallopin, where he wylleth you to take Oil of sweet
Almondes, or Oil Olyue, etc.

The disease of the Canker which breeds in the throtes and tungs of Hawks.
YE must understand that the Canker breeds of foul feeding your Hawks, not
washing of their meat in cold water in Summer, and in warm in Winter, which
ingendreth in their guts gross slimy matter. And when those humors come to
be moved, they fume up into the head, and (so distilling again) engender heat
of the liver, which breaks out in the throat and the tung, and there engender
the Canker. You shall discern this disease by the feeding of your Hawke, for
in taking her meat she lets it fall, and afterward has much ado to
swallowe it. Therefore let her beak be anointed, and you shall find the
disease of the Canker. Master Ame Cassian gives this medicine for it. Take
Oil of Almonds or Oil Olife washed as is said before, and anoint well her
throat with it twice or thrice a day. That done, give her the said medicine of
Sugre, Lard, and marrowe of Beef three days together, and feed her with
Mutton or with Pullets or Hens flesh dipped in the foresaid Oil, but ye must
not wash your Oil of Almonds. After this, you must behold and regard the
Canker, and if you find it white, take a small iron made at the one end like a
Rasor, and at the other end edged and sharp. And if her tung be very much
ouergrowen with the Canker, slit and open it handsomely along the side of her
tung, and with your Raser scrape away the whitenes softly which you see there.
Then take a little Cotton or lint to dry and drink up the blood of her tung,
and see that none be left. And if the other side of her tung happen to be so
too, slit it likewise: which done, take the juice of Maydenheare, and lay upon
it. And for want of that herb, take a little bineger, or rather the juice of a
Lymon which is much better, and wash her meat in Oil till she be thoroughly
recured. Master Michelin gives another remedy which is this. Anoint well her
throat and tung with Sirup of Mulberies (otherwise called Diamoron) two or
three days together, after which take of the foresaid good Oil: Then take
the powder of Brimston and of sugre candie, or of other white sugar mingled
well together of each a like, and put a little thereof upon the Canker: for it
you should lay much, it would fret the tung too sore. And this manner of dealyng
is better for a confirmed Canker, than any other. Therefore wash her meat with
the oil aforesaid, and feed her with mutton, or the flesh of Hens or
pullets.

Of a kind of Pippe that is in a Hawke.
THe Pippe comes chiefly of cold and moystnesse of the head: and sometimes of
feeding your hawke with evil and rotten flesh, without washing it and making
it clean in warm water in the winter, and in cold water in the Summer.
Whereof ingendereth slimy and gross humors in the body, which ascend up to
the head and engender the pip on the tip of the tung as ye see commonly fall
out in chickens. And ye may perceive this disease by your hawks often sniting,
and by making a noyze twice or thryce in her snyting. M. Ame Cassian says,
that to remedy this disease, you must cast your hawke gently, and look upon
the tip of her tung: and if ye find her to have the pippe, ye must scour her
with a pill made of Agarik and Ierapigra, given two or three days together
with her casting toward night, and that will rid her of the rhewme in her
head, the rather if she be made to tire against the sun in the mornings, as
is said before. M. Malopin in his book of the Prince, says, that to cure the
Pippe, ye must bind a little cotton upon a sticks end, and dipping it in
sweet rosewater wash well her tung with it: and afterward annoint it three
or four days with oil of Almonds, and oil olife well washed as is before
said: and when ye have done so, ye shall find the Pippe all white and soft.
Then take an awle, and with the point of it lift up the Pippe softly, remouyng
it as women do Pippe their Chickens. Howbeit ye must not remove it till it be
full ripe: for if ye take it to green, you shall hurt your hawke. And look
that you wet her tung and palate twyce or thryce a day with the foresaid oil,
till she be thoroughly cured.

Of the disease of their palate which falls of swelling by reason of moisture
of the head.
SOmetimes it happens that the palates or roofes of hawks mouths are
swollen, and look whytish: which comes of moisture and cold wherewith their
heads are surcharged. And ye may perceive this disease by that they cannot
close their beakes, and by that they look not so cherely as they were wont to
do, ne can put over, or endew their meat but with great pain. To cure your
hawke of this disease, you must open her beak, where you shall find the
roof of her mouth whytish and swollen. And if you find it not so, you must
search her beak to discern if she have any other disease there that lettes
her to shet it: for sometimes their beakes grow more on the one side of the
clappe than on the other, so as they cannot close the^. The remedy that M. Ame
Cassian gives for this evil, is this: The hawks that are so diseased must
have the said pills of Larde, sugar, and maree of beef, given them every
morning, one or two, for four or five days space together, and about an
hour or two after, feed them with some poultrie or mutton drawn through the
foresaid oil. And after those days, open her beak again and softly scrape
of the whytenesse: and if ye find the swellyng abated, then do none other
thing to her but only continue your anointing of her with the said oil. But
if ye perceive the swellyng to ryze to high, ye may lance or prick it, but ye
must beware that ye stryke not to deep, for ye may soon kill your hawke.
Afterward lay the juice of maydenheare to it, and continue it till it be
thoroughly cured, and always draw her meat in the said oil, or else in milk
or butter.

For the disease of the jaws.
THe disease of the jaws comes either of drawing the hoode to streyt, or for
that it is to close and streyt of it self. And yt causes the Rewme to drop
down out of the hawks head upon her gummes and jaws, (if we may so term
them.) You shall know it by this, that she can neither open nor shet her beak.

M. Michelins medicine for the same.
Annoint well the gorge, jaws, and nares of your hawke with oil of sweet
Almondes three or four days together, and for want of that, take oil Olife
washed in two or three waters, and draw her meat through it as is said before,
and give her pills of Lard, sugre and marie of a beef, or else common pills
to scour her both upward and downward.

Of the Hawke that has broken her clappe, by some mischaunce.
AN other inconvenience befalls Hawks by the negligence of such as keep
them: for in their feeding there cleaneth or remains some piece of flesh in
their jaws or in the roof of their mouth, or on some place or other of their
beak, which marreth their beakes, so as it is enforced to fall away in
sliuers and pieces. This happens for want of wiping their beakes as they ought
to be after their feeding, by mean whereof both her clappes grow so much, as
at length it falls to breaking and riuing, if it be not remedied in time. And
thereof breeds this disease which we call ( Formica Corrosiua) whereby the
beak becomes brittle and is utterly marred. Master Ame Cassian apointeth it
this remedy following. Look into your Hawks beak, coping it and keeping it
very clean, and if you find any Formica corrosiua there, remove it. That done,
anoint the horn of her beak with the blood of a Snake or an Adder, and the
blood of a Hen, mingled together, to make it to grow the more speedyly. Also
let the meat which she eats be cut in small pellets, for otherwise she
cannot feed. And yet for all that, cease not to flee with her. Within.xv.
days or three weeks after, when ye see her beak begin to grow again, cast
your Hawke handsomely, and cope her nether clappe that the upper clappe may
join orderly unto it, as it should do of his own nature.

Of the falling sickness, which happens to hawks as well as to men, and
other living things.
THe chief Falconers say, that the falling sickness happens too hawks,
through a fumyng heat that ascends up from the liver to their heads, and
makes them to fall down upon the suddayne. M. Mallopin says, that to remedy
this disease, the hinder part of their head must be perused and sought, where a
man shall find two little pittes, which must be cauterized with a wire of
brass. And if that help not, then must you cauterize her dayntely upon the
head with the foresaid round iron, or else you may hap to kill her. This done,
dry read Lentils in an oven, and make them into fine powder: then take the
filyng of iron, the finest of it, as much of the one as of the other, and
mingle the^ both together with honey, and make it in little balls of the
bigness of a peaze. Then give your hawke two or three of them, puttyng them as
far into her gorge as you can, and hold her upon your fist at the fire or in
the sun til she have made a mute or twain, and let her have no meat till
noone, and then serve her of a Pigeons wing, dealing so with her seven or eight
days together: In the night let her be kept always abroad, and in the day
times in the dark, with water continually before her.

M. Ame Cassyan teaches another medicine: that is to wit, that the skin of
their heads must be launced right over against the foresaid pittes, where
there are little veins which must be taken up with a silk threede, and
anointed over with the blood of a Chicken. Which being done, ye must give her
the foresaid pills seven or eight days together, taking good heed that ye
set her not near any other hawks, and that your hawking glove be very clean.
For that kind of diseaze is contagious, and will soon pass from one hawke to
another, by feeding on the glove whereon another has been fed before. And by
night let her stand in the wind and open air, and by day in dark places,
with water always before her, as is already taught you.

Of another falling evil which first breeds in the neck and in the gorge of
a Hawke.
IF you perceive your hawke to have a swollen neck and gorge, and that she
pants more strongly in the mornings at one time than at another: assure your
self that she has the falling evil. Martin says, that you must take
Sanguis draconis, Nutmegs, that kind of Mirabolans, which are called
Kebuline, Cloves, Cynamon and Ginger, of each two penny weight, and making it
all into fine powder, strew a quantity of it every morning upon her meat,
supping her every night with a ratte or a mouse, three or four days together,
and that will make her whole and sound.

Of the Fistula, a grief that proceeds through pain of the head.
YE shall perceive when your hawke has ye Fistula, by the running of her nares
and by the streaming down of ye humors from her head. For yt which disease,
Martin allows this remedy. Ye must cast your hawke handsomely, and deplume
her head behind in the backer part, and anoint it with butter and swynes
blood together. And you shall find a vain that comes down to her eyes,
which you must cut, and knit it again with a red silk threede, anointing
it well and thoroughly with butter and swynes blood for nine days together, and
then it will recover her.

For the swymming in the head of a Hawke.
IF your hawke gape much and beat her wings, then be ye sure that she has ye
swymming in ye head. The remedy whereof is this. Take a fine needle that is
sharp poynted, and when ye have well het it in the fire, pearce her nares with
it through on both sides, and beware that ye go not awrie, for so ye may do
her great harm. Then anoint it with Oil and butter together, and it will
recover her, by mean of the vente that you shall give the humor by the nares.

For all manner of diseases in the head, and specially for the ache that is in a
Hawks head.
Whenever your hawke has any great disease or pain in her head, take six
graynes of pepper, four of Stauesaker, and five cloves, and beat them
together into sine powder, and feed her but three days together, with warm
meat mingled with it, and she shall recover. And for want of that, ye may use
the fine powder that is me^cioned heretofore. And if your hawke will not be
fed with it, let it be conveyed into cotton or into a a Hens skin, to take
away the sent of it, and feed her with none other than warm meat, and such
as is light of disgestion. For the diseases of the head, do so weaken her
appetite and stomach, that she cannot put over, nor indew her meat. And to
the end she may the better indew it, give her but small meals till she be
thoroughly recovered. And if she will eat the yolke of an egg, drop upon it
some of the said powder, and give it her with whote meat, and so ye shall
recover her. Here are sundry receytes and medicines, which I never have
proved, and therefore I can warrant little of them: but nevertheless I find
them in my French Authors, and therefore am so ventrous to place them here in
this collection of remedies for hawks: leaving them over to the desirous
Falconer, that has a will to practice upon his hawke. For store (they say) is
no sore, and among many there must needs fall out some good and wholesome
receytes. Wherefore judge discretely of all: and make proof of such as you
like: Experience is the mother of skill.

Of the stone, and how and whereof it comes.
YOu must understand yt there are.ij. sorts of diseases in hawks, called by the
name of the stone: and scarsly does the one come without the other. The one
keepth beneath in their tuels, and the other in their bowels and panels: and
they may be cured both together. Some call this disease ye Cray. And M. Ame
Cassian says that the stone or Cray comes by the eating of filthy flesh,
and by mean of foul feeding. For it burns and dries in their bowels, (as I
said heretofore in the diseases of the head) because the filthe which they have
gathered in their panels inflameth their Liver, which does so dry up the
substance of the guts, that they cannot mute, but must needs die of it, if
they be not cured. Some say that this disease comes of giving them washed meat
whote before it be thoroughly cold, and that is like enough: for a hawke likes
not of water and blood both together at once. The stone in the fundement comes
of the filthe which the hawke should mute, which thickeneth and lies bakte at
the tuell: by means whereof she becomes so poor, that she cannot mute or slyse
from her, and so must needs die. Yet notwithstanding I have often seen, that
when a Falcon is high and lusty, she will slyse it out well enough by mean of
her strength. And ye may perceive when she has the stone, by that she muteth
with pain and by drops, which is a sign that she needs to skowre that
matter, whereof the stone does grow. And when she muteth at twice, and a third
time after that, it is a token that the stone is thoroughly confirmed in her
guts and panel. Moreover, when ye see that her tuell is chased, and but
little drops from her, and that the feathers of her train are much filed
with her muting, and that she is evermore picking with her beak about her
tuell, be ye sure she has ye stone in her tuell, which we call the stone Craye.
Again when she muteth and makes as though she would iouke upon your fist, and
in her eyes is more troubled tha^ of ordinary: doubt not but that she has the
stone cray. And because she cannot rid it, she is in danger, if she be not
lookte too in time. The remedy thereof by the judgment of M. Ame Cassyan, is
this: take a slyce of Larde (or a pellet of Soap, wet in salet oil) of the
bigness of a goose quill, and an inche long, and put thereon the powder of
Aloes cicotrine: which done, cast your Hawke handsomely, and convey it into her
tuell as ye would give a man a suppositorie: and if the Larde be too tender
and soft to handle, stick it upon a Hens feather, so as the feather appear
not through the Larde (for so may ye do her great harm with the feather) and
so convey it up into her tuell, drawyng away the feather gently, and leaving
the Larde behind, and have snayles in a readiness to give her immediately after
ye have applied the said devise. And for lack of Snayles, give her the
forementioned pyll of Lard, mingled with marrow and sugar, and set her in the
Sun, or by a fire, without feeding of her till one hour after noone. And if
she endure well to be by the fire, or in the Sun, let her alone, for the
heat is very good for her. After this, give her somewhat more than half a
gorge of a young pullet, or if ye can come by any Myce or Rats, nothing is
better. But let her not stand in the air or in the wind, except the weather
be fair and warm. At night when she has indewed well, give her four or five
cloves of Mace broken, and lapped up in a little cotton, or in the skin of a
Hen: and do so three or four days, saving the suppositorie or pellet
aforesaid, for it will serve twice well enough. And thus shall you skoure your
hawke thoroughly. Look well to it, that she cast not up the cloves of Mace, for
they be singular good for hawks in all respects, specially for all humors
that surcharge their heads, and generally for all Filanders and worms. And if
you mind to rid a Falcon clean of the Cray, and of the said disease: give her
meat steeped in Goats milk, or in other milk, and do so four or five days
together: for the said milk is very good against the Cray. In the book of
the Prince, there is another receyt, for this disease of the Cray or stone.
That is to wit: Take the gall of a Pigge of three weeks old, and convey it
into your hawks beak, so as she may take it and swallowe it down whole
without breaking, and take heed that she cast up none of it again.
Afterward, give her a little piece of the Pigges flesh, of the bigness of a
Bean, and let her stand emptiepanneld upon the same until night, setting her
in the Sun or by the fire. This medicine is very good for all birds of
pray that are encombred with the Craye or Stone. Nevertheless, if a
Gossehawke or a Sparrowhawke have that disease (so it be not too sore) give it
her nor more but once. But as for other hawks that are of stronger mettel, ye
may give it them thrice. And when evening is come, feed your hawke with a
pullet, or with mutton, or with small birds, and the next morning steep her
meat in Goats milk, or woman's milk, feeding her so three days together
with small gorges, and she shall be sound. And if you will not or can not use
the said Receypt, ye may take a little oil Olyf, and somewhat less Honnye,
and wette your hawks meat therewith, for it is good to help that disease.
Some put the said things into a Hens gut tide fast at both ends, because a
hawke will take it the better: and naturally she likes not oil with her meat.

Master Michelin sets down another medicine which is this. Take Larde, marow
of beef, Sugar clarified and once boiled, and Saffron in powder, or each a
like quantity, provided that the Lard be first stieped in vinegar four and
twenty hours, and the water shifted three or four times, and set abroad in
the open air. Of the which things confected together, ye must make pylles of
the bygnesse of a Bean, whereof you shall give your hawke one or two, setting
her in the Sun or by the fire, and feeding her with poultrie or with mutton,
allowing her but reasonable gorges, four or five days together, and giving her
Maces as before: for they can not but do the hawke great pleasure in every
condition and part. Master Michelin teaches another receipte for this disease,
specially for Gossehawkes and Sparowhawkes, which I have tried often.

Cut a Sheep heart in small pieces, and when ye have let it lie stieping all
night in Asses milk, Gotes milk, or woman's milk, put a little boylde Sugar
into the milk, and gorge your hawke reasonably therewith three days together.
And assure your self, that this medicine is very excellent for the Cray, and
without danger for all manner of hawks. M. Martine says in auouchment of this
matter, that when a hawke cannot well mute with her ease, it betokens and
plainly shows that she has the stone Cray. For remedy whereof, take the
heart of a Hog, and a quantity of his sewet minced very small, and make them
into powder together, and give it the hawke in her meat three days
successively.

Again, I have seen some take the white of an egg, or the whole egg, with a
little Saffron in powder, well coyled and beaten together, which being bestowed
upon the hawks meat, has cured her.

Mallopin sets down yet one other receipt more. Put the juice of (water
Cressyes) in a Hens gut of one inche long, tied at both ends, and force your
hawk to receive it. Which done, set her in the Sun or by the fire, and feed
her not till noone, at which time give her but half a gorge of hot meat,
because of the medicine, which has set al her body out of temper. Let this he
done two or three days, and if you find the medicine to have scowred and taken
much at the first of your hawke, give her less and less, and so shall she
recover. The book of Princes sets down yet one other remedy for the same
disease, that ye might put it in ure which soever liked you best. Take a
penny weight of Persley seed, as much of Smallage seed, a dram of boylde
Sugar, a penny weight of Stauesaker, of Wheaten branne one dram, and half the
shell of an egg. Put them altogether into a good large psnet full of water,
and seethe it till it be consumed to the one half, and then streine it through
a cloth. Then take of Cassia Fistula one dram, and of Turbith one penny
weight, of Hermodactils two pennye weight, and of Aloes Cicotrine three penny
weight. Beat all these into fine powder, and put them into the water, wherein
the other mixture was boiled, and make thereof a Clyster in the bladder of a
Pygge.

Then take a great quyll of a Goose or of some other bird, and thereof make
the neck of your Clysterbagge fast tied to the bag, that nothing may issue
out of it, and so give your hawke the Clyster, as you have seen it given to
men at their need. This done, set your hawke in the Sun or by the fire, and
keep her empty till noone, at which time give her a pullets leg, and so she
shall recover no doubt.

For the disease called the Filanders which happen in the bodies of Hawks: and
first of such as are in their gorge.
THe chief Falconers say, that all hawks have the Filanders at al times, and
are never without them, like as it is said that no horse is without the Bottes.
There are four kinds of Filanders, and one other kind of Filanders, of which
I will speak hereafter in their due places. And with all these sorts of
Filanders, some hawks are more pestered than other some. The cause of them is
either their feeding on gross and foul meats, which engender and increase
those Fila^ders in them, or else for that inflying either ye field, or the
river, they break some small veins within their bodies, at the encounter, by
seazing too violently upon their pray. By reason whereof the blood bursteth
out into their bowels, and there dries and clottereth, whereof breed the said
Filanders in great abundance. Afterward by reason of the stinch of the said
blood so clottered and bakte, being corrupted and putrified in the bulk
because it is out of the proper vessels and veins where it ought to be, the
Filanders run about seeking the cleanest places of the body, to shun the
said noysyme stinche, and creep up either into the hawks heart, or into her
gorge, so as she dies of it. Again, some men say, that their hawks dye of
the diseases of the head, or of the Craye, when in deed they dye of the
Filanders or (which is worsse) of the ( Aignilles) a kind of Filanders for
which we want an english term. I will speak first of those Filanders that
craule up to the hawks gorges, and from thence to the holes in their palates
whereat the hawks do breathe, and by them into their brains, whereby they be
in danger of death. Ye may perceive this inconvenience in the gorge by this,
that when you have fed your hawke, the Filanders feeling the sweetness and
taste of the flesh, do stir and craule about in such wise, as you shall see
your hawke oftentimes gape. By reason whereof it comes to pass that now and
then she casts her gorge. Again, ye may know by this, that your hawke will
be strayning at them with her talons. Therefore cast her gently, and look into
her throat, and you shall see them crawling there. To kill the said
Filanders, master Ame Cassyan says thus: take a great Radysh root, and make a
hole in it, and fill it with water, and set it in embers very hot, putting
fresh embers to it continually by the space of half an hour or more, till it
be thoroughly well boiled, and as your water diminishes, fill it always up
again, howebeit that the Radishe yields water enough of his own nature.
Then put the Radishe into a dyshe, stamp it and press out all the juice quite
and clean. This done, put the quantity of a Peaze of Saffron made into powder
into the said water, and wash your hawks meat therewith when ye feed her,
and give her but half a gorge. And if she will not feed on it, let her be
kept empty, till she be very greedy and eger: do thus to her three or four
days together, and you shall kill the Filanders, and make your hawke sound.

Of the Filanders that are in hawks bowels, and in their reins.
YE shall discern that the Filanders are in her bowelles and guts, by her
heavy cheer and playnt in the night, for she will cry, and make a mournful
noise. Also ye may perceive it by this, that when ye take her on your fist in
the morning, she will stretch her self more strongly than she is wont to do of
ordinary, and sometimes she will make as though she would iouke upon your
si^te, and she will be busy with her beak about her back right over against
her raynes. When ye see these signs, assure your self that either the
Filanders or the ( Aigailles) do trouble her: and if she have not help of
them betimes, they will kill her, for I have seen many dye of that disease.
Master Ame Cassian gives this remedy for that mischief.

Take Lentilles, of the reddest that you can find and parche them at the fire,
and make fine powder of them, with the powder of Wormeseede, less by one half
than of the powder of Lentils, and mingle and temper them well together, and
make thereof a plaster, driven (upon cloth or leather.) Then deplume your
hawke in the place where her grief is, and lay the plaster to her panell,
changing it every day, for four or five days space together, and she shall
be cured.

If ye like not that receipt, Master Michelin gives you another, which is
this. Take the leaves of a Peach tree, of Rue, and of Wormeseede, and of those
three being brayed together, streyne out the juice, and afterward take then
powder of Wormwood, and put it into the juice, and lay it upon your hawks
reins playsterwise twice a day, evening and morning, for four or five days
together, and it will kill the Filanders, and save your hawke.

Master Ame Cassian tells yet one remedy more. Take (says he) a cloue of
Garlyke pylled, and give it your hawke in a hens skin, and it will heal her.

Of the Filanders or worms that are in hawks legs and thighs, which the
Frenchmen call Verse.
THere is another manner of Filander called the ( Verse) which comes sometimes
upon hawks that are lately taken, by setting them upon a pearche vnhooded or
vnseled, for they fall to beating of them selves with so great force, that they
break the veins of their legs. And this happens specially rather to Hagard
hawks, than to soar hawks. By means whereof the blood of those veins so
broken, pours and distilleth along their legs and pannels, between the
skin and the flesh, and there lying in lumpes, does convert to worms,
whereof the hawke dies. This disease may come also by her bating overmuch upon
the fiste, where through she bruseth her self violently: and sometimes he that
bears her furthereth it by his rashness and impaciencie. And ye may perceive
that ye Filanders and worms are in your hawks legs or bowels, by this: They
plume themselves oftentimes, yea, and the pendant feathers of their thighs and
of their panels, fall off voluntarily. Master Mallopin says, that the remedy
for this disease, is to wash your hawks thighs and belly twice a day, for
four or five days together, with the foresaid medicine of the leaves of the
Peachtree, of Rue, and or wormeseede, and with the wormeseede it self.

For the disease called in french the (Aiguils) an evil worse than the
Filanders, for which I know no apt English term, and therefore must borow the
french term of mine Author.
THere are found a kind of Filanders which are called ( Aiguilles) because they
be sharp like a needle, shorter and more perilous than are the great
Filanders, for as much as in seeking the cleanest parts of the body, to shun
the stinch and filth, they pearce the bowels and creep up to the heart, so that
your hawke perishes of them, if she be not regarded in time. Ye shall perceive
this disease by her shrinking and snyting upon the lure, as also by her
grasping with her foot more strongly in the mornings than she was wont to do,
and again by the often picking and beaking in her braile feathers, and near
her tuell. M. Mallopin gives this remedy following. Take Stauesaker beaten
into powder, the herb of Barbary, otherwise called in greek Pestora, and
Aloes Citotrine, of each a like quantity, coyled altogether into powder, and
give your hawke the quantity of a Bean thereof, lapped up in some part of a
Hens skin, or in cotton. Which done, set her in the Sun or by the fire,
and at noone allow her but half a gorge. You may give her of this powder
three or four days, so she be not too low already: for if she be not
somewhat high in flesh and in life, she will not be able to bear and brook
it. And if this medicine cure her not, take this that follows, which is of
master Mallopins device also. Burn Hearts horn well raked in the embers, and
when it is waxen cold, beat it into powder. Then take ye like quantity of
Lupins made into powder, as ye had of ye hearts horn, and as much again of the
powder of Wormseed, as of both ye other, and half as much Aloes Cicotrine, as
of the Hearts horn, and half as much Tryacle as of Aloes. Mingle al these
together with Honny by little and little, and force it to that thickness, yt ye
may make balls of it to the bigness of a nut, whereof ye shall give your
hawke every day one, by the space of five or six days, allowing her but half a
gorge after it. And if your hawke cast it again, let it be lapped in a little
cotto^ or in a hens skin, yt she feel not ye bitter taste of it. M. Ame Cassian
gives yet another remedy, which is the medicine made heretofore for the
Filanders, that is to wit, Rue and Wormwood, of each alike, and as much of the
Peachtree leaves, as of the^ both, with a little powder of Wormseede infused in
the juice of the said herbs. Then fill a Hens gut of an inche long, therewith
tied fast at both ends, and give it to your hawke.

You may use any of all these at your own discretion and pleasure.

When a hawke gapeth inordinatly upon the fiste of her keeper.
A Hawke will now and then sall to gaping, either upon her keepers fist, or
upon the pearche, and specially when she is set in the Sun being somewhat
hot. And this gaping may be understood and construed two ways. The one is
when she does it of her own nature, but that is not so often as the other which
comes by mischance, and that either of cold that she has taken, or of some
moist humor that destilleth down into her gorge. Some are of opinion that the
hawke which uses it often, is diseased with the Filanders, which creep up and
down in her gorge before she be fed, or after she has indewed, as I have
declared in the chapter of Filanders of the gorge.

The remedy by Master Ame Cassians aduyce, is to take the powder of
Wormeseede and of Wormewoode, of each alyke, and one quarter less of Aloes
Cicotrine, and of these three pouders mingled together, to give your hawke the
mountenance of a Bean in her casting, lapped up in a Hens skyn, or in any
such like device.

Of Apostumes that breed in Hawks.
WHen a hawke has any Apostume in her body, ye shall know it by the stuffing
of her nares, and by her inordinate panting, which accident comes sometimes
by rushing rashely into bushes, or by bating too much upon the pearche, and
moreover by over free encounter with her pray Now when she is so bruised and
chafed, and takes cold upon it, Apostumes breed thereby, because the
mischief is not known and looked unto before hand, Mallopin in his book of
the Prince gives this remedy. Take the white of an egg well beaten, and the
juice of Colewortes well broosed, as much of the one as of the other, and give
it your Hawke in the morning, in the small gut of a hen, and set her by a
fire, or in the Sun, and at noone feed her with mutton, or with a Pullet. The
next day take Rosemarie dried, and beaten into fine powder, and bestow it upon
her meat reasonably. For other three days give her Sugar, and three days
next after that, plie her again with her said powder, letting her stand
warm day and night, and feeding her with good meat: and the likelyhoode is
great she shall be recovered.

Of a Hawke that has her Liver inflamed.
THe inflammation of the Liver happens sometimes through the negligence of
such as have the keeping of Hawks. For they feed them with gross and
naughty flesh, such as is stale and stinking, without making of it clean, by
means whereof proceeds the said inflammation of the Liver. Also it happens
for want of bathing when need is, and for lack of water, which they ought to
have, or with ouerfleeing of them, when they be empty panneld. Ye shall
perceive this disease by their feet: for they will be chafed, and the color
of their chappes will be changed, and look whitishe through the heat of
their Liver. And if ye find her tongue scorched and scalded black, it is a
sign of death. To remedy this mischief, make the medicine of Snayles steeped
in Asses milk, or Gotes milk mentioned in the Chapters of the diseases of the
head, and of the stone: and give your Hawks of it three or four days in the
mornings. And if ye cannot get that medicine, ye may use the other that is made
of Lard, Marrow of beef, and of boiled Sugar, with a little Saffron, four or
five days together every morning, as is said before. For the scouring of her
will rid and abate her heat. And all that while for seven or eight days,
feed her with poultrie, or with mutton, steeped in milk: for milk is very
good for the heat of the Liver. And you must beware you feed her not with
Pigeon, nor with other gross flesh, for breeding her to inordinate heat.
Master Ame Cassian says yet further, that to allay the said heat in Hawks,
it is very good to steep or wet their meat in Endive, or Nightshade water:
and likewise in white whey newly and lately made. And that this manner of
feeding must be continued four or five days, till the Hawke be well scoured.
And that if the hawke have a desire to bowze the said whey, ye must let her
take her fill. Master Ame Cassian says moreover, that when your medicine has
scoured your hawke after the manner, and her tongue is not aught in the better
tune, ye must take oil Olife washed in two or three waters, and bath her tung
and throat therewith with a feather, three or four times in the day, for four
or five days together, and gently scrape her tung and throat with a devise of
silver, or of other metal for that purpose. And although she neither can
feed nor will, yet she must not be given over, but have meat gently conveyed
into her gorge by small morsels, and thrust down low enough with a fine
stick, that she may take it: for she cannot swallowe her meat by reason of
the swelling of her tung, and therefore she must be assisted in manner
aforesaid. Master Michelin says furthermore, that to comfort and strengthen
the Liver withal, ye must steep Rubarb in a dishfull of cold water all
night, and the next morning wash her meat therewith, continuing so by the
space of four or five days together.

Martin gives yet one other medicine, which is this: Take a Pullets gut,
thrice the length of your little finger, and cutting it in three pieces (which
you must tie fast at either end) fill them with Oil of Almonds, or oil Olife,
and thrust them into her throat so as she swallow them one after another: and
within an hour after gorge her reasonably with a young Pullet. And the next
morning take the seeds of Rushes, and the scrapings of Iuorie, and the dung of
Sparrowes, of each two penny weight, and make thereof a powder, and season your
Hawks meat therewith, and it will pleasure her. And these two medicines are to
be used when a hawke is not very foul within, for if she be, then are the
other former medicines better.

Of the Canker which breeds of over great heat in the Liver.
IF a Canker happen in the throat or tongue of a Hawke, by means of the heat
of the Liver: Make her the foresaid medicine of Snayles, or that of Larde, as
it is devised before, gyuing her her meat sowst in Milk, or Oil of sweet
Almondes, or Oil Olife: and let the Canker be washed twice or thrice a day,
till it wexe white and ripe. Then with your Instrument scrape it clean away,
that nothing of it remain. And if there happen to be any dead flesh in it,
put powder of Alome, or the juice of Lymons in it, and plye it still with the
said Milk or Oils, till she be thoroughly recured. And to make new flesh
grow up again, put to it a little honey of Roses.

Of the Pantas of the gorge.
Because many menned speak of the disease of the Pantas dyuersely, and yet
know not what it is: I will show three manner of Pantases wherewith Hawks are
diseased. The first in the gorge, the second comes of cold, and the third
is in the reins and kidneys. The first kind of Pantas comes of bating upon
the perch, or upon the fyst of him that bears them, by means whereof some
little veins of the Liver break, and the blood pours out upon the Liver,
which dries and cloddeth into small flakes, and those rising up afterward
when the Hawke bateth again, do stop the passages and windepype, and
thereof comes the Pantas. And sometime when the Hawke bateth, those flakes
do so ascend into her throat, and lie overthwart it, that she presently
falls down dead: insomuche that some hold opinion it is the Pantas that
makes Hawks to dye suddenly. For proof whereof, open your hawke when she is
dead, and ye shall find this malady in her throat. Master Ame Cassian
gives no medicine to this Pantas in the gorge, because it cannot be ministered
to her, neither by her throat nor otherwise. For the disease holds her in the
very windepipe, whereby the breath passes in and out. Nevertheless his
counsel is to cloze up the Hawke in some convenient Chamber, with Lattis
windows, so as she may not get out, and to set her two or three perches, that
she may flee from one to another, and have the Sun shine in upon her if it
be possible, and she must have always water by her. And when ye feed her,
her meat must be cut in small pellets, and have neither feather nor bone in
it, least she streyne hirselfe in tyring, and she must have but half a gorge
at once, and but once in a day. This is his counsel and advice for this
mischief.

Of an other Pantas that comes of cold.
AN other Pantas comes of cold when Hawks take wet in fleeing the field,
or the River, and are not weathered afterward, nor set in a place where they
may stand warm. Again this disease comes by standing where smoke or dust
may annoy them. And ye shall know the Pantas, by your Hawks panting, for that
she cannot draw her breath as she should do. Mallopin says that to remedy
this disease, ye must take the filings of iron, and meal of Lentils, of each
like quantity, which you must temper together with honey till it be like
paaste, that ye may make it in little balls as big as a peaze. Whereof you
shall give your Hawke two or three every morning, and after noone feed her
with good meat, but not with beef: which diet you shall allow her three or
four days. And if she amend not, season her meat with powder of Orpiment
two or three days.

Master Michelin gives this medicine following: Take Maydenheare, which
grows lightly at the heads of pondes and pittes, and therewithal the roots
of Persley, the roots of Smallage. Of all these take like portions, and boil
them in a good big pot that is new. Then streyne the water through a
Colander, and put thereto a quantity of clarified Sugar, with a little marrow
of Beef, and stir them all together, and thereof give your Hawke a portion
in the morning, and as much at Even, with a small tunnel, or otherwise with a
spoone or other fit device four or five days together, and let her not
feed till noone be past, then give her of Pullettes flesh without blood,
dipped in Oil of sweet Almondes, or Oil Olife washed in two or three waters:
and when ye have so sowst her meat, let it also be seasoned with a little
Saffron and Sugar. And four or five days after, if need be, give her on her
meat the powder of Orpiment without Oil other three or four days. And
afterward ye may return again to your oil of Almondes, or oil Olife, till
your Hawke be thoroughly recured.

Of the Pantas that is in the reins and kidneys.
IT happens sometimes that when a Hawke has been recovered of some great
grief by good keeping and intendance, afterward she waxes evil again, and
falls to panting, whereof breeds this disease of the reins and kidneys, in
manner of a Canker, as big as a bean, which swells bigger and bigger, in
such wise, that she falls to casting some part of her meat. This Pantas
differs much from both the other: for it will leave her seven or eight
days, and then vex her again more strongly. And somtymes it will take her but
from Month to Month, so as she shall bear it out a whole year. It is
discerned by this, that when she pants, she stirs her reins more than
her Pinions, whereas in the other she styrreth more her Pinions, than her
reins. Again to know it truly when it comes and goes every seven or
eight days, if your Hawke chance to die, rippe her and you shall find a
knubbe of the bigness of a small Bean full upon the reins and the small of
her back, whereof that disease proceeds.

Master Cassian gives this remedy for it. Ye must take the roots of
Capers, of Fenell, of Smallage, and of Parsley, and boil them together in a
new Pot, to the consumption of a third part. Then take an old Tyle, the
older the better, and make powder thereof. When you serve your Hawke, feed her
with flesh stieped in the water of the said roots, a quarter of an hour or
thereaboutes aforehande. In the morning when ye give her of that washed meat,
give her none of the powder, and at night wash not her meat with the said
water, but besprinckle it with the powder, so competently as she may receive
it, and give her not at any time above half a gorge: let this be done nine or
ten days, or more. If ye see that your Hawke amend not, continue it still:
for then was the disease very much confirmed, and the Hawke had borne it out
long, and it is hard to be cured. But if ye take the disease when it is new
and green, plye her diligently with this Medicine, and it will help her.

Of the Hawke that is morfounded by some mischaunce.
Morfound is the French word which does signify on English the taking of
cold.
SOmetimes it falls out that Hawks are morfounded by some mischaunce, and
sometimes also by giving them to great a gorge, specially when they be wette.
For then they cannot indewe nor put over their gorges, and so they surfeyte,
because their meat conuerteth into slyme, and gross humors which overthrow
their appetite, by means whereof they come oftentimes to their bane. Ye shall
know the disease by this, that if ye give your Hawke a great gorge, specially
over night, the next morning she will have no list to her breakefast, but
becomes cold, and so falls into great disease. Mallopin in his book of
the Prince, gives this medicine for it. When ye perceive her to be so
morfounded, and to have lost her appetite, give her no meat that day, but set
water before her, and let her bowze or bathe at her pleasure. When she has
bathed and is weathered again, throw her a live Pigeon, and let her kill it,
and take as much of the blood of it as she lysteth, but let her not eat past
one of the legs at that time. Afterward set her down on some high thing,
with water by her, and beware of giving her any great gorge. Then for four or
five days together give her five or six cloves of Maces, lapped up in a
hens skin, and that will recover her.

Of the disease that is called the privy and hidden evil in a Hawke, for
which we have no special term.
Sometimes Hawks perish for want of knowledge of some secret disease that
happens to them, and therefore I will tell you how you shall know it. The
Hawke that has that disease is always greedy to feed, insomuch that when ye
have given her a great gorge in the morning, she will have indewed it out of
hand, and if ye give her another at Noone, she will put it over by and by,
and if ye give her the third at night, she will dispatch that quickly also,
and the more she feeds, the more greedy and nippie she is. This disease
comes of this, that when your Hawke is very poor and low in state, and you
desirous to set her up quickly, thinking to bring her in good plight with great
gorges, you feed her with Pigeons and other flesh, which she cannot indew, by
reason of her poverty and weakness, for want of heat in the liver: the heat
whereof is the cause of all kindly digestio^ and indewing. Also you may know
this disease by her often muting which is waterish and thin, and besides she
does slise further tha^ she is wot to do, by reason of spedy induing her meat.

Master Mallopin in his book of the Prince, says that for remedy of this
disease, ye must stiepe a sheep heart cut in small pieces all one night
in Asses milk or Goats milk, and the next day give your hawke a quarter of
it in the morning for her beaching, as much at noone, and the rest at night,
forcing her to receive as much of the milk as ye can, and continue it five or
six days together, till ye see her mute kindly. Then feed her reasonably
with good meat, stieped in Oil of sweet Almondes, continuing it for three or
four days space twice a day. And as ye find your Hawke to mend, so increase
her meals by little and little, till she be in as good plight as she was
before, always continuing the said Milk: for some are of opinion that milk
is good for all diseases of a Hawke. Master Ame Cassian says, that to remedy
this disease, ye must take a Tortoys of the land, and not a water Tortoys, and
stiepe the flesh of it in woman's milk, Asses milk, or Goats milk, and give
your Hawke a quantity of it for a beaching three or four times, and a little
more at her feeding times six or seven days together. Afterward feed her
with sheep hearts stieped in Woman's milk, by little and little at once,
till she be recovered: and let her not stand in a dampishe or moist place,
but in warm places in the Winter, and in cool places in Summer, and always
hooded.

Of the disease and weakness in the reins.
WHen your Hawke cannot iumpe the length of her lines and Criance to your fist,
or from your fist up to the perch, nor bate with her wings: Ye may well think
that she has the disease of the reins. Therefore master Cassian wills you
to chop a Hares skin hair and all in very small and fine pieces, and to
mingle it with Cattes flesh, and to feed your Hawke with it seven or eight
days together: and if she indew it, she shall recover of her disease.

Of Havvkes that have the ague or fever.
TO know whither your Hawke have the Ague: Mark whether her feet be more
swollen than they were wont to be or no: if they be, then has she the
Ague. To remedy this mischief, Michelin says, you must mingle Arsenicke
and Capons grease together well sprinkled with Vinegar, whereof you must make
a little Ball, which you must cause your Hawke to take by casting her, and
use it in such wise as she may keep it, and it will rid the Ague.

Of the Havvke that voydeth worms.
IF a Hawke void Worms, by master Martins advice ye must make this
Medicine following. Take of the fine fylings of iron and strewe it upon your
Hawks meat, which (if you do well) must be Porke: and feed her so three or
four days with that kind of flesh so seasoned, and it will cure her.

Of the Teynte in a Hawks feather, and how many kinds of it there be.
HItherto ye have read of the inward diseases of Hawks: Now I will tell you
of the outward accidents: and first will speak of the Teynte, which the
French Falconers call Taigne, the Italians, Zignuole and Tarmae, whereof there
are three sorts. The first is when their principalles or long feathers begin
to drop off, by means whereof many Hawks are marred and cast away, without
knowledge how to help it. Master Ame Cassian says, that this comes
sometimes of the Liver, and of the excessive heat of the body, by means
whereof small pymples rise upon their wings, or on their traynes, which
afterward cause their feathers to drop off, and when they are gone, the
holes where they stood do cloze again, wherethrough the Hawke does perish,
if she be not remedyed. This disease is contagious, and one of them will take
it of an other, and therefore ye must not let the Hawke that is affected with
it, stand near a Hawke that is sound, neither must you touch or feed a
sound Hawke on the Glove whereon a sick Hawke has beende fed. And ye
shall know that she has that disease, by her often picking with her beak
upon her principal feathers of her wings and train, and by their dropping
away. Therefore cast your Hawke, and let her be well perused, and ye shall
find the said disease. For remedy whereof, Master Martin, and Master
Cassian say, you must cast your Hawke, and when you have sound the small pimple
whence the feather dropped first, you must get a little stick of Fur, which
is by nature gummie and fat, make a little pegge of it, not sharp at the
foreende, nor thruste it in with violence, but softly as you may. And if ye can
get none of that Woodde, then take a grain of Barlye, and cut of the
forepoynt of it, and annoint it with a little Triacle, or Oil Olife, and
convey it into the hole, so as it may stick a little out, and the hole not
cloze together, and stop again. Then with a small Lance or Penknife you
must slitte the pimple, and let out the red water which you shall find
there. After this take Aloes Cicotrine in powder, and put it into the gall of
an Ox, coyled in a dishe, and with those two mingled together, annoint the
slitte round about: and beware that there come nothing in the hole where the
feather grew, for it might do the Hawke great harm. This done, take of the
reddest Lentilles that you can come by, and less than half so much of the
fylings of iron, and mingle them together with Honey, and thereof make Pills
as big as a Peaze, and give your Hawke two or three of them every Morning.
Then set her by a fire, or in the Sun, and after Noone give her a reasonable
good gorge of a Pullet, or of Mutton, and if ye list ye may give her of
those Pills toward the Evening also. Let her meat be stieped in milk as
is said heretofore, five or six days together, and look always to the
incysions that ye made, and she shall be recovered.

An other remedy Martin gives for the same disease. Annoint the place with
some good Bawlme where the feathers fell away, and the Teynte will dye out of
hand, and fresh feathers supply the place again. And he says moreover,
that you must take the powder of Petre of Alexandria which is sold at the
Potecaryes, and mingle it with Vinegar, and annoint the diseased place with it
three or four times, and it will be whole.

The second kind of Teynte which fretteth the principals of a Hawke to the
very Quill, comes (as the chief Falconers affirm) of ill keeping, when
they have not their due intendance, being neither bathed nor scoured, nor kept
in wholesome places. And therefore we are forbid to keep a Hawke in a
sluttishe corner. Again, sometimes both in the mew and out of the mewe it
happens that by feeding them with filthy and loathsome flesh, they become
full of filth both within and without, whereof breeds such a sort of Worms,
as do utterly frette asunder and mar their feathers. The three chief
Falconers say, that for this second Teynt which fretteth the feathers of a
Hawke, in sort that they become like sticks, ye must take vine shredds, and
make thereof as strong Lie as ye can, and wash your Hawke once a day with it
thoroughly: and when she is weathered again, anoint all her feathers with
honey out of the comb. Then make powder of Sanguis Draconis, and Roch Alom
very small, and powder the foresaid Quils therewith, and your hawke shall be
recured. Or else take a Mole of that sort which breeds in Meadows, and put
her in a new earthen pot well covered and stopped, and set it on the fire one
whole day: which done, take her out again as she is, and make her into powder
very small. And when ye have bathed your Hawks feathers thoroughly with the
said Lee, by and by bestrow her feathers with the powder of the Mole a certain
time together, and it will pleasure her.

The third kind of Teynt is known in Hawks by the ryuing of their principal
feathers throughout along the upper side of the web of them. And that
happens commonly for want of clean feeding, and due attendance. To remedy
this, Mallopin says, that ye must take a green Reed, and cleave it all
along, and scrape out the pithe of it, and wring out of it as much juice
as ye can, wherewith you must moysten the said ryuen feathers all alongest
the ryftes of them, and they will close and shette again as before. And if
any feather happen to be dropped away, let a tente made of Fyrre or of a grain
of Barlye as is said heretofore be put into the hole of it, and use it after
the foresaid manner, and a new feather will grow again out of hand. If
this devise to cause a feather to grow again be not to your liking, you shall
in this collection find such as may content you.

Martin gives another Medicine and advice for the same, which is this: Take
twopennie weight of Orpiment, and nine graynes of Pepper, and make it into
powder, and cast it upon her meat, which must be reasonable warm. Again,
take three slices of Bacon, of that which is nearest the skin, and let them
be so small as your hawke may swallow them with ease: sauce them with a little
honey, and strew of the powder of the filings of iron upon the honey, and give
your hawke thereof three days together. After which time take a young Chicken,
and before ye boil it in wine, broose the breast of it, and open it with a
sharp knife or other instrument, that the blood may follow. Then feed her with
the said Pullets flesh warm, steeped in Goats milk, or other milk. Practice
this two or three days, and afterward thereupon give her good warm meat,
and she shall recover.

Of the Hawke that indeweth not, ne puts over as she should do.
IT falls out sometimes that a Hawke cannot well indew nor put over her meat
as she should do, and that is only because she is foul within, or has taken
some surfeyt, or else that when she was low and poor, her keeper being
desirous to set her up again to hashly, gave her to great gorges, which she by
reason of her weakness was not able to put over and indewe, wherethrough she
surfetted and forwent her appetite of feeding altogether. For remedy hereof,
Mallopin says ye must feed her with light meats, and little at once, as
with young Rattes and Mice, or with great Rattes, for there is more substance
in them than in the other, whereof ye must give her but half gorges, that
she may the sooner indewe them, and put them over. Or else feed her with
Chicken, or Mutton dipped in Goats milk, or otherwise. And for want of
those, take the yolke of an Egg, and give her a quarter of a gorge thereof,
and when ye feed her with the flesh of any live bird or foul, steep it well
in the blood of the same foul, and it will do her much good. So shall your
Hawke mount of her flesh apace: if besides that, you do also scour her with
pills made of Larde, Marow of beef, Sugar, and Saffron three mornings
together, and two hours after give her a reasonable gorge.

Another receyt which master Michelin gives, saying. When a Hawke indewes not
her meat, ne puts it over as she ought to do, but has surfeyted and
wants natural heat: Take very pure white wine, and steep her meat in it
luke warm, giving it her by little and little often times in the day, always
changing her meat, and see that it be light of digestion. Do thus to her
till she be in better tune again, giving her five or six cloves of Maces in
the Evening wrapped in a little cotton, or in some other such like device: for
that will warm her head, and all her other parts very well, and let the
Cotton be dipped in odoriferous old wine.

Of the Hawke that can neither cast up her meat, nor endew it as she ought.
ANother mischief is wont somtymes to light upon Hawks, namely that by taking
ouergreat gorges, they can neither indewe nor cast it again, and also that
many times a Hawke soareth away with her pray, and feeds so greedily upon it
by reason she was kept ouereager and sharp, that she can neither get it up nor
down, and thereupon falls in danger of death. Wherefore all men ought to use
discretion in feeding their hawks, that they ouergorge them not.

Master Cassian says that for remedy thereof, ye must set clean water in a
vessel before your Hawke, and let her bowze thereof at her pleasure. And if
she list not: then take the quantity of a Bean of Porke, of the fattest of
it, and two parts less of powder of Pepper, with a little salt brayed very
small, and when ye have mingled them all together, make a little ball of it as
big as a Bean, and put it in your Hawks beak, so as she may receive it.
Then set her by the fire, or in the Sun, and you shall see her cast her
gorge. But let not the Hawke be too poor, to whom you intend to allow this
pill, for if she be too low, she will hardly bear it.

Another medicine to make her cast her gorge.
RUb the roof of her mouth with a little Vinegar and Pepper, and she will cast
by and by. And if ye list, ye may also convey two or three drops of the same
into her nares, and it will make her cast her gorge out of hand. And if ye see
that the Vinegar and Pepper do vex and distemper her to much after the
casting of her gorge, spirt a little fresh water with your mouth into her
pallat and nares.

Of the Havvke that casts her gorge over much, and cannot indew as she
should do.
MAny times it comes to pass that when a Hawke has fed, she cannot keep
her meat but falls to casting, as soon as she has received it. This
comes of feeding her with gross, foul, and unwholesome meat not washed: or
else for that she is foul in the panell, and so cannot indew by reason of the
great store of filth that is within her. Therefore ye must beware that ye cut
not her meat with a foul knife, or with a knife that has cut Onions, Leeks,
Chibbols, or such other like things. To remedy this inconvenience, give not
your Hawke great gorges. And to bring her well in tune again, scour her with
the forementioned pills of Larde, Marrow, Sugar, and Saffron, by the space of
three days. And above all things, let not the Hawke that has cast her gorge
be fed a good space after it, but let her stand empty in the Sun with
water before her to bowse at her pleasure, for that will do her much good.
And when ye feed her, give her at the first time but a quarter of a gorge,
and at the second somewhat more, if she keep the first: and her meat must
be some live foul, and good of digestion, till she be brought again to her
natural plight. But if she keep not all her meat, give her young Rattes, or
live Mice: and for want of those, give her small birds till she be recovered.
If these foresaid things boot not, then by Mallopins advice, take Coriander
seed beaten in powder, and temper it with warm water, streyning it through a
cloth, wash your Hawks meat therewith four or five days together, and if
ye have no Coriander seed, take the juice of Coriander. And if your Hawke
mende not yet for all this: Follow the counsel of Master Michelins here
insuyng. Boil Baye leaves in white Wine till half the lyquor be wasted, and
then let it cool with the leaves still in it. Which done, force a Pigeon by
device to bowse so much of the Wine that she may die of it. Then immediately
feed your Hawke with the same Pigeon, and let her not eat more than a leg
of it.

Of the Havvke that has lost her appetite and will not feed, to make her
eager without bringing her lovv.
A Hawke does sometime lose her appetite of feeding by some misfortune, as by
taking to great gorges toward Evening, which she can not well indewe,
because the nyghtes are colder than the days. Also she may lose her appetyte
by being foul in the pannell, and diverse times by coldenesse, or by some
other disease which can not be perceived out of hand. For remedy whereof,
Master Mallopin says, ye must take Aloes Cicotrine, boylde Sugar, and
marrowe of Beef, of each alyke, saving that there must be least of the
Aloes, and when ye have mingled them together, and made them in little Balls
or Pills as big as Beans, give of them to your Hawke, and hold her in the
Sun till she have cast up the slyme and fylthe that is within her. And if
it happen to skoure downewarde, let it not trouble you, for it will do her
much good: and feed her not till noone, at which time give her good meat, and
serve her so three days together.

For the same disease, Michelin says you must take common Pills that are
given to purge men withal, and give one or two of them to your Hawke in the
morning, keeping her hooded by the fire, or in the Sun, looking to her that
she cast them not, (if it may be) to the intent they may cause her to scour
downward. And the book of the Prince says that it is good giving of those
Pills to Hawks in the beginning of September. For if they have the Filanders,
or any other inward disease, it scoureth them, and riddeth them of all
mischiefs that may ensewe. Three or four days after you have given your
Hawke these Pills, if she have yet no lust to feed, cast the filings of iron
upon her meat three or four days together.

Master Ame Cassiansayth, that for the same disease, when you perceive it, you
must give your Hawke a live Stockedone, allowing her leave to seize and tire
upon it, and to take the blood of it at her pleasure. And for want of a
Stockdone, small birds are good, and so be Rattes and Mice, so she have them
alive. And if you will have her to indewe them quickly, give her but half
gorges.

When Hawks are low brought, a remedy.
IT happens sometimes that Hawks are brought so low, that a man shall have
much a do to set them up again. And that comes through the fault of
unskillful keepers, rather than any other thing. For some give them ill meat,
cold and unwashed. Also Hawks do happen to grow poor by some disease that
their keepers are not ware of. Again sometimes it happens that a Hawke
soars away, and is lost four or five days, and so becommes poor for want
of pray. Master Cassian says, that if ye will set her up again, ye must feed
her a little at once and with good meat, such as Rattes and Mice are, for they
they be light of digestion, or else with small birds, which are good likewise,
and of great nourishment. Pultrie also is good, but it nourishes not so much
of his own nature, as Mutton does.

Again ye may set her up, (when she is low) in this manner following. Take a
spoonful or twain of honey, three or four of fresh butter, boil them
together in a new pot of water, the^ take Porke well washed, and stiepe it in
that water, giving your hawke a good reasonable gorge of it twice a day,
warming your said water when you intend to feed your hawke. And if ye ca^ find
any Snailes that breed in running waters, give her of them in the morning, and
they will both skowre away the gross slimie humors that are in her panell,
and also be a great help to set her up again, (for they nourishe very well.)
And if ye mind to make your hawke eager, and sharp set, without bating her
self, take the heart and liver of a Pie, and when ye have made it into powder,
make your hawke to eat it, and it will set her sharp and eager. These are
the opinions of the French Falconers. You are to consider of them all, and to
use the most probable at your election and pleasure.

Of a Hawke that has no list to flee, and is become unlusty or slothful.
Now and then it happens, that a hawke has no list too flee, either because
she is in evil keeping, that is to wit, of such as know not how to give
her her ryghtes: as bowzing, bathing, and such other things, whereof sometimes
she has great need: or because the hawke is too high, and full of grease,
wherethrough she becomes coye: or contrariwise, because she is too low and
poor: or else by reason of some mishappe or disease which she has, that is
unknown.. Therefore Master Cassian says, if a hawke be unlusty to flee,
she must be vewed and perused by some one of good skill, and have such
remedies ministered to her, as she has need of, as well for bathing, as for
bowzing: For in any wise water must be set before her. And if she be high
and not well enseamed, her meat must be thoroughly washed, that it may skowre
her the better. Or else if ye list, ye may give her the foresaid medicine of
Larde, Marrowe, and Saffron. And if ye perceive your Hawke to be sick, or
diseased, ye may use the remedies set down heretofore, according to the
several natures of the diseases, till your hawke be in good plyght again, as
she was before.

Of the Hawke that has broken her wing by some mischaunce.
IT happens somewhile, that a hawke breaks her wing by mischaunce, as by
bating against the ground, or otherwise. Master Mallopin says, that when a
Hawke has her wing broken after that manner, ye must take Sanguis draconis,
Bole Armoniacke, Gum Arabicke, white Franckincense, which is called Olibanum,
Masticke, Aloes Cicotrine, of each of them a like quantity, and a reasonable
quantity of fine meal flower. Make a powder of all the said things,
tempering it with the white of an egg, and make thereof a plaster, and lay
it to the hurt, when ye have first set it right again. Then cross her
wings one over another, as though they were not broken, and maile her well and
fast, so as she may not stir them, and let the meat that you give her, be
cut in small pellettes. Remove not the plaster for seven or eight days,
and when ye lay on another, in any wise beware that that wyng be not
removed: For if it be never so little removed or displaced, your labor is
lost, and your Hawke marred for ever.

Therefore keep her in that order by the space of.xiiij. or xv. days, setting
her upon a very soft Cushion, and let her meat be good, and new killed,
and give her meetely good gorges of it, for she needs not to be kept low, to
recover her health the better.

Of a Havvke that has had some blow or stripe upon her vving.
Sometimes a Hawke has a strype on her wing by some mishappe, so as she
cannot afterward hold it right, but it hangs always down, and lolleth:
Master Casian says, that ye must take Sage, Myntes, and Pelamountaine, and
boil them all together in a new earthen pot full of good wine, and when they
be well sodden, take the pot, and set it upon hot imbers, as close
stopped as may be. Then make a round hole of the bygnesse of an Apple, in
the clothe that your pot is stopped withal, for the steame to issew out at.
Which done, take your Hawke upon your fiste, and hold out her hurt wing
handsomely a great while over the hole, that it may take the fume which
seameth up out of the pot. Afterward, let her be well dried by keeping her
warm by the fire, for if she should catch sudden cold upon it, it would
becomme worse than it was before. Use her thus twyce adaye, for three or four
days together, and she shall be recovered.

Of the Havvke that has her vving out of ioynte.
WHen a Hawks wing is out of ioynte, ye must take her handsomely, and put it
up, so as ye may set it in his right place again. Which done, lay a
plaster to it, made of Sanguis draconis, Boli Armeni, Masticke, and flower
tempered together with the white of an egg, and maile her up, letting it lie
by the space of five or six days, and it will be whole.

Of a Havvke that has her pynion broken.
IF a Hawke chance to have her pinion broken by treading upon her, or by
striking against some thing, Master Mallopin says, that there is no better
remedy, than the foresaid Receyte, made for her wing broken: and that if
need be, she must be mayled, that it may the better join together again,
and the plaster renewed every five days. Or else let the hurt be splented by
and by, and bound up with convenient devises for the purpose, giving her her
meat cut in small pellets, and let her continue maled, that she trouble not
hirselfe with tyring.

Of the Havvke that has her leg or thyghe broken.
TAke Fur or Frankincense, pill of the bark of it, and beat it into powder,
and mingle it with the white of an egg: and if ye can, put in also a little
Sanguis draconis, and make a plaster of it. Then deplume your hawks thygh, and
lay the plaster to the broken place, taking good heed that ye bind it not
too straight, for fear of flux and repair of accidents to ye place, for so
ye may do her great harm. And for want of Fur, or Franckincense, take the
bark of an Oak: for Fur is not to be had in many places. Afterward renew
your plaster every five or six days, till your Hawke be thoroughly whole,
always cutting her meat to her, as aforesaid, and keeping her hooded. And if
it be broken beneath the thyghe, lay the same plaster to it, taking good
heed, that ye bind it not too hard: for in so dooyng ye may make her foot
to wither away, and mortify the member, which is a very great negligence.
For hawks are dayntie birds, and dayntily to be dealte withal.

Of the Hawke that is wounded with a stripe, or some other misfortune.
IF a Hawke hap to be wounded by an Eagle, or any other bird of pray, by
crabbing together, or by encounter in fleeing: or by a iobbe with the truncke
of a Crane, Hearon, or other water foul: or by taking some greater blow
against a tree or Rock, whereby she is greatly payned, and in danger to
be marred, if there be not skyll to help her with speed. By Master Ame
Cassians advise, take the juice of the herb called Culuerfoote, otherwise
named Herb Roberte: and if ye find your Hawks strype to be great and
black, and yet that it has no great gashe, you must make incision, and
slytte the skin a little more by your discretion, that ye may the more easily
convey in the said juice. That done, lay a leaf of the same herb upon the
wound, to cover it, spreading the feathers handsomely again over it, and
let it not be removed.xxiiij. hours after. And know ye, that the said
herb has such virtue, that what wound soever you lay it on, it shall never
swell nor ranckle. For want of the herb it self, take of the powder of it,
and put it into the wound, keeping it always clean, by washing it with a
little white wine, as is aforesaid. And if ye see that the juice or powder of
that herb do no good, take the medicyne that Mallopin speaks of. Take Oil
of Roses, and Capons grease, of each a like quantity, with a little less
Oil of Violets, and less of Turpentine by the one half, and confecte them
all together. Then take Masticke and Franckincense in powder, of each alyke:
and if ye can find the said herb called Culuerfoote, dry it, and beat it
into powder also: and when you have serced your powders, put them into the
said Capons grease, and stir them together with a stycke, till they be
thoroughly incorporated, and so shall your Unguent be perfect. And the chief
Falconers say, you must make handsome tents of Cotton, bestowing on them
this vnguente, and so apply them to ye wounded places of your hawke from time
to time, till they be recured. And if the Hawks skin be much broken or
torn, ye must sow it up handsomely, leaving a little hole in one side for an
issew, which you must keep open with a tent noynted with the foresaid
vnguente, till it be thoroughly whole.

Master Michelin sets down another medicine, saying, that if a Hawke happen
to have a strype or a wound, you must pluck away the feathers round about
the hurt place, and that if the wound be so deep, as it can by no means
be stytched up: ye must put of the powder hereafter following, into it. Take
Sanguis draconis, white Franckincense, Aloes Cicotrine, and Masticke, and of
those four being all in like quantity, make a fine powder, and lay it upon
the wound, and afterward annoint it round about with Oil of Roses, or Oil
Olyue warm to comfort it. And if the wound be not so large, but that it may
well be stytched: sow it together again, leaving a little hole for an issewe.
Then make a plaster with the white of an egg, and having first anointed it
with the said Oil, lay of the powder upon the sore, and put a tente in it
dypped in the said vnguente, to keep the issewe, and lay your plaster upon
it, dressing it after that manner still, till your Hawke be sound.

There is yet another medicine very good and auaylable, which is this. Take
the powder of fine Canell, which is nothing else but Cinnamon, and put it in
the wound, supping it afterward with good Oil of Roses, or Oil Olive.

Another medicine of master Cassians making.
TAke half an ownce of Masticke, a quarter of an ownce of Bole Armoniacke,
half an ownce of Roses, an ownce of Capons grease, an ownce of Oil of Roses,
an ownce of Oil of Violets, and a quarter of an ownce of virgin wax. Of all
these, let the things that may be molten, be molten together: and let those
things that are to be beaten into powder, be beaten to fine powder. And when ye
have streyned all your liquors into a new pot, put your powders into them,
stirring them about with a stick, till they be well incorporated together,
taking good heed that ye put not too much fire under your pot, and so shall
your unguent be perfect. Which you may use in handsome pleggets for your
hawke, tenting her with small tents dipped in the same unguent, after the manner
mentioned in the former receyte, till she be thoroughly recured.

And if your Hawke be hurt or broosed without any skin broken, take the
powder of Mummie, myngled with the blood of a wood Culuer, or of a Pullet, and
convey it into her throat, so as she may receive it down, and two or three
hours after, give her a reasonable gorge of good meat. If the broose be
apparent, annoint it with good oil of Roses, and if need require, for the
largeness or soreness of her wounds, let her be mailed, as is before said,
for her more quiet, and more speedy recovery.

Of the Hawke that has swollen feet.
IT happens diverse times, that hawks have a swelling in their feet, and
that comes by chasing of their feet in fleeing their pray, and in striking
it, and by taking cold upon it, for want of rolling the perch with some warm
clothe: or rise because they be full of gross humors, and foul within, which
humors being removed by their labor and travel in fleeing, drop down upon
their feet, and there swell, specially in Sacres more tha^ in any others. For
they be of their own nature very heavy Hawks, and have gross feet. Again,
it happens sometimes that a Hawke pricketh her self upon a thorn by
russhing into bedges and bushes over ventrously, whereupon follow such
swellings as are dangerous, and hard to be cured. Therefore Master Cassian
says, that when a hawke is in that taking, she must be skowred three
mornings together with the pills of Larde, Marowe, Sugar, and Saffron, and
set in the Sun, and fed two days after with some good meat. Then must
ye take Bole Armoniacke, and Sanguis draconis, less by one half, and make it
in powder, and temper them well together with the white of an egg, and Rose
water, and annoint her feet with it three or four days twice aday, setting
her upon some cloth to keep her feet warm. And if this medicine do her no
good, take this that follows.

Mallopin says, that if a hawks feet be but swollen, and have not any knubs
in the ball of the foot, take a pair of Sizzers or coping yrons, and cope the
talons of her swollen foot, till the blood follow which done, take Capons
grease, oil of Roses, and oil of Violets, of each alike, and twice as much of
Bole Armoniack. When ye have mingled the^ all well together, make thereof an
unguent, and anoint your hawks feet therewith twice aday til they be throghly
whole, always setting some soft and warm thing under her fete. And if this do
her no good, then try the receites above mentioned, till your hawke be
thoroughly recured.

Of the swelling in the legs or thighs.
SOmetimes a hawke has her legs swollen, and sometime her thighs, and not
her legs: and that comes either by ouerlaboring her self in fleeing, or by
overmuch seazing her pray, and by taking cold upon it. Also by like labor
and bating, the humors being styrred within her, drop down to her thyghes
and legs, and thereof comes this swelling.

How to make oil of eggs.
Wherefore first let your hawke be skowred with ye pills made of Larde, Marow,
Sugar, and Saffron, then roste nine or ten eggs hard in their shells, and when
they be cold agane, take the yolks of them, and break them with your hand in
an iron possenet over ye fire. The^ take an iron Ladle, and stir them
handsomely without ceassing, and when ye see them become black that ye would
think they were mard and burnt, boil them still, which done, gather them
together and press out the Oil of them, then heat them again as before to
press out as much Oil of them as is possible, and put it up in a glass. And
when ye mind to use it for the said disease, ye must take ten drops
thereof, put thereto three drops of vinegre, and three of Rose water, and
mingle them well together. This medicine is singular good against al swellings
of their thighs, legs, and feet, and moreover it suppleth and mollifyeth
their finewes. But first ye must anoint the swellings with a little Adiantum,
and afterward with your Oil prepared as aforesaid, till your Hawke be cured.

Of the swelling in a Havvkes foot, which we term, the pin, or pin Gout.
Diverse times there rise up knubbes upon yt feet of Hawks, as upon the feet
of Capons, which some call Galls, and some Goutes. They come sometimes of the
swelling of the legs and thighs, which I have spoken of before, or of other
diseases that breed of the abundaunce of humors within the Hawke, which must
first be scowred with the last mentioned pills three or four days together.
And Master Ame Cassian says, that when a Hawke has the said pinnes and
gowtinesse in her feet, ye must make round matches of paper as big as the
agglet of a point, and sear or cauterise the pin round about. And if the
knubbe stick far out, ye may slit it mane^ly with a whot sharp knife, and
put a little slise of fat Lard into the slit to keep it open, and set your
Hawke upon a little heap of very fine salt. And if there grow any dead fiesh
in it, lay the powder of glass, and two parts of Hermodactils upon it, and
when the Sore is skowred, anoynte it with Swines grease, and honey together,
always laying salt under her feet to the end of your cure. And to remedy the
same, Mallopin in his Book of the Prince says, that when a Hawke is gowty or
has the pin on her feet, ye must take of Rue three ownces, of Barberies three
ownces, of Colewort leaves three ownces, of Oil of Violets a reasonable
quantity, of Turpentine two ownces, of Sheep sewet as much shall serve, of
the fat of a young Pullet one ownce and a half, of Virgin wax one ownce, of
Masticke one ownce, of white Frankincence one ownce, of Opopanax one ownce, and
of Alome two ownces. First strain out the juice of the said Herbs brayed
together, then put thereto all your other mixtures made into powder. Which
done, melt all your sewets together in a new earthen pot, and put your iuyces
and powders thereunto, stirring them continually with a stick over a soft
fire, and so cooling them by little and little, whereby your unguent will
become perfect, and you may keep it two years good. And when ye occupy it,
spread it plaisterwise upon lether, or linen cloth, laying it upon the pin
Gout, removing it each other day till it be whole, for xv. days together. And
if the pin open not of it self, slit it and open it with a little sharp lance
of steel made whot, then clenze the filthy matter and quitture, and so shall
your Hawke recover assuredly.

Master Cassian sets down another good and well tried receyte for the same,
which is this: Take a quantity of Turpentine, half as much white Soap, making
the Soap into powder. That done, make ashes of vineshreddes, and take thereof
somewhat less than of the powder of ye Soap. Set these three mixtures together
upon the coals in a new pot, and stir them softly with a stick till they be
incorporate together. The^ make plasters thereof, and bestow them on the
pinnegoute, so as they may not fall off, nor be removed by the Hawke, shifting
them every two days till fifteen days be past, and that the disease grow to
maturation. Afterward you may slit the pin, drawing out all the matter and
quitture clean, but let your lance be somewhat hot wherewith you slit it,
and if the pin open of it self it is better. After this, you must apply
another plaster of Diaculum magnum, which you shall find at the Apoticaries:
for it is a great drawer, and if it have any dead flesh in it, lay a little
Verdegrece to it, for that is a corrosiue, and a fretter.

Martin says, that to soften the pin on the Hawks foot and to make it
grow to a head, ye must take the roots of Flower deluce, which bears the
blewe leaf, dry it and beat it into powder, and make thereof a Salve with
honey of Roses, and lay it to the pin till it be thoroughly whole.

Master Cassian says further, that if your Hawks feet be chafed and fall to
swelling, take the fyling of iron beaten into powder, to the mountenaunce of a
bean or twain, and the quantity of a bean of a gad of steel fyled into
powder, and twice as much of the bark of an Oak as of the fyling of iron, of
which bark of the Oak, you must take away the uttermost part, and of the rest
make fine powder, serced through a cloth. When ye have mingled all these
powders together, boil them in a new pot with a potle of good vinegar, to
the consumption of a third part. Then let it settle, and put the cleerest of it
alone by it self, and the grounds of it also by it self in a long narrow
bag, that the Hawke may rest both her feet upon it. And with the water ye
may use to bath her feet every day three or four times aday. Likewise ye
must wette and refresh the bag with the same water, that the grounds may lie
the closer under the feet of the Hawke, which must stand upon it night and
day till she be recured. And truly this is good for all manner of griefs and
swellings of the feet.

Martin is of opinion that you must take half an ownce of Aloes and the white
of an egg, with half an ownce and two penny weighte of Glewe, mingle them all
together, and put them in press, so as all may be residence, and make
thereof a plaster, and lay it to your Hawks feet till there be some issue
and vent, then anoint them with soft Soap. And when there happens any rupture,
take Saltpeeter and Alome, of each two penny weight, making it into powder,
bestow it upon the broken place to fret the dead flesh away, for this is a
good corrosiue for that purpose.

Of the Havvke that eats away her own feet.
THis inconvenience happens to Merlions in chief, above all other Hawks, and
to few or none else that I ca^ read of. Master Cassian says it is a king of
Formica which makes them to eat their feet in that order. For remedy
hereof, make your Hawke a Collar of Paper to convey about her neck, so as
she may not touch her feet. Afterward take an Ox gall, mingle it with a
reasonable good quantity of Aloes, and anoint your Hawks feet therewith
twice or thrice aday, four or five days, and it shall do her pleasure, and
preserve her from this evil. If that do her not good, then by Master Cassians
advice, take Swines dung, and putting it on a Tyle, set it to the fire or in an
Oven, bake it till ye may force it into powder. Which done, wash your Hawks
feet with the purest and strongest vinegre that ye can find, afterward bestow
her feet in the same powder, doing so twice or thrice aday for xiiij. or xv.
days till she be thoroughly recured.

The manner of the taking up of Havvkes veins when an humor droppeth down
too fast on their feet.
WHen ye intend to stop the veins that feed ill humors in your Hawks
feet, let her be hand somly cast, then away with her pendant feathers. After
that, force her leg a little with your finger, and you shall see a good pretty
big vein under the knee. Having found the vain, take a needle and raise up
the skin a little, and make an issew at your discretion: but take good heed
that ye touch not the vein. That done, take the Clee of a Bitttor, or of some
other bird whatsoever, wherewith do lift up the vein, and draw your silk
threede under the vein upon the Clee, and knit it on the side toward the leg
to the kneeward: for if ye cut it toward the thigh above the knot, ye spoil
your Hawke. Do no more to her, but let it bleed as much as it will, remembering
the next morning to anoint it with Oil, or Capons grease. And be ye sure
that the taking up of veins is good and needful. For afterward the humors
power not down upon their legs and feet. I thought good to set ye down
this manner of taking up of veins, because I have used it my self, and
recovered many Hawks thereby. For when a Hawke has the veins of either thigh
once taken up, the disease can no more return, for want of the wonted supply
of moist humors, and crude matter that flowed unto the place.

The manner of scowring, and using your Hawks when they are to be cast into
the mewe.
WHen the time is come to cast Hawks in the mewe, it is requisite and
needful to scowre them and to make them clean. For diverse times we see, that
foul feeding of Hawks in lewring and fleeing time, ingendreth the Filanders
and other diseases in them, whereof they perish for want of care and cure in
due time. Wherefore Master Michelin says that when ye intend to cast your
Hawke into the mewe, ye must make three pittes of the bigness of a bean, of the
foresaid mxture of Larde, Marowe, Sugar, and Saffron, which you may give her
three mornings together, not feeding her in two hours after, but suffering her
to gleame. Then give her some good flesh and reasonable gorge, setting her all
the while at the fire, or in the Sun. And for other three mornings after
that, you must give her the mountenance of a bean of Aloes Cicotrine when she
has cast, keeping her likewise by the fire or in the Sun, and she will cast
the Aloes with gross slime and filthy stuff. Likewise, Aloes being given
toward night enwrapped in her casting, is very good against the Fila^ders.
This done, and performed, as I have told you, ye may cast her into the mew.

Master Ame Cassian says that for the same purpose ye must convey the
quantity of half a hazel nutte of Ierapigra into a hens gutte, knitte fast
at both ends, and force it into your Falcons throat, holding her on the fist by
the fire or in ye Sun, till she have skowred, and so keep her empty and void
till noone, at what time she must be allowed of some good hot meat a
reasonable gorge: the next morrow feed her well and after those two days cast
her into the mew without any more ceremonies or circumstance.

Artelowch advises you, that the mewing of a Hawke naturally, with young
Rattes, Mice, Dogs flesh, Pigeons, Rabbets, and other wholesome fowls, is
far better, than to use any art in the matter, or such superstitious
practices, as you may perhaps read some, and hear of many. Truly I am of his
opinion, and so do persuade you, that will mewe your Hawks in good order:
for haste in that case, makes waste, as in all other things.

The best thing that you may do, when you mean to cast her into the mew, is
first, to skowre her well, after that manner that I have showed you in this
book, to cope her well, and to set her up in flesh before you cast her into
the mew, to discharge her of al disease as near as you can, to rid her of
mites and lice, being once in the mew, to set her water sometimes, to feed her
with liquide and laxatiue meats now and then, and to omit none of those
instructions, which I have collected for you out of the Italian Falconers: for
they are very good observations, specially for soar Hawks, and Nyasses.

But in the French man Artelowch, I find one necessary note for a Haggart,
which is this.

The Haggart (says he) is not to be cast loose into the mew, but to be mewed
on the fiste, for otherwise she would become too coye and strange, and if she
fall to bating and beating her self for heat, then must you hood her up, or
bespowte her with cold water, the next way to make her leave bating. Thus
must you continue her on the fiste, till she begin to shed her feathers, then
shall it be good to set her down, and tie her to a stone, or perch, as you
do the rest. And after she has mewed, and commes to flee, then if you let her
stand on a block, or billet, cased and rolled with cloth, you shall do very
well.

Goshawkes, Tiercels, and Sparowhawkes, must be mewed as Falcons, save that
they will not be borne on the fiste, but be at liberty in the mewe, and very
clenly served.

Before you draw your Hawke out of the mewe, fifteen or twenty days, you must
begin to bate her of her diet, the sooner and better to enseame her, by
restraint of her full feeding, which she had before, for otherwise, there would
follow surfeit and repletion, than which there is no more dangerous evil.

It is no slender part of skill, so to use a Hawke in the mew, as she may be
quitte of all mishappes, that befall her in the mewe, if she be not well
attended and regarded, during the time she is in the mew.

The manner how to deal so with a Havvke in the mevv, as she may avoid the
mischaunces of the mevv, which sundry times do happen, as well diseases, as
other harms.
IT happens diverse times that when Hawks are in the mewe, some do mewe well
and some ill, so as some of their own nature, and some by mishap, do fall to
be diseased, or otherwise break their feathers, and cast them not all the
year long. As touching this matter, Master Mallopin in his book of the
Prince, says: that when your Hawke meweth not well and kindly: go in May to a
slaughter house where Sheep are killed, and take the kernelles that are under
their ears right against the end of the iawebone, of the bigness of an
Almond. Choppe ten or twelve of those kernelles very small and give them to
your Hawke with her meat, finding the means, by some way or other, that she
may receive them and put them over. And when she once begins to cast her
feathers give her no more of them.

Another way.
WHen ye meene to further the mewing of your Hawke, take of the Snayles that
have shelles, stamp them shelles and all, strayning them through a cloth, and
with the Oil that comes thereof wash her meat two or three times. Also take
of the Snayles that lie in running streams, give your Hawke of them in the
morning: for that will both scowre her and nourish her greatly, and sets her
up, and makes her to mewe apace. Master Michelin, in his Book of the King of
Cypres, says thus: Cut an adder in two parts and sees him in water, and with
that water and wheat together feed your Pullets, Pigeons, Turtles, and other
birds which you intend to allow your Hawks that are slack to mewe, and soon
after they shall mewe their feathers apace.

Master Cassian says, that when a Falcon will not mewe, ye must take of
Backs, otherwise called Reremice, and dry them so at the fire or in an Oven,
as ye may make them into powder, which you must bestow upon your Hawks meat.
Also take little sucking whelps, and feed your Hawke with the flesh of them,
steeped in the milk or renet, which you shall find in the mawes of them:
afterward shred the mawe it self in small pieces, and force her to take it,
and she shall mew very well, and timely. Likewise all manner of live birds make
a Hawke to mew well, for it is their natural feeding, and therefore best for
them.

Martin says, that to mew your Hawke well, ye must set water by her once or
twice a week, and also roast Frogs in the fire, making them into powder, and
bestowing it upon her meat. Likewise small fishes chopped, and given with her
meat do further a Hawks mewing very much. Thus do the french Authors write, I
leave them to your experience, that list to follow the french fashion.

The manner of dieting and keeping Hawks in the mewe.
WHen ye intend to cast your Hawke into the mew, ye must see the mew very
clean, then furnish your hawke with all her implements, setting her two or
three times in the Sun, taking good heed that her furniture of her legs
be not so straight, and uneasy, as she be driven to be ever tearing at it.
Also you must cast her into the mew high, lusty, and in good plight, well
skowred, and fed with good hot flesh. Again ye must now and then give her
small fishes, specially to Goshawkes, Sparowhawkes, and all other rou^dwinged
hawks, because those fishes be (as my Author terms them,) laxatiue, and
good to skowre, setting them water twice or thrice a week. For now and then
they will bowze, by means whereof they discharge their bodies of humors, and
also their bathing in it makes them the better penned and the firmer. Young
Rattes, Mice, and Swallows, are very good feeding for a Hawke, for they be
nourishing meats, and will keep the Hawke in good plight. Therefore let your
Hawke be mewed in a place that is clean, handsome, and well kept, for she will
rejoice, and delight greatly in it. Thus have ye the manner of mewing your
Hawke, after the opinion of the French.

The manner of drawing Hawks out of the mewe.
WHen ye draw your Hawks out of the mewe, ye had need to take heed that
they be not so greasy: for sometimes when they be so, and set upon the fiste
vnhooded, they so take on, and heat themselves with bating, that they break
their grease within them, putting themselves in great danger of death.
Wherefore my counsel is, that all mewed Hawks should be well attended and fed
with washed meat, fourteen or fifteen days before they be drawn out of
the mewe, to breed resolution of glitte, and gross matter, whydx is in their
panels, whereof they shall skowre the most part by doing as is aforesaid, and
so shall ye quit them of all danger.

Mallopin speaking hereof in his book of the Prince, says, that if a Hawke
be huge and greasy, when she is new drawn, a man must not bear her vnhooded.
For ye may well understand, that if she feel the sun, the air, or the
wind, she lightly falls to bating and stirring, by means whereof she heateth
hirselfe inordinately, and so runs in danger of death and spoil by taking
cold upon it. Whereupon the Petifalconers and Nouices, which know not what it
means, say that the Hawke perishes by mean of her mewing and thorough
default. And therefore when a Hawke is to be drawn out of the mewe, she must
be well attended, and lookte too, that her meat be washed, and regard had that
she be not ouergorged. And if happily she loze her appetite and list to feed,
take Aloes Cicotrine, and the juice of Barberies, and force her to receive it
in the gut of a Hen. Which done, hold her upon your fiste until she have
skowred, keeping her empty till noone: At which time give her some hot meat
or bird, and the next day give her of a Hen, setting her water to bathe: and
assure your self that this medicine is good against all worms, and Filanders
that may breed in the body of a Hawke.

Mallopin says that when ye draw a Hawke out of the mew, ye must wash her
meat, feeding her therewith by little and little, and allow her such flesh as
is laxatiue, that she may have the less joy to keep it long, or stand upon
it, and to the end she be not proud or ouerhaught of her drawing out of ye
mew. And therewithal she must be daily plied and borne on the fiste. Within
few days after she is thus drawn, ye must skowre her and ensayme her with the
foresaid medicine of Lard, Sugar, Maree, and Saffron, with a very little Aloes:
for if ye co^fect it with too much Aloes, ye shall bring her ouerlowe. Therefore
give her of it every day a pill, for three days together: and thereupon set
her in the Sun or by the fire, keeping her empty two or three hours after,
then give her a reasonable gorge of a Pullet or of mutton.

Master Cassian says that some Falconers, after they have ensaymed their
hawks in manner aforesaid, three or four days before they intend to flee, do
give them a pill of the bigness of a bean, made in manner following. They use
to take a little Larde, with the powder of Pepper, and ashes fifted and
serced, of each alike much, and make thereof a ball, and convey it into the
hawks beak, so as they enforce her to take it down, if she will not otherwise.
Which done, they hold her hooded by ye fire or in ye Sun, making her to keep
the pill as long as they can, and afterward do let her cast it at her pleasure.
By this mean ye shall set yt she will cast gross and flegmaticke humors,
whereby her panell and bowels will be discharged of much glit, and she become
sound and cheereful, and ready to flee her pray. And an hour or twain after
this, they feed her with a live chicken: for ye must note, that the pill which
she has received, has distempered her very much. Nevertheless I must give
you warning, that you must not so deal with a poor and low hawke, as ye would
with a hawke that is high and in pride. In doing after this manner, your Hawke
shall be lusty, and enjoy her all the year after. For hardly shall yt hawke do
her part in fleeing that year, which is not well skowred, and carefully
ensaymed.

When Aloes is to be given to Hawks that are fleeing.
MAny are of opinion that when Hawks are fleeing, they must have Aloes
Cicotrine given them from mooneth to mooneth, conueying the quantity of a
bean thereof into their meat, or into a Hens skin, to take away the
bitterness thereof, that they may keep it as long as may be, before they cast
it, then setting them all the while by a fire or in the Sun, til they have
cast the slimie and gross humors with the Aloes. And if ye mind to keep your
Hawke from the worms and the Filanders, give her the mountenaunce of a peaze
of Aloes every eight days in her casting. Again, ye must remember, that
whenever you perceive your Hawke wax any thing cold, to give her five or
six cloves of maces, and they will skowre her head of all watrie humors:
moreover being given at evening in a little cotton as ye give the Aloes, they
be very good and auaylable against all manner of Filanders.

Of the Hawke that has her talons broken.
A Hawke does sometimes break a talon by some mischance, and often by the
rudeness and churlishness of the Falconer in vnseazing her roughly from her
pray, in so much that her talon taryeth behind in the thing that she seized on,
and sometimes is quite broken or sliued from the flesh, by reason whereof she is
in danger of spoil, or at leastwise of lozing her talon. When a Hawks talon
is so sliued off, as there remains nothing but the tender part that was within
it: make a little pretty lether glove of the bigness of her stretcher or clea,
and fill it with Capons grease and draw it on, tying it handsomely to her leg
with two pretty strings, renewing it every other day till the point of her
stretcher be well hardened again.

And if a Hawke happen to have but a piece of her talon broken off, so as some
part of it remains still behind, let it be anointed with the fat of a
Snake, and it will grow again as the others. And if the Hawke be hurt by
violence, so as the talon is become looce from the flesh, and falls to
bleeding: then first of all cast the powder of Sanguis draconis upon it, and
it will staunch the blood out of hand: and if it swell or rancle after it, then
dress it and anointe it with Capons grease or honey of Roses till it be
thoroughly recured.

In these hurts of Hawks talons, Martine gives this counsel following. Make
little matches of paper and sere therewith the stretcher that has lost his
talon, and bind the cindre of the same paper with a little honnie to it, and
let it so rest nine days together. And if the talon be quite bereft, put on
the foresaid glove with Capons grease, till the pownce be grown again, and
let the Hawke rest till she be thoroughly sound. And if the Hawks foot or
leg chance to rancle, and grow to further inconvenience, confect the unguent
of Capons grease, Oil of Roses, Oil of Violets, Turpentine, powder of
Frankincense, and Mastik, and anoint the swelling therewith, and let her rest
till she be thoroughly recured.

Of the Hawke that lays an egg in the mewe, or out of the mewe.
SOmetimes Hawks are with egg in the mewe, and efte without the mewe, whereby
they fall sick and are in great danger if there be not remedy had for it:
which thing you shall easly perceive by them in May and April, at which times
they are wont to be with egg. To remedy this inconvenience, let the Hawks
meat be washed in the urine of a manchild of six or seven years old, eight
or nine days together, and that will keep her from laying. But if the eggs
be already full fashioned within her, then to break and dispatche them, ye
must (as Master Martin says,) give her the yolks of a couple of eggs reere
roasted with butter, twice or thrice a week: and that must be done during the
mooneths of May and April. For besides that it will break and wast away the
eggs within a Hawke, it is good also to set them up when they be low in
state, howbeit you must remember that whenever ye minister this medicine,
ye must give them flesh withal, for it is of great nourishment.

Again, Mallopin says that to break eggs in a Hawke, ye must take of the
liquor that bleedeth or oozeth out of vynes in March, when they be cut, and
with that liquor wash your Hawks meat nine or ten days, and the eggs
will consume and waste away by yt means, how great soever they be.

The manner of taking Hawks in the Eyree.
FIrst you must beware that you take them not before they are somewhat woxen:
for if ye do so, and bring them into a cold and moist place, they will have a
disease in the back, so as they shall not be able to stand on their feet, and
moreover they shall be in danger of utter spoil. Therefore they must not be
taken, till they be somewhat strong, and can stand well on their feet. And you
must set them upon some pearche or bail of wood, that they may by that
means the better keep their feathers unbroken, and eschew the dragging of
their trains upon the ground, for so shall they be the better sunned.
Michelin says further, that to keep Eyesse Hawks from that inconvenience,
specially when they be taken over little, they must be kept in a dry and
clean place, and ye must strewe every where under them the herb, that in
(French is called Yeble) which has a seed like Elder. This herb is of
nature whot, and good against the gout, and the disease of the reins which
might befall them: Wherefore if ye will keep Hawks well that are new taken
from out of the nest, if ye take them in the morning, ye must let them stand
empty till noone: and if ye take them in the evening, ye must not feed them
till the next morrow. And when ye feed them, give them tender flesh, and
after that, let them not stand empty any more too long for hindering their
feathers, and tainting them.

Of Hawks that have lice, mites or other vermin.
IF ye will know whether your Hawks have lice, or mites, set her in the warm
Sun out of the wind, and by and by ye shall easyly perceive it: for they
will crall out upon her feathers and swarm there. For remedy hereof take a
quantity of Orpinent beaten into very fine powder, and having mingled it with
half as much powder of Pepper, let your Hawke be cast handsomely, that she
break not her feathers, then powder first the one wing and so the other
gently, and finally all the whole carcass of her: after which, set her upon
your fiste again, bespoute her, and squirt a little water on her with your
mouth, and set her by a fire, or in the Sun, till she be thoroughly wetherd.
Afterward when ye intend to feed her, wash her beak to take away the savor of
the Orpiment, and beware that your Hawke be not poor, when you intend to use
Orpiment. Having thus done, you shall see that all the mites and lice will
discover them selves upon her feathers and die, either the Orpime^t alone, or
the Pepper alone are as good as both of them together to spoil the mites. But
here is the odds, the Pepper makes the mites to show themselves, and then
the Orpiment murdreth them. When ye use the Pepper alone, put thereto a third
part less of Ashes, to abate the force of the Pepper, and so shall your Hawke
be rid of those vermin. And assure your self yt no hawke which has ye mites
(be she never so good) is able to do her duty and play her part, by reason
of ye anoya^ce which she feels in her feathers by the^. And if ye would rid
her of the mites without washing her, the^ my Author bids you take a very old
Mauis or Black bird, and having taken out all the grease that ye can find in
her, anoint your Hawks feet and the perch whereon ye set her therewith, for
all the Vermin will repair down to it: and therefore shift her out of her
place twice or thrice in the night, that she may be no more troubled therewith.

Of the Hawke that holds not her wings up so well as she should do, but
lolleth them.
IF a Hawke that is newly taken, be set straightwayes upon a perch or upon
the fiste of one that has no skill to use her, she ouerheates her self with
bating, and afterward catches such cold upon it, as she cannot recover or
trusse her wings close to her again, nor be able to flee well. Mallopin says,
that to remedy this mischief, you must take of ye best vinegar that is to be
gotten, and with your mouth spirt it upon, and betwixt her feathers, till she
be thoroughly wet, taking good heed that none of it come in her nares, and
afterward set her by the fire or in the Sun, serving her so two or three
days together. And if she recover, do nothing else to her, but if she
recover not, let her bathe, either of pleasure or of force, and she will
trusse up her wings to her, by mean of striving with her self. Then let her
be set very warm by a fire or in the Sun: for if she should chill upon it,
she would become worse than before.

Of the Crampgout.
MArtin says, ye shall discern the Crampgout by your Hawks holding of her
one foot upon the other, and by her often knibbing and sobbing of her foot
with her beak. For remedy whereof ye must cast her handsomely and let her
blood on the vein that is between the foot and the leg, and afterward
anoint the vein with Capons grease or with Oil of Roses.

To keep a Hawke from all manner of Goutes, the French man's opinion is this.
BY Martins advise, if ye doubt that your hawke shall have the Gout, you
must fear her and cauterize her, as hereafter follows. Take a small iron
with a round button at the end, as bygge as a Peaze, heat it read hot,
and fear her therewith, first above the eyes, then upon the top of her head,
and thirdly upon the balls of her feet. And this violent kind of dealing with
her, is the next and assuredst way to do good in such desperate diseases, if
any help be to be had. But my Italian Author Sforzino, gives over a hawke
that is troubled with the Gout, and thinks there is small credit to be
gotten by the cure, because of the impossibility.

For the biting of avenemous beast or woorme.
IF your Hawke be bitten or stung of a venomous beast, or woorme, make her to
receive a little Tryacle, and powder of Pepper, and afterward feed her with
hot meat two days: and beware that she touch no water for twenty days
after. Or else burn a Frogge, and beat her into powder, and put thereof upon
Cattes flesh, and give it your Hawke.

These are strange remedies and rare, and of the French devise. Give your
judgment of them, and by trial you shall know what they will do. I find
them in my Author, and therefore do set them down, and not for any
experience I have had of them.

For the wound or biting of any beast.
IF your hawke be hurt by any mischaunce, and the mouth of the wound very
small, ryppe it larger, and skowre it with white wine, laying thereon a plaster
of white Frankincense, and Masticke, and annoynte it round about with butter,
Oil of Roses or Oil Olyue.

A treatise and brief discourse, of the Cure of Spanels, when they be any
way ouerheatte: devised and written by Master Francesco Sforzino Vicentino,
the Italian, Gentleman Falconer.
depiction of men with dogs and bird

How necessary a thing a Spanell is to Falconrie, and for those that use that
pastime, keeping Hawks for their pleasure and recreatio^, I deem no man
doubts, as well to spring and retriue a foul being flowen to the mark, as
also diverse other ways to assiste and aid Falcons and Goshawkes. Wherefore,
seeing that hythertoo in my collection, I have spoken altogyther of Hawks,
both for the River and field, and in my conceyte, have left few needful
points for a good Falconer, vntouchte or treated of: now I shall not do
amiss, nor wander over wide from my purpose, if I say somewhat of Spanells,
without the which a Falconer, (specially using to flee the field) cannot be,
without mayme of his pastime, and impair of his gallant glee. And again, for
that they are subject to many diseases and plagues, (as we commonly term
them) for dogs, and longer than they are without infection, we may expect
from them no pleasure, assistance, or recreation: I will only in this
treatise describe you their harms, with cures due to the same. Among all
which, I place the Mangie first, as the capital enemy to the quiet and
beauty of a brane Spanell, wherewith they poor dogs, are oftentimes
greatly plagued, both to the infection of their fellows, and the no slender
grief of their masters.

The way to cure and discharge a Spanell of the Mangie, The cure for the
mangie.
is to annoynte him either at the fire, or in the Sun, thryce every other
day, with an unguent made of Barrowe flicke one pownde, common Oil three
ownces, Brimstone well brayed four ownces, salt well beaten and broosed,
ashes well syfted and sierced, of either two ownces, boiling all these in a
Kettle or pot of earth, mingling them well together, till the barrowe flicke
be incorporate and well compounded with the rest. With this vnguente thus
made and confected, annoynte and besmeare all the body of your Spanell, and
every other part of him, shifting his litter and kennell often, the oftener
the better. And lastely, having thus done, wash him over and over with good
strong lie, and it will mortify and kill the Mangie.

But if perhaps (as commonly it falls out) the Spanell loose her hear,
though it proceeded not of the force of this unguent and strong medicine, yet
it shall be very good to bathe your Spanell, shredding his hear in this order,
with the water of Lupines, or Hoppes, and to annoynte him with stale barrowes
flicke.

This medicine, over and besides that, it cures and quitteth the Mangie, it
also makes the Spanells skin beautiful and fair to look to, and kylles
the flies, the dogs disquieters and enemies, to his ease.

But when this foresaid remedy is not of force sufficient to rydde the
mangie, but that it spreddes and gets greater power and dominion over your
Spanell: then does it behooue you to devise a far stronger medicine, which
is, to take of strong Uineger two quartes, Another remedy more strong.
or as much as will suffice, common Oil six ownces, Brimstone three ownces,
sutte of a chimnie or pot, a quantity of six ownces, brayed salt and
serced, two handfulls: boil all these aforesaid in the Vinegar, using the
former order of annoynting your Spanell in the Summer time.

If neither of these remedies aforesaid will serve the turn, then for a last
refuge, you must be driven to practice with a far stronger, than either of
both. But in any wise, this medicine must not be ministered in the cold of
Winter, for it will then put the Spanell in great hazard of death.

A very strong medicine for the Mangie.
Take quick Silver, as great a quantity as shall suffice, and mortify it
with stale barrowes flicke, or Larde, as if I should set you down this
proportion: Of Quick Silver, two ownces, Barrowes grease ten ownces, myngle
them well together, until they be incorporated: with this unguent annoynte
your Spanell in the Sun, tying him afterward for the space of an hour in
the Sun, to the end the vngue^t may syncke in, and pierce the deeper. Then
wash him twice with black Soap, and observing this order of annoynting him
every other day twyce or thrice, assuredly you shall rydde him of all
Manginesse, whatsoever it be.

But I must tell you this by the way, that this vnguente of Quick Silver,
will cause her hear to fail away. Wherefore it shall be requisite, every third
or fourth day, to annoint him with stale Bacon grease, for that will presently
make his hear to grow and come again.

If a Spanell be not very much infected with the Mangie, A way to cure the
mangie without any unguent.
then is it and easy matter to cure it in this sort:

To make a kind of bread with wheaten branne, and the roots, leaves, and
fruit, or flouers of the herb which we call Agrimonie, beating it well in a
mortar, and making it into a paste or dowe baking it in an oven, and so made to
give your Spanells of the said bread, as much as they list to eat, and none
other bread at all for a time. With four or five of these loaves of bread,
made in manner as I tell you, have I cured my Spanels of the mangie, and some
other of my friends.

Though every body for the most part, do know these common herbs, yet
nevertheless I will follow mine Author, and set it down with the same
description as he does.

Agrimonie, is an herb that grows in meadows and fields, near unto some
root of a tree, and upon the mouth of saw pittes, and other old unclean
and unoccupied places. The leaves of it do spread upon the ground, they are a
shaftment in length, iagged on each side, like unto the leaf of Hemp,
divided into five or moepartes and branches, indented round about. It brings
forth one or two blackishe stalks, upon which there are certain boughs,
standing one distant from another, on which there are yellowe flowers, and
those flowers, being through ripe, do yield certain round berries as bygge
as a Peaze or Fatche, which will cleave and hang to a man's garments, if he
once touch them. This description does my Italian Authoure make of the herb
Agrymonie, whereof he would have this bread made to cure the mangie Spanell. I
leave it over to thy use and discretion, till thou need it.

Of diverse accidents that happen to dogs, and first of that ill, which is
called Formica.
EVery man does know, that there is a kind of vile disease that lyghtes
upon Spanels ears, which does greatly vex them, in the Summer time
especially with the flies, and the scratting and tearing themselves with their
own feet. We term it in English, a kind of Mangie, but both the Latinist,
and the Italian term it Formica. The French man he calls it, Fourmyer,
which in truth is in English nothing else but an Ante, or Pysmere, applied
here in this place to a dogs disease, for some likelyhoode and property
betwixt the Pysmere and the mischief, which is accustomed to creep and go
further and further, with his infection, to the great anoyance of the poor
Spanell, even as the Pysmere is ever busy, trauayling too and fro, and never
unoccupied.

The cure.
The way to rydde this vile disease and mischief, is to bestow upon the
infected place, a medicine made of Gum Dragaganthe, four ownces, infused in
the strongest Vyneger that may be gotten, by the space of eight days: and
afterward broosed on a Marble stone, as Paynters do their colors, adding
unto it, Roche Alome and Galls, beaten to powder, of either two ownces. Using
these things as I have showed you, you may make a powder of marvelous force:
for this purpose, laying it upon the member where the Mangie lies. This no
question, will kill the Formica.

Of the swelling in the Spanels throat.
Sometimes there befalles this mischief upon poor Spanels. There droppeth
down an humor from their brains, by mean of which their throats and necks
do swell unreasonably. For remedy of this, I will advise you to take nothing
more, than to annoynte all the place without with Oil of Camomil, then
washing and embroching the dogs throat round about the grief with Vinegar
not ouerstro^g, and with Salt. If you do this, you shall recover your Spanell,
and drive away this distillation of ill humors, that fall out of the Spanels
head, causing the great swelling in the throat.

Of a kind of woormes, breeding in the hurtes and mangie parts of a Spanell.
Sometimes when a Spanell has taken a hurt or wound, there do engender in the
wound certain woormes, that do hinder the cure of the hurt, causing it to
continue at one stay, or to grow worse and worse. Wherefore it shall be
very necessary to endeavor to kill them, which you shall do assuredly, if you
convey into the wound nothing but the gum of Iuie, The cure.
called in Latin, (Gumma Hederae) keeping it there for the space of one day or
two, washing the wound with wine, and after that annoynting it with Bacon
grease, Oil of earthwoormes, and Rewe.

Moreover, a juice made of the green pills and ryndes of Wallnuttes, or the
powder of dried Lupynes is very good. Likewise powder of wild Cucumbers, is
excellent to kill those woormes: and not that alone, but it will play the part
of a Corrosyue, fretting away the dead flesh, and increasing the good.

But when the woormes grow within the body of a Spanell, Of woormes within the
body.
they must be killed in this manner, with an inward receyte.

Cause your Spanell, either by love or force, to eat, The cure.
when he is fasting, the yolke of an egg, with two scruples of good Saffron
beaten into powder, and confected with the said egg, When a spanell is
bytten by a Fox, or mad dogs.
keeping him after it from meat, till night.

When a Spanel is hurt, as long as he can come to lick the wound with his
tongue, he needs no other remedy. His tongue is his Surgeon. But when he
cannot possible lick it, then such wounds as be not venomous, you may
resolve with the powder of Matresilua, dried in an Oven, or in the Sun. And
if it be the byte of a fox, it shall suffice to annoynte it with Oil, wherein
earth worms and Rewe have been boiled together.

But if it were bytten by a mad dog, it shall be best presently to
thruste through the skin of his head and poll with a hot iron, just
betwixt the ears, so as the fire may touch both sides of the hole made: And
after that, with your hand to pluck up the skin of the dogs shoulders and
flanckes backewardes, thrusting it through with the hot iron in like manner.

The gyuing of this vent to the wound, will greatly pleasure the Spanell, and
is a ready way to cure him.

Besides the application of this canterie and fire, there is one other approved
remedy, and that is, to cause your Spanell to lap twice or thrice of the
brothe of Germander, and eat the Germander it self boiled. I need not to
describe the herb, it is so well known: but my Author settes oowne his
proportion and flower. It bears a iagged leaf, and has a purple or blew
flower, and in shape it is like a little Oak.

This herb Germander, sodden and confected with salt and Oil, either simply
broosed together, or made into a paste, and given unto a Spanell, will do him
very much good in the cure of the byte of a mad dog.

To help a spanell that has lost his sense of smelling.

The cure.


Now and then Spanels, by mean of too much rest and grease, and some other
accident besides, do loose their sense of smelling, so as they cannot spring
or retriue a foul after their accustomed manner. In this case it shall be very
good, to skowre a Spanell in this manner.

Take Agaricke two drammes, Sal gemma one scruple, beat these into powder,
and incorporate them with Oximel, making a pill as big as a nutte, convey the
pill into butter, and so give it the Spanell, either by love or force, as he
may swallowe it. This will bring him to a quick sent and sense again, as I
have oftentimes approved.

To cut off the tip of a Spanels tail or stern.
IT is very necessary to cut off a little of the Spanels tail, when it is
a whelpe for sundry occasions: for in so doing, you shall deliver him, and be a
mean that no kind of woorme or other mischief shall greatly offend that
part of your Spanell: Which, if it be not cut a little at the very point
and top, is subject to many evils and inconveniences, and will be a cause
that the dog will not dare to prease ouerhastily into the covert after his
game. Besides the benefit of it, the Dog becommes more beautiful by cutting
the top of his stern: for then will it bushe out very gallantly, as
experience will teach you.

It shall be good when Spanell whelps are one month old or somewhat more, to
worm them under the tongue: To worm a Spanell.
for there have they a string very like unto a worm, which must be plucked
away by some devise or other. This is the order of it. If it be a whelpe of a
month old, they take him and open his flew and jaws with a man's hand: but
if it be a bigger Spanell, then do they convey a round stick into his mouth,
to keep it wide open: which done, they pluck out the Dogs tongue, and with a
sharp knyfe of purpose for it, they slitte the tongue all along where the
worm lies, on both sides, and so very artificially with the point of the
knife, they raise up the worm the better to pull it away. But in this case
there must be care used, that the worm be not cut asunder, but had clean
away, without leaving any part of it behind.

Some men do use (in the taking away of this woorme in a Spanels tongue a needle
or such like instrument with a double twisted threede hanging to it, two
shaftmentes in length, thrusting the needle quite underneath the worm just in
the middle of it, drawing the needle so far until the double twisted threede
be level with the middle of the worm, then drawing it hard with the hand,
they pull it out (but by not drawyng the threede artificially, many times the
worm breaks in two pieces, and then it is a very hard matter to come by
that part that is slipte and left behind. Wherefore in mine opinion, the first
is the better way to dispatche him clean. For when this worm is once quite
drawn out, the Spanell will become far the fairer, and wax ^he fatter. Many
times the want of worming does keep a Spanell poor, and out of flesh, so as
he can not prove. And (as ancient writers affirm) the worming does discharge
the Spanell of madness and frenesse (which I can hardly credit or believe:
the infection and biting of an other mad Dog being so venomous, as it is
able to work great effect in the Dog, that is bitten.)

Thus much I thought good to write of Spanels, and their diseases and cures,
for that they are superintendantes, and necessary servants, both for the
Hawke and the Falconer, without whom, the sport would be but cold, and the
toil far more than it is to the man. Wherefore it shall not be amiss for a
good Falconer, always to breed and keep of the best kind of Spanels that he
may come by, and so to respect them, as they heat not at any time: Or if they
do by misfortune or negligence of your lackey boy, then to regard their
cure, which may be done in manner as I have here set down: And withal to
use due correction to the boy. For a good Spanell makes a good Hawke, and a
cursed master, a careful footeman. Farewell. ()

FINIS.
The Epilogue unto the Reader.
LO Reader here, the end of this my book,
Though not the end of my good will and love,
Bestow thy pains hereon a while to look,
As I employed my head for thy behoue:
It shall suffice if thou do not reprove
This slender work, compilde for thy delight,
Whose friendly look my labor shall requight.
I count my toil and travail but a game,
I deem the days not long or spent amiss,
If so I may unto thy fancy frame
This book of mine which all of Hawking is,
Than which there can be found no better bliss
In my conceyte to such as love the glee,
And force the fields where brauest pleasures be.
I must confess, my Hammers have but hewde
That royal Rock, which others found of yore,
I do but tread the pathe which others shewde
Unto their friends, to make their skill the more:
I but translate a garment made before:
Which if I do with gallant shape to vewe,
I deem as much as if I made a new.
For hard it is to stalk in others steps,
He thinks himself a thrall that marches so:
He iumpes in joy that at his pleasure leapes,
And is not forced in others feet to go:
Nothing more leefe than liberty you know,
Which no translatour has I undertake,
Unless that he his Authors sense forsake.
Which vaunt I dare, I seldom here have done,
Zforcino knows, and can control me then,
Italian borne, whose book I ouerronne,
And Giorgies eke compilde with learned pen,
Assuredly these two were skillful men,
And wist full well what Hawks and hawking meant,
And all things else that further this intent.
To Tardiffe eke the Frenchman, I appeal,
To Malopyn, and Mychelyn, cunning wightes,
Let Artelowche be witness how I deal,
In field affairs, or else in river flights,
And Cassyan eke who well of hawking wrytes:
All these I wish as Judges in the case
Where I corrupt or alter any place.
Some men perhaps will wonder that I wrote
Of stately Hawks, and birds of rare delight,
And blazed it out but in so base a note,
As scarce will please the gallant Courtiers sight,
Who weyes no gold that is not burnisht bright:
His curious ear but hardly will dygest,
Sweet Musickes sound, that is not of the best.
For mine excuse and for my simple pen,
To answer thus, I fear I shall be feign,
Since charge of Hawks committed is to men,
That nobles serve for yearly hire, and gain,
(Who are not fine but homely mates and plain)
My purpose was, to set them down the trade,
To man their Hawks, and how they might be made.
For Peers (I know, and you must needs agree)
Regard no more but only to behold
The fleeing Hawks, their joy is but to see
The haughty haggarde worth her weight in gold,
To slay the soul at brook with courage bold,
With Hawks they never deal in other sort,
Their servants feed, and they enjoy the sport.
Which if be so, the low and playnest style
Does best agree the Falconers mind to fit,
To carpe it fine with those that have no guile,
A jest it were and sign of slender wit,
The writers ought the readers vain to hitte.
This was the cause I wrote my book so plain,
I told it earste, I tell it now again.
The modest mind I know, will rest content,
With this excuse, and brook mine answer well,
Of other some perhaps I shall be shent.
Whose sullen breasts with secret envy swell,
Who pleases all deserves to bear the bell.
But if the Courtier fancy this my book,
I scorn the proud disdaynfull Momus look.
Falkners farewell, at pleasure do peruse
These leaves and lines, each picture and each page.
Readers adue, I have no farther news,
I can but wish you ancient Nestors age,
Unto whose doomes my wrytings here I gage:
To cure your Hawks or make your cunning more,
If ought be here, I clappe my hands therefore.
My Muse, and I, have done the best we can,
To learn you how your Hawks to lewre and man.
George Turberuile.

Liuor, edax rerum, tuque inuidiosa vetustas, Omnia destruitis.
FINIS.
GEntle Reader, if Argus with all his eyes should pervse an impression, yet
some thing might of him be unseen: so I must of force confess sundry
faults to have escaped in printyng this book of Falconrie, by which some
places are made obscure, and sundry terms quite abused, contrary to the
Authors meaning and mine: which is not my small grief, neither yet could I
much help the same, the copy being obscurely penned and not legible in
sundry places, for that it was the translaters original. And therefore when
happily they do occur, or that thou light on them, blame not the book or me,
but run over to the Errata, where thou shalt be satisfied in every point,
as hereafter ensues.

Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 3 14 Thornkretzera, Thornkretzer, a 30 6 bended
bonded 43 7 Juan Vazilniche, Juan Uazaluiche 64 31 Astuy Astur 72 4 of or 113
11 Hare Hearon 113 27 male make 149 10 times turns 170 13 female formal
ibide^ 15 female formal 176 11 lentrers lentiners 191 34 pashet plashe 204 9
metred mewed ibide^ 26 lentmers lentiners ibide^ 32 lentmers lentiners 208 4 in
to 222 26 Psillin Psillium 227 vlt. beaten beak 230 33 Hawk Hawks 231 19
snuff sniffe ibide^ 29 snuff sniffe ibide^ 33 Senuiza Stauesacre. 241 17
increased encrassed ibide^ 23 Asma Asma 256 21 Iroes Ireos


