TRAGICAL Tales translated by TVRBERVILE In time of his troubles out of
sundry Italians, with the Argument and Lenuoye to each Tale

Nocet empta dolare voluptus Imprinted at London by Abell Ieffs, dwelling in
the Forestreete without Crepelgate at the sign of the Bell Anno Dom. 1587.

printer's device of Abel Jeffs PRASE THE LORD WITH HARP AND SONG A I


TO THE Worshipful his loving Brother Nicholas Turberuille Esquire.
ALbeit your many and great courtesies bestowed on me, deserve sundry, and no
slender thanks from me: Nevertheless mine insufficiency pleading for mine
excuse, and d^sabilitie dealing in my behalf, do hope to receive from you no
less good liking for a small req^^all, than he that ye^lds you a treble
recompense. Let it suffice that J live no vn^^indfull man of your goodness, nor
will be found ungrateful for your gentleness, if ever fortune favor my
desires or allow me mean to make level with your good deserts. Till when, I
present you this little book, as well the undoubted badge of my good
reme^br^ace, as the gretest part of my slender substance. Following herein
seabeaten soldiers, and miserable mariners, who in ancient age aster their
happy ariuals, acc^stomed to hang up in the temple before their sacred Gods,
their broken oars, and ragged sails, with such like reliks, the assured
monuments of their lametable fortunes and persit pledges of late escaped
dangers. Which commendable custom of those thankful Ethnicks I both allow for
good, and follow at this instant as fully apperteyning to my present ^late, in
dedicating to you these few Poetical parers, and pensine Pamphlets, the rusul
records of my former travel, in the sorrowful sea of my late misa duentures:
which having the more spedily by your careful and brotherly endeavor,
ouerpassed and escaped could not but offer you this treatise in lieu of a more
large liberality, and in steed of a greater gift, presuming of good acceptance
at your hands, who have always been my most assured shield, and strongest
slay in all my life. Wherefore take these (I pray you) in no worse part than
mean them, and at leisure for your pleasure peruse them, excusing my lack of
learning, and brooking my want of cunning, both which defaults and
imperfections, might have been sufficient to have stayed my hasty hand: but
that J ever chose rather to be reputed of strangers unskillful, than to be
condemned of my best friends for ungrateful: for the one proceeds for lack
of industry, but that other grows for want of humanity. J leave to trouble
you further, recomending you to the Tragical (...) delight you, I pray you
peruse (...) aught offend you, eftsoone refuse it: if any history deserve
reading* of courtesy respect it: if any seem unworthy, do boldly reject it. J
favor not the best so well, as J will wish^ your trouble in surneying the
evil whose endeavor was only to this end, to do you pleasure and service,
for your ancient goodness^ toward me, that am your bounden brother, and
wholly to rea^ yours during life.

George Turberuile

(...) friend (...) Baynes.
M^ word (...) wish, my det, and thy desire,
(...) book (my Baynes) lo here I send
To the at (...) as friendship does require,
(...) wills it rather left vnpend,
(...) the same the Author should not shend:
(...) blush who lust, so thou do like the works,
(...) shall no longer lurk.
^^r^se each page as leisure gives thee leave,
(...) each verse thus ragged as they lie,
Let nothing slip whereby I may receive
(...) all check of curio as readers eye:
(...) ^ll I know how haut thy muse does fly:
therefore I yield this foul misshapen Bear,
(...) thy choice, to tender or to tear.
Wherein if ^ught vnworth the press thou find,
(...) or, that seems unto thy taste,
(...) to the troubles of my mind,
Whose late mishap made this be hatched in haste,
(...) of care best beauties be defaste:
Lik^^^se be wits and freshest heads to sceke,
Which way to write, when fortune list to stre^k^.
Who know^^y cares, who wist my wailefull woe,
(As thou (...) to the same)
Or understood how grief did ouergrow
The pleasant plot which I for mirth did frame
Would bear with this, and quite me clean of blame
For in my life I never felt such fittes,
As whilst I wrote this work did daunt my wits
For as the Pilot in the wrathful wave,
Beset with storms, still beaten too and fro
With boysteous bellows, knows not how to saume
His sielie bark, but lets the rudder go.
And yeeldes himself whither tempest list to blow
So I amidde my cares had slender skill,
To write in verse, but bowde to fortunes will.
The more thy pain, thy trouble and thy toil,
That must amend amiss each fault of mine,
Yet grudge not (Baynes) with share to turn the soil
In sort as though the same were wholly thine,
The charge whereof, lo here I do refine
For want of health, my friend at large to thee,
Since that my limbs with greef surcharged be.
Apollos lore I quite have laid aside,
And am enforst his Phificke to peruse:
I hate the Harp, wherein was all my pride,
I hunte for herbs, I loathe Mineruas muse,
My want of health, makes me my book refuse:
The blo^ting rage that erst inspirde my brain,
Satu^^^s chill^^g humor does restrain.
Wherefore fith I confess my want of skill,
And am to secke to better this my book,
S^^ (Baines) thou run unto Parnassus hill,
As Helicon, or else that learned brook,
Which Pegase made, when he the soile-fosooke:
For well thou know, where Clio and the rest,
Dei ^une their Lutes, and pipe with pleasant breast.
I can no more, but for thy mickle pain,
Yield thousand thanks upon my naked knee,
And if thou need the like supply again,
Assure thy self then I will pleasure thee:
So friends unto each other bounden be.
(^^y Baynes) Adieu, this little book of mine,
When thou have done, may best be termed thine.
Thy friend, George Turberuile.

To. Baynes to the Reader, in the due commendation of the Author.
WHat weight of grave advice, what reason left vnsaught,
What more, of Pallas brain has taste, than Poets pens have taught.
Whose povvdred saaes are mixed, with pleasure, and delight:
Aduising this, forewarning that, ^irecting still the right.
Which vain though Grecians first, and Romans after found:
Yet now the same in English phrase, does gorgeously abound.
A virtue lately won, to this our native foil:
By such as seek, their country praise, though to their greater toil.
Among the rest, who has, employed therein more pain?
Or who? than Turberuill has found, in verse a sweeter vain?
Whose quill, though yet it tread, the path of green delight:
The same who vevves, shall find his lines, with learned reason dight.
And as to elder age, his stayed brain shall grow:
So falling from, his riper pen, more grave conceits may flow.
The while, let each man reap, the pleasure that he lends.
The cost is free, his charge but small, an others wealth that spends.
The subject here, is such, as differs far from pelse:
I deem thee wise, thy judgment good, the thing will praise it self.
Qui nihil sperat nihil disperat. The Author here declares the cause why he
wrote these Histories, and forewent the translation of the learned Poet Lucan.
I Undertook Dan Lucans verse,
and raught his horn in hand,
To sound out Caesar's blooddy broiles
and Pompeis puisant band:
I meant to paint the haughty hate
of those two marshall men,
And had in purpose civil swords
of rufull Rome to pen:
Of rufull Rome to pen the plagues
when Caesar sought to reign,
And Pompey pitying Countries spoil,
would do him down again.
I had begone that hard attempt,
to turn that ferule soil.
My bullocks were already yokte.
and flatly fell to toil.
Me thought they labored meetlie well,
Till on a certain night:
I gazde so long upon my book
in bed by candle light.
Till heavy sleep sull slilie came
and muffled so mine eye,
That I was forced with quill in hand
in slumber down to lie.
To whom within a while appeard
Melpomene, the Muse,
That to entreat of warlike wights,
and dreadful arms does use.
Who me beheld with grave regard,
and countnance fraught with fear:
And thus the ghastly Goddess spoke,
her words in mind I bear.
And art thou woxe so wilful, as
thou seem to outward eye?
Darste thou presume with ymped quilles
so proud a pitch to fly?
Remember how fond Phaeton farde,
that undertook to guide:
Apollos charge, by mean of which
that wilful wanton did.
Ear thou do wade so far, revoke
to mind to bedlam boy,
That in his forged wings of wax
reposed too great a joy:
And soard so near the scorching blaze
of burning Phoebus brande,
As feathers failde, and be fell short
of what he took in hand.
In this thy hauty heart thou shewst,
too plain thy pride appears,
How durst thou deal in field affairs:
leave off, unyoke thy Steeres.
Let lofty Lucans verse alone,
a deed of deep devise:
A stately style, a peerless pen,
a work of weighty p^^ce.
More meet for noble Buckhurst brain,
where Pallas built her bower,
Of purpose there to lodge her self,
(...) and show her princely power.
His swelling vain would better blase,
those Royal Roman peers:
Than anyone in Brutus land,
that liude these many years.
And yet within that little Isle
of golden wits is store,
Great change and choice of learned ymps
as ever was of yore.
I none dislike, I fancy some,
but yet of all the rest.
Sance envy, let my verdite pass,
Lord Buckurst is the best.
We all that Lady Muses are,
Who be in number nine:
With one accord did bless this babe,
each said, This ympe is mine.
Each one of us, at time of birth,
with Juno were in place:
And each upon this tender child,
bestowd her gist of grace.
My felse among the more alowde
him Poets praised skill,
And to commend his gallant verse.
I gave him words at will.
Miner^a ^uid him on her lap,
and let him many a kiss:
As who would say when all is done,
they all shall yield to this:
This matter were more meet for him,
and far unfit for thee:
My sister Clio, with thy kind,
does best of all Agree.
She deals in case of liking love.
her lute is set but low.
And thou werte wont in such devise,
thine humor to bestow,
1. As when thou toldest the Shepherds tale,
that Mantuan erst had pend:
2. And turndst those letters into verse,
that loving Dames did send
Unto their liugring mates that fought
at sack and siege of Troy:
3 And as thou did in the writing of
thy songs of sugared joy.
4 Mancynus virtues fitterore,
for thee to take in hand,
Than glitering gleaues, and weak full wars,
that all on slaughter stand
The Giants proud, aspiring pomp
when they so fondly strove,
And hopde with help of heaped hills
to conquer mighty Jove.
Is not for every wit to wield,
the weight too heavy wear.
For eury Poet that has wrote
in ancient age to bear:
Unless that Lucan Virgill, or
the great renowned Greek
Would undertake, those boysteous broiles,
the rest are all to seek,
Each slender ship that hears a sail,
and flittes in quiet flood:
Is not to brook the byllowe, when
the rooryng teas be wood.
Alcydes slippers are too wide
for every wretch to wear
Not every child can Atlas charge,
upon his shoulders bear.
Not every dick that dares to draw
a sword, is Hectors paere,
Not every woodman that does shoot
has skill to chose his Dear
No beast can match the lions might
his force is over fell:
Though every little star do shine,
yet does the Sun excel.
Not every bryer, or tender twigge,
is equal to the Pyne,
Nor every Prelate that can preach,
is thought a deep divine.
Not every fish that flittes amyd
the flood with feeble finne,
Is fellow to the Delphine swifte,
when he does once begin.
The peeuishe puttocke may not preace
in place where Eagles are:
For why their kingly might exceedes,
their puissance passes far.
All which I speak to let thee wit,
that though thou have some skill,
Yet have thou not sufficient stuff
this Authors loome to fill.
Too slender is thy feeble twiste,
thy web is all too weak:
Before thy work be half dispatchte,
no doubt thy warpe will break.
Wherefore renounce thy rash device,
thy yielding force I know:
And none so well as I can judge,
the bente of Lucans bow.
Think of the toade in Aesops tale,
that sought to match the Bull,
For highness, and did burst at length,
his bowels were so full,
So thou, unless hou take good heed,
translating Lucans war,
Shall spoil thy Lute, and stroy thy strings,
in straining them too far.
I here advise and eke commounde
that thou no farther go:
Lay dawne thy Lute obey my will,
for sure it shall be so.
With that my orousie slumber fled,
my senses came again:
And I that erst was vrownde in dreams,
beheld the God^^e plain,
Whose frouning phrase and spiteful speech
bad daunted so my wit,
As for my life I wiste not how.
to shape an answer fit.
Each word (me thought) did wound me so,
each look did lurche my bar^e:
Each sentence bredde my sorroi^es such,
each line was like a darte.
But yet at last with manly mind,
and mouth vnfraught of fear,
Unto this lofty learned Muse,
these words I vttred there:
O noble Impe, and daughter dear
to mighty Jove his grace:
It much relieues my weakened wits
to see thy heavenly face.
For which ten thousand thanks I yield
thee here with bended knee:
And count my self the blessedst man
alive, thine eyes to see.
Thy presence makes me to presume,
thou holdst me very dear:
But (out alas) thy words were such
as I was loathe to hear.
Controlements came from hanghtie breast,
for that I undertook
With English quill to turn the verse
of learned Lucans book.
And shall I (Lady) be unflyk^c
to take in hand a deed,
By which unto my ^atiue say^^
advantage may succeedr^^
By which the civil swords of Rome
and mischiefs done thereby,
May be a myrront unto us,
the like mishappes to fly?
I yield my brain too barraint far,
my verses all too vile,
My pen too plain, with meter mete
to furnith Lucans style:
Whose deep devise, whose filed phrase,
and Poets peerless pen,
Would cloye the cunningst head in court,
and tire the Iustiest men.
But yet since none of greater skill,
and ryper wit would write
Of Caesar and Pompeius wars,
a work of rare delight:
I thought it good as well to pass
the idle time away,
As to the world to set to vewe
how discord breeds decay:
To turn this princely Poets verse,
that simple men might see
Of Civil broils and breach at home,
how great the mischeiues be.
But since it stands not with your wills
who lady Muses are,
That one so dull as I, should deal
in case concerning war:
I am content to plie unto
your pleasures out of hand,
It boots me not against the will
of heavenly states to stand.
Yet being that my present plight
is stufte with all anoye,
And late mishaps have me bereft
my rimes of roisting joy:
Sith churlish fortune clouded has
my glee, with mantell black,
Of foul mischaunce, whereby my bark
was like to bide the wrack:
(Good lady) give me leave to write
some heavy sounding verse,
That by the vewe thereof, my harms
the readers heart may perse.
With that the Goddess gave a beck,
and yielded my request,
And vanished straight without offense,
and licenste me to rest.
Then I to reading Boccas fell,
and sundry other more
Italian Authors, where I found
great stoare of states in woe,
And sundry sorts of wretched wights:
some slain by cruel foes,
And other some that through desire
and Love their lives did lose:
Some Tyrant thirsting after blood,
themselves were fowly slain:
And some did sterue in endless woes,
and pynde with bitter pain.
Which gave me matter fit to write:
and hereupon it grew
That I this Tragical devise,
have set to open view.
Accept my pains, allow me thanks,
if I deserve the same,
If not, yet let not meaning well
be paid with check and blame.
For I am he that build the bower,
I hew the hardened stone,
And thou art owner of the house,
the pain is mine alone.
I burn the be, I hold the hyue,
the Summer toil is myue:
And all because when winter commes,
the honey may be thine.
I frame the foil, I grane the gold,
I fashion up the ring,
And thou the jewel shall enjoy,
which I to shape do bring.
Adieu (good Reader) gaze thy fill,
if aught thine eyes delight:
For thee I took the work in hand,
this book is thine of right.
The argument to the first History.
THrough wilful love, and liking overmuch,
Nastagios state did melt, and without return
Of like good will: Euphymiu^ min^e was ^uel
She felt no flame, when he, g^od man, did bu^^^
But made hi^ grief her gl^^, (...) bitter ^marre
Might nothing rize or pierce her marble heart.
By friends advise at last he parted thence,
Though greatly gree^^ed, removing rack him sore,
To quit the cause of al his fond expense,
And purchase case which he had lost before:
A death (no doub^) it was to put away,
And yet no life with her in place to stay.
Behold the happ, as he full pensive stood
Amyd a grove adjoining to his tent,
Recounting former toys: athwart the wood
With cruel curres an armed knight there went,
That had in chase a frotion fresh of hew,
Whom he by force of sword and mastiues ^lewe.
And after death this lady liude again
Up start away she ran before the Knight,
For thus the Gods allotted had her pain,
Because she slew by scorn that ^^uing wight:
In death he was her plague wh^ me ^^e in life
Enforst to slay himself with mutthering knife.
Nastagio pondering in his restless thought
As well the requely, as the cause of all.
Seeing that skorne the ladies penance wrought.
For dealing erst so hardely with her thrall:
Bethought him how to make a my ^rour right
Both of the maid, and eke the cursed knight.
His plat was thus: he bid in friendly sort
Unto his tente, to feast and banquet there
His ancient love, that made his pain her sport,
Whose mother came and diverse friends I fear,
Amyds the feast the knight pursude the maid,
And slevve hi^ there, as I before have said.
Which sight amazde the route, but most of all
That virgin coye, so careless of the man
Be gonne to quake it touched her to the gall,
And thereupon her liking first began.
For after that she woxe h^s wife at last,
Dreading the gods revenge for rigor past.
IN Italy there is a City, hight
Rauenna, by report as brave a place
As may be found, both fresh and fair to sight
Wherein of yore there was a noble race
Of gallant wights, great choice of men of fame,
But one in chief, Nastagio by name.
The father of this forward ympe did dye,
Forespent with years, and load with silver locks,
Whose laud and fee descended orderly
Unto the Son, with store of other stocks:
Few fathers of this aged man's degree,
In so good case did leave their sons as he.
This might suffice to make Nastagio rich,
But, where wealth is, there lightly follows more,
For he an uncle had, who gave as much
At time of death, as father left before:
The wealth of thief two rych renowned wights,
Iu little space upon Nastagio lights.
Not one in all Rauenna might compare
With him for wealth, or matched him for his muck:
He liude at full, not tasting any care,
But took his time, and used his golden luck:
Not wanting ought that fitted for his state,
By mean of flowing wealth full warm he sat.
This youth his wanton prime without a wife,
Retchlesse consumde, and liude in single sort,
Esteeming that to be the blessed life,
Because he found it stuffed with glee and sport:
As yonkers that at randon use to range,
Refuse to wed, because they love to change.
Until at length his roauing eyes he kest
Upon a wench, and took so perfect view
Of Graces that did harbor in her breast,
As straight to liking of this maid he gre^^
His fancy fed upon her featurde looks,
In sort as none save her this gallant br^kes.
Who doublesse was a neat and noble Dame,
Trauersar cleaped was her worthir Sire,
And she herself Euphymia called by name,
As fresh of hew as men might well desire:
With her I say, Nastagio fell in love,
Whose settled choice no reason might remove.
Her crystal eyes had lurcht his yielding heart,
And razde his bending hreast by often glaunce,
Her glittering locks so queyntly coucht by art,
Had brought this youth to such a loving trance,
As all his care was how to compass grace,
From her whom he so derely did embrace.
Then as it is the trade of Cupids ^^nghts)
He fell to feast, where lackt no dainty fare,
To come be foreign cates that breed delights,
For no expense this courtly wight would spare.
He used the tilt on Ienate trapt with gold,
To please his Donnas eyes with courage bold.
For if she be a noble Dame in deed,
She pleasure takes to view a man^^e knight.
In armor ^lad, bestriding of his steed:
And does detest the base and coward wight,
For that the valiant will defend her fame,
When carpet squires will hide their heads withshame.
Thus wasted he the day in Love device,
And spene the nights with costly musikes found,
In hope at length this virgin to entice
To salve his ^ore, and care his covert wound:
Nothing was left in any point undone,
Whereby the love of Ladies might be won:
By letters he vnfolder all his fittes,
By message eke imparted all his pain,
His moiumfull lines be^^aid his mazed wits,
His songs of love declarde his passions plaiue:
The rockiest heart alive it would have movde,
To see how well this noble man had loud,
Yet eruell she, when he had done and said
The most he might to move her stony heart,
To like of him might not at all be waide,
For she was struck with Cupids Leaden dart,
Whose chilling cold had bound her bowels so,
As in no wise she could abridge his woe.
But how much more the lover made his moan,
Suing for ruth and well deserved grace,
The more she sat unmoved, like the stone,
Whom waves do beat, but wag not from his place:
Either beauties pride or stately flock did force
This haughty dame from pity and remorce.
She rigorously refusde, and took disdain,
So much as once to yield him friendly cheer,
Who for her sake had bid such bitter pain,
As any tender heart would bleed to hear:
And in reward of all his friendship past,
She gave him leave to spoil himself at last.
Whereto through deep despair his mind was bent
In hope thereby to end his wretched woe,
Because he saw her malice not relent,
Who for good will became his deadly foe:
For in such cuse aye death is counted light,
Where men may not enjoy their sweet delight.
His wilful hand was armde with naked knife,
And even at point to give the fatal stroke,
By short dispatch of loathed lingering life,
To rid his weary neck of heavy yoke:
But life was sweet, and he to live, would leave
The Dame, from whom he might no ruth receive.
When Fancy saw his raging humor cease,
And Reason challenge rule, and charge again,
Whereby his fond affection would decease,
And he be quit of all his former pain:
To keep him in, and hold his lover fast,
She gave him Hope, to come by love at last.
Thus diners thoughts did soiourne in his breast,
Sometimes he meant himself with sword to slay,
An other time to leave to love was best:
Some other while affection bare the sway:
Was never man below the starrie sky,
So loath to live, and yet so woe to die.
For why? in life he found himself a thrall,
Unable aye to compass his delight:
And yet by death there was no hope at all,
For then he was assurde to loose her quight:
So neither life nor death might ease his mind,
That by the Gods was thus to love assignde.
Whilst thus Nastagio sought his own decay,
By liquorous lust, his friends and nearest kinn^
Perceiving how his wealth did wast away,
And that his body pinde and waxed thin:
Did diverse times their friendly counsel give,
That from Rauenna he abroad should live.
For change of place perhaps would purchase health
And absence cause his foolish fancies wear:
They did not leave to tell him how his wealth
And all things else consumde, and melted there.
But scornful he did scoff their good advise,
And had their grauest words in slender price.
As lovers wont, who fancy nothing less
Than speeches tending all to their avail:
Not much unlike the lame, for whose redress.
When counsel commes, they lightly turn their tail,
Loathing to lend an ear to wholesome lore,
Of such as seek to salve their lingering sore.
Yet they like friends would never blin or stint,
To show him means to better his estate:
Whereby, As often drops do pearce the flint,
So they at length by many speeches, gare
His free consent to travel for a space,
To try what chance would hap by change of place.
Judge you that love, and can discern aright,
How great annoy departure bredde in mind
To him that loud a passing proper wight:
(Though not belovde) and now must leave behind
The idol that was shrinde within his breast
Whose rife remembrance loud him little rest.
But yet away for promise sake he would,
All needful things were ready for the saius,
Both cates and coin, with plate of beaten gold:
And for his better comfort, kinsmen came,
Who ioyed to see him part away from thence,
Where she abode that caus^ his lewd expense.
To fo^^a^n^ coast Nastagio now was bent,
But not resolode what special place to see,
Either Flounders, France; or Spain, I think he meant
For that these seats of civil nature be:
To make it short, he took his horse in peast,
And so departs the soil he fansied most.
They had not trauailde far, before they came
Unto a place, that from Rauenna stood
Three miles or thereaboue the village name
Was Classye, there Nastagio thought it good
To make abo^de for ease and solace sake,
Wherefore he pight his tent, and thus bespoke.
In thank you (friends quoth he) with all my heart,
I hold my self indebted for your pain,
Now here you may (if so you list) depart,
And to Rauenna shape return again:
For I and mine will respite here a spare,
I like the seat, and fancy well the place.
Here do I mean to make assured stay,
Until the rufull Gods do ease my woe,
And Capide chase my sorrows clean away,
I purpose not a foot from hence to go:
Lo here I pledge my faith to come no more
Unto the soil where I receiude my sore.
Which promise if I hold, you have your wills,
Who gave advise and counsel to the same:
There restes no more your pensine friend fulfils
A beauie charge, to flee so fair a Doine,
As to my do^^ne, there are not many more,
To match with her, whose beauty breeds my woe.
But well, content I am, a^ your request
To live exilde, in manner as you see,
I will ^o more procure mine own burest,
By loving her that leat^es to pit me:
And having thus at full doclard his mind,
They took their leaves, he pausde and staid bind.
Thus he al plasure lodge, did banquet more,
And led his life at greater liberty.
Than in Ranenna he had done of yore:
He did exceed for courtly iolitie,
There wanted no delight that youth does craud,
Which he for coin or any cost might have.
And whylom, as his ancient custom was,
For diverse of his friends he used to send,
In gladsome joys the weary day to pass:
Whereby no love care might his ease offend:
Was never wight that liude in greater glee,
Nor spent his time in brauer sort than he.
When May, with motly robes began his reign,
(A lusty time for every loving lad)
Nastagio pondering in his busy brain,
The slender hyre that he received had,
And foul repulse for all his good desert,
Began walk abroad, and wild his grooms to part.
Whereby he might the better call to thought,
The causeless rigor of the cruel Dame:
Whose small regard his former spoil had wrought
And turnde his torments into pleasant game:
Along he paced into a gladsome grove,
Whilst in his head ten thousand fancies strove.
There stalkte he on, as soft as foot could tread,
In deep discourse of beauty and disdain,
Until himself a mile or more he lead.
Into the Coppyse, not having any train:
So long he staide, as dinner time drew near,
Which he forgot, not minding bellye cheer.
Lo see the hap, that him did there betide,
Within a while he heard a doleful noise,
Of one that in the grove full shrilly cryde,
Who seemde to be a virgin by her voice:
The sudden fear so much amazde the man,
As straight to leave his pleasant thoughers he began,
Vplifted he his head, and glewde about
To see what woofull wight it was and why
She so exclamde, and made such sudden shoute:
And as along the lawnde he kest his eye,
A naked Nympbe well shapte in every lym,
With speedy pace, he saw come toward him,
Reichelesse she ran through thick and thin amayn,
Bebrusht with briars her broosed body bled.
The brambles skirmishte had with every dayne,
Untrust her hair hoong round about her head:
And ever as she ran athwarte the wood,
Mercy she cryde with open mouth a good.
Two monstrous mastyues eke he saw that ran
Close by her side, two ugly curres they were,
Who ever as they ouertooke het, began
Her haunches wish their greedy teeth to tear:
To view (alas) it was a woeful sight,
Such hungry hounds on naked flesh to light.
He lookte a little more ascance, and vewde
One riding fast, as Ienats legs could go,
A hydeous knight, to seeming swarthie hewde,
And (as appearde) he was the maidens foe:
For in his hand a naked sword he had,
Whose face was grimme, and he in black yelad.
Who gallopt on, and glewde with fell regard,
Pronouncing threats and terms of hye disdain,
With cruel tools for murder well preparde:
And cryde so ^onde Nastagio heard it plain,
That he revenge of her by death would take,
With other thundering words which thoe he spoke.
Thus for an hour space, or thereaboute,
In one self brake Nastagio mazed stood
Perplexed sore, and greatly in a doubt,
Beholding how the dogs athwarte the wood,
Did chase the wench, and how the wrathful knight
With ghastly look pursewde this silly wight.
So long he gazde, that pity grew in fine,
And swelling ire incenst his manly breast,
Pricking him on, and making him repine,
To see a fillie daine so sore distress:
So as unless he rescued her from soes,
She was assurde estsoone her life to lose.
But beoclesse it was to mean to help the maid,
Not having we apons fit, nor sword, nor lance,
But yet, because the case required aid,
He raught a truncheon from a Pyne by chance,
And therewithal against the armed knight
And both his curres he made with all his might.
The horseman when be saw Nastagio dent
For her supply, whom he would reaue of life:
Exclamde alowde, withstand not mine intent
Nastagio, stinte and breed no further stryse,
Forgo thy force, let mastiues have their will,
Since they and I this monster mean to kill.
He scarsly spoke the word, but by and by
The egr^ curres unto her flanks they slew,
And with her blood that ran abundantly,
Their monstrous mouths they hastened to imbrewe:
VVithall the knight dismounted from his sleede,
And in he ran his hungry dogs to feed.
Nastagio seeing this approcht the knight,
I muse (quoth he) how thou should know my name
Who never erst, each either saw with sight,
But this assure thy self, it is a shame,
A man at arms his honor to distaine,
With conquest of a maid so fowly slain.
Ablouddie fact, a fimple wenche to kill
With cruel sword, whofe force consistes in flight,
A beastly part, such mastiues mawes to fill,
With giltlesse blood, a vill aines nature right.
Thou dealte with her, as though she were a beast
In forest bredde, not tasting women's breast.
Assure thy self as much as lies in me,
I mean to guard her, maugre all thy might,
I compte her clear without offense to be,
She is unlike to be a guil^ie wight:
I may not brook such wrong in any wise,
Against my kind and honor sore it lies.
Whereto the knight to this effect replyder
Nastagio would thou wist and knewst it well,
That I to thee am very near allyde,
Both borne and bred where thou and thine do dwell:
My first descent I took of noble race,
Thou know my stock. Now listen to my case.
I lived, when thou were but of tender age,
A mortal man, and hight sir Guye by name,
My luck was such as fancy made me rage,
And fall in liking with this stately dame,
Whom here thou see, my love was nothing less
Than that which does thy yielding heart possess.
I likte her well, I held her very dear:
But cruel she, so tygrelyke requites
My great good will with such a skornfull cheer,
As lack or ruthe berefte me my delights:
Despair so grew within my hapless breast,
As on a time to compass greater rest,
This fauchion fell, in d^^pe despite I drew,
To stinte my woes which never would aslake,
And with the same my sefe I fowly flewe,
In hope thereby an end of bale to make:
Which wicked deed the Gods detested so,
As I was judge to hollow hell to go.
And there assignde by rightful doom divine,
For shortning of my life to live in pain,
Where lingering griefs should make my ghost to pine,
For life misspent, the fittest hire and gain:
With Plato thus it was my lot to stay,
Woe worth the time that I my self did stay.
But listen on within a little space,
This haughty dame that hastened on my death,
For yielding me such slender hire and grace,
Who thought it none offense to stop my breath,
Likewise did dye, whom mighty Jove and just,
For her desarte, among the furies thrust.
To quit her shame, in hell she had a share,
With devilish impes, that whilom wanted grace:
And after that she had remained their,
And plungde her limbs in frozen pittes a space,
She was aduaunste up to the earth again,
And I with her to breed each others pain.
Lo thus the Gods did will it for to be,
Whose sentence may at no time be undone.
That she in poaste (as thou thy self do see)
All bare of roabes before these dogs should run,
And I on horseback after her should go,
Not as a friend, but like a mortal foe.
And look how often I reachte her on the way,
So often I should dismember all her corse,
With self same sword that did his master slay,
She giving cause, though I did use the force:
And butcherlike to rippe her down the raynes,
Who for good will, allowde me bitter pains.
And having cut her carcass quite in twain,
That I should crushe the heart as cold as stene,
Not sparing to dispoyle each little vain,
Each tender cord and string that grew thereon:
And take those other inward parts, to feed
My hungry dogs, to serve their present need.
This heau^e doom was by the Gods assignde
The cruel dame, for wanting dew regard:
She is assurde no greater case to sinde,
This torment is for her entrage preparde:
These curres and I in order as you see,
Appointed are her daily scourge to be.
And in this self saine grove where now we go,
Cache Friday near about this time of day,
This wicked wenche bewayles her wretched woe,
And I with help of curres my part do play.
The mastiues they do chase her thwarte the wood,
And I imbrewe my weapon with her blood.
Each place where she has wroth my woe ere this,
And yielded grief in guerdon of good will,
Unto her plague that place appointed is,
There must I her with bloody weapon kill:
And mark how many months I spent in love,
So many years must she this penance prove.
Wherefore do let me put the same in ure,
Which she deserves, and Jove did give in charge,
Let her for former pride such pains endure,
As she may smarte, and I my self discharge:
An any wise take not her cause in hand.
In vain it were for man with God to stand.
Nastagio having heard the tale he cold,
And waying well the earnest words he spoke,
Although he were a ventrous wight and bold,
Yet began his trembling limbs with fear to quake:
He had not tho a hair but stood upright,
Wherewith he starte abacke, as one afright.
And gazde upon the girl in woeful case,
Marking the rigor that the knight would use
And practice thereupon the wench in place,
Who was to bide his force, and might not choose:
His heart it bled within his breast, to vewe,
How tho the knight to devilish choler grew.
For when he had his tedious process done,
Full like a bed^^^ beast in forest bred,
He began upon the silly wretch to run,
Who to escape, before the mastiues fled:
With naked sword he preast to do the deed,
And came behind, full cowardlyke to speed.
Bootlesse it was for her away to fly:
The Ienate was too good for her of foot,
And more than that, the tyrant was so nigh,
As to appeal for pity was no boot:
Wherefore with faint, forfeebled as she was,
With bowing knee she fell upon the grass.
The greedy hounds estsoone began to bite,
Seazing upon her carkas with their jaws:
With that comes in the ghastly sweating knight,
Who thrust her through, and made no longer pawse:
Straight down she went, with bloody breast to greund
Unable to sustain so great a wound.
Then back he put his hand behind his hippes,
And drew a shoulder knife of purpose made,
Wherewith the beast the brisket bone vnrippes,
As is the bluddie butchers commen trade:
And out he hewde the liucly leaping heart,
Whereof each waiting mastiue had a part.
They quickly chopte it up, and made dispatche,
As carrion curres and ravening whelps do use,
That every filthy morsel lightly snatche,
And being nipt with famine, naught refuse:
As soon as this was done, the virgin rose,
And was on foot, and to the seawarde goes.
As though there had been no such matter past,
And by her side the mastiues raune a main,
The knight he mounted on his horse in haste,
Not sparing spurs, and cut he drew again
The dreadful sword, as he had done of yore:
Within a while Nastagio saw no more.
They vanished soon as those that went apace,
On neither side was slacknesse to be found,
The maid she mounted, being had in chase,
Life made her leap, even as the Hare does bound:
The hungry dogs, that hunger starued wear,
Laid on as fast her fleshye flanks to tear.
The rustie knight he gave his horse the rain,
And followde hard, as men for wager run,
Upon desire to plague the wenche again,
Who carst to him so great a wrong had den:
Thus famine, fear, and fell revenging mind,
Made mastiues, maid, and knight their legs to find.
Nastagio having seen this pageant plaide,
Stood still in part to pity movd withal,
In part with strangeness of the sight dismaide,
Began to ponder with himself, and call
To mind afresh, how that the knight had told,
Each friday that he might the like behold.
Which fieted well be thought for his intent.
It might perhaps turn him in time to good:
Wherefore he marked the place, and home he went,
Leaning a sign undoubted where he stood,
Till time he were dispozde to put in dre,
That new devise, his quiet to procure.
Retirde unto his tent, his man he sends
Unto Rauenna, out of hand to will
His nearest kin, and best beloved friends
To visit him in proof of their good will:
Who being bid, came posting straight away,
To whom Nastagio thus began to say:
Mine ancient friends, you counseld me of yore
To shun the shameful love, that whylom I
Bestowde on her, that me tormented sore,
And plagude me so as I was like to die:
You warned me to fly my pleasant foe,
within whose breast no tender ruth might grow.
And more than that, you friendly did advise
That I should part my country, to aucide
My monstrous charge, that daily did arise
And mount so ^ie as I was much anoyde,
Now friends, the wished time is come, for I
Am ready here unto your best to plie.
I yield you hearty thanks in humble sort,
In great good part your bolsome read I take:
I crave no more, but that you will resore
Unto my lodge on Friday next, to make
Good cheer, bring Paul Trauersar then along,
And eke his wife, or else you do me wrong,
In any wise let not the Matron leave
That dainty peate her daughter dear behind,
I mean in friendly manner to receive
My friends as then: such fare as you shall find,
Accept in gree, fail not to come, I pray,
And bring with you these parties at the day.
So many as were present there in view,
Both gave him thanks, and promised not to fail,
Themselves to come, and bid the residue,
Which they performde, the suit did soon prevail
With all the guestes, save with that rockie maid,
Who scornd his feast, and gladly would have staid.
But yet at length with much ado she went,
The presence of her parents led her on,
Who being come unto Nastagios tent,
With courtly grace he greeted every one,
Rejoicing there to see so brave a train,
But her chief, that bred him all his pain.
Just underneath a very stately Pine,
That shadowed all the troop in compass round,
The table stood, where all these states should dine:
To tell you truth, it was the self same ground,
Where erst the knight had had the maid in chase:
The feaster prayde ethe one to take his place.
And so they did, regarding their estate
That worthy were the highest room to hold:
The fourine was fraught, upon the bench there sat
Euphymia, so as she must needs behold
From first to last all things that fortunde tho,
There was no shift, Nastagio meant it so.
I leave to descant of their daiutie fare,
(Set bankets-made by Courtiers lack no cates,)
We may presume the seruire there was rare,
Because the board was virond round with states:
So much the more because his mistress came,
Whom he had sound so joy and queint a dame.
When second course was servde in order rowine,
Even then the blooddie Tragedy began:
The Sewer set the meat no sooner down,
But by and by was heard of every man,
A yelling noise that Echode in the skies,
The wofulst sound that man might well devise.
VVhereat each one that sat at meat did muze,
Demanding who that wretched wight should be,
And asaing what should mean that sudden news,
They heard a voice, but could no creature see:
They vaunst themselves; and stood me bolt upright,
Because they would the sooner have the sight.
Within a while, each one might plainly view
A naked Nymph with mastiues by her side,
And eke an ugly knight that did pursue,
And posting on a Croyden Ienate ride:
It was not long before they proched near
The place, where as was held this royal cheer.
Wherein among the gazing guests she flewe,
Exclaiming there for ruch with open arms:
with that regrece and tender pity grew
within their breasts, to rescue her from harms:
To whom the knight cryde, let alone the maid,
Reciting that which he before had said.
He shewde at large, both who the party was,
And did unfold the cause of all her woe,
And why the sentence of the Gods did pass
In cruel sort upon the mayoen so:
Which pocesse made them muze and marvel much,
She as none durst the knight or curres to touch.
Then he behaude him as he did of yore,
Slashing the Lady with his fauchion fell.
The dogs receivde their pittance as before:
who fed upon the heart, and likte it well:
As many men and viomen as did view
This woeful sight, and both the parties knew.
And eke the houses whence they did descend,
And wist the cause of all this cursed case,
But now sir Guye for faithful love was shend,
And how the cruel maiden wanted grace:
with one consenting mind lamented so,
As out brast tears in witness of their woe.
When that the knight had used the matter thus
In blooddie sort, as you have heard it told:
Amongst themselves the feasters began discuss,
And diversely debate from young to old,
From first to last, what lately happened there,
Touched all with dread, but most that dame did fear
Whom good Nastagio lovde, and tendered much
Because she thought within her guilty mind,
That her in chief this tragedy did teuch,
For foul disdain and being so unkind
To him who for good will deserved ruth,
And could atchieue but scorn for all his truth.
Then first of all resorted to her thought,
what rockie heart and brazen breast she bare
The courteous Knight, her love that dearly bought,
And who for her had langstuisht long in care:
And hereupon as there she sat in place,
She thought herself the wench that was in chase.
Full sore she feared her flanks, and thought she saw
Her friend pursne her on his fretting steed,
And how he did his wrathful weapon draw
To take revenge of that her cursed deed:
And meant besides his hungry hounds to fill
with flesh of her, for want of due good will,
So passing was her dread, as then there grew
A deep desire within her mellow breast,
Her loving friend in gentle wise to rewe:
Whereby her self might purchase quiet rest,
And escape the scourge and penance for her pride
Bestowde on him, who deep in fancy fride.
When finished was this feast and royal cheer,
And every guest returned back again
Unto her home, Euphymia did appear
Tormented sore, and vexed with monstrous pain,
The sudden fear of what she saw of late,
Had planted in Love, in place of former hate.
The silent time that others do bestow
From heavy cares and troubles of the day
To quiet sleep did breed this Ladies woe,
Who might not chase those deep conteites away:
No wished wink could enter in her eye,
Unto her pillow fancy sat so nie.
When day drew on, and Phoebus with his waiue
Had cleard the pole, and darkness put to slight,
She felt a fresh supply of pleasant pain,
And wept the days as she had watched the night:
Nastagio stacke so firmly in her breast,
As for her life she could not compass rest.
Wherefore she calls a chamber maid of trust,
(A witty wench, and one that knew her good)
And told her that in all the have she must
Unto Nastagios tent in Classy wood:
To let him wit, that if he would vouchsaue
Her honest love, he might his purpose have,
For she was fully bent without delay
To stoop unto his will, if so it were
His pleasure, then with speed to come away.
The maid departs, and being entered where
Nastagio was, she told her mistress mind
From point to point, as duty did her bind.
All hail (good sir) quoth she, in luckie hour
And blessed time I view thy lovely face:
Mine unexpected coming to thy boure,
And preassing here thus ouerbold in place,
Is by my joyful news to wright thy case,
Whose noble mind in love has melted long,
As to thy pains, so to thy open wrong.
Suffices now thy sad and solemn cheer,
Discharge those cankred cares that fret thy mind,
Lay sorrow quite aside, which thou too dear
Have bought, by means my Mistress was vnkind^
Plucked up thy spirits, henceforth be sure to find,
As great good liking at my Ladies hand,
As thou would wish, she means thy friend to stand.
And for a proof of what I utter now,
Lo the lines that flatly do unfold
Her yelding neck, that to thy yoke does bow,
With such good will as may not well be talde,
So fair a friend is worth her weight in gold.
Thus much by mouth my mistress wild me say,
Therest (I judge) this paper ^ill bewray.
The Ladies Letter of pity to her afflictd friend, to whom she had been cruel
AS thou will muze to read,
so I might blush to write
These lines of love, who for good will
have fed thee with despite
And from the day when thou
becamst a thrall in love,
Could never spare one spark of grace
that was for thy behoue:
Till now, both clean against
mine honor and mine use,
A Lady, and a maiden both,
I send thee terms of truce.
But listen well unto
the tale that I shall tell.
Ere rashly thou my kindness deem,
and think I use thee well.
For Lions seldom sewe
unto the silly sheep,
No porter to their captives crouch,
whom they in chains do keep
Few Ladies of estate,
few Dames of hie degree,
Do bow unto their vassals wills,
as I do now to thee.
But know that though I write
the words of great good will.
Yet I regard mine honor aye,
and keep my countnance still.
No lust procurde my lines,
my credit to impair:
No fleshie fit my fancy forced
to speak Nastagio fair.
But seeing how in seas
of sorrow and distress,
Thy body bathde for love of me:
I could not do no less,
But seek to salve thy harms
by pitying thine anoy,
Who, to possess my liked limbs,
bereft thy self if joy.
I saw how for my sake
thou wasted had thy wealth,
And planting battrie to my fort,
were retchlesse of thy health:
Devising how to raze
the bulwark of my breast,
And scale the walls of my good will,
whom thou did fancy best,
I plainly did perceive
(as Lovers soon will see,)
How thou forsookest thy native soil,
and all for love of me:
Quite careless of thy coin,
thy friends and yearly rents,
Not forcing stately builded bowres,
nor gallant garish rentes:
Which when I flatly found,
from fancy to proceed,
(Although thou thoughtst me ouerproud)
I pitied thee in deed.
Yea Jove shall be my judge,
when thou beganste to sewe,
And in Rauenna were inragde,
and first to liking grew:
Thy courtly grace was such,
so comely was thy corse,
And all thy parts so pleased mine eyes,
as I had had remorse,
And bended to thy bow,
save that I dreaded guiles:
My fearful youth hid me beware,
of men's mistrustfull wiles.
Who feign to fry in love,
and melt with fancies flames:
When their devise is only how
by craft^ to compass dames.
I read in ancient books,
how Jason playde the Jew,
And to the Queen that savde his life,
in fine was found untrue:
Not forcing her a fig,
who for his sake forwent
Both aged sire, and tender babes,
and crown by due descent.
Again I calde to mind
how false Aeneas fled,
And left the courteous Carthage dame
fast sleeping in her bed:
Whose bounty erst had bound
by det and due desert,
When weatherbeaten he arrvide,
this traiterous Troyans heart.
Then Theseus came to thought,
and pranking Paris eake:
Who like unfaithful fickle men,
their sworn vows did break.
Fair Oenons woeful writ
can witness of the tone:
The Other from Ariadna fled
and left her post alone.
With sundry suitors mo,
who being bound to love,
Saunce quarrel good, or matter why,
their likings did remove:
Renouncing to their shames,
those Ladies, who did rewe
Their base estates, and did relieve
the men they never knew.
These parts procurde my pawse,
And wild me to beware,
Least I by giving rash consent
to love, were trapt in snare.
My love was like to thine,
I fryde with egall fire:
But nature helps us to conceal
the sparks of our desire.
Kind aids us to convey
our fittes in finer wise:
For honors sake, than men, who show
their fancies by their eyes,
Which if we Ladies did,
Defame would ring her bell,
And blaze out arms in colors base
although we meant but well.
You men like Merchants are
that set their wares to show,
Whereby to lure the lookers eyes
that by your wyndowes go,
And sundry times in stead
of right and costly clothes,
You utter trash, and trifling stuff,
which every chapman lothes.
But we like Goldsmithes deal,
that forge their plate within:
Whose hammers plie the Anuil aye,
and yet no working seen.
No smoke nor smoother flies,
for any to behold,
Until the rude imperfect mass
be brouhht to burnisht gold.
We work, but all within,
our hammers are not heard:
We hotly love, but keep it close,
for fear our match be marde,
For who esteems the maid,
or holds the virgin pure:
That stands a stale for every guest,
and stoupes to every lure?
Yea, be she maid or wife,
if once her looks be light,
And that in sundry suitors tales
she place her deep delight:
Down is her cre dite cut
with hatchet of mishap,
Her hooour hewde in pieces straight,
by mean of open lap.
O Gods, what grief were this
unto a noble mind?
How would it vex an honest Nymph,
whose credit clearly shynde?
For offer of goood will,
with meaning not amiss:
To beat the badge of Helen, or
of Creside, for a kiss?
Then ought not we (I pray)
that noble maidens are,
So guide our tender steps of state,
as virtue may prefarre,
And place us in the rank,
that is for Ladies dew?
Should we lend light belief to love?
or every futer rewe?
So might we reap the crop
of care, and foul defame:
Where erst we never meant to sow
the sinful seeds of shaine.
I write not this of all
that loving suitors be,
Or in such sort, as though I thought
the like deceit in thee,
As erst in Jason was,
or in the wandering Prince,
And sundry other Lordings mo,
that have been lovers since.
One Swallow is no sign
that Summer time is come,
No more must all Cupidos knights
be cast because of some,
Birds are not plumde alike,
yet all birds in kind:
So men are men: but yet in some
more fickle parts we find.
I count thee no such one
as lightly will remove:
Thy lingering suit, my long delays
confirm thy faith in love.
Whom since I find so firm
and steadfast in desire,
As neither lowering looks, nor lack
can make thee once retire,
Or folter in thy faith,
which thou have vowde to me:
Proceed in love, but have thee home,
that I thy face may see.
Pluck up thy manly mind,
and sprites forspent with woe:
Dry up the deaw that from thine eyes
and drearie cheeks do flow:
Do barbe that boisterous beard:
that ouergrowes thy face:
Either cut, or kembe thy feltred locks
to mende thy manly grace.
Put on thy golden gyte,
and former fresh array:
Bestride thine ancient stately steed
and quickly come away.
Back to Rauenna ride,
even there to purchase joy,
Where thou ere this (the more my blame)
have liude in great anoy.
Forgo thy solemn walks,
bandon Classie wood:
Leave off to lead thy life in lawndes,
embrace thy townish good.
Thou art no vowed Monk
in Cloister close to dwell:
No Aucker thou enioynde with Beads,
to hyde in simple Cell.
But thou a comely knight,
in field a Martial man:
And eke in time of peace, a wight
that rule Rauenna can.
Whefore as I enforst
thy bale and causeless care:
And was the only the that made
thee mourn, and languish their:
So (good Nastagio) now
let me revoke thee thence:
That hand that did the harm ere this
now use in thy defense.
I shot, I must confess,
the dart that gave the dynt,
For which, lo here the blesseful balm,
thy deadly griefs to stint.
Surceasse thy woeful plaintes,
discharge thy dark despair:
The golden beams of my remorse,
shall clear thy cloudy air.
When angry faowning foes
encounter in the fildes,
With murdering minds, the stronger slaies.
when once the weaker yeeldes.
Up goes the wrathful sword
into his sheath again:
The yielding of the tone, does cause
that never a man is slain
If weakest thus may win
by stouping to the strong,
In combat fell for life and death:
thou do me double wrong,
That hold in virgins hand,
thy bale and eke thy bliss,
And am thy Queen, and only joy,
and frankly offer this:
If thou my kindness scorn,
and rather makste the choice
To spill thy gallaunt prime in plants,
than with thy friends rejoice.
Thou see how I do sue,
to whom thou for suedst grace.
Since I do pity thy distress,
to hight thy doleful case:
Dispatch without delay,
tread torments under foot,
That mirth within thy mourning mind
may take the deeper root.
The banquet lately made,
where I beheld my cheer,
And marckte thy mood from point to point,
in whom did plain appear
A kind and constant heart,
not bolstred up with gyle:
Enflamde my liver so with love,
as I was forced to smyle.
And had by outward shows,
bewraied thee my good will,
Save that my mother present was
who marked my countenance still.
I saw, when we approcht,
the tent amid the wood:
How all thy guests reioyst thee, but
it was I that did thee good,
My presence bred delight,
with thy blooming breast:
And to dissemble liking thou,
did welcome all the rest.
I marked at table how.
thou shlie cast thine eye,
On me askance, and caruedst too
my mother by and by:
As who would say, behold
the meat I meant to thee,
I am enforst to give it here
least they my fancy see.
And when I raught the wine,
and drank my thyrst to quell,
In self same peer how thou would pledge
I yet remember well.
I saw, when after meat
we parted home again,
How all thy former frolic fit,
was quickly changde to pain,
My coming brought thee bliss,
my parture made thee pine.
My beatie for the time enflamde
and heat that heart of thine.
I saw (what will thou more)
my presence was thy life,
And how mine absence set thy wits
at cruel war and strife,
Then since thine eyes are bent
to feed upon my face,
And that the want of my good will
has made thee run this race:
I rue thee now at last,
I pity thy distress,
I yield that thou the castle of
thy comfort now possess.
I am no Lions whelpe,
I sucked no Tigers teat,
In spoil of such as sewde for love,
delight I never set.
I never pleasure took,
in forcing foe to death.
Much less my tender heart will brook
to stop Nastagios breath.
Time gives assurance good
of thine unfeigned trust:
Thou bearst no treason in thy breast,
thou have no lechers lust.
Whom sithence I have tried
in love so perfect true:
To quit thy faith, I am thy friend,
reserving honor due.
If marriage love thou mean,
then frank consent I give,
To yield thee up Dianas bow,
and love thee whilst I live.
In Iunos joyful yoke,
to join and draw with thee:
It likes me well, there rests no more
but that my friends agree.
Small suit shall serve the turn,
for if they do not yield:
Then I my self enright thee with
the conquest of the field,
My self do keep the key,
where lies the jewel, which
Is thy delight, and only joy
whom thou desirst so much.
But no mistrust I have,
thy motions are so good:
Thy flock, and state, so noble, as
thou shall not be withstood.
Wherefore (O makelesse men)
set all delays aside,
Thy Lady loves, and is content
to be thy bounden bride,
Retire, thou retthlesse wight,
whose lingering wounds twain:
Two noble hearts shall think them blessed,
when thou return again,
These words I wrote in bed,
where often I wished for thee:
Mine honor bids me pawse at that,
as yet it must not be.
Farewell, with Nestors years,
God send thee happy days:
Remember, thou that loving minds
can broke no long delays.
Alas, for thee I die
ten thousand times a day:
My fits be fierce, my grief is great,
wherefore dispatch away.
I wish thee Daedals wings,
or Perseus praunsing steed,
Or else the Cart that Phaeton ruled,
but better far to speed.
In heart I am thy wife,
if that content thy will,
Once more adeu, thy lingering long,
thy faithful friend will spill,
Thy long beloved in RAVENNA. EVPHYMIA.

Guerra ei mio stato, dira, e di duol piena.

Vegghio, penso, ardo, piango.



EFtsoone replyde the knight, with friendly face,
With gladsome heart, and trembling tongue for joy:
Fair Nymph (quoth he) thy coming to this place
Delights me much, and quits my great annoy.
The thing, whereto thou say I shall aspire,
Is that which long Nastagio did desire,
Thy message likes my mind exceeding well,
And since thy Lady deals so friendly now
With me her thrall, forget not thou to tell,
That by the Gods I make a solemn vow,
Not to abuse her honor or defile
Her noble name by any wanton wile.
My purpose is, in good and godly sort,
To take her to my lawful wedded wife,
And so unto the Lady make report,
I swear my self her husband during life:
Do give mg Love this Amathiste from me,
As pledge that I ere long with her will be:
And for thy pains, lo here a slender sum,
But better this, than no reward at all:
I mean to friend thee more in time to come,
Farewell (fair sweet) accept my guerdon small:
The maid had money, thanks, and leave to part,
Whose answer made her Lady light of heart.
And thereupon withouten longer stay,
Unto her friends she brake her whole intent,
As touching marriage, and withal did pray
With willing minds that they would give consent,
Unfolding her effection to the man,
And how in heart that only course she ran.
The aged parents of this willing wight,
Perceiving how their daughters mind was set,
And knowing eke the fancy of the knight,
Triumphed for joy, and thought it sin to set
Such honest love, or hinder marriage band,
The short is this, they wedded out of hand,
A marriage day no sooner gone and paste,
There were not in Rauenna man wife,
If you had fitted all from first to last,
In greater glee that wasted all their life:
She shewde he^ self not half so hard before,
But being matched, she loud him ten times more.
And not alone this one good turn befell
Nastagio, through this sudden forced fear,
But diverse more that there about did dwell,
Bepitied those that loving hearts did bear:
And such as for good will had rigor showen,
No more for foes, but lovers would be known.
The Lenuoy.
THrice happy those I deem above the rest,
That ground good will, and six affection so,
As in the end it fall out for the best,
Not broken off by fortune, nor by foe:
Seeds w^^ely sown will prosper well and grow.
But where advise and wholesome counsel wants,
Trees may not prove, they perish in the plants
Who makes his choice to love in tender age.
And scorns the skill of such as tune has taught,
And headlong runs at riotin his rage,
Is like the bird in net by fowler caught,
Bringing himself and all his wealth to naught:
It cannot be but such as counsel scorn,
Must needs at length be utterly forlorn.
The sick that leathes to listen to his cure,
And seeks no mean his malady to cease,
To die the death, for lack of help is sure.
The careless man is full of wretchedness:
^o raging love brings balefull end, unless
The patient plie, and lend a bending ear,
Unto his friend, that wills to forbear.
Which seldom when in frantike youth is found,
In case of love where pleasure strikes the stroke,
They hate the plaster that should heal the vvound,
And like the beast run willing to the yoke,
That with his straightness sundry times does choke.
The least a^oy that frail defires bestow,
Is wrack of wealth, if quite the carcass go:
Yea diverse times goods, life, and al decays,
Through foolish lust, and wanton witless will:
So many be the dristes and double ways:
That crafty dames do put in prattise still,
As some they sotte, and other some they kill.
They little force, how raging lovers rewe,
So they themselves in peace the pageant vewe:
Not much unlike the wily witted boy
That tiles his trappe to take the subtle fox,
Who clappes his hands, and makes the greatest joy,
When he pecceiues fale Raynard in the stocks,
And for his labor gives ten thousand mockes:
So crafty Dames contented are to lute
Men on to love, but scorn them being sure.
Their pranking beauties prick them on to pride,
Their feitured limbs bedeckt with natures die:
Makes them follow rigor for their guide,
And ouerlookes their friends with haughty eye,
Who for their loves are even at point to die:
Without regard of spoil, or of expense,
Deeming them selves quite clear of all offense.
As in this process plain is set to view,
Wherein a heavy mistress playde her part,
Right well content to let Nastagio rewe,
And for good will to reap disdain and smarte,
That loud her from the bottom of his heart:
Who though were ritche, and noble by descent,
Yet might not make her marble mind relent,
By lingering love she made his money mealte,
As wax does wear against the slaming fire:
Through her disdaiue outragiously he dealt,
Vasting his wealth to compass fond desire,
A great deal more than reason did require:
She was the cause, for had not fancy been:
He would more near unto his profit seen.
But vvomens beauties bleare the clearest eyes,
Their feeble force makes vveake the vvisest vvittes,
Their limber chains the sturdie Champion ties,
The grauest sage is thrall to loving fitts,
The rockiest breast with bolt Cupido hittes:
And who so thinks to escape most clear away,
Is soonest caught, and makes the longest stay.
I could account Cupido for a God,
When I respect his puissance and his might,
If in his shaftes he were not found so odd,
But would in case of liking deal aright,
And force fair daines their lovers to requite.
But commonly vvhentmen in tansie burn.
Then women's hearts are most unapt to turn.
When man does rage, his Lady lies at rest,
When he laments, she lives at quiet ease,
She coldely loves, when he does fancy best,
And when she powtes, yet he must seek to please,
And make fair wether in the roughest seas:
Yea, and perhaps, at last when all is done,
As far to seek as when he first begone,
As proves this noble man who having spente
No slender sums in service of his love,
And barde himself, by racking of his rent:
Yet could by no desert good lyking move,
In ruthlesse breast no pitties plants might prove,
Till fear of harms her late repentance wrought,
She could to clothe by no devise be brought:
But when in fine this bloody broile she saw,
And plainly vewde, amid the open grove
The Ladies plagues: then was she pincht with awe
Of like success then little Cupide strove
Within her bulk, because that she had woue
The web that wrought Nastagio all his woe:
And thereupon she let to be his foe.
Then fell she flat to fancy out of ^ande,
Than sent she messege to bewray her mind,
Then did she let Nastagio understand,
How that she meant no more to be unkind,
But willing was her self in match to bind:
Whereby we see that sundry things are done,
By force of fear, which wit had never vvonne.
But sure good will of fear that takes his ground,
But badly proves, a fancy forced in heart
Full lightly fades, and seldom when is sound,
With every heat it is ready to depart,
It does resemble colors made by art.
The frank consent in love it is ever best,
Whom mere affection breeds in yielding breast.
Fair Ladies, bear with what I utter here,
Concerning women, and their deep disgrace,
I gyrde the coye, I leave the courteous clear.
And this I say: Who favvnes upon the face
Of any dame, and reapes a scornful grace:
Were she as brave as Paris Lady was,
For loving so he proves himself an Ass.
Who serves a sot, and bovves at every beck,
Without the guerdon that to love is dew,
And plays his game at chesse to gain a check,
Deserves the mate that does the check enfevve,
Because he scorns his mischief to eschevve:
And she that has a perfect friend to trust,
Deserves a plague, if she be found vn^ust.
You stately Dames, that peacocklyke do pace,
Through pride abusing such as are your thralls,
Enforcing them for lack of better grace,
Unto their bane, which sundry times befalles,
Not finding lalue to cure their griefull galls:
Euphymias plagues imprinte in he defull mind,
And look for like, if you be found unkind.
Ama chitama.
Minor paena Tantall ne linferno
Pate, che chi di donna sta al gouerno.
The Argument to the second History.
NIcocrates a cruel tyrant flewe
Sir Fadimus, who had unto his wife
One Aretafila, of gallans hew,
And after, (having reft the husbands life)
Did wedde this dame who though were made a queen
Might not forget the murder she had seen.
No love devise, no jewels fet from far,
Could so reclaim this noble Ladies mind,
But that she would adventure him to mar,
Who slew her knight, whereat she so repinde:
By poisoned drink she meant to do the deed,
But that was found, it might not well succeed.
The tyrants mother Caluia, tygreleeke,
Procurde her plagues, and torments diversely,
For that the Queen to slay her son did socke,
But vvisely she did slack this cruelty:
And made him think her sirupe was to prove,
Where she might forte in him a greater love.
Which shift allowed, she more in credit grevv,
The king forgave, but she could not forget,
But once again deuisde a drifte anovve,
Which as she thought, might lightly have no let
The king a brother had, a vvifull vvight,
Bente all to love, and he Leander hight.
This Lady bare by Fedimus of yore,
A daughter fair, whom she by practice sought,
To couple with Leander evermore,
Which macht at length with much ado was wroght
Then all the mothers skill, and daughters drifte,
Was by this youth, the king from crown to lift.
By day the Queen the daughter did persuade,
The wife by night did play her part so well,
As in a while these two Leander made
To undertake to rid this tyrant fell:
No dew regard of blood, no care of kind,
Could stay the fact, this Princoxe was so blind.
The king was slain by cruel brothers hand,
The realm releast of such bloody foe,
Leander then did govern all the land,
The hope was great that matters well should gee:
But when this youth had once atchiude the state,
He scornde the Queen, and al her friends forgate.
Puffed up with princely pride, he wore the crown,
And lawless liude, so near his brothers trade,
As needful was to seek to put him down:
And thereupon the Queen this practice made,
She hirde for coin, a noble man at arms,
To slay her son, to salve her countries harms.
This warlike Captain came from Libie land,
Who took by force this tyrant coward king,
And gave him up into his mothers hand:
A Noble dame that compast twice to bring
Her realm to rest, and rigor to subdewe.
Lo here the sum, the process does ensewe.
Within Cyrene erst
there dwelling was a Dame
Namde Aretafila, of birthe
and noble blood she came,
Elator was her Sire,
a man of great renown:
Sir Faedimus her husband hight,
the chief in all the town
For noble mind and wealth:
this Lady was so well
With beauty dighte, as she the rest
not only did excel
For feature of her face,
that was full fair to look,
But eke for grave Mineruas gifts,
and cunning in her book:
Her sacred gifts were great,
her wisdom was as rare,
As was her face, for few with her
in learning might compare.
What time this Lady liude,
a tyrant fierce and fell,
Nicocrates, possessed the land
where did this matron dwell.
Who many of the men
that in the City were,
Did do to foul and shameful death,
he kept them all in sear.
(...) In color of the dead,
who cause he did not trust
The bearers with his naked sword
the bodies used to thrust
Through coffin where they lay,
to make the matter sure:
This great outrage of his, the Queine
no longer could endure,
But very much mislikte
these Tyrants tricks, and had
Compassion of her native soil,
and would been very glad
With hazard of her life
to rid this monster quight,
For hatred which she hare to him
that murthred so the knight
Whom she full dearly loud:
and albeit the king
Made very great account of her,
yet did she mind the thing
Which she concerude before
and purposde in her breast,
And till she had atchieude the same,
could never live at rest.
And though the Prince his power
this daily greater grew,
Had bred the Subjects to despair
their freedom to reuewe,
Or ever safe to live
within their native land,
Where such a cruel king did hold
the scepter in his hand:
Yet did this noble dame
conceive a greater trust,
To find a time to work her feate,
which either do she must
And so at freedom set.
her country men again,
And venge her loving husbands death,
or let them all be slain,
As he, good knight, had been.
To prick her on the more,
She called to mind the practice of
a Theban dame before,
That wise Faeraea hight:
for doing of the which,
The valiant women wan renown,
and was commended much.
Whom she had great desire
to follow in this deed:
But when she saw for lack of aid
and helping hands at ueed,
(Which the the Theban had,)
she could not do the leeke:
She meant to do it with a thing
that was not far to seek.
Devising by a driuke,
to rid the Tyrants life,
Who sieve her busband by deceit
and forced her to his wife.
A poison she preparde,
whereby as I shall tell,
In present peril of her life
this ventrous Lady fell.
For still her purpose failde,
and being in the end
Discovered, and the matter found,
which she did then pretend,
Dissembling could not serve
to salve the sore again.
For what good heart she bare the king
did then appear too plain.
The Tyrants mother eke,
that Madame Caluia hight.
Not loving Aretafila,
(a dame of great despite)
Full fit to breed a babe
of such a blooddie mind,
(For children commonly are like
unto the mothers kind)
Persuaded, that to death
this Lady should be done,
As one that did pretend the spoil,
and slaughter of her son.
But what the great good will
to her the Prince did bear,
And answer bold that she had made
with usage void of fear,
Before the mother Queen,
who there in open place,
Accusde her of her murder meant,
there standing face to face,
Did quit her from the death.
But when the proof was such,
And evidence so plain appearde,
so that she might not much
Excuse her of the fact,
but that the poisoned cup,
Was made by her, and meant unto
the king to drink it up:
There Aretafila,
before the Judges face,
In presence of the Prince her spouse,
did thus declare the case.
My Sovereign Lord and Love,
I cannot do no less,
But, that this cup I did procure,
before thee now confess.
My self the syrrope made,
and meant to give it thee:
But this I will protest again,
not knowing it to be,
A venim rank and vile,
but verily did think
By cunning to devise this cup,
and make a crafty drink
To cause a man to love:
for know you this, that I
Am spited at, of sundry that
my marriage do envy.
It greeues a number, that
you bear me such good will,
It is a gall to some to see
that I should have my fill
Of treasure and attire
and be a Prince his wife,
And they themselves to live unknown,
and lead a private life.
I know they cannot well
my haphy state endure,
But that they will at length devise
your friendship to allure,
And cause you cast me off:
which was the cause that I
Did brewe this drink to keep good will.
I thought it good to try
By art to stay a friend,
whom I by fortune wonnes
And if so be I did offend,
you cannot deem it done
For malice, but good will,
for hatred, but for zeal:
Why should I then condemned be
that never meant to deal
But as a loving wife:
And if your pleasure be
I shall be punished for my fault,
yet doeaccount of me
Not as a witch, that would
bereave you of your life,
But one that by enchauntment thought
to make your Love your wife,
And match her in good will
that does extreemely love:
And who, to be belovde alike,
did mean this slight to prove.
When thus the Matron had,
with manly mouth and grace
Ypleaded for her self, the Prince
to whom pertaind the case,
Well liking this excuse,
would not in any wise
That she, who was his wife, should die:
but this he did devise,
That there she should be rackt
till time she would confess
The truth, and what she meant thereby
in open place express.
When torment ready was,
and rack there set in place,
Then cankred Caluia, plaide her part,
and laid her on a pace,
Until she weary woxe:
she longed for her blood,
Which made her earnest in the case,
and plague the Queen a good.
But Aretafila,
as one that forced naught
Of all the pains she had indurde,
discovered not her thought:
She nothing would confess,
but kept it in her mind,
And hereupon deliuerde was.
Nicocrates could find,
No due desert of death.
Then grew within his breast
A great remorse for rigor shown
to her he loved best,
Whom he without offense
had put to cruel pain.
Wherefore within a space the king
began to love again:
And fancy her as fast,
devising sundry shifts,
To win her old good will, he gave
her many goodly gifts.
She could not want the thing
the tyrant had in store,
Who then but Aretafila,
whom he had rackt before?
And she that was full wise,
by countnance and by the are,
Did make as though she did embrace
and held the tyrant dear:
But still in store she kept
within her wrathful mind,
Remembrance of revenge, till she
fit time and place might find.
And in her head she cut
the pattern of his pain,
How, if occasion servde she might
avenge her husband slain.
By Fedimus she bare
whilste he yet living was,
A daughter that for honest life
and beauty brave did pass.
And so befell it, that
the king a brother had,
Leander namde, a wilful youth,
and eke a wanton lad,
Much given to the love
of light alluring dames,
To whom, as to a biting fish,
a bayte this maiden frames.
To take him by the ^^ppe,
by sorcerie she wrought,
And cups that cause a man to love:
whereby this youth she brought
Into her subtle net:
thus was Leander caught
By love devises, that the Queen
unto her daughter taught.
This damsel having woonne
Leander to her lure,
So trained him on, as she at last
the Princess did procure
The tyrant to request,
to yield him his desire,
As touching marriage of the Maid,
that set his mind on fire:
Who when Leanders love
and purpose understood,
To Aretafila to break
the same he thought it good.
She willing was thereto,
as one that wrought the wile:
Nicocrates perceiving that,
denying it a while,
Yet granted at the length:
not willing to be seen
An enemy unto the maid,
the daughter of the Queen,
When all good wills were got,
the marriage day drew near,
Until Leander wedded was,
he thought it twenty year.
To make the matter thord,
I leave for you to scan,
Both of the maidens rich attire,
and jewels of the man.
I leave the music out,
I let the banquet go:
I speak not of the noble men
that were at wedding tho.
I write not of the wine,
nor of the dainty cates,
Assure your selves there wa^ted naught
that fitted royal states.
When wedding day was done,
the wife to chamber went,
And after her Leander came:
where they in pleasure spent
The night, as custom is,
and married folks do use:
And self same pleasure night by night
from that day forth ensues.
The lately wedded wise
behaude her self so well,
That still Leander ten times more
to doting fancy fell.
Which when she vnderst^de,
a wench of wily wit,
To set her purpose then abroch,
she thought it passing fit,
A fyled tale she framde,
and thus begun to speak:
Mine own (quoth she) the great good well
I bear you, makes me break
My mind and meaning now:
The carke and care I have,
Is causer that I will you from
your brothers sword to save
Your life, whilste yet you may:
you see his monstrous miude,
And how his hateful tyrants heart
is all to blood inclinde.
You know his cruel deeds,
I shall not need recite
The sundry men that he has slain
upon a mere despite:
You view the gorie ground,
where yet the bodies lie,
You see how tyrant like he deals,
you see with daily eye,
Such undeserved deaths
as woe it is to tell:
In my conceit, if you should seek,
his spoil, you did but well.
It were a worthy deed,
and well deserving praise,
To murder him, and reaue his realm,
that so his subjects slayes.
To rid your native soil
of such a monster, may
Not only gain immortal fame
that never shall decay:
But win you such good will,
in country and in town,
As by the means thereof, you may
attain the royal crown,
Which now your brother wears
against the peoples will,
Who would (no doubt) elect you prince,
if you the tyrant kill.
To quit so good a turn,
and noble deed withal.
But if you let him reign a while,
I fear, at last you shall
Repent your long delay:
your state is never sure,
As long as he, the mouster lines,
he will your bane procure.
What thraldom like to yours?
how wretched is your life?
Have you forgotten how you sude
to him, to take a wife?
Fie, shame, Leander, fie,
I greatly disalow,
That you who are his brother, should
unto your brother bow.
Put case he owe the crown,
is that a cause that you
May not go marry where you list,
but must be forced to sue
So like a boy, for lea^^
to choose your self a make?
Oh that I were a man, I would
enforce the beast to quake.
Leander, if you love
or make account of me,
Bereave the monster of his life:
my mother longs to see
The slaughter of her so,
that sieve my father erst.
With these her words Leander felt
his heart so thoroughly pearst,
As up from bed he flew,
with mind to murder bent:
To suck his brothers blood, ere long
this wilful merchant meant.
Leander had a friend
whom he did love as life,
Callde Danicles, to whom he rode
and told him what his wife
Had willde him take in hand,
wherein his aid he must
In whom especially he did
repose assured trust.
Leander with his friend,
when time and place did serve,
Nicocrates the tyrant slew,
as he did well deserve.
And having done the deed,
achieude the kingly Crown,
He struck the stroke, and ruler was,
and gouernde all the town.
Thus he in office plaste,
puffed up with princely might,
Not forcing Aretafila,
his mother law awhit,
Nor any of her blood,
once having got the reign,
Did all the world to understand
by that his high disdain,
That he his brother slew
for rancour and despite:
Not for desire his Country soil
from tyrants hands to quight.
So loath some all his laws,
so strange his statutes were,
Such folly in his roysting rule,
as made the people fear.
Their former foe to have
been raysde to life again,
Who was not many days before
by this Leander slain.
When Aretafila
saw how the game did go,
And that Leander in his sway
did use the matter so,
And proudly ruled the realm,
esteeming her so light,
Who hoped by his brothers death
the country had been quight
Releast of tyrants rage:
when she perceiude (I say)
How haughtily his heart was bent,
she meant her part to play:
In ridding of the realm
of such a cruel king,
That kept his subjects so in awe,
and under yoke did wring:
A fresh report was blown
of one Anabus, bred
In Libie land, a Martial man
that all his life had led
In face of foraine foes:
with him this wily dame
Did practice, and such order took,
as he with army came
Leander to subdue:
who being nigh at hand,
With mighty troop of warlike wights,
to ouercom the laud:
The Queen, his mother law,
as one that were dismaide,
To work her wile, Leander ^al^,
and thus to him she said:
Lo here (good son) you see
how nie your mighty foe,
Is come to bid you battle, and
your Captains are (you know)
Not to be matched with his:
behold what men they are:
Well skild in feats that touch the field,
and traind in trade of war.
Your soldiers are but sheep,
for battle far unfit:
Besides their policies are great,
your Captains have no wit
To deal in such a case
that touches Princes state:
Again, there commes no honor by
such brawles, and broyling hate:
Consider with your self,
you scarssy have as yet
Good footing gotten in your reign,
unstable (son) you sit.
And like to take a fall:
whereof if woman's brain
May give good counsel to the wise,
I would (I tell you plain,)
Your foe and you were friends:
I would allow it well,
If you with Captain Anabus
to truce and concord fell.
I do presume on this,
and dare to undertake,
That you shall safely come to talk,
by means that I will make
With him that is your foe:
the words his mother spoke,
Leander liked very well
and in good part did take.
Destrous of a parle.
but ere the pointed day
Of talk betwixt the Captains came,
she sent a Poast away,
A messenger of trust,
Anabus to entreat,
That when Leander Iss^de out,
then he should work his feate,
And either slay him there,
by force in open field,
Or unto her, the cruel king
in chains a captive peeld:
In recompense whereof
She made a large behest,
Of gold that she would franklike give:
whereto this greedy gest,
The Lybian man of war,
full gladly lent his care.
Leander (as the nature is
of Tyrants) stood in fear,
Deferring day of parle,
unwilling forth to go,
But Lady Aretafila
still lay upon him so,
As very shame at last
did further this intent:
And she, to egg him on the more,
made promise if he went.
To set her foot by his,
and look the foe in face:
Which moude Leander very much,
and mended well the case.
So out at length they pass,
disarmd he and his,
As one that meant to treat of truce,
for so the custom is.
Anabus seeing this,
to counter him began,
And with his power approached near:
Leander fearful man
Would gladly made a st^^p,
and gazde about the place:
To view his guard that should assist
and help in needful case.
But how much more he seemde
to linger on the way:
So much the more his mother law,
by words, that she did say
As touching his reproach,
of fearful cowards heart,
Did prick Leander, onward still,
not letting him to part.
At Length the Lady, when
of force he would have staid,
Upon the wretched dastard wight
his feeble fingers laid:
And by the aid of men
whom there she had in place,
She brought him baund both hand and foot,
before Anabus fare.
And captive gave him up,
to live in loathsome hold,
Until the Quee^^, as promise was,
he paid him all his gold.
Then he eftsoone retyres
unto the town again,
Declaring what success she had
and what a spiteful pain
She took or ear she could
that blooddie beastly king
Depose and rid him from the realm,
and so to bondage bring.
The people passing glad
that he was so displaste,
Did make a common purse, to pay
the Lybian Duke in haste:
Who having told the crowns,
did send Leander back,
Unto the Queen: and she enclosde
the monster in a sack,
And causd him to be cast,
from off a mountain hie,
Into the Sea, to drown the beast
that well deserude to die.
Then Calnya, she was caught,
and to a pillar tied,
And there the cruel crooked queen,
with flaming fagots fried,
Till all her aged bones,
to ashes were consumde,
That often in youth with Ciuet sweet
and Amber were perfumde.
When all this broile was done,
the townsmen in a rank,
Kneeld down to Aretafila,
and highly did her thank,
For freedom got again,
with peril of her life.
I need not here express the joys
of maiden, man, and wise.
For all reioyst alike,
^ot one in all the town,
Nor country, but was glad at heart
that they had won the crown
Into their hands again,
and shapte the Tyrants scourge,
Then began they all with one consent
the aged dame to urge,
With help of chosen men,
to govern all the land:
For vantage of the public weal,
she took the charge in hand.
Because we lightly see
when Peers and Princes fail,
Then runs the commonwealth to wreck,
as ship without a sail.
But when she saw the realm
at good and quiet stay:
And understood that commons did
with willing minds obey
Unto their lawful heads,
the Senate she bethought,
To take the government a fresh:
her self unfit she thought
To deal in case of state,
then took they all the charge,
And did the Lady from the crown,
and troubles quite discharge.
Thus having rid the realm
of two such blooddie foes,
Into a Nunnrie, there to end
her life this Lady goes.
Where she devoutly dwelt,
and to her prayers fell:
And as she liude in virtue erst,
so did she very well.
The Lenuoy.
Who sits aloft in sacred Princes seat,
And wieldes his realm by love and not by dread
Whose puisant hand by ^^idnesse does entreat
The silly rowte that under him is led:
Shall safely reign, and hold his scepter sure,
A courteous king does lightly long endure.
But who so reigns in threatening tyrants throne,
Bathing in blood his haughty hungry chaps,
And rules by force, is surely overthrown.
The Gods assign such Soueraines sorry haps.
It may not lost, that so exceeds reason,
The truest hearts, by force are brought to treason.
A pleasant port does rule a raging horse,
When harder brakes do break the mouth too much,
And makes the colt to s^eare with all his force:
Rough handed Surgeons make the patient grutch.
The Pilote that by skyll the sh^p does guide,
And not by might, makes vessels brocke the tide.
A lawless pecre by law deserves to die,
True justice ^ayes the blooddie home their hyre,
And blood mispilt for vengeance aye does cry,
^^xtalionis does the like require:
As in this tale that h^ere my Muse has told,
Of brothers two, each man may well behold.
Could Dyonisius deal with greater force?
Or searefull Phala^^s with more despite?
Than did Nycocrates without remorse
That s^ew his ^^ily subjects lawless ^ight?
Did not ^^ander deal in monstrous wise,
Whom brothers blood might not aloue suffyce?
Prease hither Peers, whose heads with crowns are clad
Who hold the kingly scepters in your hands:
Behold the end that blooddie tyrants had,
A ^^rrour make of these to rule your lands:
With all, see here a Ladies manly mind,
Whom God to wreake this bloodshed had assignde.
Mark how the first was blinded all with blood,
The husband slain, and sundry moc be^^de,
To wed the wife this monster thought i^ good,
Note how the Gods herein their scourge did hide,
For who but he would trust a wronged wight,
Or place her in his naked bed at night?
Look how I ^ander lewd by wyle was won,
And led by lust to work his brothers woe:
And ^^^^e than that see how this beast did run
A wicked race and woxe his mothers foe.
Note how the heavens made level yet at last,
And plagude by death his blooddy dealings past.
Aut sero,

Aut citius.

The argument to the third History.
GEntile loud one Nicoluccios wise,
Fair Catiline, a matrone grave and wife:
Whom to corrupt since he might not devise,
He parted thence to lead a grauer life.
For she was bent to scorn such masking mates,
As houerd still about her husbands gates.
Within a while this Nicoluccio,
(His Lady great with child) was forced to ride
In haste from home, and leave her there as guide:
Whom sudden grief assaylde by fortune so,
As Physic, friends, and all that saw the chance,
Did yield her dead, she lay in such a trance.
The senseless corse was to the Church co^ueide,
And buried there with many a weeping eye:
The brute was blown abroad both far and nigh.
Report once spread, is hardly to be stayde.
Gentile hearing how the matter went,
His Ladies loss did bitterly lament.
At length when tears had well dischargde his woe,
And sorrow slakte, a friend of his and he,
Took horse, and rode by night, that none might see
Whether they meant, or wherabout to go.
To Church he came, dismounted from his horse,
He entered in, and up he took the corse,
With full intent to dally with the dead,
Which he in life by suite could never win:
He cold, he kissed, he handled cheek and chinne.
He left no limme vnfelte from heel to ehad:
So long he staide, at last the infant steerd
Within her womb, whereby some life appeerde.
By fellows help he bore the body thence,
Home to his aged mother where she dwelt:
Who moude to ruthe, with her so friendly dealt,
As to revive her, sparde for expense,
She could not use her own with greater care,
So choice her cheer, so dainty was her fare.
When time was come for nature to unfold
Her coferd ware: this dame was brought a bed,
And by Gentiles means had happily sped:
And he forthwith a solemn feast did hold,
Where, to the husband, both the wife and boy
S^rrendred were, to his exceeding joy.
BOlogna is a town
of Lumbardie you know,
A city very bravely builte,
and much set out to show:
Where as in ancient days
a famous knight there dwelde,
Who for good gifts and lineage both
all others far excelde:
A man commended much,
Gentile was his name.
This worthy gallant fell in love
by fortune, with a dame
That Catilina hight,
one Nicoluccios wife,
A passing fair, and featurde wenche,
and led an honest life,
And loud her husband so,
as she did little way
The friendship of enamored youths,
nor ought that they could say.
This Gentleman that saw
the Ladies faithful breast,
And how he might by no device
to him her fancy wrest,
Nor enter in her grace,
whom he did love so well,
Nor by good service gain good will,
to deep despair he fell.
And hereupon unto
Modena he retyrde,
And bore an office in the town,
as one there to desyrde.
It fortunde on a time
when Nicoluccio rode
From home, as touching his affairs,
and that his wife abode
A three miles off the town,
where he had buylte a graunge,
To make her merry with her friends,
and eke the air to change:
Then being great with child,
not many weeks to go:
This Lady had a great mishap,
as here my pen shall show.
A grief, I wot not what,
with such a sudden force
And monstrous might, befell the dame,
and conquerde sore her corse
As in the Ladies limbs
no spark of life appeerde,
And more than that, an other thing
there was, that most discheerde
Her kinsfolks then in place:
for such as had good sight
And skill in Physike, deemde her dead,
and gave her over quight.
And thereupon her friends
that wiste how matters went
By her report in time of life,
and how that she had spent
Not full so many months
as give a babee breath,
And make it up a perfect child:
when once they saw her death.
Not making farther search,
in case as there she lay,
Unto a Church, not far from thence,
the carcass did convey,
And gave it there a grave,
as Ladies use to lie.
The body being buried thus,
a friend of his did hye
Him to Gentile straight,
to tell him of the news,
Who though was fardest from her grace,
yet could none other choose
But sorrow at her death.
When greatest grief was past,
And that he had be thought awhile,
thus out he brake at last.
Lo (Lady) lo, (quoth he)
now art thou dead in grave,
Now (Madame Catilina) I,
who during life could have
Not one good friendly look,
nor sweet regarding eye,
Will be so bold to steal a kiss
as you in coffin lie.
Now booteth do defense,
you cannot now resist:
Wherefore (assure thee) Lady now,
thou shall be sweetly kissed.
How dead soever thou art,
now will I take delight.
And ^^uing told his tale, the day
withdrewe, and made it night:
Then taking order how
he might, that none might see,
Dispatche and go unto the place,
his trusty freud and he,
Upon their geldings mount,
and never made a stay
Until they came unto the Church,
where dead the Lady lay:
Where being lighted off
their horses, in they go,
And up they brake the coffyn straight,
and he that loud her so,
Lay by the Ladies side,
and clapte his face to hers,
And lent her many a loving kiss,
and bathde her breast with tears,
Lamenting very sore.
But as we daily see,
The lust of man not long content,
does ever long to be,
Proceeding farther on:
but most of all the rest,
The fond desire of such as are
with raging love possessed.
So he that had resolude
no longer there to stay,
But do his feate, and home again,
thus to himself began say:
Oh, since I now am here
why should I idle stand?
Why do not I this breast of thine
embrace, and feel with hand?
I never after this,
shall touch it so again,
Nor never mind, Gentile thus
proceeding in his vain,
Into her bosom thrust
his hand beneath her pappe,
And staying there a little space,
did feel a thing by hap
Within her womb to wagge,
and beat against her breast:
Whereof at first he woxe amazde,
but after repossest
Of wits and sense again
a further trial he
Did make, and then he found the corse,
not thorough dead to be,
Though little were the life,
yet some he knew for troth,
To rest within the Ladies limbs:
wherefore the gallants both,
From out the coffyn took
this lately buried corse,
And up they leapte in all the poast.
and laid her on the horse
Before the saddle bow,
and home in haste they ride,
Both to recover life again,
and fearing to be spyde.
Thus closely was she brought
within Bologna walls,
Unto Gentiles house, where he
upon his mother calls,
Requesting her to help,
the case required haste.
His mother being grave and wife,
receiude the corse as fast
As she good matron might:
which deed of pity done,
Both who she was, and what had hapt,
demanded of her son:
Who told her all the news,
and how the fortune fell,
Which when the matron vndrstood,
and wist the matter well:
To ruth and mercy moude,
(as is a woman's guise)
She makes her fire, she heats her hathes
and so the carkas plyes,
With chasing up and down,
and rubbing every vain:
As she at last had made the life
and senses come again:
Her wandering wits retyrde,
that erst had been astray,
And being thus reuiude, at length
thus sighing began she say:
Alas, where am I now:
what place is this (quoth she?)
Gentiles cheerful mother said,
a place full fit for thee.
With that she somewhat woxe
aduisde, but wist not where
She was bestead, when that at last
she saw Gentile there:
Amazed in her mind,
requested of the dame
To tell her of the case, and how
unto her house she came.
Gentile thereupon
the whole discourse begone,
And did unfold from point to point
how every thing was done.
Whereof she woeful woxe
and pensive for a space.
But yet at length she gave him thanks
for all his former grace
And courtesies imployde:
and as he ever bore
A true and faithful heart to her
in all her life before,
And as he was a man
in whom good nature were:
So did she crave him that she might
not be abused there:
But safely be conuaide
unto her graunge again,
And to her bushandes house vntouchte
without dishonours stain.
To whom Gentile thus
replide: Well dame (quoth he)
How great soever the love has been
which I have borne to thee,
Before this present day,
I do not purpose now,
Nor after this at any time,
(since God would this allow
Me grace to save thy life,
and raise thee from the pit:
And love which I have always meant
to thee has caused it:)
I purpose not, I say,
to deal in other wise,
Chanif thou were my sister dear,
this promise shall suffice.
But this good turn that I
have done to you this night,
Dath well deserve, that you the same
in some respect requight.
Wherefore I shall desire
that you with willing breast,
Will friendly grant me my demand,
and yield me one request.
Whereto the humble dame
agreed, and was content,
If so she could, and honest were
the suit Gentile meant.
Then spoke the courteous knight,
Well (Madame) this is true,
That both your parents and your friends
of Boline, think that you
Are buried low enough
in coffin closlie laid,
None tarries you at home as now,
they all do deem you dead,
Wherefore my small request
and simple suit shall be,
That with my mother here to stay
ye will vouchsafe, and me,
In secret and unseen,
until such time as I
May to Modena go and come
again, I mean to hie.
The cause that makes me crave
and ask this lingering stay,
Is, that in presence of the best,
and chief that bear the sway
Within the town, I mind
to give you as a gift,
And to present you to your spouse,
this is my only drift.
The Lady knowing that
Gentile was her friend,
And saw that honest was his suit,
did quickly condescend:
Though greatly she desirde,
new brought to life again,
To see and comfort those her friends
that mournde for her amain:
She promised on her faith,
with her to tarry there.
And yer her tale was througly told,
her time was come to bear
The Babe wherewith she went,
she must to travail straight
The Matron ever at an inch
did on this Lady wait:
And used the matter so,
as in a day or twain,
She was deliuerde of a boy,
and overcame her pain.
VVhereat Gentile ioyde,
and eke the dame that had
Such great good hap and passing luck,
did wax exceeding glad.
The knight disposde his things,
and used the matter so,
As she had been his wedded wife:
and thereupo did go
Unto Modena, where
an office he had borne,
And there he stayed until such time
as all his year was worn.
And self same day that he
accounted on, to make
Return unto his mothers house
at Boline, he bespake.
That diverse of the states,
and chiefest men that were
Within the town, should be his guestes.
there was of purpose there,
That Nicoluccio, who
did owe this gentle dame.
As soon as to his mothers house
this lusty gallant came,
The master of the feast
dismounted, in he hyes:
Where, when among his other guestes,
the Lady he espies,
And eke her sucking son,
that hung upon her breast,
He was the meeriest man alive:
Then plaste he every guest
In order as their state
and calling did require,
There wanted not a deintie dish
that Courtiers could desire:
When washing time drew nigh,
and every man at boorde
Had vittled well, and all was whiste,
and no man spoke a word:
The Lady being taught
her lesson long ere that,
And well instructed in the case,
and knowing what was what,
Gentile thus begun
his solemn tale to tell:
My Lords and guestes (quoth he) I like
the order passing well
That men of Persie use:
for when they make a feast,
In honor of their friends, whom they
do love and fancy best,
They bid them to their house,
and set before their eyes
The chiefest jewel which they have,
and good, of greatest price,
What thing soever it be:
his wife, with whom he sleeps,
His dainty daughter, or his wench,
whom he for pleasure keeps.
He nothing hides as then,
or locks from open sight:
Affirming by this deed of his,
that likewise (if he might)
He would unfold the heart
that lies within his breast,
Which custom I in Bologne mind
to practice to my guest.
You honor this my feast
with noble presence here,
And I will play the Persians part:
look what I hold most dear,
And chiefly do esteem,
or favor in my heart,
Or ever shall regard or weigh,
will show you or you part.
But first I shall request
or ere I bring it out,
That you will here decide a case,
and rid me out of doubt
Which I my self will move.
There is a noble man,
Who has a servant in his house
that does the best be can
To please his masters mind,
he does at nothing stick:
This trusty painful servant falls
at length exceeding sick,
The tetchlesse master, not
regarding him at all,
Nor forcing what by such difease
his sernant may befall,
Conuayes him out of door,
in open streat to lie,
To sink or swim, to mende or pair
to live or else to die.
A Stranger commes by hap,
and he to mercy moude,
To see the poor dise asde soul
so slenderly beloude,
In danger of his death,
to lie amids the streat:
A place for such as are in pain.
too cold and far unmeet:
Does be are him to his home,
and takes such tender care
Of him, and plies him so with fire
and comfortable fare,
As both recouers limbs
and gettes his former strength,
And settes this feeble scruant up
upon his legs at length:
Now gladly would I learn
which of these both does best
Deserve to have this servant, who
was lately so distressed?
Where he that ought him first
and gave him off in grief,
Or he that pitied him in pain
and help him to relief?
And if the master, who
so cruelly did deal
In time of sickness, will the man
that did his servant he ale,
To yield him up again,
where he by law and right
May well withold the servant, whom
he help in wretched plight?
The gentlemen among
themselves debated hard,
But drew in one self string at length
the matter was refarde
To Nicoluccio, who
(because he could full well
Discern of matters, and his tale
in skillful order tell)
Should give the verdit up.
He highly did commend
The use of Persia, with the rest
concluding in the end,
Which was, that he whom first
this silly soul did serve,
Of right could lay no lawful claim:
full ill he did deserve
A masters name, that when
his servant was at worst,
Would turn him off, and let him lie:
but he, that when the furst
Had played this cruel part,
did courteously entreat
The sick and outcast, ayding him
with Physic and with meat,
He might by law and right,
no prejudice at all
Done to the first, enjoy the man,
and him his servant call.
Then all the other guestes
that at the banquet were,
Affirmde the same that Nicoluccio
had pronounced there:
The knight who moude the case,
as one that was content
With such an answer, and the more,
for that with him it went,
Concluded, that he thought
as all the other said:
And now (quoth he) I think that I
sufficiently have stayde.
Now time it is that I
perform my promise made,
In that I meant to honor you,
as is the Persians trade.
With that he calls to him
a couple of his friends,
Familiar, and of greatest trust,
whom he in message sendes
Unto the Lady, that
was clad in brave array,
Within a chamber, willing her
that she would come her way,
To cheer his Royal guestes,
with presence of her self.
The Lady taking in her arms
that little puling else,
That was so lately borne,
came in, and the other too
Attending on her, and as erst
Gentile willde her do,
She sat her down beside
a guest, a Noble man,
And then the Knight that made the feast
his process thus began.
Lo, Lordings, here behold
the thing whereof I spoke,
This is the jewel, whereof I
such great account do make,
And ever do entend,
of nothing else so much
I force, as this: now judge your selfs,
where it be worthy such
Regard as I bestow:
mark every member well:
With that the states, to honor of
this featurd Lady sell,
And praisde her very much,
affirming to the Knight,
That sin it were not to esseeme
so fair and brave a wight.
The guestes begonn^ to gaze,
and some there were in place,
That would have sworn, that she had been
the very same she was,
Save that they knew that she
was buried long ago.
But most of all the other guestes,
that Nicoluccio,
The husband of the Dame,
this lovely Lady eyde:
And when Gentile did by chanuce
and fortune step aside,
As one that had desire
to question with the Dame,
No longer able to withhold:
demanded whence she came,
Where she a stranger were,
or else in Bologne borne:
The Lady knowing who it was,
should she not been forsworn,
Would to her husband told
and opened all the case:
But to discharge her promise made,
she held her peace, with face
As modest as she might.
Some other asked, where
That little pretty boy was hers
which she at breast did bear?
And other did demand,
where she were ought allyde,
Or were Gentiles daughter dear?
she not a word replide.
With that the feaster came,
your jewel sir (quoth some
That sat at board) is passing fair.
but is too seeming dombe.
What? is she so in deed?
whereto Gentile said:
It yeeldes no slender token of
her virtue that she staid
And held her tongue as now.
Declare (quoth they) to us
What Dame she is, to which request
Gentile answearde thus.
I will with all my heart
declare the truth (quoth he)
If you, until the whole discourse
be told, will promise me,
Not once to move a foot,
but every one to keep
His place: whereto they all agreed,
and began to swe are by deep
And very solemn oaths
to complishe his request.
The table being taken up,
the keeper of the feast
Sat by the Ladies side,
and thus began to tell:
This woman, is the servant true,
that serude her master well,
Of whom I spoke right now,
when I your judgments craude
This is the servant ilbeloude,
that when she had behaude
Her self in each respect
as fitted such a one,
Was shaken off, and turned to grass,
in streets to make her moan:
Whom I, to pity moude,
did succor as I might,
And by my care and handie help,
from present death did quight:
And mighty God, that saw
the great good heart I bare,
Restord her from that loathsome corse
unto this beauty rare.
But to the end you may
more plainly understand
How these adventures me befell:
I purpose out of hand
In short discourse to show
and open all the case.
Then began he to unfold his love,
and how he sude for grace
Unto this worthy dame,
whose beauty pearst his breast:
And passed so, from point to point,
vnripping all the rest,
Distinctly from the first:
which made the hearers muse,
To listen to this long discourse
of strange and wondrous news.
And having told the whole
as I before have pende,
Both how he loud, and how she died,
thus closde he up the end.
Wherefore (my Lords) quoth he,
unless you have of late
Ychangd your thoughts and minds anew
since you at table sat:
And chiesly you, (and points
to Nicolnccio) she
Whom here you view, of right is mine,
and only due too me.
No lawful tittle may,
or rightful claim belayde
To chelenge her from me again,
was no man there that said
A word, but all were still
to hear those matters paste,
And for desire to learn the rest,
and what he meant at last.
Good Nicaluccio,
and all the rest beside
That present were, and eake the dame
no lunger could abdie,
But out they burst in tears,
and wept for pities sake.
With that Gentile standing up,
the little babe did take,
And bare betwixt his arms,
and led the Lady eke
By one hand to her husbandwarde,
and thus began to speak.
Stand up (good Gossup mine)
I do not here restore
To you your wife, whom both her friends
and yours refusd before,
And as an outcast scornd:
but frankly give this dame
My Gossup, and her little child
that of her bedie came,
To thee, for this of troth
I know, the babe is thine,
Begot by thee, I christened it,
it bears this name of mine,
And is Gentile calde:
and my request shall be,
That through three months, this Lady has
been soiornesse with me,
Thou will no less esteem
of her, or worse good will
Bestow on her, than though she had
with thee continued still.
And by that self same God
which foreed me to bear
Such love, as by that love to save
her life, to thee I swear,
That, neither with her friends,
nor with thy parents, she,
No, not with thee her spouse, she could
in greater surety be
As touching honest life,
than with my mother dear:
Assure thy self, she never was
abusde, nor tempted here.
This process being told,
Gentile turnde him round
Unto the Lady (dame quoth he)
you know, I had you bound
By faith and lawful oath:
I quit you here of all,
And set you free aboorde again,
and go again you shall
To Nicoluccio, and
with that both wife and brat
To Nicoluccios hands he gave,
and down Gentile sat.
The husband did receive
his wife with willing hand,
And eke the babe: and how much more
he in despair did slande
Of having her again,
whom he accounted dead:
The greater was his joy and mirth
when he so happily sped.
In recompense whereof,
he yielded to the Knight
Gentile, for his great good turn,
the greatest thanks he might.
And all the rest beside,
that were to pity moude,
Gentiles nature did commend:
he dearly was beloude
Of all that heard the case,
and feasted there that day.
Thus will I leave the matron, and
her son at home to stay.
These matters ended thus,
each guest his horse did take,
And parted from Gentiles house,
that did the banquet make.
Home rode the man and wife
unto their grange with speed,
The cheer which was at her return,
and welcome, did exceed.
The people maruailde much,
that she who buried was,
Cuuld live again, and ever as
she through the streets should pass,
In Bolyne men did gaze,
and greatly view the dame.
And from that day Gentile still
a faithful friend became
To Nicoluccio, and
the parents of his wife,
Whom he by virtue of his love
had raisde from death to life.
Lenuoy.
Unbridled yonth is pricked to pleasure aye,
And led by lust to tollow fan^^es fyts:
Vnsaufull heads run retchlesse on their way,
Like wylfull coltes that broken have their bats:
Not lookyng back, till foultring foot do fail,
And all consumde that was for their avail.
Unhappy they, by scathe that purchase skyll,
And learn too late how youth did lead awrie:
Unlucky men for wit that follow will,
And foul delights in golden prime apply:
More wisdom were each one to wed a wife,
Than married daines to lure to lewder life.
For though that nature let us run at large,
And all things made by kind to common use:
Yet man must lend an ear to civil charge,
That points a baine for every foul abuse:
And bids (beware pollute no marriage bed)
Without offense let single life be leed.
As honest love by custom is allowde,
(Both law and reason yielding to the same
In single wyghts) so parties being vowde
To marryage yoke assaulted are with shame:
Both God and man such sluttysh suits detest,
The lawful love is ever counted best.
Which makes me blame Gentiles rash assault,
On Carilina fair, from former vow
Whom he pursude to tharge with heavy fault,
And sought to linne to make this matron bow:
Yet grace at last preuailde in both so well,
As she stayed chaste, and he to virtue fell.
His foul dessre his lewd and lustful mind,
Was cause of life, and wrought a double pleasure:
This b^ried dan^e in pit to death had pynde,
Had he not l^ude, and like her out of measure,
Thus ^^l sometime is cause of good success,
And wicked meanings turn to happiness.
Had some rash yinpe been in Gentiles case,
So far inflamde with Beaurie of a danie,
And after that had had so fyt a place
To work his will, and done a deed of shame,
I doubt inee much, he would have reapt the frule,
By leave of force of all his paynefull suit.
Here all were blessed; the mother well reuiude,
The infant borne, the matron full of ruth:
Thrice happy he for bring so truly wind,
Gentile worthy praise for ioyall truth.
All lovers may hereby example take,
And learn of him blind fancies to forsake.
The argument to the fourth History.
TWo Knights did link in League of great goodwill,
At length the one corrupts the others wife,
And traitourlike procurde her unto ill,
Which vile abuse bred deadly hate and strife,
And was the cause this leacher lost his life.
For why, the Knight to whom this wrong was wrought
This tratour slew, when he full little thought.
The murder done, he gave his Cook the heart
Of him that had conspirde this filthy feate,
And made him dress it curiously by art,
And gave his wife the same at night to eat,
Who fed thereof, and thought it passing meat:
But when she knew, the heart, the hap, and all,
She loathde to live, and slew her self by fall
Quid non cogit amor?

VVHilome in Prouance were,
as they that knew the same
Do make report, two Courtly knights,
both men of worthy fame:
Each knight his Castle had,
well furnished every way,
With store of servants at a beck
their pleasures to obey.
The tone Rossilion calde,
a bold undaunted knight,
The second, egall to the first,
sir Guardastano hight:
Who being men at arms,
and passing well approude
For valiant courage in the field,
like faithful brothers loud,
They daily used to ride
to Turneies both yfeare,
To tilt, to just, and other feats
perfourmde with sword and spear.
Their garments eke agreee,
and were of egall sise:
To show the concord of their minds
unto the lookers eyes.
And thus though either knight
his several manner held,
And either ten miles at the least
from others Castle dwelde:
Yet happens it at last
that Guardastano fell
In liking with Rossylions wife,
and loud her very well.
A dame of beauty brave,
renowned very much,
Whose featurde face and goodly grace
the knight so near did touch:
As he rejected quight
the faith he should have borne
Her husband, and his trusty friend
that was his brother sworn.
He used his gestures so
unto this gallant dame
At sundry times, that she at length
his friend in love, became,
And liked well the knight
and so began to place
Her fancy, as she naught so much
did tender or embrace
As Guardastanos love:
She ever looked when he
Would frame his humble suit, and crave
her secret friend to be.
Which fortunde in a while:
for he bewraide his case,
And she less wise than wanton, straight
did yield the Lover grace.
There neaded flender force,
so weak a fort to win,
For she as willing was to yield,
as he to enter in,
And thus for twice or thrice,
the lusty lovers delte
In Venus sport, whose frying hearts
with Cupids coals did melte.
But in this love of theirs,
they did not use so well.
The matter, but the husband did
the smoke by fortune smell.
Of that their silthy flame:
who highly did disdain
That such outrage and soul abuse
his honor should distaine,
Whereby his former love
to mortal hate did grow,
And then he purposde with himself
to slay his deadly foe
That fowlie so abusde
a Knight that gave him trust.
Mean while came tidings that in France
the Lystes were made
The Trump proclaymde the tilte
Rossilion out of hand.
To Guardastano Castle sent
to let him understand
The news: and eake withal
did will his man to say,
That if he would the morrow next
vouchsafe to come away
Unto his house, they would
conclude upon the case
Full friendly Guardastano did
the messenger embrace
And told him that he would
(if God did lend him life)
The morrow night come over, to
Rossilyon and his wife,
Which answer when the knight
received had he thought
The tuncapprocht, wherein to slay
the traitor knight, that wrought
Such salfehoode to his friend
I leave you for to scanne
The thousand thoughts, the broken sleeps
and fancies of the man,
That such a murder meant;
and ekes the knights desire
Who thought it long besore he came
in place to quench his fire
When morning came the knight
well armed from foot to crest
Took horse, and had a friend or two
whom he did fancy best,
Well mounted on their steades:
they had not ryd a mile,
Before they came unto a wood,
a place to work their wile.
There lay he close in wait
within the cops, whereas
Full well he wist that Guardastan
of very force must pass.
There having staide awhile,
a far he might discry
The Knight vnarmde, with other two
that rode unarmed by,
As one that feared no fraud,
nor any force at all,
When that Rossilyon did perceive
him just against the stall
Where he on horseback sat
full ready for the chase,
A vallie fit to work his feate:
with grimme and ghastly face
He sets his spurs to horse
and put his lance in rest,
And gallopt after, crying loud,
thou knight and traiterous gest,
Now be thou sure to die,
in penance of thy fact:
And with the word, he struck him through
the shieuered lance it crack
Against the broken bones,
and thorough pearst his corse.
Unable Guardastano then
for to resist the force,
Or once to speak a word,
fell down upon the blow,
And presently gave up the ghost,
the spear had spoyld him so.
With that his friends amazed,
and very much in doubt
What this should mean, stood still a space,
at last they turned about
Their nagges, and sparde no spurs,
unto the Castle ward
Of Guardastano, whence they came,
fear made them gallop hard.
When thus Rossilion saw
his foe bereft of life,
He left the saddle, and withal
drew out a shoulder knife,
And ripped me up the breast
of him that murdered lay:
Which done, with egrehands he plucked
the trembling beart away,
Wherein the treason lodgde:
and having there by chance
Or else of purpose, (skilles not which)
the pendant of his lance,
He wrapped it up therein,
and willd his man to look
Unto the carriage of the same:
the heart his servant took.
Then having straightly chargd,
that none should dare to say
A word of that which they had seem
and he had done that day:
He mounted on his horse,
and in the evening rode
Unto his Castle back again,
and there the knight abode.
His wife that hard him say,
that Guardastano came
That night to suppe with him at home,
and looked for the same,
Did wonder at his stay:
and being one dismayde,
How hapt that Guardistano commes
not now (good sir) she said.
To whom the knight replyde,
be sent me word right now
He could not come to day, good faith
his let I do allow.
The Lady woeful woxe,
and lowering began to look,
Rossilyon lighted from his horse
sent one to call the Cook:
Who being come in place,
take here (quoth he) this heart
I slew a Bore of late by ha^,
herein bestow your art.
Do make some dainty dishe,
according to your skill,
And serve it up in filuer place:
dispatch you know my will.
The cook receiude the heart.
and made a running mess
Of meat thereof, as men are wont
that curious cates can dress.
He minst it very small,
not sparing any cost,
For why, the knight his master, did
allow him with the most.
When time of eating came,
Rossilyon sat him down,
And eake the Lady, who for lack
of Guardastan did frown.
The meat was brought to bor^e,
than he that ganne to think
Upon his murder lately done,
could neither eat nor drink.
At length the cook sent up
that other mess of meat,
But he, as one that had no list,
did will his wife to eat,
And set the dayntie dishe
for her to feed upon.
The Lady, somewhat hungry, fell
unto the cates anon.
And felt it very sweet,
which made her feed the more,
She rid the dishe, and thought it had
been of a savage Bore.
Rossilyon, when he saw
her stomach was so good,
And that the meat was all consumde,
the dishes empty floode:
How think you wife (quoth he)
how like you of your meat?
Good sir (quoth she) I like it well,
I had good list to eat.
No wonder (quoth the knight)
by God, although this cheer
Do well content thee being dead,
in life thou thoughtst it dear.
The Lady hearing this,
stood still, as one dismayd^
Upon the words, when pause was past,
unto the knight she said,
Why? what is that (good sir)
which you have given me
To sup withal? who answerde thus:
I do protest to thee,
The food whereof thou fedst,
was Guardastanos heart,
Whom thou did so entierly love,
and playdst the harlots part.
Be bold it is the same,
this knife his belly ripe,
And from the rentes with these my hands,
the traitors heart I stripped,
And cracked the strings in twain
to ease my heart of woe
That could not rest contented, but
by murthring such a foe.
The Lady, when she heard
that Cuardastan was flayne
Whom she had loud, to ask where she
lamented, were in vain,
Conjecture of her cares,
imagine her distress.
It last (quoth she) thou cruel knight,
(I can not term thee less)
Have played a wicked part,
and done a curs^ (...),
In flaying of a (...) man.
(O bloody (...) fact)
A wight that word not me,
it was I that earned death,
If any did deserve at all
the loss of vital breath
It Was I that did the deed,
I loud, I do protest,
And did of worldly men, account
that worthy knight the best.
How might he death deserve
who loyal was to thee?
But (mighty Gods) it is your will,
and pleasure now I see,
That these so noble cates,
the heart of such a wight,
In chivalry that did excel,
a passing courteous Knight
As Guardastano was,
should be my latter meal,
And that I should with baser meats
no more hereafter deal.
Wherefore (good faith) quoth she,
I do not loath my food,
And therewithal upon her legs
the loving Lady stood
Before a window, that
was full behind her feet,
And suddenly from thence she fell
into the open street.
Which deed no sooner done,
the window was so hie,
But out of hand, her breath was stopped,
and so the dame did die
With carcass all to crushed,
by reason of the fall.
The knight her husband seeing this,
(who was the cause of all)
Stood like a man amazde.
and then misliked sore
Both of the Ladies loss, and eke
the murthres knight before.
And being then adrad,
and standing in a doubt
Of Count Province, and the rest
that bordred thereabout:
He sadled up his horse,
and road in post away:
The night did favor his intent.
As soon as it was day,
It Was all the country through
that such a dame was dead,
And presently upon the fact
the knight him self was fled.
Then they that servants were
of either castle, came
With bitter tears, and took the dead,
the knight, and take the dame,
And in the castle Church,
in marble hewde for twain,
They buried both the murdered knight,
and eke the Lady slaint.
With verses on the grave,
to show both who they were,
And what was cause that Guardastan
and she were buried there.
The Lenuoy,
THE Poet that to Love did pen the path,
And taught the trade Cupidos yinpes to train,
Within his second book advised has,
That who so looks, and would be willing taine,
To keep his love unto himself, he must
Neither brother, friend, nor yet companion trust.
And hereupon his grounded reason grows,
That each man seeks to serve himself in chief:
And he to sight that friendliest countenance shows.
Yet for his flesh will soonest play the thief.
As stolen Dear in taste exceedes the gift
So gallantst gain is that which commes by shyft.
In greatest trust, the greatest treason lies,
Where least we fear, there harm we soonest find,
In open foe each man full quickly flies,
He wounds most that strikes his blow behind:
But little hurt the open Adder works,
The Snake stings sore, that in the covert lurkes.
The barking Hound has seldom hap to bite,
His mouth bewrayes his meaning by his cry:
No bird upon the open twig^ does light,
The naked Net each foolish foul does fiye:
The hidden hook is he that does the feate,
Of sugared bane the wiliest mouse will eat.
Who fears no fraud, with ease you may biguyle,
The simple mind will soon be ouergone:
He takes least barme that doubts deceyt and wile,
And dreading thorns, does let the Rose alone:
The Trumpets sound bewrayes the Foe at hand,
And warning gives his fury to withstand.
The glewing grome that fyghts before becommes,
Is either voyded,, or by sleight subdued;
The way to win, is not to beat the drums,
For threatening throats are easily eschued:
The surest mean to work another woe,
Is fair to speak and be a fryend in show.
Had not this knight reposde assured trust,
Upon his fryend, that loud him as his life,
Could he so well have serude his fylthie lust?
Or leisure had so to abusde his wife?
No, had he thought such treason hyd in breast,
He would have lookte more nearely to his gu^st.
But loving well, and meaning not amish,
He loud him scope, without suspect of ill
To come and go, to use the house as his,
A perfect show of very great good will:
Both purse and plate, both lands, and life, and all,
(Save wife alone) lay pledge at every call.
Which makes his fault, and foul offense the more,
That did this deed and wrought this treachery.
Against his friend that loud him evermore,
And thought him void of vice of lechery:
Good nature deemd that Guardastan could not,
For fleshly just so dear a friend forgot.
But see, how sin once seasing on the mind
Does muffle man and leads him quight a^^ay:
It makes him pass beyoud the bounds of kind,
And swerue the trade where truth and virtues lay,
Refuling friends, rejecting laws, and right,
For greedy care to compass foul delyght.
And as the man herein deserves shame,
For stoupyng so to base and beastly vice,
So are those dames exceedingly too blame.
Whose glaueryng glee to lewdness does entice:
Who frame their looks, their gesture tongs and tale,
To serve their turn in steed of pleasant stale,
Two sorts I find deserving trust aleeke,
The mounting minds that sue for high estate,
And such again as sensual pleasures secke,
And hunt the haunt of every loving mate:
Both which to come by what they like and love,
Renounce their friends, and scorn the Gods above.
But mark yet well the sause that does ensue,
Such stoine flesh, is bitter as the gall,
Great are the plagues to such disorders due,
From skies revenge and fearful scourge does fall:
The dome divine although it suffer long.
Yet strikes at last, and surely wreakes the wrong.
For Heleus rage king Menelaus wife,
The Stories tell how Priam and his town
Confounded were, and how for broyle and strife
In wrongful cause, the walls were battered down:
Full many a knight in battle spent his blood,
And all because the quarrel was not good.
So when this Traitor knight had fed his fill,
Upon Rossilions wife, and wrongde his friend,
By foul abuse: in guerdon of his ill,
The wrathful Gods brought him to wretched end
To quit his glee, and all his former sport,
He dyed the death in most unhappy sort.
And she, who falst he faith and marriage heste,
And double penance for her pleasure past,
For first she eat his heart she fansied best,
And desperately did kill her self at last.
Note here the fruttes of treason and of lust:
Forbear the like, for God is ever just:
Nihil proditore tutum.

Amore,

Puo piu che ogni amicitia, et che ogni honor.

The Argument to the fifth History.
THe Lumbard Albion conquered Cunimund,
And after death of him inioyd the state,
And married with the Lady Rosamund,
The Princes daughter whom he slew so late:
Whose skull he did convert into a pot,
Because his conquest should not be forgot.
His custom was at every feast he made,
To drink therein for pomp and foolish pride,
And on a time his Queen he began persuade
To do the like: whereto she naught replide
But so much scornd his offer of disdain,
As straight she drew a plot to have him slain.
A noble man that Don Ermigio hight,
With on Parradio by the Queens deceate,
Were wrought to kill this mouster if they might,
And by the sword they meant to do the fear:
And so they did within little while,
When least the king mistrusted any guile,
Upon his death, Ermigio out of hand,
Espousde the lady Rosamand to his wife,
Which when longums chaunst to understand
He practisde with the Queen to reaue his life,
To thend that he might marry with his dame,
Who gave consent to do this dead of shame.
With venim vile to work she thought it best
Which when Ermigio drank, and found the drist,
By force be drove the Queen to drink the rest
Who seeing that there was none other shift
The pay son supt, and took it patiently.
As just reward for both their villainy.
Parradio eke whose helping hand did further
The Lumbards baue, and brought him to his death
For guerdon due to him, to quit the murder,
First lost his eyes, and after that his breath
That men might see, how truly God does
And plague offenses, lightly with the like.
AMong those warlike wights
That erst from Almaine came,
And other northly parts besides
Those men that bear the
Of Lombards chunst to light
In Italy and there
Two hundred years and somewhat more.
The only rule did bear
Throughout that realm which we
Now Lombardie do call:
Until such time as Charles the Great
Had dispossessed them all,
And drove them theuce by force.
And mean of knightly might?
What time (I say) it was their lot
In Italy to light.
One Alboine was their chief,
A man of monstrous wit,
And valiant in the feate of arms
For martial practice sit.
This Alboin ere his came
To Italy, had slain
Ring Cunimundus and bereft
Hina of his princely reign.
And not content with death
Nor having helly full
Of noble blood, cut off his bead
And of the cloven skull
Did make a quaffing cup
Wherein he took delight
To bouse at boorde, in token of
His pomp, and former fight.
This Cunimundus had
A daughter passing fair,
Rosmunda hight, that was his joy,
And should have been his heir,
If he had kept his crown,
And not been conquered so:
But being slain, his daughter was
A captive to his foe,
This Captain kept her thrall,
And meant it all her life:
Till love at last this Lumbard forced
To take her to his wife.
When marriage day was past,
And he to battle fell,
And conquering of Italy
He loud his wife so well,
As she might never part:
But like a warlike dame,
She ever logde in open camp,
Where so her husband came:
Who sundry cities took,
And conquerde many a town,
By force of sword, and Lyonlike
Went ramping up and down.
Until at length he came
To Pauoy, where of old,
(As in the chiefest place of all)
The kings their court did hold.
When full three years and more,
This Lumbarde there had layne:
Unto Verona he remoude,
With all his princely train.
And presently preparde
A solemn banquet there,
To seast his friends, and others that
Of his retinue were.
Amids which princely cheer
And royal feast, the king,
Did will the wayter on his cup,
That he to boorde should bring
The mazare that was made
Of Cunimundus head:
And having it in presence there,
(Where he with wine were sped,
Or else by malice moude,
I wot near what to think)
But having it in place, he gave
His Queen the cup to drink.
The cup her fathers skull,
O wilful witless act,
Which no man well aduisde would do,
But one that were distracte.
The Queen perceiving this
In mockage to be meant
Of Alboyne, as it was in deed,
And saw his lewd intent,
And how he skofte the king
Her father in the same,
Was stuffed with raging rancour straight,
And blushed for very shame.
In sort that all her love
Which she had borne before
Unto her husband, grew to hate,
She loathde him ten times more
Than ever she had loud
Or fansted any wight:
And thereupon resolude to do
A mischief, if she might,
And to revenge by death
Of Alboyne, monstrous man,
Her father Cunimundus blood,
Lo here the broyle began.
For Rosmonde all in rage,
Consulted with a peer,
Ermigio calde, a courtly wighte,
This noble man to steer
To murder of the Prince,
I leave her words vnpende,
This noble hearing whereunto
Her long discourse did tend,
Declarde the Queen his mind,
And vttred his conceit,
And said Parradio was the man
That must dispatche the feate:
Without whose help (quoth he)
I wot near what to say:
I think him such a one as dares
Such ventrous parts to play.
Your grace were best to prove,
If he consent, you shall
Not fail of me, but stand assurde
To have me at a call.
Forthwith the Queen did cause
Parradio to appear:
Who after sundry offers made,
And words of courtly cheer,
To move him to the spoil
Of Alboyn, thus replyde:
In vain your grace does go about
To have the king destroyde
By these my giltlesse hands,
That day shall never be,
I trust, the world shall never prove
So foul a fact by me,
As to procure the death
And murder of the king:
Of treason vile, to have a thought
To practice such a thing.
Leave off your lewd entente,
Or seek some other wight
To work your feate, I never yet
In slaughter took delight.
The Lady hearing this,
Hnd having earnest zeal
To work her will, rejecting shame,
Bethought her how to deal.
There did at self same time,
Upon the Queen awayte,
A proper wenche, of comely grace,
Full fit to make a bayte
To take such loving woormes
And hang them on the hook,
Whose greatest pleasure is upon,
A courtly dame to look,
This gallant likte her glee.
Her gesture, and her face,
And by device did bape at last
To purchase privy grace.
Mean while the subtle Queen
That found this lovers haunt,
And knew he daily plyde her maid,
Thereby to make her grant
And yield him his desire,
Thus thought it best to work,
In self same place where they did meet,
In secret sort to lurk,
As though it were the wenche
With whom he would debate,
And so perhaps she might both check
And give the fool a mate.
Which happened so in deed:
For on a certain day,
The Queen to compass this her craft,
Put on her maids array,
And in the wonted place,
Where they did use to talk,
Bestowde her self. When night was come
Forth began this gallant walk,
And to the standing came
Where lay this lodged do,
Whom he had thought to be the maid,
But it was nothing so.
Straight he in wonted wise,
As custom was of yore,
Pronounste his painted terms of love,
And flattred mo^^ and more,
Bewraying all his thoughts,
And ripping up his heart
Unto the wenche (for so he deemde)
And playde the Lovers part.
Ten thousand words he spoke,
And tending all to love:
Whom after all his long discourse,
The Queen did thus reprove.
Parradio do thou know
With whom thou stand here?
Who thus replyde in loving wise:
Yea that I do (my dear)
And namde the self same maid,
Who was his friend in deed,
With whom he had conferrde of love,
In great good hope to speed.
What sir? you are beguilde,
I am not she you ween:
No serving maid assure thy self,
I am (quoth she) a Queen.
And Rosmond is my name,
Now do I know thy mind,
And privy am to all thy guyle,
Thou shall be sure to find
Of me a mortal foe:
Now make thy choice of twain,
Where thou will spoil ye king my spouse
Or thou thy self be slain,
For this outrage of thine,
Which thou have done to me:
Leave off delays, dispatche with speed,
It may nane other be.
Parradio hearing this,
And pondring in his thought
To how extreme a point by wyle
Of Rosmond he was brought:
Resolude to slay the Prince,
And rid him of his life:
And for the better working of
His feate, did use the wife
The devilish Queens devise,
And Don Armigios aid.
And in this sort these wicked folks
The cruel pageant playde:
The king, as custom was,
Because the day was hot,
To take a nappe at after noone,
Into his chamber got.
Where being softely laid,
The place was voyded strayte,
And eurte groom had leave to part
That usually did wait.
To yield the king his ease,
Thus dealte the subtle dame.
And to be sure to have her will,
She shifted thence with shame
Her sleepie husbands sword,
Who then in slumber lay,
For that he should by no devise
Have power to escape away,
This done, the cruel wightes
(Of whom I spoke before)
With bloody minds, and armed hands
Approached to the door:
And up they thrust the same,
And softly entered in:
And stole upon the heavy prince,
That slumbring long had been.
Yet wrought it not so well,
For all their theeuish pace,
But that king perceiude them when
They came unto the place:
Who mazed in his midde,
And chargde with sudden fear,
To see these two suspected wights
To prease in presence there:
Gate him up with Lions rage,
From Cabin where he slept,
And to his sword, for safegarde of
His life and honor, leapt.
But out, alas, the Queen
Had reft the weapon thence,
Which erst the Prince was wont to use.
And wear for his defense.
The Ruffians that in rage
For blood and mischief sought,
Bestowde their blows upon the king.
That no such practice thought:
And so bestirde themselves
His weapons being bad,
As in a while they slew him there,
And so their purpose had,
Vnwist of any wight,
The murder was unseen,
And known of none, but of the two,
And of the cursed Queen,
When this devise was wrought,
Ermigio out of hand
Did seyze upon the Palace, with
Intent to rule the land.
And thought to wed the Queen,
And so he did indeed:
Whereto the Queen and all the rest,
That fauourde her, agreede.
Imagine of their joys,
Whom filthy sin did link,
What pleasure they in kingdom took,
I leave for you to think.
But sure in my conceit,
Where murder brings the wife,
There wealth is woe, lust turns to loath,
And liking grows to strife,
But turn I to my tale,
That plainly may appear,
What hap befell, and whether they
Did buie their marriage dear:
The Lumbards paiute that
Their king was foully slain,
And that by mean thereof they might
Their purpose not aitaine:
But should be forced to flee,
Or worser hap to have
By longer stay, their chiefest goods
And jewels for to save,
Trusst up in fardell wise,
And so conueide by stealth
The Lady Aluisenda thence,
(And eke good store of wealth.)
Who daughter to the king,
But lately murthred was,
Not by this wife, but by the first:
Away the Lumbards pass,
Unto Rauenna, where
As God and fortune would,
Longinus tho Licuetenant to
Tyberius, court did hold:
Great Constantine his son,
Whose Empire stretched wide,
And under whom Longinus had
In trust those Realines to guide.
This Captain entertainde
Them in good loving wise
And did the greatest friendship use,
That he might well devise.
It fortunde so at last,
(The cause I wot not well)
Longinus to good liking of
The Lady Rosmonde fell,
Whose fausie grew so great
Unto the featurde wight,
As marry out of hand he would
To further his delight.
To bring this match about,
He practisde with the dame,
And gave advise that she should take
In hand a deed of shame.
The murder of the man
That used her as his wife:
There was no choice, but she must reaue
Ermigio of his life.
The Queen that clean had cast
The fear of God away,
And awe of men, not weying what
The world of her might say:
And thirsting for estate,
Whereto she hoapte to clime:
Preparde a poisoned drink for him
Against his bathing time,
And made in wise, she gave
A wholesome Gossups cup.
Which he should find exceeding good,
If he would drink it up.
Who having no distrust
Of wife, or devilish drift,
With willing hands unto his mouth
The poisoned pot did lift:
And drank a greedy draught
His former heat to quell:
It was not long before the drink
Unto his working fell:
Which when he felt to rage
And boil within his breast,
And knew himself unto the death
With venim vile possessed.
He drew his desperate sword,
In choler and despite,
And drove the Queen to quaffe the rest,
And empt the vessel quite.
Which done, at one self time,
Both he and eke his Queen,
Did end their lives, that hastners of
King Albyons bane had been
Oue poisoned syrrupe slew,
This cursed couple tho,
Whose beastly lives deserude so vile
A death for living so.
Which when Longinus heard,
And how that matters went:
The Lady Aluisinda straight
Unto Tyberius sent,
And all her treasure eke
That erst her fathers was.
VVithall, Parradio who did aid
To bring these feats to pass.
Who heing there in place,
In eruell sort was slain,
And ere he did, was reft his eyes,
To put him more to pain.
Nullum peccatum impunitum.

Ogni peccato a morte a'l fin Ihuom meua.

The Lenuoy.
LO here the fatal end of murder done,
Such blooddie factes deserve no better hyte:
(...) the threede that of such wool is spon,
Mark well their lot that mischtese do conspire,
It lighthe does upon their heads retire:
And th^ie that are the workers of the deed,
Though long forborne, at last no better speed.
See, to revenge when Rosmond once began,
Incenst there to vy wrath and deep disdain,
She could not stint by murder of a man,
Nor leave, although she saw her husoande slain,
But thought she would attempt the like again:
Her vise conceit was blinded all with blood,
She could not turn about to see the good.
Soldst once in sin, and washed in waves of ill
She ^amsht ruth, and pity flong aside,
Yelding hey self to spoil the flaughter still,
Whom she misukte, should straight have furehe did.
(...) flames of wreake withyn her bowels fride:
(...) being caid to hie and princely state,
In foul attempts, she could not want a mate.
Worth while to note how such as bear the sway,
And sit in seat of royal dignity,
The righteous Gods without respect, do pay,
And plague them for their hellish crueltic,
With loss of honor lives and iolitie:
And such as are their ministers in ill.
Either gallows eats, or fatal sword does kill.
Crude'ltasta spesso in donna bella.

The Argument to the sixth History.
THE king of Thunise had a daughter fair,
Whose beauties brute through many countries ran:
This Lady was her fathers only heir,
Which made her loud and likt of eury man,
But most of all the king of Granate than,
Began to love, who for he was a king,
By little suit, this match to cloth did bring,
The promise past between these noble states,
The rested naught, but only her convey
In safety home, for fear of rouing mates,
Who would perhaps assault them by the way:
Wherefore the king Cicils pledge they pray,
Who gave his word and Gantlet from his hand,
Not to be vexed by any of his land.
Away they went, the ships forsook the shore,
And held their couse to Granate ward amain,
When sodeinly Gerbino (who before
Had lovde the Queen, and did his match (...)
With Galies came this royal prize to gain:
The fight was fierce, a cruel battle grew,
But he at length most likely to subdue.
When Sarizens saw the force of blooddie foe,
And that they must surrender up the dame,
Maugre their might, and needs their charge forgo:
What for despite, and what for very shame,
And partly to discharge themselves of blame,
They killed the Queen, Gerbino looking on,
And threvve her out, for fish to feed upon.
To venge which deed, and cursed cruel act,
He slew them all, not leaving one alive,
With fire and svvord the Sarizens he sacked,
For that they durst so stouthe with him strive
And did his love of life and light deprive.
Yet back again to Cicill I Will retyrde,
Missing the mark which he had long desyrde.
When nevves was brought unto the aged king
The Grandsire, how his nephew vvilfullie
Had broke the league, and done a heinous thing,
Committing spoil, and shameful Piracie:
Although he loud Gerbino tenderly,
Yet did adiudge him to the death, because
He did prefer his lust before the laws.
King William, by report of such
As dwelt within his land,
Who second Prince of Cecil, held
The Scepter in his hand
Two babes h^got upon his Queen,
A male, that Ruggier hight:
And eke a daughter, Custance called,
A Dame of beauty bright.
This Ruggier, whilst his father liude,
By fortune had a Son,
Gerbino namde, of whom this tale
Especially does run.
Who by his Grandsyre nonrisht up
And nurtred from a boy,
At length became a proper man,
And was the Princes joy.
His courteous nature won renown,
His valiant courage known
Not only in Cicilia was:
But brute abroad had blown
The fame thereof to foraine realms.
His praise does pass the bounds
Of all the I Will, where he was bred,
And in Barbaria soundes:
Who to the Ring of Cycill paid
Their tribute money then:
Which great renown of Gerbins name
Unto the ears of men
Was brought that every one extolde
His virtues to the sky:
Who but Gerbin^ all abroad,
Whose fame like his did fly?
Among the rest that heard report
Of Gerbin, was a dame,
The daughter of the king of Tunise
(I wotte not well her name)
But as (the men that saw her vaunte)
She was the fairest hewde,
And trimmest shapte, that ever kind
Had cast or creature vewde
Whose body-was no brauer deckte
With lovely limbs without
Tha^ was her mind with manners fraught
And virtues round about.
This Lady hearing noble men
Often reasoning of renown
That Gerbin wanne, by worthy deeds,
And how his fame did drown
That chiualry of all the rest:
And that his courage was
So great as he inmanly feats
All other knights did pass,
Delighted very much therein,
She likte the talk so well,
And stood so long devising of
H^^ prowess, that she fell
To like Gerbino, though unseen:
She felt her breast to fry
With fancies flame, and was of him
Enamord by and by.
So that it did her good at heart
To hear of Gerbines fame,
And tke her self among the rest
To publish out the same.
As willing as she was before
To bear of others talk,
So glad this Lady woxe at last.
To have her tongue to walk.
The playnest proof of great good will
That lurking lies in breast:
For when the mind does like, the mouth
Can never be at rest.
And on the other side, as fast
This peerlesse Princess fame
Was noysde abroad, and so in fine
To Cicill I Will it came:
There was her beauty bruted much,
As other where beside:
So long till Gerbin through report
Of his fair Lady fride.
And felt himself enlaste in love,
And tangled in the net:
That willie C^pid erst to take
His loving Lady see.
This heat did ^aily gr^^^ to more
Within the gallantes breast,
And did torment him so within,
That he to purchase rest,
Deuisde an honest lawful skuse
To part from Cicill I Will,
And gat him leave to trau^^le vn^^
Tunise for a while,
Upon desire to se^ the dame,
Whose fancy bound him thrall:
And gave in charge unto his fyende,
And folks he went withal,
As much as ever lay in them
To further his intent,
As every one should think it best:
And tell her what was meant
Of Gerbines part, and how he loud,
Enduring bitter pain
For her, and from the noble Queen
To bring him news again.
Of whom, those men that had the wit
To handle matters well,
Went Merchant like unto the court,
Fine jewels there to sell:
Which they of purpose brought from hon
And Ladies use to bye,
As rings, and stones, and carkenettes,
To make them please the eye,
And by this practice in they got
Within the Palace gate,
And made their show, and marcha^tlike
In every point they sat,
To spy a time to move their suit
Unto the noble Dame:
Who, in a while that they had been
In place, by fortune came,
And twharted where Cicylians sat,
Upon desire to see
Such jewels as might like her best,
Now here began the glee:
For one that had a fyled tongue,
And durst his tale to tell
And look a Lady in the face,
Unto his purpose fell.
And after reverence done, began
To say in sobre sort,
That Gerbin willd him to repair
Unto her fathers court,
To see, and to salute her grace,
Whom he did tender more
Than all the Ladies on the earth,
That he had seen before.
Her love had pierst his noble breast,
And cleft his manly heart:
And he was well contented with
The stroke of Cupides darte.
Both he, and all the wealth he had
Was hers to use at will,
Requesting her to take in worth
Gerbinos great good will:
I can not pen the tale he told,
So well in every place,
As he, perhaps, pronounst it then:
The gesture gives the grace.
But this you may assure your self,
He dealte so orderly,
As needed: for the Princess did
Receive him thankfully:
And did accept his message well,
With answer to the same,
That as Gerbino burnt in love,
So she did fr^e in flame,
And felt as hot a cool as he
Within her tender breast:
If inward love, by secretache,
And griping might be gest.
And to thend het former talk
Unfeigned might appear,
She sent Gerbino such a ring,
As she did hold most dear.
A jewel of no slender priee,
The value did excel:
This message being vorne him back
Did like the Lover well,
The token highly was esteemd,
No richesse might have pleased
His fancy half so well, as that,
For why? his smarte was easde.
And after that, he sundry times
Sent freindly lines of love,
And tokens to the Princess, by
The man that first did move
The suit, and brake the matter up:
Devising how he might,
And meant him self to talk with her,
If fortune fell aright.
But matters being at this hand,
And luckely begone:
Deferring off from day to day
The thing that should been done:
Whilst Gerbin melted with desire
His Lady to embrace:
And she again did long as much
To see her lovers face.
It so befell, the king of Tunise
His daughter spowsed had
Unto the Prince of Granate, which
Did make the Lady sad.
She woxe the wofulst dame alive,
For being matched so:
It did not only grieve her, that
She was compeld to go
So far away from Gorbin: but
The thing that nipte her nere,
Was, that she feared she never should
Have seen her lover dear,
Once being p^ried from the place
In all her life again:
And hereupon she willing was,
And would been very feign
To escape the King her fathers hands,
And liude with Gerbin aye:
She beat her brains, devising means
By stealth to run away
Likewise ye knight was cloyd with care,
And liude a woeful man.
Her marriage known, his valiant breast
To throbbe and ache began:
Was never wight in greater woe,
Nor angry mood than he:
At length when care was somewhat past,
He thought his help to be,
And only aid to rest in force,
Wherefore he did entend
By strength of hand to win his lone,
When so the king should send
Her home unto her husbands reahne:
Love had possessed him so,
As, he the Princess to enjoy.
Through fire and floudes would go.
The king of Tunise having heard
Some inckling of good will,
That was betwixt the knight and her,
And doubting of some ill
That Gerbin would pretend: befides,
Well knowing that he was
A valiant wight and one that did
Full manly prowess pass:
When time was come to send the queen
Unto her husbands land,
By letters which he sent, he let
King William understand
His meaning and his full inteent,
And did request beside,
To have assurance at his hands,
That he would so provide,
That not a man within his Realm
Should hinder his pretense,
Nor Gerbin make resistance, when
He sent his Lady thence.
The hoarie grave Cicilian king,
That laden was with age,
And wist not of his daughters idue,
Nor yet Gerbinos rage,
Nor deeming that the kings demand
Did tend to such effect,
Did frankly yield his suit, as one
That did no ill suspect.
And for assu^ance of the fame,
To rid the prince of fear,
He sent his Gentlet, for a pledge
That things confirmed were.
Who having such assurance made,
Let build a mighty barks
In Carthage Haue^ and did ri^
The same with earnst carke.
And finely finished up the ship.
In mind, without delay.
Unto Granata, by the Seas,
To send the Queen away.
He wanted nothing save the time
To complish his intent:
Mean while the want^n Princes, that
Knew her father meant,
And smelling out his purpose, causde
Her man in poast to go,
Unto Palermo covertly,
To let Gerbino know,
Both of the Ladie^ late contract.
And that by ship she must
Within a while to Granat got,
To serve her husbands lus^.
Wherefore tell Gorbine, if he he
The man in deed (quoth she)
And such a valiant Knight at arms
As he has bragd to me,
And often boasted of himself
Or bear me half the love,
He made in wise: he knows my mind,
I shall his courage prove.
The messenger that had the charge
Did as the Queen had wild:
And made return to Tunise, when
He had her hest fulfild.
When Gerbin had receiude the news,
Both of her going thence,
And also that his Granstre gave
His glove for their defense
That should co^^ey the Princess home
Unto her husbands land:
He doubtful woxe, and wist not what
Was best to take in hand.
But waying well the Ladies words
Whom he did most embrace:
To make a proof of faithful love
In such a doubtful case,
Unto Messina straight he went,
And there two Galleys made:
And armde them well with valiant men,
And skilde in Rouers trade.
And to Sardinia did convey
Him self, and all his route:
Entending there to make his stay,
And linger thereabout,
Till time the Queen by shipping came
Which was within a space:
For why Gerbino had not long
Continude in the place.
But that he might perceive aloof
One under sail that came,
And had but slender gale: he knew
It straight to be the same
Wherein the Queen his mistress went:
The Gods would have it so,
For at that instant slender was
The wind that there did blow.
Then (quoth Gerbino to his mates)
If you be valiant men,
(As I have thought you all to be,
And do account you:) then
There is not one among you all
I dare auowe, but erst
Has been in love, or presently
With Cupids shaft is pierst:
And certainly withouten love
Within the breast of man,
No goodness grows, as I do deem
Nor any virtue can.
And if you love, or ever did,
Then lightly may you guess
The great desire, and burning love
That does my heart oppress.
I do confess I am in love,
And Cupid causer was
That I procurde you hither now,
To bring my will to pass,
And undertake this present toil.
The yonder ship you see,
And in the ship does rest a dame,
The only joy of me.
And eke besides my Lady dear
Whom I would have so feign,
Great wealth there is, to quit your toiles,
An easy thing to gain.
Small fight (no doubt) will serve the turn,
If you will play the men:
Which booty, if we may atchieue,
(My mates) assure you then
I only will the Lady gain,
That is my only care:
As for the goods, I am content
Among your selves to share.
Wherefore (my friends) attempt the fight,
Let courage never fail:
The Gods you see are willing, that
We should the ship assail.
You see she has no gale to go,
She can not pass away:
Fight freely, all the spoil is yours,
You shall be made to day,
There needed not so many words
Their willing hearts to win:
For why encountering rat^er than
Their lives they would ha^^ bin
The booty bred the great desire,
They thought his tale too long:
The greedy lust of pray did prick
Those lusty Lads along.
Wherefore as soon as he had told
His tale, the trumpets blewe:
And every man his weapon caught,
And to the oars they flewe,
And to the shipwarde on they weat,
With all the speed they might:
The men aboard that see them come
Preparde them selves to fight.
For why they could not escape away,
The Galleys were so near,
And eke the wind so slender was
To cause the ship to steare.
When Gerbin did approach the bark,
He wild the chiefest men,
That were the guides, and ruled the ship,
To come aboard him then,
Unless they meant to fight it out,
The Sarizens that saw
Both who they were, and what they would,
Said that they brake the law
Which erst the Prince of Cicill made
Unto their Sovereign, and
To make the mattir plain, they shewde
The Gantlet of his hand:
Lo here King Williams Glone (quoth they)
Behold it here in sight:
This is your Pasport, naught ye get,
Unless it be by sight.
Gerbino having erst descride
The beauty of the dame
Aloft the Poope, began to fry
And melt with greater flame
Than ever he had done before:
For then her feature seemde,
Far fresher than in all his life
The lusty lover deemde.
And there upon enraged thus
By beauty of the Queen:
He gave his froffing answer, when
He had the Gantlet seen:
Good faith (quoth he) I need no glove,
My Faulcon is away:
I have no use to put it to:
But if without delay
You do not yield the Lady up,
Prep are your selves to sword:
For sure, unless I have my will,
You shall he laid aboard.
And present^^ upon the (...)
Without a farther talk,
The arrows flew^ from (...),
The bullot stones did walk^^
A cruel fight (...)
On either part a space:
But when Gerb^^^ (...) at longth
His force could take no place,
Helades a Lyter all (...),
And with his galleys went
Full closely to the migh^ie ship,
They seeing his intent,
And knowing this, of very force
That they must yield, or die^
Did make no more (...), but causde
The Princes by and by,
(That under harth^^ s^bbing sat
Gerbinos only lone)
To leave her tears, (...) her self
Upon the deck above.
Who, as upon the foreship sto^de
In presence of them all,
The hellish hounds, the Sarizens,
Unto the Knight did call,
And full before his face, they s^u^,
With many a blooddie blow
The Ludie, crying out for grace:
And having done, did throw
Her carved carcass from the ship
Into the brackishe flood:
And to Gerbino therewithal
Exclaymde, and cried a good:
Lo, take sir Knight, we yield her up
Unto thy craving hands,
In sort as lies in us to do,
And as the broken bands
Which thou have (wretchlesse man) despisde,
Deserve: now do thy best.
Gerbino, having viewde the deed,
And wayed within his breast
The tygres hearts, and bloody minds
Of those that slew the dame,
Did make no more ado, but close
With dreadlesse courage came
A board the ship, and there begone
Without respect of grace,
Full Lion like, that lackes his pray,
When bullockes are in place:
To do those wicked slaves to death,
He did not favor one.
Some re^t he with his eger teeth,
He set his nails upon
Some other, breaking all their bones,
To glut his hungry heart,
That longd for vengeance of the fact.
Then began he play his part,
With sharp and cruel sword in hand,
As one without ^emorse:
He seard me one, and scotcht an other,
And mangled every corse.
Meanwhile the flame began to grow,
And kindle all about
The bloody bark, and bodies slain,
The sparks began to spout.
The knight to save the taken spoil,
Did cause his water men,
To bear away such booty as
Serve their purpose then.
Which done, he left the burning ship,
And to his galleys goes,
With woeful conquest of the Mores
That were his mortal foes.
Then willd he all the Ladies limbs
That in the water were,
To be vptaken, piece by piece,
Not one to tarry there.
Which bones he long bewept with tears,
That in abundant wise,
For very grief distilled were
By lymbeckes of his eyes.
And after many doleful plaintes,
And profes of lovers pain,
Returning home unto the Isle
Of Cicille again,
He causde her body to be tumbd
In Vstica, an isle
Full sore against Traponus soil.
And then within a while,
He hyed him to his native home,
A man of heavy heart,
Meanewhile the king of Tunise, that
Had tiding of the part
That late was playde, attyred all
In black, his legates sent
To Cicill, to the king to show
His grace, how matters went,
And all the order of the fact,
And let him understand
How that his nephew broken had
By rash attempt, the band.
Whereof king William wrothfull worcester,
And seeing that he must
Of force, or show himself a Prince,
Or not be counted just:
He made Gerbino to be tant,
And kept in iron gyues.
His nobles could not change his mind,
And purpose, for their lives.
He judged his nephew to the death,
And loosing of his life:
There past not many days, but that
Gerbino felt the knife,
And did eudure his grandsires wrath,
Who rather wished to see,
His nephew murthred, than him self
A faithless King to be.
And thus these two unhappy wights
Without the fruits of love
Had shameful deaths, as you have heard
By this discourse above.
Lenuoy.
Who works against his sovereign Priuces word,
And stands not of the penalty in awe,
Well worthy is to feel the wrathful sword,
And dye the death appointed hy the law:
No favor is to such offenders due,
That, ear they did amiss, the mischief knew.
For Princes wills are ever to be wayde,
The statutes are the strength and stay of all,
When laws are made, they ought to be obayde,
What royal Peers, by pledge, or promise, shall
At any time confirm to friend or foe,
Must stable stand, the law of arms is so.
For they are second Gods in earth below,
Assignde to rule and strike the only stroke,
Their crowns and scep^ers, be of perfect show,
That all estates are underneath the yoke:
What they shall say, or do in any case,
By duty ought to take effect and place,
Wherefore who dares adventure up so hie,
And proudly press to alter kings decres,
Not fearing what may light on them thereby,
Nor forcing what they shall by folly leese:
Of law deserve the hardest point to bide,
For scorning those whom God appoyntes to gyde.
When royal Rome did flourish in estate.
In ancient age, the Senate bearing sway,
The laws were so severe, as who forgate
To live upright, and do as they did say:
Was presently committed to the block.
Without respect to blood, or noble stock,
Some in exile were sent to foreine lands,
Leaving their wives, and little babes behind,
Some sons were slain even by the fathers hands,
Who favoring right, forgot the saw of kind:
Justice in Rome bore then so great a sway,
As no man durst good orders disobay.
We read of one, a ruler grave and wise,
Who made a law, and that to this effect,
That he should be berest of both his eyes,
Whom any of adultery might detect:
And bring good proof that it was so in deed,
Upon which act, the sages all agreed,
It so befell, his son against the law
Did first offend, that first deuisde the same,
Which fortune when the woeful father saw,
And that his son could not avoid the blame:
For justice sake did thus devise to deal,
To give example in the common weal.
Where as the law expressly willde, that he
Who did offend, should be bereft his sight,
The father with his son did so agree
As each did loose an eye the fauite to quite.
Wherein the father shewde himself severe.
And yet as ruthful as the law could bear.
O worthy wight. O ruler fit to reign,
That rather chose his chude to punish so,
And eake himself to bide some part of pain,
Than parciaily to let offenses go:
A double tumbe was due unto his bones,
For being just and ruthful both at once.
King Romulus who let the city build,
And fonnder was of all that royal race,
That none should ouerleape his rampire wild,
Which Remus did the fortress to disgrace:
Which when his brother saw in mockage meant,
With wrathful sword be five him ere he went.
So here this aged Prmes of Cicilie,
When he had plegd and pawnd his honor down,
Though less offense to slay by cruelty,
His nephew, than to stane his kingly crown:
For iusti^e is the chief and only thing
That is requirde and lookte for in a king.
Wherefore what Peers, and Princes once have wild,
No subiecs should endeavor to undo:
For kings will look to have their bestes fulfild,
And reason good that it should aye be so.
As beasts obey the leftie Lions look,
So mean estates must puysant Princes brook.
Ill fares the bark amid the broyling seas,
Where every swayne controlles the masters skill,
And each one stires at heline him self to please,
And folowes not the cunning Pylots will:
So realms are ruled but badly, where the base
^ill check the chief, that sit in highest place.
The Argument to the seventh History,
AMercha^ts daughter loud her brothers boy
That kept the shop, of lineage basely borne,
Which grome became the damsels only joy,
Whereat the brothers took no little scorn:
That he who was a youth of no account,
Presumde unto their sifters bed to mount.
So deeply sanke disdain within their breast,
As naught save death their malice might assuage
Those stately merchants might not be at rest,
Till time they had dispatched the silly page:
Wherefore they all, with one consent agreed,
To murder him, and so they did in deed.
Whose absence long did grieve the tender maid
That wept the days, and spent the night in tears,
Not knowing where he was, nor why he stayde:
It so fell out in fine, the ghost appears
Amyd her dream, of him that so was slain,
And bid her stint her tears, that were in vain.
He wried his wounds, he shewde the shameful
He told the traitors treason, and the train
That wroght his bane, and whence their malice rose blows
And where his mangled carcass they had laines
Which process told, he vanished out of sight,
The wench awoke, a heavy woeful wight.
To try the truth of what her vision spoke,
She got a mate of trust, and on she hide
Unto the place, a perfect view to take:
Where after search, the body she espide,
The body of her friend so lately dead,
Whose hmmes she buried, bearing thence the head,
Which head she plasht within a Basell pot,
Well covered all with harden soil aloft,
Her daily use was to lament his lot,
That so was slain: she wept and sorrowed often:
So long, until her brothers stole away
The Basell pot, wherein her lover lay.
This second grief compared to the furst,
That she (poor wench) had suffered for her friend,
Increast her cares, and made her heart to burst,
Whose life did whole upon the pot depend:
The merchants, when they saw their sister ded.
For fear of law, in post their country fled.
OF yore within Messyna dwelt
Three brothers, merchant men,
Left wealthy by their fathers death,
Who died by fortune then.
This merchant had beside his sons,
A daughter, very young,
Elizabeth by name, in whom
With beauty, nurture sprung.
Which nymph, as nature furnished had
With seemly shape to view:
So in her tender breast, a troop
Of honest manners grew.
Which gifts of course are wont to cause
Good liking, and good will
But yet for all these virtues rare,
This virgins luck was ill,
Or else her brothers cruel were:
For she was ripe to wed.
And yet without a married mate,
Her lusty prime she led,
It fortunde so, at self same time
This damsels brother had
A yonker, that did keep the shop,
A very handsome lad.
Lorenzo was the prentise name,
To whom they gave the charge
Of shop and warchouse, all was his,
To buie and sell at large.
This ympe being very neat and frim
Of person, and of wit,
And passing pleasure in devise,
A man for folly fit:
By gesture and demeanure, set
This damsels heart on fire,
Who but Lorenzo with the wench^
He was her chief desire.
When thus the virgin livde in love,
This prentise did perceive,
By noting her from day to day,
He then began to leave
His foreign haunt at game abroad,
And only bent his breast
To love of her, of whom he saw
Himself so sure possessed.
Thus lyking grew from less to more,
The faggot equal was
That burnt within these loners breasts,
And brought the match to pass.
For why there were not many days,
Before the wench and he
Gave full assurance of good will,
It might none other be.
Each felt the fruit of former gripes,
Each lover found such sweet
In Venus joys, as sundry times
At pointed place they meet,
And sport as the manner is
Of wanton Cupids crew,
That more respect the present toys,
Than troubles that ensue.
And thus in play they spent the time,
But love gives such a flame,
As few, or none, have reason how
To quench, or hide the same.
For why the light bewraies it self
Unto the lookers flight.
So farde it by these lovers two,
For on a certain night
As she (good wench) was hasting to
Lorenzo, where he lay:
Her eldest brother chaunst to see
And tract her on the way,
And knew for certain that she went
Unto the prentise bed:
But like a witty man he held
His peace, and nothing sed.
Although it was a death to him
So foul a fact to know,
Yet reason, and good nature did
Persuade this merchant so.
As after sundry doubtful thoughts
That wandered in his head,
He was content to hold his tongue,
And so he went to bed.
I leave to descant of his dreams:
But sure I scarce believe
He slept at case, who saw a sight
That so his heart did grieve.
When morning came, and stars did start,
The man that saw the deed
The night before, rose up, and gate
Him to the rest which speed
And told his brothers what had hapt:
And after long devise,
And counsel had upon the case:
Because their sisters vice
Should purchase them no open shame,
Nor yet their lineage blot:
They purposde so to deal in things
As though they wist it not:
Until such time as fortune serude,
Without mistrust or blame,
To rid away the party that
Had done them all the shame:
Mean while they bore a merry face,
And show of friendly heart,
To outward sight, unto the man
That plaide so vile a part.
The better to reueuge the wrong.
For that an open foe
Is easy to be voyded, when
His looks his rancour show.
Which made them laugh in wonted wne,
With him that had defilde
Their sifter, till such time as they
The leacher had begilde:
Which happened in a little space.
For being in this glee,
The brothers did devise to take
Their horse, and ride to see
The country for a day or twain:
And as the Proverb goes,
The more the mertier is the feast.
And thereupon it rose,
They prayed Lorenzos company
For sport, and solace sake.
Who though would gladly stay at home,
His wonted mirth to make
With her that was his only joy:
Yet granted his consent
To go abroad, suspecting no
Such mischief as they meant:
These merchants, and the prentise thus
Their prauncing Ienates took,
And bravely out of town they rode
In all the have to look
A place wherein to do the deed,
I mean Lorenzos death.
They had not iourneied far, before
Whey came unto a Heath
Besides the way a desert where
No travel was in dre.
And being brothers there alone,
They thought themselves as sure
As needed, to dispatch a man,
That no such force did fear.
The short is thus, they made no words,
But slew Lorenzo there.
Mine author writes not of his wounds,
But reason gives it so,
That in revenge of his abuse
Each brother had a blow:
Whose body thus bereft of life,
They buried in such sort,
As no man saw the fact, nor none
Could ever make report.
The Prentise slain, the carcass laid
In grave, the warchant men
Vn^^ Messyn ^hence they came,
Returned back again.
And to dissemble this their deed,
They bruted all abroad,
That lately in affairs of theirs
The youth Lorenzo rode,
And trauaild touching merchants gain:
Which made the tale the more
Of credit, for because he used
To do the like before.
Elizabeth, at last, that saw
The lingering of the man,
And that he staid beyond his time,
To languish fore began.
And as the custom is of love,
To deem each hour a day,
Each day a year, each year an age,
When lovers are away:
So she that thought his absence long,
And livde in bitter pain,
Did question with her brothers, of
His coming home again.
Demanding when the time was set,
And when the day would be,
That she Lorenzo safe returned,
From foreign coast should see.
To whom her brother thus replide,
With countenance cursed and grim,
What do thou mean to question thus?
Have thou to do with him
For whom thou do demand so often:
Good faith, unless thou leave
These terms in time, thou shall from us
An answer fit receive
And well agreeing to thy deeds.
Which bitter gyrde did nip
This silie maid, as she eftsoone
Began to byte her lip.
And wore the wofulst wench alive,
Nor after durst to make
The like demand again, for him
That suffered for her sake:
But spent the day in dole^^ll plaints,
And sobde in secret wise,
The bitter torment of her breast
Brast out and bathde her eyes,
With sundry showers of trickling tears
Distilling by her face,
She often called him by his name,
And wild him home a pace.
Lamenting much his long delay,
Whom she did love so well.
Whilst thus the maiden stood on terms,
Upon a night it fell,
That after many hearty sighs,
And sundry cries,
For lack of Lorenze, slumber came
And shut her aching eyes.
Who was no sooner fallen a sleep,
But dreams began to grow
Within her raging retchlesse brain:
Then seemd to open show,
Her murthred friend to stand in place,
With usage pale and wan,
And chakes with buffets blown out.
The garments of the man
Were all to rent, his robes were rag^:
And, as the wench did guess,
Lorenzo in her dream bespake
Her thus. Thy deep distress
(O faithful friend) I well perceive,
I see my long delay
Does cause thy cries: for my return
In grief thou pynste away:
My absence is the cause of care,
Thou do accuse thy friend
Of longring, and thy beauy playnts
A see, can have no end.
Wherefore (I say,) dry up thy tears,
That flow like floudes of rain:
Lament no more, I cannot come,
Though I would nere so feign.
For why, the day thou sawste me last,
Was ender of my life:
Thy brothers, whilst I rode with them,
Slew me with sudden knife.
And therewithal he shewde the place
Where dead his body lay:
And willd her weep for him no more,
And vanished so away.
The wench aw^oke, and credit gave
Unto this dream of hers,
Which made her to bemoyst her face
And bosom all with tears:
Full bitterly she did bewail
The murder of her love.
When morning came, and Phoebus beams
The darkness did remove,
Not daring to disclose the thing
Unto her brothers, she
Did mind to go unto the place,
Of purpose there to see
Where that her dream were true, or no,
Which troubled her the night.
And being that this Damfell was
At liberty, and might
For pleasure wander out, and home,
In company of one
A woman friend, that wonted was
To walk with her alone,
And privy was of all her deeds:
As rathe as she might rise,
With mother nurse she gate her out,
And to the heath she hyes:
Where by couiecture lay the coarse
Of him that murthred was.
As soon as they arrived there,
She scrapt away the grass,
And sweepte the parched leave aside:
And where at first she found
The hardest soil, and stoniest bancke,
Began to delue the ground:
She had not dug any depthe,
But lighted by and by,
Upon her lovers woeful corse,
Unwasted that did lie
And uncorrupted in the grave:
Whereby the maiden knew
That all the vision which she saw
The night before was true.
Whereat she waylde and wept a good,
But knowing that the place
Was far unfit for sighs and tears,
Which could not right the case:
She would have gladly borne away
The carcass, to have laid
It in a decent tom be at home,
Save that she wanted aid.
Wherefore she drew me out a knife,
Wherewith away she swapte
Her lovers head, and up the same
In linen cloth she lapte:
And covered up the corse again,
And gave the head to bear,
Unto the nurse, her trusty friend,
That was of purpose theare:
She tuckt it in her apron close,
(As women use to do)
And so unseen, from thence unto
Messina home they go.
Where being come, and entered to
Her chamber with the head:
She shut the door, and on the same
So long her tears did shed:
Until with bryne she all besprent
It, as it lay in place:
And now and then among her cries,
She all bekist the face.
Which done, she took an earthen pot,
Wherein she used to set
Her Basil, or her Parsely seed,
The best that she might get.
Whereto in foldes of silken lawne
She put Lorenzos skull,
And after that, with garden soil,
She pourde the pitcher full:
And strewde her finest Basil seed
About alofte the same,
From whence like Orange water, sinell,
Or Damask roses came.
And daily after that, she sat
Imbrasing of the Can,
And culling of it in her arms,
As though it were the man,
Whom she entirely loud before:
And after kissing, then
She would to tears, and sighing sobbes,
From sighs, to tears again.
Continuing so, until such time
As she had watered all
The Basil, with the dreary drops,
That from her face did fall:
So that at length by tract of time,
Or grossness of the ground,
By reason of the rotting head,
The Basil did abound,
And gave a passing pleasant smell.
The wench did never leave
This folly, till the neighbors chanste
Her practice to perceive.
Who, (when her brothers muzed that
Her beauty did decay,
And that into her hollow brows
The eyes were suncke away.)
He spoke then thus, we stand assurde,
It is her daily gise,
To go into the garden, where
The Basil pot it lies:
And there to weep in woeful wise,
A wretched wench to see:
The brothers when they heard the tale,
And having willd that she
Should leave that fond and foolish trade,
But saw it booted not,
Did make no more ado, but hid
Away the Basil pot
Which, when she hapt to come again,
And not to find it there,
Full earnestly began to crave
The same with many a tear:
And being barde thereof, begone
To wexe diseasde, and all
Her sickness time, for nothing but
The Basil pot did call,
Her brothers not a little muzde
To hear her strange request,
In craving of the pot, and there.
Upon did think it best
To see the same, and make a search:
Who having powered out
The earth that was within the pot,
Est soon espyde a cloute,
And in the cloth, the head inwrapte,
So fresh and fair to vewe,
As it to be Lorenzos head,
By curled he are they knew.
Which set them in a sudden dumpe,
And made them greatly dread,
The murder would be brought to light
By reason of the head:
And hereupon they hid the skull,
And laid it in a grave,
And from Messina went by stealth
Them selves from death to save:
Entending, being fled the town
If they might pass vnspide,
From thence, in post, upon the spurte,
To Naples straight to ride.
And thus I leave the merchant men
Their journey forth to take,
Who after sped, I wot nere how:
But thus an end I make:
The silly wench, amid her grief
Did never leave to cry,
To have the Basil pot again.
But when she did epsy,
That all her calling was in vain,
Her tears did never blin
To issue from her cristall eyes,
Till timy the heart within
For very anguish, brast in twain.
Then Clotho came to rid
The mourning Damsel of distress,
And brake her vital third.
Lo here the lotte of wicked love,
Behold the wretched end
Of wilful wightes, that wholly do
On Cupides laws depend.
Un puoco dolce multo amaro appaga.

Lenuoy.
If all the earth were paper made, to write.
And all the Sea converted into ineke,
It would not serve to show Cupido, might:
No head can half his bloody Conquests therske:
Unto his yoke he forces every wight,
No one away dares for his life to shrink.
Who most contends, the widest wound receaues,
For Cupid then by force his freedom reaues.
The sage who said, that (love exceeded all)
Pronounst the troth, and spoke as we do find:
He wist full well, that every wight was thrail
Unto the God that feadreth is and blind:
No Poet him, but Prophet may we call,
For that of love so derely he definde:
For Cupid with a look does wound more hearts,
Then thousand spears, or thousand deadly darts.
Which Caesar saw, who fundrye Realines subdude,
Whereby his feign did reach the stately startes,
For when that he fair Cleopatra vewde,
He fell to love, for all his civil wars:
In aged breast his youthfyll wounds renewde,
Where Cupids scourge had left him sundry scarred.
That learned Marcus, so rendwinde for wit,
For Faustine fair was rid with loving bit.
Eake Annybal of Carthage manly wight,
That past the Alps to come to Italy,
Whose puissance put the Roman host to flight:
For all his force and prudent policy,
Did stoop to love, surprisde with deape delight,
Of one, a wench bred up vnciuill^y:
And many more, as fierce as he in field,
Cupido forced with tender bow to yield.
And not alone this Archer masters man,
But by this power, does pierce the golden skies,
And there subdues the greatest now and than:
Such subtle driftes the Godhead does devise.
As when that Jove lodde Leda, like a Swan,
And pricked his plumes to please his Ladies eyes:
Another time became a milk white Bull,
And all to steal away a country Erull.
Who has not heard how Phoebus Da^hne lovde?
Bow mighty Mary was bound in Vulcans chain?
And eke how Jove his greatest cunning provde,
When be became a galden shower of rain.
Endymion he was passingly belovde
Of Phebe, who with him had often lain:
On Latinus hill, the ghastly God of hell,
Pluto him self, did like Prolerpine well.
May Neptune boast or vaunt above the rest?
Did he not love as other Gods have done?
Has Cupid never rasde his rockie breast?
Could he for all his waves dame Venus shun?
No, he has been, by pangs of love oppressed,
The water nymphs his godhead often have won,
No storm could stint, nor frosen flood remove,
Nor water wast his flames of burning love.
To banish him no wile, or wit anailes,
No heart so hard, but melts as does the wax,
To cure his wound all learned Physic fails,
It burns the breast, as fire consumes the flax:
The fort of force must yield when love assailes:
Each rebels mind with lingering siege he sacks.
No tower so high no castle half so strong.
But love at last will lay it quite along.
And look who once is tangled in his net,
And bears his badge fast fixed in his breast,
By no devise or gile away may get,
But forth he must, and march among the rest.
By nature so the law of love is set,
As none has will or power from him to wrest,
No grief so great, no toil or trouble such,
That faithful lovers think to be too much.
No counsel given by friend, no fear of foe,
No rulers rod, no dread of threatening law,
No wrack of wealth, nor mischief that may grow,
Can cause the wight that loves, to stand in awe:
As flattly does this former story show:
Where you a wench so deep in fancy saw
As naught save death might bring her woes to end,
When she had lost her faitfull loving friend.
Wherefore this wrong was great they did this maid:
The brothers were a little not too blame,
That would the weneh from fixed fancy staid:
And thought by force to quench her kin^^ed flame.
Loves heat is such, it skornes to be delaide.
With greater ease you may a Tiger tame,
Than win a wight whose liking once is set,
Either to forgo a friend, or to forget.
Amor vine^ ogni cosa.

The Argument to the eight History.
When Aristotimus did strike the stroke,
In Elyesus, and did weld the Mace
As King alone, so heavy was his yoke,
That subjects thought themselves in woeful case:
For greedy gustes that gapt for giltles blood,
Were best esteemde, and most in favor stood.
Each villain vile that vaunted of his vice,
Each loathsome leacher longing for his lust,
Was mounted up, and held in hiest price,
Sin sat at bench, extortion counted just,
The best might bear no palm whilst he did rain,
He banished some, and some with sword were slain.
Till Gods at last detesting murders done
Iucenst the hearts of sundry noble wights,
For due revenge, unto his realm to ron,
where matchte with such, as were his household knights
With one consent this blooddy beast they slew,
Amid the Church for Gods themselves to view.
The woeful Queen, the murthring mo^ster wife,
By fame assurde of doleful husbands death,
To flee the force, bereft her self of life,
Envying that her foes should stop her breath:
Two Ladies eke, the daughters of the king
Had leave to die, who hung themselves in string,
What time the proud and puisant Prince
Antigonus, in hand
The Macedonian Scepter held
And gouernd all the land:
There livde one Aristotimus,
A beast of blooddie kind,
That all to monstrous murder did
Employ his Tigres mind.
Who, when by favor and by force
Of Antigon the King,
The state of Elyesus to
His yoke and beck did bring:
Full tyrantlike he struck the stroke
And having got the crown,
Gave up himself to loathsome lust,
And brought the subjects down,
That erst in freedom long had livde.
So mighty was his reign,
As to resist his cruel parts
Men thought it all in vain:
What foul abuse was then unwrought?
What rigor left untried?
What wicked prancks and pageants plaide
whilst he the realm did gide?
His cankred nature all inclinde
To slaughter and to blood,
To kill the poor, and giltlesse souls,
It did this monster good:
And to this murthring mind of his,
He ioynde the vile advise,
Of barbarous people, that to blood
This tyrant did entise:
The beastliest men that living were
Alone he did not place
In office, to control the rest,
(Which was a cursed case:
That such uncivil brutish beasts
Should rule a Princes land)
But choze them for his persons guard,
To have them near at hand.
Of all the vile unkindly parts
That he alive did play,
I note but one above the rest,
Wherein I mind to stay,
To set this viper out to view^
That all the world may see
What plagues in store for cruel Kings
By Gods reserved be:
Who though to drink in golden cup,
And feast with dainty fare,
And for a time abound in bliss,
Yet end their lives in care.
And steed of former sugared sops,
They swallow bitter gall,
And from the top of kingly throne
Abide the shameful fall.
There dwelt within this tyrants realm
A Citizen of fame,
A man of wealth and great estate,
Phylodimus by name:
Who father was unto a wench
For feature that did pass,
An A perse, among the rest,
And nurtred well she was.
Fair Micca was this maidens name,
Whose beauty did excel.
This Tyrant had a Soldier, who
Did like the virgin well,
One Luzio, a roysting Rogue
In favor with the king,
That to the end he might the maid
Unto his bias bring,
A messenger dispatched unto
The father, straight to will
Him yield his daughter to his hands,
His pleasure to fulfill.
He let him understand his lust,
The father seeing such
A foul demand, and shameful suit,
Was vexed very much,
And gripte with anguish of the mind:
But having wayde the case,
And knowing that this ruffian stood
So in the princes grace:
And highly was esteemde of him:
Be gonne to be afraid,
And thereupon his wife and he
Thought good to send the maid:
Whom they persuaded as they might,
For safety of her life.
To yield the Soldier up the fort,
Withouten farther strife.
But she (good heart) that less esteemde
Her life, than spotless name,
Well nurtred up from tender youth,
And aye, in fear of shame,
Fell prostrate at her fathers foot,
Upon her fainting knees,
Embracing him with bitter tears,
The suits she made were these:
That he would never see her spoilde
Of such a varlet vile,
Nor let a cutthrote soldier so
His daughter to defile:
But rather let her die the death
With fathers willing knife:
Than yield her up to Luzios lust,
To lead a strumpets life.
She was content with any lot,
So she might escape his hands.
Whilst hearing thus his daughters plaints
The woeful father stands:
And with the mother wayles the hap,
And pities of the maid,
Not knowing what to do therein:
The Leacher that had staide
And looked for Miccas coming long,
Impacient of his flame
And beastly heat, to fet the wench
Himself in person came:
Puffed up with deep distaine and wrath,
And fiild with envious ire,
That she did linger there so long,
Whom he did so desire.
Who being come unto the house
Where did this damsel dwell,
And seeing her at fathers foot:
For rage began to swell,
And much misliking her delay,
With fierce and frowning face,
Controlde the wench, and bid her rise
And follow him a pace:
And must I Damsel come (quoth he)
Might message not suffice?
Do way delays, leave of those tears,
And wype your wantons eyes:
Dipatch and come along with me,
Do linger on no more.
VVhereat the wench renude her plaints,
As she had done before:
And made no have at all to rise,
But sat upon her knees:
Which Luzio seeing, all in rage
Unto the maiden flees,
And strips her naked as his nail,
And beat her round about,
A thousand stripes he gave the girl,
That had not on a cloute
To save the burden of a blow
From off her tender corse.
But sh^ee continde on her mind
For all the villaynes force,
Not weying all his blows a bean,
A maid of manly heart:
For though the beast had beat her sore
She made no show of smarte:
Nor yielded any sighing sobbes,
In proof of inward pain,
But valiantly abid the scurge,
And ready was again
To do the like, more rather than
To yield to such a slave,
Or make him owner of the hold
Which he did long to have:
The woeful parents vie wing this
With grief, and dewed eyes,
Were greatly tho to pity moude,
And out they made their cries:
With suit of Luzio, there to leave,
And beat the maid no more.
But when they saw they naught preuaild,
Their aged locks they core,
And out on God and man they call,
Their daughter void of blame
To succor, being sore distressed,
Even then at point of shame.
Which suit, and yelling cry of theirs
Did make the monster mad:
And set him farther in a rage,
That erst so plagued had
The maiden Micca void of gilt.
With that he draws his knife.
And in the aged fathers sight
Bereaues the wench of life.
Out gusht apace the purple blood
From Miccas tender limbs,
In such abundance, as about
The place the maiden swimmes:
A perfect proof that all the zeal
Which Luzio bore the wench,
Did only grow of Leachers lust,
Whom wrath so soon could quench.
For had he grounded lust on love,
Or fanside Micca well,
He would not so have slain a maid,
Whose beauty did excel.
Farewell to thee Dianas Nimphe,
Thy virtue was so great,
As well thou did among the gods
Deserve to have a seat.
For Lucrece could have done no more,
Than yield her self to dye,
And in defense of spotless fame
A tyrants hand to try.
What kingly heart, what princely breast?
Nay more, what manly mind
Could see, or suffer such a fact,
Against the laws of kind?
Would any man of woman's milk,
Endure so foul a deed,
Not yelding him that played the part,
A gibbot for his meed:
And yet this butchers bloody rage,
This tyrant could not move
To hate him ought the more, but eke
The good that did reprove
The filthy villayne for his vice,
The Prince did make away.
For some of them with cruel sword
He out of hand did slaye,
And other some he forste abroad
As banished men to rome
Eight hundredth at the least, into
Aeolia fled from home,
For succors sake, to save their lives,
And escape his hateful hand,
Who only sought the spoil of such
As dwelt within his land:
Where having certain months remaind
These exile wightes did write
In humble wise, by lowly suit
That they such favor might
Obtain from Aristotimus,
As to enjoy their wives
And silly babes, the only staff
And stay of all their lives.
But naught their letters moght avail,
He would not condescend
In any case, the Matrones to
The banished men to send:
In hope by that to force them home
And so to wreake his spite
Upon those wise forecasting wightes
That saude themselves by flight.
But yet he causde a trumpe in fine
To sound in market place,
To show that he was well content,
And that it pleased his grace,
That wives should seek their husbands out:
And gave them leave beside,
With bag, and baggage, babes and all,
Without restrainte to ride,
He licenst them, to journey thence,
And part the city quight,
Which tidings made the Matrons glad,
The news did breed delight:
The packts and fardles then were made,
The wagons were puruayde,
Both carte and horses ready were,
And women well apayde,
That to their husbands they should pass
When poynted day drew on,
The streets were stuffed with carriage, wives
Were ready to be gone:
Their little babes and all were there.
The porter only was
The cause of stay, without whose leave
There might no carriage pass.
Whilst they at gate thus waiting were
A far they might espy
A trowpe of sweating Soldiers run,
That made a cruel cry:
And willd the women there to stop,
And thence again to go
Into the city whence they came,
The Princes will was so:
Those hewsters drove the horses back,
The streets were somewhat straight,
Which made the prease exceeding great,
The iades were fully freight
With heavy burdens on their backs,
Which so anoyde the way,
As women might not well retire,
Nor there in safety stay.
But, by the mean of horse and men
Such hurly burly grew,
That there the iades from off their backs
The little infants threw.
The woeful sight that ever man
Of honest heart might see,
Such silly souls in such a throng
Of carts and coltes to be:
Who could not help them selves awhit
Nor have the mothers aid,
For they (good matrons) by this chance
Were very much dismayed.
For as their glee was great before,
And joyful eke the news,
To part the town: so this arest
Did make them greatly muse.
There might you see some babes brains
About the channel lie,
Some broken legs, some broosed arms,
And some with fear did cry.
Were few but felt some part of pains,
In such a retchles throng:
And she, that escaped best away,
Was crushed, and curstlie wrong.
When the Soldiers reckned had
And taken full account
Or wives, and babes, and knew the sum
Whereto the whole did mount:
Unto the Palace ward they drove
Then like a flock of sheep,
Which hired shepherdes on the hills
For meat and wagies keep.
And beat the silly souls a good,
That seemd to slack the way,
Who, what for fear and faintness would
Been very glad to stay.
When to the tyrants court they came,
The monster by and by
Bereft the matrons all their robes,
Both wives and babes to lie
In prison eke be gave the charge:
Thus were they foul beguild,
Who thought (good dames) to seek their men,
From Country bounds exilde.
Here will I leave with heavy hearts,
The wives their woes to wail,
Who hoping to depart the town
Were closely kept in goyle,
And to the towns men will return.
Who, when they saw the rage
Their Prince was in, and wist not how
His rancour to assuage,
Amongst themselves deuisde at last
One practice to approve,
Whereby perhas they might have hap
The tyrants heart to move.
They had within the city walls
A sort of sacred dames
Whom sin they thought it to abuse,
I wot not well their names:
Of Denis order all they were,
Sixtene, or there about.
The Citizens did deem it good
The Nuns to furnish out
With robes and relics of the church:
Tnd in their hands to bear
Their painted Gods, procession wise,
Ts was the custom there:
Well hoping by this subtle slight
To move the Prince his heart,
Who though did murder men, they hopt
Yet had not laid aparte
All fear and dread of sacred saints,
(As it fell out in deed)
For when that every virgin had
Put on her holy weed,
Along the town they began to go,
In very grave array,
With humble suit to stir the Prince
To pity those that lay
In prison, mothers with their bakes,
Which was a woeful case.
As then, by chance the Tyrant was
Amid the market place.
The Soldiers seeing dames devout
So decked with temple stuff,
For reverence of their order, did
Begin to stand aloof,
And gave them leave to prease unto
The Tyrant, where he was:
Who having license, through the midst
Of all the guard did pass:
And being somewhat near the prince,
The king began to stay,
To know, both when the women came,
And what they had to say.
They told their tale, and movde the suit,
And opened their intent:
Which when the Tyrant understood,
Perceiving what they meant:
Unto his train he made a turn,
With grim and ghastly cheer,
Controuling them, that did permit
The Nuns to come so near.
I lay the Tyrants taunts aside,
I purpose not to put
His kingly chafe within my verse:
But Soldiers combs were cut.
With that the guard began to grudge,
And for the check they had,
With Holbards, which they held in hand,
They laid about like mad,
And bitterly did beat the dames,
With many a clubbish blow,
Respect of relics laid aside,
The Soldiers raged so.
Thus did they use the sacred Nymphs
That were to Denyse vowde:
And to increase their griefs the more,
Each virgin eke allowde
Two talents for a recompense,
Besides their hurts receivde:
Thus of their purpose, both the dames,
And City was deceyvde.
At self same time, there living was
A man of great renown,
When this outrage was put in ure,
And dwelt within the town:
Ellanycus this noble hight,
Then stricken well in age,
Whose sons though Aristotimus
Had murthred in his rage:
Yet did mistrust him naught at all
Because he was so old,
Was thought unable ought to do.
Which made the tyrant bold.
This aged father waying well
His sons and countries spoil,
Determinde with himself to put
The tyrant to the foil,
And take revenge of blood, by blood,
Of death, by murder done.
Lo here I leave the Prince a while
His headlong race to run.
I must again convert my tale
Unto those banished wights,
Whom sore it yrkt so long to lack
Their wives and sweet delights.
For country love by kind does work
In every honest breast,
And till we make return again
We never live at rest
It was not long (I say) ere they,
That to Aolia were
By Aristotimus exilde,
And forced to tarry there,
With joint consent of many more,
Took arms against the king:
To bid him battle out of hand
Their Soldiers they did bring
Within the tyrants country bounds,
And did possess the land
That bordred on the city which
This monster held in hand.
There making stout and strong defense
Against the Princes power,
From whence they might with ease assail,
And eke the foe devour.
And to increase their might the more,
All such as fled for fear
From Elyesus, ioynde their bands,
And were united there:
So that the whole assembled rout,
Unto an army grew:
So many were those banished men
That from their country flew.
Wherewith the Tyrant began to quake,
And tremble very much,
For why? this battle that did grow,
His state did greatly touch.
The hammers beat within his brains,
As on a smithes forge,
He wist not how to void the foe,
Or troubles to disgorge,
That on his back were like to light:
At length he thus bethought,
That having all their wives and babes
Who all the mischief wrought,
In prison closely under key,
He hopte he might with ease,
Devise a mean the malice of
His enemies to appease,
Not by entreatie, but by force:
For so his cankred mind
Was bent to rigor: as of course
It is the Cyrants kind.
Wherefore upon a day he went
Unto the prison, where
The silly captive Ladies lay,
With countnance full of fear,
With glowing eyes, withbended brows
And angry Lions look,
Commanding those whose husbands erst
Their native soil forsook,
To write their letters out of hand,
And speed a poast away
With earnest suit unto the men
From farther force to stay,
And do their wrathful weapons down:
Thus wild he them to write.
This was the sum that he would have
Those women to endite.
Which of you do refuse (quoth he)
To complish by and by,
Be sure those eluish brattes of yours
And puling babes shall die:
And more than that, you (mothers) you
Shall not be clear exempt
Of torment, but the duly scurgde
For penance of contempt.
The women aunswerd not a word,
Which chaft the tyrant sore:
Who being thus to choler movde,
Bid them delay no more,
Nor trifle, but resolve upon
The matter out of hand,
If not, they should his princely power
And pleasure understand.
The Ladies doubtful what to say,
Upon each other gazde,
As who would say, they feared not,
But somowhat were amazde.
There was by chance amongst the rest,
One wife, a worthy dame
Temoliont her husband hight,
Megesten was her name,
Who for the honor of her spouse,
A man of good descent,
And her good virtues, far before
Those other matrons went:
One whom the rest did reverence much
And honor for her wit:
This Lady whilst the tyrant talked,
With sober grace did sit,
And never modde her self a whit,
But causde the others eke
To do the like: who when the Prince
Had done his tale, began speak,
Not honoring the king at all,
And thus the Lady sed.
O Aristo timus, had thou
Had judgment in thy head,
Or any wisdom in thy breast,
Thou would not thus entice
Or go about to make us write
Our letters of advice
Unto our husbands, teaching them
How they should do and deal,
In case concerning good estate
Of this our common weal.
Far fitter had it been for thee
Us matrons to have sent
In message, using better terms
To further thine intent,
And better order in thy deeds
Tha^ thou have done of late:
I mean the time, when we were staide
Even at the castle gate
At point to issue out of town.
Thou mockdst us there in deed,
Full greatly to thy taynte and shame.
But now that things preceede
Against thee as thou knowste no mean
To escape the present doubt:
If now (I say) by mean of us
In speech thou go about
Our husbands to begile, as us
In deeds thou have before:
I tell thee plain, thou art deceidde,
Thou scanste without thy score.
That they be not encrapt again,
We women will beware:
I would not wish thou should furmise
That we such Asses are
Or sotted so, as seeking ways
To aid and save our selves
From pain of prison, and to ease
Our little apish elues,
We would advise out husbands to
Despise their country wealth,
Whose freedom dearer ought to be
Than any womas health.
The less were light, though we decay,
That babes and women be:
And better were, our husbands should
Us all in cofyn see
Than they should unrevenged go,
Or die, without the foil
Of him, that seeks to murder men,
And work his country spoil.
This Lady would have further gone
And told the process out,
Save that the Tyrant grew in rage,
And ghastly looked about,
Unable longer to endure
The force of furious rage:
Go sir, go in post and fetch
(Quoth he unto his page)
This desperate dames unhappy babe:
And ere I part this place,
I will destroy and slay the some
Before the mothers face.
Whilste thus the Page in message sent
Went seeking here and there
Among the other boys: this dame
(A Lady void of fear)
Had spide anon her little impe:
Come hither come (quoth she
My pretty elfe, yet rather I
My self will murder thee
With friendly mothers forced hand,
And reaue thy limbs of life,
Than ever with thy blood thou shalt
Imbrewe a butchers knife.
Which speech of hers so spiteful was,
And nipe the King so nigh,
As he in fury farther set,
Did swear the dame should die.
And therewithal set haud to sword
To let the Lady blood,
That ready there to brook his force
Before his presence stood.
And died doubtless there she had
And caught a sudden clappe
To set her packing, save there was
A friend of his by hap,
One Cylo, whom he deerly loud,
That held the Princes arm,
And was the cause, by ^ay thereof,
The Lady had no harm.
This Cylo he was one of them
Who meant to flay the king
With help of good Ellanycus:
They had deuisde the thing
Long erst betwixt themselves: for why?
They could no longer bide
This cruel monsters bluddie hand,
And stomach stuffed with pride.
This sage appeasde the Priuces wrath
Who having thoroughly made
A truce betwixt his rage and him,
And causde him sheathe his blade:
Persuaded that it ill became,
And was a brutish thing,
For him that was a noble peer,
Yea such a puisant King,
To bathe his blade in woman's blood:
The conquest was unfit
For such as in the like estate
And royal room did sit,
Within a while that this was done,
A marvelous hap befell
To Aristotimus, that did
This tyrants death foretell.
For being with his Queen in bed
In daliauce and delight,
His servants, going to their meat,
An Egle saw in sight,
That made unto the Pallacewarde,
As fast as she might fly:
This vggly Egle came am (...),
And soaring in the sky
Just ouergainst the very place,
Somewhat beside the hall
Where lay the Prince, from out her foot
The foul a stone let fall,
And presently upon the deed
Away apace did fly
Quite out of sight, and as she went
She gave a cruel cry.
Whereat the servants meruelld much
And made so great a din,
As therewithal the king awoke
That had in slumber been.
His servants told him what they saw,
And how the raze did stand,
He all in poast, upon report
Sent horsemen out of hand,
For one that was a deep divine,
In whom he did affye
To show the case, to hear his mind,
And what was meant thereby.
The Prophet made him answer thus:
O puisant Prince, (quoth be)
Disgorge thy care, abandon fear,
Let nothing trouble thee.
Pluck up thy manly heart: for Jove
Does tender thine estate,
And makes a specia^ ^re of thee,
The Egle that of late
Thy servants saw, his herald is
Whom he in message sent,
To show thee, that the mighty God
Is very greatly bent
To aid thy force against thy foes,
Who long with murthring knife,
To spoil their country of their king
And reaue the Princes life.
But boldly this presume, that God
Himself will stand with thee,
Against such as seek thy death, and who
Thy mortal enemies be.
The tale this cunning Calcar told,
Did ease the tyrants breast
Of diverse doubts, wherewith he was
By Egles mean oppressed.
He soundly slepte, not doubting death,
Nor fearing civil sword:
But mark the end, and what it was
To trust a Prophets word.
For hereupon the men that meant
The murder of the king,
( Ellanicus, and all his mates)
Thought good to do the thing
Which they pretended out of hand,
Not making longer stay.
And so among themselves eft soon
Concluded, on the day
That followed next to work the feate
And bring their drifte to pass,
And that self night, Ellanicus,
As he in slumber was,
Dreamte, that the elder of his sons
Whom erst the tyrant flewe,
Presented him before his face,
With words that here ensue:
Why sleep, and slugge you (father dear)
Why do you linger so?
That you to morrow shall subdue
Do you as yet not know?
And reaue this city from the king
Who now enioyes the same?
Depart your pillow (father mine)
And balke your bed for shame.
Wherewith Ellanycus reliude,
And hoping then in deed
Of happy luck, in break of day
Sought out his crewe with speed.
That were confedered in the fact:
Persuading them to cast
All dread aparte, and slat to fall
Unto their feate at last.
And at the self same time the king,
(As hapte) a vision had,
That fed him with assured hope,
And made him passing glad.
This dream presented to his thought,
That with a mighty train
Craterus came, to take his part,
Resistance was in vain.
There was no cause why he should care
But be of courage stout,
For that Craterus had beset
Olympia round about.
This vision vain, of good success
Did so assure the king,
As in the dawning timely he
Not dreading any thing
Departes the Palace, void of awe,
With whom there only went
That C^lo, which was one of those
That all this mischief meant.
By one and one his other men,
Did follow somewhat slack:
Which when Ellanycus perceiude,
How he his train did lack:
The time it fitted finely then,
The season seemed good,
Unto this ancient foe of his,
To let this tyrant blood,
Without the giving any sign,
For so deuisde he had
With such as were his fellow friends:
But being very glad,
Up lifts he his aged arms
Unto the azurde skies,
And with the lowdest voice he could,
Unto his mates he cries:
Why do you loyter, (valiant laddes)
And men of great renown,
To do so worthy deed as this,
Amid your noble town?
Which word us sooner spoken was,
But Cylo first of all
Set hand to sword, and drew it out,
And slew me therewithal,
First one of those that issued with
The tyrant him to guard.
Who so should take a tyrants part,
Deserves the like reward.
Then after that, when Cylo thus
The matter had begun,
Lampydio, and Trasybule
With all their force did run
Upon the monster, fully bent
Him out of hand to slay,
Who then began to trust his legs:
For why? he ran his way,
To escape the danger of his death,
And to the temple fled
Of Jupiter the mighty God,
In hope to save his head.
But heathen gods might nothing help
His enemies were so hot,
As him amid the sacred Church
With shining swords they smote,
And there bereft him of his life,
That well deserude to dye:
And after dragde him blooddy thence
In open street to lie.
There lay his loathsome tarkasse slain
For every man to vewe,
The people did rejoice at heart
For freedom got anewe.
So glad were never hungry hounds
Pursuing of the hare,
To fasten on the fearful beast
Each dog to have his share,
As were the subjects eger then
The tyrant to pursue,
With hateful blood of such a beast
Their wepons to imbrew.
Whilst thus the folks debating stood
Of matter hapt so late,
Each wife began to gaze about,
And pry to find her mate.
For now the banished men were come
Unto the town again.
To tell the mirth at meeting the
I think it were in vain.
For as their care was common erst,
Whilst he the realm did gide,
So semblant was their joy no doubt,
When such a monster did.
This done, the people began to preace
Unto their Pallaceward,
But ere they came, how matters went,
The quaking Queen had hard,
And of the flaughter of her King,
Full beauie news, God wot:
Wherefore mistrusting what would hap,
Eftsoone her self she got
Into a privy counting house,
Where to escape their force,
About a beam she hting a sheet,
And strangled so her corse.
A doleful case that any dame
That was a Princes wife,
Should for her husbands sake, be forced
To rid herself of life.
But yet of both, more happy she,
Than was her husband slain:
For ventrously she put her self
To death, not dreading pain,
But he the captive, cowardlike
To Jove for succor ran,
And took the temple, like a wretch,
And did not like a man.
But turn we to our tale again:
The tyrant by this Queen
Two daughters had, the fairest wights
That lightly might be seen,
And ripe in years to match with men:
Who having heard report
How that their father murthred was
In such a cruel sort:
In mind to void the furious foes
(As virgins full of fear)
Conuaide themselves into a vawte
To stay in safety there.
But they that sought, so many were,
And pryed so well about,
As in the seller where they lay,
They found the maidens out.
Whom thence, without delay, they drew,
And whet their eger knyues,
As fully bent (...) men might be,
To reaue the Ladies lives.
But there by hap Megesten was,
Of whom we spoke before,
At whose entreatie, and the suit
Of other matrones more,
Those noble Nymphs were tho forborne,
For thus Megesten said
To such as sought to do the deed:
In slaying of a maid
You do the thing that Butchers hearts
Would never undertake,
Good faith it were a shameful fact
So vile a spoil to make,
As file your sisters with virgins blood,
Against your manly kind:
Let greedy lust to be auengde
Not make your eyes so blind.
But rather, if so be, there is
No nay, but they must die,
Give leave, at my request, that they
Their proper strength may try.
Let them make choice upon their death
And escape your handie force.
Whereto they all agreed in one,
But no man took remoise.
It irckt them that the tyrants blood
Should rest so long vnshed:
There were appointed for the noue^
That both the Ladies led
Into an tuner lodging, where
When they arrived were,
The eldest sister like a Dame
Undaunted, void of fear,
From off her waste did loose the scar^e
That girt her loins about,
And bid her younger sister do
The like with courage stout.
Then to a rester of the house,
Their girdles both were tide,
The knots and all were fitly made
To cause the silk to slide.
Who so had viewde those virgins then
He would have thought, that they
had not intended by and by
Such break neck game to play.
Their faces were so fresh to fight,
Their eyes did never stare,
Their tungs pronounst their tales as though
Their hearts had felt no care,
Their outward gesture shewde a joy,
More rather than distress:
When thus (I say) the knots were knit,
To do the feate, the less
Of both the Ladies took the elder
Sister by the hand,
Requesting her, that she as then
So much her friend would stand,
As first to let her die the death,
And play her part before:
To whom the elder answered thus.
As never heretofore
I have denyde thee (Sister) aughte
In all my life: So now
Even at my death I am content
Unto thy will to bow.
Thou shall have leave to let me live
Till thou be dead and gone:
But that which greeues me most of all,
And gives me cause of moan,
Is, that I live to see thy death
before my loss of life:
The younger Lady thereupon
Without a farther strife
Conuaid her head into the scarf:
The other standing there,
Gave counsel so to place the knot
Just underneath the ear,
As lightly she might loose her breath,
And rid her self of pain:
The younger followed her advise,
An easy death to gain.
A woeful thing for me to write,
And loathsome eke to you
(Dear Ladies) who to pass their time
Shall hap my book to view:
To think that two such virgins, borne
And bred in Princely bliss,
Should be inforst in fine, to make
So hard a choice as this.
But (as the ancient Proverb goes)
Perforce obaies no law:
The crabbed carters whip will cause
A stately steed to draw.
The younger sister thus hereft
Of life, the elder came
And cut the girdle of the beam
To hide her sisters shame,
As well as she (good Lady) might.
Then was her part to play:
Who putting on that other scarf
About her neck, began say
Unto Megesten: noble Dame,
When thou shall see me ded:
For honors sake unto thy kind
See thou my carcass led
In place that is for maidens meet,
Let not my body lie
Despoyld of robes, to naked show
And view of every eye.
And with her saying, down she slipte,
And by her bodies pease,
(Though light it were) did stop her pipes,
And so she did with case.
The Lenuoy.
THose realms right happy are, where princes rainge,
That measure out by virtue all their deeds,
Abhorring with their vassals blood to stain
Their sacred hands, and gore their kingly weeds:
The subjects there with willing hearts obey,
And Peers be safe from fall and foul decay.
But (out alas) where awful Tyrants hold
In haughty crucil hands the royal power,
And mischief runs by office vncontrolde,
There aye the great the lesser sort devour:
By daily proote each one may daily see,
That such as rulers are, such subjects be,
Unless the law forbid the lewd to sin,
Unless the Prince by rigor vices quell,
Disorders will by sufferance soon rush in:
Who strives not then in mischief to excel?
By nature man unto the worst is bent
If wholesome statutes stay not his intent.
A hangrie wight is hardly hard from food,
The kindled straw is seldom when put out,
A Cyrant that has tasted once of blood,
With much ado forbeares the fillie rout:
So sweet is sin, as once from virtue fall,
And thou art lightly lost for good and all,
No looking back, no bending foot about,
No fear of fall for mauy a mischiefs past,
No ill reuockt, no dreed of any doubt,
Till God by heaps power down his plagues at last:
As by this verse is planily set to view,
No matter tainde, but ancient story true.
Who would by might have maintained Iuzios lust,
That ^ewe the child before the fathers face?
Wha^ King would wincke at matter so unjust?
Or favor muffian in so foul a case?
The fact was vile, and dreadful vengeance dew
Unto a Prince, that such disorder knew.
To bolster vice, in others is a blame,
For such as may by power suppress the deed:
But crowned kings incur the greatest shame
When they themselves on Subjects flesh do feed:
For Lions take no pleasure in the blood
Of any beast unless they be withstood.
And when such states so foully do offend,
Not they alone do bide the bitter scurge,
But subjects are for rulers vices shend:
Is when the Sea does yield to great a surge,
The lesser brooks do swell above their bounds,
And ouerflow like floods, the lower grounds.
Lyacon lewd, that fed on strangers blood,
Although himself were he that God forgate,
Yet causer was that love with sudden blood
Drownde all the world, save (...) and her mate:
Thus one ill year may work ten thousands woe,
God hates ill kings, and does detest them so.
As here we see this ugly Tyrants wife,
And giltlesse brood that never did offend,
Raunsomde the fathers faults by loss of life,
And he him self was brought to wretched end:
Wherefore let Peers and states uprightly stand,
Least they and theirs be touched by Gods own hand.
For he that guydes the golden globe aloft,
Bekoldes from hie, and marks the deeds of man,
And has revenge for every wicked thought,
Though he forbear through mercy now and than:
He suffers long, but sharply pays at last,
If we correct not our misdoings past.
He spares no more the Monarke, than the Page,
No more the Reysars than the country Clownes,
He favors not the auncieut for their age,
He cuts off Kings, for all their costly Crowns,
No royal roabes, no scepter, no device,
Can ransom those that favor fylthy vice.
The Argument to the ninth Hyst^rie.
SY^^ona lilet of Pasquine passing well,
And he did fry as fast with egal slame,
In sort, as on a time these lovers fell
To make a match, of purpose for the same:
With one co^^ent where time and place was set,
This loving couple in a garden met.
There (...) to other uttered their devise,
To salve the fores that fancy fixed in breast,
They kissed, they ^ol^d, thus neither part was nice,
To take the time of both was compted best:
Amid their glee, was Pasquines hap to spy
A bed of sage, that there was growing by.
Whereof he plucked a leaf to rub his jaws,
And presently fell dead upon the deed:
The vvech exclamde, whose soden cry did cause
The neighbors by to come away with speed:
The man was found there senseless as he lay,
And she (bo^^^ vvench) as captive borne away.
The (...), the jury was in place,
The (...) for trial of the truth,
The Judge was there: who hearing all the case,
And having of the filly maiden ruth,
For ^itie pausde, and to the garden went,
To learn the troth, and scan of her intent.
Symona straight unto the border ran,
Where grew the Sage, and plucked a leaf or twain,
And therewithal to frote her gummes began,
As one that would been quit of murder feign:
Lo thus (quoth she) my Lord, did he before,
And thus was all, I saw him do no more.
And with the word before the Judge his face,
The giltlesse maid fell groueling on the ground
And there she died before them all in place,
And then the cause of both their banes was found
The tale ensues, which more at large does tell,
Both of their loves, and how their deaths befell.
THe fame of Florence is so great,
That simple men do know
The brute thereof by true report:
Where dwelt not long ago,
A virgin fresh and fair to view,
A jolly lusty dame,
As any was in all the town,
Symona was her name.
Whose beauty though were very brave
And kende had done as much
For her, as she might well request,
Yet for tune seemde tolgrutche
And malice at her featurd shape:
For as the same did pass,
Even so her father of the mean,
And basest order was.
A man not having wealth at will,
The stately mistress chance,
Would not voutchsafe from low estate
This miser to advance.
And hereupon the fathers want,
With whom it went so hard,
Of force constrainde the maid to get
Her living by the card
And wheel, and other like device,
As selly maidens use,
With handy work she won her bread,
She could none other choose,
Who though to earne her meat and drink
In spinning spent the day:
Yet in this beggars breast of hers,
A Lordlike heart there lay,
That durst adventure to assay
The force of Cupides flame:
For by the iestures and the talk
Of one that daily came
Unto the house where she abode,
A passing pleasant lad,
One of her own estate, for wealth,
That of his mistress had
Both wool and yarne to spin and twist:
The wench Symona fell
In fancy with this merry Greek,
And lykt the weauer well.
The virgin by his sweet regardes
Was entered very far,
And masht within the net of love:
But yet she did not dare
To further on that first attempt,
She fryde with secret fire,
Of Pasquine (thus the youth was tearmd)
Whom she did so desire.
But ever as she twisted had
A thread upon the wheel,
A thousand scalding sighs she fette:
The silly wench did feel
Them whotter far than any flame
Thus issuing from her breast:
And ever as she went about,
She thought upon the guest
That brought the wool, to have it wrought,
The spinning bredde the spite,
The threedes did make her mind the man,
When be was out of fight.
And shall we deem the weauer, whom
The maiden loud so well,
Quite void of wanton huniors? no:
For he to liking fell,
And likewise eake as careful woxe
As was the loving trull,
To see that thee did well dispatch
And spinne his mistress wool.
(As though the making of the cloth
All wholly did depend,
And only of Symonas thread)
Which made him not to send,
But often come him self, to see
How she her wheel applyde:
He never used to go so often
To any place beside.
And thus the one, by making means,
The other by desire
She had to be thus sude unto,
It hapt, he felt a fire
Unwonted, flaming in his breast:
And she had shifted fear
And shame aside, which still before
Her chiefest jewels were.
And hereupon they jointly fell
Each other well to leeke,
Both parties did so well agree,
Small need it was to seek
Which of them both should first assail,
Each fancyde other so,
As by each others face, each friend,
Each others heart did know.
And thus from day to day it g^ewe,
And still enkindled more,
The flaming love which she to him,
And he Symona bore.
Until at length this Pasquine prayde
The maiden earnestly,
To work such way and means to come
Unto a garden by,
Where he would tarry her in place
Until such time she came,
For that the garden was a plotte
Convenient for the same,
And merely void of all suspect:
There might they talk their sill.
Symona, like a gentle wench,
Did grant him her good will.
One holyday at after noone,
Her father to deceive,
Symona came with solemn suit,
Requesting him of leave
To go unto saint Gallus Church,
To fetch a pardon there.
The selly aged sire agreed,
Whose eye the maid did bleare:
For hereupon, another wench
Lagina called, and she
Unto the garden went, where they
Had poynted him to be.
But Pasquine ere they came, was there,
And brought with him a mate,
Called Stramba (Puccio was his name:)
This Stramba he should prate
And with Lagina chatte of love,
The match was pointed thus:
And whilst these two gross lovers did
Their matters so discesse,
Unto the farther end of all
The garden, Pasquine went,
And with Symona there conferde
As touching his intent.
Hear leave I (Ladies) both the talk
Which Stramba did devise
Unto his late acquainted less,
Presume his tale was wise,
For as Cupido whets the tongue
So does he sharp the brain
Of those that love, and earnest are
Their Ladies to attain.
And though perhaps this fellow were
Not come of gentle kind,
Yet being matched with on he likt,
Perhaps could tell his mind.
For fancy makes the foolish wise,
And compass in his head,
By what device he may atchieue
His liked Ladies bed.
To Pasquine turn we now again,
Who (as I said) of late
Was stepped aside, of purpose with
His minion to debate.
There was, where he did sit, by chance
Conferring of the case,
A goodly bordered bed of sage,
Even full beside the place,
Where as this loving couple coapt
In secret sport and play:
Who having long with merry talk
Consumde the time away,
And made appointment eke to meet
Another day again,
To banquet with Symona there
To feel a farther vain.
This Pasquine to the sage resorts,
Whereof a leaf he strips
To rub his teeth and gummes withal,
He put it twixt his lips,
And so began to touch his teeth,
And therewith all did say
That Sage was very good to freat
The filthy flesh away
That stuck betwixt his hollow teeth.
Within a while that he
Had practisde thus upon his gummes,
His countnance began to be
Quite altered from the former form,
And after that a space
That thus his visage swollen was
Unto an ugly face,
He lost the use of both his eyes,
And of his speech beside:
And so at length in sudden sort
This loving weauer did.
Which when Symona had beheld,
She watered straight her eyes,
And (out alas) to Stramba, and
Lagina loud she cries.
The lovers left the deep discourse,
And to the place they run,
Where as so late this chance befell,
And deadly deed was done.
Ariuing there, and sinding dead
The weauer in the grass,
And more than this, perceiving how
His body swollen was:
And seeing all his face bespaugde
With spots as black as cole,
And that in all the body was
Not any member whele:
Then Stramba cried out aloude,
Oh vile unthrifty wench,
what have thou done? why have thou given
Thy friend a poisoned drench?
What meanst thou by this deed of thine?
Which words were spoke so hie,
That all the neighbors heard the same
That were the dwellers by.
And in they pressed all in have,
Into the garden, where
The showte was made, and being come
They found the body there
Both void of life, and foully swolue,
An valy sight to see.
And finding Stramba shedding tears,
And blaming her to be
The only cause of Pasquines death:
The wench unable eke
For very grief of heart, a word
In her defense to speak:
Though she in deed were not the cause
Yet they that came to view
Did apprehend the girl, and thought
That Strambas words were true.
When thus the wench arested was,
She wrong, and wept a pace:
And so from thence, was brought before
The common Judge his face,
Unto the palace where he dwelt.
The maidens accusers were
Exceeding earnest in the case,
Both Stramba that was there
With Pasquine as his faithful friend,
And other more beside,
That came into the garden, when
The faithful virgin cride.
And hereupon the Justice fell
To question of the fact,
Debating with the witnesses,
Who having thoroughly rackt
The matter, and not finding her
As giltte of the deed,
Nor any proof of malice that
Might from the maid proceed,
As touching murder of the man:
He thought it good to stay
His judgment, and himself to go
Where dead the carcass lay,
To view the party, and the place,
To beace the matter out:
For all the other evidence
Might not remove the doubt
Within his head the Judge conceivde
In this so strange a case.
The men that knew the garden, brought
The Justice to the place
Where Pasquines carcass puffed lay,
And strouting in such wise,
As made the Judge himself am azde,
He could not well devise
How such a mischief might be done.
Which made him ask the maid
Symona, how the murder hapt.
To whom the virgin said,
Renowned Justice, after talk
Betwixt this man and me,
He stepped aside unto the bed
Of Sage that here you see:
And with a leaf thereof he rubd
His gummes: as I do now,
(And therewithal she took a leaf
To show the Justice how
Her friend had done and this (quoth she)
He did, and died than.
Whereat this Stramba, and the rest
That records were, began
To scorn and laugh in presence of
The Judge, and earnestly
Made suit that fire might be fet,
Wherein the wench to try,
To feel the penance of her fact,
Which like a wicked wretch
She had deuisde: she earned death
That would her friend dispatch.
The virgin woeful for the death
Of him that lately died,
And fearful at the earnest suit
Which Stramba made beside:
Thus having rubd her tender jaws
With Sage before them all,
Without suspect of such mishap,
Bereft of life, did fall
Unto the ground, where Pasquine lay,
And in like sort did swell,
From lovely looks, to loathsome limbs
A monstrous chance to tell.
And thus to show the mean, how erst
Her lover lost his breath,
This silly giltlesse wench her self
Even there did die the death.
O happy souls, whose hap it was
In one ielfe day to laue
So faithfully, and in self day
The pangs of death to prove.
And happter had you both ybin
If you had had the grace,
Some other where to spent the time,
And not within that place.
But far more blessed are ye now,
If in this death of yours,
You love each other as in life
Your likings did endure.
But (thou Symona) happiest art,
For ending so thy days:
If we that live may judge aright,
And yield the dead their praise.
Whose innocent and giltlesse ghost
Dame Fortune did deny
By Strambas false surmised proofs
Without just cause to die.
I count thee treble blessed of God,
For Fortune found (I say)
A mean for thee by self same death,
That rid thy friend away.
To set thee free from misreports,
And slander that did grow,
And gave thee leave by loss of life,
Unto thy love to go.
The Judge that saw this sudden chance
And all others eke
That present were, amazed stood,
And wist not what to speak
Or to comecture in the case,
The wisest tongues were domme.
At last, the Judge as soon as he
Was to his senses comme,
Thus said: by this it does appear
The Sage that here you see,
Infected is, and venim strong:
Though Sage by nature be
A very soneraigne wholesome herb,
The proof has made it plain.
But for because we will be sure
It shall not hurt again,
Do delue it up, and burn it here,
It may offend no more.
The Gardner therewithal was come,
Who digd it up before
The Judge, and all the standers by:
He had not parde the ground
Far in, but that the cause of both
Those lovers banes he found.
For underneath this bed of Sage,
The fellow that did dig,
Turned up a toade, a loathsome sight,
A worm exceeding big.
The toade was of a monstrous growth:
Then every man could tell
And judge the cause of that mishap
Which both those friends befell.
Then could they say, the venomd worm
Had bealchd his poison out,
And so infected both the root,
And all the bed about
Where grew the Sage, that bred their deaths:
Then saw they plain the cause
And reason why the weauer did,
By rubbing of his laws.
They made no more ado, but forced
The gardner by and by
To make a fire to burn the Sage,
And eke the Toade to fry
That was the cause of double spoil.
The Judge had naught to say
When this was done, but parted home,
The people went their way.
Straight Stramba, and his other mates
That gave in evidence
Against Symona, brought a Bear,
And bare the bodies thence
So ugly swollen as they lay,
Unto Saint Paul's, and there
Within one Tomb did bury both,
For of that Church they were.
Lenuoy.
AS noble minds to love are kindly bent,
And haughty hearts to fancy homage yield,
As upon makes the stoutest states relent,
And martial men that daunt the foe in field:
So meanest mates are masht within the net,
That wily love, to trappe his train has set.
What Prince so proud, what King for all his crown:
What sage so sad, or solemn in his sawes,
What wight sowise, but Cupid brings him down,
And makes him stoop to nature and her laws?
Both poor and rich do love by course of kind,
The proof whereof in all degrees we find.
That Hector stern that strove to maintain Troy,
And slew with-sword full many a ^reekish knight,
For all the warr^s, yet loud ^ndron^ene,
With her he ^e^t, in her he took delight:
His manly b^est that force of foe withstoode,
Was razde by love, his Curage did no good.
Ulysses ^^ie, for all his wily wit,
Was lodgde in love, by Cyices sugared cup,
^lato divine, whose stue the Stars did hit,
With learnedlips of Venus sauce did suppe:
His grave precepts stood him in slender sted,
Whom law of kind, in lincke of fancy led.
Fell D^onyse with Alexander great,
Duke Jason, ^ari^, ^ir^hus, Pompey take,
And he whom Dydo did so well entreat,
That to the curreous Queen his vow did break:
Yea soue him self, Apollo, Mar^ and all,
To Venus bowde, each one was Cupids thrall.
The noblest Nymphs that ever were alive,
The queyntest queens the force of fancy felt,
The dayntiest dames durst not with love to strive,
The haughtiest hearts, had Cupid made to mete:
Medea, Phillis, Helen, Phedra flerce,
Crcu^a, Oeuon, Lucrece love did pierce.
Laodamie, Hermyon Hypsiphill,
Cursed Cliremnestra, Brisies, Deyanire,
Semyramis, and Progne prone to kill,
With Mirth^ Biblis lust to love did stirree
And thousands more, of whom the Poets tell,
Prouokt by love, to flaming fancy fell.
Which since is so. I may with better face
A pardon crave of you that Ladies be,
For dringing here a homely wenth in place,
And ranking her with danies of gallant glee:
Who since did rage in fancy as the rest,
Why should she not be plast among the best?
Put case her birth was base, her lineage low,
Herparynts poor, her liuelod bare and shin,
Since Cupid did his golden shaft bestow
Upon her breast, when liking entered in,
Let her receive the guerdon that is dew
To faithful love, and march with Cupids crewe.
Where leave is lowed for each one to contend,
Where marks are made the cunningst hand to try,
Without reproof each one his bow does bend
And arrows there without contr^lement she:
Likewise since love at rendon roues his darts,
We ought not scorn the meanest loving hearts,
When Cresus brings his gorgeous gifts in hand,
And slay an ox to offer to the gods,
A groom with got by him may baldly stand,
In holy Church they little count of odd es:
E^e mind is all that makes: or marres the thing,
A Carter loves as whotly as a King.
The Argument to the tenth History.
AMerchants son that Girolanus hight,
Of tender age, in great good liking fell
With one Saluestra, a damsel fair and bright,
A taylers daughter, who there by did dwell:
The aged father did, and left the boy
Abounding wealth, his heir and only joy.
The careful mother doubting least her son
Would make his choice, and marie with this maid
Dispatched him thence to Paris, there to won,
Until his heat and humor were delaide.
To please his friends away this yonker rode,
And there a space (unwilling) made abode.
Retires in five to Florence back again,
When mothers fear and doubts were laid aside,
His ancient love aye sticking in his brain:
But ere he came, the wench was woxe a bryde,
Which greude him sore, he wist not how to deal
At last deuisde into her house to steal.
Where being plast, vnwist of any wight,
He stayde his time, till husband fell on sleep,
Then out he gate, defenst with dark of night,
And softly to Saluestras bed did creep:
He sighde, he sued, he pleaded there for life,
In hope to had his pleasure of the wife.
But al for naught, his wind did shake no come
The woman's will was bent another way:
Which when he found, as one that was forlorn
He wist not how to do, nor what to say:
His grief was such, as by Saluestras side
He laid him down, and there for sorrow did.
The husband wakes, the wife bewrayes the case,
The corse was straight conueyde away by night,
When morrow came, the bear was brought in place,
The grave was cast, the body lay in sight,
The mother mournd, and many matrons more,
Bewayl the chance of him that died so.
Among the rest that present were to view
This heavy hap, Saluestra stood as than,
She saw her friend, whom she unkindly slew,
And therewithal to rewe his death began:
So deeply sanke remorse into this dame,
As down she fell, and did upon the same.
AS ancient men report, there dwelt
A Merchant man of yore
In Plorence, who by traficke had
Increast his stock to more
Than any of his race had done,
A very wealthy wight:
Who on his wife begat a son
That (Girolamus) hight.
And after time the babe was borne,
The father chaunst to die,
But (as it bape) be made his will
Before, and orderly
Disposde his goods, as men are wont:
The careful mother then,
A widow left, with good a duise
And apde of loarned men.
The tutors of this merchants son,
Both used the infant well,
And gave such eye unto his stock
As naught to damage fell.
This child (as common order is)
Did use to sport and play
Among the other neighbors babes,
To drive the time away.
And (as the childrens custom is,
Some one among the rest
To fancy most,) even so this boy
Did like a maiden best
A Taylers daughter dwelling by:
They daily used to meet
With sundry other babees more
Amid the open shreete.
This liking in their tender years
Shot up, and grew to more,
Even as their li^^s encreast by age,
The spark which love before
Had kindled in his wanton breast,
Did grow to greater fire,
And Girolamus in his heart
The maiden did desire.
Their daily custom came to kind,
And look what day that he
Had past without the sight of her,
He thought it lost to be.
And that which set the flax on fire,
And bred the hoter flame,
Was, that the boy did well perceive
The maiden meant the same,
And likte as well of him again,
The mother when she saw
This matter work, began to check.
And keep the wagge in awe,
And whipped him now and then among:
But when she did perceive
The stubborn stripling set her light,
And that he would not leave
Those wanton tricks, unfit for youth,
She wexe a woeful da^e:
And to the tutors of her son
This pensive widow came,
(As one that of that reabtres thorn
An Orange tree would feign
Have made, because his stock was great,
But all her toil was vame.)
And to the sages thus she said,
Ungracious graffe my son,
Scarce fourteen years of age as yet,
Already has begone,
And entered in the suare of love:
The wagge begins to fry
With one Saluestras liking lust,
A taylours daughter by.
So that unless we wise by deal,
And warely seem to watch,
At length (perhaps) this foolish else
Will with the maiden match,
And make a rash contract with her:
Which if should happen so,
From that time forth, I should not live
A merry day I know.
Or if he should consume and wast
With thought, or pine away,
To see her matched some other where,
Then woe were me I say.
Wherefore to void this present ill,
I think it best (quoth she)
That you convey him hence in have,
If you be ruld by me.
Cause him to travail in affairs
Concerning Merchants trade:
For that perhaps by absence from
The maid, he may be made
To quite forget his wanton love,
And put her out of mind,
And make some other better choice.
Abroad the boy shall find,
A wench that is descended well,
To link himself withal:
No doubt, I seehem fully bent
By love to hazard all
The tutors liked well the tale
The mother widow told,
And made her promise presently
To do the best they could,
By counsel and by good advise.
And thereupon they sent
Amessenger unto the ympe,
That to the warchouse went,
And wild the boy to come away:
Who, being come in place,
The one began to speak him thus
With mild and friendly face.
My son, fith you are past a child,
I would your wit allow,
If you would somewhat look about
Unto your prosite now,
And see your self where all go right
That does concern your gain:
We, that your tutors are, agree,
(If you will take that pain)
That you to Paris travail, there
To stay a certain space:
For, there, your father, whilst he liude,
In bank your wealth did place,
Even there your chiefest traficke lies:
And eke besides the same,
You shall your self to manners good
And better fashion frame,
By lodging in so trim a town
Where lusty gaisants be,
There shall you store of Gentlemen,
And brauest Barons see.
And having learned their good grace,
And marked their usage well,
You may return you home again,
Among your friends to dwell.
The boy did note his tutors tale,
That did persuade him so,
And briefly made answer, that
He did not mind to go
To Paris, for he thought he might
As Well in Florence stay
As any one, what need he then
To travail thence away.
The sages being answerde thus,
Unto the widow went,
And told the mother how her son,
The wilful wag, was bent.
The matrone, mad to bear the news,
Spoke not a word at all
Of Paris matters, but forthwith
Unto his love did fall:
Controuling him for roysting rule,
And for his baudie life:
And did not let to tell him, how
He meant to take a wife.
But, as the mothers manner is,
For every bitter check,
She gave her son a honey sop,
And hung about his neck:
And flattred him again as fast,
And did the boy entice
By all the friendly means she might
To follow their advise:
The mother widow preached had
Unto her son so long,
Of this and that, and in his ear
Had sung so swee te a song:
As for a year to travel well,
The boy persuaded was,
To stay in France, and so his time
In foreign Realm to pass.
I leave the taking of his horse,
I write not of his woe:
I pass of purpose all his plaints
His country to forgo.
I do omit his bitter tears
At time of his remove,
For those to deem, that have assaide
The pangs of pensive love.
I write not of the mothers grief,
To bid her son farewell,
For that her self was pleased withal
And likt his voyage well.
To Paris when this gallant came,
Love gave the charge anew
Upon his heart, the fight was fierce,
A greater fancy grew
Within his bosom, than before,
The absence from her face,
Might not delay the ho^^ desire
That had this youth in chase.
And thus, the boy, that meant at first
But for a year to stay,
Full two years out, in burning love
In France at Paris lay.
Which time expyrde, inwrapped more
In flakes of fancies flame,
Than when he went from Italy,
He back to Florence came,
And being there arrivde, he heard
His ancient friend was sped:
A certain Curten maker hapt
This wench mean while to wed.
Whereat he greatly grieved was,
And vexed out of erie:
But seeing that there was no choice,
Nor other means to try.
He purposde with himself a truce
His sorrows to expel.
But at the length he had espide
Where did this damsel dwell,
And found her standing at her door:
Then grew this youth in heat,
And as enamored wights are wont,
He began the streets to beat,
Both up, and down, both to and fro,
He used often to stalk
Before the Curten makers house,
In hope by often walk
That she wanld pity of his pains,
And eke his torment rue,
He verliy presumde that she
Her Girolanus knew.
But fortune fell not out aright,
She knew the man no more,
Than one whom erst she never saw
In all her life before.
Or if she did remember him,
At least she made in wise
She wist not who the Merchant was,
So coy she kest her eyes
On Girolamus passing by.
Yet he would never leave
His wonted walk, in hope at last
Same favor to receive:
Devising all the means he might
To bring the wife again
In mind of him, who was her love,
Her strangeness bred his pain.
It greeude the Merchant to the guts
That he was so forgote:
In fine he purposde, with himself
(His fever was so hot)
To speak with her, although it cost
The loosing of his life:
And heerevpon, instructed by
The neighbors, where the wife
Whom he entirely loud did dwell,
He watched his season so,
That, when the husband and his spouse,
With other neighbors mo,
Were walked abroad to keep the watch,
He slilie did convey
Himself into Saluestras house:
And being there, he lay
Behind the Curtains, ^ie the bed,
Vnspide of any man.
The Curtain maker and his wife
Returned home, began
To take their rest in wonted wise.
The man was sound a sleep
As soon as he was laid in couche:
Then began this youth to creep,
Upon his knees, unto the side
Whereas Saluestra lay,
And having softly plast his hands
Upon her pappes, began say:
What are you (sweeting) yet a sleep:
With that the wife dismaide,
Would have exclaimde, (as women wont
In such like sort afraid)
Save that the Merchant presently
Her friendly thus bespake.
Alas, my Dear, exclaim not now,
You need no thought to take,
For I a^^ Girolamus, he
That tender your estate.
She hearing that, said, all afraid,
What make you here so late:
Good Girolanus get you hence,
Those youthful years are spent
Wherein it was our hap to love,
That time good faith I meant:
Then lawful was the thing we did.
But now you see that I
Am otherwise bestowde and matched,
I must not now apply
My liking, but to him alone.
Wherefore, I pray, quoth she,
For love of God depart this place
Your purpose may not be.
For if my husband wist you here,
(Put case none other ill
Ensude thereof) yet this be sure,
I should have chiding still:
Your being here would breed debate,
And purchase deadly strife,
Whereas with him, as now I lead
A iollie quiet life,
I am his darling well belodde.
When Girolanus had
Both heard, and noted all her talk,
He woxe exceeding sad.
His heart was pierst with pensive woe
To he are the tale she told,
Then began he wrie his former love,
And all his flame unfold.
Declaring her, that distance had
Not flakte his burning fire:
And made request withal, that she
Should grant him his desire.
He promisde golden mountains then,
But all his suit was vain:
No jot of friendship for his life,
The merchant might attain.
Wherefore desirous then to die,
Saluestra he besought,
That in reward of all his love,
And all his former thought
Which he had suffered for her sake,
She would but yield him grace
To warm himself within her bed,
Fast by her side a space:
Whose flesh (...) manner frozen was,
With staying there so long,
He made her promise on his faith
He would not offer wrong
Unto Saluastra, at not once
Let fall a word so mutch,
Nor yet her naked carcass with
His manly members tutche:
But having taken there a heat,
And warmde himself in bed,
He would depart, and deem that he
Sufficiently had sped.
Saluestra taking pity then
Of Gyrolamus case,
Upon the promise made before
Did yield him so much grace,
As on her bed to stretch him self
The youth thus being laid
Besides his mistres, touched her not
But with him self he waid
The great good will that he so long
Within his breast had borne:
Upon her present rigor eke
He thought, and shameful scorn.
And being brought to deep despair,
He purposde not to live,
But die the death without delay,
And up the ghost to give.
And hereupon his sprices withdrew
Themselves from outward parts,
His senses fled, he stretched him self,
And so the youth departs
Fast by Saluestras savage side
To whom he sude for grace:
When Girolam thus dead had line
Upon her bed a space
The wench did wonder very much
That he was wore so chaste.
Whose flame of late so burning was
And fancy fride so fast.
At length in fear her husband would
Awake, she began to say
Oh Gyrolamus how (...) this?
When will you pack away?
But hearing him no answer make
She thought him sound asleep
Which made her reach her hand to wake,
The man that slept so deep.
She felt and found him cold as ye
Whereof she marueld much:
And thereupon with greater force
She began his limbs to touch.
And thrust him, but he stirred not,
With that within her head
The wife conceived and wistful well
That Girolam was dead.
Whereof she was the soriest wench,
That ever lived by breath:
She knew not what to do to see
So strange and sudden death.
But yet at last she did devise
To feel her husbands thought
In person of another, not
As though her self had wrought
Or been a party in the fact.
Put case, good fir (quoth she,)
A yonker loved a married wife
As I my self might be:
And coming to her chamber late,
In hope to win the wife,
Were both begilde of all his hope,
And eke berefte of life,
By only force of frantic love
And lack of his desire,
And want of pities water, to
Delay his scalding fire.
What would you do in such a pinche?
How would you deal as than?
Whereto the husband answered, that
He weuld convey the man
Unto his home, without mistrust
Or malice to the dame
His wife, that had resisted so
The force of Cupides flame.
Which when she herd, she answered thus
Then (husband) does it lie
Upon us now to practice that,
And eake that trick to try.
And taking of his hand, she put
It on the coarse that lay
Upon the other side of her,
As cold as any kaye.
Whereat the wilful wight dismayde,
And ierst with sudden fear,
Lepte of the bed full sore amazde,
To feel a body there.
And out he ran to light^^ link,
Without debating more
Of further matter with his wife,
Of what they spoke before.
The candle light bewrayed the corse,
He saw the party plain,
He made no more a do, but put
Him in his robes again,
And bore him on his shoulders thence:
And knowing very well
His lodging, set him at the door,
Where did his mother dwell:
When day was come, and people saw
The carcass of the dead
Before the gate, the fame thereof
Throughout the city spread.
Each one did wonder at the chance,
That passed by the way,
They knew the party passing well,
But wist not what to say.
Yet most of all, the mother musde,
And vexed was in mind,
That having searchte the body, could
No wounded member find.
Which made Physicians flatly say,
That forowe stopte his breath:
With one assent they all agreede,
That grief did cause his death.
As custom is, the corse was borne
Into a temple by
Where merchant men of his estate
And welthie wights did lie.
The mourning mother the there came
To wail her sons decease
And with the matrone thousands more
Of neighbors more and less.
Were come to church to shed their tears
Saluestras husband then.
Perceiving that the preate was grent,
Of women and of men,
Ran home and wild his wife do on
A kerchiefe on her head:
And throng amid the (...) to bear
What news went of the dead.
And be him self thrustan among
The men, to learn what they
Imaginde of the merchants death,
Where any one did say
Or had him in suspect thereof
S^^aestra hereupon
Made have to church, and felt remorse
Within her breast anon.
But all to late her pity ^ame,
For she desired to view
Him being dead, whom carst alive
She took disdat^e to r^we.
Or recompense so much as with
A kiss. O wenche unkind,
A maruels thing, to think how hard
It is for man to find
Or sound the depth of lovers thoughts,
Or know the force of love:
For lo her breast, whom Gyrolams
Good fortune might not move,
Nor during life procure to ruth,
His death did raze her heart.
His misaduentures did renew
The stroke of Cupides darte.
Her ancient flame rekindled was,
And to such pity grew,
When as she did the carcass dead
Of Gyrolamus vewe,
That being but in simple weed,
As meanest women were,
By one and one she gate before
The richest matrons there,
Not stintyng till she came unto
The body where it lay,
And being there she gave a shoute,
And yielded forth a bray.
So loud as for her life she could,
And groueling with her face,
On Gyrolamus carcass fell,
His body to embrace.
And bathde his limbs with brackish tears,
That issued from her eyes
As long as life would give her leave:
Which done, Saluestra dies.
And look how grief and hidden thought,
Had slain her desperate friend,
Even so remorse of couerte cares,
Her loathed life did end.
Which when ye mourning matrons saw
Each one in friendliest wise,
To comfort her in words began,
And willd her thence to rise,
As then not witting who she was:
But at the last, when that
She would not mount, but lay me still
Upon the body flat,
They came to lift her vnber legs,
And raise her from the ground,
And then, both that the wife was dead,
And who she was, they found.
Saluestra then she did appear,
Then dubble woxe the woe
Of all the wives that mouruers were,
When they the dame did know.
Then began they mourn as fast again
As ere they did before,
For every sighe, a hundred sobbes,
For every tear a score.
This brute no s^^er out of Church,
Among the people came:
But out of hand per husband heard
The tidings of the same.
Who (as I said) was gone among
The men, to lend an ear,
And hearken what report there went
Of them that died there.
Then like a loving husband, that
Imbrast Saluestra well,
From sobbing sighs, to trickling tears,
For her misfortune fell.
And waild her ddath no little time,
And after that, to some
That were in place, declard, by night
How Gyrolam did come
Unto his house, through burning love
Which he Saluestra bore,
And told the tale from point to point,
As I have pend before.
Where at the audience woeful woxe,
That understood the case,
Then taking up the carcass of
The wife that lay in place,
And having knit the shrowding sheet,
As common custom is,
They laid her body on the bear,
And set her side to his.
Thus having wept upon the dead
In proof of inward pain:
And buried both together, home
The people went again.
See luck, whom love was not of force,
Alive to link in one:
Death found the means to couple close,
Within a marble stone.
Lenuoy.
Whether stars do stir good lykyng from above,
By hidden force and covert power deuyne
Or c^aunce breed c^oyce and leads us on to love
and fancy falses as fortune list assign,
I cannot judge nor perfectly defyne.
But this I know ouce let it ghther root
And to remove it then is slender boot.
Let sickness grow, let cankers work their will
Seek not at first their malice to suppress
Scorn wholesome help do floute at physikes sail
In hope thy grief will swage and vvaren less
And thou at last shall never have redress
Diseases more admit no cunning cure
The cause by time is fastened on so sure.
When fire to once crept in among the shaw
And flame has raught the rotten roose on hye
It Is hardly quenched his fury has no law
It seldom sinkes till all on ground do ly
The way to help is busily to ply
The matter first before it grow too far
When steedes are stolen tys bootles doors to darre.
Even so it fares when fancy blows the cole
Of friend ^ipf^^st and s^ts abroach good will
I man may ympes with ease from love control
Whilst fear dot force them stoop to parents will
But let them run their race at riot still
And not rebukte by reason at the first
Along they go let parents do their worst.
Too late comes salues to cure contyrmed sores
When love is linkt and choice is chayned taste
You may as soon pluck trees up by the roots
As break the knot or sunder promise past
The tackle hangs so sure unto the Mast
When shyp^ from shore have hopste up all their sa^les,
To bend about again it little vailes.
So stately is the stroke of Cupids bow,
So fell his force, so huge his heavy hand,
No striuyng serves, no shift to shun the blow.
No might nor mean his Godhead to withstand,
Who fastest runs sinks deapest in the sands:
Wherefore I wish that parents give consent,
And not repine when minds to match are bent.
For bar the sick whom Fever does molest,
To drink his fill, gis thirst will be the more,
Restrain thy Ienates course, thy bridle wrest,
The beast becouimes far fiercer, than before,
Where streams be stopped, there rivers most do rore,
Down go the banks, and over flows the flood,
Where swellyng waters feel themselves withstood.
No travail serves to sunder loving hearts,
No absence breeds in friends forgetful minds,
The farther of that dely from other parts,
The botter each his flaming fancy finds.
Who strives to stop, does most enrage the wynds:
No lover true, but bears within his breast,
The shape of her whom he does fancy best.
As thunder showers, whom weather calmes again,
Give greater drought and helps along the string,
By means of heat mixed with the blomiing rain:
So safe return of absent friend, does bring
Increase of love and faster streams the spryng:
Respect of birth, of state, or ought beside,
Stops not the boat, that drives wuh such a tide.
A folly then for parents to restrain,
For lucres sake their children, ^th we see
That both their care and labor is in vain,
And sundry times a thousand tiles there be
That do ensue, when they will not agree:
As in this tale the Florentine does show
The great mishaps by such restraint that grow.
Could mothers threats, or tutors taunts reucke
This Merchants mind, or make him alter love,
Could Parris pleasure once this youth provoke,
His ancient friend from fancy to remove?
Yea, though it were a thing for his behoue,
No, back he came the self same man he went,
He chaungde the air, but not his first intent.
And love, to help him onward od his race,
Assisted with devise and subtle slight,
Eke Venus taught him how to come in place,
And shrouded him in cloudie cloak of night,
Whereby he might approach to his delight,
But all for naught. The game that he pursude,
Was caught before, and thence his have ensude.
So Pyramus in Babylon of pore,
Fair Thisbe loved, but parents disagreed,
They might not match, but prisoned were therefore:
Yet love at length this faithful couple freed,
The time was set, the place and all decreed,
When foul mishap bereft them both of life,
Who slew themselves with one unlucky knife.
Had pity lodge within Saluestras breast,
Would she have forced so true a man to die,
Who chargde with love and thousand woes distressed,
Did hazard life to press in place so me,
Unto a dame that with her spouse did lie?
O blooddie Bear, nay rather Tigers whelp
That would refuse her ancient friend to help.
O marble mind O stayne of woman's stock
Not fed with un ^e of kindly nurses pappe
But hewed with tool out of some ruthles rock
And laid withyn some Lionesses lap
Could thou allow thy friend so hard a hap
As by thy side amid his suit to see
Him d^e the death and all for love of thee?
Draw hither dames and read this bloody fact
Note wei the fruit of frovvardnes in love
Peruse the plague of her that pyty lackt
See how in that she pleased the gods above
Example take your xygo^ to remous
And you that are Cupydos knyghts ta^e heed
Bestovv no more good will then shalde need.
Renounce the love of such as are forsped
Forgo those friends vvh^m law forbids to like
Court no man's wife embrace no marriage bed
Leave of your lust by others harines to seek
No such good will can last above a week
Look when you think your selves in cheifest price
They set you by vvhylst others throvv the dyce.
When once regard of honor lies aside
When credyt is respected naught at all
Then shame ensues and follows after pride
From virtue then to fylthy vice they fall
And to allure they use a pleasant call
And being once entangled in the tvvyg
To make you fat they ^eede you with a fyg.
For one delyght ten thousand yls ensues
For little glee much bitter gall you gayue
You may not hope to ty^^oe those women true
Their husbands beds that voe not stick to stayne
And make them serve for cloke^ against the rain
Wherefore I say force not of any daine
That for a friend forgoee an honest name.
EPJTATHES and Sonnettes annexed to the Tragical histories, By the Author.
With some other broken pamphlettes and Epistles, sent to certain his friends
in England, at his being in Moscouia. Anno 1569.

Omnia probate.

Quod bonum est tenete.

A farevvell to a mother Cousin, at his going toward Moscouia.
Go post you pensive lines,
and papers full of woe,
Make haste wnto my mothers hands,
her sons farewell to show.
Do mark her looks at first,
ere you your message tell,
For fear your sudden news, her mind
do fancy nothing well.
But sithen needs you must
my travails troth unfold,
To offer up her sons farewell,
and last adewe, be bold.
I know she will accept
your coming in good part,
Till time she understand by you
that I must needs depart.
But when you make report
that I am shipte from shore,
In mind to cut the foming Seas,
where winter wyndes do roe rore:
Then woe be unto you,
that mournful message bear,
For doubtless she with trembling hands
will you in sunder tear.
But (mother) let your son
persuade you in this case,
For no man sure is borne to lead
his life in one self place.
I must no longer stay
advantage is but vile
The cruel lady fortune on
your son will never smile.
My country coast where I
my Nurses milk did suck,
Would never yet in all my life
allow me one good luck.
With cost increase my cares,
expenses nip me near,
Love waxes cold, no friendship does
in natures breast appear.
Where slender is the gain
and charges grow too hie
Where living lackes and money melts
that should the want supply:
From thence it is time to trudge
and hire the hackney post
To shift to ship, to leave the land
and seek a better coast.
Since I have all my years
in studies fond applide
And every way that might procure
a better chance have tried.
Yet better not my state
but like a sotted dolt
Consume my time that goes about,
to mend a broken bolt.
Since I have livde so long
and never am the naere
To bid my native soil farewell,
I purpose for a year.
And more perhaps if need
and present cause require:
They say the country is too cold
the whotter is the fire.
Moscouia is the place,
where all good furs be sold
Then pray thee (mother) tell me how,
thy son shall dye with cold.
Put case the snow be thick,
and winter frostes be great:
I do not doubt but I shall find,
a stoue to make me sweat.
If I with credit go,
and may return with gain
I hope I shall be able well
to bide this trauayles pain.
The slothful Groom that sits,
at home and tells the clock:
And fears the flood because therein
lies hidden many a rock.
As he abydes no woe,
no wealth he does deserve,
Let him that will not cut the loaf
for lack and famine sterue.
The Catte deserves no fish
that fears her foot to weate,
It Is time for me in profit now
mine idle brains to beat.
I trust I shall return
far better than I go,
Increase of credit will procure
my simple wealth to grow:
Mean while I wish thee well
(good mother mine) to fare,
And better than my self, who yet
was never void of care.
Since need obeyes no law,
and needs I must to barcke,
Farewell, and think upon thy son,
but have of him no carcke.
The Gods I hope will hear
the suit that you shall make,
And I amid the Sea shall fare
the better for your sake.
If ever fortune serve,
and bring me safe to land,
The hard mishappes of travail you
by me shall understand.
And whatsoever strange
or monstrous sight I see.
Assure thy self at my return
I will declare it thee.
Thus every thing has end.
and so my letters shall,
Even from the bottom of my breast,
I do salute you all.
What so becomes of me
the mighty Gods I crave,
That you my friends, a blessed life
and happy deaths may have.
That nothing can cause him to forget his friend, wherein is touched the hardness
of his travail.
IF boystrous blaste of fierce and froward wind,
If weltring waves, and frothie foming Seas,
If shining Sun by night against his kind,
If lack of lust to meat, and want of ease,
If fear of wrack, and force of rouing foe,
If raged Rocks that in the rivers lie:
If frozen floodes where sliding Sledds do go,
If cruel cold upon the mountains hye,
If seldom sleapes, if sundry sorts of care,
If bareskin beds, or else a borded bench,
If lack of kindly cates and courtly fare,
If want of holsom drinck the thirst to quench,
If stinking Stoues, if Cunas and bitter brag,
If savage men, if women foul to sight,
If riding poast upon a trotting Nagge,
If homely yammes, in stead of Innes at night:
If these (I say) might make a man forget
So true a friend, then thou art out of mind.
But in good faith, my fancy firm was set,
No Russie might the true love knot unbind.
Venus be judge, and Cupid in this case,
Who did pursue me aye from place to place.
He declares that albeit he were imprisoned in Russia, yet his mind was at
liberty, and did daily repair to his friend.
NOw find I true that has been often told,
(No man may reaue the freedom of the mind,)
Though kepers charge in chains the captive hold,
Yet can he not the Soul in bondage bind:
That this is true, I find the proof in me,
Who Captive am, and yet at liberty.
Though at my heel a cruel clogge they tie,
And ranging out by rigor be restraynde,
Yet maugre might, my mind does freely fly
Home to my friend, it will not be enchainde:
No Churles check, no Tyrants threat can stay
A Lovers heart, that longs to be away.
I do desire no aid of Dedalus,
By feate to forge such waxen wings anew
As erst he gave his son young Icarus,
When they from Crete for fear of Mynos flew,
Dame Fancy has such feathers still in store,
For me to fly as I desire no more.
Il desire non hariposo.

A comparison of his mistress, with a brave Lady of Russia.
Fair is thy face, and lovely are thy looks,
Rich be thy robes and geason to be had
White are thine ears, hangde full of silver kookes
Brave be thy boots, thy body costly clad,
With Sable, Sube, thy neck beset with pearl.
Thy brodred gyte makes thee a gallant gyrle.
The Russies rude do deem right well of thee,
Mine english eye no painted image leekes,
I have a friend that well contenteth me,
With kindly shape and kindly colored cheeks,
Such one she is, as I will here declare,
Few are her peers, I find her matches rare,
Her hear is golden wire, her shineng eyes
Two Dyamondes that glister passing bright,
Amids her lylye cheeks, the Rubie lies,
Her teeth of pearl, lips lovely red and white,
All other limbs do answer well the same,
Now judge of both which is the brauer dame,
La mia donna
bella e buona.
To his friend promising that though her beauty fade, yet his love shall last.
I Wotte full well that beauty cannot last,
No rose that springs, but lightly does decay,
And feature like a lilly leaf does waste,
Or as the Cowslip in the midst of May:
I know that tract of time does conquer all,
And beuties buddes like fading flowers do fall.
That famous Dame fair Helen, lost her hew
When withred age with wrinckles chaungd her cheeks,
Her lovely looks did loathsomeness ensewe,
That was the A per se of all the Greeks?
And sundry more that were as fair as she
Yet Helen was as fresh as fresh might be.
No force for that, I price your beauty light,
If so I find you steadfast in good will:
Though few there are that do in age delight,
I was your friend, and so do purpose still,
No change of looks shall breed my change of love
Nor beauties want, my first goodwill remove.
Per gentilezza,

Tanto.

Non per bellezza.

From the city of Mosqua, to his friend in England.
GO burning sighs, and pierce the frozen sky,
Slack you ye snow with flames of fancies fire
Twixt Brutus land, and Mosqua that do lie:
Go sighs I say, and to the Phoenix fly,
Whom I embrace, and chiefly do desire,
Report of me that I do love her best,
None other Saint does harbor in my breast.
Tell her that though the cold is wont by kind
To quench the cole, and ffames do yield to frost,
Yet may no winters force in Russia bind
My heart so heard, or alter so my mind,
But that I still embrace her beauty most:
I went her friend, and so continue still,
Frest cannot freat the ground of my good will.
Ardoe ghiaccio.

To his mistres, declaring his life only to depend of her looks.
THe Salamander cannot live
without the help of flaming fire:
To has his limbs in burning coals,
it is his glee and chief desire.
The little fish does love the lake,
dame nature has assigned him:
To live no longer then he does
amid the silver channel swim.
Chameleon feeds but on the air,
the lack whereof is his decay:
These three do perish out of hand,
take fire, floods, and air away.
Judge you (my dear) the danger then
of very force that must ensue:
Unto this careful heart of mine,
that cannot live withouten you.
I am the fish, you are the flood,
my heart it is that hangs on hook:
I cannot live if you do stop,
the floudhatch of your freudly brook.
I silly Salamander die.
if you maintain not frendships fire:
Quench you the coal and you shall see
me pine for lack of my desire.
You are the pleasant breathing air,
and I your poor Chameleon,
Bar me your breath and out of hand
my life and sweet delight is gone.
Which since it is so (good mistress) then
do save my life to serve your turn
Let me have air and water still
let me your Salamander burn.
My death will do you little good,
my life perhaps may pleasure you:
Rewe on my case and pity him,
that swears himself your servant true,
I bear the badge within my breast,
wherein are blazed your colors brave:
Love is the only livery, that
I at your courteous hand do crave.
I do desire no greedy gain,
I covet not the massye gold:
Embrace your servant (mistres) then,
his wages will be quickly told.
As you are fair so let me find,
your bounty equal to your face:
I cannot think that kind so near,
to beauties bower would rigor place,
Your comely hew behight me hope,
your lovely looks allow me life.
Your grave regard does make me deem,
you fellow to Ulysses wife,
Which if be true then happy I,
that so in love my fancy set,
In you does rest my life, my death,
by slaying me no gain you get.
The noble minded Lion kills
no yielding beast by cruelty.
And worthy dames delight to save
their servants lives by courtesy.
Virtu ti comes inuidia.

MY Spencer, spite (...) virtues deadly foe,
The best are ever sure to bear the blame,
And envy next to virtue still does go,
But virtue shines, when envy shrinkes for shame.
In commonweals what bears a greater sway
Than hidden hate that hoordes in haughty breast?
In princes courts it bears the bell away,
With all estates this envy is a guest.
Be wise, thy wit will purchase privy hate,
Be rich, with rents flock in a thousand foes
Be stout, thy courage will procure debate,
Be fair, thy beauty not vnhated goes.
Bear office thou, and with thy golden mace,
Commes envy in, and treades upon thy train,
Yea, be a Prince, and hate will be in place,
To bid him stand aloof it is in vain.
So that I see, that Boccas words be true:
For each estate is pestred with his foe;
Save misery, whom hate does not ensue,
The beggar only does vnspited go:
Yet beggars base estate is not the best,
Though envy let the beggar lie at rest.
Sola miseria esenza

inuidia, Boccacio.

That though he may not possible come or send, yet he lives mindful of his
mistress in Moscouia.
WHo so has read Leanders love,
which he to Lady Hero bore,
And how he swamme through Aelles flood,
twixt Abydon and Sestus shore.
To gain his game, to live at lust,
to lay him in the Ladies lap,
Will rue his pains, and scarce exchange
his case to have Leanders hap,
But happy I account hi^ case,
for having past those narrow Seas,
He was assured to lodge alost,
with Hero in the tower of ease.
He never went but did enjoy,
his mistres whom he did desire.
He seldom swamme the foming flood,
but was assured to quench his fire.
The torch it hung upon the tower,
the lamp gave light to show the way:
He could not miss the darkesome night
it shone as clear as sunny day,
Thus happy was Leaders lot,
but most unhappy mine estate:
For swimming will not serve my turn
to bring me to my loving mate.
The floods are frozen round about,
the snow is thick on every side:
The raging Ocean runs betwixt
my friend and me with crueltide.
The hills be ouerwhelmde with hoare
the country clad with mantels white
Each tree attirde with flakes of ye,
is nothing else faue snow in sight.
The mighty Volgas stately stream
in winter slipper as the glass:
Abides no boat, how should I then
devise a mean a way to pass?
And Suchan that in summer time,
was casie to be ouergone:
With Boreas blast is bound as hard,
as any flint or marble stone,
Free passage Dwina does deny,
whose stream is stopped and choakt with snow.
There is no way for any barge,
much less for any man to go:
I cannot for my life repair,
to thee to ease my present pain:
There is no passage to be had,
til summer slake the snow again.
Mean while yet may thou make account,
that I do still remember thee.
In Russia where I lead my life,
and long again at home to be.
No force shall cause me to forget
or lay the care of love aside:
Time is the touchstone of good will,
whereby my meaning shall be tried.
If I might have conueid my lines,
unto thy hands, it would have easde,
My heavy heart of diverse doubts,
my message might my mind appeasde
But (friend) endure this long delay
my self will come when time shall serve
To tell thee news and how I fare:
mean while stand fast and do not swerue
Presume that as I was thine own,
even so I do continue still.
I stnow her not whose beauty shall remove
or change my first good will.
Thy face has pierst my breast so far,
thy graces este so many be,
As if I would, I cannot choose
but love, and make account of thee.
To a fair gentlevvoman, false to her friend.
Within the garden plot of thy fair face,
Does grow a graffe of diverse qualities:
A matter rare within so little space,
A man to find such sundry properties:
For commonly the root in every tree,
Barcke, body, boughs, bud, leaf, and fruit agree.
First for the root is rigor in the breast,
Creason the tree, that springs of the same,
Beauty the barcke that over spreds the rest,
The boughs are brave, and climing up to fame,
Braules be the buds that hang on every bow,
A blossom fit for such roots to allow.
Love is the leaf that little time endures,
Flattrie the fruit which treasons tree does bear,
Though beauties barste at first the eye allure,
Yet at the last ill will the worm, does wear
Away the leaf, the blossoms, boughs, and all,
And rigors root, makes beauties buds to fall.
Par essere ingrata, Non sarai amata.

A farewell to a crafty deceitful Dame.
AS he that lothes the powders smell,
must never prease where Gunners be:
So he that hates a double daine,
must never have to do with thee.
For craft I see, is all thy care,
thy smoothest looks betoken guiles:
In woman's womb thou feedst a fox,
that bites thy friend on whom he smiles.
Had Nature wist thy deep deceits
before thy birth, I think that kind,
To save thy name, and ease thy friends,
had sealed thine dies, and kept thee blind.
For what is she that bears a face
of greater trust, and more good will:
Yet who is she that has a heart
more prone to pay the good with ill?
Thy beauty Ied me on to love,
thy looks allured my looking eyes:
Thy doubleuesse now breeds despair,
thy craft does cause my woeful cries.
I could requite dissembling love,
and gloze perhaps as well as you:
But that I take but small delight
to change mine ancient friends for new,
Yet will I not be sotted so,
as still to let my love to loss,
I better know what metal is,
than to exchange the gold for dross.
Good will is ever worth good will,
if both the balance egall be:
But sure too massy is my love,
to make exchange of loves with thee.
Wherefore I say, unknit the knot
wherewith thy love was falsely tide,
Thou lackst a grain to make up weight,
men say, (good measure never lide.)
Go seek some other to deceive,
too well I know thy crafty call:
My mouth is very well in taste,
to judge the honey from the gall.
That you are gall, I may auow,
for honey has no bitter taste:
The wine of your good will is spent,
you keep ths dregs for me at last.
Wherefore I do renounce the caske,
I leave the lees for other men:
My hap was ill, my choice was worse,
I yield you up to choose again.
Spare to speak, Spare to speed.
MY Spencer spare to speak,
and ever spare to speed,
Unless shou show thy hurt, how shall
the Surgeon know thy need?
Why has a man a tongue,
and boldness in his breast,
But to bewray his mind by mouth,
to set his heart at rest?
The fisherman that fears
his cork and coard to cast,
Or spread his net to take the fish,
well worthy is to fast.
The forrestman that dreads
to rouse the lodged Bucke,
Because of bramble brakes, deserves
to have no hunters luck.
Where words may wingood will,
and boldness bear no blame,
Why should there want a fare of brass
to bourd the brauest dame?
Unless thou cast thy lure,
or throw her out a train:
Thou seldom shall a Falcon, or
a Tassell gentle gain.
Though looks betoken love,
and makes a show of lust,
Yet speech is it that knits the knot
whereto a man may trust.
Assure thy self, as he
that fears caliuer shot,
Can never come to scale a fort,
or skirmish worth a grote:
So be that spares to speak,
when time and place are fit,
Is sure to miss the mark, which else
he were in hope to hit.
Give him an iuie leaf
in stead of pipe to play,
That dreads to bourd a gallant dame
for fear she say him nay.
Where venture is but small,
and booty very great,
A coward knight will hazard there
in hope to work his fea^.
Wherefore when time shall serve
(my Spencer) spare to blush,
Fall to thy purpose like aman,
and boldly beat the bush.
Who so accounts of loss,
does seldom gain the game:
And blushing cheek and be often hard,
for fear of after shame.
No doubt, a Lady does
embrace him more, that dares
To tell his tale, than such a one
that of his language spares.
Deceit is dreaded more,
and craft does rifer reign,
In one that like an image sits,
than him that speaks plain.
Yea, though thy mistress make,
as though she loved no wine,
Remember Aesops Fox, that was
too low to reach the vine.
Take this for certain troth,
the best and brauest bow,
Will stoop, if so the cause be good,
thou know my meaning now.
Experience has no peer,
it passes learning far:
I speak it not without my book,
but like a man of war.
Wherefore be bold to board
the fairest first of all,
Aye Venus aides the forward man,
and Cupid helps his thrall.
Weary of long silence, he breaks his mind to his mistress.
NOt much unlike the horse
that feels himself orprest
With weighty burden on his back,
does long to be at rest:
So I, whose boiling breast,
with fancies flood did flow,
Had great desire my great good will
with painting pen to show,
To ease my woeful heart
of long endured pain,
And purchase quiet to my mind,
whom love welnie has slain.
Believe my words (dear dame)
dissembling is a sin,
Not mine, but thine, these many days
my captive heart has bin.
But shame, and coward fear,
the lovers mortal foes,
Would never condescend that I
my meaning should disclose.
Till now at length desire
my wonted ease to gain:
Did bid me sue for grace, and said
I should not sue in vain.
For as thy beauty is
far brauer than the rest,
So bounty must of force abound
within thy noble breast.
Oh, seek not thou to shed
or suck of yielding blood:
Alas, I think to murder me
would do thee little good.
Whom if you seem to rue,
as I do hope you will,
In praise of your good nature then
my hand shall show his skill.
Lo here in pawn of love,
I vow my self to thee:
A slave, a servant, and a friend
till dying day to be.
He wishes his dreams either longer or truer.
SHort is the day wherein
I do not think of thee:
And in the night amid my sleep,
thy face (dear dame) I see.
The dream delights me much,
it cuts my care away:
Me thinks I kiss and clip thee often,
the rest I blush to say.
Who happy then but I,
whilst sleep and slumber last:
But who (alas) so much a wretch,
as I when sleep is past.
For with the sliding sleep
away slips my delight:
Departing dreams do drive away
thy countnance out of sight.
And then in place of glee,
in glydes a crew of care:
My panting heart laments, that I
do feel my bed so bare.
For thou that were the cause
of comfort, art not there:
And I poor silly woeful man,
in sobs the night do wear.
Then curse I cankred chance,
that made me dream of thee,
And fancy fond, that fed it self
with dreams that fained be.
Thus wears away the night
consumde in careful pain:
Those restless banners beating still,
upon my busy brain.
Then draws the dawning on,
I leave my couch, and rise,
In hope to find some pleasant toy,
that may content mine eyes.
But out alas, I can
not see so fair a sight,
That can my heause heart relieve,
and dainty cies delight.
Each beauty that does blaze,
each visage that I see:
Augments my care, in causing me
to long and look for thee.
Thus waste I all the night
in dreams without desire:
Thus drive I on my days in love,
that scalds like scorching fire.
Yet well content therewith,
so that, at my return
Thou pity me, who for thy sake
with Cupids coals do burn.
I am the Turile true,
that sits upon the tree:
And wail my woe without a make,
and only wish for thee.
Unable by long and hard travel to banish love, returns her friend.
VVOunded with love, and piercing deep desire
Of your fair face, I left my native land,
With Russia snow to slack mine English fire,
But well I see, no cold can quench the brand
That Cupides coals enkindle in the breast,
Frost has no force where friendship is possessed.
The Ocean sea for all his featefull flood,
The perils great of passage not prevail,
To banish love the rivers do no good,
The mountains hie cause Cupid not to quail,
Wight are his wings, and fancy flies as fast,
As any ship for all his sails and mast.
The river Dwina cannot wash away
With all his waves the love I bear to thee,
Nor Suchan swift loves raging heat delay,
Good will was graft upon so sure a tree.
Since tranaile then, nor frost can cool this fire:
From Mosqua I thy friend will home retire.
That he finds others as fair, but not so faithful as his friend.
I Sundry see for beuties gloss
that with my mistress may compare:
But few I find for true good will
that to their friends so friendly are,
Look what she says I may assure
my self thereof, she will not feign:
What others speak is hard to trust
they measure all their words by gain.
Her looks declare her loving mind,
her countnance and her heart agree:
When others laugh they look as smooth,
but love not half so well as she:
The grief is hers when I am grypte,
my fingers ache is her disease:
With me though others mourn to sight,
yet are their hearts at quiet ease.
So that I mark in Cupids court,
are many fair and fresh to see:
Each where is sown dame beuties feed
but fair and faithful few there be.
Travailing the desert of Russia, he complayneth to Echo, with request that
she comfort his afflicted state.
YOu hollow hills and valleys wide,
that wonted are to yield again:
The latter cause of lovers cries
resound and help me to complain.
Repeat my piteous pensive plaints,
recite my tale when I have done:
Howl out ye hills and let me heart
my voice among your rocks to run.
It will delight my dazed sprites,
when I report my mistress name:
Amid my plaint to hear the hills,
at every call to call the same.
Good Echo show me thy good will,
is no man here but thou and I:
Take up my tale as I lament,
and say (Alas) as I do cry,
Was never man that did enjoy,
a better dame then I have done:
But now (Alas) she is alack,
help Echo, help, I am undone
Besides mine absence from her sight,
another does possess my place,
And of my harvest sheares the sheaues,
help Echo, help, lament my case.
I know not when I shall return,
or when to see that sweet again:
For (out alas) she is away
good echo help to ease my pain.
But naught I see it does avail,
thy talk increases but my woe:
It irkes me to recite her name,
and miss the saint I honor so.
Wherefore since bootlesse be complaints,
and clepings cannot right my case:
I bid thee (Echo) here adieu
I will go seek to see her face.
The face that Paris would have chose,
if he had seen her in the mount:
Good faith the lady Venus had
been had as then in small account.
And as for Pallas and the third,
I mean the mighty Iunos grace:
I know right well they would have hid
themselves, and never pressed in place.
For nature made her not to match,
but to exceed and pass the rest:
Thrice happy he that can attain
her love, and to be liked best.
He craves his mistress to accept his writing being otherwise insufficient to
win good liking from her.
AS many are the means,
to fall in fancies frame:
So diverse be the driftes of men,
for to atchieue the same.
For some to win their loves,
and purchase privy grace:
With curious tongues like carpet knights
do plead a fained case.
And all to please the ears,
and mate their mistress mind:
Of this and that they tell their tales,
as they fit leisure find.
Some other wanting chatte,
not having words at will:
With nimble joints, and fingering fine,
on Lutes do show their skill.
By sugared sound to win,
their ladies to their love:
With earnest care those wanton wights,
Apollos practice prove.
And such as skillful are,
in daunsing do desire
To practice that whereby to sit,
their fronions hearts on fire.
Whose breast is sweet to ear,
he strains his voice to sing:
The reby unto his greedy lust
his mistress mind to bring.
The martial man at arms,
to muster does delight:
And loves to show his helmed head;
before his Ladies sight.
In hope to purchase praise,
and after praise some grace:
For women love a valiant man
that dares defend their case.
Thus each one does attempt,
and puts the thing in ^re
That fittest is to gain good will,
so Faulkners use the lure.
But I unhappy wight,
that can do naught of these:
How might I do, or what devise
my mistress mind to please.
Where neither tongue can talk
nor finger frame with Lute:
Nor footing serve to dauner: alas,
how should I move my suit?
Not pleasant is my voice
unable to delight:
I can do naught vnlesst it be
with pen to show my plight.
I only can in verse,
set out a dame to show^
And on a well deserving friend,
a friendly praise bestow.
Thus must I hunt for love
wherefoe (good Lady) then
In lieu of other finer skilles,
accept my ragged pen.
Let me by writing win,
what others do by art:
And during life you shall assure,
you of a loving heart.
No virtue shall be lodgde
within your courteous breast:
But I will blaze the same abroad,
as bravely as the best.
And as for beuties praise,
I will procure that fame
Shall sound it out so loud, that all
the world shall read thy name*
So as by loving me,
you shall have love again:
And eke the hearts of thousands me
for you good will attain.
I never was mine own
since first (...) your face:
Nor never will, but ever yours,
if you will rue my case.
The mean is best.
THe fire does frye, the frost does freese
the cold breeds care, the heat does harm,
The middle point twixt both is best,
nor ouer-cold, nor ouer-warme.
I dream it not the happy life
the needy beggars bag to bear:
Ne yet the blessed state of all
a mighty Kaisars crown to wear.
That one is cloied with sundry cares,
and dies ten thousand times a day:
That other still in danger goes,
for every traitors hand to flay.
The highest hill is not the place
whereon to build the stately bower:
The deepest bale it is as ill,
for lightly there does rest the shower.
The failing ship that keeps the shore,
upon the rock is often rent:
And he that dentures out too far,
and tries the stream with waves is hent.
For there the win^ does work his will,
there Neptunes churlish imps ^o reign:
The middle way is safe to sail,
I mean the mean betwixt the twain.
So that the mean is best to choose,
not over hie, nor over low:
Wherefore, if you your safety love,
embrace the mean, let mounting go.
To his friend Edward Dancie of Deceit.
DAncie, deceit is rifer now a day,
Then houest dealing, virtue is but vile,
I see dissembling bears the bell away:
Craft has a cloak to cover all his guile,
And underneath the same a knife does lurk,
When time shall serve a shameful spoil to work.
Each man almost has change of faces now,
To shift at pleasure, when it may avail:
A man must give no credit to the browe,
The smoothest smiling friend will soonest fail,
No trust without a trial many years,
All is not gold that glistringly appeeres.
Who so shall make his choice upon a man
To love, and like, must warily look about,
A faithful friend is like a coleblacke Swan.
We may not trust the painted sheath without,
Unless good luck continue at a stay.
Farewell thy friends, like fowls they fly away.
Of the right noble L. William, Earl of Pembroke his death.
THough betters pen the praise
of him that earned fame,
Yet pardon men of meaner skill
if they attempt the same.
Good will may be as great
in simple wits to write,
In commendation of the good,
as heads of deeper sight.
Wherefore among the rest
that rue this Earls want,
My self will set my Muse abroach,
although my vain be scant.
This Realm has lost a lamp,
that gave a gallant show:
No stranger half so strange to us
but did this Noble know.
His virtues spread so far,
his worthy works so wide,
That foreign princes held him dear,
where so he was imploid.
Whose wit such credit won
in country service still,
That Envy could not give the check,
nor rancor reaue good will.
He ever kept the room
that prince and fortune gave:
As courteous in the country, as
in court a Courtier brave.
To low and meanest men
a lowly mind he bore,
No hawtie heart to stout estates,
unless the cause were more.
But than a Lions heart
this dreadful Dragon had:
In field among his foes, as fierce,
as in the Senate sad.
Had Pallas at his birth
for Pembroke done her best,
As nature did: then Pembroke had
surmounted all the rest.
For though that learning lackt
to paint the matter out:
What case of wright so weighty was,
but Pembroke brought about:
By wit great wealth he won,
by fortune favor came:
With favor friends, and with the friends,
assurance of the same.
Of Princes ever praisd
aduaunst and staid in state:
From first to last commended much,
in honors stool he sat.
Beloved of Henry well,
of Edward held as dear:
A doubt whether son or father loved
him best, as might appear.
Queen Mary feel a want,
If Pembroke were away:
So greatly she affied him,
whilst the did bear the sway.
And of our peerless Queen,
that all the rest does pass,
I need not write, she showed her love
whose Steward Pembroke was.
Since such a noble then
by death our daily foe,
Is reft this realm, why do we not
by tears our sorrows show?
Why leave we to lament?
why keep we in our cries?
Why do we not power out our plaints
by condites of the eyes?
Our noble prince, our peers,
both poor and rich may rue,
And each one sorrow Pembroke dead,
that erst him living knew,
Yt joy in one respect,
that he who lived so hie,
In honors seat his honor saved,
and fortunde so to die.
Which stock of noble state
since cruel death has reft,
I wish the branches long to bud,
that of the root are left.
And prosper so alive as did this noble tree,
and after many happy days,
to die as well as he.
Finding his Mistress untrue, he exclaimeth thereat.
SVnne, cease to shine by day,
restrain thy golden beams:
Let stars refuse to lend their light,
let fish renounce the streams.
Sea, pass thy kindly bounds,
set ebb and flood aside:
Brass leave to grow, yet gallant plants,
depart with all your pride.
Bend Tyber back again,
and to thy spring return:
Let fiery coals begin to freeze,
let ise and water burn.
Wolves leave to slay the Lambs,
hounds hunt the Hare no more:
Be friend to fowls, ye hungry hawks
whom ye pursude before.
For kind has altered course,
the law that nature set,
Is broken quite, her orders skornd,
and bands in sunder fret.
Love is accounted light,
and friendship forced naught:
My self may well proclaim the same,
that love has dearly bought.
I fortund once to like
and fancy such a dame:
As sundry serud, but none atchieud
her feature wan her fante.
Long suit and great desnet,
with trial of my trust
Did make her fancy me again,
she found me pers^^ just.
But ere I felt the bliss,
that lovers do attain
I bode a thousead ecu^ll fic^,
ten thousand kinds of pain.
Till ruth by reason grew
and rigor laid apart:
On me she did bestow her love,
that best deserved her heart.
Then mirth began counter prise
the griefs I felt before:
And if I had endured smart
I ioyed than the more.
She past me many voy^^s,
and sundry sorts of hest:
And swore I was the only wight
whom she did fancy best.
Then happy who but I,
that did believe the same?
As who is he that would refuse
to credit such a dame^
O friend when I (quoth she)
shall alter my good will,
And leave to love thee passing well,
thy fancy to fulfill:
When I for gallant gifts,
for mucke or glittring gold:
For comely limbs of courtly knights,
delightful to behold:
For Ka^sars kingly crown
thy friendship do defy:
O Gods (quoth she) renounce me then,
and let me monster die.
These words and sacred vows
might quickly credit gain:
For who in such a case would gloss
or go about to feign?
Yet now for all her speech
and glauering talk the used,
She is revolted, and her friend
too fowlie has abusd:
Though not against her kind,
(for Ladies are but light,)
And soon remove but clean against
their oaths and promise quite.
But what should we expect
from thorns, no Rose perdie:
The figtree yields a fig, on vines
the grapes in clusters be.
Which since I find at last
though greatly to my pain:
Lo here I do defy the face
in whom such craft does reign.
Farewell thou shameless shrew,
fair Cresides heir thou art:
And I sir Troylus erst have been,
as proves by my smart.
Henceforth beguile the Greeks,
no Troyans will thee trust:
I yield thee up to Diomed,
to glut his filthy lust.
And do repute my self
herein a blessed man.
Who, finding such deceit in thee,
refuse thy friendship can.
For sundry times we see,
the sots that serve in love,
Can never purchase freedom, nor
their frantike rage remove.
But who so has the grace
to banish fond desire,
I count him blessed of mighty Jove,
for few or none retire.
So sweet is sinful Just,
the venom is so vile:
As Circes cup no sooner might
the bowsing Greeks beguile.
Now hang abroad thy hooks.
bestow thy baytes elsewhere,
Thy pleasant call shall have no power
to lure my cunning ear.
I tried thy twigges too much,
my feathers felt thy lime:
To give thee up, and shun thy shifts,
I coumpt it more than time.
A warning that she be not discourteous.
I Choose you not to change,
I entered band to bide:
But plighted promise cract by you
I count my self untied.
No hest is to be held,
no vow of value, when
You dames the collar slip:
by craft to compass men.
Presume not of good will,
because I swore you love:
For faithful friends upon abuse,
their fancy may remove.
Which lincke of love undone
repentance comes too late:
The fort is won when truth is slain
and treason keeps the gate.
No tears can purchase truce,
no weeping winnes good will:
True love once lost by due desert,
is not renewde by skill.
Good meaning may not serve,
to feed your friends withal:
As wit in words, so truth in deeds,
appeeres, and ever shall.
Who so does run a race,
shall surely sweat amain
And who so loves, shall hardly gloze
or secret hidden pain.
Way well my love at first
recall to retchlesse thought,
The fiery fittes, the pensive panges,
which I full dearly bought.
Before I took the taste,
of what I lykte so well:
And then consider careless; how
to Iunos yoke you fell.
Forget not how for gain
and mucke your match was mader
When I the while (po^re man) was forced
a weery life to trade,
The Lions love refusde
the noblest beast of all:
Unto a sotte you yokt your self,
and woxe a willing thrall.
Then who wiould force but I,
or hold the fuel dear.
That on another finger fits
and has done many a year.
And long is like to do,
the hog that gapes for hawes,
That hang so fast, may groynd his tuskes
and die with empty laws.
I speak it not of spite,
but sure you ill deserve:
A man that means so well as I,
since you do daily swerue.
A fool by foul abuse,
shall have you more at beck:
Then he that ever loved you well
and never gave you check.
Which shows that either wit,
or faithful love you lack:
Beware in time, misliking grown,
may not be bended back.
When Cresid clapped the dish,
and Lazerlike did go:
She rewde no doubt that erst she did,
the Troyan handle so.
And might she then retirde,
to beuties ancient tower:
She would have stuck to Priams son,
of faithful love the flower.
But fond, too late she found
that she had been too light:
And ouerlate bewaild that she
forwent the worthy knight.
Imprint it in your breast,
and think that Ladies lot
May light on you, with whom your friend
is causlesse thus forgot.
I would be loath to love,
and leave with loss again:
I smarted once, and you (none else)
the ground of all my pain.
Time tries the trusty mind,
which time does council me
To deal my love by equal weight
least I deceived be.
Where counsel nor advice,
can take no better hold:
The loss is light: for color I
embrace not glowing gold.
No more I way a friend,
for feature of her face:
Her dealing well must hind good will,
uprightly judge my case.
I wholly was your own,
and less you love aleeket
The match betwixt us two is marde,
and I your friend to seek.
If any else deserve
a share or better part:
Let me but know your mind, and then
adue with all my heart.
I sound the trumpet now,
that warning geues to you:
To leave to love besides my self,
to whom the whole is due.
I tell you this betimes,
as one that would be loath
By your desert to choose again,
and break mine auncientoth.
Which if by fortune fall,
allow your self the thanks:
Whose parts unkind may force a man
to play unfriendly prankes.
To one whom he had long loved, and at last was refused without cause, and one
embraced that least deferued it.
Che prende diletto di far frode
Non si delamentar, si altrile inhanna,
If lyking best with fancy firmly set,
If loving most, with retchlesse care of state,
If true good will, whom time could never fret,
If pardoning faults, which now I rewe too late,
If good still done, and ever meant to you:
Are not of force to make your frendships true.
If foul abuse and terms of loath some sound,
If mischief meant, and seldom good bestowed,
If black defame and credit brought to ground
If base reports so rashly spread abroad,
Can win good will, and bind a surer band:
Then he that loves and bears you not in hand.
Then happy he that works your deep deray,
And slander seeks to both your open shames,
For he does laugh and bear the belaway,
Unlucky I with whom so^il it frames,
As now at last in guerdon of my toil:
I reap refuse and bide this second foil.
Well may he laugh that is my deadly for,
And I lament impatient of my pain,
Il may she fare whose craft has causde my woe,
And fickle faith deceived me thus again.
But I too blame as many foulers be.
Who had the bird in hand and let her flee.
More wise then you the have that feeling flame
And once indangerd of the burning blaze,
Does straight refuse the touching of the same,
But you much like the guat do love to gaze,
And flee so long about the candle light:
As both will sear your wings and carcass quight.
The slave that serves his prentiship in pain
Not half so much a wretch as wretched I,
For he does end his years with certain gain,
Where I have leave the hardest hap to try,
And hopeless quite of what by due was mine
To groan in grief, and with my pains to pine.
Well, well, content, since chance and you agree
I take my hap though clean against my will
Enforst by you my faith and friend I flee,
You must by kind remain a woman still,
Who looks to have the crow to change his black
Before it chance perchance his eyes may lack.
Since you can rule (as by report you may,)
(And that to rule is it you women crave)
Begin your reign, God grant he do obey
That long in yoke has kept you like a slave,
I fear, I wish, I hope the time will be:
When Louedaies made for lucre will not gree.
Stick fast to him who bolsters your estate,
Forgive the faults that have been done amiss,
Forget reports, cling closely to your mate,
But think on him sometime that wrote you this,
If ever chance do make your bondage free:
God send your second choice like this to be.
And as for him whose helping hand has done,
The best it might to work my cruel woe,
I trust in time when all the threede is sponne,
Shall deeply rewe that he abusde me so.
That woman's spite all other spites exceedes:
It does appear by both your cursed deeds.
If my desert to him had been so ill,
Then could I not on him have laid the blame,
If mine abuse to you had cracked good will,
Yours were the praise and mine the open shame,
I loved you both, and yet do reap at last:
But hate from both, for all my friendship past.
1. Due volte me haiing annato.
2. Supplicio al mondo none dato,
Maggior, quanto pate un che inamorato.
3. Qual lieni foglie, le dome sono, ecrude piu che tasse
Piu che Tigre inclementi, and disdegnose,
Piu che orse, and piu che luge empie erabbiose.
Hanno piu inganni, che non hanno capelli in capo.
4. O quante, art and inganni ha il sesso feminino.
O quanti lacci? O quanti nodi, e groppi?
Per far huomini venir debolie zorpi.
A lio ingrata, troppo amata.
An Epitaph upon the death of Henry Sydhnam, and Giles Bainpfield Gentlemen.
AS rife as to my thought repaires
that dreatie doleful day,
And most unlucky hour (alas)
that hent my friend: away:
So often my breast is like to burst,
and ribs to rend in ^waine:
My liver and my lungs give up,
my heart does melt amain.
And to decipher inward griefs
that crush my carcass so:
The sluices of mine eyes do slip,
and let these humor go.
Out flies the flood of brackish tears,
whole seas of sorrow swell:
In such abundance from my brain,
as woe it is to tell.
Why do I then conceal their names?
what means my sluggish pen,
To hide the haps and lucklesse lot
of these two manly men.
Since silence breeds a smothering smart,
where sundry times we see:
That by disclosing of our minds
great cares digested be.
When fore my mournful Muse begin. etc.
So Fortune would, the cankred Kernes,
who seldom civil are,
Detesting golden peace, took arms,
and fell to frantike war.
Up rose the rude and retchlesse rogues
with dreadful darts in hand:
And sought to noy the noble state
of this our happy land.
Whose bedlam rage to ouerrule,
and fury to confound:
The L. of Essex chosen was,
a noble much renownd.
Away he went awaited on
of many a courtly knight:
Whose swelling hearts had fully vowed
to daunt their foes in fight.
Among the rest (I rue to tell)
my Sydnham took the seas:
Gyles Bampfield eke aboard he leapt,
his princes will to pleafe.
Whose martial minds and burning breasts
were bent to bear the broile:
Of bloody wars, and die the death,
or give the foe the foil.
And treble blessed had they been,
if fortune so had willed:
That they with hawtie sword in hand
had died in open field.
For fame with garland of renown
undoubted decks his head:
That in defense of Prince and Realm,
his life and blood does shed.
But out (alas) these gallant imps
before they came to land:
To show their force and forward hearts,
by dint of deadly haud.
Before they fought amid the field,
or looked the foe in face:
With sudden storm in Irish stream
were drowned, a woeful case.
Up rose with rage a tempest huge,
that troubled so the surge,
As shipmen shrunk, and Pylot knew
not how to escape the scourge.
And yet no dread of doubtful death,
no force of fretting foam:
Nor wrath of weltring waves could stay,
those martial mates at home.
Not angry Aeols churlish chafe,
that scoules amid the skies:
Nor sullen Neptunes surging suds
might daunt their manly eyes.
Unworthy they (O gods) to feed
the hungry fish in flood:
Or die so base a death as that,
if you had thought it good.
But what you will, of force befalls,
your he auenly power is such,
That where and how, and whom you lift,
your godheds daily tuch.
And reason good, that sithence all
by you was wrought and done:
No earthly wight should have the wit
your wreakefull scourge to shonne.
Well, Sydhnam, Bampfield, and the rest,
since wailing does no good:
Nor that my tears can pay the price
or ransom of your blood.
Since no devise of man can make
that you should live again:
Let these my plaints in verse suffice
your souls, accept my pain.
If ought my writing be of power
to make your virtues known:
According to your due deserts
which you in life have shown.
Assure your selves, my mournful Muse
shall do the best it can:
To cause your names and noble minds,
to live in mouth of man.
And so adue, my faithful friends,
lamenting lets my quill:
I loved you living, and in death,
for ever so I will.
Accept my writing in good worth,
no fitter means I find
To do you good, now being dead,
nor ease my mourning mind.
No better life than you have led
unto my self I wish:
But happier death, if I might choose,
than so to feed the fish.
The gods allow my lims a tomb
and grave wherein to lie:
That men may say, thrice happy he,
that happened so to die.
For kindly death is counted good,
and blessed they be thought:
That of their friends unto the pit,
upon the beer are brought.
But for my felfe, I reckon those
more blessed a thousand fold,
That in the quarrel of their prince,
their lives and blood have fold.
As you mine ancient mates did mean,
for which the mighty Jove:
In heaven shall place your souls, although
your bones on rocks do roue.
A letter begun to a Gentlewoman of some account, which was left of by means of
the advice of a friend of his, who said she was foresped.
YOur beauty (madame) made
mine eye to like your fare:
And now my heart did cause my hand,
to sue to you for grace.
The ground of my good wit,
by feature first was cast,
Which your good noble nature has
for ever sealed fast.
When psants be surely pight.
than lightly will they prove,
No tree can take so deep a ^oote
as grifts of faithful love.
If I had feared disdain,
or thought that hawtie pride
Had harbourd in that breast of yours,
which is the pecocks guide.
Then should I not have durst
these verses to indite,
But waying well your courteous kind,
I took the heart to write.
In hope that Venus gifts
are matched with Pallas goods,
And that true friendship flowers will spring
of blasing beauties buds.
For seldom shall you find
a dame of your degree:
And of such features, but her looks
and manners do agree.
Which if in proof I find,
as I presume I shall,
Then happy others, but I count
my fortune best of all.
And to express my joy,
my hands I mean to clap:
As who would say, lo I am he
that have this blessed hap.
Let not my hopes be vain,
in your hand lies my life:
And if you list to cut my throat,
you have the fatal knife.
For wholly on your looks
and mercy stays the thread
That holds my lims together now,
the gods have so decreed.
I am your bounden thrall,
and ever mean to be:
I will not change my choice, etc.
To his friend not to change, though jealousy debar him her company.
CHange not thy choice (my dear,)
stand stable in good will,
Let ancient faithful love appeete
betwixt us lovers still.
A wisdom friends to win,
as great a wit again:
A gotten friend, that faithful is,
in friendship to retain.
Thou see how hatred hewes
the chips of our mischance:
And jealousy does what it may,
the Viper to advance.
Whose prying eyes are pressed
to hinder our intent
But malice often does miss his mark,
where two good wills be bent.
So careful Argus kept,
the fair well featured cow:
Whose watchful eyes fol soldome slept,
according to his vow.
And yet at length he lost
his head, and eke his hire:
For Mercury his cunning crossed,
to further Jove's desire.
So cursed Acrisius closde
the maiden in the mewe
Where he assuredly supposed
to keep the virgin true.
Yet Danac did conceive
within the secret tower:
And did in lap receive the god,
that fell in golden shower.
Way what good will he bears,
that lives in such distrust:
He fares as does the wretch that fears
his gold, and lets it rust.
Whose hungry heaping mind
for all his looking on:
Is often abusde, and made as blind
as any marble stone.
I crave but your consent,
when time and place agree:
And that you will be well content
to yield your self to me.
Who ever will regard,
the honor of your name:
And look what pleasure may be sparde,
will only crave the same.
No check shall taint your cheekt,
by proof of open act:
I never will unwisely seek,
to have your credit crackte.
My love excels his lust.
my fancy his good will:
My truth does far surmount his trust
my good deserts his il.
Wherefore (my dear) consent
unto my just request:
For I long since have loved you well,
and ever meant you best.
So shall you have my heart,
still ready at your call:
You cannot play a wiser part
then cherish such a thrall.
To his friend not to forget him.
WHere liking grows of lust,
it cannot long endure:
But where we find it graft on love,
there friend ships force is sure.
Where wealth procures good will,
when substance slides away
There fancy alters all by fittes,
and true love does decay.
Where beutie binds the band,
and feature forces love.
With crooked age or changed face,
there friendship does remove.
No one of these (my dear)
that fickle thus do fade:
Did bend my breast, or forced thy friend
to follow Cupids trade,
But mere good will in deed
not graft on hope of gain:
I lovde without regard of lust
as proof has taught you plain.
I way no wavering wealth
I force not of thy face:
No grant of pleasure pricks me on
thy person to embrace.
No hope of after hap,
ingenders my good will:
I lovde thee when I saw thee first,
and so I love thee still
Wherefore requite with care
the man that means you so:
It lies in you to yield him ease,
or plague his heart with woe.
You were not bred of rocks,
no marble was your meat:
I trust I shall so good a dame,
to love me best entreat.
You know I bear the blame,
your self are nothing free:
He loves me not for loving you,
nor you for loving me.
Consider of the case
and like where you are lovde:
It is against your kidde to please
where you are so reprovde,
His friendship is in doubt,
you stand assured of me:
He hates us both, I cannot love,
the man that hates thee.
His frantike words of late,
bewraide his folly plain:
Assure your seife he loves you not,
his glosing is for gain.
Which purpose being brought,
to his desired pass:
The sotte will show himself a beast,
and prove a wayward Ass.
By reason rule his rage,
by wisdom master will:
Embrace your friend in spite of him,
that means you no good will.
A time in time may come,
if gods will have it so:
When we each other shalinioy,
to quite each others woe.
Which time if time agree,
to pleasure us withal:
Our honey will the sweeter seem
that we have tasted gall.
Till when use woman's wit
therein you know my mind:
I never was, nor never will
be found your friend unkind.
A vow of Constancy.
FIrst shall the raging floods
against their course run:
By day the moon shall lend her light,
by night the golden sun.
First fickle fortune shall
stand at a stedy stay:
And in the sea the shining stars
shall move and keep their way.
First Fish amid the air,
shall wander to and fro:
The clouds be clear, in beuty eke
the cole exceed the snow.
First kind shall alter all
and change her wonted state:
The blind stal see, the deaf shall hear,
the dumb shall freely prate.
Before that any chance,
or let that may arise
Shall Be of force to wrest my love
or quench in any wise.
The flame of my good will,
and faithful fancies fire:
Save cruel death shall nothing daunt,
or cool my hot desire,
Desire that guides my life
and yeldes my heart his food:
Wherefore to be in presence still,
with thee, would do me good
Which presence I presume
thou never wilt deny:
But as occasion serves,
so thou to friendship wilt apply.
Til when I give thee up,
to good and happy chance:
In hope that time to our delights,
will seek us to advance.
Adue (dear friend) to thee,
that art my only joy:
More fair to me then Helen was
to Priams son of Troy.
And constant more in love,
then was Ulysses make
Of whose assured life and zeal,
so much the Poets spoke
Less light then Lucrece eke
whom Tarquins lust defilde:
As courteous as the Carthage Queen,
that fowly was beguilde.
To quite all which good parts,
this vow I make to thee:
I will be thine as long as I
have power mine own to be.
Another Epitaph upon the death of Henry Sydhnam, and Gyles Bampfield gent.
IF tears might ought avail to stynt my woe
If sobbyng sighs breathd out from pensive breast
Could ease the gryping greefes that pain me so
Or pleasure them for whom I am distressed
Neither would I stycke with tears to fret my face:
Nor spare to speud redoubled fighes apace.
But since neither dreary drops nor sighs have power
To do me good, or stand my friends in steed
Why should I seek with forovves to devour
Those humors that my fayntyng lymmes should feed.
Bootelesse it were therefore I will assay
To show my self a friend some other way.
Some other way, as by my mournyng pen,
To do the world to wit what vvyghts they were
Whose deaths I vvayle, what friendly forvvard men
And to this land they both did bear
Alas, I rue to name them in my verse:
Whose only thought my trembling heart does pearse.
But yet I must of force their names unfold,
(For things concealde are seldom when bewaild,
Tone Sydnham was, a manly wight and bold.
In whom neither courage baute, nor feature faylde,
Faithful to friends undaunted to his foes
A lamb in love, where be to fancy chose.
The second near unto my self allyde,
Gyles Bamfield hight. (I weep to write his name,)
A gallant ympe, amyd his youthful pride:
Whose seemly shape commended natures frame.
Deckte of the gods in cradle where he lay:
With lovely lymmes, and parts of purest clay.
Themselves might boast their byrths for gentle blood
The houses are of countenance whence they came
And vaunt I dare their virtues rare as good,
As was their race and fitted to the same.
There wanted naught to make them perfect blessed:
Save happy deaths which clouded all the rest.
When rascal Irysh happened to rebel,
(Who seld we see do long continue true)
Unto the Lord of Esser lotte it fell.
To have the lotte those outlawes to subdue.
Who went away to please the Prince and state:
A ^^^ded on of many a doughty mate.
Whose names although my dreary quil conceal,
Yet they (I trust) will take it well in worth
For noble minds employed to common weal,
Shall find a stem to blaze their prowes forth.
My doleful muse but this alone entends:
To write and wayle, my friends unhappy ends.
Away they would, and gave their last adieu,
With burning hearts to slay the savage foe,
Bestride their steads, and to the sea they flew,
Where weather rose, and water raged so,
As they (alas) who mean their country good,
Were forced to lose their lives in Irish flood.
Those eyes should have looked the foe in face,
Were then constraind to wink at every wave,
Those valiant arms the ^illowes did embrace,
That vowed with sword this reaims renown to save:
Those manly minds that dreaded no mishap,
Were soust in seas, and caught in sudden trap.
Proud Eole Prince, controller of the winds,
With churlish Neptune, sovereign of the ^e^s,
Did play their parts, and showed their stubburn kinds,
Whom no request nor prayer might appease,
The Tooyan Duke bid not so great a brunt,
When he of yore for Laume land did hunt.
And yet these wights committed none offense,
To Juno, as sir Paris did of yore,
Their only travel was for our defense,
Which makes me wail their sudden deaths the more,
But what the Gods do purpose to be done,
By proof we see, man's wisdom cannot shun.
Ye water Nymphs, and you that Ladies be,
Of more remorse, and of a milder mood:
Than Neptune or king Eole, if you see
Their balefull bodies d^^uing on the flood,
Take up their lims, allowing them a grave,
Who well deserved a richer hearse to have.
Whereon do stamp this small device in stone,
That passers by, may read with dewed eyes,
When they by chance shall chance to light thereon.
Lo Sydhnam here, and Bampfields body lies:
Whose willing hearts to serve their prince and realm,
Shortened their lives amid this wrathful stream.
Ante obitum, supremaque funera fo^lix.

Deo iubente, fato cedunt mortalia.

A lover deceived, exclaimes against the deceiuer and her kind.
HOw much a wretch is he
that does affie so well
In woman's words, and in her heart
does lodge his love to dwell:
Believes hir-outward glee.
and tickle terms to trust,
And does without regard of time,
apply to woman's lust?
Since that her wandering will,
and most unstable mind:
Does daily toss and turn about,
as leaves amid the wind.
Who lothes her most, she loves,
and him that sues for grace,
She sharply shuns, and proudly scorns,
and ebbes and flows apace.
O gods what have I done?
alas, at length I spy:
My former follies, and discern
how much I marched awry.
To plant assured trust,
in tickle woman's breast:
That Tygerlike sance mercy lives,
and ever shuns the best.
And yet she knows I love,
and how I waste away:
And that my heart may have no rest,
nor quiet night or day.
Which since to her is known,
and how I hold her chief:
Why cruel and unkind, does she
not pity of my grief?
Who is so perfect wise,
that may such malice brook,
Of woman's proud disdain,
or bear their braules with quiet look?
Without an open show
of loathsome lurking smart:
That racks the ribs, that beats the breast,
and plagues the pensive heart.
O me unhappy wight,
most woeful wretch of all,
How do I lose my liberty,
and yield my self a thrall.
In serving her, that clean
against all law and right:
Consumes my life, destroys my days,
and robs my reason quite.
O love, cut off her course,
and bridle such a dame:
As skornes thy skill, and leaves thy laws,
and makes my grief her game.
If (as I deem) thou be,
the sovereign of the skies:
Of Elements and Nature eke,
that all in order ties.
Wreake both thy wrong sustamd,
and eke thy damage done
To me, on her, whom flatly thou,
perceiuest us both to shun.
Convert her frosen heart,
to coals of scalding fire
Where rigor raigns, and envy dwells,
with poisoned wrathful ire.
She, crue^l, knows my love,
and how as Saint, I shrine
Her beauty in my breast,
and how with pearcing pains I pine:
And how a thousand times,
each day I die, she knows,
Yet merciless, no mercy she,
nor sign of sorrow shows.
She bound me to the stake,
to broile amid the brands:
At point to die a Martyrs death,
all which she understands.
Yea, though she know it well,
yet she conceiues a joy:
At all my bitter grief, and glads
her self with mine annoy.
O most disloyal dame,
O bloody brested wight:
O thou, that have consumd by care,
my heart and courage quite.
O thou for treason that
Iugurtha, and the Jew
Do far excel, and from thy friend,
withholdst thy favor dew.
O traitorous of thy troth,
of all good nature bare:
Lo here of my poor wounded heart,
the gash cut in by care.
I see thou see my sore,
and yet thou will be blind:
Thou stopst thine ears, and wilt not hear
the griefs that I do find.
Where is become thy love,
and ancient great good will:
That erst was borne: where is that desire
that forced thee to fulfill
Thy pleasures past with me
in cabin where we lay?
What is become of those delights?
where is that sugared play?
Where Is all that daliance now,
and profers proudly made?
Where Is those imbrasings friendly,
where is that blessed trade
And signs of perfect love,
which then thou putst in ure?
And which for any gift of mine,
might yet right well endure.
Full shadowlike they shift,
and can no longer bide:
Like dust before the wind they fly,
your other mate does guide.
And strikes so great a stroke,
he wrests your wits as round
As flittering leaves, that from the Ash
or pine are shaken dowue.
Full lightly woman's love,
is altered evermore:
It may not last, there is exchange
continually in store.
And reason: For by kind
a woman is but light,
Which makes that fancy from her breast,
is apt to take her flight.
I had good hope at first,
when hap did me assure,
To like of thee, that this thy love,
was planted to endure.
I never feared a fall,
on ground that lay so green:
Where path was plain for me to pass,
and bottom to be seen.
I doubted no decay,
nor feard-no after smart:
Thy beauty did me not despair,
thy looks assured thy heart.
But who believes the looks
of any of your race,
May soon deceive himself,
There lies no credit in the face.
Well, fith thy froward mind,
does like to hear my moan:
And mine unhappy planet gives
consent, that I alone,
Without thy love shall live,
and lack the lamp of light:
To clear mine eyes, that far excels
all other stars in sight.
Unto the hawtie skies,
and people here below:
I will my griping griefs express,
and surge of sorrows show.
In hope that direful death,
with dreadful dart of force:
Will couch my carease in the grave,
and there convey my corse.
Yet ere I die, receive this Swanlike song,
To ease my heart, and show thine open wrong.
O Wavering woman's will,
that bends so soon about:
Why do thou so revolt in have,
and shutst thy friend without.
Against the law of love,
O thrice unhappy he:
That does believe thy beauties beams,
and looks of gallant glee.
For neither thraldom long,
that I poor wight abode:
Nor great good will by sundry signs,
and outward gesture showed.
Had force to hold thy heart,
and keep thee at a stay:
No good desert of mine might stop
that would of force away.
Yet of this cruel lotte,
and fell mischance, I find
Nor know no cause, but that thou art
sprung out of woman's kind.
I judge that Nature, and
the Gods that govern all
Deuisde this wicked shameless sect
to plague the earth withal.
A mischief for us men,
a burden bad to bear:
Without whose match too happy we,
and too too blessed were.
Even as the Bears are bread,
the Serpent and the Snake.
The barking Wolf, the filthy fly
that noisome flesh does make.
The stinking weed to smell
that grows among the grain:
Even so I think the Gods have made
your race us men to pain.
Why did not kind foresee
and nature so devise
That man of man without the help,
of woman might arise?
As by the art of hand
of apples apples spring:
And as the pearetree graft by kind
another pear does bring.
But if you mark it well,
the cause is quickly seen:
It is for that thou Nature art
a woman though a Queen.
O dames I would not wish
you peacocklike to look
Or puffed with pride to vaunt that man
of you his being took.
For on the bryar often
a gallant Rose does grow
And of a stinking wede an herb
or flower fresh to show.
Ye are excessive proud,
stuffed up with stately spite:
Void of good love, of loyal truth
and all good counsel quite.
Rash, cruel causlesse, cursed,
unkind without desert
Borne only for the scourge of him
that bears a faithful heart.
I rather wish to die,
then live a vassaile still
Or thrall my self unto a dame
that yeldes me no good will.
The worms shall sooner feed
upon my happy heart:
Within my grave, then I for love
of you will suffer smart.
Adue dear dames,
the ghastly ghostes of hell
Shall plague your bones
that gloze and love not well.
To his cruel mistress.
Give loosers leave to speak,
let him that feels the smare
Without controlment tell his tale,
to ease his heavy heart.
To thee (proud dame) I point,
who like the beast of Nile:
By tears procurest thy friend to love
and flaiest him all the while.
By weeping first to win
and after conquest made
To spoil with spite those yelding impes
that follow Cupids trade.
Condemns thy cancred kind,
more glory were for thee
To ransacke none but rebel hearts
and let the rest go free.
Kind wist not what she wrought
when she such beuty lent
Unto those gallant limbs of thine
to monstrous mischief bent.
For either fowler face
she would have yielded thee:
Or better mood and milder mind
to make remorse of me.
Thou bear two burning brands,
below those brows of thine:
And I the brimstone in my breast,
which makes my heart to pine.
Each lowering look of yours,
Irets farther in my heart:
And nips me nearer then
the force of any other dart.
And to increase my care,
thou make thy beutie more:
An oil (God wotte) unto my fire,
no salve to case my sore.
If thou a woman were,
of ruth and due remorse:
Thou would allow me love,
and not so proudly plague my corse,
I sue for mercy now,
with hands lift up on hie
Which if I miss I am assurde,
within few days to die.
And if I may not have
the thing I would enjoy:
I pray the Gods to plague thee
as they did the dame of Troy.
I mean that Creside coy
that linkt her with a Greek:
And left the lusty Troyan Duke,
of all his love to seek.
And so they will I trust
a mirror make of thee:
That beuties darlings may beware
when they thy scourge shall see.
I never meant thee well,
in all my life before:
But now to plague thy foul abuse,
I hate thee ten times more.
For reason wills me so,
my friends to love and serve
And cruel Ladies like thy self,
to wish as they deserve.
Henceforth if any limme,
of mine perhap rebel:
And thee whom I of right should loath
do love or fancy well.
I quite renounce the same
he shall no more be mine
To use or stand in stead, then I
do purpose to be thine.
And thus I make an end
of love, and lines at once
The frounce consume the flesh of her,
that feeds upon my bones.
The Author being in Moscouia, wrytes to certain his friends in England of
the state of the place, not exactly, but at all adventures, and minding to have
descrybed all the Moscouites manners, brake off his purpose upon some occasion.
The three Epistles follow.

To his especial friend, master Edward Dancie.
My Dancie dear, when I
recount within my breast:
My London friends and wonted mates
and thee above the rest.
I feel a thousand fittes
of deep and deadly woe:
To think that I from sea to land,
from bliss to bale did go.
I left my native soil,
full like a retchlesse man
And unacquainted of the coast,
among the Russies ran.
A people passing rude,
to vices vile enclinde:
Folk fit to be of Bacchus train,
so quaffing is their kind.
Drink is their whole desire,
the pot is all their pride:
The sobrest head does once a day,
stand needeful of a guide.
If he to banquet bid his friends,
he will not shrink
On them at dinner to bestow
a dosen kinds of drink.
Such licour as they have
and as the country gives:
But chiefly two, one called Kuas,
whereby the Music lives.
Small ware and waterlike
but somewhat tart in taste:
The rest is Meade, of honey made
wherewith their lips they baste.
And if he go unto
his neighbor as a guest:
He cares for little meat, if so
his drink be of the best.
Perhaps the Mausick has
a gay and gallant wife:
To serve his beastly lust yet he
will lead a bowgards life.
The monster more desires
a boy within his bed
Then any wench, such filthy sin
ensues a drunken head.
The woman to repay,
her drousie husbands dettes:
From stinking stoue unto her mate
to baudy banquet gets.
No wonder though they use
such vile and beastly trade:
Since with the hatchet and the hand,
their chiefest Gods be made.
Their Idolles have their hearts
on God they never call:
Unless it be (Nichola Bough)
that hangs against the wall.
The house that has no God,
or painted saint within:
Is not to be resorted to,
that roof is full of sin.
Besides their private Gods,
in open places stand
Their crosses, unto which they crouch,
and bless themselves with hand.
Devoutly down they ducke,
with forhead to the ground:
Was never more deceit in rags,
and greasy garments found.
Almost the meanest man
in all the country rides:
The woman eke against our use,
her trotting horse bestrides.
In sundry colors they
both men and women go:
In buskins all, that money have
on buskins to bestow.
Each woman hanging has
a ring within her ear:
Which all of ancient use, and some
of very pride do wear.
Their gate is very grave,
their countenance wise and sad:
And yet they follow fleshly lusts,
their trade of living bad.
It is no shame at all,
accounted to destle
Another bed, they make no care
their follies to concile.
Is not the meanest man
in all the land, but he
To buy her painted colors does
allow his wife a fee.
Wherewith she decks her self,
and dies her tawnie skin:
She prancks and paints her smokie face,
both browe, lip, cheek and chin.
Yea those that honest are
(if any such there vee)
Within the land, do use the like,
a man may plainly see.
Upon some women's cheeks
the painting how it lies:
In plaster sort, for that too thick
her face the harlot dies.
But such as skillful are,
and cunning dames in deed:
By daily practice do it well,
yea sure they do exceed.
They lay their colors so,
as he that is full wise:
May easily be deceived therein,
if he do trust his eyes.
I not a little muse
what madness makes them pain
Their faces, waying how they keep
the stoue by mere constraint.
For seldom when, unless
on church or marriage day.
A man shall see the dames abroad
that are of best array.
The Russie means to reap
the profit of her pride:
And so he mewes her, to be sure
she lie by no man's side.
Thus much (friend Dancie)
I did mean to write to thee:
To let thee wite, in Russia land,
what men and women he.
Hereafter I perhaps
of other things will write:
To thee and other of my friends,
which I shall see with sight.
And other fluffe befides,
which true report shall tell:
Mean while I end my loving lives,
and bid thee now farewell.
To Spencer.
IF I should now forget
or not remember thee:
Thou (Spencer) might a foul rebuke
and shame impute to me.
For I to open show
did love thee passing well:
And thou were he; at parture whom
I loathd to bid farewell.
And as I went thy friend,
so I continue still:
No better proof thou can desire
than this, of true good will.
I do remember well
when needs I should away:
And that the poast would license us,
no longer time to stay.
Thou wroongst me by the fist,
and holding fast my hand:
Did crave of me to send thee news,
and how I likte the land.
It is a sandy soil,
no very fruitful vain:
More wast and wooddie grounds there are
than closes fit for grain.
Yet grain there growing is,
which they untimely take:
And cut or ere the corn be ripe,
they mow it on a stake.
And laying sheafe by sheafe,
their harvest so they dry:
They make the greater have.
for fear the frost the corn destrie.
For in the winter time,
so glarie is the ground:
As neither grass nor other grain
in pastures may be found.
In comes the cattle then,
the sheep, the colt, the cow:
Fast by his bed the Mawsicke
then a lodging does allow.
Whom he with fodder feeds,
and holds as dear as life:
And thus they wear the Winter with
the Mowsicke and his wife.
Eight months the Winter dures,
the glare it is so great:
As it is May before he turn
his ground to sow his wheat.
The bodies eke that die,
unburied lie till then:
Laid up in coffins made of fur,
as well the poorest men.
As those of greater state,
the cause is lightly found:
For that in winter time
they cannot come to break the ground.
And wood so plenteous is
quite throughout all the land:
As rich and poor at time of death,
assured of coffins stand.
Perhaps thou musest much,
how this may stand with reason:
That bodies dead, can vncorrupt,
abide so long a season.
Take this for certain troth,
as soon as heat is gone:
The force of cold the body binds
as hard as any stone.
Without offense at all,
to any living thing:
And so they lie in perfect state,
till next return of spring.
Their beasts be like to ours,
as far as I can see:
For shape and show, but somewhat less
of bulk and bone they be.
Of watrish taste, the flesh not firm,
like English biefe:
And yet it serves them very well,
and is a good relief.
Their sheep are very small,
sharp singled, handful long:
Great store of foul on sea and land,
the moorish reeds among.
The greatness of the store
does make the prices less:
Besides, in all the land they know
not how good meat to dress.
They use neither broach nor spit,
but when the stoue they heat,
They put their vitails in a pan,
and so they bake their meat.
No pewter to be had,
no dishes but of wood:
No use of trenchers, cups
cut out of birch are very good.
They use but wooden spoones,
which hanging in a case:
Each Mowsike at his girdle ties,
and thinks it no disgrace.
With whittles two or three,
the better man the me.
The chiefest Russies in the land,
with spone and knives do go.
Their houses are not huge
of building, but they say
They plant them in the loftiest ground
to shift the snow away.
Which in the Winter time
each where full thick does lie:
Which makes them have the more desire
to set their houses hie.
No stone work is in use,
their roofes of rafters be:
One linked in another fast,
their walls are all of tree.
Of mastes both long and large,
with moss put in between,
To keep the force of weather out,
I never erst have seeue.
A gross devise so good,
and on the roof they lay:
The burden bark, to rid the rain
and sudden showers away.
In every room a (stoue)
to serve the winter turn:
Of wood they have suffising store,
as much as they can burn.
They have no English glass,
of slices of a rock:
Hight Sluda, they their windows make,
that English glass does mock.
They cut it very thin,
and sow it with a thread,
In pretty order like to panes,
to serve their present need.
No other glass good faith
does give a better light:
And sure the rock is nothing rich,
the cost is very slight.
The chiefest place is that
where hangs the God by it:
The owner of the house himself,
does never use to sit.
Unless his better come,
to whom he yields the seat:
The stranger bending to the god,
the ground with browe must beat.
And in that very place,
which they most sacred deem:
The stranger lies a token that
his guest he does esteem.
Where he is wont to have
a Bears skin for his bed:
And must in stead of pillow
clap his saddle to his head.
In Russia other shift
there is not to be had:
For where the bedding is not good,
the bolsters are but bad.
I mused very much
what made them so to lie
Since in their country down is rife,
and feathers out of cry.
Unless it be because
the country is so hard:
They fear by nicenes of a bed,
their bodies would be marde.
I wished thee often with us,
save that I stood in fear
Thou would have loathed to have laid,
thy limbs upon a bear
As I and Stafford did,
that was my make in bed:
And yet we thank the God of heaven,
we both right well have sped.
Lo thus I make an end,
none other news to thee:
But that the country is too cold
the people beastly be.
I write not all I know,
I touch but here and there
For if I should, my pen would pinch,
and eke offend I fear.
Who so shall read this verse,
contecture of the rest:
And think by reason of our trade
that I do think the best.
But if no traffic were,
then could I boldly pen
The hardness of the soil,
and eke the manners of the men.
They say the Lions pawe
geues judgment of the beast:
And so may you deem of the great
by reading of the least.
To Parker.
MY Parker, paper, pen
and ink were made to write,
And idle heads that little do,
have leisure to endite
Wherefore respecting these,
and thine assured love,
If I would write no news to thee
thou might my pen reprove.
And since fortune thus,
has shoued my ship from shore:
And made me seek another Realm
unseen of me before.
The manners of the men,
I purpose to declare
And other private points beside,
which strange and geason are.
The Russie men are round
of bodies, fully fast
The greatest part with bellies big,
that ouerhang the wast.
Flat headed for the most,
with faces nothing fair.
But brown by reason of the stoue,
and closenes of the air.
It is their common use,
to shave or else to sheare,
Their heads: for none in all the land,
long lolling locks do we are.
Unless perhaps he have
his sovereign Prince displeasde
For then he never eues his hear,
until he be appeasde.
A certain sign to know
who in displeasure be:
For every man that bewes his head
will say, lo this is he.
And during all the time,
he lets his locks to grow:
Dares no man for his life,
to him a face of friendship show.
Their garments be not gay,
nor handsome to the eye?
A cap aloft their heads they have
that stands very hie.
Which (Colpack) they do term
they wear no ruffes at all The best have collars set with pearl
Rubasca they do call.
Their shirts in Russie long
they work them down before
And on the sleeves with colored silks,
two inches good or more.
Aloft their shirts they wear
a garment iocket wise
Hight Onoriadka, and about
his bourly wast he ties
His Portkies, which in stead,
of better breeches be.
Of linen cloth that garment is
no codpeece is to see
A pair of yornen stocks
to keep the cold away:
Within his boots the Russie wears,
the heels they underlay.
With clouting clamps of steel,
sharp pointed at the toes:
And over all a Suba furde,
and thus the Russie goes.
Well butned is the Sube
according to his state
Some silk, of silver other some
but those of poorest rate
Do wear no Subes at all
but grosser gowns to sight:
That reaches down beneath the calfe,
and that Armacha hight.
These are the Russies robes,
the richest use to ride
From place to place, his servant runs
and follows by his side.
The Cassocke bears his fealt,
to force away the rain:
Their bridles are not very brave,
their saddles are but plain.
No bittes, but snaffels all,
of byrche their saddles be:
Much fashioned like the Scottish seats,
broad flaxs to keep the knee.
From sweating of the horse,
the pannels larger far
And broader be than ours
they use short stirrops for the war,
For when the Russie is
pursude by cruel foe
He rides away, and suddenly,
betakes him to his bow.
And bendes me but about
in saddle as he sits
And therewithal amid his race,
his following foe he hittes.
Their bows are very short,
like Turkey bows outright:
Of sinews made with byrchen bark,
in cunning manner dight.
Small arrows, cruel heads,
that fell and forked be:
Which being shot from out those bows
a cruel ways will flee.
They seldom shoe their borse,
unless they use to ride
In poast upon the fooyen floods,
then cause they shall not slide
He sets a slender calke,
and so he rides his way^
The horses of the tountrey go,
good fourscore veorsts a (...)
And all without the spu^re
once prick them and they skip,
But go not forward on their way.
the Russie has his whip
To rap him on the ribs
for though all booted be
Yet shall you not a pair of spurs
in all the country sie,
The common game is chesse
almost the simplest will
Both give a check and eke a mate,
by practice comes their skill.
Again the dice as fast,
the poorest roges of all
Will sit them down in open field
and there to gaming fall.
Their dice are very small,
in fashion like to those
Which we do use, he takes them up,
and over thumb he throws,
Not shaking them^a whit,
they cast suspiciously:
And yet I deem them void of art,
that dicing most apply.
At plaxe when silver lackes,
goes saddle, horse and all:
And each thing else worth silver walks,
although the price be small.
Because thou love to play,
friend Parker, otherwhile
I wish thee there, the weary day,
with dicing to beguile.
But thou were better far
at home, I wist it well
And would been loath among such loutes
so long a time to dwell.
Then judge of us thy friends,
what kind of life we had.
That near the frozen pole to wast
our weary days were glad.
In such a savage soil,
where laws do bear no sway
But all is at the King his will,
to save or else to slay.
And that saunce cause God wot,
if so his mind be such
But what mean I with kings to dealt
we ought no Saints to touch.
Conceive the rest your self,
and deem what lives they lead:
Where lust is law, and subjects live
continually in dread.
And where the best estates,
have none assurance good
Of lands, of lives, nor nothing falls
unto the next of blood.
But all of custom does
unto the Prince redowne:
And all the whole revenue comes
unto the king his crown,
Good faith I see thee muse,
at what I tell thee now
But true it is, no choice
but all at Princes pleasure bow.
So Tarquine ruled Rome,
as thou remembrest well:
And what his fortune was at last,
I know thy self can tell.
Where will in common weal,
does bear the only sway.
And lust is law, the prince and realm
must needs in time decay.
The strangeness of the place is such
for sundry things I see:
As if I would, I cannot write
each private point to thee.
The cold is rare, the people rude,
the prince so full of pride:
The realm so stord with monks and nuns,
and priests on every side.
The manners are so Turkylike,
the men so full of guile:
The women wanton, temples stuffed
with idols that destle.
The seats that sacred ought to be,
the customs are so quaint:
As if I would describe the whole,
I fear my pen would faint.
In sum I say, I never saw
a prince that so did reign:
Nor people so beset with Saints,
yet all but vile and vain.
Wild Irish are as civil as
the Russies in their kind:
Hard choice which is the best of both,
each bloody rude, and blind.
If thou be wise, as wise thou art,
and wilt be ruled by me:
Live still at home, and covet not,
those barbarous coasts to see.
No good befalls a man that seeks,
and finds no better place:
No civil customs to be learnd,
where God bestows no grace.
And truly ill they do deserve,
to be beloved of God:
That neither love, nor stand in awe
of his assured rod.
Which (though be long) yet plagues at last
the vile and beastly sort
Of sinful wights, that all in vice
do place their chiefest sport.
Adieu friend Parker, if thou list,
to know the Russies well:
To Sigismundus book repair,
who all the truth can tell.
For he long erst in message went,
unto that savage king:
Sent by the Pole, and true report
in each respect did bring.
To him I recommend my self,
to ease my pen of pain:
And now at last do wish thee well,
and bid farewell again.
To his friend Nicholas Roscarock, to induce him to take a wife.
ROscarocke, since my raging prime is past,
And riper age with reasons learned lore,
Well stayed has my wits that went so saft,
And coold the heat that hent my breast of yore:
I cannot choose but write some solemn stuff,
For thee to read, when thou art in thy ruff.
I see thee muse what should the matter be,
Whereof I mean to treat, thou bitest thy lip,
And bendst thy browe as though I were not he
That had a trick my Cornish friend to trip:
Well, to be short, it touches marriage vow,
An order which my self have entered now.
A sacred yoke, a state of mickle praise,
A blessed band, belikt of God and man,
And such a life, as if in former days
I had but known, as now commend I can,
Good faith I would not wasted so my prime,
In wanton wise, and spent an idle time.
An idle time, as sundry gallants use,
I mean my London mates, that tread the street,
And golden wits with fond conceits abuse,
And base devises far for such unmeet.
Leaving the law, and casting books aside,
Whereby in time you might your countries guide.
Your daily practice is to beat the bush,
Where beauties birds do lodge themselves to lie:
You shoot at shapes and faces dear a rush,
And bend your bows, your feeble strengths to try.
Of closure you sometimes do common make,
And where you list, abroad your pleasures take.
You count it but a game to graffe the horn
That inward grows, and seldom shows without:
The silly man you skoffe and laugh to skorne,
And for his patience deem him but a lout.
By day you gaze upon your Ladies looks,
By night you gad to hang your baited hooks.
Thus do you lavish frolike youth away,
With idle words not worth a parched pease,
And like to wanton colts that run astray,
You leap the pale, and into every lease.
Where fitter far it were to marry wives,
And well disposd to lead more sober lives.
Revolt in time, least time repentance bring,
Let each enjoy his lawful wedded mate,
Or else be sure, your selves in time shall sing
The selfsame note, and rue your harms too late.
For commonly the wrong that we entend,
Lights on our heads and shoulders in the end.
Perhaps thou would as willing wedded be,
As I my self and many other more:
But that thou can no perfect beauty see,
For which thou will thy single life forgo.
Both young and fair, with wealth and goods thou seekst,
Such one she is, whom thou Roscarocke leekst.
Be ruled by me, let giddy fancy go,
Embrace a wife, with wealth and coin enough:
Force not the face, regard not feature so,
And aged grandame that maintains the plough.
And brings thee bags, is worth a thousand peates,
That pranck their pates and live by Spanish meats.
That one contents her self with now and than,
Right glad if she might sit at Venus mess
Once in the month, the youthful Damsel can
Not so be pleased, her rage must have redress,
As often as pleasure pricks her lims to lust,
Else all the matter lies amid the dust.
Wherefore I judge the best and wisest way
Were wife to wed, and leave to range at will,
In married life there is assured stay,
Where otherwise to follow every Gill,
Breeds wrack of wealth, of credit, ease, and bliss,
And makes men run their races quite amiss.
Experto credere tutum est.

A gentlewomans excuse for executing unlawful parts of love.
Erst Sylla took no shame, for Minos sake
Her father Nysus purple pate to sheare,
Medea for the love of Jason brake
The bands of kind, and slew her brother dear,
Forwent her worthy Sire, and kingly crown,
And followed him the rouer up and down.
For Theseus when in Labirinth he lay
In dread of death, the monster was so nie,
Fair Ariadna did devise a way
To save his life, unless that Ovid lie,
And yet the beast, her brother was in deed,
(Whom Theseus slew) and sprang of Minos seed.
At siege of Troy whilst Agamemnon fought,
Aegistheus wan Queen Clitemnestras heart,
So as when he returned and little thought
Of death, this dame began to play her part,
She slew the prince to follow former lust,
And thought the fact to be exceeding just.
Fair Phyllis slew hire self, unhappy dame
Through love: and did not Dydo do the like
For Prince Aeneas who to Carthage came,
When he was forced, by showers the shore to seek:
What more unkindly parts can man devise,
Than Queens for love their honors to despise^
Now judge my case, my fault uprightly scan,
Deem my desert, by this it may be gest,
I am by nature made to love a man,
As Sylla, Phyllis, Dido, and the rest,
If they and I have done amiss for love,
Let kind be blamd, that thereunto did move.
The wisest men as far as I can see,
Have been enthrald through love as well as we.
Amor vince ogni cosa.

Of his Constancy.
WE way not wax, for all his gallant hew,
Because it vades and melts against the fire,
We more regard a rock of marble blew,
For that no force does cause it to retire,
The builder makes his full account, that it
Will firmly stand at a stay, and never flit.
So may you (sweet) be sure, that my good will
Is no good will of wax, to waste away,
When fond desire of fancy has his fill,
My love is like the marble for his stay,
Build thereupon, and you shall surely find,
No blast of chance to change my steadfast mind.
Black shall you see the snow on mountains hie,
The fish shall feed upon the barren sand.
The sea shall shrink, and leave the Dolphins dry,
No plant shall prove upon the senseless land,
The Tems shall turn, the Sun shall lose his light
Ere I to thee become a faithless wight.
I neither am nor mean to be.
None other than I seem to thee.
The Authors Epilogue.
LO here the end of all my work,
behold the thread I drew
Is wrought to cloth, accomplished now,
you see this slender clew.
A piece (God wot) of little price,
scarce worth the Readers pain:
And in mine own conceit
a book of barren verse and vain.
I blush to let it out at large
for Sages to peruse:
For that the common custom is,
in books to gape for news.
And matter of importance great
which either may delight
By pleasure, or with sad advise
the readers pains requite.
But this of mine so maimed is,
for lack of learned style
And stately stuff, as sure I shall
the readers hope beguile.
Who does expect some rare report,
of former ancient deeds:
Or new device but lately wrought,
that breaths yet and bleedes.
But truly none of both in these,
my verses is to find:
My slender ship has kept the shore,
for fear of boystrous wind.
I bore my simple sails but low
I dreaded sudden showers:
Which sundry times from hauty skies,
the puisant ruler powers.
I durst not stir amid the stream,
the chanel was too deep:
Which made me have the more regard
about the banks to keep.
It is for mighty hulkes to dare,
adventure out so far:
And barks of biggest sise,
and such as builded be for war.
I write but of familiar stuff,
because my style is low:
I fear to wade in weighty works,
or past my reach to row.
Which if I should, the Reader might
as boldly blame my quil:
As now I trust he shall accept,
my show of great good will.
Though diverse write with fuller phrase,
and far more hawty style:
And burnish out their golden books
with fine and learned file.
Yet meaner Muses must not lurk
but each in his degree
That means well, and does his best
must well regarded be.
Though Nilus for his bigness bear
away the greatest name:
Whose seue^fold stream has gaind ye gulf
of such a lasting fame.
Yet must not lesser lakes be lost,
nor had in vile account
That serve for use and ease of man
though Nilus do surmount.
Great Alexander mighty was
and dreadful in the war:
Yet that's no cause why Rome should not
of Caesar boast as far.
The Planets are the pride of heaven,
and cheifest lamps of light:
Yet other stars do yield a show
and help to clear the night.
Likewise though diverse write in verse
and do exceeding well:
The remnant must not be refusde,
because they do excel.
Ill may we miss the slender shrubs
for all the princely Pine:
No more we scorn the baser drinks
though most we way the wine.
Which makes me hope that though
my Muse does yield but slender sound:
And though my Culter scarcely cuts,
or breaks the marble ground.
Yet since that I meant with verse,
to feed the Readers eyes:
And to that purpose bent my brains
these fancies to devise.
I trust he takes it well in worth
and bears with what he finds.
And thereunto the Reader aye
the writers travail binds.
Which if he do I have my hire,
who happy then but I?
That wrote this work for grateful men,
to vewe with thankful eye.
And so I give the congee now,
with wish that this my book
Be such as may thy sprites delight,
that hapnest here to look.
Ill were my fortune if in all
this treatise as it stands:
There should be nothing worth the view
when so it comes to hand.
Roscarockes warrant shall suffice
who likle the writing so
As did embolden me to let
the leaves at large to go.
If il succeed, the blame was his
who might have kept it back:
And friendly told me that my book
his due devise did lack.
But as it is, lo there it goes,
for every one to view:
The man that each ones humor pleased,
as yet I never knew.
Suffices if the courtly sort
whose doom is deep in deed:
Account it ought, with baser wits
I care not how it speed.
The courtier knows what best becomes,
in every kind of case:
His nature is, what so he does
to deck with gallant grace.
The greatest clerks in other arts,
can hardly do the leeke:
For learning sundry times is there
where judgment is to seek.
The Authors excuse for writing these and other fancies, with promise of grauer
matter hereafter.
LOrdings allow my light and lewd devise
And Ladies ye that are of greatest state
Bear with my books, imputing naught to vice
That I have pende in youth, nor now of late,
My prime prouokt my hasty idle quil:
To write of love, when I did mean no ill.
Two things in chief did move me thus to write
And made me deem it none offense at all,
First Ouids works bedeckt with deep delight,
Whom we of Poets second best do call,
I found him full of amors every where:
Each leaf of love the title eke did bear.
Then next I lived in place among the more,
Where fond affection bore the cheifest sway,
And where the blinded archer with his bow
Did glaunce at sundry gallants every day
And being there although my mind were free:
Yet must I seem love wounded eke to be.
I saw how some did seek their own mishap,
And hunted daily to devour the hooks,
That beuty bayted, and were caught in trap,
Like wilful wights that fed on women's looks,
Who being once entangled in the line,
Did yield themselves and were content to pine.
Some other minding least to follow love,
By haunting where dame Venus darlings dwelt,
By force were forced Cupidos coals to prove.
Whose burning bra^ds did make their minds to melt
So as they were compeld by mere mischaunce,
As others did, to follow on the dance.
Some eke there were that groapt but after gain
That faynd to fry and burn with blooming heat
Of raging love and counterfetted pain,
When they (God wot) had slender cause to treat,
But all was done to make their Ladies deem
How greatly they their beuties did esteem.
And then (O gods) to view their greeful cheeres,
And listen to their fond lamenting cries,
To see their cheeks deep dented in with tears
That day and night powered out from painful eyes,
Would make a heart of marble melt for woe,
That saw their plights, and did their sorrows know
And all for lack of ruthe and due remorse
Their cruel Ladies bore so hard a hand,
And they (poor men) constraynd to love perforce,
And fruitless clean to sow the barrain sand.
That unto me who priui^ was of all,
It was a death and grieved the to the gall.
Then for my friends (as diverse loved me well)
Endite I must some light devise of love,
And in the same my friends affection tell,
Whom nothing might from beauties bar remove
My pen must plead the silly Suitors case,
I had my hire, so he might purchase grace.
Some otherwhile when beauty bred disdain,
And feature forced a pride in hawtie breast,
So as my friend whs causeless put to pain
And for good will might purchase slender rest:
Then must my quill to quarrels flatly fall,
Yet keep the mean twixt sweet and sower brall.
Sometimes I must comme^d their beauties much
That never came where any beauty lay,
Again somwhiles my mates would have me tutch
The quick, because they had received the nay:
And thus my pen, as change of matter grew,
Was forced to grief, or else for grace to sue,
Thus did I deal for others pleasure long
(As who could well refuse to do the like)
And for my self sometimes would write among
As he that lives with men of war must strike.
I would de^lise a Sonet to a dame,
And all to make my sullen humor game.
So long I wrote, so often my friends did sue
So many were the matters, as at last,
The whole (...)
Then to the press they ^^st in all the have,
Mauger my beard, my mates would have it ^o
Whom to resist it was in vain you know.
These causes forced my harmeles hand to write,
And no desire I had to treat of ill
Who does not know that youthful heads delight
Sometimes to show the queintnes of their quil,
But pardon (Lordings) what is past and done
I purpose now a better race to run.
I mean no more with loves devise to deal,
I never will to wanton Venus bow,
From Cupids court to Pallas I appeal,
Juno be judge whom I do honor now
Hie time it is for him to blow retreat:
And leave to love whom self rod now does beat.
Wherefore, go (wanton) trusse up all your trash
Fancy farewell, to grauer gods I go,
Then love and Venus, clean my hands I wash,
Of vain desires that youth enrageth so
Virtue does far surmount such filthy vice
Amend my mates, or else you know the price.
Vtile consilium est sae^as extinguere flammas,
Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit.
FINIS.

