A new Book of the natures and properties of all Wines that are commonly used
here in England, with a confutation of an error of some men, that hold, that
Rhennish and other small white wines ought not to be drunken of them that
either have, or are in danger of the stone, the reume, and diverse other
diseases, made by William Turner, doctor of Physic.

Whereunto is annexed the book of the natures and virtues of Triacles, newly
corrected and set forth again by the said William Turner.

Jmprinted at London, by William Seres. Anno. 1568.

TO THE RIGHT honorable Sir William Cecill Knight, chief Secretary unto the
Queens Majesty, and master of her Highness Courts of Wards and Liueries.
etc. and sometime his Constudent in the University of Cambridge, William Turner
wishes all prosperity both of body and soul, through Jesus Christ our
Savior.
SIR, AFTER that I perceived that my age joined with continual sickness,
would suffer me no more to be profitable too Christ's Church and commonwealth,
by my voice, words, and going abroad, thought it meet by such members and
means as GOD has left in me as yet unhurt and untouched, for that portion of
living that I have, to profit the Church of God as much as I could. And
therefore within these xij. Months I have translated one book out of Latin
into English, and have written one homily against Gluttonye and Drunkenness,
and other vices annexed thereunto, and have set them abroad, for the promoting
and increasing of the kingdom of GOD. I thought also, seeing that God has
also endued me with the knowledge of bodilye Physic, after that I had sought
to promote the kingdom of GOD, to communicate some part of my knowledge that
God has given unto me in natural knowledge, unto my brethren that had need
thereof. But when as I perceived that there was so much use of Wine in all
countries of England, and so many errors committed in the abusing of it, both
of the most part of the Laity, and also of some of the learned that profess
natural knowledge, I thought I should do no small benefit unto the Church
and Commonwealth of England, if that I should set out a book of the natures
of Wines, and confute the errors and ill opinions that all men have concerning
the natures and properties of them. And this book have I now ended, and
dedicate unto your Honor for a token of the good will that I bear unto you,
desiring you also to be a Patron of it against all such babbling and unlearned
Sophisters, as will speak against it, not being armed with learning,
authority and reason, but only with their old Sophistry, which they
learned in the time of ignorance and darkness. If these will be to busy in
defending of their errors, and will go about to defend them, and confute the
truth that I have taught in this book, if that I can have by the help of God,
granted unto me any truce between me and my disease, I entende to put you to
small pain in the defending of my Book, for I have been matched with as big
men as these be, I thank GOD, and well have escaped without dishonor. But if
my sickness will not suffer me to do it that I would otherwise do, then I
must desire you and other of my friends to defend me so far forth as I
defend the truth.

Furthermore, whereas I set out of late a book, declaring at large the virtues
and properties of the great Triacle called Theriaca Andromachi, and of the
Triacle of Mithridates called Mithridatium, and also of the Triacle Salt, and
the book was negligentlye and falselye printed, and diverse honest men think
it necessary to be printed again, and I purpose to do the same, and because
it were necessary to have a patron for it, which it has wanted hitherto: I
dedicate and give this book also unto your learned Honor, desiring you also by
your learning and wisdom to be patron unto it as I ^aue made you of my other
book. No more at this time, but the Lord Jesus increase you with the
knowledge of his holy word, and with grace to live always according to the
same, Amen.

OF THE NATVRES, properties, profits, hurtes and helps that come of Wine.
ALTHOUGH the order of learning do require, that every man that shall write of
any thing, should declare and open by definition it that he entendeth to
entreat of: yet need not I (as I judge) going about to write of wine, to take
any great pain to make a definition of it, because all men, women and childer,
that are cummed to any perfect age, know well enough that Wine is the juice of
grapes pressed out, and put up into vessels, to be drunken afterward at
convenient times of men, for diverse ends and purposes that the Grape maker
has ordained it for. For many great causes, it shall be more necessary to
divide Wine into his kinds and sorts, that thereby the reader may the better
know what kinds of Wines are best for what ends and purposes. Wines may be
divided into six sorts at the least.
Wines may be numbered and divided either by the country and places that they
grow in, or by their colors, or by their youth, or age, and by their tastes,
smelles, and by properties that they have, and some of the manner of making, and
every one of these kinds, may be divided again into certain other special
sorts or under kinds.

Some Wine is called Creticum of Creta, which is named in English Candie, some
is called Graecum of Graecia, some Rhennish, because it grows beside the
Rhene, some Gallicum, that is French Wine, because it grows in France, and
some is called Rheticum because it grows in Rhetia, and so a great sort of
other Wines have their names of the countries, and places whereas they grow.
But it is best as I think, first of all according to nature to entreat of new
and old Wines, and of it that is a middle Wine between them both.

Of new and old Wine, and of it that is of a mean age that is neither to be
called new nor old.
THere are two sorts of new Wine, one that is called Must, Two kinds of
new wine.
and that is but latelye made or pressed out of the grapes, and is sweet in
taste, troubled in color, and thick in substance, and this sort is properlye
called in Latin Mustum. And another sort is called new Wine, which has left
his sweetness and gotten clearenesse, Galene.
but yet it is not long since it was made. New wine after Galen.
Galen in his book of making of medicines, seems to call all Wine that is
not fully five years old, new wine, and it that is past five years until
it he ten year old, wine of middle age, and it that is above the age of ten
years, old wine, and Dioscorides writing of the nature of Wines in his fifte
book, calls it Wine of middle age, that is more than seven year old, and
Pliny writes, not without an error of the scribe (as I guess) that Falerno
media aetas incipit ab anno decimo quinto. But Valeriola a man otherwise well
learned, Valeriola leaves the authority of Galen.
leaving the authority of Galen, calls it new Wine that keeps still his
Mustish and sweet taste, and as yet has gotten no sharpness, and he calls
that Wine of middle age, that is no more sweet, but is clear, and says that
he and his countrymen take the most notable Wines of France for old Wines,
before they be fullye one year old. And this does he hold enarrationum
medicinalium, lib. sexto, enarratione septima. In the same place he reproves
Aloisius Mundella for saying that wine six years old was new wine after
Galen, who although failed in exceeding one year beyond Galens numbering of the
years of new wine, yet he went a great deal farther from Galens mind than
Mundella did. Must only hot in the first degree
Must when it is made even of ripe grapes, is but hot in the first degree. for
Galen in his book of the powers of simple medicines, has these words
following. Vinum est ex fecundo ordine excalfacientrum. Sed quod admodum vetus
est ex tertio, sicut quod mustum vocant ex primo, caliditatis eius proportioni
respondet siccitas, that is, Very old wine hot in the third degree.
wine (that is to say of middle age) is hot in the second degree, but it that
is very old is hot in the third degree, as it that is called Must is hot in
the first degree. By these words their error is openly confuted, Non omne
vinum esse calidum in secundo gradu.
that hold that every wine is hot in the second degree. Galen writes truly
that the Grapes that grow in very cold places, never come to ripeness,
neither to sweetness, but when other wines are made, they are sweet and
pleasant, but such Wines made of such grapes, are very sour and therefore
cold, the words of Galen are these written in ye second book de alimentoru^
facultatibus. In regionibus frigidis ne vuae quidem ipsae exquisite maturari
queunt, nedum passaru^ quaepiam, ob id quod resinam vinis immittant, ne
acescant celeriter. That is. In cold countries neither rasins come to any
perfect ripeness neither the grapes, Rosin preserves small wine from souring.
and therefore men put rosin into the wines, that they should not shortly wax
sour. And in the book of good and ill juice he says thus. The Wines that are
to old or to new, are to be eschued. For the old do heat to much, and the
new Wines as long as they are green, Very grene and new wines heat nothing
at all.
or very new, heat nothing at all, so far are they from helping of men to
digest their meats, that they are very hardly digested themselves, and often
times they hang and abide still in a man's stomach, even as water. Dioscorides
also who wrote before Galen, says lib. 5. The sinews are hurt with old
wine, and other instruments of the senses: yet for all that it is sweeter in
taste than the other wines are. Wherefore a man ought to beware of it, that
feels the weakness of any inward part. Yet when a man is in good health a
little being delayed with water, it may be taken without harm. New Wine
puts a man up, New wine.
and fills him with wind, and is hard of digestion and breeds heavy
dreams, and makes a man to make water. It that is of a mean age between
both, is free from the harms that may come of both, wherefore it is commonly
used both of hole and sick men with their meat. Aristotel in his fourth book
Meteorologicorum the.x. New wine has much earthlynesse in it, and therefore
ill for them that are disposed to the stone.
Chapter writes. That new Wine has more earth or earthlynesse in it than old
has, whereupon a man may gather plainlye that new Wine is very ill for them
that are disposed to the stone, for it having so much thick earthlinesse in
it, gives matter whereof the stone may be made to hot kidneys, that the heat
of kidneis may so bake it into stones as the heat of the Brick kill turns
the claye into Brick or tile stones. Wherefore I must needs dispraise the
manner of our delicate Englishmen and women that drink the Rhennish wine only
for pleasure, whilst it is as yet as thick as puddle or horsepisse. For beside
that it gives matter to make the stone of, I have known three within the
space of one year in high Germany that took the falling sickness by drinking
much new Rhenishe wine, and they died all three, and could not be helped with
physic, one of them suddenly lost his spech and died within an hour after
that he sickened, and the other two lived but a day or two after, and died
miserably with great pain, and had grievous fittes of the falling sickness at
sundry times. I have marked that within these dosen years there have been more
sick in the falling sickness, than had wont to be before. The cause whereof I
judge to be, that men's wives, nurses, The causes of the rifenesse of the
falling sickness now in England
and children drink more Rhennishe Must, and other sweet wines vnfined,
brought out also of other countries as well as out of Germany: tha^ they were
wont to drink before in times past. Aetius a diligent follower of Galen, and a
faithful gatherer of the writings of old Greek writers of physic, says
that wine (meaning thereby wine of middle age that is neither very new,
neither very old) is hot in the second degree, The degrees of wines by their
ages.
and that very old is hot in the third degree, as very new Must is hot in
the first degree. Ye may see here once again, that they are more bold than
learned and wise, Whether al kinds of new wines ought to be refused or no?
that hold that all Wines are hot in the second degree. Some peradventure
will ask whether there is any kind of new Wine that may serve for any uses,
and may be dronken at any time or no* To whom I make this answer by the
authority of Galen in his book of good and evil juice, Si vina tenuia, alba
and aquosae tuto bibi possint, errat Plinius qui vina tenuia and austera magis
caput tentare asseuerat. lib. 23. cap. ^
that ex recentibus vinis genus illud du^taxat tuto bibitur, quod tenuis
substantiae est, sicuti ex Italicis Cauchanum and Albanu^. etc. quae sanc
tenuia, candida and aquosa existunt. etc That is. Amongst new wines only that
kind may be safelye drunken, that is of a thin substance, as amongst Italian
wines are Cauchanum and Albanum. etc. which wines in deed are thin, white, and
waterish, and therefore are called Oligophora, that is, wines that can abide but
small menging of water with them. Fulua vinae quia calida sunt, caput cito
replent, non igitur vini tenuitas, sed caliditas caput tentat.
And as redishe yelow Wines because they are hot in working, they fill the
head by and by, so the other wines that are thin and waterish wines, and gently
binding are not only not noisome unto the head, but often times take away light
head aches which come of humors gathered together in the stomache, Hic Galenus
Pliniu^ and eius discipulos manifest impugnat.
thus far Galen. Now some men that read this book, acknowledging
themselves to be my scholars, peradventure would learn of me because I teach
English men in this English book, what kinds of wines that are brought into
England, Small wines helps the hedache, but make it not.
are of this sort. I answer, that neither Sack, Malmesey, Muscadell, neither
Clared, French nor Gascone wine, though they be most used here in England at
this time, are such Wines as Galen speaks of here, but Rhennish wine that is
racket and clear, and Rochell, and Sebes and other small white Wines that are
clear from their grounds, therefore to them that are disposed unto the
headache, amongst all new Wines these above named small Wines are least
hurtful, and may be taken with less ieoperdie. If any contend that French,
Clared and Gascone wine, and other wines as strong as Gascone is, do as little
hurt to the head as these Wines do: I answer that the French, Clared and
Gascone wines are not thin and subtle, but strong, thick and hot, and not as
Galen says aquosa that is, waterish. Wherefore if the authority of Galen may
take place, their opinion is here openly confuted, which commend so much
French, Clared and Gascone Wine, and despise and condemn Rhennish and such
like White wines. Rhennish and white wines forbidden to be used of some new
physicians.
The same men have forbidden all their patientes that are disposed to the
stone, gout, and rewme, by name all Rhennish and white Wines, and say that
white and Rhennish Wines make and engender the gout, holding that white and
Rhennishe Wine drive so sore that they bring matter to the kidneis and bladder,
That white wines bring the matter of the stone to the kidneyes, and that
therefore breed the stone by the argument of some sophisters.
whereof the stone is engendered. First I must reason against this unreasonable
reason more largely than the argument of this book, in some men's opinion,
requires, because they have holden this opinion so long and without authority
or good reason teach it so sliffelye still. For the better discussing of this
matter, it is needful to tell what things breed and make the stone, and how
many chief causes there be of it, and whether thin and waterish wines be ye
material or efficient cause of the stone, or no cause of it at all, but a
preservative from the stone. Although the natural disposition that a man has
of his father or mother to the stone be a great and unavoidable cause of the
stone, yet beside that, there are two common causes, of the which the one is
the material cause, and the other is the cause efficient, or working or making
cause, that makes the stone, of ye matter that is disposed to be a stone.
Galen in the third book of norishmentes, writing of cheese in few words
shows both the material and efficient cause of the stone. Old cheese,
Gross humors are the material cause of the stone, and burning heat the cause
efficient.
says he, is harder to digest and of worse juice, and therefore readier to
breed the stone, Nam vbi succorum crassities cum arde^ti calore iungitur,
illic calculi generantur, that is, whereas there is grossness of juices joined
with a burning heat, there are stones engendered. Galen I grant in his book
of good and ill juices, writes that the often use of such medicines that make
thin and cut gross humors in pieces, Medicines that are ho^e and make thin,
and cut gross humors, to much used, make the blood whai^ish, or choleric, or
melancholic.
makes a man's blood either whayish, or Choleric or Melancholic, for such
kinds of Medicines do not only cut and make thin, but also heat out of
measure. Behold and mark here that he speaks not of Rhennishe and white
wine, but of vnmeasurablye hot medicines, and he says immediatlye after, ob
idque solida membra exiccant, and crassum humorem reddunt, quo in renibus
assato, gignuntur calculi, that is. They dry up the fast and sound members,
and make the humor gross, whereof when as it is burned or roasted in the
kidneyes, stones are engendered. Thus far Galen. The same sentence and meaning
has Galen methodi medendi. 13. Meats of gross juice engender the stone.
libro in these words, qui crassi succi cibis vescuntur, calculi vitio
vexantur. They that eat meats of gross juice, are grieved with the disease
of the stone. Aetius writes that the causes of the stone are continual
crudities or rawnesse, or undigested humors whereof is gathered together great
plenty of undigested and raw matter, when a burning rises about the kidneys
and bladder, which burns them and makes them go together in one, and makes
thereof an hard stone. Alexander Trallianus entreating of the stone, says: Est
materialis calculorum causa humor crassus, efficiens autem ignea caliditas, the
material cause of the stone is a gross humor, and the efficient cause is a
fiery heat.

Now by these authorities that I have alleged, it is clear unto all them that
can and will see that the matter or material cause of the stone is a gross or
thick humor, and that the worker or efficient cause of the same is a great
heat in or about the kidneyes or bladder. If that be granted to be true, it
follows that those meats and drinks that are of grosser substance and hoter
than others be, cause and breed the stone rather than other meats and drinks
that are thinner, finer and of a colder complexion, but both French, Clared and
Gascone Clared wine are of grosser and thicker substance, and hoter of
complexion than white Rhennish wine and white french wines be of. Clared wine
whether it be of France or of Gasconie, and red wine with such like, bread
more the stone, than white and Rhennish do, both concerning the material and
efficient cause.
Therefore they breed ye stone more than white Rhennish and white French Wines
do. The Rhenish wine that is commonly drunken in Gentlemen's houses and
Citizens houses is commonly a year old at ye least before it be drunken, and
therefore it is older than ye common Clared wine, which dureth not commonly
above one year, and if Rhennish wine be drunken within the year, it is
commonly racked before it be drunken, therefore for two causes it has fewer
dregs and less terrestritie or gross earthlynesse than the Clared wine
has, and therefore breeds the stone less than Clared wine that is commonly
drunk in gentlemen's houses does. If I can prove this yt I have said, and also
that Clared wine is hoter than white Rhennish and white French wines be, there
is nothing to let me but I may conclude without any withstanding, that Clared
or red wines breed the stone more than white wines do. Which I will assaye to
bring to pass after this manner following.

Of the difference of wynes by the colors.
Pliny makes four principal colors of Wine.
Pliny in the.xiiij. book of his natural history writes thus of the colors
of Wine. Colores vinis quatuor. Albus, fuluus, sanguineus, niger, that is,
wines have sower colors: white, redish yellowe, sanguine and black. The white
is well known to all our countriemen, but the other are not fullye known even
unto some of the learned here in England. Wherefore I think it needful for
the better understanding of it that I shall entreat of hereafter, to declare
these colors, so that they may be known of all men that read this book.
Aulus Gellius in his second book de noctibus atticis cap. 26. Fuluus.
writes, that Fuluus color videtur de rufo atque viridi mistus esse. There are
diverse degrees vini fului.
that is, the color that is called in Latin Fuluus, seems to be menged with
red and green, and there seems in some to be more green, and in other more
red. And he writes that the color called Flauus Flauus color.
in Latin seems to be made of the mengling together of grene, red and white.
And he writes that the color of the lion, Leo fuluus, Aurum fuluum.
gold, and sand is named Fuluus in Latin, thus far Gellius. Whereas
Dioscorides writes of wines he has these words following. (...) which words
Ruellius translateth thus. Giluu^, vtpote quod medium est, medias inter
vtrunque vires habet. But Cornarius in this place turns (...) into fuluum.
And in deed I like better the translation of Cornarius in this place, than the
translation of Ruellius, otherwise an eloquent and learned man, whereunto
moves me the translation of Galen of our Linacre written in his xij. book de
methodo medendi. Neque inuenies ex alborum vinorum genere calidum vllum, quando
austera and mediocriter alba, cum inueterauerine fuluiora quodammodo reddantur.
Quod si aliter nominare fuluum colorem velis, licet voces igneum pallens.
Quotquot autem in ipsis calidissima sunt omnia certe flaua sunt. These words
peradventure some learned Gentleman or other learned men, had lever read in
Greek than in the Latin or English alone, for whose sakes I will rehearse
Galens own words in his own tongue, that men may judge the better of the
nature of the words, and thereby of Galens meaning, (...). Out of all these
places of the authors that I have alleged, I gather that Fuluus color is it
that a man may call in English, redish yelow, for as Virgill calls Gold
Fuluum, because it is redishe yellow, our countrymen marking in gold both a
roadnesse and also a yellowness, sometime say, that a thing is as red as
gold, and other whiles, that a thing is as yellow as gold, as commonly they
say that his eyes and skin that has ye disease that is called in Duch, Die
guel sucht, and the Northe^ English tongue, yt Guelsought, and in Southern
English, the yellowe iaundise, are as yelow as gold. This disease is named in
Latin Aurigo of Cornelius Celsus, of the color of gold. Galen seeming to doubt
whether al men understood what he meant by this word (...) which Hippocrates
uses in this signification, takes the pain to open and show by two other
Greek words what he means by (...), saying that he thinks that (...) may
be called (...), that is, Wine of a fierye color, having mixed therewith the
color of yellow Ochar, which Ochar is not of a bright yellowe color as (...)
is, but more darker, whereby a man may plainly know that Fuluum which is called
in Greek (...) or (...) is a redish yellow color, Fierish yellow.
as our Muscadine and Bastards are, when as they come to us are of. Vinum
sanguineu^.
Vinu^ sanguineum, that is sanguine, or blood colored Wine, it is that we call
commonly in English Clared wine, but not the pale, or pallet (as some call it)
Clared wine. Vinum nigrum, so named of Pliny, and called (...), in Greek, is
foolishly, but commonly called in English red wine, when as it ought to be
called black Wine, of the black color that it has in comparison of other
wines. And now after that I have showed what the four colors that Pliny
makes mention of, betoken in our English tongue, I will go forward to declare
the natures of Wines by their natural colors.

Of the nature and properties of white Wines.
DIoscorides says, vinum albu^ tenue stomacho vtile, ac facile in membra
distribuitur. That is, white wine is thin, and good for the stomach, and is
easily conveyed into the members, White wine both in sickness and in health
is rather to be chosen than other wines by the authority of Dioscoriaes.
and white wine both in sickness and in health is rather to be chosen tha^
others. And Galen writing of the nature of white Wine, says: (...). That is,
ye can find none of the white wines that is hot, meaning of the common white
wines that were about where as he dwelt.

Out of Galen in his fifth book de locis affectis.
FVrthermore, when as a certain young man being a Gra^marian, as often as he did
to earnestlye teach, or devise of any matter, or waxed hungry or angrye, was
taken with the falling sickness, by reason of the to much quick feling of the
mouth of his stomach: I commanded to give unto him bread well prepared in the
third or fourth hour alone, if he did not thirst. But if he were troubled
with thirst, to be moystened in wine, White wine measurably binding hurts not
the head.
and that in white wine which measurably binds, for such wine, as it
strengthens the stomach, so it hurts not the head as hot wines are wont to
do. Thus far Galen. Out of whose words we may gather how unreasonable and
unlearned they be in Galens works, that say that all white Wines whether they
be Rhennishe or French, or of like nature with either of both, are hurtful for
the rheum and other diseases of the head, and forbid their patientes to drink
them for a table or common drink to be taken with meat, when as Galen allows
it for them that have the falling sickness, and says that it does not hurt ye
stomach, neither trouble ye head as hot wines do, of which sorts they allow
some for their patients for common table wine, as diverse kinds of Clared wine,
whereof every one of them is hotter and more headie and fumish than the common
Rhennishe and French wines are, of the which matter we will talk hereafter
more largelye, if God will. That the thin, small and waterish wines do not hurt
the head, so that they have a littell astriction, Galen declares plainly in
his book de euchymia and cacochymia, in these words. And eue^ as firish red
wines, seeing that they are hot of nature, by and by fill the head, Fierish
red wines fill the head by and by, because they be hot.
even so those wines that are thin and waterish, and gently binding, are not
only unhurtful unto the head, but also sometime they take away those small
head aches which come of humors gathered together in the stomach.

Out of Aetius.
OF all wines, Which wines hurt least the head and sinews.
white wines are least hurt, waterish wines neither breeds the head ache,
neither hurt the sinews. Wines that are white in color, nourish least of all
other Wines, if they be thin in substance, and after a manner like unto water.
Aetius allows white wine for a preservative against the stone.
Aetius also prescribing a diet for the^ that are delivered of the stone, how
that they may be preserved from falling into the disease of the stone again,
allows a small wine that provoke water, and is not very old. And the
author of the book of healing of the stone which is ascribed unto Galen, and
judged of many to be his, in express words faith as follows here. Vinum
sit tenue admodum and album, non ita vetus, dulcia vero and nigra vina,
calculosis sunt inepta. That is, let your wines be very small and white, Red
that is Clared wine is not good for the stone.
and not so old, but sweet wines and blackish red wines are very unmeet for
them that have the stone. And the author says in the same book a littell
after. Vinum tibi conuenit tenue and album, quod misturam non ita patitur
(...), nam eiusmodi facile descendit, and succos qui sunt in nobis attenuat and
secernit per vrinas, virtutemque roborat. That is, white and small wine is good
and meet for you, which being small, cannot abide to be menged with much
water, for such wine does easilye go down, and makes subtle or fine the
juices or humors that are in us, and sifteth them out by the water, and
strengthens the power of man.

Of the natures of white and diverse other wynes, taken out of Actuarius the
last of the noble Greek writers of physic.
Gross and thick wines nourysh much, Gross or thick wines.
Thin or subtle wines.
and are cause of gross blood, and of the stopping of inward parts, but thin
or subtle wines which drive out water, are of a contrary nature, Redish
yellow wines are hotest of all. Wines in color red, are next in heat to readish
yellow. Least hot of all are waterish and small wines, and they trouble the
head least. A small white wine is best for a common table wine.
for they engender fine or thin blood. Some wines that have a little
astriction, are better for the stomach but nourish less, but sweet wines are
of the contrary nature, but white wines are less hot tha^ other wines. Of
wines are hotest of all redish yellow, and next unto them are hotest, Wines of
red color, they are least hot that are waterish, which are called in Greek
(...), because they will not suffer to be delayed wc much water, such wines as
these do trouble the head least. But strong and well colored wine are more fit
for them that labor for to be of a good plite, and to look well. But for thee
that carest only for thy simple health, and for thy lively spirit, it may
seem that a weak wine which is white and thin should he sufficient for thee,
and thou ought therewith to be content, except thou be compelled to fly for
needs sake to use hoter wines when as thou art to much cooled in thy body.

Of the nature of red wine, which here in England is commonly called Clared
wine, and of the nature of black wine which is called commonly in England red
wine, out of Galen in his third book de alimentis.
Red wine and thick wine.
IF that whatsoever does norish, be meat, the^ is wine to be placed among the
number of meats (that is of things that do feed and increase the body. No
color of any wine is liker to blood, than it that we call Clared wine, for the
black wine that we call red wine, is blacker tha^ it may be compared unto
blood. Rufa atque crassa vina. Deinceps nigra. Rufa aut nigra crassa and
adstringentia.
) Of all wines red and thick wines are most meet to make blood, as such as
need little changing to be turned into blood, after these follow in order
black wines, gross and sweet, and also those which in color is red and
black, and in substance or composition are thick, joined with a binding
quality. The same sentence has Aetius in these words following. Rufa itaque
and crassa ex omnibus ad sanguinem generandum commodissima sunt, vt quae parua
egeant in sanguinem transmutatione. Deinceps nigra simul dulcia ac crassa.
Deinde color quidem rufa aut nigra, compage vero crassa, and habentia simul
adstringentem qualitatem.

Out of the fourth book of Galen de sauitate tuenda.
REfuse and fly thick and black wines, because they make an evil juice, and
enter through and go very slowly down, and in the fifth book he says. Such
wines as tarry long in the belly, are none of them fit for an old man, and
that black wines that are gross and thick, and are binding, tarry and abide
long in the belly and stir up flowinges in it. But they that are black and
thick, and have no astriction, in deed they tarry shorter while in the belly.
But yet they stir not a man to make water, some take them before meat but
they are not good for old men, neither any other which make a thick juice, for
these stop the liver, milt and kidneys, whereby it comes to pass that some
old men using these more largelye, fall into the dropsey, and other fall into
the stone.

Of the nature of wynes of diverse and sundry colors out of Galen de methodo
medendi, sexto and.12.
IN the sixth book. Whatsoever Wines be sweet, and also of a readish yelow
color, all such are sharp or biting, and hot above measure. Wines good for
them that swounde.
In the.xij. book. To them that swoune by the reason of yellow gall that
vexes the mouth of the stomache, a cold drink is to be given unto them, yet
for all that wine that is hot of nature, and does further the conneyance of
juices into the body, ought to be offered to al them that are vexed with
swounding, for it is plainly our will, that the nourishment that is taken in,
should be dealt and conveyed into the body, and that it should not tarry in
the stomach, but it is openly known that of wines they ought to be chosen that
are yelow in color, Wines yellow in color and fine in substance are best for
fainting or swouning.
of a fine substance and old, and such must needs be of a good smell.

To them that fall in a swounding by to much plenty of raw humors, gross
thick wines are noisome, and waterye wines as unprofitable are to be eschued.
Therefore we must choose out those that are middle wines, which, as is before
said, are yellowe and white. But so many wines as are the hotest of all, are
bright yelow in color, as is the wine called Cecubum in Italy.

Of other kinds of wine they that are sour with astriction, Austera alba.
and meetelye white and thick, are not fit for the conueyance or leading of
juices into the body. Vina austera alba antiqua.
But if they be old enough, if ye have no other, ye may use them, for all
such when they are old are good for the stomach. Redish yellow wine trouble the
head.
Furthermore all wines that smell well and are redish yellow, so much as is of
their nature altogether, they trouble the head when a man is vexed with both
kinds of swounding, that is of it that comes of yellow gall, and also it
that comes of great plenty of raw humors falling into the mouth of the
stomach, and there is no convenient wine as is required, and thou art needs
compelled to use some wine, thou must fly as I have said before, all sour
astringent wines, and new wines, Old thin or waterish wines are lightly carried
into the body.
and thick wines, and chose waterish wines, and of them such as are old, for
such wines although they do not mightily heat, yet they are led or carried
lightly into the body, wherefore these do all alike convey and deal the
norishing juices into the body, Both red yellowish and old small wine convey
and deal the juices into the body alike.
as red yellow wines do, yet there is a difference between the^, that is, that
the redish yellow wines are more profitable for the digestion that is in the
stomach, and in the veins, because they do heat more. Moreover, they are
easy to be tempered (or else as Linaker translateth it, to be mixed) and
therefore are profitable to make good juice. But there is none of all these
things in waterishe wines, for very little of the substance of these is turned
into ye kind of blood. Redish yellow wines smite the head.
But when as redish yellowe wine smite the head, they that are waterishe do
never trouble it, and they beyond all other drive out water. Next unto the
which are redish yellowe wines that are most thin and subtle, Small waterish
wines drive out piss most of all other wines.
which also ought to be chosen most chieflly against swounding. Yelow wines
that are grossest in substance are conveyed into the body more slowly tha^
these be, howbeit they are more piercing then all sour and binding wines, but
these redish yellowe wines again do nourish more than thin wines, and correct
fautie juices, of all other wines most speedily engendring a good blood. Thus
far Galen. Now after that it is often enough proved by the best authors that
ever wrote of Physic, that all red wines as are our Clared wines, and all
black wines, which we call red wines, are hoter and grosser in substance than
small white wines be of: and both drive out water less than small white wines
do: It follows that Clared and red wines are more, both the material and
efficient causes of the stone, than small white wines are.

Where as some argue that such wines as drive most, bring humors most of all
other to the kidneys, The argument of them that hold that Rhennish and white
wines breed the stone more than other wines do.
water vessels, and bladder, whereof the stone is ingendered there. But small
Rhennish wine and other small white wines drive humors most to the places
before named, therefore they breed the stone more than other wines that drive
not so much as they do: I answer unto the mayor, that not every wine that
drives most humors unto the kidneys, water vessels and bladder is ye greatest
breeder and engendrer of the stone. For although small and waterish white wines
drive more than Clared, yet it follows not that they breed ye stone more
than red and Clared wines do. For although they drive some kind of humors
unto the places above rehearsed: yet do they not leave them sticking fast in
those places, but they drive them quite through all the water vessels into the
chamber pot or vrinall, for the which cause they are called in Greek (...),
that is, driuers forth of water and urine, and such things as are in the urine.
Which name they have not, because (as some men do dream) they bring many
humors whereof the stone is made, to the kidneys and bladder, and let them lie
there, as it were rotting in a dunghill, but as a fair and thin water casten
into a canel of a street if it have one to drive it forward, not only
carries it self away forth of the town into the common sink that is without
the town, but also the filthiness that has been in the canell long before,
even so that small white wine that has a nature to drive forth it self, and
with it other things that are necessary to be driven out by the urine,
breeds not humors in the water vessels, but drives them quite away, and
suffers them not to tarry there, how then can white wine that after this
manner scoureth the water vessels be an ingendrer of the matter of the stone,
when as it drives the same matter away, and will not suffer it to tarry in
those places where as the stone uses to be engendered. When I was a scholar in
Cambridge, there was there a stinking butcherie, and very noisome to the^ that
went by it, or through it, what if a man should have been hired for.xl.s. in
the year to keep the butcherie, and the rest of the town sweet, by carrying
out of the puddings, guts, and stinking blood? if this fellow should carry out
all the filthiness out of the butcherie once in the week unto the market
hill, and let it lie there, should this man justly be called a scourer or
clenser of the town, that carries the filth thereof from one place only to
another, and not quite out of the town? I think no. Even so if small white
wines should drive humors from diverse places of the body, and should not
carry them forth by the water vessels, but let them lie stinking there, it
ought not to be called a scourer but a defiler, and an hurter of the body. If
the master of the pudding cart before named, would let the filthiness of the
butcherie tarry so long there until it stanke so sore, by reason of long
continuing in that place, and for lack of carrying out betime, that both they
of the butcherie, and all the neighbors about were grieuouslye vexed with the
foul stink of that filth that tarried so long there, if an other carter offered
for the same wages every second day to carry out all the uncleanness of the
town, which of these two me^ were more worthy to have the office and name of
the townescourer? Small white wines scour and drive out the uncleanness of the
body as much as it is possible to be done by them, and red and Clared wine
stop and hold back, and fill the body full of ill humors, now which are
most profitable to be taken most commonly of a man for the keeping of his
health? But although small white wine by nature has such properties to drive
out by urine unprofitable humors, that are commed within the compass of their
working, yet the virtue of it is hindered, either if the man by eating and
drinking to much continually fill the body with so many excrementes, that
nature even being helped with white wine cannot drive them out, by reason of
the ouerflowing plenty of them, also if that the meat lie to long in the
stomach, and the excrements to long in the guts, and go not down at
convenient times to the stool. White wine sometime cannot drive out humors
sufficiently if it be hindered by ill diet.
Than the white wine for lack of help, can not do his office. And it is
plain, that banketting and much eating and drinking and keeping of the meat to
long in the stomache, and the excrements vnscoured out of the belly, give the
most part of the material cause unto the stone, which thing may be easilye
proved by the authority of Aetius writing of the stone, in these words. The
material cause of the stone.
Ye must beware of such meats as are hard of substance, and are not esie to be
broken with chowing, and also them that have much substance, Holding of humors
to long in the body, is the cause of the stone, and not the driving of them
forth daily in good season.
and nourish very much, and those that are conveyed in by heaps into the
body, before they be fully digested, or made ripe, also meats of an heavy
quality, and are hardly changed and swim above, and go to slowly down to ye
belly, and fill it full of wind. Fly also such as stop the ways and veins of
the body, or otherwise abide to long in the bellies, for the belly being made
weary with such meats, sends them forth either as yet raw, or half sodden
to the liver and kidneyes, and so it that was brought in by heaps raw, is
sifted or streyned vnfitlye and against nature, and with an hasty rage is
carried to the kidneyes, and by and by it grows together, and is thickened, and
stands there still. Thus far Aetius. Of whom we may learn plainly how
the stone is made, and of what causes, and that neither small white wine,
neither any other wine, will preserve a man from the stone, except he keep
good diet withal, and empty out the excrements of the belly dailye. And the
same says afterward, ventrem semper probe laxum habere oportet. Hic enim si
been subierit, puriora lotia prodibunt. That is, ye must have your belly always
well losed, for if the belly work well downward, your water shall come forth
the fairer and cleaner.

If so often emptying of the bellye as nature requires, makes a man's water
clear and fair, then the to much stopping of the body makes a foul,
drousie or dreggye water. But such foul gear breeds the stone, therefore to
much stopping of the bellye is often the cause of the stone. For when as such
plenty of filthy matter comes forth by the water, there must needs be much
above in the kidneyes and bladder, whereof the stone may be engendered, if there
be any excessive heat in the kidneyes and bladder. All men therefore may
plainly see that small white wine is falslye accused to be a breeder of the
stone, when as ill diet and the stopping of ill humors within the body, is the
cause thereof, and that wines that are hoter and stronger than white and
Rhennish wines be, engender rewmes, and breed the gout more than the white
small wines do, as it is by places above alleged, fully proved.

Of the natures of wynes after their tastes.
THe wines that are commonly brought into England, named by their tastes in
Greek (...), that in Latin, vina dulcia, astringentia, austera and acerba,
and such like as are acria and acida, for the most part whereof we have never
one proper name in English, though we can name dulce vinu^ well in English
sweet wine: but what shall we call acre, austerum and acerbum in common used
English? surely I cannot tell, for I cannot give to every one of these words
one several used English word, without circumlocution, wherefore seeing that
the proper English words are so hard to be found: and the meaning of the
words are as little known of the most part of all men, I think it shall be
necessary to show by the authority of some old learned writer, what these
words adstringens, austerum and acerbum, acer and acidus do signify and
betoken. If any man say that I need not to take this pain, because the great
and costlye book, called Thesaurus linguae Romanae and Britannicae, that is,
the treasure of the Latin and English tongue, has done that thing already: I
answer that I asked counsel of that great book, and in deed as I found
great plenty both of good Latin words, and fine manners of speaking, gathered
with great pains, and ordered with no small learning and judgment: but in ye
English, as I found to much plenty of light, and new inckhorne terms: so in
some places I found such scarceness, lack, and want of proper and true
English names, that the author is feign to give one name to diverse Latin
words, for when I looked how he englished Acer, he englisheth it thus. Eger,
sharp, tart, sour or fell. Lo, here is great plenty of words, and yet we
can not tell what acer in taste does properly signify, and a little after he
writes these words, acer, acidus succus, Vitruuius, eger. By this book we
may English lac acidum, eger milk. And afterward where as of purpose he
expounds what Acidus betokens, he englisheth it, eger, sour, sharp, and he
englisheth acidula pira, four pears, he englisheth Acerbum, unripe, sour,
displeasant, and Acerbitas, soreness of taste, sharpness or grieuousnesse of
time. He englisheth Austerus, sour, sharp, unpleasant, and gustus austerus a
rough or sour taste.

Now how shall a man know by this book what difference is between, acer,
acidus, austerus and acerbus, when as he calls them all sour, and puts so
small difference between one and another. Surely we have but small help of
that book in declaring of these words, and many such other, that are much
occupied in physic and philosophy, and in other both liberal and
mathematical sciences. Wherefore I wish, to the end that the book may be in
deed as it is called: that one learned physician and philosopher like unto
Linaker, one old and learned gra^marian like unto Clemond, and one perfect
Englishman like unto Sir Thomas Moore, had the amendment and making persite of
this book committed unto them. But now as Terence says, quoniam hac no^
successit, alia aggrediendum est via. Galen in the first of his books that he
writes of the powers of simple medicines says. Cap. 39. If any man do taste
quinces or apples, or medlers, or mirtels, doubtless he shall know that there
is an other feeling that is moved unto us of these things in ye tongue, and
another of bodies astringentibus, that is, that are only binding, for those
things that are binding, appear to drive inward that part of us that they
touch in all places equally or in like, as pulling, stopping, as drawing
together. But austera seem to go down even unto the bottom, and to move a
rough and unequal feeling and drying up and wasting all the moisture of feeling
bodies. Furthermore when as that body which is moved unto our tongue does
mightilye dry and draw together, and makes it rough even to the bottom, as
choke pears that are not ripe, and cornelles, every such is called acerbum,
differing from austero in the excess of these qualities. That is to say,
austerum in many things is like unto acerbo, but acerbum is in all those things
wherein they are something like, much stronger and mightier than austerum is:
and Galen in another place writes, that astringent is weaker than acerbum and
austerum, in all those properties that they have any likeness in. And Galen
in ye.ix. book de simplicium medicamentorum facultatibus, says that
adstringentia draw together, bind together, and do make thick our substance,
and therefore upon whatsoever part of our body they be laid without, by and by
they make it full of wrinkles, and draw together. Furthermore after ye doctrine
of Galen, we may perceive in some kinds of pears, marked at diverse times,
gustum acerbum, austerum and astringentem. When the pears are newly grown, if
ye taste of them at the first, ye shall perceive that they are hard and dry,
and are very rough in taste, and then they are called acerba, but after that
they are more than half ripe, when that hardness and dryness is gone, then
become they moyster and softer, and are in taste austera. And when they are
full ripe, they are astringentia, with a sweet taste joined therewith. By this
description, I trust wise and learned men by taking of some pain in reading of
old English writers shall come by the knowledge of right and proper English
words for these.iij. Latin, or else at the least I judge that men shall
understand what difference is between astringens, austerum and acerbum. In
the mean time until that we may speed better, we may english astringens,
binding, austerum, sour binding, and acerbum, rough and binding like choke
pears. And Galen lib. 1. simpl. medic. facultatibus. cap. 39. and in diverse
other places makes an open and plain difference between acre and acidum,
contrary to it that is alleged of Vitruuius, who makes them both one. For
Galen says, that acria are calida, and that acida are ^old.

Acer may be Englished biting sharp, and acidum may be named sour as sorrel,
and sour milk, and diverse other things. Actius writes, that wine that is
sour with an harrish binding, so that it be well smelling withal, hurts the
head, but it which is waterishe, Waterish wines neither bread the headache
neither hurt the sinews, then when as the gout is the hurting of the sinews
and joints how engender small waterish wines the gout?
neither breeds the headache, neither hurts the sinews. Galen also says
that sour binding wines stop flowings, and strengthen the stomach, and hurt
not the head, but that they help not them that are fallen into a swounde.

Wines that are rough and binding in taste like unto choke pears, stop
vomitings and flowings of the belly, and they cool and dry. Moreover they go
hardlye down, when as those things that are only of a sour taste, go easily
down.

I have learned by experience (says Galen) that all those things that bind,
and are also sour, are manifestly cold.

Simeon Sethi says, wines that are a little and gently binding, and are in
colorred, and in substance thin, are good for them that are of a good and a
mean complexion and temperature. But they are of a good complexion and of a
mean temperature that are neither to hot nor to cold, neither to moist nor to
dry, of the which sort I ween we shall find as few at this time almost, as
we shall be able to find citizens of Platoes commonwealth in every parish of
England. And Galen a man of more authority than Simeon Sethi is of, writes in
the book of good and evil juices, that as fiery red wines, for as much as
they are hot in working, by and by fill the head, even so those wines that
are thin and waterishe, and do lightly bind, not only are not vnnoysome unto
the head, but also take away small headaches, and he says afterward, all
wines that are binding, are comfortable for the stomache, and that such as are
sour and cold, be of subtle parts, but they that are binding, are of gross
parts de simply. med. facultatib. lib. 4. cap. 2.

Of sweet wines.
Whatsoever things are sweet, cannot be cold, therefore sweet wines are of an
hot complexion: and Dioscorides says, sweet wines has gross parts in it,
and does breath out of the body more hardlye, it fills the stomache full of
wind, it troubles the bellye, and the guts as Must does, but it makes not
a man so sone drunken, but it is most fit of all other for the kidneys and the
bladder.

To whom wine is ill, and unmeet and very hurtful.
ARistotell says that wine is neither fit for children, nor nurses, and Galen
counsayleth that children shall taste no wine at all: and would, that not even
springoldes that are full grown, should take wine but in small quantity,
because that it makes them fall headlongs into wrath and into lust of the
body, and makes the reasonable part of the mind dull and drousie. Wine is
ill also for them that are of a hot burning complexion, and have any
inflammation within them in their bodies, or have any burning agues. It is also
generallye ill for them that have a great reume and the gout, or either an
half or hole palsy. The wine that is menged with Gipso or with Alibaster, as
Sack is, hurts the sinews, and makes ye head heavy, and sets it on
fire, and is very ill for the bladder. Wine that is menged with cute, as our
Malmsey is, fill a man's head and make him drunken, breath out more hardlye, and
trouble the stomache, which words I judge, ought to be understood of such a
wine, as has very much cute put into it.

To whom and for what purposes wine is good.
THe holy scripture says, yt wine makes the heart of man merry, and that it
is good to be taken of them that have a weak and a feeble stomach, and
the.xxxj. chapter of the Proverbs has this saying, O Lamuell, give not unto
kings, I say, unto kings, wine to drink of it, or to princes strong drink,
least they, after they have drunken, forget the law that is appointed, or
overthrow the causes of all poor men's children. Give strong drink unto them
that are condemned to die, and Wine to them that have a sorrowful heart, that
after they have drunken, they may forget their poverty, and remember no more
their misfortune.

Galen in his first book de sanitate tuenda, says that wine molsteneth and
nourishes whatsoever is before made dry out of measure, and also swageth and
overcomes the sharpness of bitter gall, and furthermore, emptieth out by
sweat, and drives forth by water.

Out of Dioscorides.xj. chapter of the fifth book.
GEnerally every wine not mixed, and is only simple of himself, and is of
nature in taste sour and binding, makes hot, is easily conveyed into the
body, it is good for the stomache, it makes a man have an appetite, it
norisheth and makes a man sleep, strengthens and makes a good color, and if
it be plenteouslye drunken, Wines good against diverse poisons.
helps them that have taken Hemlocke, or Coriander, or the poison called
Pharicum, or yt poison called Iria or Opium, which is the juice of Poppy, or
Litharge, or Eugh, or Wolfes bayne, or choking mushromes, or todestooles. It is
also good against all the bitings and stingings of all creeping beasts, which
after they have stinged or bitten, kill a man with cold, or overthrow the
stomach. It is good for the long continuance of windiness of the midrife, and
against the bitings of the stomach, and hitchcocke or yesking, and against
bending or stretching out of the stomach, and against the flowing of the guts
and bellye. Wine is also good to them that sweat much, Wine good for them that
sweat to much.
and are made faint with to much sweating, and especially such as is white,
old and well smelling. Hitherto Dioscotides. Whose words when as he speaks
of the holesoninesse of wines against poisons, and the bitings and stingings of
venomous beasts, must be understood of Muscadine, Sack, Ma^^^sey and
Bastard, and such hot (...) which by reason of their heat, enter farther
into the body, and more speedily, and are better against cold poisons tha^
colder wines be.

Simeon Sethi of the nature of Wines.
SOme use wine for profit, some to make them merry withal, and some for
pleasure, and some for all these purposes. Wine does not only nourishe, but
also makes the meats to go well down, and stirs up the natural heat and
increases it. And the most part of them that use it soberlye, when as their
body is withered before, they come into a good plight, and look well. Wine
has this property, that it carries and leads the meat unto every small
part, and through streyte ways by the proper thinness or subtilnesse of his
parts, and it heateth the members and small parts, and makes a good
digestion, and drives forth water. Wherefore it fifteth forth the most part of
superfluities, but the greater power and working of wine may be spied more
plainly in cold and withered bodies, and wherein is less natural heat, as in
old men, and in such as are amended of their sickness. But wine works not
only these things which we have spoken of before, in men's bodies, but also
shows certain chaungings wonderfully in a man's mind. For it makes men
merry, and to have a good hope, to be manly and liberal, and many that we see
before, cowardes, after the drinking of wine, to be made bold, cheerful, of
a good courage, and a good hope, and some that were niggards and filthy
pinchers to be made liberal, and free giuers. But wine if it be used out of
measure, overthrows and drowneth the lively soundness and strength, and the
natural color, and it brings the hole palsy, the half palsy, the falling
sickness, and the trembling of the members, it noyeth also the godly and
principal part of the soul, because they that gull in wine so, have mistie
and dark senses, and their mind is not clear. Hitherto Simeon Sethi. White
small wines that have no great smell, are good for the sinews that are
wounded. Wine is good to wash the moist flesh that is in old sores. Some
wines to be given in some agues at some times.
Waterish wine is necessary for them that have the ague, and have thin juices
therewith, and it may be given in diverse agues, as Galen says in his book de
methodo medendi, when as the rage of the ague is not great. Wine good for the
gout, occupied without.
And although wine when it is taken inwardly hurts both the sinews and
joints, because it fumeth up into the head, and breeds rheumes which fall
down unto them, yet for all that, if it be laid outwardlye upon the joints,
it strengthens them, and makes them fast when as they are loose by melting
away or resolving the moisture that is in them, and for that purpose serves
best of all other black wine, for the more that it is binding, the more it
strengthens.

Out of the book of Galen which teaches that the manners of the soul, and the
complexion of the body follow one another.
WIne drives away sadness, and pensiveness, but it is ill if it be to
largely taken. But if a man will use it wisely, it will digest, and distribute
or convey the nourishment, increase blood and norish, and it will also make the
mind both gentler and bolder. Plato in the.ij. Plato de legibus.
book de legibus, forbids all children wine yt are under.xij. hours old,
for that intent yt they should not be driven therewith into madness, he
suffers them that are full grown in age, to use it, because it is a remedy
against ye grieuousnesse of age, and drives away sorrows, and swageth the
hardness of manners, the age of springoldes or of growing children, is hot and
full of much blood, contrariwise the old age is cold, and wants blood,
therefore the drinking of wine is profitable for old men, but to them that are
in growing, it is exceeding hurtful, moreover Plato did not suffer that the
soldiers should drink any wine in the camp, neither bondmen in the city,
neither princes nor governors in the co^monwelth, neither judges, neither any
other that should enter in the counsel about any matter, because that wine as
a certain tyrant does rule and overcome the powers of the soul. Hitherto
Galen. But because it has been diverse times said, that wine is good for old
men, and it is not as yet fullye showed what manner of wine that should be, it
shall be best to teach men by Galen what wines are best for old men. Galen lib.
5. de sanitate tuenda, says: All your counsel must go to this end in
chosing of wine fit for old men, that it may be very thin or subtle, in color
redish yellow, or yellow, or pale yellow, which is of a middle color between
bright yellow and white. The warming of all the members in old men's bodies.
There are two profits that come to old men by the use of wine, one is, that
it warmeth all the members of their bodies, and the other is, that it scoureth
out by the water all the whayishnesse or thin waterishnes of the blood, and
because it does so effectuallye, The scouring away of the whaiish waterynesse
of the blood.
it is best for old men. But such wine is it that is thin in substance, and
drives forth water, and is yellow in color, for that is the proper color of
hot wines, and so also which have been from the beginning very white, and
have gotten a certain yellowness when they have waxed old, whereupon they
begin first to be a little yellowishe pale, and afterward to be plainly yellow
pale. But such wines as are either pale yellow, or bright yellow, and a fat
substance increase the blood, and nourish the body by reason whereof they are
now and then good for old men, to wete, at such times when as they have not
much wheyish moisture, and would be more plenteously norished, but for all
that, aged me^ had more need for ye most part, such wines as make a man piss
much, because they have such plenty of waterish excrements.

Now good reader seeing that almighty God our heavenly father has given thee
this noble creature of wine, so many ways profitable for our bodies and
minds, thank him with all thy heart, not only for it, but also for that he
has sent learned Physicians to tell thee how, in what measure, and in what
time thou should use them, and not use them, and for what complexions and ages
they are good, and for what complexions and ages they are evil. If thou take
any harm by misusing this noble creature of God, blame not him, but thine own
self, that have abused it, contrary to his will, and to the learning of his
officers and servants that taught thee the right use of it. Honor be given to
God for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
This Book shows at large the powers, commodities, virtues, and properties
of the three most renouned and famous Preservatives or Triacles: to weete, of
the great Triacle called in Latin Theriaca Andromachi: of the Triacle Salt:
and of it that is called by the name of the first finder out and maker,
Mithridatium: Gathered out of Galen and Aetius, by the labors and pains of
William Turner, Doctor of Physic.

Newly corrected and amended.

Mellis si nimia est copia, bilis erit. William Turner to the gentle Reader.
FORASMVCH AS both Christian charity, and the common civil love that every man
owes to his country, would and does require that all Christians and men
living ciuilly together in one common country, should one help another with
such gifts, either of the mind, as learning, knowledge, wisdom, and
cunning, or with bodily gifts, as riches, strength and all kind of man's
help, if they be more richly replenished therewith than their neighbors be:
Methinke we that profess the science of Physic, and can show great help and
comfort unto our brethren and countrymen, as well as men of other countries, to
wete, Italians, Germans, and Spaniards have done, might iustlye be accused of
unkindness, if none of us (being so many) would take in hand to declare in the
English tongue, the manifold and worthy virtues of the great Triacle made by
Andromachus: and of the Triacle Salt, which is called in Latin Saltheriacalis.
Wherefore seeing that hitherto I have not perceived any man to have taken that
labor in hand, for the love that I owe unto almighty God and his people, my
countrymen of England, I will adventure as well as I can, to declare the
nature, virtue, property and operations of the forenamed Triacle, and also of
the Triacle Salt. And because I am not minded to bring out any new thing of
mine own invention, I entend for to gather the sum of this whole matter out
of an old Grecian, named Galen, the most famous writer of Physic that wrote
this.xiiij. hundred year in all Europa, Asia, or Africa, and out of another
famous Grecian named Aetius, a man of great learning: who gathered into a
book that is now abroad in Latin, all the most notable compositions that his
predecessor (noble Galen) lest behind him, and a great number of compositions
of medicines, written before Galens time by noble Physicians, whereof Galen made
no mention: and also of no small number of excellent compositions of medicines
invented by learned Physicians after Galens time. If this my pain taken in
this matter shall be perceived to be thankful unto thee, and to be well
taken, if God send me longer life and health, I will set something more forth
to the profit of all my country men, both my friends and foes also. The manner
of making of the great Triacle, and Triacle Sale, and Mithridatium, may be had
both in Galen to Piso, and also in Aetius. Wherefore if there be any
Apothecaries of London, that dare take in hand to make these noble
compositions, they may know now where to have the^: or if that for lack of
some simple medicines, not easilye to he had in England, they dare not
adventure upon the making thereof: they may have them made already from
Venice, as faithfully compounded at this time, as ever any Triacles have been
made there these.xl. years. But now let us rehearse the virtues and properties
of these excellent medicines. And first of the great Triacle.

Galen writes to Piso this.
THE TRIACLE Devised by Andromachus the elder, is very good against the biting
of all wild beasts and Serpents, against poisoned medicines, against
diseases of ye stomach, shortness of wind, against the Colicke, against the
iaundise, the dropsey, the consumption of the lunges, all kind of crampes or
drawings together, the pleurisy, sores of the bladder, stopping of water,
pains of the kidneyes, pestilent diseases, and also the biting of a mad dog,
if it be taken in the weight of the Bean of Egypt, with three ciathes of warm
water: that is about the measure of four ounces and a half. It is also good
against the long during pains of the head, disinesse of the head, and
hardness of hearing: it mendeth the dullness of the eyesight, it helps the
falling sickness, and them that cast out blood, if a man will give it with the
broth of Comfrey. It draws out the worms in the guts, it helps those
that have diseases of the liver and milt, it helps thorowlye the bloody
flixe, and the common flixe that comes of the slipperinesse of the guts and
stomach, and the turning torments of the guts, especially if the guts have
no inflammation or great burning heat in them. Besides this, when as the body
wastes away with to much sweating, and his strength is brought to weakness,
and the nature of the disease will not suffer ye use of wine, this triacle
dru^ken, stays or stops the sweat, and restores the strength that was
weakened before. It does also provoke down to women their sickness that has
been long stopped, and it does now and then open the stopping of the issue of
the mother and of the Emrodes: for seeing that it is endued with sundry and
mengled qualities or properties, therefore it spreading abroad something and
making them thin, draws them together, that they may be sifted out. It uses
for to stay other things that flow above measure, by reason of the weakness
of ye strength of the body, or the power retentiue or holding power, and
therefore restores the strength again: and also it helps all diseases of
the joints, when as the time of increasing the disease is past, and it is come
to the highest, for then thou shalt give to drink this triacle after thou
have made fometations upon the aching place, the which in deed shall drive
away the flowing humors that are stuffed in, and shall drive back those that
would fall in afterward. This Triacle is good also for them that are of
perfect health, if they take it often. With the use of this Triacle, I have often
times helped those that have the disease called in Greek Elephantiasis, and
(now commonly called the lepre or leprosy, which is not in deed the lepre of
the old Grecians, neither it that the scripture makes mention of.) It is not
only good for the body, but also for the mind, for if it be often drunken, it
heals melancholyke diseases, and wastes away black choler, by reason
whereof it is also good for the Fever Quartaine which comes of black choler,
But it may not be given in the beginning of a Quartaine.
otherwise called melancholy. I have delivered many very easily that have been
sick of the Quartaine, with this remedy. For I use first to purge the sick
person by vomiting, which is done after meat, and the next day I give him to
drink the juice of wormwood, and then two hours before his (...), I give him
this Triacle, and often times the pacient is by and by delivered from his fit.
This medicine has accustomably taken away ye fear of water, which of all
diseases is the worst, and uses to come to a man after he is bitten of a mad
dog. They that have this disease, are afraid of water, and for the great
dryness that they have within the^, they are desirous of moisture, but they
forbear or hold themselves from drink, because that they are departed from
their right mind and understanding, and consider not what would help them or
do them good. And therefore it comes to pass that they flying and eschuing
water, wither, and are drawn together with a deadly crampe, by the reason of a
hot ague that they are inwardly burnt with, and so at length die the
wretchedst kind of death yt can be. I have used sometimes to put some portion
of this triacle mengled with rose oil, into the wound that the mad dog has
made, that it might after the manner of a boxing glass, suck and draw out from
the bottom the vennome, in so much that the Triacle is not only good to be
taken in, but also to be laid outwardly upon the wound, which as soon as the
dog has made with his teeth, must be launced and cut round about and kept
open, for the space of four days, that the venom may thereby breath out, that
the wound be not stopped or grown up again. And for this purpose ye may make
a cauterisation in ye wound to keep it long open, but because the most part of
men can better abide the akings than the burnings. If the wound can be kept
open with only cutting, it shall be better to let it abide so, in tender and
weak persons, but if it will needs grow to, then must it be kept open with
burning or cauterisation. A man cannot find a better remedy than this triacle
against the pestilence, which being also as it were a wild beast, bred of ye
corruption of the air, leaping upon men by the inbreathing of that ill breaths
which destroys, wastes, and makes hauock not only of one man, but of whole
tounes and Cities.

And as Hipocrates drove away ye pestilence out of Athens with great fires made
of spice woods, and sweet flowers, changing the temperature of the air, that
men by this means might draw in with their breath the purified or cleansed
air, for a remedy against the common evil that reigned there then: Eue^ so
this Triacle like a scouring or purging fire, will not suffer them that take it
in before they be infected, to be infected at al: and delivers them that are
infected already, if they take it in afterward, changing the malicious poison
of the air which they have received by breath. And suffers not the disease
to spread any further. Wherefore I counsel thee, even when as thou art in thy
best health, to use often this Triacle. But especially when thou make thy journey
in the winter. And this Triacle strengthens also the wits or senses. It
quickens the mind or understanding, and so defends the body, by reason of
the mixture, that it suffers not the body to be overcome by any poison or
venomous drink or potion. As it is reported of king Mithridates, who defended
himself so, not with the great triacle, which at that time was not, but with a
preservative of his own making, which after his own name was called
Mithridatium, that he could not be ouercommed with any poison, a man must use
this Triacle after he has perfitely digested. Sometime in the quantity of a
bean of Egypt with three ounces and a half of water. And sometime when he has
more time to digest the medicine, he may take the quantity of a Hasel nut,
with four ounces and a half of water. But I would counsel no body to take
this triacle in the heat of Summer. Neither ought it to be taken often and much,
of them that are of flourishing or lusty age, neither of the^ that are of hot
natures or complexions: I counsel also that they whose years turn toward age
do take it often and much, not with water but with wine. Children in no case
ought to receive this medicine, because it will dissolve or lose in pieces
their bodies. For I remember that I saw once a little boy, who by the
unseasonable using of this Triacle, fell into a palsy.

Of the Triacle Salt.
THe Triacle Salt is a medicinal Salt, made of diverse excellent herbs, and of
burnt Salt and burnt Vipers, or else of the trochiskes of Vipers being burnt.
And the composition of this Salt, is found both in Galen and also in Aetius.
Galen writes thus of the triacle Salt: not word for word but in sentence, as I
am ready for to prove, if any man hold the contrary. The triacle Salt (says
Galen) is good for the same diseases, poisons, bitings and other things that
the great Triacle is good for, but it works not so effectuously nor in so
short a time. Some peradventure will think that the virtue of Triacle Salt
shall soon vanishe away, because the Vipers which are the principal ground
of the medicine are burned, and thereby leefe their strength: but that is not
true, for many things by reason of the fire are made better, or else declare
their nature that lurketh. We melt or try gold by the fire, and it that is
counterfeit gold, is bewrayed thereby, and it that is good gold, is declared
to be good, by the trial of the fire. And iron also is made soft by the fire
and bowable, and so is made fit for many things necessary for man's life. Are
not also many things that we receive inwardly for the norishment of our bodies
made better by ye help of the fire?

Galen rehearses examples of diverse other things which are made better by
burning of them in the fire. And so he says, that al Vipers burnt whole, do
put away their poison that they had before, and are made wholesome by the fire.
Although the triacle Salt be good for many other things, yet properly and
especially it helps those diseases that rise in the uttermost part of the
skin: as the scuruye evil that goes through the skin into the flesh, and
makes it of a white color, the common lepre of the Grecians and scripture,
and the Wild scabby or scuruy evil. And it drives away lice that breed of
corruption, and besides these, it scoureth the teeth very well, and suffers
them not to be eaten through, and it strengthens the gummes that are lose, and
holds down or stops the flowing and the rotting of them.

Of the Triacle Salt: out of Aetius.
THe Triacle Salt is good for all things that the great Triacle is after a
moderate manner, and shows his profit by continual using of it: howbeit
there are some that deny utterly that it has any power to help or do any
good, alleging that the property of the Vipers is destroyed by the burning,
but I dare affirm that although the Triacle Salt has not so great virtues as
the great Triacle has: Yet nevertheless that it leeseth not his strength by
the coming into the fire. For there are many things which are found and
perceived to be better for that they have been in the fire, as gold, lime, and
such like. For Vipers burnt whole in the fire, put away by the reason of the
fire, their more strong and hurfull property, and take of the fire their
wholesome temperature and right property. The Triacle Salt is chieflye
commended in helping the diseases of the skin, as the white Morphew, yt Lepre
of the Grecians, and Scripture, the wild scurfe, and the sickensse now
commonly called the Lepre, which in deed is not the Lepre, but Elephantiasis,
the black morphew, wild scabbes, thinness and falling of the hear, for it
does away by and by such euilles or griefs of the skin and drives away
very well sharp excrements, being in plenty under the skin. The use of this
Salt drives out sweat of many, and so by the sweating, the rotten substance
is emptied out: in so much that certain draw out lice in the beginning,
within.14. days after the use of this medicine at the most, and afterward
there appeared no more any lice, but some instead of lice, cast out flemmy
spitting, beginning first with the casting out of the Salt: and then within a
little while after, when the spittell is purged out, it is stopped. Ye may use
it as well at dinner, as at supper, with what soever kind of meat ye list to
take it, neither shall ye need to provoke any man further, to the receiving
of it. For there is such pleasantness in it, that a man might say, it were
rather made for pleasure, than for other intentes. A man may take the quantity
of three spoonefuls in one day, especially if the meat be well digested in
the stomach before. They that eat it have a better digestion, and a greater
appetite to their meat, and they have a more flourishing or lusty body, and
all their wits or senses lustier and fresher. It dissolues suffusions that
are yet beginning, and not fully grown together. Neither shall any man be in
danger of suffusio^ that uses them daily. The same provoke the monethlye
disease of women, that are stopped by reason of a clustering or stopping
co^geling of the blood, the same stays and stops the outrageous and large
flowing of the same. Whosoever will take it before hand, shall overcome all the
lying in wait of beasts that cast out poison, neither when a man is hurt with
the venom already, and take the Salt by and by after, shall run into any
danger thereby, especially if he have prepared, or as it were seasoned the
complexion of his body a long time before, by the using of this Salt. It is
good to fly for succor unto this helping medicine, which drives away the
evil in the beginning of the Pestilence, especially if thou menge withal
some part of Tamariske. Furthermore the triacle Salt is good physic for the
most part of all diseases, and especially for such as are in the kidneyes, for
it breaks the stones that are in them, Suffusion is the running of a noisome
humor in the eye which if it be not stopped, engenders haw and pearl in the
eye, and some name this disease Cataracta.
and when they are sore weakened, restores and makes them fresh again.
There can no like medicine be given, to help the disinesse of the head, and
headaches, and to the falling sickness, unto this if a man will take it
plenteouslye, for the space of a year, I have known old iaundises, and those
that have had ill miltes, and men diseased with the Colike, which fell often
into that disease, to have been helped by this Salt. And I have dried up the
dropsey with it, especially it that goes between the fell and the flesh. And
I have driven away the disease of insatiable hunger, which is called in greek
Bulimos, with this salt: and also if it be eaten, it helps those that go in
cold air, that they take no harm thereby. It stays continual quiuerings or
shaking, that come to one by courses, and dries up moist horce and coughes.
This Salt spinkled upon the meat brings them that were consumed with a
consumption, to their right state again, and makes them that are losed by
weakness, to amend again. For I know many that have had all their members
losed, that is to say stricken with a palsy, restored to their perfect health
again. This etable Salt a man would think that it were only made for them
that begin to have the gout, and for all them that have any disease of the
joints, it helps them so spedilye. A man can not well express how much
this Salt will stay and hinder old quarteyns, and dotings or madness, that
rise of melancholye, if it be taken before the fittes, or in the space between
the fittes, it kills also all kind of worms, it is also very good to rub
the teeth, specially the great teeth, for it does make the teeth not only the
whiter, but also strengthens them, so that no tooth shall move or be losed
after, nor eaten through, nor set on edge.

It draws also out of the head ye great plenty of humors, and purges it and
makes the eyes lighter. The physician must occupy this triacle Salt after
diverse manners and ways: as for an example. If he will give this Salt to one
that spitteth blood, let him put the sixth part of Comfrey bruised and sifted, to
one proportion or quantity of this Salt: as to five spoonefuls of the Salt,
one of Comfrey. In the curing of them that are sick in the consumption of the
lungs, called the ptisick, and them that have matter running out of their
breasts: ye physician must put also to one part of the Salt, six parts of Oris
powder, or Dittamy of Candy. To the^ that are diseased in the liver, Ground
pine, to them that are diseased in the milt, the root of Swines bread, called
Cyclamem, or the barks of Capers, or put unto the sixth part of pepper. If thou will dress it for them that have the gout, take away the half of the
prescribed weight of Satirion, taking good heed that thou stirrest not up
furious pleasures, and such as lose the joints in them. But the Salt will
break the stone in the kidneys, most of all if it have mixed with it ye fruit
of Balsamum or Gru^mell sede. If thou will make a stronger power against
poisons, thou shall double ye quantity of Scordiu^, otherwise called Water
Germaunder, and Horehound, in the making of the Salt: and beside that, thou
shall add dried Duckes blood. It will be better for them that are bitten of a
mad dog, if they put unto it the roots of Piony or burnt Crabbes. The Salt will
be good for them that have their necks grown backwarde, by reason of drawing
together of the sinews, if they can abide to have a little Castoreum, and
Opopanax, mixed with it. It clears and makes sharp the eye sight, if thou
put in thy Salt ye leaves of Malabathrum, in double quantity. It helps ye
digestions of meat, if there be put in it a sufficient quantity of Cassia,
and Costus, for the swelling that comes of wind. Put Commin to it, it will
provoke brine or water in greater plenty, if thou put of ye seed of Dancus to
it. It will deliver a man sooner from the quartein if right up growing Veruin
and Agrimonie, and the juice of Cireneik or Laser it self be mixed with it.
But to tell the sum of the matter shortly. Whatsoever thou know to be
wholesome and good for the diseased member, mix that with the Salt: either in
the making of it, or in the quantity that thou entendest to give in. But we
must not give it to them that are with child, nor to sucking children, neither
to other little children, neither to them that are of a hoter complexion, and
especially not in Summer, neither to them that have a sharp and a dry ague in
any case. Hitherto have I written of the great Triacle and the Triacle Salt:
but because there are many excellent virtues, helps, and remedies that may be
had also of the noble preservative medicine called Mithridatium, bearing the
name of Mithridates the king, who invented it, I think I shall do well also
to declare to such as understand no Latin, the virtues, properties, remedies,
and helps, that may be had of that preservative: which may be taken with
much less ieoperdie, then the great Triacle can be taken. Yea may take at the
most, the quantity of a hasell nut of this medicine. They that are come to
full age may take the quantity of a bean of Graecia, which is called Lotos.
This quantity may be increased or diminished in ye middle ages, and they that
have no ague may take it with wine, or with honied wine, or sugared wine, or
with spiced wine, if that they have a stopped liver. But they that are agewish,
must take it with water, or Mede. It is very good for old reumes that flow
down into the stomach and breast, and for all impostumes, and deep old
exulcerations or wearing of the skin that are far and deep in the body. It is
good for them that are in a consumption, and them that have great plenty of
wind in their bellies, and it helps the common flix, it mendeth the dull
appetite, and brings a fresh appetite again. And makes a man's body have a
good color, it breaks the stone, it helps them that cannot but with great
pain make water, and suffers not melancholy to be gathered together. It
sharpeneth their sight that receive it, if it be taken before hand, it has a
great power to hinder or let that a man be not hurt with any kind of deadlye
poison, for the which cause it was first ordained and invented of King
Mithridates.

AN ADMONITION OF William Turner to the Reader.
ALthough both Galen and Aetius has given sufficient warning unto all me^ and
women, at what times, in what ages, complexions, and in what diseases these
medicines may be hurtful or wholesome to the receyuers of it: yet marking the
great dull grossness of many English men that cannot understand it, that is
plainly spoken, and the foolish hardynesse of other some that care not for
sufficient warning, but will boldlye become murderers of themselves, by
misusing of Gods creatures, not using them by the advice of almighty Gods
servants and officers the learned Physicians, but out of time, and out of
measure take them in, without al discretion, following only their own advise
or else the counsel of some doting old Gooddame, or some craking Cremer, or
prating runnagate Pedlar, I cannot think my self sufficiently discharged,
except I give warning to all men and women that will use these medicines, that
they take the^ not in rashly and unadvisedly, without the advice and counsel
of a learned physician, who may tell them, whether they be agreeing for their
natures and complexions and diseases or no. The which thing if they will not
do, neither will learn in what quantity they ought to be taken, neither what
persons, of what ages, neither at what times they ought to be taken,
doubtless, I think that it will chance sometime, that the most precious
medicines shall turne^ to their own destructions. Let no man now say but he is
sufficiently warned. The great Triacle and the Mithridatium may be had well,
even of the best making, of the most part of ye Apothecaries of the city of
London: and sometimes of other that travail to Venice, all these three sorts
are now lately made and dressed in the famous City of Venice.

THE NAMES OF DISeases and griefs that may be healed by the great Triacle,
called Theriaca Andromachi, as Galen writes in his book unto Piso.
THE biting of all venomous beasts and serpents. All kind of poisons and
poysened drinks. The diseases of the stomach. Shortness of wind. The
Colicke. The Iaundise or Guclesought. The Dropsey. The consumption of yt Lungs
or ptisick. All kind of Cramps, or drawings together, or shrinking of sinews.
The pleuresey or side ague with a stitch, and spitting of blood, and
vlcerations. Sores of the bladder. Stopping of water or urine. Pains of the
Kidneyes. Pestilence, and pestilent diseases. The biting of a mad dog. Old
headakes. Disinesse of the head. Hardness of hearing. The dullness of the eye
sight. The falling sickness. Vomiting of blood. Worms in the guts. The
diseases of the Liver. The diseases of the Milt. The bloody flix. The common
flix. The turning torments of the guts. Wasting away with to much sweating.
The stopping of women's monthly sickness. The stopping of the mother. The
stopping of the Emrodes. All superfluous flowings of the body. All diseases of
the joints. Poisoning, and falling to perilous diseases. The common Lepre
called Elephantiasis. The disease of the mind that came of melancholye. All
melancholicke diseases. Plenty of choler: called melancholy. The quartaine
ague. The fear of water after the biting of a mad dog: The weakness of the
wits or senses.
THE NAMES OF THE diseases and griefs that may be healed by the Triacle Salt:
according unto the learning of Galen and Aetius.
All the diseases of the skin, but chiefly these that follow.

THe white Morphew. The Lepre of the Grecians and scripture. The wild scurfe.
The common Lepre, called in Latin Elephantiasis. The black morphew. Wild
scabbes. The falling of the hear. Thinness of the hears. Stopping of sweat.
Overmuch plenty of flegmaticke excrements. Lack of digestion. Lack of
appetite. Dullness of senses or wits. Suffusions that breed the hawe, and
pearl in the eye, called of some Cataracta. Stopping of venomous diseases. The
outrageous flowing of venomous diseases. The bitting of venomous beasts and
serpents. The pestilence and contagious air. The disease of the kidneyes. The
debilitie and weakness of the kidneys. Old headaches. The falling sickness.
Old Iaundise. The diseases of the Milt. The Colicke. The dropsey. The
insatiable hunger called Bulimos. The cold yt a man takes in cold weather.
Shakings and tremblings, that come before agues. Consumptions, Ptisicks, and
wastings of the body. The Palsy and weakness of the ioints, and other
members. The Gout. All diseases of the joints. Old quartaines. Dotings, and
madness that come of melancholy. All kind of worms that breed within a
man. The rotting and other diseases of the teeth. Rheumaticke humors in the
head. Certain diseases of the eyes.
THE NAMES OF THE diseases that may be healed by the noble preservative
medicine called Mithridatium, as Galen and Aetius and all other learned
Physicians, that wrote after them of such matter, do bear witness in their
writings.
THe stopping of the Liver. Old reumes flowing down into the stomach and
breast. Impostumes. Deep vlcerations, and of scraping of the skin that are
far in the body. Consumptions and Ptisicks. Windynesse in the body. The
common flixe. The dull appetite. Evil favored color of the face and other
places of the body. The stone. Hardness and painfulness in making of water.
Gathering together of melancholy. Dullness of the eye sight. All deadly poison.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by William Seres, dwelling at the West end of Paul's, at
the sign of the Hedgebogge.


