A DISCOVRSE Against Painting and Tincturing of WOMEN.

Wherein the abominable sins of Murder and Poisoning, Pride and Ambition,
Adultery and Witchcraft, are set forth and discovered.



Whereunto is added the Picture of a Picture, or, The Character of a Painted
Woman.

Imprinted at London for Edward Merchant. 1616.

A TREATISE AGAINST PAINTNG AND TINCTVRING OF MEN AND WOMEN:

Against Murder and Poisoning: Pride and Ambition: Adultery and Witchcraft.

AND THE ROOT OF ALL THESE, Disobedience to the Ministry of the Word.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED The picture of a picture, or, the Character of a Painted
Woman.

By THOMAS TVKE, Minister of Gods Word at Saint Giles in the Fields.

ROMANS 6. The wages of sin is death.

Quot vitia, tot venena. A deceitful heart has deceived them: they consider
not that a lie is in their face.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Creed, and Barn. Allsope, for Edward Merchant dwelling
in Paul's Churchyard, near the Cross. 1616.

AD NIGELLAM MAGIS RVBICVNDAM, QVAM verecundam summo candore.
CRassa dies. Nec enim vergentis vespera saecli
Splendidius passa est emicuisse iubar.
Ergo quod vmbra sumus, nihil est, fratres, sed and vmbrae
Vmbra est. Tum sequitur, quod sumus, vmbra sumus.
Scilicet hoc mirum: tibi derubuisserubore
Frontem, sic frontem, faemina, habes, nec hahes.
Tincta extinctaiacent, minioquerubentia sordent
Lumina, labrae, genae, quae nec habes, and habes.
Sola auris superest, audi, corrumpere noli,
Vt probior fias, and quod habes, habeas.
Eiusdem.
Curiosus and Curiaesus.
GEntlemen and Yeomen, in my opinion,
From the Latin Miniu^, comes our English Minio^.
Who fearing lest the Proverb should prove good,
Still wear's two faces, but has left the hood.
And trust me la, her word's not worth two chips:
For she is a woman of polluted lips.
Nath. Tuke.
To women that paint themselves.
A Lome wall and painted face are one;
For th'beauty of them both is quickly gone.
When the lome is fallen of, then lathes appear,
So wrinkles in that face fro the eye to the ear.
The chastest of your sex contemn these arts,
And many that use them, have rid in carts.
Arthur Dowton.
Infucatas.
QUe pictas geritis facies, vos iure potestis
Dicere cum Flacco, puluis and vmbra sumus.
Johannes Owen
lib. 1. epigram. 90.
ENcretata timet Fabulla nimbum
Cerussatatimet Sabella Solemn.
Martialis
lib. 2. epig. 41.
Infucatas.
CLaudia de pictis olim Rufina Britannis,
Gestabat pictas non tamen ipsa genas;
Claudia non pictos tam nacta Britanna parents,
Picta suum perimit qua fonet art, decus.
Sic maribus quondam fuerat quae insania turmis,
Faemineum vexat iam furibunda chorum.
Johan. Iefferie.
To painted women.
STay women-Gallants, cast an eye aside,
See where a mirror represents your pride.
Not that your fardingales fill too much room,
Nor that your lofty tires you misbecome:
Nor paps embossed laid forth to men's view:
(Though that be vain too, if wise men say true)
But that ye have renounced your native face,
Under a color that paint adds a grace,
To your intising looks. But is it no sin,
When Vermeil blushes to belie your skin?
Alas what comfort can your looking glass
Yield you, fond creatures, when it comes to pass
That over the paint is blurd, which makes you fret,
Or ye see naught else but a counterfeit,
A shadow of your self? Why should you seem
Fairer then women? Men often misesteeme
Your sweetest beauties: for because they know
Some of you are less beauteous, then they show.
And who would willingly her beauty saint,
Whose face ill-colour'd is clouded over with paint?
If ye be fair, what need of new complexion?
If black, or wrinckled, learn what a confection
The first, that was a Moralist does learn you;
Be virtuous, a bad face will nothing yerne you.
Who would be ugly in heavens piercing sight,
To seem fair to some mortal partial wight?
Yet none so partial, but he needs must see
Upon your brow folly and vanity
In their own colors: and it is hard to find
A painted face sort with a single mind.
Ed. Tylman.
In fucum.
Natalem saciem pigmentis faemina tingit,
Emendare petens, quod Deus ipse dedit.
Faemina fucata facie pictura videtur:
Nescis an haec mulier sit, vel imago sui.
Uix puto dicatur facies fucata pudica;
Non fucus mendaxora pudicategit.
Robertus Hall.
Ad delicatiores faeminas pigmentis vtentes.
MAtronae (modo sint piae, pudicae)
Utuntur proprijs, sine art, formis:
Qui vero color est adulterinus,
It vere color est adulterarum.
Quarum si numero pudet referri,
Quid tempus studio preciosum iuant
Pingendi teritis? Quidora (Magni
Iehouae fabrieam) renuntiantes
Diuinae sapientiae, scelestae
Tanto corrigitis labor, sumptu?
Tandem desinite his studere nugis,
Quarum vos pretium hoc habetis duum,
Vt pictae meretriculae audiatis.
R. Iackson.
Offace and haire-deceits.
THey that leave truth, do leave the Lord:
For God is truth, and all accord. So says Latimer in a certain sermon.

But th'natiue color of face and hair,
Is true and right, although not fair.
But's false and wrong, that is died by art,
Work of a lying, wanton heart.
Then it is a bad conclusion,
That follows this illusion.
Again:
FVcus is paint, and fucus is deceit,
And fucus they use, that do mean to cheat.
Me thinks the very name should stir up shame,
And make it hateful to each modest Dame.
Sure none, but such, as take delight in guile,
Would please themselves with such a garish wile.
If truth the inwards held, and governed,
Falsehood could not so shine in white and red.
T. T.
De fuco.
GEllia habet faciem, facies Pallantidos ortae
Cui cedit, cedunt lilia mista rosis.
Sanguine Sythonij quae nimbi vellera mista,
Quae Tyrio tinctum murice ebur.
Cur talem persona tegit? cur inuidet ora
Spectanda, optaret quae Venus esse sua?
O simplex animi! quam non sit Gellia simplex
Cernis, persona quae tegitur duplici?
Primam si tollas personam, erit alterafucus
Non facies, vultus non erit, vlcus erit.
Lecythum habent malae; rugas oblimat aniles
Lomento, tragicafece peruncta genas.
Creta, timet nimbum, solemn cerussa. Secundam
Deem hanc personam; Tertia, larua mera est.
Larua, poetarum superat quae monstra, Chimaeras,
Empusas, Furias, Gorgonas, Harpyias.
Quae vero faciem medicamine adulterat: illi
Men's and adultem erit. Frons animi indicium est.
Tho. Farnaby.
Ad Librum.
VAde, valequeliber, soboles libertaparentis,
Ingenui proles ingenij, and genij.
Exis, mentiri and blandirinescius exis.
Sic Domino liber es par, similisque tuo.
Euge liber, fuci expers, dilne fucum.
Fucus eat, pereat, teque vigente cadat.
Horrescas obelis, in te omnis saeuiat vnguis,
Faemineaque licet dilacerere manu.
Quicquiderit, linguae viris, virusue malignae:
Sorstua verae simplicitatis erit.
Persta, insta, damna in faciem vsque atque fucum,
Quos stringis, stringunt ista, probique probant.
Aegid. Baden.
De fucaiis.
Non homopictus homo est, nec faemina faemina picta:
Anglum se pingas, illico Pictus erit.
Robertus Felton.
A painted woman to her love, being about to go abroad for two or three days
from her.
Certe equo quae fueram, te discedente, puella,
Nempe reuersuror facta videbor anus.
Of the original of painting the face.

DEscribe what is fair painting of the face,
It is a thing proceeds from want of grace:
Which thing deformity did first beget,
And is on earth the greatest counterfeit.
T. Draiton.
De fuco.
FOrmosam cerussa facit, tamen indicat esso
Deformem; rugas improba larua regit.
Ad fucatam.
O quam te fieri puella vellem
Formosam minus, aut magis pudicam.
Ed. Tylman.
Of tincturing the face.
To what may I a painted wench compare?
She Is one disguized, when her face is bare.
She is a sickly woman always dying.
Her color's gone, but more she is a buying.
She is a rainebow, colors altogether,
She makes fair show, and bears us all fair weather:
And like a bow: she is flexible to bend,
And is led in a string by any friend.
She is Medea, who by likelihood
Can change old Aeson into younger blood,
Which can old age in youthful colors bury,
And make Proserpine of an hagge, or fury,
She Is a Physician well skild in complexions,
The sick will soon look well by her confections.
She Is a false coyner, who on brazen face,
Or coper nose can set a gilded grace.
And though she does an hood, like Ladies wear,
She bears two faces vnder't I dare swear.
When hosts of women walk into the field,
She must the Ancient be, we all must yield.
For she does bear the colors all men know,
And flourishes with them, and makes a show.
And to conclude, she will please men in all places:
For she is a Mimique, and can make good faces.
Tho. Draiton.
Ad fucatam.
Tufacieque mala, and mente es, fucata, maligna,
Aut pudet, aut fucus posse pudere vetat.
Aegit. Baden.
I have thought it not unmeet to set down here what Du Bartas has written of
Iezebel to painted Dames in his fourth Book of the 4. days work of the
second week, turned into English by I. Syluester.
But besides all her sumptuous equipage,
Much fitter for her state, then for her age,
Close in her closet with her best complexions,
She mends her faces wrinkle-full defections
Her cheek she cherries, and her eye she cheeres,
And faines her fond as wench of fifteen years,
Whether she thought to snare the Dukes affection,
Or dazzle with her pompous prides reflection
His daring eyes, as fowlers with a glass
Make mounting larkes come down to death apace:
Or were it that in death she would be seen
As it were interd in Tyrian pomp a Queen.
Chaste Lady maids here must I speak to you,
That with vile painting spoil your native hue.
Not to inflame younglings with wanton thirst,
But to keep fashion with these times accursed.
When one new taken in your seem beauties snare,
That day and night to Hymen makes his prayer:
At length he espies (as who is it, but espies)
Your painted breasts, your painted cheeks, and eyes:
His cake is dough, God dild you, he will none:
He leaves his suit, and thus he says anon:
What should I do with such a wanton wife,
Which night and day would cruciate my life
With Ieloux pangs? since every way she sets
Her borrowed snares, not her own hairs, for nets,
To catch her cuckows with loose, light attires,
Opens the door unto all leaud desires,
And with vile drugs adultering her face,
Closely allures the adulterers embrace.
But judge the best, suppose (says he) I find
My Lady chaste in body and in mind;
As sure I think): yet will she me respect,
That dares disgrace the eternal Architect?
That in her pride presumes his work to tax.
Of imperfection, to amend his tracts;
To help the colors, which his hand has laid,
With her frail fingers with foul dirt be raid?
Shall I take her, that will spend all I have,
And all her time in pranking proudly brave?
How did I dote? the gold upon her head,
The lillies of her breast, the Rosy red
In either cheek, and all her other riches,
Wherewith she bleareth sight, and sense bewitches,
Is none of hers: it is but borrowed stuff,
Or stolen, or bought, plain counterfeit in proof.
My glorious idol, I did so adore,
Is but a vizard newly varnished ore
With spauling rheumes, hot fumes, and ceruses,
Fo, fie, such poisons one would loathe to kiss,
I wed, at least I ween, I wed a less,
Young, fresh, and fair: but in a year and less,
Or two at most, my lovely, lively bride,
Is turned a hagge, a fury by my side,
With hollow yellow teeth, or none perhaps,
With stinking breath, swart cheeks, and hanging chaps,
With wrinkled neck, and stooping, as she goes,
With driueling mouth, and with a sniueling nose.
The Inuectiue of Doctor Andreas de Laguna, a Spaniard and Physician to Pope
Iulios the third, against the painting of women, in his Annotations upon
Dioscorides, li. 5. cap. 62.
THe Ceruse or white Lead, wherewith women use to paint themselves was, without
doubt, brought in use by the devil, the capital enemy of nature, therewith to
transform humane creatures, of fair, making them ugly, enormious and
abominable. For certainly it is not to be believed, that any simple women
without a great inducement and instigation of the devil, would ever leave their
natural and graceful countenances, to seek others that are suppositions and
counterfeits, and should go up and down whited and sised over with paintings
laid one upon another, in such sort: that a man might easily cut off a curd or
cheese-cake from either of their cheeks. Amongst which unhappy creatures,
there are many, who have so betard their faces with these mixtures and
slubbersauces, that they have made their faces of a thousand colors: that is
to say: some as yellow as the marigold, others a dark green, others blunket
color, others as of a deep red died in the wool. O desperate madness; O
hellish invention, O devilish custom: can there be any greater dotage or
sottishness in the world, then for a woman in contempt of nature, (who like a
kind mother gives to every creature whatsoever is necessary to it in its
kind) to cover her natural face, and that pure complexion which she has
received, with stench of plasters and cataplasmes. What shall God say to such
in the last Judgment, when they shall appear thus masked before him with these
antifaces: Friends, I know you not, neither do I hold you for my creatures: for
these are not the faces that I formed. Thus the use of this ceruse, besides the
rotting of the teeth, and the unsavory breath which it causes, being
ministered in paintings, does turn fair creatures into infernal Furies.
Wherefore let all gentlewomen and honorable matrons, that make price of their
honesty and beauty, leave these base arts to the common strumpets, of whom thy
are fittest to be used, that by that filthiness they may be known and noted. Yet
do I not altogether mislike, that honest women should wash themselves, and
seek to make their faces smooth, but that they should use the barley water, or
the water of Lupines, or the juice of Lymons, and infinite other things, which
Dioscorides prescribes as cleanely, and delicate to clear the face, and not
go continually with rank smelles of ointments and plasters about them.
Howbeit that you may not think that this unhappy trade and practice of
painting is altogether new and of late brought into the world, I will recount
unto you a story, which Gallen alleges in that little book of his, which he
intituleth, An exhortation to good arts. Phryne a famous harlot of Athens being
present at a great feast or banquet, where every one of the guests might by
turns command what he pleased to the rest there invited, she seeing many women
there that were painted with ceruse, enjoined that they should execute her
command very severely, which was, that they should bring a boule full of warm
water, and that they should all wash their faces therein, which was done
without gaine-saying, for that was the Law of the feast. Whereupon the faces of
all the women there present appeared foulely deformed and stained over, the
painting running down their cheeks to their utter shame and confusion, and
the horror of all that stood by, to whom they seemed and appeared as horrible
monsters, only Phryne appeared much more beautiful and fair then before: for
albeit her life were not free from blame, yet was her beauty and comely grace,
pure, natural and without artifice, but God be thanked, says he, our Ladies
of Spain are so fair of themselves, that they have no need of any thing to
clear their complexions, but only a little Orpin, and Soliman, or Mercury
sublimate.

Now that you may know that he flouteth his country-women, hear what he says
of this Soliman in his Annotation upon the 69. chapter. The excellency of this
Mercury sublimate (says he) is such, that the women, who often paint
themselves with it, though they be very young, they presently turn old with
withered and wrinkeled faces like an Ape, and before age come upon them, they
tremble (poor wretches) as if they were sick of the staggers, reeling, and
sull of quicksilver, for so are they: for the Soliman and quicke-siluer differ
only in this, that the Soliman is the more corosiue and biting; insomuch that
being applied to the face, it is true, that it eats out the spots and stains
of the face, but so, that with all, it dries up, and consumes the flesh that
is underneath, so that of force the poor skin shrinketh, as they speak of the
famous pantofle of an ancient squire called Petro Capata, which being often
besmeared over to make it black, and to give it luster, it shrunk and
wrinkled, and became too short for his foot. This harme^ and inconvenience
(although it be great, yet it might well be dissembled, if others greater then
this did not accompany it; such as are, a stinking breath, the blackness and
corruption of the teeth which this Soliman ingendreth. For if quick silver
alone, applied only to the soles of the feet, once or twice, and that in a
small quantity, does mar and destroy the teeth; what can be expected from the
Soliman, which is without comparison more powerful and peniuatiue, and is
applied more often, and in greater quantity to the very lips and cheeks? So
that the infamous in conueniencies which result from this Mercury Sublimate,
might be somewhat the more tolerable, if they did stick and stay only in
them who use it, and did not descend to their of spring. For this infamy is
like to original sin, and goes from generation to generation, when as the
child borne of them, before it be able to go, does shed his teeth one after
another, as being corrupted and rotten, not through his fault, but by reason of
the vitiousnesse and taint of the mother that painted her self, who, if she
loath and abhor to hear this, let her forbear to do the other.

Translated out of Spanish by Mist. Elizabeth Arnold.
Errata.
Page 4. Line 2. Read, Work of God. p. 12. l. 30. put out to labor. p. 15.
l. 26. for wast, r. woade. p. 18. l. 8. r. may not lie. p. 23. l. 31. r. to use
all. p. 28. l. 24. r. bring on. p. 32. l. 33. r. And though. p. 34. l. 20. f.
promise, r. praise. p. 37. l. 23. f. lie, r lit p. 38. l. 8. f. it, r. lie. p
44. l. 27. f. falsely, r. safely. p. 45. l. 1. r. and Machiuillian attempts. p.
47. l. 19. r. in exile. p. 49. l. 1. f fained, r. failed. p. 49. l. penult. r.
cannot. p. 52. l. antepenult, r. Arichbertus. p. 53. l. 6. r. Claudius. p. 54.
l. 33. f. Cold, r. Coulen. p. 55. l. 18. f. Naxlicus, r. Natholicus. p. 58. l.
5. f. commend, r. mend.

Reliqua vel corrige, vel condona.

OF PAINTING THE FACE.
THough these times and places, in which we now live, are stained with fouler
faults, then this, of which I have taken upon me here to entreat, yet because
it was (as I suppose) never so common, as it is now amongst us, and seeing by
conuiuence, or silence, it still dilates it self, and now at length finds
some friends, which stick not in corners either to defend it, or to extenuate
the vileness of it, I have therefore singled it out alone from many other
vanities, against which many have bent themselves by word and writing,
purposing to declare unto the world what I am able to say against it,
entreating all with judgment to ponder what I write, and if they shall
perceive my reasons sound and good, to join together with me in the
persecution and banishing of this evil from amongst us, of whom better things
are looked for, and desired. And I humbly beseech Almighty God to direct my
heart and hand, that I may think and write that which shall be pleasing to
him, and to prosper and bless it unto all that shall read or hear it, that
it may find friendly entertainment in their hearts, and produce fruits
answerable to it in their lives and practice.

Saint Paul inspired with the Spirit of Christ, gives a golden precept, to
which if we will yield obedience, as we should, we shall willingly abstain
from this artificial facing. Whatsoever things (says he) are true,
Whatsoever Phil. 4. 8.
things are ((...)) venerable, Whatsoever things are just, Whatsoever things
are ((...) chaste or) pure, Whatsoever things are lovely, Whatsoever things are
of good report: if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on
these things. These things he would have us to delight in, and to do: the
contrary he would have us decline, and abandon. But a painted face is a false
face, a true falsehood, not a true face. Illa pictura, says S. Ambrose, That
picture, (or painting) is of corruption, and not comely, that painting is
deceitful, and Amb. Herameron. lib. 6. cap. 8.
not of simplicity, that painting lasts but a while, it is wiped off either
with rain or sweat: that painting deceives and beguileth, that it can neither
please him, whom thou desire to please, who perceives this pleasing beauty
to be none of thine, but borrowed: and thou do also displease thy maker, who
sees his work to be defaced.

Or is this painting venerable, or venerous and abominable rather? Do men of
worth and judgment respect and favor it, as a thing honest, and worthy to be
esteemed? Did ever Patriarch, Prophet, Apostle, or Father of the Church approve
it? Has it not been ever scorned of sage and grave men? A painted face is not
much unlike an Idol; it is not that, it would be taken for: and they, that
make it, are like unto it, and so are all they that do delight therein, and
worship it.

Shall we say the painting of hair or face is just? Does the law of God
require or favor it? Or does reason uncorrupted teach it? Or have the laws of
any wise and understanding heads endured or enjoined it? Or rather is it not
altogether injurious? Sure there is a wrong done to God, whose workmanship they
would seem to mend, Hieron. cont. Heluid. Cited by P. Mar. loc. com. class. 2.
cap. 11.
being discontented with it: S. Hierome says, Haec ad speculum pingitur, etc.
She paints her self by a glass, and to the contumely of her Creator
labors to be fayrer, then she was borne. And in an Epistle to Laeta
concerning the institution of her Daughter, where he relates a story of a
certain woman grievously smitten for painting of her daughter, he calls
those that do such things, violaters of the Temple of Christ. Saint Origin
likewise taxes painted women by sundry places of Scripture amongst other Orig.
tom. 2. hom. 4.
things, for dawbing their living face with dead colors, and affirms, that
they do these things in contumeliam Creatoris, to the disgrace of their
Creator. Saint Ambrose also thus writes to the same effect: Thou art painted,
Amb. Hex. l. 5. c. 8. Pictus eso homo, etc.
O man, and painted of the Lord thy God. Thou have a good Artizan and Painter:
do not deface that good picture (non fuco, sed veritate fulgentem) shining not
with deceitful stuff, but but with true colors. O woman, thou defacest the
picture, if thou dawbest thy countenance with material whiteness, or a
borrowed red. Tell me, if after one workman has done, thou use the help of
another to ouer-lay the work of the former with his new devises, does he not
take it in ill part, who sees his work to be disguised? Do not take away Gods
picturing, and assume the picture of an harlot, because it is written, Shall I
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? 1. Cor. 6.
15.
God forbid. If any men adulterate the work of God, he commits a grievous
offense. For it is an heinous crime to think that man can paint thee better
then God. It is a grievous thing that God should say of thee, I see not the
image, I see not the countenance, which my self have formed, I reject that,
which is not mine. Seek him that has painted thee, deal with him, take grace
of him to whom thou have given a reward. What answer will thou make him? Of
the same mind also is Tertuilian, who says, that they sin against the Lord,
which be spot their Tertul. de habitu muliebri. ca. 5. In illum delinquunt, etc.
cheeks with red colors, and die their eyes. The workmanship of God surely
does displease them. They blame and find fault with the worke-maister of all
things in themselves. For they reprehend him, because they mend his work,
because they put unto it, taking these additions from the adversary
Craftes-man, that is, the devil. To all these ancient Doctors of the Church,
I will add the judgment of a modern Writer by name Danaeus, who says, that
fucus faciei, the painting of the face is Danaeus. Ethic. Christ. lib. 2. cap.
14
a deforming of the very work in us, and damnable. God then is injured by this
kind of painting: now let us see if man also be not wronged by it. Doubtless
these Painters are injurious to themselves and others. Saint Ambrose, who
terms these devises torments rather then ornaments, thus somewhere writes:
Whiles she studies to please another, she displeases her self. O woman, what
truer Judge of thy deformity Ambros. de Uirginibus, lib. 1. Dum alij studet
placere, etc.
do we require, then thy self, who fear to be seen? If thou be fair,
why art thou hidden? Ifill-fauoured, why do thou counterfeit beauty, having
no regard of thine own conscience, nor of another bodies error? For he loves
another, and thou would please another. And thou will be angry, if he should
love another, who yet does learn by thee to commit adultery. Mala magistraes
iniuriae tuae, Thou art an evil teacher of thine own wrong. It is injustice
with saigned shows to endeavor to cousin others, laboring to make them
think they be that they are not. S. Austine does not stick to Aug. Ep. ad
Possidium. In foemina non potest non esse vitiosu^, quod virum decipiat.
say it is vicious. And if it be not just to deceive men with counterfeit wares,
much less lawful is it to deceive them with a disguised countenance. Besides,
this borrowed beauty does sometimes steal away the praise from that that is
natural. Yea, and because this evil craft is so much in use, it comes to
pass sometimes, that they that use it not, are suspected and said to meddle
with it. And whereas every one should be careful of their name, they do much
wrong themselves herein, that use such Arts, causing thereby their modesty,
humility, wisdom, and continency to be called into question, and suspected.
And what wrong do they to themselves in provoking God against them, to punish
them for their pride and vanity? Sir Thomas More, one not meanly learned, was
wont to say of such, that there were very many, which * S. Tho. More.
purchased hell unto themselves in this life with that labor, with the one
half whereof they might have gained heaven. Clemens Alexandrinus says, They
are not once, but thrice worthy to perish, which dawbe their brows, and wear
their chcekes with their painted stuff. Saint Cyprian has a Clem in Paedag l.
3. c. 2. Ter enim, non semel, dignet sunt, quae pereant, etc.
notable speech full of sting and terror, where he thus writes: If some
cunning Painter should set forth the countenance and shape of a woman, having
ended his work, another should take upon him, as being more skillful, to
reform and mend it, the first workman might justly seem to be wronged and
offended: And do thou think (O woman) to escape unpunished, presuming with
the like audacious rashness to offend God? Does Cyprian. de discipl. and Hab.
virgin. Si quis pingendi artifex, etc.
sincerity and truth continue, when those things, that are sincere, are
polluted with counterfeit colors, and those things which are true, are changed
into falsehood with deceitful tricks? The Lord does say, Thou art not able to
make one hair white or black: and thou to put down his saying would thou
be stronger? By audacious iudeauour, and sacrilegious contempt thou colourest
Mat. 5. 36
thine hairs: with an He means, I think, they may justly fear, that these
counterfeit flames, or fire-like and yellowish hairs, shall be punished with
the true flames of hell fire.
ill presage of future things thou beginst with flaming hair, and offendest in
thine head, that is, in the better part of thy body. Oh detestable act! fear
thou not I pray thee, who art thus disguized, lest the workman that made thee,
should not acknowledge thee; and lest he should say, This is not my work, this
is none of our image, thou have polluted thy skin with deceitful art, thou
have changed thine hair with a coumterfeit color, thy face is falsisied, thy
shape is defiled, thy countenance is borrowed. Thou can not see God, having
not the eyes that God has made, but which the devil has marred. Thou have
followed him, thou have imitated the red-shining and painted eyes of the
Serpent, being trimmed up in thine enemies fashion, thou art to burn also in
like manner with him. Ought not these things, I pray thee, to be considered of
the servants of God? Are they not to be dreaded always, both day and night?
But to procced, Whatsoever things are pure, or chaste, says Saint Paul.

Is that pure, or to be deemed the fruit of a chaste mind which is so common
amongst the impurest of women, and altogether contemned of those that Tertul.
de habitu muliebri. ca. 8.
are most grave and pious? Allthose things, says Tertullian, are refused as
idle, and enemies to chastity. Vbi Deus est, ibi pudicitia: Where God is,
there is chastity, there is gravity, the helper and companion of it. How then
shall we practice chastity without the instrument thereof, that is, without
gravity? And how shall we use gravity for the service of chastity, if there
be not a certain seuerenesse both in the face, and in apparel, and in the
whole man round about? Saint Hierome likewise thus writes, Quid facit in facie
Christianae purpurissus, Hieron. ad Furiam de viduit. soruand. tom. 1.
etc. What makes this purple and white stuff in the face of a Christian women,
the inflamers of youth, the nourishers of lust, impudicae mentis indicia, and
tokens of an unchaste soul? Clemens Alexandrinus makes this painting a sign of
a sick soul: For as he (says Clemens) that has some salve Clem. Alex. in
suo Paedagogo, li. 3. c. 2. Quemadmodum enim, etc.
applied to him, or his eyes anointed does by the very sight, give cause to
suspect that he is diseased: so paintings, tinctures, and affected dressings do
signify, that the soul is sick within. S. Ambrose says boldly, that (De
adulterio vultus meditantur adulterium castitatis) by the adulterating of the
countenance, they meditate the adulterating of chastity. But I may not
pretermit an Ito fuci, etc. Ambros. de Virginibus, lib. 1.
other speech of Clemens, in yt place quoted already, where he says, that the
Egyptian Temples were fair and sumptuous: but in stead of God, who was not to
be found with in them, there was a Cat, a Crocodile, or some serpent of Clem.
Alex. in Paed. l. 3. cap. 2.
the country, or some other beast, beseeming a coue or hole, or the mudde, and
not a Temple; So (says he) the women, which are exercised in frizling their
hair, in anointing Apnd Aegyptios templa, etc.
their chcekes, in painting their eyes, and dying their hair, and following
other wantonness with unlawful arts, do seem to me to draw on unhappy
lovers: but if any man shall open the veil of the Temple, I mean their
dressing, coloring, dying, and those things, that are plaistered on them,
thinking to find true beauty, I wot well he will grow into a lothing and
detestation. For he shall not find the image of God dwelling within: but
instead thereof, a foraicatresse and adultresse occupy the temple of the soul:
he shall discern a painted Ape; and that seducing Serpent, through (...)
desire of glory, does possess the soul, in stead of an hole, transforming
women into whores, discharging the office of a bawd. And that renowned and holy
Bishop of Millaine, whom before we cited, calls this painting, which of women
is so Ambros. Hex. l. 6. c. 8.
much usurped, Picturam Meretricis, the picture of an harlot. Plutarch also
shows, that Lycurgus banished tincture out of Sparta, as a flatterer of the
sense, and forbad Plutar. Lacon. Apotl. eg.
the City, to all that used the arts of painting, and tricking the body, because
evil arts corrupted men's manners. And the said Author writes, that women were
at that time so chaste, and so far from the lightness of those that followed
after, that the crime of adultery with them, was counted a thing incredible.
Plutar. vhi supra.
And as one said to his ghest, How could there be an adulterer in Sparta, where
luxury and painting (luxus and fucus) are decmed ignominious, and where
shamefastness, modesty and obedience domineere?

But Saint Paul proceeds; Whatsoever things (says he) are lovely. Does a
painted face procure love, or lothing Ambros. de offic. lib. 1. cap. 18.
rather, if it be perceived? Nihil fucatum placet, Nothing counterfaited does
afford contentment, as Saint Ambrose speaks. Who is pleased with counterfeit
money, with counterfeit friendship, with counterfeit stuff? Who loves hypocrisy
in religion? And what is a woman painted, but a certain kind of hypocrite,
resembling that in show, which she is not truly? Is dece it and falsehood
lovely? And what is this artificial facing, but a true deceit, or a deceitful
Augustine. ad Possidor.
truth? Fucare effigiem figmentis adulterina fallacia est, qua non dubito ipsos
maritos se nolle decipi. To color the face with artificial devises, to make
it look more red or lovely, is a counterfeit and base deceit, says Saint
Austen, with which I am persuaded, husbands would not be deceived. And another
says, Quum facies adulterino color fucatur, os abomina bili faetore
corrumpitur: when the face is Iun. de vilit. condit. humanae.
painted with a false color, it becomes an abomination. And if Lenocinia
formarum, the painting of the face, and borrowing of complexion ((non nisi
prostitutis and impudicis Cypr. dedisc. and hab. virg.
foeminis congruunt) beseem none (as Saint Cyprian says) but whores and
dishonest women, why should any one delight therein, as in things pleasing, or
worthy love? Or if it be such a lovely thing, what reason had Saint Hierome to
say, Erubescat mulier Christiana, etc. Let a Christian woman blush for shame,
if she force favor, if she take care of the Hieron. ad Marceliam de exitu
Leae.
flesh unto concupiscence, in which they, which are, cannot please God; as the
Apostle speaks? Or why should he say, that dressings void of curiosities,
became Christian matrons, and forbid Laeta to color her daughters hair, and
to begin Romans 8. 8. Matronas Christianas decet neglecta mundities. Hieron. 16.
in her any thing of the flames of hell? No, no, these arts and actions are not
to be loved, but hated rather. Doubtless nature and art are both good, and to
be beloved: but the abuse of both, or either, is evil, is of the devil. And
is not art abused, when it is made an organ and slave to pride, wantonness,
and vanity? And that I may speak a little by digression to her, that
exercises her self in these unlawful and unlovely arts; Tell me, how can
thou desire, that another should not loathe thee, seeing thou lothest thine own
self? For as Peter Martyr speaks out of Saint Ambrose, They that seek by
these devices Martyr. loc. com. clas. 2. cap. 11.
to please others, do testify, that they have disliked themselves first. For
had they not disliked themselves, and desired something in themselves,
Nonquaesiuissent suas facies meliores fucis reddere, They would not have sought
to have mended their faces with painting. Their very bravery, wherein they
glory, bewraies their wants. Or do thou love thy self artificial, and like
an Idol, and loath or dislike thy self natural, and in thy native colors? O
woman, great is thy pride and folly, foolish pride and proud folly. What folly
is it to fall in love with a picture? Quanta amentia est effigiem mutare
naturae, picturam quaerere? What madness is it (says a forenamed Father) to
change natures shape, and to seek a picture? Doubtless thou deseruest to be
lothed of others, because thou do loath thy self, and being displeased with
the pleasure of God, do please thy self in that, that is displeasing to him.

But I have digressed; The Apostle adds, Whatsoever things are of good
report. And in another place he says, Provide things honest in the sight of
all men. Say now, is this painting of good report? Do all, or the wisest, and
Romans 12. 17
honestest of all account it honest? Diverse of the Fathers, as we have seen,
have condemned it in that name. It was ignominious in the days of Lycurgus.
Peter Martyr out of Saint Chrysostom says, Magna voluptas est, etc. It is
very pleasing to see such a face, as Pet. Mart. vbi supra.
God created: whereas on the contrary, a countenance (rubrica and cerussa
plenus) full of red and white colors, otherwise then natural, is disallowed.
Deformity is no point of dishonestie, Fucatio vero deprehensaignominia semper
notatur, but painting being discerned and known, is branded always with
reproach and infamy. Saint Hierome to Marcella says, that those women are
matter of scandal to Christian eyes, Quaepurpurisso and quibusdam fucis ora,
oculosque depingunt, which do paint Hieron. de exitu Leae.
their faces and eyes with certain artificial colors, Whose faces (says he)
being plaistered and deformed with too much brightness, are counterfeits of
Idols. And such old women as use those, and the like vanities, he calls in
mocking, Trementes Uirgunculas, trembling girls. And unto Furia he says,
that this furniture Hieron. ad Fur. de vid. ser. tom. 1. Ornatus iste non
Domini est.
is not the Lords, this covering is of Antichrist, Uelamen istud Antichristi.
Sure it is not for Christ, but rather against Christ, and ill beseemes chaste
and godly Christians, suting fitter with the favorites and lovers of that
Mother of harlots, araied in purple and scarlet colors, and full of
allurements. Platina writes, that Reu. 17. 4. 5.
Paulus Secundus, Bishop of Rome, used to paint himself; a thing not much to
be found fault with in such a friend unto the Whore, tho very ill beseeming
one, that counts himself the Vicar of Christ. It seems the Churches Head has
been once a painted one. But to return, the Apostle would have us delight and
think on those things, that are of good account, and he will have us do it
in the sight of all men, according as our Savior says, Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works. It is not enough to be good, but
she Mat. 5. 16.
that is good, must seem good: she that is chaste, must seem chaste: she that
is humble, must seem humble: she that is modest, must seem to be so, and
not plaster her face, that she cannot blush upon any occasion (tho she would)
so as to be discerned of another. It is Tertul. de hab. mulieb. cap. 13.
very pat, which Tertullian writes; pudicit. Christianae sat. non est esse,
ver. and videri: It is not enough for Christian chastity that it be, but that
it be also seen. And good counsel, which he gives to Christian women, Prodite
vos, etc. Come forth now furnished with the medicaments and ornaments of the
Apostles, taking from simplicity brightness, and from chastity redness, your
eyes painted with modesty, for an earing having the word of God, and the yoke
of Christ for a chain unto your neeks. Subject your head unto your husbands,
and ye shall make show good enough. Array your selves with the silk of
honesty, the fine linen of sanctity, with the purple of chastity. Taliter
pigmentatae Deum habebitis amatorem, Being so painted and tricked up, ye shall
have God your lover.

But Saint Paul has not yet ended his speech, If (says he) there be any
virtue. But dare any say it is a virtue, or act of virtue, to paint the face or
hair? S. Ambrose Ambr. Hexam. l. 6. ca 8. Gem Paedag. lib. 2. cap. 10.
says, Illa pictura vitij est, this painting is of vice, or vicious. And
Clemens Alexandrinus commends one Caeus, who fitly described virtue and vice in
two images. For, he made virtue standing simply clothed with a white-shining
garment, and pure, adorned only with bashfulnesse: but vice with superfluous
and changeable apparel, alieno color exultantem; and glorying in borrowed
colors. But that it may appear plainly that this kind of painting and
coloring is vicious, let us inquire into the Tertul. de hab. mulieb. cap. 5.
causes of it. Tertullian says expressly, it is from the devil. For who (says
he) would teach to change the body, but he, that has changed the soul of man
through malice? He out of doubt has stirred up such wits, that so he might
after a sort us lay hands on God. That, which is natural, is the work of God;
therefore that, which is counterfeit, is of the devil. Saint Cyprian likewise
says as much in effect, affirming, that the Apostaticall Angels taught women
Cypr. de disciplina and hab. Virg.
to paint their eyes and checkes, and to alter their hair with counterfeit
colors, and as he says, Expugnare omnem oris and capitis veritatem, to drive
out all the truth of their face and head. If these things be of the devil, God
is little beholding to those that use them. What a wickedness is it (says
Tertullian) to bring in Satan's devises after Gods work? Our servants borrow
nothing of our enemies: Tertul ab.
Soldiers ask nothing of the enemy of their commander. And shall a Christian
receive help of that evil one? I wot not whether this name (Christian) should
belong any longer to him. Erit enim eius, de cuius doctrinis instrui
concupiscit: For he shall be his, with whose instructions he longs to be
instructed.

And as the exterior Author of these devises is evil, even no other then the
devil: so the interior grounds thereof are also evil, as pride, wantonness,
and lack of judgment, or else rebellion of affections against judgment. What
a pride it is, that thou can not be content to appear in thine own
likeness, and to seem that to others, which thou art in thy self? The bird
appears in her own feathers, the Peacocke shows himself in his own
colors, the sheep is seen in her own fleece and likeness, white or black;
the tree has her own rind, appears in her own blossoms and fruits; and
shall it be horrible to a woman to seem to be, as she is indeed, displeasing
to her to appear in her own likeness, her own hair, her own complexion?
She was borne in her own, nature would show it self in her proper colors: she
was not borne painted in this world (unless perhaps so, as is expressed in the
Prophet) neither shall she rise painted in the next world, and I think she
would be loath Ezeck. 6.
die painted, why then should she live painted, why should she love it? Vtinam
miserrimus ego, etc. I would I poor wretch (says Tertullian) might see in
that day of Christian exultation (An cum cerussa, and purpurisso, and croco,
and cum illo ambitu capitis resurgatis) Whether ye Tertul. de hab. mul. c. 7
shall rise again with your white, red, and yellowish paintings, and those
strange dressings of your head, and whether the Angels shall lift you up so
pictured, to meet Christ. Hodie vos Deus, etc. O ye women, let God see you such
now, as he shall see ye then. Is not this also a point of pride by such
deceitful shifts to gain the praises of men, and to desire to be reputed
fairer, or younger, or better favored, then one is indeed? And does not God
hate pride, and reward humility? Does he not resist the proud, and give grace
to the humble? What a contempt of God is this, to prefer the work of thine
own finger to the work of God? What impiety is it to go about to have that
thought James 4. 6.
Gods, which is thine own? What injustice to conceal his work, and ostent
thine own, and indeed to spoil his with thine own? Innocentius says, An
artificial form is drawn over, and the natural face is painted, as Inn. vbi
sup.
if the artifice of man exceeded the art of God. And is not this a trick of a
wanton, to use these arts to procure and tie the eyes of people to thee, or to
gain some unfortunate servant? Is it not a foolish wiliness, and a certain
wily kind of folly by these lime-twiggs, these painted lime-twiggs, to labor
to think or labor to catch a Wood-cocke, or a Wild-goose? Are these devises
allowed, as stales, or snares, to take men in them? Do thou deem men as
simple, as those birds, that were deceived by the Painters artifice, flying to
grapes, that were but painted? Because Lycoris pleases her self being painted,
being otherwise as black, as an ouerripe Mulberry, does she therefore think
to gain an husband, who knows an ill face well painted, is but as Martial. l.
1. epig. 73. Cerussata sibi placet lyceris, quae nigrior est cadente more.
a piece of counterfeit silver, or as a fair carpet over an unhandsome table?
Tell me, Are all men borne rich, or noble (Though all these are borne men, yet
all men are not borne these. Now shall he, that is base and needy, and not
yet promoued, nor made wealthy, make fare as if he were some noble or rich
man? It were intolerable vanity. Say, Is every man truly virtuous and
religious? No, no more then every Angel is good and holy. Now shall he, that
is profane and impious, make show of piety and true devotion? Were it not
damnable hypocrisy in him? If he be not, let him not seem to be. For not
being, his very seeming is a sin unto him. And do thou think it lawful
for thee to make shows of favor and beauty, or of another complexion and
temper, then thou art of, by thy dawbing, painting and borrowing, God and
Nature, which is his Handmaid, having withheld beauty, or a lovely complexion
from thee? Virtue is one gift of God, and beauty is another: now as a man may
not counterfeit virtue, being vicious: so he may not counterfeit beauty, being
destitute of it. Doubtless unthankfulness to God, has a great stroke in this
ungodly exercise. For were we thankful to God, as indeed we should be, would
we loath and despise his work upon us, and love our own? Would we not care how
we corrupt and mangle his with ours? If we were thankful to him for our
complexions and favor, how mean so ever, we would humble our selves before
him, and not go about to cozen the world with our borrowed feathers, or show
our selves altogether impatient of his handy-worke, yea, we would labor to
supply the want of good outward parts by inward virtues, and by the offices of
piety, charity, and humility; things, which (I fear me) are sildome and
little thought of amongst the Painters, who, if we may believe the speeches of
the world (and they say, Market-men use to speak as the market goes) are too
many of them, not much unlike ill cloth of a good die; or to a Letter fairly
written, and with good ink, but not without some false English, or ill
contents.

But let us see how the Apostle ends his exhortation. If there be any praise
(says he) think on these things. Now is a painted face worthy to be praised?
Is a borrowed beauty, or fresh-coloured hair with women's skill to be
commended? Shall we bestow our praises, on what we may not spend our love?
Shall we laud that, that is not worthy one good look? Shall that be praised
that is vile, and vain? Quidvanius, qham tingeregenas, vugerefaciem, etc. What
more vain, says Innocentius, Inn. ib.
then to die the cheeks, and anoint the face? True it is, that God has given
a man oil to make him have a cheerful countenance: but this is by refreshing
Psa. 104. 15
and cheering the blood, and not by daubing or dying the countenance, which is
to be discommended in all that use it, what ever they be. Fucation (says Saint
Chrysostom) being espied, is ever marked with ignominy. More ornament is not to
be given to the body, then is profitable Chrysostom. t. 2. hom. 31. in, Matthew.
for the soul, says Saint Basil the great; For to a generous man, and one
truly worthy of this name, it were no less reproach to be want only decked, or
to take superfluous care of Basil. de legend. li. Gentilium.
the body, then to be affected with some other note of disgrace, and evil
affection through slothfulness. Consider also the judgment of Heathen men.
Chius, a certain old man, came upon some business of state to Lacedemon, and
having died his gray hairs, he came before Archidamus, Aelian. lib. 8 de Var.
hist.
the Lacedemonian King, who seeing the old man disguised, rose up, and said,
Quid hic sani diceret, cuius non solum animus, verum etiam caput fucis
contaminatum est? What good thing can this fellow say, whose not only the
heart, but head also is stained with deceit? And so exploded, whatsoever he
said, reprehending his disposition by the deceit, he used with his hair.
Questionless there is lack of truth in the heart, when false hair is worn
for deceit. Doubtless falsehood is in his or her heart, whose face or hair is
falsified to deceit. Falsehood uttered in the face, or hair, is first conceived
and coined in the heart. Wantonness, pride and vanity are conceived inwardly,
before they are expressed outwardly. The hand does but what the heart bids it.
Of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and the hand works. King
Philip of Macedonie made one of Antipaters friends a Judge; but understanding
Plutarch. in Apotheg.
that he used to color the hair of his head and beard, he displaced him,
saying, He which would not be true in his hairs, was not worthy to be trusted
in an office. He used deceit in dying his hair, whereof no great lucre could
arise, doubtless he will be much more deceitful in the affairs of his
office, where deceit sometimes is very gainefull. The natural form and color
is not laid to a man's charge, but only that which is counterfeit and ascitious.

Vtnatura dedit sic omnis recta figura: Propert. Eleg. 19.

Turpis Romano Belgicus ore color.
Natures form and favor is right and good:

But Belgic colors becoms no Roman blood: that is to say: The waste of
France, and such painting stuff, are disgraceful in an Italian. If an old
woman painted her self, they used to say, Lecythum habet in malis, which is a
certain enigmaticall and biting byword used against old wives, that they
cloked their wrinkles with their artificial dawbings. Festus Pompeius says,
that common and base whores, called Schoenicole, used daubing of themselves,
tho with the vilest stuff. Diogenes said to one that had anointed his hairs,
Cave ne capitis Laert. lib. 6.
suaue olentia vitae maleolentiam adducat, Beware thy sweet head make not thy
life stink; so may it well be said to those, that buy and borrow their favor
and their color: beware lest this borrowed grace bring ye not into disgrace
both with God and his children, and that the counterfetting of form do not
deforme you. Surely the Lord did most terribly threaten the proud and wanton
Dames of Israel for their pride, Isaiah. 3. 16 Isaiah 3. 9. Piscat. in 2. Reg.
cap. 9 verse. 30. Pet. Mart. in 2. Reg. 9. 30.
wantonness and vanities. And may it not be said of these painted faces, as
the Lord said of that people, The show of their countenance do witness
against them? Doubtless this kind of favor finds no favor, no one word of
praise in all the word of God. In Iesabel, who painted her eyes is propounded
(says Piscator) an ensample of a proud woman. Nec bona est eafacies, quaeista
quaerit adiumenta. It is no good face (says Martyr) which seeks these Hieron.
in Ier. 4. 80. Sub figura mulieris adulterae loquitur. Calvin. in Ier. 4. 30.
helps. Let us in the mean while, consider the impudency of a wicked woman,
who being in extreme danger, yet shows no token of repentance, Imo vacat
fuco, yea, she bestows her time in painting of her face. And on the Prophet
Jeremy, where mention is made of painting the face, or eyes, Saint Hierome in
his Comments says, He speaks under the figure of an adulterous woman. In
like manner, Calvin Hieron. in Eze. 23. 40. Omnem adulterae habitum implesti
super eis, etc. Maldonatus in hunc locum idem ait; Sicut meretrices, amatoribus
suis. Clem. Alexandr. Paed. l. 3. c. 2.
thus writing on the said place, says, that the Prophet has respect to the
furniture of whores, Because the people was like an adulterous woman. And
whores (says he) to intise adulterers, are wont to paint their faces, and by
such allurements to entangle and catch men. And where as Ezekiel also does once
make mention of this painting. Saint Hierome (others likewise consenting with
him) says upon the same place, Thou have fulfilled all the habit of an
adulterous woman. This painting therefore being no better entertained in the
word of of God, and being (as we have heard before) a work of Satan, there is
no reason at all why Christian women should be addicted to it. I would think
women should beware of the Serpent (who has an oar in this boat, as Clemens
shows) seeing their mother was beguiled with him of old, and that they al
fare the worse for him still. Neither do I read, that ever any grave and
discreet woman used these deceits. Some write of some barbarous people, which
delight in painting their skin. Saint Hierome writes, that Maximilla,
Montanus his Prophatisse, a woman diuell-driuen, did use to paint. And there is
also mention, in the Ecclesiastical history, made of one Prisca, who
practiced the same arts. Caesar likewise writes, that the Britanes Caesar. lib.
5. belli Gallici.
used to color their faces with their Woad: but this was not out of pride, or
wantounesse, but to strike a terror in their enemies, with whom they were to
fight. But me thinks Christians should not only be, but seem so: the
children of wisdom should not only be such, but seem such: they that
profess modesty and humility, or which have promisde it in their Baptism,
should not only be modest and humble, but appear to be so by their shows.
And to use the words, I find in Peter Martyr: As Paul said, There is a
difference betwixt a married woman and a virgin: so may we say, Pet. Mart. loc.
com. class. 2. c. 11. 1. Cor. 7.
there should be a difference between the handmaidens of Christ, and the
handmaides of the devil. The handmaids of the devil, because they are
unchaste, do use these pictures: wherefore the handmaids of Christ should fly
from them, that they might show themselves to be unlike to them. In goodsooth
if Christian women will so color and paint themselves, I pray you what does a
matrone differ from an harlot? I remember Amb. lib. 1. de ossic. c. 18. Est
etiam in ipso, etc.
Saint Ambrose says, that Inipso motu, gestu, incessu tenenda verecundia,
modesty is to be kept even in the motion, gesture, and gate: and shall it be
banished out of the face? Habitus enim mentis in corporis statu cernitur, For
(says he) the condition of the mind is discerned in the state and behauior of
the body. Without doubt then a deceitful and effeminate face, is the ensign
of a deceitful and effeminate heart. Ne dicalis vos habere animos pudicos, si
habcatis oculosimpuaicos: Say not (saint August. de Christiana side.
Saint Austin) that you have modest and chaste affections, if ye have unchaste
and wanton eyes: so I say, say not that thou have the heart of a chaste and
humble woman, if thou have the face and favor of a proud dame, or wanton
minion. And to use the words of Tertullian, How far from our disciplines and
professions, how unworthy Tertul. de hab. mulieb. cap. 5. Quantulum etc.
the name of Christian is it, to have a fained face, to whom all simplicity is
commended; to lie with the countenance, who may lie with their tongue; to
desire that, which is not granted, who should abstain from that, which is not
theirs; and to practice the making of shows and faces, whose study is to be
chaste and modest? These arts make those that use them, too like the devils,
who though they be Angels of darkness, yet to work some feate, they will now
and then transform themselves into Angels of light: they are one thing, but to
deceive, they will seem another. And in truth I wonder how they dare pray to
God with such impure faces? How shall they look up to God with a face, which
he does not own? How can they beg Some kind of painting makes the^ look
always alike. Hieron. ad Fur. de vid. ser. tom. 1. Quomodo flere potest pro
pecc. Psa. 66. 18. John 9. 31. Calum. in 1. Pet. 3.
pardon, when their sin cleaues unto their faces, and * when they are not
able for to blush? How can she weep for her sins, says Saint Hierom, when
herteares will make furrows in her face? With what confidence does she list up
her countenances to heaven, which her Maker acknowledges not? Youth is in vain
pretended, and girlish age alleged for excuse: What hope is there that God
will hear, whilst her heart is set on vanity and pride, on wantonness and
deceit. David says, If I regard iniquity in mine heart, the Lord will not
hear me: We know (says one in the Gospel) God hears not sinners: but if
any man be a worshipper of God and does his will, him he hears. Doubtless
these curiosities are not things indifferent, as some imagine them to be. It
is well said by Calvin somewhere, Too much finenesse and superfluous
brightness, and finally, all excess arises out of the corruption of the
heart. Moreover, ambition, pride, luxury, affectation, and such like, are not
(says he) res mediae, things indifferent. But what need I throw water into the
sea, or set up a candle in the Sun? But by the doctrine and judgment of
Saint Paul, as is observed by Peter Martyr, men must beware not only of evil,
but abstain from all appearance 1. These. 5. 22 Pet. Mart. loc. com. clas. 2.
c. 11.
of evil. In fucis autem adeo perspicua est malispecies, vt negari non possit.
But in these painting practices, the show of evil is so perspicuous, as it
cannot be denied. Truly (says he) in Gods Book, this painting (stibium) is
never taken in good part. And the greater the persons be, that use these arts,
the worse it is. For, Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in Iuvenal.
se crimen habet, quanto mayor, qui peccat habetur. The greater the man is,
that sins, the greater is his sin. It is more scandalous and hurtful. And
the more, that any man has received of God, the more he owes unto God. The
higher a man is, the more humble he I am. 4. and 1. Pet. 5. and Luke 18.
should be. The greater he is, the better he should be. When high trees and
steeples fall, there is much looking. And be men never so higher, yet there is
one high, before whom, and under whom they must humble themselves, and bewail
their pride and vanities, or else they must not look to be exalted of him.
And if these borrowed faces, and painted locks be ridiculous and odious in a
woman, that is poor and base, as in a Kitchin-wench, or such like, how much
more discommendable is it in such, as God has advanced? What poor thanks do
they pay him for those benefits of wealth and greatness, which without their
merit, he has conferred and cast upon them? Even a little stain is noted in
fine Lawne, a little blot or blurre is discerned in white paper. Honorable and
rich persons stand as upon hills; all men's eyes are on them: they should be
patterns of piety, ensamples of virtue. For by their examples, they do either
much good, or much hurt. If it would please them to consider what the Apostle
says unto the Corinthes, I am persuaded they would not meddle with these
vanities. Read and weigh what is said in 1. Cor. 7. 29. 30. 31. Surely they
that abuse the world, that abuse their greatness, that abuse their wealth and
wit, they lose a blessing of the world, of their greatness, wealth and wit.
These things are theirs, whilst well used: but being abused, they are not
theirs, but their enemies rather: they make not for them, but against them. Oh,
how happy had it bin for them, if they had not known what wit, what wealth,
what the world, what greatness meant! A man must be poor in riches, little in
greatness, humble in honor, virtuous in beauty, meek in authority, modest
and not selfe-conceited in all his ornaments, else all is nothing, and he is
nothing, or a certain Something, worse then nothing. Think we not that all
Christian women, how great soever, are bound to those two speeches of their
Apostle Saint Paul? Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And
again: 1. Cor. 10. 31. 32.
Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God. But do they paint their faces, or die their hair to the glory
of God? Is God honored by these exercises, or disgraced rather, as we have
seen before? Saint Cyprian says, Foeminae manus Deo inferunt, etc. Women lay
hands on God, when they seek (by such counterfeit devises) to reform and
transfigure that, Cypr. lib. de hab. Virg.
which he has formed: Nescientes quodopus Dei est omne, quod nascitur, Diaboli
quodcunque mutatur: None knowing that that is Gods work, which is borne and
the devils, whatsoever is changed. And do they think, that this their
painting is offensive unto none. Some they displease and grieve: others they
poison by this ill ensample, which is as a match to give fire to them that are
as capable of it, as tinder, flax, or gunpowder: and besides, they give the
enemy occasion to disgrace the Church, and that Gospel of Jesus, which we
profess and boast of. Let us all therefore remember that golden rule, which
the Apostle there does give us, Which (as Hemingius speaks) Whosoever does
willingly and wittingly Heming. in 1. Co. 10. 31.
violate, he without doubt dishonoreth God, and is made guilty of eternal
anger, until he shall repent. But if the respect of men cannot prevail, whose
eyes are offended with such vanities, yet let the reverence of Gods holy
Angels, that tend upon you, dissuade you from them. For they cannot but be
offended, as often as they shall see men pervert nature it self, and the order
that God Bullinger. in 1. Cor. 11.
has appointed, and contumaciously to tread it under foot. And is not this the
Ordinance of God, that every man should appear in his own likeness, every
woman be seen in her own face? Is not this an inuersion of nature, to
dissemble and hide the natural visage with an artificial, and to offer one
for another? Now shall we offend our good Angels, our keepers, our protectors,
who can as ill endure a painted face, and counterfeit hair, as any man can
endure a sluttish face, or nittie locks? And why should a man be so fond on
beauty? Amplasatis forma pudicitia: Modesty is sufficient Propertius.
beauty. Truly virtue is the best beauty, which is indeed so beautiful and
bright, that were it to be seere with eyes, it would draw and hold all men's
eyes unto it. A virtuous woman needs no borrowed, no bought complexion, none of
these poisons; for so Uictor calls them, when he says, Quid agunt incorpope
casto cerussa, Uictar ad Salmonem.
and minium, centumque venena colorum? What do this white and red paint, and
an hundred other poisons of colors in an honest body? the time, labor and
cost, which thou wastest on these superfluities, bestow and spend in getting,
keeping, and exercising virtue, which is even beauties beauty: which (as Saint
Ambrose speaks) no age shall extinguish, no death can take away, Ambros. de
Virgin. l. 1.
no sickness can corrupt. But this borrowed beauty is a vanishing beauty, or
beautiful vanity; a little wet, a little swet, a little breath will mar it.
Perhaps thou will say, it is an ornament. An ornament? A torment it is, says
the said Father: The true ornaments of Christians (says Saint Austin) are not
only no counterfeit and lying painting, no nor so much as the pomp of gold or
garments, but good Aug. ep. 73. ad Possid. Uerus ornatus Christianorum, etc.
Stob. Ser. 72 Stob. 16. Nazianz. cont. mul. Immodice comptas.
manners. An ornament (says Crates) is that, which does adorn: and that
adorneth, which makes a woman more honest: (Tale vero praestant, non coceus)
but painting (either of face or hair) performs not this: but those things,
which show gravity, moderation, and shamefastness. Democritus likewise said,
that sparingnesse of speech adorned a woman, and that the parcitie even of an
ornament is an ornament to her. I may not omit what Saint Gregory Nazianzene
has written of the true ornaments of women, where he says: Anthos hen esti,
etc. There is says he) one flower to be loved of women, a good red, which is
shamefastness. This our Painter painteth. We will give thee, if thou desire,
a second: thou may draw a palenes unto thy beauty, spent with the labors
of Christ with prayers, sighs, and restless night and day. These are the
medicines both of unmarried and married people. Ho tropos esti gun, etc. To
tarry much at home, to confer of Gods word, to set the maids their taskes,
to be delighted only in their husband, to bind up their lips, and not to
stir forth a doors, these manners are precious things for women. So the
prime of the Apostles, Paul and Peter, having shown their dislike of some
things, which by 1. Tim. 2. 1. Pet. 3.
some foolish women are made even idols of, show that the true ornaments of
Christian women, young and old, high and low, are shamefastness, modesty, and
good works, together with the incorruption of a meek and quiet spirit, which
is of great account with God. On the contrary, painting of the face, coloring
of the brows, litting of the hair, and such superfluous curiosities, are
abominations in his eyes. But thou will say, that the Apostle forbids not
painting of the cheeks Theophylact. In ep. 1. ad Tim. cap. 2.
or hair. It is true by name he does not: but in effect he does; and as
Theophylactus speaks, If the Apostle forbid those things that belong to
wealth, then much more those things, which with a certain unnecessary care
and study, are composed only for vain trimming, as the dawbing of the cheeks
and face, and some ointments put to the etes to make them beautiful, and the
rest of this rabble. But tell me one thing; for food and raiment, for strength
and health, for natural favor, form and beauty, a man is bound to praise
the Lord, and a good man will not forget to do it: hut dare any wanton thank
God for her colored hair, her borrowed beauty, her artificial facing (I
remember Saint Paul says, In every thing give thanks. Now I demand of thee, If
thou will give thanks 1. The. 5. 18
in this thing (I demand again, Why will thou live in that state, in which
thou would not die? Surely they forget death and those days of darkness,
that are dead alive in these toys and vanities. A serious and sad remembrance
2. Cor. 5.
of death and of the judgment, wherein every one must receive of the Lord
according to that, he has done in his body, whether it be good or evil, would
deter and keep us from these abuses, and vain expense of time (which is not
ours, if we do abuse it) and would make us think of better things, then
these. It is worth the noting, which Isidorus Clarius a most eloquent Preacher,
as Stapleton calls him, says in this argument; If some man (says he) should
promise a woman, that, if she would leave of her painting and bodily Isid.
Clar. t. 1. orat. 53. Si quis mulieri cupiam polliceretur, etc.
bravery for a year, she should appear for an hundred years after the most
beautiful of all women, that ever should be, without doubt she would most
willingly accept the condition. Again, if it should be told her that she has
leave for one years space to allkinds of painting and coloring, and all
manner of ornaments; but with that condition, that she should be the vgliest
of all women all her life long after: there is no question, but that she would
refuse the offer of that years bravery for fear of ensuing deformity. But
all these things shall oome to pass, and those things, which are of so much
the more moment, by how much eternitte surpasses a little time, and yet so
sluggish are they in a matter of so great importance. For it shall come to
pass, that those women, which in this life have lived modestly, and without
paintings, and idle ornaments, shall have bodies bright as the Sun, and that
for ever: but such as would needs appear conspicuous and beautiful (by
borrowed bravery) here, shall possess eternal deformity with the Devil and
his Angels. Calvin writing on these words of Hoseah, Tollat seortationes suas a
facie suas: that is, Let her take away her whoredoms from her face, and her
adulteries Hoshea 2.
from between her breasts, says, What means this? for women play not the
whores with their face, nor breasts. It is well known (says he) that the
Prophet alludes to the dressing of harlots: because Whores, that they may
alluremen, dres themselves up more costly, and paint their faces curiously, and
garnish their breasts. Immodesty therefore is seen as well in the face, as in
the breasts. Tremelius also and Iunius commenting upon the said Scripture,
understand thereby in like manner, Adulterinos fucos, paintings, and such
counterfeit devises, by the which, (as one has well observed) Vid. Dictionar.
Pauper. a Pet. Rodol. editum. p. 76
a woman does not become more beautiful, sed potius naturalis pulchritudinis
aliquid subtrahit, but rather takes away somewhat from natural favor.

Master Tho. Hudson writing of a Painted woman, says accordingly,

She surely keeps her fault of sex and nation,
And best allows still the last translation.
Much good time lost, she rests her faces detter:
For she has made it worse, striving to make it better.
Holinshed in his description of Scotland, tells, how the Picts used to paint
over their bodies: and some write, that Medea a notable Sorceresse devised
these arts: and sure it is, that the Heathen and Infidels did first and most
vsurp them: seeing therefore we have cast off 1. Cor. 6. 19.
their Barbarism and Infidelity, let us also lay aside their other vanities
and adulterous devises. But if for very shame, let not these heathenish images
be brought into the houses of God. They do ill become the bodies of Saints
which are the Temples of the holy Ghost, but 1. Cor. 6. 19
the Congregation of Saints worse, who are assembled in Gods house, not to show
vanity, but to learn humility; not to draw down wanton eyes to themselves,
but to lift up their eyes and hearts unto God; not to deal with vain and idle
people, but with Jesus Christ, whose holy eyes are offended with such sights.
Master Barnabee Rich his complaint may here not unfitly be inserted, who thus
somewhere writes: You shall see (says he) some women go so attired to the
Church, that I am ashamed to tell it alloud they are so bepainted, so
beperriwigd, so bepowdered, so be perfumed, so be starched, so belaced, so be
imbrodered, that I cannot tell what mental virtue they may have, that they do
keep inwardly to themselves: but I am sure to the outward show, it is a hard
matter in the Church it self to distinguish between a good woman and a bad. I
would to God our painters would consider what Saint Jerome writes (as Eustoch.
Epitaph. Paulae. ep. 27.) of Paula, who when he prayed her to spare her eyes
for the reading of the Gospel, which she marred with weeping for her sins,
returned this answer to the holy Father: Turpandaest facies, quam contra Dei
praeceptum purpurisso, and cerussa, and stibio saepe depinxi: That face is to
be fouled, which I have often painted against Gods commandment. I must afflict
my body, which I have pampered with many pleasures: long laughing must be
recompensed with continual weeping.

I will end this present Treatise with the words of that golden-mouthed Teacher
of the Greek Church, I mean Saint Chrysostom, who writes much about this
argument I have in hand. His words, as many as concern our purpose, I will
turn as faithfully as I can, which yet by turning will loose some grace, as
wine being turned out of one vessel into another. Thou have (says he) a wife
too much loving the bravery of the body, Chrysostom. l. 2 hom. 31. in Mat. p.
228 Uxorem habes ornatum corporis, etc. Chrysostom excuses his speech against
women. Greater faults in men commonly, then in women.
painted, wantonizing daily in delights, given to babbling. For though al these
things cannot befall one woman, yet in our speech we will faigne, that they
have all met together. But thou will say, Woy was it your pleasure to speak of
women rather, then of men? Doubtless there are men corrupter, then such a
woman. But because government is granted unto men by nature, therefore we have
described a woman and not because more faults may be found in women, then in
men. For you shall often find among men many, which women never, or but very
sildome do commit; as are murder, the euersion of sepulchers, and unprofitable
fighting with wild beasts, and the like. Do not therefore think that we do
these things in contempt of the sex (let this be far from me) but because it
is now more commodious to make our description after this manner. Be it
therefore, there is such a woman, as we have described, and her husband would
reform her by all his care and industry. By what means then shall he effect
it? Namely, if he do not command all things to her at once, but the more easy
things, and those things first, How the husband is to redress his wife.
Painting of the face is an evil bravery.
which she does seem to care less for. For if thou would mend all at first,
thou shall do nothing. Thou shall not therefore bie and bie deprive her of her
golden ornaments. Let her have them a time, and use them. For that seems to be
a lesser evil, then a painted and counterfeitface. First therefore take away
her painting, and do not that with terror and threats, but with a gentle and
sweet persuasion. Let her ever and anon hear The husband should show his delike
of this painting.
thee say, that the painted faces of women do displease thee, and that they
cause such a lothing in thee, that thou can not endure them. Allege also the
judgment of others, that are of thy mind: and tell her that that gear uses to
mar them, that are comely without it, that by this means thou might weed
this evil out of her. In the mean while as yet, speak not a word of hell, or
heaven: but make her believe that it will glad A painted face displeases good
men.
thine heart to see her with such a face, as God has made: but that a face
corrupted and altered from it nature, and filled with artificial reds and
whites is commonly disliked amongst good men. After thou have wrought her with
these words, then speak to her also of hell and heaven. Be not slack to
discourse of these things, not once, but again, and again; not spitefully or
in anger, but with love and pleasantness; sometimes speaking fair, and
sometimes turning away thine eyes with dislike, and sometimes again making
much of her. Do thou not see that painters, when they go about to make a
fair picture, do Husbands should use all good means to reform their wives.
now apply these colors, and then others, wiping out the former? Be not thou
more unskillful then painters. They being to paint the shape of the body on
tables, do use so great pains and care; and is it not meet that we should
try all conclusions, use all means, when we desire to make souls better! Si
paulatim sie animum vxoris tuae formaueris, etc. If by degrees thou shall thus
reform thy wives mind, thou shall be the best painter, a faithful servant, an
honest husbandman. With these How an husband may prove a very good picturer.
Holy ancient women used not to paint themselves. Tho they were not fair, yet
they did not paint their faces. Painting of the face an invention of Satan.
Helps against these vanities. Painting is deformity. Christ delights not in
painted faces.
also, make often mention of illustrious women, which either have excelled for
beauty, or which have not been so fair, as of Sarah, Rebecca, and the like.
All which it is certain have condemned such vanity, which may appear, in
that Leah, the wife of the Patriarch Jacob, though she was not fair, nor so
well loved of her husband. And besides bred among the Gentiles, did yet devise
no such trick, nor altered her natural complexion, but constantly kept the
lineaments of nature uncorrupted. And will thou, whose head is Christ, who art
a believer, will thou allow of the inventions of Satan? will thou not remember
that water, that was sprinkled upon thy face, nor the Sacrament, which
beautified thy lips, nor the blood, which made red thy tongue? All which things
if thou would keep in memory, though thou louedst bravery very well, thou
would not dare, thou could not endure to put any powder, or paint upon thy
face. Remember that thou art made fit for Christ, and thou will abominate this
deformity. For he joys not in these colors, but requires a more noble
branch, to wit, of the soul, which also he loves greatly, and which is to be
greatly esteemed, as the Prophet shows, where he says, and the King shall
greatly desire thy beauty. Let us not therefore Psalm. 45. 11. Painting a
superfluity.
put any idle and superfluous thing upon us. For there is nothing wanting unto
any of the works of God, neither is there ought, which needs thy mending. No
man presumes to put any thing to the image, which A Simile showing this
painting to be a wrong to God. Painters neglect their souls.
is made according to the similitude of a King: and if he shall presume, yet
he shall not escape unpunished. Thou addest therefore nothing to the
workmanship of men; and do thou strive to amend that, which God has
wrougth? Neither do thou think of hellfire, nor fear the desolation of
thy soul, which then lies altogether neglected, when thou set all thy
mind, care and study on thy body. Why say I the soul is neglected, seeing
that it falls out otherwise with the body, then thou wishedst. Which hence
appears. Because whereas thou studiest by this thing to seem fair, in truth
with this thou appearest deformed: by this thou think to please thy husband,
It falls out otherwise with these painters, then they think. Painting marres
the color.
which in truth causes him no little sorrow: neither does he only, but
others also blame thee. Would thou seem a young woman? But that artifice
does bring an oldnesse. Through this thou imaginest, that thou may glory,
as being fair: but it works thee no small disgrace. Thou may It may better
translate it, be ashamed: for a painted face cannot blush. Painting an offense
of God. The Bellows of jealousy. The imitation of whores.
blush, when thou see not only thine equals and friends, but thy maids and
servants, that are privy to it, and much more, when thou see thy self in a
glass. But why do I heap up so many of these things, passing by those
greater things? To wit, that thou offendest God, ouerthrowest modesty,
kindlest the stame of jealousy, and imitatest prostituted harlots. All which
considering, contemn these devilish dressings, and unprofitable arts, and
leaving this beauty, indeed deformity, get ye that beauty in your hearts,
which the Angels desire, which God does love, which pleases your husbands,
that having lived here honorably, ye may also obtain future glory. Unto
the which I would we might come by the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen. Thus far Chrysostom.

Trin-vni Deo Gloria.
AN APPENDIX.
ALL painting or coloring of the face is not of one kind, nor by one mean.
The more artificial and sumptuous is by tincture, the skin being died and
stained with artificial colors. This the wealthier sort perform by the help
of pearl. Were it not much better to bestow this cost on the poor, which are
creatures and images of God, then on such idle images and works of their own
creation? O what thankfulness do they show unto him, that mispend his gifts
on things, he skornes to look on! Vt quid die ligitis vanitatem, and quaeritis
mendatium? Why love they vanity, and seek after lies? for a painted face is a
vanity, and very lie.

It is a point of pride to desire by false devises, to be reputed of others
more excellent, then one is indeed. They therefore that paint or die their
faces (as the manner is) are not able to clear themselves of pride, and the
practice of it, which is a thing most odious to God and man.

Pride may show it self in rich apparel, but it does singularly appear in a
painted face; because they that paint, would have that, which is artificial
and borrowed, taken to be natural and proper.

A painted face is a superfluous face: it were well, if the world were well rid
of all such superfluous creatures. I cannot think that God, who is the Lord of
our time, does allow us to spend one hour of all our time on such a vanity.
And if he allow it not, we steal it, if we take it.

This art is often used upon Sunday, which is the Lords day: and so by this
means that holy day is profaned, and God dishonored.

They that practice these arts, do often hear them reproved by the Ministers
of Christ, who have authority Heb. 13, 17.
over them in the Lord, neither can they (I think) be ignorant how the Fathers
and Doctors of the Church have writ against these vanities. Now what is this
but gross irreuerence, and disobedience, when women, and wanton wagges resist
and contemn their judgment and monitions; or else, to make themselves wiser
then their masters, and to be wise in their own eyes, as if forsooth they
knew better what were good, and what were evil, what became, and what
mis-became Christian men and women, then the Church or the most holy and
learned Pastors and Teachers, Priests and Bishops, that have been, and are
therein? But, Woe unto those, that are wise intheir own eyes, and prudent in
their own sight. Isaiah 5. 21.


They that paint or die their hair and faces, their neck and breasts, do
either judge they do well, and sin not; or else they know they do evil, and
yet do it, being transported by the corruption of their wills and affections;
or otherwise they do well, and sin not; or otherwise they do it out of
ignorance, not knowing that they do evil. For the first, if they think and
deem it good, and not evil to use these arts, as the fashion is, they receive
an error, or false ground into their minds. And how shall they repent of
that, which they think is lawful? How will they beg pardon of that, wherein
they glory, and which they think is good and not evil? And if they shall judge
that good, which indeed is evil, how shall they not also speak good of evil?
And how are they safe then (specially if they shall despise instruction) seeing
the Lord denounces, Woe unto those, that speak good of evil, and evil of
good, which put darkness for light, and light for darkness? Now without all
question the grounds of this coloring are pride, or wantonness, or deceit, or
something that is sinful. And that, that is of the flesh, is flesh.

For the second, if they know they do ill to paint, and yet use it, the
greater is their sin; if they know they do well not to paint, why then do
they not forbear? To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it
is sin, says S. James. James 4. 17
He that sins wittingly, sins more willingly, and therefore sins more
heinously: and (as Saint Austen speaks) The precept is violated with so much
the more injustice, Aug. lib. 14. de ciuit. dei c. 12.
by how much the more easily it might have been observed. But he that knows
his duty, may more easily do it, then he that knows it not. And if he know
it, and address not himself to do it, he shall be beaten Luke 12. 47
with many stripes.

For the third, if they use these arts, as not knowing that they do evil,
they are not yet wholly excused. For even this ignorance is a sin, and
deserves punishment in it self. But what if it be wilful and affected
ignorance? Have they not heard? Have they no means of knowing it to be a
sin? So they not consider, that the wisest and holiest of either sex contemn
and condemn such vanities? Or are they not able to find out the reasons, why
they do use them? See they not that pride, vainglory, adulterous
affections, and such like, are the very motives, that make them use them?
Affected ignorance of that, which a man ought to know, is a two fold evil;
one, that it is ignorance; the other, that it is affected. And the simple and
unaffected ignorance of such things be not so grievous, yet in one respect it
is more dangerous then when one sins of knowledge. For he that sins of
ignorance, is farther of from repentance, then he that sins of knowledge. For
he that knows his duty, may more easily repent and leave it, then either he
that does evil, and knows not that he does evil, or then he also that
thinks he does good, when he does an evil, and so is so far from repenting
of it, that he rather glories in it.

They that use these arts, do judge it better, safer, and more laudable,
either not to paint and die themselves, or to paint and die themselves. If they
hold the former, why cleave they to the practice of such arts? Why choose they
not the better? If they maintain the latter, why are they loath to depart out
of the world in that kind of bravery? Why do they not condemn those, that
altogether abstain from such arts? Or what be their reasons of their opinion?
For my part, I think none to be so gross, as to think it better, or so good.

There are some, whose leaders seem greatly to respect the ancient Fathers and
Doctors of the Church, and the Conflitutions called Apostolical: but the
Fathers, as may appear by their writings, quoted in this Treatise, are
altogether set against these arts and actions: and amongst those Canons, this
rule is given, Noli depingere os tuum, quod fecit Deus, that is, Do not paint
thy face, which God has made. Why then should any Clem. constit. Apostol. l.
1. c. 9.
that profess themselves the Disciples of such their guides, as magnify these
Ancients, give themselves to such forbidden practices? But it is to be noted,
that though among women, and men too, of sundry opinions in matters of
religion, there are many differences and much discord, yet in the practice of
pride and vanity, there is great consent and concord. The devil is a most
politic and pestilent enemy of man: He cares not much, tho the manners of a
man be good, if his faith be naught; nor though his faith be good, if his
manners he wicked. And he knows, that as pride shut him out of heaven, so
pride likewise will shut men up in hell. Erasmus tells a prittie tale of a
company of Eras. Apot-Varie mixed. lib. 6. Vid. Galen. in exhortatione ad bonas
arts.
gallants, that were met at a banquet, al of them having their faces painted,
unless one Phryne, the fairest of the^. It was thus; Their manner was at their
feasts to make certain sports or ieasts, and that whatsoever any of them began
to do, the rest must all of them follow. Now Phryne washed her face in a basin
of water: and because her natural beauty was good, and her years fresh and
flourishing, she looked nothing the worser, but the better rather for it:
whereas the rest doing the like, because they were al painted, they were al
disgraced. But (they say) some are now adays both more cunning and more
costly, then that their art should be washed away with a little water. This is
to trifle away and devour time, not to redeem it. This is not to buy time,
but to sell it for naught. This art is worse then ignorance: this curiosity is
more to be blamed; then carelesnes. And of them that use it, it may be said,
They love the praise of men more, then the promise of God, who delights in
plainness, not in deceitfulnes; in verity, not in hypocrisy. The eye of
purity and justice cannot abide falsehood and counterfeiting, as not counterfeit
money, counterfeit men, counterfeit friends, counterfeit wares, counterfeit zeal,
counterfeit devotion, so not counterfeit greatness, counterfeit wealth, counterfeit
beauty. I would feign know what a man would have counterfeit, or what
counterfeit and base thing, he would have put upon him, as true, natural and
proper. A friend, a wife, a child, a father, an horse or dog, fire, water,
meat, money? What, nothing, nothing? Why the^ beauty? would any be deceived with
art in stead of nature? No why then should any deceive another, if he would not
be deceived by another Or why should any study to get the praise of another by
that, for the which, if he did epsy it, he would not beslow his praise upon
another? And how ill is a man beholding to himself, when he takes pains, and
is at cost to bring an ill name upon himself? For were he not vain and
deceitful within, he would not express and show it without. And he that is
false and deceitful in trifles, how can he be trusted in matters of greater
importance? But it is not enough for these dyars and painters to do evil, but
they will also defend it, and to this purpose they bring the Psalmist upon the
stage, as if he taught or allowed these arts. But whereas the Psalmist says,
that God gave men oil to make the face shine, without doubt he meant it not by
tincture or dying (for we may not make the holy Ghost to war with himself) but
some other way. For oil is wholesome to eat, it cheereth the heart, and a
cheerful heart causes a cheareful countenance. Besides, oil is used for
lights or lamps, which illuminate the eyes, and so some expound it. And again,
if the face be rubbed or anointed with it, it helps the natural color,
because it heateth and cheereth the blood. Eusebius. says, that oil is
phaidropoion, making the face of those that are anointed with it, diathgete,
cailampran, bright and shining. With the Eusebius. lib. 4. demonstrat. Euangel.
Jacob. Iansenius, in Psalm. 103. 17. Amb. de Elia, and iniu. cap. 10. Mat. 6.
17. Johan. Wolp. in Psalm. 104. 15. hom. 34. Muscul. in Psa. 104. 15 Bellarm. in
Psalm. 103. 17
anointing of oil, wherewith the men of old time anointed their heads (says
Ianssonius) they did procure unto themselves, and demonstrate gladness of mind:
wherefore also the Lord, as witnesses Ambrose, inuiting those that fast, to a
cheerfulness of spirit, says, Anoint thine head with oil. Wholphius
likewise says, It is the nature of oil to warm the body, and to defend it
against colds, and to refresh the members. Muscul. writes, that oil was given
to make the body bright and cheerful, the use whereof was fitter for hot
countries, then cold: and that God prepared the mitigation of oil against the
outward labefactation of the body: by the use whereof not only the clearenes of
the skin might be preserved or repaired, but also other burts and annoiances
cured. Bellar. thus also writes, That he might cheer up the face with oil,
i. that man might make his face cheerful with oil brought forth by thee: for
he gave wine to cheer up the heart: and he also gave oil, either to anoint
and clear the face, or else to eat, as Theodoretus teaches, to wit, that
being mingled among herbs and pulse, it might make the meat more pleasing,
and that man might make his face cheerful in tasting of that meat; or that
God might make the face of man cheerful with oil, whilst he gives him
meat seasoned with oil. For the face appears clearer, when a man is
nourished with those things, that have a good relish or savor. Pet. Lumb. in
Psalm. 103 17. Mol. in Psa. 104, 15
Lombard according to S. Austin expounds it thus: That man might exbilarate,
that is, cheer up; his face, that is, his mind; with oil, that is, with some
grace of the holy Spirit, by which he is made to be gracious with others.
Mollerus, and diverse others also not altogether disliking, makes the words to
sound thus, And wine, that makes glad the heart of man, and his face to shine
more then oil. But whatsoever the interpreters speak here of oil, I find in
them no one syllable for fucation or painting, which Chrysostom. hom. 31. in Mat. *
The horn of Stibium, which is a black and fuliginous medicine of the eyes.
Pined. in Job 42. Merlinus, Mercer. and Piscator on this place of Job. Abr.
Scultetu. in cap. 3. and 4. Iesaiae p. 68. 69.
Saint Chrysostom says is a deformity, a superfluity, and an invention of
the devil. That which Diogenes sometimes said to a certain youth too
curiously dressed, may be fitly applied to any of our youths, that use these
curious arts, If thou go to men, all this is but in vain, if unto women, it
is wicked.

They are ill beholding to their wits, that would maintain this kind of
tincture lawful, because one of Jobs fair daughters was called Keren-happuk,
* Conustiby: whereby was signified, not that she was painted (for her natural
beauty was so perfect, that she needed not): but that she had, as Pineda with
others notes, not only very fair eyes, but whatsoever also other women are
wont to procure unto themselves by painting and medicines: who also shows, it
is not the least praise of women, or commendation of their beauty, that they
use not such artificial trimming of their bodies. Where the Hebrew. in the 3.
of Esaias has wandering, or rolling eyes, a man both learned, and godly, says,
thas the Germane Interpreter has Facie cerussata, a painted face, to vpbraid
women with their painting or dying, wherewith they counterfeit redness of
their cheeks and lips, indeuouring to the contumely of God their maker, to be
fairer then they were borne. But they will thus plead, says he, What evil is
it, if by these arts I shall entice an husband Scultet. vbi supra. Ans. 1 Ovid.
2.
to like me? To whom he answers two things. First: Non pellicies nisi
stolidum and vecordem, Thou shall allure none, but a fool and dizzard. For
what wise man will be wooed or won by pictures? Who that rightly fears God,
and is not miserably transported by a spiritual fury, will bestow his
affection upon the divise of a foolish woman; which belongs indeed to the work
of the most wise Creator? But native beauty is his work: but a scitious and
adusterine is her own, or his rather, that taught her first to sin. Ovid
speaking Fast. Forma placet, etc.
of Lucretia says, That form and beauty pleases, which is made by no art;
it is indeed pleasing both to God and man. Artificial favor and beauty
becomes only artificial creatures, as statues, images, and the like But if the
heart were well sifted, as it is indeed seem Ier. 17. 10. Pruden. an Hamariigen.
to God, who does search the heart, and try the reins, I fear it will be
found, that our married Listers lie and paint themselves to content themselves,
their Flesh, being discontented with that, they have, and are. Nec Cypr. de
Bono Pudicitiae.
enim content a decore ingenuo mentitur faemina formam, says Prudentius: that
is, they counterfeit beauty by their their arts, because thy are not content
with their own beauty, which they have by nature. Now this solicitude (and
unquietness) about beauty is an argument (says Saint Cyprian) of an ill
mind, and of deformity. She is always miserable, that pleases not her self, as
she is. Why is the color of the hair changed? What means this suffusoation of
her eyes? Wherefore is the face by art altered into another form? And after all this, why does she consult with her looking glass, but because she is afraid,
lest she should be she, which she is indeed?

But be it, says the said learned Writer; thou may allure and draw on
another, that is no fool, into the Ans. 2. Scult. ib.
net: but when he shall see himself deceived, and that there is nothing but a
fair counterfeit outside (non fuci praemium iurgia feres, etc?) shall not thy
painting and litting be rewarded with chiding and unkindness? Assuredly the
gains, that such deceivers get, being once discovered, (and lies it not long)
they may put in their eyes, and see never a whit less.

But howsoever some may pretend they use these arts to get them husbands, with
whom they mean to live honestly in lawful wedlock, as they would make us
believe (tho not the least evil should be done that the greatest good might
come thereof) yet are there a number, whom the earth is weary any longer to
bear, which use these arts of purpose to win men to commit folly with them for
lust, or lucre sake: whom we may rightly call the Diuils Faire-ones, to whom
belongs the blackness of darkness for ever, which in this estate they cannot
possibly escape. Either they must repent, and burn these bellows of
concupiscence, and cast away these matches of carnalitie, these instruments of
Just and vanity, or themselves must burn for ever in that lake, that burns
with fire and brimstone, being utterly cast out of the sight of God, and for
ever.

And all ye that are the daughters of God, and handmaidens of your Lord and
Savior, that true-virginman, and eternal God, Christ Jesus, please your
Father, do his will, and not the devils: and follow your Lord, who has gone
before you in humility, modesty, chastity and all godly simplicity. Have
before your eyes his blessed mother, and a certain convert of her sex, and
name and time: and think on Sarah, the mother of faithful women: who served God
their Father in all sincerity, wore their own hair, appeared both at home and
abroad in their own colors, and abhorred all these immodest, wanton, proud
and vain deceits, the inventions of idle brains, and exercises of idle
people, that are never less idle, then when they be most idle. Read, and
read again the sayings of Bathshebah, and the exhortations of Saint Paul, and
Saint Peter. And for ever remember what was threatened to the Pro. 31. 1. Tim.
2. 1. Pet. 3. Sal. Gesner. In Esa. c. 3. Doct. 1.
proud wantons of your sex in Israel by the Lord himself in Esaias. On which a
certain learned Germane Doctor, sometime principal Professor of Theology in
the University of Wittenberg, commenting thus writes, Obseruent hic mulieres,
etc. Let women here learn not to pranke it with their hair and painted face,
and allure men unto lust. And let them have in their sight the painted face of
Iezabel, and her head curiously and immodestly dressed, the which dogs did
deueure. Remember ye not, that are married, how he, that married you to your
husbands, in the day and hour of your marriage prayed unto God for you in the
prayers of the Church, unto which ye said, Amen, that ye might be followers of
godly and holy matrons? who (I am sure) all unto one detest and despise these
arts and actions, as abominations, as unbeseeming women professing sincerity
and godly pureness; and becoming only light skirts, and proud and idlewomen
that delight in nothing more then pride, and pranking and pleasing of their
flesh. Now what ye prayed for then, labor to perform always after. Ye pray
but ill, except ye be careful to practice well. Desires are not respected,
when deeds are altogether neglected. Men and women too, will keep state, and
stand upon their points; why then should Christian men and women neglect their
state, and admit of things, that misbecome their calling? But as S. Jerome
says, Nec affectatae sordes, nec exquisitae munditiae conueniunt Christiano,
i. Neither affected slutterie, nor exquisit bravery become a Christian, whose
true inward glory is but il matched with a false outward glass.

But a woman, that uses these arts, will say, if I were certain that to paint
or die my skin or hair were a sin, I would not do it for all the world.

I answer, art thou sure it is not a sin? Will thou do a thing, that thou
art not certain thou may do? Sol.
The rule prescribed thee is this, Linque incertum, leave that, whereof thou
art not certain. Do thou stand in doubt of this painting? Then forbear it,
leave it, use it not. Use not that, for which thou have no faith, no ground for
thy belief. Thou art sure it is no sin not to paint, of this thou art out of
all doubt, as thou have just cause indeed. Then paint not thy self, but
abstain, and so thou shall do well, and shall find peace in thine heart.
Adherre to this, thou art sure of: and hold of thine hand from that, thou art
not sure of.

Yea, but thou will say, If it be a sin, it is the transgression of the Law:
but what Law does it transgress? Ob.


I answer, it is against the Law and order of nature, Sol.
which produces and appoints every creature to appear in his own personal
form, favor, hair, skin and color. And it is a manifest transgression of the
word of God, which is the Law and light of a godly man. For first, when pride
of heart does cause it, it is against that law, that forbids pride, and
commands humility. Secondly, when an whorish or lascivious humor does produce
it, it transgresses the precept, which requires holiness and chastity, and
forbids fornication, adultery, and all uncleanness. Thirdly, because it is
scandalous, and of ill report. therefore it is against the laws, that forbid
offenses, and inioyne the meditation and pursuit of those things, that are of a
good report with men of understanding, and of the best report and repute in the
Church of God. Fourthly, because it is against the practice and preaching of
the grauest and soundest Doctors and Fathers of the Church, that either are
now, or have been heretofore, it is against the fifth Commandment, that says,
Honor thy father and thy mother; and against that speech of the Apostle Saint
Paul to the Hebrews, saying, Obey them Heb. 13. 17.
that have the rule over you, and submit your selves. Fifthlie, because they
that use these arts, mispend their time which God has but lentthe^, and that
for no such purposes; they are thieves, sinning against that precept, that
says, Thou shall not steal. Sixthly, because silly women and foolish
youths, make themselves wiser and more subtle, then their teachers, that
would persuade them to leave such vanities (yea, these very same) refusing to
be instructed by them, they sin against God, who says, Be not wise in thine
own eyes. And again, The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge: and they,
that is, the people, shall seek the Law at his mouth, Prou. 3. 7. Mal. 2. 7.
and not out of their own brains. For he (and not they) is the messenger of
the Lord of hosts. Seventhly, when people paint and die themselves to deceive
their neighbors, or to intise a man or woman, to love them, and marry them, or
to gain their praises to their counterfeit beauty, as if it were true and
natural, this is against the law, that commands upright dealing, and forbids
deceit and falsehood. Yea finally, he loves not God with all his heart, that
would have that affection or commendation, given to a picture, or piece of art,
which is due to the work of God, and his handmaide Nature, and which no man of
understanding, and true devotion would give, if he do perceive the fraud.
Neither does he love his neighbor, as himself, nor do to his neighbor, as
he would have his neighbor do to him, that goes about to deceive and beguile
his neighbor, making him believe by vain flourishes and outward shows that
that is, which is not, and that that is not, which is indeed. These things we
have touched already, and therefore thus I end mine answer.

Yea, but me thinks, I hear some Spaniard say, that Lessius, and other
Theatines, his Fathers-Confessors, and the great Proctors of the Romish
religion, do hold Fieri potest vt faeminae pigmentis sine peccato vtantur 1.
causa tegendae alicuius maculae. 2. Si maritus iuleat vt vxorinter alias magis
decora appareat. Lessius de iustitia and iure, l. 4 cap. 4. fol. 802. Fingere
maiorem pulchritudinem ornatu and fuco, licet sit mendacium operis, nonest
peccatum mortale. Pet. Alagora in Compendio Manuales Nauarri, cap. 23. Numb.
19. full. 257.
it lawful, that in Spain, where the Sun beam does swart their women; it
should be permitted to them to paint, as a conciliation of love between them
and their husbands, and therefore he will require it of her to give
contentment, and to win her self favor in other company.

Surely it is a doctrine that does well enough become the Jesuits, who as they
are the great Masters Sol.
of lying, equivocation, and mental reservation, so do See Master Perkins in
his Refora med Catholic. chap. 21. Perkabid.
they make no difficulty, to teach that it is lawful to belie the face, and
the complexion. Secondly, it well enough beseemes the Church of Rome, who as
she is the Mother of spiritual fornications, magic, sorcerie and witchcraft.
so has God given her over to defile her self with corporal polutions and
fornications, not only to give allowance to public Stews and Brothel-houses,
but that the Mass it self (which is the master piece of the Papacy) should be
made the baude Hen. Steph. in Apolog. pro Herod. c. 15. fo. 179.
to much uncleanness, as is well known by their Masses at midnight, and their
morning Matins before day. And therefore this old Romish Iesabel, as she has
painted her own face with the fair show of many goodly ceremonies, of
antiquity and succession, and multitude of her professors, thereby to set the
world at a gaze, so in this particular also she does tolerate the abuses of
her children. Thirdly, to husbands that require this obedience from their
wives, we oppose the Apostles rule, who requires children, servants, and
generally al inferiors, to obey them, to whom they are in subjection only in
the Lord, that is, in those things wherein Colos. 3. 18. Ephesians. 6. 1.
the laws of God and Nature may not be violated and infringed. And lastly,
whereas they require it of their wives out of a carnal respect and
sensuality, the Apostle bids them to dwell with their wives according to
knowledge: and what greater point of prudence discretion Pet. 3. 7.
and moderate affection can there be, then for a man so to cohabite with his
wife, as to have a respectfull care of the children that are to be borne of
them, whose health, and strength, and comlinasse of body, is by means of this
painting greatly endangered and endamaged, the contagious effects which it
breeds in the mother, hereditarily descending upon her child, and therefore
is well compared by Doct. de Saguna, to original sin, which propagateth it
self by generation, to whose testimony I refer you, set down here in the
beginning of this book, a sone who out of his great experience, and the
grounds of his art of Physic labors to dehort his country women of Spain
from this pargetting and rough-casting of their faces by painting.

Now because this sin goes not alone, but as it self is used to a
provocation and incitement to lust, so lust that it may accomplish its desire,
will not stick to stoop to practice loue-potions by charms and socerie, yea
rather then fail, will make its way by blood; let me therefore touch a little
upon these neighbor sins. As unto the bodies of men diseases are very
dangerous, especially if they be let run, and not withstood in time, even so
are sins unto their souls. And as by obedience unto God, and a virtuous
conversation among men, peace and al good blessings from heaven may be looked
for for godliness (as the Apostle teaches) is profitable unto all things,
having promise of the life, that now is, and of that which is to come: so by
disobedience and wicked sinning against God, his wrath was kindled, good things
are hindered, and his judgments, which are fearful and intolerable, are most
justly procured. Upon the wicked (says David) he shall rain suaires, fire
and brimstone, and an horrible Psalm. 11. 6.
tempest; this shall be the portion of their cup. But as some diseased are
more noxius and offensive to the body, then others: so some sins are more
foul and heinous then others, and will not let the Lord alone, but are ever
crying in his ears for vengeance; and therefore should be prevented with
greater care, and purged with greater sorrow and deprecation. It is that we are
fallen into those perilous times (prophesied of by Saint Paul) in which men
shall be proud, unthankful, unholy, traitors, ambitious, incontinent, 2. Tim.
3. 1.
bloody, despisers of those that are good, lovers of pleasures more then of
God, having the form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. And with
our eyes we see that true, which Esaias speaks; Let favor Isai. 26. 10.
(says he) be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness:
in the land of vprightuesse will be deal unjustly, and will not behold the
majesty of the Lord. See we not what the Lord has done for this Nation, how
he has planted his Church among us, and given us peace on all sides round
about us? See we not how he has given us his Gospel and all his ordinances
of salvation, and leave to use them freely, openly, and falsely in all
tranquillity? See we not how he has blessed us with two such noble and virtuous
Princes, one most happily succeeding another, such as in truth the whole world
since the beginning of their reigns (which is now near 60. years) is not
able to match in either sex in all their Royal and Christian indowments, and
how he has protected them to this very day (someties in a manner
miraculously) against the many, barbarous and devilish treacheries, and
traiterous machiuelions and attempts of their wicked adversaries? See we not
with what ease and clemency their Governments have continued, and what floods
of temporal favors have streamed from the heavens by them unto us; so as that
we may say with David: The Lord is with us: he has prepared a table before us,
in the presence of our enemies: he has anointed our heads with oil, and our
cuprunneth over? Psalm. 23. 4. 5. And yet for all this, the wicked will not
amend. but most horrible and transcendent villainies, most grievous and foul
enormities break out among us, to the dishonor of God, the disgrace of
Religion, the shame of their Country, the grief of their King, and of all
good Christian hearts, in so much, that if there were not amongst us those,
that mourned for these evils, which ungodly men rejoice to commit, and but that
(thanks be to God for it) there is an exact and just proceeding against ali
such enormious persons, we might well have feared some notable and fearful
judgment had been near unto us. Now all sins deserve ill with God, but some
there are, that for their heinousness are said to cry in the ears of the
Lord, such as is the sin of murder, as appears by the speech of God to
Caine, after he had murdered his brother Abel. What have thou done, says God?
The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the ground: Genesis 4. 10.
This sin was so fearful to David, as that with a careful and pensive heart
he prayed against it unto God, Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God, thou
God of my salvation: Psalm. 51. 14. And speaking of bloody people, he says,
The Lord will abborre the bloody and deceitful man: Psalm. 5. 6. And again:
The bloody and deceitful man shall not live out half his days: Genesis 9.
5. And indeed the blood of the life of a man is so precious in Gods eye, as
that he tells Noah and his sons, that he will require the blood of man at
the hand both of man and beast. And to stay us from this so unnatural a sin,
besides his commandment, that forbids it, he shows that even the prayers of
murderers shall find no favor with him, so long as their sin cleaues unto
them. When ye spread forth your hands, says he, I will hide mine eyes from
you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your Isaiah 1. 15.
hands are full of blood. And if we mark the dealings of God with murders, it
will appear that very seldom, or never, they escape unpunished, but by one
means or other, he finds them out, and meets with them, though it be by
suffering them to murder themselves. The first murderer in the world, Caine was
not indeed killed by God: but he was suffered to live such a life, in such
torments of conscience and frightings, as if he had had an hell within him,
wandering up and down like a vagabond upon the earth, that whosoever saw him,
and was acquainted with the curse of God, that went along with him, could not
but be terrified from committing murder. Abimelech out of ambition murdered
70. of his brethren, but after had his braine-pan cracked by a woman, and was
killed outright by one of Judges 9.
his own men at his own command. Cambyses, the son of Cyrus shot a noble man's
son to the heart with an arrow wittingly, and made his own brother to be
murdered privily, and slew his sister for reproving him for that deed: but at
last as he was riding, he fell down upon the point of his sword, which had
fallen out of the scabbard, and so was slain. Cassius and Brutus, that had
helped to murder Julius Caesar in the Senate, was afterward murdered by
themselves. Phocas, that had like a barbarous traitor murdered Mauricius the
Emperor his Master, was at last taken and put to a most cruel death.
Hemichild murdered his Lord Albenius a King of Lombardie, as he was in bed.
Rosimund his Queen having her hand in the said murder: but the Lord was even
with them both. For she thinking to have poisoned him after, made him drink
half her poison, which he feeling in his veins presently stayed his draught,
and made her drink up the remainder, and so they died both together. Ethelbert
King of the East Angles unjustly and deceitfully murdered at the persuasion of
Offa (the King of Mercia) his Queen; which Queen lived not a quarter of a
year after, and in her death was so tormented, that she bither tongue (which she
had abused to the causing of that murder) in pieces with her teeth. Selimus, a
Turkish Emperor murdered his father Bajazet by poison: but not many years
after, God took him into his hands, and smote him with a most loathsome and
stinking disease, which spread over all his body, and at length killed him.
Calippus that slew Dian, his familiar friend, and committed many other murders,
afterward lived an exile, and great necessities, and at length was killed
himself. And 2. Sa. 10. 10,
for David himself, whose hand had been defiled with blood, the Lord
(notwithstanding his great repentance) did severely chasten him. The Lord had
threatened him saying, The sword shall never depart from thine house: Behold, I
will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house; and so indeed it came to
pass. For one of his sons killd another, and by his own child he had liked
to have lost his kingdom. And as the Almighty God is just in punishing of
murders: so likewise his providence watches to discover them, that murderers
sildome or never lie hid, but first or last they are discovered. It is strange
to consider, how murders have been detected, sometimes by dogs, as that of
Lothbroke the Dane, of Hesiode the Poet, and a certain soldier of King
Pyrrus, from whose dead body his dog could not be won, but fawning upon the
King, as desirous of his aid, the King commanded all his soldiers to come
along by him by two and two in a rank, till at length the murderers came, on
whom the dog flew, as if he would have killed them, and turning to the King
ran again upon them, whereupon they were examined, and forth with they confessed
the fact, and received their punishment. Sometimes they have bin discovered by
birds, as Bessus (who had murdered his father) by Swallows; whom when he heard
to chatter, his guilty conscience wrought him to think that they said in their
gibberish, that Bessus had killed his father: So that now no longer able to
contain himself, he confessed his villainy, and was put to death for it. The
murder of the Poet Ibycus was discovered by Cranes: and Luther speaks of the
murder of a certain Germane, which was detected by Crows: who also with
Melancton saw a notable discovery of a murder made by a young fellow at
Isenacum, who having killed his host, and took from him all his money, began to
make have away: but by the judgment of God, and terrors of his own
conscience, he was so frighted and amazed, that he was not able to stir one
foot before he was taken. A certain Merchant traveling to Paris, was in the
way murdered by his man: now as the murder was a doing, a blind man being led
by his dog passed by, and hearing one groan, asked who it was? To whom the
murderer answered, It was a sickeman going to ease himself. But it so fell
out after, that this treacherous fellow was in question for the murder of his
master: but he denied it: the blindman also was heard of, and brought to the
murderer, and twenty men were caused to speak one after another, and still
the blind man was asked, if he knew their voices: at last when the murderer had
spoken, he knew his voice, and said, This is the man, which answered me on the
mountain. This course was often used, and still the blind man named the same,
and never fained. Whereupon the Court condemned him to death, and before he
died, he co^fest the fact. But what need we go so far for examples, even this
very year in Lancashire was there a villainous murder strangely discovered by a
young boy: which story, I hope, will by some that exactly know it, hereafter be
declared and published. In like manner also the murder of Sir Tho. Ouerburie in
the Tower, though it lay hid some time, yet at length by the providence of
heaven it is discovered. Diverse that have been found guilty of that cruel and
most merciless murder, have bin condemned to death for the same and hanged; who
though they would feign have shifted of the fault, and pleaded, Not guilty, as
though they had bin innocent, yet it pleased God still before their deaths to
touch their hearts, that they did ingeniously confess their fault, and did beg
of God the pardon of it. This sin of murder is so grievous, that it cries
aloud and shrill, and will not leave the Lord, till he have disclosed it: many
and admirable are the ways, whereby God has discovered it: some I have already
set down, and many other might be named, but that I mean not to be large. All
which should teach us to detest and decline this sin, which shuts men's
prayers out of heaven, and pulls down the judgments of God upon the^. And the
greatest mercy, that God uses to show to Murderers, which repent, is this, That
he saues them as it were by death, and preserues their souls from hell by
delivering up their bodies into the hands of Magistrates, his Ministers, to
take away their lives from the^ by law, as they have taken away the lives of
others against law. But among all the devises of murderers, which are many,
these Italian devises by poisoning are most vile and devilish, and they say, An
Englishman Italianated is a devil incarnated. If these arts should come in
once amongst us, who shall be secure? Here can a man see who hurts him, and how
shall a man prevent the blow, if he see not the arm that strikes him? Yea here
a man shall be made away under the pretext of friendship, yea, he shall perhaps
thank a man for that, that is made to destroy him, which has death lapt up in
it, which thinks is sent or given him as a tokan of love unto him. God deliver
us from these evils, and strengthen the hearts and hands of our Magistrates, to
cut off all such offenders without respect of persons. But besides this sin
of blood, there are diverse others, which are accessaries thereunto; the very
stain of religion, and the bane of humane society, as pride, ambition,
witchcraft, whoredom, and the mother and nurse of all disobedience to the
Ministry of the Word. Against every of which I will speak a little showing
some notable judgments of God upon sundry persons, that have therein offended.

Of Pride and Ambition.
ANd to begin with pride and ambition, sins hateful before God and man. These
things spoiled the Angels of their felicity, and man of his immortality. They
were bred in heaven, but they bring to hell. They were thrown out of heaven,
and were never so fortunate as to find the way thither again. They are the
spoil of virtues, the source of vices, the roots of evils, the disgraces of
religion, by remedies they beget diseases and by medecines maladies. The
bounty of the ambitious is shown to rich men, and their patience is for
vanity. When they are advanced, they are proud and full of bosting, Non curant
prodesse, sed gloriantur praeesse, and they think themselves better, because
they see themselves greater, neither are they thankful for those degrees of
honor, they have attained to, but they are discontented for lack of those,
they would attain to. For their desire looks not back from whence they
sprang, but whither they gang. And it often fares with ambitious men, that have
great estates, as with such, as wear their choates too long, which makes them,
if they take not the better heed, to stumble, fall and hurt themselves. But if
men would well weigh with themselves the instabilitie of al earthly things, and
consider the judgments of God upon ambitious and proud people, whom for their
very pride he does resist, it would doubtless abate their swelling spirits,
and teach them to be lowly-minded.

Tho. Rogers, Esquire, of the Instabilitie of Fortune, written to the Earl of
Hartford.

Boautie is like a fair, but fading flower.
Riches are like a bubble in a sireame.
Great strength is like a fortified Tower.
Honor is like a vain, but pleasing dream.
We see the fairest flowers soon fade away.
Bubbles do quickly vanish like the wind.
Strong Towers are rent, and do in time decay.
And dreams are but illusions of the mind.
Call but to mind the judgments of God upon the proud and ambitious, as on
Lucifer and his fellows, our first parents, Abimelecke, Absalon, Haman,
Scnacherih, Nebuchadnezzar, Olofernes, Antiochus, Herod, Alladius, Apryes,
Caligula, Domitian, Alexander, Timotheus the Athenian, Ajax, Capaneus: and but
mark his dealings with the proud and hautie of the world, that neither know
God nor man, neither themselves nor others, and then shall thou be forced to
confess, that there is a God that abaseth the proud, which (as David says.
Psalm. 119) are cursed, and err from Gods commandments.

And here I cannot but magnify the wisdom, and honorable proceeding of our
State, in detecting and pursuing malefactors of these our times, who having
carried their leaud practices with a great deal of hautinesse, of secrecy and
security, thought the world, Fortuna non art regi, to be guided by chance,
not by any steady course of divine providence. But their punishment Claudian in
Ruffin.
has cleared this doubt, absoluitque deos, has justified God in his righteous
dealing, so that all the world is ready to say with David, verily there is a
reward for the righteous: doubtless there is a God that judges the earth,
Psalm. 58. 10. One of the offenders having made a profitable use of her
arraignement and conviction, did confess to the glory of God, being truly
humbled by hearty repentance, that she was hainously guilty of the murder of
Sir Thomas Ouerburie, Mistress Turnor executed at Tiburne the 14. of Nouemb. 1615
and was justly condemned for the same, detesting her former life led in
popery, pride and sensuality, and exhorting the assistants with much
earnestnes to leave off their yellow bands, and of garish fashions, the very
inventions of the devil. I wish that her words might take impression in those
that heard them, and her example serve others for instruction.

Of Adultery.
I Am now come to speak of whoredom, and to show some of the judgments of
God against it. True it is, that marriage is honorable in all, and the bed
undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. God did severely
chastise David for his adultery. For the child so gotten he took away, and
suffered his daughter Thamar to be ravished by his son Ammon, and his
Concubines to be defiled by Absalom his son, that was so dear unto him,
Rodoaldus a King of Lombardy was slain, as he was in the very act of
adultery. Olrichbertus, eldest son to Lotharius, a King of France, died as
he was embracing his whore. Luther somwhere speaks of a Noble man so sensual
and whorish, that he slucke not to say, that, If this life of pleasure and
harlot-hunting would last ever, he would not ear for heaven, or eternal life.
But the filthy wretch died among his harlots, being stricken with a sudden
stroke of Gods vengeance. Messelina, the wife of Claudicus the Emperor, was a
woman of rare in continency. She fell at last in love with one Silius, a fair
young Gentleman, and that she might marry him (tho the Emperor her husband
was alive) she caused his wife Sillana to be divorced, and so married him: for
the which after the complaint and suite of the Nobles to the Emperor, she was
put to death. This sin of adultery was odious even among the Heathen, as
appears by the slorie of Abimeleck, Genes. 26. by the practice of the Turks
and Tartars, and of Aurelianus, who for terror sake, adjudged one of his
Soldiers to a cruel death for adulterating his hostisse; as also by the law
of Iulia, by which all adulterers were sentenced to die; and by the words of
Queen Hecuba in Euripides, who would have it made a law, that every wife
should die, that gave her chastity to another man. And how unpleasing this sin
is unto God, any man may see, that reads the Laws, he gave unto his people
the Jews, by the which adulterers were to be put to death, or which considers
what the Apostle writes in sundry places, in which he shows, that
Whoremongers and adulterers shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6.
Gal. 5.

Of Witchcraft.
But there is yet another sin behind, which is very sacrilegious, and
altogether derogatorie to the glory of God, and dishonorable to all Christian
men, which is Witchcraft, or all those curious arts and devises, that are
wrought by the Devil, whether it be superstitious divination, or iugling, or
Incantation, in the doing whereof, every witch is at a league with the devil,
open or secret, and does wittingly and willingly use his help. This Saint Paul
(Gal. 5.) numbers up among the deeds of the flesh, and threatens them, that
use it, with the loss of heaven. Almighty God (in Deuteronomy. 18. 10.) forbids all
kinds of witches and witcheries, as abominations unto him, and for the which he
drive out the Nations out of Canaan, and in Leuit. 20. he bids, that a man or
woman, that has a familiar spirit, or that is a wizzard, be put to death. And
he is so bent against this hellish sin, that he says expressly (in Leuit.
20. 6.) that the soul, that turns after such, as have familiar spirits, and
after wizards, to go a whoring after. I will even set my face against that
soul, and will cut him off from amongst my people. But behold some of the
judgments of God upon Magicians and Witches. Platina with others testify that
Pope Ione obtained the papacy by Magique: but after she had been papesse some
two years, and a little more, she (being thought an he) fell in travel of a
child in the open streets, as she was going to the Church of Lateran, in
which she died? Bladud, the son of Lud King of Britain, was given much to
these black arts, and wrought wonders by them: at last he made himself wings,
and assaied to fly, but the devil forsook him in his journey, so that
falling down he broke his neck. Plutarch speaks of a notable witch, called
Cleomedes, who being pursued by diverse that had had their children killed by him,
hid himself in a coffer, which when they came to search upon notice given
them, they found not the murdering witch in it: for the devil had carried him
quick away with him. A witch called Cold in Lorraine would suffer pistols to be
shot at him, and catch the bullets, as they were a coming: but at length one
of his servants being angry with him, so shot him with a pistol, that he killed
him? Benedict the 9, a Pope, and a Magitian, was (as some write) strangled to
death by the devil in a Forest, whither he had retired to follow his coniuring
exercises. Cornelius Aggrippa, a notable Magitian died but basely. Simon Magus
likewise perished in his slight, the devil forsaking him at the word of S.
Peter. Simon Pembroke, a figure-caster of Saint Georges parish near London,
was presented for a Coniurer, and being in Saint Saviors Church, where he was
warned to appear, he was sudde^ly stricken by the hand of God, and there died,
and there being searched, there were found about him diverse coniuring books,
with a picture of a man of tin, and much other trash. And it is reported,
that the inuenter of Magic, Zeorastres, a King of Bactria, was burned to
death by the devil. And I pray you what got Saul by his witch-seeking? Was not
his destruction told him, which accordingly came to pass? And Buchanan tells
us, how Naxlicus, a Scottish King, was slain even by the man, whom he had sent
unto a witch, to inquire of the success of his affairs, and of the length of
his life, the witch having before told the fellow, that he was the man that
should slay him* By all which we plainly see, that God is offended with these
devilish arts, and all that use them. How is it then to be lamented, that in
this clear light of the Gospel, there should be found amongst us (to the
dishonor of God, and of his Religion, and the infamy of our Nation) men that
have yielded themselves disciples, Students and practicioners in these hollish
arts, which Saint John calls, the deep things of Satan, Revel. 1. 24. and
have fearfully prostituted themselves to become base instruments and vassals
to act and accomplish the hests and commands of wicked ones, upon whom, though
the justice of the State has taken hold, as one W^ston and Franklin, and has
made them public spectacles of wrath to the terror of others, yet considering
the open signs of their true penitencie, we are to hope charitably of them,
and to say of them, as S. Paul does in another case, 1. Cor. 5. 5. that they
were delivered over unto death, to the destruction of the flesh, that their
spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. And I desire all men by
the mercies of God, to abhor and forsake all such ungodliness, and to deucte
themselves unto God alone, their Maker and Redeemer, studying to serve him in
righteousness and holiness all the days of their life. For obedience is better
then sacrifice, and to hearken then a the fat of Rams. And the truth is, that
all the plagues and judgments, that ever came upon the children of Israel,
light upon them for their rebellion against God, and their disobedience to his
word. And questionless it is come to pass by the just judgment of God that
these offenders, we have spoken of, and have lately seen cut of, were given
over of God, and left unto themselves, because they listened not unto him, but
were disobedient unto his word. O this disobedience, it is as the sin of
Witchcraft, and Idolatry, it is in truth the mother and nurse of all
iniquity. God has two sorts of judgments; judgments for men to keep, and
judgments for men to bear: and God has two sorts of Ministers; Ministers of
his Word, and Ministers of his Sword: now it is just with God that they, which
will not keep his judgments; should undergo his judgments, and that they
that will not be reformed by his word, should be punished and cut off with the
sword, and that such as regard not the power and doctrine of Ministers, should
feel to their smart, the authority and force of Magistrates.

THe great God of heaven and earth, even the Father of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins, all our
abominable and crying offenses, keep back and remove his judgments from us,
continue his blessings amongst us, preserve and prosper our noble King and all
his kingdoms, detect and bring under all his enemies, and grant us truth and
peace and love, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Trin-vni Deo Gloria.
THE PICTVR OF A PICTVR, OR, THE CHARACTER of a Painted woman.
SHe is a creature, that had need to be twice defined; for she is not that she
seems. And though she be the creature of God, as she is a woman, yet is she
her own creatrisse, as a picture. Indeed a plain woman is but half a painted
woman, who is both a substantive and an adjective, and yet not of the neuter
gender: but a feminine as well consorting with a masculiue, as Iuie with an
Ash. She loves grace so well, that she will rather die, then lack it. There is
no truth with her to favor, no blessing to beauty, no conscience to
contentment. A good face is her god: and her cheek well died, is the idol,
she does so much adore. Too much love of beauty, has wrought her to love
painting: and her love of painting has transformed her into a picture. Now her
thoughts, affections, talk, study, work, labor, and her very dreams are on
it. Yet all this makes her but a cynamon tree, whose bark is better then her
body; or a piece of gilded copper offered for current gold. She loves a true
looking-glass, but to commend age, wants and wrinkles, because otherwise she
cannot see to lay her falsehood right. Her body is (I ween) of Gods making: and
yet it is a question; for many parts thereof she made her self. View her well,
and you'ill say her beautie's such, as if she had bought it with her penny.
And to please her in every of her toies, would make her maid run besides her
wits, if she had any. She Is ever amending, as a begger's a peecing, yet is she
for all that no good penitent. For she loves not weeping. Tears and mourning
would mar her making: and she spends more time in powdring, pranking and
painting, then in praying. She Is more in her ointments a great deal, then in
her orizons. Her religion is not to live well, but die well. Her piety is not
to pray well, but to paint well. She loves confections better a great deal,
then confessions, and delights in facing and feasting more, then fasting.
Religion is not in so great request with her, as riches: nor wealth so much as
worship. She never chides so heartily, as when her box is to seek, her
powder's spilt, or her clothes ill set on. A good Bed-friend she is commonly,
delighting in sheets more, then in shoes, making long nights, and short
days. All her infections are but to gain affections; for she had rather die,
then live and not please. Her lips she lays with so fresh a red, as if she
sang, John come kiss me now. Yet it is not out of love, excepting self-loue,
that she so seeks to please, but for love, nor from honesty, but for honor:
it is not piety, but praise that spurs her. She studies to please others, but
because she would not be displeased her self. And so she may fulfill her own
fancy, she cares not who else she does befoole. A name she preferres to nature,
and makes more account of fame, then faith. And though she do affect
singularity, yet she loves plurality of faces. She is nothing like her self,
save in this, that she is not like her self. She sildo^ goes without a pair of
faces, and shes furnished with stuff to make more if need be. She says a good
archer must have 2. strings to his bow, but she has hers bent both at once:
yet you must not say, she wears 2. faces under one hood; for that she is left
long since to t'hawks, and has got her headgeare that pleases her better; not
because better, but nower. Her own sweet face is the book she most looks
upon; this she reads over duly every morning, specially if she be to show her
self abroad that day: and as her eye or cha^bermaid teaches her, sometimes she
blots out pale, and writes red. The face she makes in the day, she usually marrs
in the night, and so its to make a new the nexr day. Her haire's sildom her own,
or if the substance, then not the show, and her face likes her not, if not
borrowed. And as for her head, that's dressed, and hung about with toies and
devises, like the sign of a tauern, to draw on such as see her. And sometimes
is written on her forhead, as on the Dolfin at Cambridge in capital letters, e
pithi, e apithi, like or look of. Shes marriageable and 15. at a Drink, or be
gone, as the Persians used to say at their drinkings,
clap, and afterward she does not live, but long. And if she survive her
husband, his going is the coming of her tears, and the going of her tears is
the coming of another husband. It Is but in dock, out nettle. By that time her
face is me^ded, her sorows ended. There Is no physic, she so loves, as face
physic: and but assure her she'st never need other, whiles she lives, and
she will die for joy. Rather then she'il leave her yellowbands, and give ore her
pride, she will not stick to deny that Mistr. Turn. spoke against them, when she
died. Her devotion is fine apparel dear bought, and a fine face lately
borrowed, and newly set on. These carry her to Church, and clear her of
Recusancy. Once in she vnpins her mask, and calls for her book, and now she is
set. And if she have any more devotion, she lifts up a certain number of eyes
toward the Preacher, rises up, stands a while, and looks about her: then
turning her eyes from beholding vanities (such as she her self brings with
her) she sits down, falls a nodding, measures out a nap by the hower-glasse,
and awakes to say, Amen. She delights to see, and to be seen: for he labors,
more then half lost, if no body should look upon her. She takes a journey now
and then to visit a friend, or sea cousin: but she never travels more merrily,
then when she is going to London, London, London has her heart. The Exchange is
the Temple of her Idols. In London she buys her head, her face, her fashion. O
London, thou art her Paradise, her Heaven, her All in all! If she be unmarried,
she desires to be mistaken, that she may be taken. If married to an Old man,
she is rather a Reed and a Rack unto him, then a Staff and a Chair, a
trouble rather then a friend, a corrosiue, not a comfort, a consumption, not a
counselor. The utmost reach of her Providence is but to be counted Lovely,
and her greatest Envy is at a fairer face in her next neighbor; this, if any
thing, makes her have sore eyes. She is little within her self, and has small
content of her own; and therefore is still seeking rather, then enjoying. All
is her own, you see, and yet in truth nothing is her own almost you see; not
her head, her hair, her face, her breasts, her sent, nay, not her breath
always. She has purchased lips, hair, hands and beauty more, then nature
gave her, and with these she hopes to purchase love. For in being beloved
consists her life; she is a Fish, that would feign be taken; a Bird, that had
rather a great deal be in the hand, then a bush. These purchases, she uses to
make, are not of lands, but looks; not of lives, but loves. Yet usually the
love, she meets with, is as changeable as her face, and will not tarry on her,
though she die for it She spends more in face-phisicke and trifles, then in
feeding the poor. And so she may be admired her self, she cares not though
all her neighbors round about her were counted Kitchinstuffe A good huswife
takes not more pleasure in dressing her garden with variety of herbs and
flowers, then in tricking her self with toys and gauds. Here she is costly,
if any where. It Is her grace to be gay and gallant. And indeed like an Ostrich,
or bird of Paradise; her feathers are more worth then her body. The worst piece
about her is in the midst. For the Tailor, and her Chamber-maide, and her
own skill, even these three, are the chiefest causes of all her perfections.
Not truths, but shadows of truths she is furnished with; with seeming truths,
and with substantial lies. Yet with all her fair shows she is but like a
piece. of course cloth with a fine glass, or fairo die; or as the herb Molio,
which carries a flows, as white as snow, but is carried upon a root as
black, as ink. Here first care in the morning is to make her a good face, and
her last care in the evening is to have her box, and all her implements ready
against the next morning. She is so curious, and full of business, that two
such in a house would keep the nimblest-fingered girl in the Parish, she
lives in, from making her self one crosse-cloth in a tweluemoneth. She is so
deep in love with toys, that without them she is but half her self: and
half ones self, you know, is not ones self. She looses her self in her
self, that she may find her self in a Picture. Her trade is tinckturing, and
her luster is her life. You kill her, if you will not let her die. The
Hyacinth, or Heliotropium, follows not the Sun more duly, then she Vanity..
Pride, which is accidental to a woman, and hateful to a virtuous woman, is
essential to her. Her godliness is not to do well, but to go well. Her care
is not to live well, but to look well. And yet if she live well, sheell give
you leave to chide her, if she look ill. She so affects the titles of
illustrious and gracious, that she carries them always in print about her.
Her imagination is ever stirring, and keeps her mind in continual motion, as
fire does the pot a playing, or as the weights do the jack in her kitchen.
Her devises follow her fancy, as the motion of the Seaes do the Moon. And
nothing pleases her long, but that, which pleases her fancies, with one of
which she drives out another, as boys do pellets in Elderne gunnes. She
thinks it is false to say, that any woman living can be damned for these
devises: and it may be true she thinks. For so long as she lives, she cannot:
but if she die in them, there is the question. She Is ever busy, yet never
less busy, then when she is best busy. She Is always idle, yet never less
idle, then when she is most idle. Once a year at least she would feign see
London, tho when she comes there, she has nothing to do, but to learn a new
fashion, and to buy her a perwigge, powder, ointments, a feather, or to see a
play. One of her best virtues is, that she respects none, that paint: and the
reward of her painting, is to be respected of none, that paint not. If she be a
Maiden, she would feign be rid of that charge? If a Widow, she is but a
counterfeit relic; 'twere too gross superstition but to kiss or touch her.
Old Age still steals upon her unawares: which she discernes not by increase of
wisdom, but of weakness, nor by her long-liuing, but by her need of dying.
To conclude, whosoever she be, she is but a Gilded Pill, composde of these two
ingredients, defects of nature, and an artificial seeming of supply, tempered
and made up by pride and vanity, and may well be reckned among these creatures,
that God never made. Her picture is now drawn out, and done.

T. T.
FINIS.

