News from Turkey. OR A true and perfect Relation sent from CONSTANTINOPLE.

Touching the death of Achmet the last Emperor of the Turks.

AS ALSO THE MIRACVLOVS deliverances of MVSTAPHA, (brother to the said ACHMET
then Emperor,) and his strange escapes frrm his purposed death.

Together with the memorable access of the said MVSTAPHA into the Turkish
Empire, and a narration of such things as have since happened.



LONDON, Printed by William Jones for Samuel Nealand, and Nathaniell Brown
and are to be sold at the great North-dore of Saint Paul's Church. 1618.

A RELATION SENT from Constantinople touching the death of Achmett the last
Emperor of the Turks. As also the memorable access of Mustapha his brother
to the said Turkish Empire.
MAhumet 3 of that name the fourtenth Emperor of the Turks, departing this
life in the year 1602 left two children behind him, which he had of the
Sultane Flatra a Cipriote Lady; the elder whereof was named Achmett, and the
younger Mustapha, Achmett the elder of the age of fifteenth years was at that
time resident in Magnesia the ordinary Appennage and entertainment of the elder
children, and future successors of the Sultane Ottomans, from whence he was
sent for with all diligence by the Bassaes to take the possession of the Throne
of his late father which accordingly he did, and was the first Emperor of that
name, and the fifteenth of the race of the Ottomans contained from the father
to the son even to this time.

Now for as much as it is the Custom of the Turkish Emperors, that entering
into their Empire: they put to death by the halter all their brothers and
Nephews, without leaving any Male in life, but only such as save themselves
by flight, as sometimes it happens.

Nevertheless the Bassaes, and other great ones of the Ottoman port were of
opinion, not to suffer, that Mustapha brother of Achmet should run this
fortune; and that by a Council of estate, because that seeing their Emperor
Achmet to be only aged fifteen years, they were afraid that he coming to
fail in this younger age and leaving no Children able to govern, the estate
might come to be troubled and weakened by Civil wars.

It was therefore Decreed that Mustahpas life should be conserved, but in such
means that he should be retained prisoner in there Chambers of the Seraile of
the Emperor at Constantinople under sure guard.

During the first years of the imprisonment of Mustapha there was nothing
cruel decreed against him, by reason of the minority of the Sultan, but when
that Achmet saw that he had Children, many times he proposed to his Council
the putting to death of his brother and it seems miraculous that the same
Council came not to effect. For among other times it is reported that one
evening his death having been determined and appointed to be executed the day
following, the Emperor Achmet found himself all the night long so troubled
with apparitions and hidious dreams, that the day being come, he said, seeing
that the only resolution of putting his brother to death* had so troubled him,
he did believe that his pain and torment would be much increased, if he should
execute his purpose, and therefore he commanded, that his brother should live.

Another time, Achmet being in a window of his Seraile beheld Mustapha his
brother who by his license was walking in the gardens with his Guarde. One that
was near to Achmet said unto him that it was a matter of dangerous concequense
to let him have that liberty Upon which discourse Achmet entering into choler
(through distrust) took his Bow (which he could draw with great dexterity
and good aim) and bending the same with ^he Arrowe couched, he aimed at his
bro^her to stick him but at the very instant he ^elt so great pain in his
arm and shoulder, that being not able to execute his purpose, he said with a
loud voice that God would not that Mustapha should die.

This Prince during his detencion and imprisonment in the three chambers of the
Secaile which has lasted fifteen years has passed the time in a devout and
contemplative life after the manner of the Musulmans, not delighting himself
in any other exercise and passetime but in reading of the Arabian books of
their Doctors in diverse sciences.

Sometimes the Grand-signor did permit him to walk in his gardens with his
Guard, an^ likewise called him to the affairs of consequence to take council
with him, and oftentimes followed his aduises, because he knew him of a good
judgment and very deep.

After this long time and this so long apprehention of death Achmet the first
of that name, and the fifteenth Emperor of the Ottoman race being grievously
sick in the Month of November 1617 in his Secaile of Constantinople was given
to understand by those that were about him that he should do well to think
upon the succession of his Empire.

He had Children of the Sultane his wife which were in so young an age that
there was no^ appearance for looking that way, and besides this Sultane was
dead, so as none would speak for the Children; but on the other part the
Sultane Harachie mother of the Emperor and of Mustapha was yet living, who
fearing that if the Children of the Emperor were admitted to the government and
that during their under age the Bassaies should take the authority of the
gouerme^t, there would not, remain for her any honor or dignity, this was the
reason that she inclined on the side of Mustapha and solicited the sick
Emperor to name him for his successor. Wherefore the 15 of the said month of
November 1617. the Emperor Achmet seeing himself near his end, and without
hope of life, he sent for his brother Mustapha, and told him that foreseeing
that God would otherwise dispose of him, he desired before he died to provide
for the conservation of the Empire, and to that end had chosen him for his
successor, praying him to take into his hands the government immediately after
his death. Mustapha very much astonished at such discourses, made him answer
with words full of fear and humility that he might not accept of that honor
which he did him, seeing that of right and by justice the Empire belonged to
his eldest son. Whereunto Achment replied that his son had neither age nor
capacity to take it upon him; and that he would acquit himself of that charge
better, and that it was necessary for the maintenance of this so great a
Monarchy that he should take the direction and managing thereof; recommending
to him his Childrin that he had by the Sultane, and praying him to afford them
the same treatment and usage that he had received from him, leaving the other
Children which he had of women that were his slaves to his discression. A
little after Achmet had uttered these words he rendered up his spirit and
Mustapha was acknowledged by all for the successor to the Turkish Empire, who
at his first coming to the Crown found himself so amazed that he thought he
had been in a dream, to see himself from a straight captivity and a
continual apprehension of death to be lifted up to so great and Sovereign a
power. This Prince is aged about twenty three years, of a fair proportion,
great and straight, meager and pale with a black beard.

Since the decease of Achmet there has not happened any change in the
government. The Emperor Mustapha shows himself a lover of peace with his
neighbors. So soon as he was entered into possession of the Empire he caused
to be set at liberty the Ambassador of the King of Persia whom his predesessor
had caused to be stayed contrary to the public faith, under color that
during his abode at the Port of the Graund Signear there were come some news
of stures and troubles raised by the Persian. Which being done, Mustapha
dispached onein all diligence toward the Bassa of ^uda in Hungerie commanding
him to abserst and entertain inuiolately the Treatis made by his predisessors
with the Emperor Mathias.

God open the eyes of the understanding of this Prince and make him know how
much he is bound to his divine Majesty who has mortified and quickened him,
and from the shadows of death has raised him upon one of the highest Thrones
of the world, to render him thanks for the same. Not after the Musulman
fashion, enemy to the cross of our Sauionr, but in the bosom of the
Christian Catholic Church, out of which there is no salvation.

For if the Lord should once open his eyes, be should see what wrongs, and
injuries his predesessors have done against the Christians, in shedding
innocent blood. With his sword, what Lands, Nations, and Countries, what
Empires, Kingdoms, and Provinces, with Cities inumerable has be won from
the Christians: Yea, then he shall see, that where Gods word has been truly
preached, and the Sacraments administered, there his predecessors have set up
barbarous Mahomet with his erroneous Alchoran quite overthrowing the
flourishing Churches in Asia, the learned Churches in Grecia, the manifold
Churches of Africa, yea all Churches where the diligent Apostle S. Paul, the
Apostles Peter and John, with others of the Apostles so labouringly by
preaching and writing planted, have been utterly defaced by his predecessors:
As in all the Kingdoms of Syria, Palestine, Arabia, Persia, in all Armenia,
with the Empire of Cappadocia, yea, through the compass of Asia, with Aegipt,
and Africa, they have subdued. Also let him look into Europe, there he shall
also see, how all Thrasia, with the Empire of Constantinople, all Grecia,
Cyprus, Ilyricum, and not long since, almost all the whole Kingdom of
Hungaria, with much of Austria: All these Nations, Countries, Empires,
Kingdoms, Provinces, with their famous Cities, have they subdued, with
lamentable slaughter of Christian and that bloudily.

It is necessary for all Christians to know the Story of the Turks, their
cruel tyranny and bloody victories, with the utter ruin of so many christian
Churches: for these reasons.

1 For the better explayning of the Prophecies in the scriptures, showing his
overthrow. 2 That we may learn thereby, either with the public Church to
lament with our brethren, such a great decay of christian faith by these wicked
Turk: or else may fear thereby our own danger. 3 That we may ponder more
deeply with our selves the scourge of God for our sins, and corrupt lives,
and for our better admonition to amend our lives. 4 The consideration of the
horrible persecutions of the Turks, chiefly rises through discordes and
dissentions among christians themselves, may reduce us to join together in
christian patience and concord. 5 But cheifely these great victoryes of the
Turks, and unprosperous speed of christians fighting against them: may
admonish and teach us, following the example of the old Israelites, how to
seek for greater strength to encounter with these enemies of Christ, then
hitheto has bin done.
First we must consider, that the whole power of Satan the Prince of this
world, goes with the Turks, which to resist, no strength of man's arm is
sufficient, but only the power of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God,
going with us in our battles. As among the old Israelites, the Arc of Gods
Covenant and promise went with them also fighting against their enemies: for
it is true that the Scripture says, without me ye can do nothing: other
wise: there is no puissance to with stand the Devil, or to conquour the world,
but only our faith: to which all the promises of God (touching salvation) be
annexed* beyond which promises we must not go.

Now it behooves every good Christian to call upon God that be would convert or
confound the enemies of his Church, and then we should soon see the effect of
our prayers, with the utter overthrow of those that are enemies to the cross of
Christ. Which we entreat the Lord to bring to pass for his own glory, and for
the joy and comfort of the Saints, through our Lord and Savior jesus Christ.

FINIS.

