A SERMON PREACHED ON PALME-SVNDAY, BEFORE KING HENRY the VIII.

By CVTHBERT TONSTALL, Bishop of DVRESME.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper, M. DC. XXXIII.

TO The Honorable Knight, Sir JOHN TONSTALL; Servant to her Sacred Majesty:
AND, To the Right Noble Lady, his WIFE: The Publisher Consecrates This, Devotes
Himself, Wishes all Happiness.

T. H.

Hoc sentite in vobis, quod and in Christo Jesus, etc. Ad Philippen. 2.
Let the same mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who being in the
form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: But made himself
of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in
the likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself,
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. Wherefore God
also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name, which is above every Name:
That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth: and that every tongue should
confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. THis is in
English the sentence of the Epistle of this day. And first I do intend by your
patience, to declare particularly the literal sense thereof, containing the
infinite and inestimable humility and obedience of our Savior Jesus Christ.
Secondly, I do intend to speak of disobedience of men by pride done to man
against Gods law. And how that may be eschued. Thirdly, I intend to speak of
disobedience of all men by pride done to Almighty God, against Gods law. And
how that may be amended. And so to make an end. And to return to the first.

Saint Paul in the second chapter to the Philippians, next before the words of
the Epistle of this day, commanding humility with charity to be used, says;
Ye must think by humility, every man to be your superior, not considering
every one of you his own furtherance, but the furtherance of other. And
therefore he exhorts all men by the example of Christ, not to regard, nor to
take heed to their own advancement, but the advancement of other, saying, See
the same mind be in you, that is in Jesus Christ, that is to say, show humility
and patience for the wealth of other, as Christ did. Whose high degree the
Apostle Paul here first speaks of. From which he was content to come down
for our sake. For he being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God: what is this to say, in the form of God? The sense thereof is
this: He was in full substance, in full essence, in full glory, in eternity,
equal with his father. As for to put for our better erudition of things
incomprehensible far above our capacity, an example of things that we may
understand, to direct us in some part to the attaining of higher things. As the
brightness is in the fire, and as the image or print is in a seal, and as a
word is in the mind, so the Son of God is in the Father. For the brightness
is as soon as the fire is, and the print is within the seal, as soon as the
seal is. And the word that man will express, is in the mind, as soon as the
mind has conceived it. Saint Paul in the beginning of his Epistle to the
Hebrews says, that the son of God is the shining of the glory of the
Father. As in the foresaid example, the brightness is of the fire, and figure
of his substance, as the print is of the seal, supporting all things by the
word of his strength and virtue, as the mind brings forth the word.

And where saint Paul says, that Christ thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, he means, that he made not himself equal to God by usurpation,
but God the Father begat him in the beginning equal to himself. For if he
should have made himself equal to God, not being so by nature, he should have
save fallen by ravyn as Lucifer did. For he because he would make himself
equal to God being but a creature, did fall, and of an Angel was made the
Devil: and this his pride he persuaded to man, by which he was overthrown
himself, saying to Eve before the fall of Adam, Taste of the fruit that is
forbidden you, and ye shall be as Gods. That is to say in effect: take upon you
by usurpation that thing, that ye have not by creation, for so was I
overthrown. But Christ was borne in the beginning equal to his Father, not
made after equal, and borne of the substance of the Father. Wherefore he did
not usurp equality unto God, but was in that equality, in which he was borne
in the beginnin^*

It follows in the text. But he did abase himself, taking upon him the form
of a servant, which he did, not losing the form of God, in which he was
before, but taking the form of man, which he was not before. And thereby he
was made inferior to his Father. And yet he abode still equal with him both
in one person, that is to say, by reason that he was the word of God, equal to
his Father, and by reason he was man inferior to him, one son of God, and
the same son of man. One the son of man, and the same the Son of God. Not
two Sons of God, God and man, but one Son of God and man, God without
beginning, man from a certain beginning, our Lord Jesus Christ. For as God does
grant to his creatures, being temporal and subject to suffering, that they may
beget the same thing that they are; how much more God the Father, being
eternal and impassible, did beget his son, not of another substance than he
himself is, but of the same. Which is yet to our great admiration, because he
begat him without any alteration, and in such equality with himself that
neither in power, nor in age, the Father goes before the Son.

But the Son does attribute unto the Father, and not to himself all that he
has, and may, because he is not of himself, but of the father. He is equal
to the Father, but he had that same of his Father. Nor he took not of himself
to be equal, but he is equal by nature. As he was ever borne, he was ever
equal.

Wherefore the Father begat him not inequall to himself. And after he was
borne, gave to him equality, but in begetting him, gave it unto him, because he
begat him equal, not inferior to himself. But yet he says, his Father is
superior to him, because he took the form of a servant, not losing the form
of God: by which form of a servant he was made inferior, not only to his
Father, but also to himself, as to the Son of God, and to the holy Ghost.
Nor only he was inferior to the Trinity, in his form of manhood, but also he
was made inferior under Angels. And he was also inferior unto some men, that
is to say, to his Mother, and to Joseph, whom men took to be his Father, to
whom he was subject, as it is written in the second chapter of Luke. And for
the form of a servant, he said; My Father is superior unto me. And for the
form of God, which he never left, he said in the tenth chapter of John; I and
my Father are one thing, that is to say, one substance.

In form of God, he was superior to himself, and in form of man, he was
inferior to himself. And therefore not without a cause, the Scripture says
both the Son equal to the Father, and the Father superior to the Son, the
one for the form of God, the other for the form of man, without confounding
the one nature into the other, both natures of God and man, being in one
person. In the form of man, which he took for us, he was borne, and he
suffered, and he arose from death to life, and ascended into heaven. By the
first two, that is to say, by his birth and his passion, he showed to us our
estate; By the two last, that is to say, his resurrection and his ascension, he
showed to us an example of our reward. The two first, all that be borne do
feel, and the two last we shall attain, if we do believe in him.

And as the Apostle says, Christ thought it no robbery to be equal with God:
so Saint John in the beginning of his Gospel says, That the word, which is
the Son, was God. And as Paul says here; That he did abase himself to take
upon him the form of a servant; so Saint John says, The word of God is made
flesh, that is to say, Man: and has dwelt amongst us, God and man in one
person. For as the number of persons is not increased, when the soul is knit
to the body, to make thereby one man, so is not in Christ the number of persons
increased, when man is knit to the word of God, to make one Christ.

It follows in the Text: He was made in similitude of men, that is to say, he
took all our nature upon him, albeit he was without sin, and he left no
carnal procreation, by generation carnal. Nor that only was in him, that
appeared in outward visage, his manhood, but godhead also was in him. For he
was not only man, but in his person godhead was knit with manhood. And
therefore he says here, that he was like to men, but more was in him then is
in men. For we be made of soul and body, he had both soul and body, and
godhead; and therefore he says here, in similitude of men. As Saint Paul says
in the eighth chapter to the Romans; God sent his Son into the world, in
similitude of sinful flesh, not because he lacked flesh, but because the
flesh that he took, lacked sin, and yet was it like to our flesh, which is
subject to sin, like by nature, but not like by wickedness.

It follows in the Text: That in shape he was found as a man: that is to say,
where he was without bodily shape, he took upon him the for me and shape of a
man, abiding still God as he was before, but in figure, that is to say, in
flesh, he was made a man, and clad with manhood, as with a clothing, not that
his godhead was changed thereby into manhood, as the members of a man be not
changed by putting on of a new garment. And he says, that he was found in
shape as a man, because he seemed outwardly but one of the common sort of men,
and yet he was more then so. For he was God therewith: and yet was he a very
man in nature, not in fantasy and imagination. Saint Paul also in the second
chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy, calls him a man, saying, There is
one Mediator of God and man, A man Christ Jesus. And as he is in the form of
God, perfect God, so is he in the form of man, a perfect man.

It follows in the Text; Christ has humbled himself, and became obedient
unto death. Here we may learn humility, as Christ does teach us in the 11.
of Matthew, saying, Learn of me, for I am meek and humble in heart. He was
made for thee a man without sin. And thou sinful man, why will thou not come
to him, that calls thee? and says, Come to me all ye that do travel, and
be overcharged, and I shall refresh you. Thou proud sinful man, why art thou
so proud? Christ became obedient for thy sake to be incarnate, and to take part
of the mortality of man. He was obedient so far, that he suffered,

First, to be tempted of the devil. He was obedient to suffer the mocking of
the people of Jews. He was obedient to suffer to be bound, robbed, and spitted
at, to be stricken, and to be scourged. And yet he was further obedient to dye
for thee thou sinful man.

It was a great humility at his birth to lie in the manger with beasts, for
lack of a Cradle. It was a more humility to live thirty three years amongst
sinners, he being without spot of sin. The most abundand humility, was that
he suffered upon the Cross betwixt two murderers.

It was a hard suffering, that he suffered for wicked men: it was more hard
that he suffered of wicked men. And the most hardest of all was, that he
suffered with wicked men, and the same death that wicked men and murderers do
suffer.

It follows in the Text. That he suffered the death of the Cross: which
death was worst of all other kinds of death. For those that were put to that
death, were first nailed upon the Cross, hands and feet drawn on length, and
stretched abroad, hanged up in the air, quick, naked, and bleeding, not
because longer life should follow thereby, but because the death it self was
prolonged, to make the pain the more, lest the shortness thereof should less
have been felt. Hanging, or drowning, or striking off of the head, be pains
soon overpassing; but the death of the Cross, long time does endure: In which
they were wont to break their legs, to make them dye more painfully, as we
read in the 19. chapter of John.

This death of the Cross was the worst death that the Jews could imagine for
him to dye: but yet Christ did choose his death, and intended to make it to be
his sign, and to make of it his badge, that all men believing in him, should
in their foreheads make his sign of the Cross, as it was prophesied and
figured before in the 9. chapter of Ezechiel: and glory in the Cross of
Christ. As Saint Paul in the last chapter to the Galathians says, God forbid
that I should glory in any thing, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by which the world is crucified to me, and I to the world.

There was nothing before more intolerable to the flesh of man, then death of
the Cross. And there is now nothing more glorious set forth in the forehead of
a christian man, then the sign of the Cross. Here we may note, what high
reward in heaven is reserved to a christian man, when Christ has given such an
honor to the form of the Cross, representing to us his passion, for now the
form of the Cross is so honored amongst christian men, that if a man worthy
to dye, should be crucified, if should be thought amongst christian men, that
he should thereby rather be honored then punished. The Cross is now every
where amongst christian men erected and set up, as an arch triumphall against
the devil, declaring unto us the victory and triumph that Christ upon the
Cross obtained against the devil, in cancelling the bond of our sin,
wherein we were bound to the devil, and fastening it cancelled to his Cross,
as Saint Paul says in the second chapter to the Colossians.

It follows in the Text. Therefore God has exalted him, and has given to
him a name, that is above all names. Here it is to be noted, that God gave to
Christ his exaltation, as to man, and not as to God. For there was never no
time before he was made man, that he in the form of God was not exalted, nor
no time that all things did not bow down to him, that be in heaven, earth, and
hell. And for that cause he says; therefore that is to say, for his manhood
and form of a servant taken upon him, and united to his godhead, and for his
obedience unto death of the Cross. For in the same form of man, in which he
was crucified, in the same he was exalted. And a name was given to him above
all names; that he being in the form of a servant, rising from death of the
flesh to life, and ascending up into heaven, should be called the only
begotten Son of God; which name he, as the Word and Son of God eternally
begotten of God, and equal to God, had before. Whereof the Angel sent to the
blessed Virgin Mary, before his birth prophesied, saying in the first chapter
of Luke: That holy birth that shall be borne of thee, shall be called the
Son of God. This high exaltation of Christ given to him for his manhood and
sufferance of death for mankind, is like to that, that Christ himself spoke
in the last chapter of Matthew, saying, All power is given to me in heaven and
in earth, which he spoke of his manhood, and not of his godhead, for by his
godhead, he had it, before he was man.

It follows in the Text: That in the name of Jesus, every knee shall bow down,
of all things that be in heaven, or that be in earth, or that be in hell; That
is to say, of Angels, of men, and of devils. For the Angels of heaven at his
ascension glorified in him the nature of man, and bowed down to him, exalted
above all Angels. And men in earth do glorify him, and do kneel down to
him, and adore him, as their Redeemer, and God and man. The devils do stoop
down to him for fear, and one of them whom he expelled from a body possessed
by him, said to him, I do know that thou art the holy one of God. And all the
devils shall know his power, when he shall sit in judgment, rewarding good
men, and punishing the evil. And the bowing down of every knee, is meant the
submission of all creatures to their maker, not that either Angels or Devils
have bodily knees, but because we men, that have bodies, in our submission do
bow our knees. And therefore submission of all creatures to their Maker is
meant thereby. His godhead once knit by his incarnation to his body and his
soul, never departed after from either of them both, but still abode with
them, that is to say, with his body in the sepulcher, and with his soul
descending into hell, never departing from neither of them, after his
incarnation.

It follows in the Text. And every tongue shall confess and knowledge, that
Jesus Christ is our Lord, to the glory of God his father. That is to say, to the
high preferment thereof; for the glory of the Father is to have such a Son,
Lord of all, maker of all, and God of all: To whom all be subjects and do
obey: to whom all creatures do bow down, and whom all tongues do exalt and
glorify.

The glory of God the Father is, that the Son every where be glorified; like
as where God the Son is despised, there God the Father is despised; and
blasphemy spoken against God the Son, is spoken also against God the Father.
Like as amonst men, dishonor done to the son, sounds to the dishonor of
the father. For betwixt God the Father, and God the Son, there is no
difference, but that that rises and comes by diversity of their persons: And
therefore the honor or dishonor of God the Son, stretches to the honor or
dishonor of God the Father. Where the Son is perfect in all things, it is
the honor of the Father, that so begat him, of whom he had it. And where he
needs nothing, it is the honor of his Father, of whom he has all plenty.
And where he by his godhead is not inferior to his Father, it is the honor of
his Father, of whom he has the same substance, and the same essence; and where
he is wise, it is the honor of the Father, whose wisdom he is, and where he
is good, it is the honor of the Father, of whom he has it. And where he is
Almighty, it is the honor of the Father, whose arm he is. In all these things
it is the high honor of God the Father, that he eternally begat a Son of so
much glory.

And it is a great demonstration, that Christ the Son of God is God by
nature, because he humbled himself, taking man's nature upon him. For he knew,
that by his humility he could suffer no damage in the highness of his godly
nature: for his godly nature could not be hid, nor kept under, nor oppressed by
any humility. His humility therefore is an evident argument of his natural
godhead. And therefore if any man do desire to be great in virtue, let him
humble himself, for humility shows the greatness of virtue. Let him follow
Christ in humility, and he shall gain great things thereby. He that is poor
in virtue, fears to humble himself, lest he should fall from his fained and
dissembled height. And he that is rich in virtue, does humble himself, knowing
that he has in him virtue, whereby he shall be exalted, which virtue cannot be
hid. As a candle burning cannot be hid in a dark house, nor a sweet smell hid
in any corner, but it will by the good savor thereof, disclose where it is,
and allure men to take up the thing that so smells.

So we do see in the Epistle of this day, that Christ for his humility has
received exaltation, as he himself says in the Gospel, in the 23. chapter of
Mat. And for his obedience he has received high honor, to have a name above
all names. And for his patience and passion, he has received power over all,
that all creatures do bow down to him. And for his infinite charity against
mankind, he does receive of all faithful people, laud, praise, and glory. And
thus have we hitherto declared the literal sense of the Epistle of this day,
by which ye may see, that the humility and obedience of Christ, does furmount
all examples of humility and obedience of the old testament, as far as the
bright shining of the sun is above the dim light of an old lantern. For if
we should compare the humility and obedience of Abraham, who left his Country
of Chaldee by Gods commandment, and went forwards, not knowing whether he
should go, to the humility and obedience of Christ, who descended from heaven
to be incarnate and suffer death for us in form of man: there is almost no
comparison: for where all the world is full of misery, Abraham went but from
one wretched place thereof, to another much like. But Christ being the Son of
God, from the beginning ever in glory, and in heaven with his Father, where no
misery never was, nor none can be, came down from heaven to be incarnate, and
to live in this wretched world, knowing it before to be the vale of misery.

Likewise if we should compare Isaac, who when his father went to sacrifice
him, bare the faggot that should make the fire of his sacrifice, to Christ
bearing his Cross, when he went to his death (whereof Isaac was a figure) The
obedience of Isaac is far beneath Christ's obedience. For Isaac going with his
father, knew nothing what his father did mean, when he bade him bear the
faggot; which appears by that when he asked his father, where the sacrifice
was, that should be burnt. But Christ the Son of God, before he was incarnate,
knew all the counsel and secrets of the Father of heaven, and yet he was
content willingly for our sake to be incarnate, and to suffer death upon the
Cross, and showed before to his Disciples, that he would and should so do; so
that in comparing the great and infinite humility and obedience of Christ, with
the humility and obedience of other, that were in the old Testament, we shall
find them to be, as Saint Paul says, but figures and shadows, as figures of
men painted, be far under the living bodies of men. And as the living body of
a man far passes in substance the shadow of the same; so the virtues of
Christ, so far do exceed the virtues of good men, that were in the old
Testament figures of him, that his virtues be further above theirs, than heaven
is above the earth.

HItherto we have declared the true sense of the Epistle of this day, read in
the Church, containing so great humility and obedience of our Savior Christ,
that neither by the tongue of man it can be worthily expressed, nor yet in any
wise by man's thought comprised. But now let us somewhat speak of the vice and
sin of Disobedience, which shall more set forth the incomparable virtue of
Christ's humility and obedience, and also open unto us, how far they be from
Christ, and how contrary to his doctrine, that do give themselves to
disobedience. Which disobedience was the first sin that man after his
creation did commit, and is always joined with all other sins, as a companion
never departing from them. For every sin that men do fall in, is done against
Gods law, so that the transgression and disobedience of Gods law is coupled
with every sin. For if we obey Gods law, as we ought to do, then we should
not sin.

And that disobedience was the first sin done by man after his creation, it
plainly does appear in the third chapter of Genesis; where after Adam was put
in Paradise by Almighty God, and commanded to eat of all the fruits in the
same, except the tree of knowledge of good and evil; which he was commanded to
forbear, and not to touch, nor eat of the fruit of it* the devil in the
Serpent said to Eve; God that forbade you to eat of that tree, knows, that
what day soever ye do eat of that tree, your eyes shall be opened, and ye
shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. By which false persuasion, the woman
induced did eat of the tree forbidden, and gave unto her husband, who eat
also of the same, disobeying Gods commandment, who commanded that in no wise
they should touch it, upon pain of death to follow for their disobedience: for
which disobedience not only they were forthwith expelled out of Paradise, but
also they and all mankind was by the sentence of Almighty God, made subject to
death, and to mortality.

Disobedience has also pride evermore annexed unto it, which makes him, that
disobeyeth, to contemn to obey, and to care nothing at all to disobey, as does
appear by the fall of the devil, described unto us by the holy Ghost in the
person of Nabuchadonozor the very child of the devil, in the 14. chapter of
Esaias, where Lucifer an high and bright Angel, full of beauty and all
cleerenesse, as soon as he was create, not giving thanks to Almighty God for
his natural gifts, given to him in his creation, but by pride reputing to have
them of himself, and not of God, said in his heart: I shall ascend into
heaven: I shall exalt my seat above the stars of God: I shall ascend above
the height of the clouds: I shall be like to Almighty God. But his fall and
ruin is forthwith there described, where the Prophet adds, saying: But yet
for all this, thou shall be plucked down to hell, into the bottom of the
lake. And Christ also in the Gospel of Luke, in the 10. chapter testifies his
fall; saying, I saw Satan fall from heaven as a lightning. So we see, that
disobedience of the devil, not keeping the order of his creation, but
surmounting far above it, and contemning the degree that his Maker had put
him in, was the cause of his fall.

Now what shall we say of those, whom God has create to be subjects,
commanding them by his word to obey their Princes and governors? Who not only
do refuse to obey Gods commandment, but contrary to his word, will be above
their Governors, in refusing to obey them, and furthermore also will have
their Princes prostrate upon the ground, to whom they owe subjection, to adore
them by godly honor upon the earth, and to kiss their feet, as if they were
God, where they be but wretched men. And yet they look, that their Princes
should do it unto them, and also all other christian men, owing them no
subjection, should of duty do the same: do not these, as ye think, follow
the pride of Lucifer their father? Who make themselves fellows to God,
contrary to his word. But who I pray you be these, that men may know them?
Surely the Bishops of Rome be those, whom I do mean; who do exalt their
seat above the stars of God, and do ascend above the clouds, and will be
like to Almighty God. The stars of God be meant the Angels of heaven; for as
stars do show unto us in part the light of heaven, so do Angels sent unto
men, show the heavenly light of the grace of God, to those to whom they be
sent. And the clouds signified in the old Testament, the Prophets, and in the
new do signify the Apostles and Preachers of the word of God. For as the
clouds do conceive and gather in the sky moisture, which they after pour
down upon the ground, to make it thereby more fruitful: so the Prophets in
the old Testament, and the Apostles and Preachers in the new, do pour into
our ears the moisture of their heavenly doctrine of the word of God, to make
therewith by grace our souls being seere and dry, bring forth fruit of the
spirit. Thus do all ancient Expositours, and among them, Saint Augustine,
interpret to be meant in Scripture, stars and clouds, in the exposition of the
45. Psalm.

But Saint John the Evangelist writes in the 19. chapter of the Apocalypse, and
in the 22. also, that when he would have fallen down at the Angels foot, that
did show him those visions there written, to have adored him with godly
worship, the Angel said unto him: See thou do not so, for I am the servant of
God as thou art. Give adoration and godly worship to God, and not to me. Here
it-appeareth, that the Bishops of Rome suffering all men prostrate before them,
to kiss their feet, yea the same Princes, to whom they owe subjection, do
climb up above the Angels, which refused such godly worship and adoration. We
do read in the Gospel of Luke, in the 7. chapter, that as Christ sat at
dinner in the house of the Pharisee, a sinful woman of that City came into
the house, having a box of precious ointment; who kneeled down, and under the
bourd with weeping tears washed his feet, and dried them with the hair of her
head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with her precious ointment: which
adoration Christ, being both God and man, there did accept, forgiving the
sinful woman her sins for her faith and her repentance: Whereby he did show
his godhead to the Pharisee, which took him but as a holy man; only God does
remit sin. We read also in the 12. of the Gospel of John, that Mary the
sister of Martha likewise did anoint his feet, and dry them with her hair of
her head. Which godly honor, Christ as God received. But neither we can find
in Scripture, that such godly honor of that sort has been done to man only,
nor we read not in any Histories, that Christian Princes have admitted such
adoration due only unto God. Christian Princes be content to see their
Subjects kneel unto them; and if they suffer their Subjects to kiss their
hands, when they put forth their hands to them, it is the most worldly honor,
that they suffer to be done unto them. But yet Christ offered his feet being
bare to be washed with tears and kissed, as appears by the Gospel of Luke:
for he said to the Pharisee, that bade him to dinner, and wondered why he
suffered the sinful woman to approach so near unto him, that albeit, he had
made him a good dinner, yet the sinful woman had done more then he. For he had
not given him water to wash his feet, but she since he entered into his house,
had not ceased to wash his feet with her tears. And feet be washed to no man,
but when they be naked, so that it appears, that Christ's feet then washed
with tears, and kissed were bare. But the Bishop of Rome offers his feet to
be kissed, shod with his shoes on: for I my self being then present 34.
years ago, when Julius then Bishop of Rome, stood on his feet, and one of
his Chamberlaines held up his skirt, because it stood not as he thought with
his dignity, that he should do it himself, that his shoe might appear,
whiles a Noble man of great age did prostrate himself upon the ground, and
kissed his shoe. Which he stately suffered to be done, as of duty: where, me
think I saw Cornelius the Centurion, Captain of the Italians band spoken of
in the tenth chapter of the Acts, submitting himself to Peter, and much
honoring him; but I saw not Peter there to take him up, and bid him rise,
saying: I am a man as thou art, as Saint Peter did say to Cornelius; so that
the Bishops of Rome, admitting such adoration due unto God, do climb above
the heavenly clouds, that is to say, above the Apostles sent into the world by
Christ, to water the earthly and carnal hearts of men, by their heavenly
doctrine of the word of God.

And that by the word of God al men ought to obey the Potestates and Governors
of the world, as Emperors, Kings, and Princes of all sorts, what name soever
the said supreme powers do use for the countries in which they be; Saint
Peter plainly does teach us, in the second chapter of his first Epistle,
saying: Be ye subject to every humane creature for Gods sake, whether it be
King as chief head, or Dukes, or Governors, as sent from God to the vengeance
and punishment of evil doers, and to the laud of good doers, for so is the
will of God; so that Saint Peter himself in his Epistle, commands all
worldly Princes in their office to be obeyed, as the Ministers of God, by all
christian men.

And according unto the same, S. Paul in the 13. chapter to the Romans says:
Every living man be subject to the high powers, for the high powers be of God.
And whosoever resists the high powers, resists the ordinance of God, and
purchases thereby to himself, damnation; for the high powers be the Ministers
of God, to succor and laud well-doers, the ministers of God to punish
evilldoers, and the ministers of God, to do justice to all men; for which
cause they received tribute; and lest men should forget their duty of obedience
to their Princes, it is there thrice repeated, that they be the ministers of
God, whose place in their governance they do represent; so that unto them all
men must obey, Apostles, Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests,
and all of the Clergy; and all Noble men of what degree, soever they be being
within their governance, with all the people also. And therefore the Bishop of
Rome owes likewise to his Sovereign and superior, like subjection by the word
of God taught unto us by Peter and Paul, as other Bishops do owe to their
Princes, under whom they be. And therefore Agatho the Bishop of Rome, in whose
time was the sixth Synod and counsel general, after his election sent to the
Emperor then being at Constantinople to have his election allowed before he
would be consecrate, after the old custom at that time used. And another
Bishop of Rome, called Vitalianus did the same, as it is written in the
decrees, in the 63. distinction, in the chapter beginning, Agatho: and as Saint
Gregory and Saint Ambrose had done before them, as it is written in the
chapter; cum long, in the same distinction; the Bishops of Rome at that time
followed the doctrine of Saint Peter and Saint Paul left unto them, to be
subjects, and to obey their Princes.

The Gospel also teaches us in the 22 Chapter of Luke, how the Apostles fell
at contention among themselves, the night before the passion, who among them
should be superior, and above the other. Which their contention Christ
discussed, saying on this wise; The Kings of people and nations have dominion
over them, and those that have power over them, be called benefactors of them.
But so it shall not be amongst you, but whosoever amongst you is the greater,
shall be as the younger: and whosoever amongst you shall be chief, shall be
as a servant and a minister. For who is superior? he that sits at the
table, or he that serves at the table? is not he superior that sits? But I
am amongst you as he that ministers and serves. And ye be those that have
bidden with me in my temptation; and I ordain for you, as my father has
ordained for me, a kingdom, that ye shall eat and drink at my board in my
kingdom, and shall sit upon seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Here
we do see, that Christ would have the meekest and most humble to be chief in
his flock, by humility, and by service done to other. As Christ by example had
washed the feet of his Apostles the same night a little before. And it
appears also, that he would not leave amongst his Apostles a worldly
kingdom, whereby they should worldly reign over other, but that he ordained for
them a heavenly Kingdom to reign with him in heaven, and to sit with him in
judgment, to judge the 12 tribes of Israel, that is to say, by the example of
their faith, who believed in Christ, to condemn the infidelity of the Jews,
that would not believe in him, but shamefully put him to death. So that hereby
it is proved plainly, that Christ left to his Disciples no worldly kingdom
here in earth to have Princes under them. A like discussing of this contention
of superiority, which another time rose also, among the Apostles, is contained
in the tenth Chapter of Mark, and the twentieth Chapter of Matthew, and by like
words absolved, that meekness, and not superiority should be regarded among
them: for the Apostles before the coming of the holy Ghost, after the time of
the resurrection, even at the time of Christ's ascension, asked him, whether he
would restore again the worldly kingdom of Israel, for which kingdom at that
time they did look; as Cleophas said in the last chapter of Luke unto Christ
appearing to him and his fellow going in to Emaus: we trusted that he was the
man, that should have redeemed Israel. And yet unto this day the Jews do
look for their Messiah to come and to reign among them by a worldly kingdom
in Jerusalem as David did; but Christ left to his Disciples no such worldly
kingdom, but said; it should not be so among them, as it was amongst the
Princes of the world.

And where Christ in the last chapter of Matthew said after his resurrection:
All power is given to me in heaven and in earth, so that both in his godhead,
and in his manhood also inseparably unite in one person, that is to say, in one
Christ, and two natures, God and man, he had all power given to him as man,
which from the beginning he ever had as the Son of God, with God his Father.
Yet nevertheless he never changed the authority of worldly Kings and Princes;
but by his own word commanded them still to be obeyed by their subjects, as
they had been before his incarnation, saying in the 22. chapter of Matthew,
when the Jews asked him whether they should pay tribute to Caesar or no, he
bade them give to Caesar those things that be his, and to God those things that
be his; signifying unto them, that tribute was due to Caesar, snd their souls
were due to God. And in the 17. chapter of Matthew it appears, that Christ
bade Peter pay tribute for him, and his Disciples, when it was demanded of him.
And Christ as man, would not change the order of obeisance to worldly Princes
by their subjects: which he as God with his father had ordained before his
incarnation, as Saint Paul testifies, saying: Worldly powers be ordained of
God, and therefore whosoever resists them, does resist God.

And that Christ himself would not reign here in earth, by a worldly and
temporal kingdom, it appears in the 6. chapter of John: where after he had
fed five thousand Jews, besides women and children, with five barley loaves,
and two fishes, and the Jews would have taken him, and made him their King, he
fled from them, and would not consent unto them: for the kingdom that he came
to search here in earth, was not a worldly and temporal kingdom, but a
heavenly and spiritual kingdom, that is to say, to reign spiritually by
grace and faith in the hearts of all christian and faithful people, of what
degree or of what nation soever they be, and to turn all people and nations,
which at his coming were carnal, and lived after the lusts of the flesh, to
be spiritual, and to live after the lusts of the spirit, that Christ might
spiritually with his father of heaven reign in the hearts of all men; which
heavenly Kingdom Saint John Baptist in the desert preached often to the Jews,
saying: Repent you, and amend your lives, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. After whose death Christ intending to manifest himself to the world,
began his preaching likewise, saying; Do penance, for the kingdom of heaven
is at hand. And it is plainly expressed in the 13. chapter of Matthew, in the
parable likening the kingdom of heaven to a man, which did sow good seed in
his field, and after whiles he sleeped, his enemy did sow evil seed in the
same: for Christ expounding that parable, says: The good seed be the children
and inheritours of the kingdom; so the kingdom that Christ seeks here in
earth, is a spiritual and heavenly kingdom. And Christ said to Pilate in the
18. chapter of John. My kingdom is not of this world. And therefore those that
go about to make of Christ's spiritual kingdom, a worldly kingdom, do fall
into error of some heretics, that look that Christ after the day of
judgment shall reign with all his Saints here in earth carnally in Jerusalem;
as the Jews do believe, that Messiah is yet to come: and when he shall come,
he shall reign worldly in Jerusalem.

So we do see, that Christ left the worldly kingdoms to princes of the world,
as is before expressed. But he committed the preaching of this heavenly
kingdom to his Apostles, giving to them like commission and equal authority
to preach and teach the same through all the world, saying in the last chapter
of Matthew, after the words before declared, that all power was given to him in
heaven and in earth. Go ye forth and teach all nations, baptising them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to
keep all those things which I have commanded you. Christ also in the 30.
chapter of John, said the evening after his resurrection, when he appeared to
his Disciples, the doors being shut; As my Father has sent me, I do send you;
and after he had so said, he breathed upon them, saying: Whose sins soever ye
shall forgive, be forgiven; and whose sins ye shall retain, be retained* And
likewise had said to them all before his death, in the 18. chapter of Matthew;
what things soever ye shall bind upon earth, I shall be bound in heaven; and
what things soever ye shall lose upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven: which
power he gave to the^ all equally and alike as w^ to all the residue, as to
Peter, Which authority Christ declares in the 20. chapter of Iuke, to be high,
and to be regarded of all men, and not to be contemned in any wife, saying, He
that hears you, hears me, and he that hears me, hears my Father of
heaven that has sent me: and he that despises you, despises me, and he that
despises me, despises my Father of heaven that has sent me* At the day of
judgment Sodom and Gomorrah, which heard not of Christ, shall be in better
case then such despisers shall be.

But here the Bishop of Rome steppeth in, and says: Peter had authority given
to him above all the residue of the Apostles; for Christ said to him in the 10.
chapter of Matthew; Thou art Peter, and upon this make* I shall build my
Church, and I shall give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in the heavens this said
Christ and Saint Peter is buried at Rome, whose successor I ^and ought to rule
the Church as Peter did, and to be Porter at heaven gates as Peter was. And
Christ said also to Peter, after his resurrection: Feed my sleep, which words
he spoke to him only: so that thereby he had authority over all that be of
Christ's flock and I as ^is successor have the same; and therefore who so will
not obey me, King or Prince, I will curse him and deprive him his kingdom or
seignorie, for all power is given to me, that Christ had; and I am his Vicar
general, as Peter was here in earth over all, and none but I, as Christ is in
heaven.

This ambitious and pompous objection is made by him and his adherents: and
has of late years much troubled the world, and made dissension, debate, and
open war in all parts of Christendom, and nourished the same. But if the
Bishop of Rome would take those places after the right sense of them, as both
the Apostles themselves taught us, and all the ancient, best learned, and most
holy interpreters do expound them, the world should be more at quietness then
it is; where now by wrong interpretation, the Scripture is perverted, and
another Gospel in that point preached unto us, than ever the Apostles
preached; so that though an Angel came from heaven, and would tell us such new
expositions of those places, as is now made, to turn the words which were
spoken for spiritual authority, of preaching the word of God, and ministering
of the Sacraments, to a worldly authority we ought to reject him, as Saint
Paul says in the first chapter to the Galathians.

But to open the true sense of the Scripture in the places aforesaid, it is to
be observed, that Christ in the said 16. chapter of Matthew, asked his
Disciples, whom men did say that he was; whereunto after answer given by them
diversely, some saying that he was John Baptist, some saying that he was Elias,
some saying that he was Jeremy, or one of the Prophets: Christ asked them,
whom do ye say that I am whereunto Peter answered for them all, for of all of
them the question was asked; as he was always ready to make answer; Thou art
Christ the Son of God that lives: Jesus answered, Blessed be thou Simon the
son of Iona, for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my
Father which is in heaven, And I say to thee, Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock I shall build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it; that is to say, upon this rock of thy confession of me to be the Son of
God, I shall build my Church: for this confession contains the whole summary
of our faith and salvation. Which confession first was spoken by the mouth of
Peter. Who of all the twelve Apostles that Christ chose to send into the world
to preach his word, was the first that with his mouth uttered that confession
and knowledging, by which all christian men must be saved, and without which no
man can be saved, as it is written in the 10. chapter to the Romans by Paul.
The word of says that we do preach, is at hand in thy mouth, and in thine
heart: for if thou confess with thy mouth our Lord Jesus, and with thy heart
do believe that God raised him from death to life, thou shall be saved. Upon
this first confession of Peter, and not upon the person of Peter, the Church is
builded. As Chrysostom expounds that place, in the 26. Sermon of the feast
of Pentecost, saying, Not upon the person of Peter, but upon the faith Christ
has builded his Church. And what is the faith? This, thou art Christ the Son
of God that lives; What is to say, upon this rock? that is, upon this
confession of Peter. And with this saying of Chrysostom, all ancient
expositors treating that place, do agree. For it we should expound that place,
that the Church is builded upon the person of Peter, we should put another
foundation of the Church than Christ, which is directly against Saint Paul,
saying in the 3. chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians; no man may
put any other foundation, but that which is put already, which is Christ Jesus;
and therefore that exposition, that the person of Peter should be the
foundation of the Church, should make of the Trinity, a quaternitie, and put a
fourth person besides the Trinity, to be the foundation of the Church.

And this first confession of Peter by faith, that Christ is the Son of God,
is the pre-eminence and primacy, that Peter had before the other spoken of in
the tenth of Matthew, wherein reciting the names of the twelve Apostles chosen
by Christ, it is written. The first is Simon Peter. For he first confessed that
faith, that all men must be saved by. For who so does agree with Peter in his
said first confession, as all the Apostles did, and as all we that purpose to
be saved must do, shall be saved, and who so does not agree with that
confession shall be damned.

And where he is called by many ancient and holy interpreters of the Scripture
for his faith; sometime the chief of the Apostles, sometime the mouth of the
Apostles, sometime the Prince of the Apostles, sometime the President of the
holy Church; all these honorable names be attribute by them unto him for his
foresaid first confession, wherein all our faith is contained. And because he
was of all the Apostles most ardent in says, and feared not being in great
tempest on the Sea, upon Christ's word, to come out of the ship, and go to
him upon the water, being in great rage; which his deed declared his faith to
be mervailously vehement in Christ.

The greatness and vehemence also of his faith was declared in the 2.3. and 4.
chapters of the Acts, when the Jews in the beginning, withstood the Apostles
Preaching the Faith of Christ. For then Peter as most ardent in faith of all
the Apostles, was ever most ready to defend the faith against the impugners of
it, speaking for them all unto the people in defense of it, for the fervent
love that he bore to Christ.

And as Peter was most ardent in faith, in which he had of God a most singular
gift, so was Paul most fervent in zeal both to win the Jews to Christ,
desiring the salvation of his country to win them to Christ, and wishing
himself in a manner to have been separate from Christ, so that they might
have been saved thereby: as it is written in the 9. chapter to the Romans, and
also in zeal to win all the Gentiles and other nations to Christ, as he
writes in the second Epistle to the Corinthians in the 11 chapter, saying, who
is weak, and I am not weak with him? who is offended, and I am not offended
with him? where he speaks also of the cure that he took for all Churches,
which his fervent zeal does appear in many places of all his Epistles.

And as Paul was fervent in zeal, so was John the Evangelist most excellent in
innocence and in charity: whereunto he chiefly exhorts all men in his first
Epistle. And all other the Apostles had their special gifts diversely given
unto them, as the gifts of Almighty God be given diversely, and not all to one
man, as it is written in the 12. chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians: and as Christ is called by Saint Paul in the 15. chapter of the
first Epistle to the Corinthians, the first fruit of those that rose from death
to life: so is Peter called the first in faith, for he was the first that with
his mouth confessed it. And Epenetus is likewise called by Saint Paul, the
first that believed in the Church of Asia, in the 16. chapter to the Romans.
And the household of Stephen is the first that believed in Achaia, in the last
chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

And that Peter should not have a rule above all other the Apostles in all
places; Saint Paul plainly shows in the 2. chapter to the Galathians, where
he says; that as the Apostleship of the Circumcision, that is to say, of the
Jews, was given by Christ to Peter, to was the Apostleship of the Gentiles
given to me among the Gentiles, so that there they divided themselves asunder,
that Peter, James, and John, should go preach the faith to the Jews, and Paul
and Barnabas should go preach to the Gentiles, as they did. Here it appears,
that Paul knew no primacie of Peter, concerning people or places, but among the
Jews. For which cause Peter dissembled in Antioch to eat of the Gentiles
meats, when the Jews came thither, lest he should offend his flock of the
Jews committed to him; in which matter Paul defending the liberty of meats
that he had preached to the Gentiles, withstood him. And Saint Ambrose
expounding that place, says: The primacie of the Jews was given chiefly to
Peter, albeit James and John were joined with him, as the primacie of Gentiles
was given to Paul, albeit Barnabas was joined with him, so that Peter had not a
rule over all.

And also that Saint Peter himself knew no such primacie over all people and
places given unto him, it appears plainly in the 10. of the Acts: where
Saint Peter after the coming of the holy Ghost, being at Ioppa, and sent for
by Cornelius to come to him, then being in Cesarea, durst not go to him
without a vision of a sheet letten down from heaven, containing all manner of
Beasts, Birds, and Serpents, whereof he was bidden eat, and repute not those
meats unclean, that God had purged. Which vision opened unto him, that he
should not refuse the Gentiles, whom the Jews did abhor as unclean. Now if
he had known his commission to be over all, he should not have needed any
such vision: but he himself understood it, not so large or above the other.
But he remembered well, that Christ in the last chapter of Luke, bade them
begin first at Jerusalem to preach to the Jews, as he did. And after his
return to Jerusalem again from Cesarea, he made a great excuse to the Jews
of his flock offended with his going thither, written in the 11. chapter of
the Acts: so it appears, that Peter himself does agree with Saint Paul, that
his commission and authority was among the Jews, as Paul's was among the
Gentiles.

And that all the Apostles had like dignity and authority, it appears by
Saint Paul in the 2. chapter to the Ephesians, where he says: Now ye be not
guests and strangers, but ye be Citizens and domestickes of Almighty God,
builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and the Prophets, Christ being the
corner stone, upon whom every edifice builded grows to be a holy temple in
our Lord. Here he says, that they be builded, not upon the foundation of Peter
only, but upon the foundation of the Apostles: so that all they be in the
foundation set upon Christ the very rock, whereupon the whole Church stands.
So likewise in the 21. chapter of the Apocalypse it is written, that the wall of
heavenly Jerusalem, the City of Almighty GOD, which is the Church, Christ's
Spouse, has 12. foundations, and in them the names of the 12. Apostles
written; so that the name of Peter is not there written only, for the twelve
Apostles through all the world, as well as Peter, preached Christ to be the Son
of God, who is the very rock whereupon all our faith is founded.

Saint Cyprian also says in his book of the simplicity of Prelates, that all
the Apostles had equal power and dignity given to them by Christ. And because
all should preach one thing, therefore the beginning thereof first began by
one, which was Peter; who confessed for them all, that Christ was the Son of
God that lives: saying further, that in the Church there is one office of all
Bishops, whereof every man has a part allotted wholly unto him. Now if the
Bishop of Rome may meddle over all, where he will, then every man has not
wholly his part; for the Bishop of Rome may meddle in his part with him, so
that he has it not wholly, which is against Cyprian.

And where Christ said, that he would give to Peter the keys of heaven, that
was said to him, not for himself only, but for the whole Church; which
confessing the Faith that he did, should have the keys of heaven as well as
he; as Saint Austine says, expounding the Gospel of John in the 50. treaty.

And as to the authority of the last chapter of John, where Christ said thrice
to Peter: Feed my sheep, after he had confessed to love Christ, thrice asked;
that place is, as Cyrillus says, expounding the same, thus to be understood;
that because Peter had thrice denied Christ, whereby he thought himself he had
lost his Apostleship: Christ to comfort him again, and to restore him to his
office, that he had lost, asked him thrice, whether he loved him, and so
restored him again to his office, which else he durst not have presumed unto:
saying to him; Feed my sheep. With which Exposition the ancient holy
Expositours of that place do agree.

And where it is said, that those words were spoken only to Peter, whereby he
ought to have a pre-eminence above the other, Saint Paul in the 22. chapter of
the Acts, proves the contrary: where Saint Paul said to all the Bishops
assembled at Milete: Take heed to your selves, and to all your flock, in which
the holy Ghost has put you to govern his Church: which word, To govern, is in
the original Text of Greek, Pimenin, the same word that Christ spoke to
Peter, and does signify to feed and govern the sheep, as the shepherd ought
to do: so that Saint Paul says, that the holy Ghost has ordained all Bishops
to feed their flock, as Peter was bidden do. Saint Peter also in the last
chapter of his first Epistle, says: Ye that be Priests, feed the flock of
God amongst you; which word there spoken to all Priests, is the same word that
Christ spoke to Peter.

So it appears plainly by the Scriptures aforesaid, conferred together, that
neither the 16. chapter of Matthew, nor the 21. of John do prove, that Peter
had power, authority or dignity given by Christ over all the other, that they
should be under him: and yet his primacie that he first of all the Apostles
confessed our faith, that Christ is the Son of God, with which his confession
all the Apostles did consent, and preached the same, stands still. And all
that will be saved must follow that lesson that he first taught us to
confess. And so the Bishops of Romes power over all, which he would prove by
those places wrong alleged for his purpose, utterly quaileth, and is not
proved.

Besides this, when Faustinus, Legate to the Bishop of Rome alleged in the 6,
Counsel Carthaginense that the Bishop of Rome ought to have the ordering of
all great matters in all places by his supreme authority; he alleged no
Scripture for him, for at that time no Scripture was thought to make for it;
but he alleged untruly the first general Council Nicene, in which Arrius
the heretic was condemned, to make for that purpose. Which after the Book was
brought forth, and no, such article found in it, but the contrary, yet the
Council at that time sent to Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, where
the patriarchall Sees were, to have the true copy of the council Nicene, which
was sent unto them, and also from Rome, whither they sent also for that
purpose. And after they found no such article in it, but in the fifth chapter
thereof, the contrary, that all causes ecclesiastical, should either be
determined within the Diocese, or else if any were grieved, then to appeal to
the Council provincial, and there the matter to take full end, so that for no
such causes, men should go out of their Province. The whole Council
Carthaginence wrote to Celestine at that time being Bishop of Rome, that since
the Council Nicene had no such Article in it, as was untruely alleged by
Faustinus, but the contrary; they desired him to abstain after to make any
more such demand, denouncing unto him, that they would not suffer any cause
great or small to be brought by appeal out of their country; And thereupon
made a law, that no man should appeal out of the country of Affricke, upon
pain to be denounced accursed. Wherewith the B. of Rome ever after held him
content* and made no more business with them, seeing he had naught to say or
himself to the contrary. And at this council, amongst other, S. Augustine was
present, and subscribed the same: which he would not have done, if he had known
or taken any part of the Gospel, or of the Scripture to be contrary.

It is also determined in the sixth Article of the said Council Nicene, that
in the orient the Bishop of Antioch should be chief; in Egypt the Bishop of
Alexandria; about Rome the Bishop of Rome; and likewise in other countries
Metropolitans should have their pre-eminence, so that the Bishop of Rome never
had meddling in those countries.

And in the next Article following, the Bishop of Jerusalem, which city before
had been destroyed and almost desolate, is restored to his old prerogative, to
be the chief in Palestine, and the country of Jury: which Church of Jerusalem,
if places should be regarded, should be the chief, for there was accomplished
the mystery of our redemption, and Christ himself, the eternal Word and Son
of God there preached in person, and after his ascension, all the Apostles and
Disciples; and Saint Paul also preached there in person: the whole twelve
Apostles began first there, as Christ had commanded, to have the saying of Esaias
the Prophet in the second chapter fulfilled, where he says: The law shall go
forth out of Sion, and the word of God out of Jerusalem. Which place Saint
Jerome there expounding, says; that the Church first founded at Jerusalem, did
fow abroad all other churches of the world. And at that time, and a good season
after, Rome had not heard tell of Christ; so that the Church of Rome must needs
confess, that they came out of Jerusalem, which was their mother, as she was
to all other Churches, as Esaias had prophesied.

And now since the purpose and ambitious objection of the Bishop of Rome is
clearly avoided, let us return to our purpose, to declare what commission was
given by Christ to his Apostles. We showed before, that he bade them preach
and teach to all men all things that he had commanded them: and in the 10.
chapter of Matthew, and of Luke, he shows them how they shall enter their
charge, saying; Into what house or place soever ye shall arrive, first ye shall
say; Peace be to this house: and if the child of peace be there, he shall
receive you, and if they will not receive you, then go forth out of the house
or city, and wipe the dust off your shoes against them, in witness of your
labor; for Sodom and Gomorrah shall be in better case at the day of
Judgment* then they that will not hear you. And as Christ commanded them to
make their entry with mention of peace, so did he himself after his
resurrection, appearing to his Disciples the evening next after, when the doors
were shut, saying to them, Peace be with you. And the Apostles in their
Epistles do begin with desiring grace and peace to be with them, to whom
they write. Christ says also in the 13. chapter of John: By this shall all men
know, that ye be my Disciples* if ye love each other. For where charity is,
there can be no debate, but all peace; and where it lacks, discord does
ensue. Christ said also to his Apostles in the 9. chapter of Mark; Have peace
amongst you. Saint Paul says also to the Hebrews in the 12. chapter; Follow
peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see God. And in
the 12. chapter to the Romans he says: As much as is in you, have peace with
all men, and in the 14. he says: That the Kingdom of God is justice, and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. And Christ, when he should go out of this
world, left to his Disciples peace: so that peace and charity ought to be
amongst all christian men, and who so preaches not peace, but debate, comes
not from Christ, but from Satan.

But the Bishop of Rome, because he cannot longer in this realm wrongfully use
his usurped power in all things as he was wont to do, and suck out of this
realm, by avarice insatiable, innumerable sums of money yearly, to the
great exhausting of the same; he therefore, moved and repleate with furious ire
and pestilent malice, goes about to stir all Christian nations, that will
give ears to his divellish enchantments, to move war against this realm of
England, giving it in prey to all those that by his divellish instigation will
invade it. Which few words, to give it in prey, how great mischief they do
contain, I shall open to thee, thou true English man: First, to make this
realm a prey to all venturers, all spoylers, all snaphanses, all forlorn
hopes, all cormerants, all ravenours of the worlds that will invade this
Realm, is to say; thou possessioner of any lands of this Realm, of what
degree soever thou be, from the highest to the lowest, shall be slain and
destroyed, and thy lands taken from thee by those that will have all for
themselves. And thou may be sure to be slain, for they will not suffer thee,
nor none of thy progeny to live to make any claim afterward, or to be
revenged, for that were their unsuerty. Thy wife shall be abused before thy
face, thy daughter likewise defloured before thee; thy children slain before
thine eyes; thine house spoiled, thy cattle driven away, and sold before thy
visage; thy plate, thy money by force taken from thee. All thy goods wherein
thou have any delight, or had gathered for thy children, ravened, broken, and
distributed in thy presence, that every ravenour may have his share.

Thou Merchant art sure to be slain, for thou have either money or ware, or
both, which they search for. Thou Bishop or Priest, whatsoever thou be, shall
never escape, because thou would not take the Bishop of Romes part, and
rebel against God and thy Prince, as he does. If thou shall flee, and escape
for a season, whatsoever thou be, thou shall see and hear of so much misery
and abomination, that thou shall judge them happy, that be dead before. For
sure it is, thou shall not finally escape; for to take the whose Realm in
prey, is to kill the whole people, and to take the place for themselves. As
they will do if they can.

And the Bishop of Rome now of late to set forth his pestilent malice the more,
has allured to his purpose a subject of this Realm, Raynold Pole, come of a
noble blood, and thereby the more errant traitor, to go about from Prince to
Prince, and from country to country, to stir them to war against this
Realm, and to destroy the same, being his native country. Whose pestilent
purpose, albeit the Princes that he breaks it unto, have in much
abomination, both for that the Bishop of Rome, (who being a Bishop should
procure peace) is a stirrer of war, and because this most errant and unkind
traitor is his minister to so divellish a purpose, to destroy the country that
he was borne in: which any heathen man would abhor to do: But for all that,
without shame he still goes on, exhorting thereunto all Princes that will
hear him; Who do abhor to see such unnaturalness in any man, as he
shameless does set forwards, whose pernicious treasons late secretly wrought
against this Realm, have been, by the work of Almighty God so mervailously
detected, and by his own brother, without looking therefore, so disclosed, and
condign punishment insued, that hereafter God willing, they shall not take any
more such root to the annoyance of this Realm. And where all nations of
Gentiles by reason and by law of nature do prefer their country before their
Parents, so that for their country, they will die against their Parents, being
traitors: this pestilent man worse then a Pagan, is not ashamed to destroy, if
he could, his native country. And where as Curtius a heathen man was content
for saving of the City of Rome, where he was borne, to leap into a gaping of
the earth, which by the illusions of the devil, it was answered, should not be
shut, but that it must first have one; This pernicious man is content to run
headlong into hell, so that he may destroy thereby his native country of
England, being in that behalf incomparably worse then any Pagan. And besides
his pestilent treason, his unkindness against the Kings Majesty, who brought
him up of a child, and promoted both him, and restored his blood being
attainted, to be of the Peers of this Realm; and gave him money yearly out of
his coffers to find him honorably at study, makes his treason much more
detestable to all the world, and him to be reputed more wild and cruel then
any Tiger.

But for all this thou English man take courage unto thee, and be nothing
afraid: Thou have God on thy side, who has given this Realm to the generation
of English men, to every man in his degree, after the laws of the same: thou
have a noble, victorious, and virtuous King; hardy as a Lion, who will not
suffer, thee to be so devoured by such wild beasts; only take an English
heart unto thee, and mistrust not God, but trust firmly in him: And surely the
ruin intended against thee, shall fall in their own necks that intend it.
And fear not; though the devil and his disciples be against thee; for God thy
protector is stronger then he and they, and shall by his grace give him and
them a fall.

And to show unto thee, that God is on thy side, consider, that it is written
in the 6. chapter of the Proverbs, that amongst many crimes there rehearsed,
that God hates; chiefly he does detest those persons that sow discord among
their brethren; as all we christian men be brethren under our heavenly Father:
also it is written in the 8. chapter of John, that those that do stir men to
murder, be children of the devil, which was from the beginning of mankind a
murderer, and brought Adam to sin, and thereby to death; as the Jews his
children stirred the people to put Christ to death. Saint Paul also in the last
chapter to the Romans, warns them to beware of those that do make dissension
and debate among them, against the doctrine that he had taught them, and
bids them eschew their company; wherein the holy Ghost wrought in Paul: for
these many years past, little war has been in these parts of Christendom,
but the Bishop of Rome either has been a stirrer of it, or a nourisher of it:
and seldom any compounder of it, unless it were for his ambition or profit.

Wherefore since as Saint Paul says in the 14. chapter of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, that God is not God of dissension, but of peace, who
commands by his word, peace always to be kept; we are sure that all those
that go about to break peace between Realms, and to bring them to war,
are the children of the devil; what holy names soever they pretend to cloak
their pestilent malice withal; which cloaking under hypocrisy a double
divellishnesse, and of Christ most detested; because under his blessed name
they do play the devils part. And therefore since Christ is on our side
against them, let us not fear them at all. But putting our confidence in
Almighty God, and cleaving fast to the Kings Majesty, our supreme head in
earth next under Christ of this Church of England, as faithful Subjects by
Gods law ought to do, though they go about to stir Gog and Magog, and all
the ravenours of the world against us. We trust in God verily, and doubt not,
but they shall have such a ruin and overthrow, as is prophesied by Ezechiel in
the 39. chapter: against Gog and Magog going about to destroy the people of
God, whom the people of God shall so vanquish and overthrow on the mountains
of Israel, that none of them shall escape, but their carcasses there to lie to
be devoured by Kites and Crows, and birds of the air. And if they shall
persist in their pestilent malice to make invasion into this Realm, then let
us wish, that their great Captain Gog, I mean the Bishop of Rome, may come
with them, to drink with them of the same cup, that he maliciously goes about
to prepare for us, that the people of God might after surely live in peace.

And now that we have spoken of disobedience done to man against Gods law, let
us somewhat speak of disobedience daily done to God by us all against Gods
law: which our disobedience is so great, that the tongue of man cannot express
it: for Christ says in the 19. chapter of Matthew, to him that asked what he
should do to come to everlasting life, If thou will enter into everlasting
life, keep the Commandments; which he there rehearsed unto him, when he asked
which they were, they be written in the 20. chapter of Exodus, ten in number.
And because I doubt not, but ye know them, for briefness of time I shall omit
to rehearse them.

In the old law, which expresses rewards temporal for the capacity of the
gross carnal people of Israel, many worldly pleasures and rewards be promised
to the keepers of those commandments, and mervailous great troubles and pains
be threatened to the breakers and transgressors of them. All which be contained
in the 28. chapter of Deuteronomie, in so much that in the 8. chapter of that
Book, the people of Israel is threatened by Almighty God, to be expelled out of
the land promised unto them, if they should not keep those Comandements and
laws by him given unto them. The Prophet David says also in the 88. Psalm;
If the children of David leave my laws, and keep not my commandments, I
shall with a rod visit their iniquities, and their sins with beatings. But
our Savior Christ regarding the forgetfulness of man's memory, lest he should
not remember the whole number of ten, has brought them all into two
Commandments, comprising in effect the whole ten, of the which two expressed
in the 22. chapter of Matthew, the first is, Thou shall love thy Lord God with
all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind: This is the first and
greatest Commandment, containing in it, four Commandments of the first
table, which be these: Thou shall have no other Gods in my sight. Thou shall
grave no image of things that be in heaven above, or in earth beneath, or in
the water under the earth, nor with adoration worship them. Thou shall not take
the name of God in vain. Thou shall sanctify thy Sabbath day. No man will
break any of these four Commandments that loves God above all things.

The second Commandment given there by Christ, is like unto the first, that
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: which comprehends all the six
Commandments of the second Table, which be these. Thou shall honor thy father
and thy mother. Thou shall not commit adultry. Thou shall not steal. Thou
shall not bear false witness. Thou shall not lust to have thy neighbors
house, nor his wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor any of his goods.

No man that loves his neighbor as himself, will offend him in any of these;
for since he loves himself so well, that he cannot be content that his
neighbor shall offend him in any of these, he in loving his neighbor as
himself, will not offend his neighbor in any of these.

In these two Commandments, says Christ, all the law and the Prophets be
contained.

But for all this, we thus plainly being taught by Christ, do fall headlong
into all kinds of vices; for where we ought to love God above all things, we
love the world and worldly things above God, against the counsel of Saint
John, in the 2. chapter of his first Epistle. For we be so given to
concupiscence of the flesh, that whatsoever it Iusteth to have, we minister it
unto it, to the concupiscence of our eyes, that whatsoever we do see, that
likes us, we will have it by one means or other. We be so high also of
mind, and proud in heart, that we will mount above our degree, suffering none
to be above us: which three faults do comprehend all vices of the world; so
that we may say with the Prophet Osee in his 4. chapter; There is no truth,
there is no mercy or pity, there is no knowledge of God left upon the earth.
Backbiting, lying, murder, theft, adultery has overflowne the world. Perjury
reigns every where, and great pity it is to see, how the precious name of
Almighty God is taken in vain in all places. No oath should be given, but
three things concurrent, as Jeremy the Prophet in his 4. chapter teaches us;
that is to say, in Judgment, when a man is called thither to show the truth.
And for justice there to be ministered, to put away wrong doing. And for truth,
that falsehood may take no place there: Else no oath should be given by Gods
law; but we should affirm our saying by yea yea, and deny by nay nay, as
Christ taught us in the 5. of Matthew. But now every thing that we affirm or
deny, must have an oath coupled with it, when men do buy or sell any thing,
more oaths be oftentimes interchanged betwixt them, then pence that the thing
is sold for. In communication and all pastimes, as many oaths, as words be
used. In playing at any games, there the tearing of Gods name, and particular
mention of all the wounds and pains that Christ suffered for us, be
contumeliously in vain brought forth. If a muster should be taken of swearers,
I think that some crooked pieces should be found, not able to take the Kings
wages, that would swear as great oaths, and as many of them, as the best and
most able man on the field. They think that great oaths do make them to be of
more estimation, and therefore they swear at every word, but surely they be
foulely deceived, for oaths be ordained where need is, that truth shall not
perish, and that they may finish debates among men, as Paul says in the sixth
chapter to the Hebrews. But he that at every word swears, declares
plainly, that no credence is to be given to any his words, and therefore he
joyneth to every word an oath, as a surety of the truth thereof, acknowledging
the lack of truth to be in his words. As if a man would offer a great
substantial surety, when he would borrow a penny of his neighbor, he plainly
should make his neighbor, thereby to think, that he were of no credence, that
would for so small a matter, offer so great a surety, where no need is so to
do.

I fear me, the great role of twenty cubits in length, and ten cubits in
breadth, which the Prophet Zachary saw flying in the air in the 5. chapter,
which as the Angel showed to him, did contain the great malediction of God
against thieves, and against swearors, that should be judged by it, does fly
now over our heads. I pray God we may avoid the danger of it, and abstain
hereafter so to take the name of God in vain, as is now commonly used.

We do profess the faith of Christ, and do speak of the Gospel with our
mouths, and have the Book often in our hands, but we learn it not as we should
do; for the Gospel is given to us to know God thereby, and to be a rule to
live by; but we much do talk of it, which is very well done, and yet we
nothing regard to amend our lives thereby, and to live as it bids us: but we
do use the Gospel, as if it were a Book of Problemes to dispute upon, and
care not to amend our living, as it teaches us, which shall be to our great
punishment. For a servant that knows his Lords pleasure, and not fulfilling
it, is more grievously to be punished than he that knows it not, as Christ
says in the 12. chapter of Luke. We much extol faith, as it is much worthy:
but works and deeds many men care not for, saying, God regards them
nothing: for faith alone justifies us, and not our works.

Here first of all it is to be observed, that no deed nor work that is done by
man without faith, can ever help him to heaven: for like as a man that runs
out of the race, where the course is set, though he run never so fast,
wins no game; so a man that does good deeds moral, without faith, deserves
of God no reward, for without faith it is impossible to please God, as Saint
Paul says, the 11. chapter to the Hebrews. But if he do good deeds with
faith, then they be acceptable to God, and he will reward him for them. And
Saint Paul teaches us always to be occupied in doing of good works: for
albeit no man may be justified by his works alone; yet after he has faith, he
must join good works with it, if he have any time thereto, or else his faith
is unprofitable unto him; for the faith that by grace does justify, is the
faith that works by charity, as Saint Paul says to the Galathians in the 5.
chapter, and not an idle faith, which Saint James in his Epistle calls a dead
faith.

Saint Paul says also in the second chapter to the Romans, that the hearers of
the law be not justified before God, but the doers of the law. And Saint James
in his Epistle, in the first chapter, does liken him that hears the word of
God, and does not there after, unto a man that looks in a glass, and after
he has so done, lays it down, and forgets that he looked in it, and
thinks of other matters.

And where they say, that faith alone justifies, that is untrue, and against
Saint James in the 2. chapter of his Epistle, saying, that a man is not
justified by his faith alone. Also to justification of a sinner, repentance of
his evil life past is necessarily first required, and must needs be joined
with faith before he be justified; for else, if he repent not, he remains
still in sin, and so he is not yet justified, and all the preaching of Christ
and his Apostles, begins at repentance and penance; so that faith without
that cannot help. Wherefore it is never true, that faith alone justifies, for
grace of God must go before faith; and on our behalf, repentance and charity
must be joined with faith. And as faith is the gift of God, so is penance, and
so is charity, so is hope; but the grace of God, who grants all, goes before
all.

Truth it is, that our good deeds done before faith, do not justify for lack
of faith; but joined unto faith, they do help; for coming after faith, they
help to make us more justified, as it is written in the 21. of the Apocalypse:
Let him that is right wise, be yet more justified.

And that Almighty God requires of us good works, it appears in the 21.
chapter of Matthew, and the 11. of Mark, where Christ coming to a Fig tree,
full of leaves, having no fruit, which he sought in it, by his curse did make
it seere: so if we being the tree, bring not forth fruit of good works, having
time thereto, neither the root of faith, nor the leaves of words can alone
help us. Another parable in the 13. of Luke proves the same: where a man
having a Vineyard, and in the same a Fig tree that bare no fruit, bade cut it
down: And at the request of his Gardener, suffered it yet longer, to see if
dung laid to the root would help it. As often Almighty God, being the Lord of
the Vineyard, suffers us being barren, to have space to repent, and bring
forth fruit of good works. For it is written in the third of Matthew, that
every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast
into the fire.

After as our deeds be, so shall our judgment be, as Christ says in the 16 of
Matthew, the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels,
and shall reward every man after his works. Saint Paul in the 2. chapter to
the Romans says also likewise, that God will reward every man after his deeds
good or evil. And in the 4. chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
he says, that every man shall receive his hire, after as his labor is; so
that for good deeds done with faith, he shall receive reward, and for evil
deeds done after faith, or out of faith, he shall receive punishment.

Therefore those that say, that God ragardeth not our works done with faith,
do say against Christ, and his doctrine given to us by him, and by his
Apostles: for since our works done with faith be the measure of our reward to
be greater or smaller, as they shall be found to be greater or smaller, who so
says, that God regards not them, says he regards not the measure of our
reward; and yet he says it shall be measured after our deeds done with faith,
and so he says against Christ. Saint Paul says also in the 2. chapter to the
Ephesians, that by faith which is the gift of God, we be of new create in
Christ, and in good works, that we may walk forwards in them, and since he
has created us in good works to walk in them, he must needs regard them; or
else he cared not what he created, which is blasphemy, and denial of his high
providence.

Now this holy week we be bidden and called to come to the great supper of our
blessed Lord Christ Jesus, and to eat of the heavenly meat, and of the bread
of life, that came from heaven, the blessed body of our Savior Jesus Christ in
the Sacrament of the altar: unto which we may not go in our filthy and spotted
coat, lest we coming thither, not having the clean garment of our soul,
that we received at our Baptism, be expelled out of the feast. And therefore
we must make clean our garment, before we be bold to go thither: But I fear
me sore, lest many shall make such worldly excuses, as be written in a parable,
in the 14. chapter of Luke, some saying, they be new married, and therefore
they may not come. Which do signify men given so to carnal pleasure of the
body, that they care not to come to heaven; some saying, they have bought five
yoke of Oxen, which do signify those that follow the sensuality of their
five senses, and worldly business; some saying, that they have bought a
Village, which signify those that purchase lands here in earth, and care not
by faith and good living to purchase heaven. All which sort of men shall not
taste of that supper, as it is there written: but God forbid that any of us
should be of that sort: and therefore let us every man prepare our selves, and
make clean our spotted and filthy garment. Let us purge and purify the
Tabernacle of our soul, and make it a lodging worthy to receive Christ into
our house, and not to disdain us, for the filthiness of our unclean living.

But how may this be done, and by what means? surely, surely; by no mean but
by penance and repentance, and calling for mercy to Almighty God with a
sorrowful heart, that we having received so innumerable benefits of God, so
little have regarded our obedience to his commandments, proudly and unkindely
despising him, and more regarding our own wretched concupiscence, and pleasure
in all worldly delights, then God. Let us follow the exhortation of Almighty
God, spoken to us by the mouth of Joel, in the 2. chapter, saying, Turn ye
sinners again to me by fasting, by weeping, by much lamenting your miserable
estate, and tear asunder your hearts, and not your clothes. Almighty God will
rather regard a sorrowful and contrite heart to dwell in it, then all the
Temples that we can build for him: as it is written in the last chap. of Esaias,
Let us acknowledge and confess our own faults first, before we be accused of
them at judgment. Let us weep for our ungracious life, and sure it is, God
will regard our tears. David says in the 55. Psalm, Almighty God, I have
showed my life to thee, and thou have put my tears in thy sight. We that have
used our eyes all the year in regarding worldly pleasures, so that through
vehement joy sometimes the tears have burst out with much laughing: now let us
weep, as David teaches us in the 118. Psalm, saying to Almighty God, The
tears have burst out of my eyes, because they have not regarded and kept thy
law. Let us follow the counsel of Saint Paul, in the 6. chapter to the Romans,
saying to us: As ye have given your members to serve to injustice to do wrong,
so likewise give your members to serve justice to your sanctifying. David says
also in the 6. Psalm, I have travailed in my wayling: I shall wash every night
my bed with weeping tears. And after that he says, God has heard the voice
of my weeping; for GOD does regard tears coming forth out of a sorrowful and
contrite heart. If thou say thou can not weep; thou do confess thy folly;
for if thou lose by example any substance of worldly goods, as if thy house be
robbed, thy ship laden with merchandise perished in the Sea, thy wife that thou
did love, departed; thy son dead, then thou can weep much more then
enough; and where thy soul is by sin departed from Almighty God, which
departing from him is the very death of the soul, and lies stinking in sin,
not four days, as the body of Lazarus did in his grave, but much more then
four months, ye thrice four months, can thou not weep? Surely thou have
great cause to lament thy self. For what exchange can thou devise to make,
so dear to thee, as thy soul is?

Wherefore let us with the sword of the Spirit, which, as Saint Paul says, is
the word of God, make a quick sacrifice of our selves, with a sorrowful
heart, because we have broken Gods commandments, applying the sharp word of
God to our sinful life, that we may therewith kill our concupiscences and all
fleshly and worldly lusts, and so making of our sorrowful heart a sacrifice to
Almighty God, obtain his mercy thereby, as he has promised to us by David in
the fiftieth Psalm, saying: The sacrifice to God is a spirit troubled with
sorrow, and thou GOD wilt not despise a heart contrite and meekened.

We must bring forth fruits of our penance and repentance by the amendment of
our sinful lives, as Saint John Baptist said to the Jews in the third of
Matthew. For God cannot be deluded with the fair words only of a sinner,
saying, I am a sinner, and yet will not amend. For God looks whether those
words come from the heart being contrite: which if they did, amendment of the
evil life should ensue, and good works should spring out, where the evil did
grow before: which new spring of good works is the fruit of penance.

We must also go forward in the way of our Lord, and not stand still, for else
we cannot come to our journeys end. David says in the 118. Psalm, The
immaculate and unspotted men be blessed, that do go forward in the way of our
Lord. He that says that he dwells in Christ, must walk after Christ in his
way, which is his commandments, as he himself did. As Saint John says in the
2. chapter of his first Epistle; and therefore we may not stand still, but go
on in doing good, to our journeyes end, as he did. Saint Paul says to the
Galathians, in the 6. chapter: See that ye err not, God cannot be mocked; such
as a man does sow, such shall he reap; he that sows in the flesh, shall
reap thereof corruption; and he that sows of the spirit, shall of the spirit
reap life everlasting. Let us not cease in good doing, for we shall reap it,
not failing when the time comes. Therefore whiles we have time, let us do
good to all men, and chiefly to the domestickes of our faith. And as we should
study to be rich in faith: for Christ did choose such to be of his flock,
though they were poor in worldly goods: As Saint James says in the 2. chapter
of his Epistle; so must we study to be rich in good works: as Saint Paul says
in the 6. chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy, where he bids him teach
the rich men of the world, to be ready with their abundance of goods, to help
the poor, and to make thereby a treasure in heaven, and to study to be rich in
good works; so for these two richesses, the one the riches of faith, the other
the riches of good works, we should chiefly study.

Also Christ in the sixth of Matthew, does teach us three chief exercises,
which will confer greatly to the amendment of our life: that is to say,
fasting to tame thereby the inordinate lusts of the flesh. Almesdeeds, to
refrain covetousness, and to help to redeem our sins therewith, as Daniel
says in the fourth chapter: And prayer to Almighty GOD, thereby to abate our
pride and outrequydance and arrogance, that we not trusting of our selves, but
of his help, may ask of him things necessary for us from time to time. And
that we should often pray, Christ teaches us by the parable of the Widow, which
by her importunity and often crying to the wicked Judge, that feared neither God
nor man, obtained at the last, justice of him: as it is written in the ^8.
chapter of Luke.

We read also of Christ, that he sometime prayed all ^ight to God, as it is
written in the sixth chapter of Luke. and Saint Paul says to the Colossians in
the fourth chap^er: give you to prayer, being vigilant in it: and to Timo^hy he
writes in the fifth chapter: She that truly is a Widow, let her give her
self to prayer night and day. And to the Thessalonians he writes in the fifth
chapter of the first Epistle, saying; Pray without any day leaving off, not
that we should do nothing else, but that we should often amongst other things
that we do, pray to Almighty God, laving him, and calling him to remembrance,
that he may help us, putting in all our deeds, our confidence in him. Which
we might easily do, briefly saying diverse times on the day, though it were
but one Pater noster at one time, so that Christ thereby should not be far
from our remembrance; nor we should not by worldly pleasures or business,
stray abroad far from him; nor the devil should not so boldly approach us,
seeing us always under the wing and protection of our heavenly Father. And
surely if we could thus dispose our selves, our affairs should prosper the
more in this world, and we should also thereby please Almighty God, and come
to the glory everlasting. Whereunto our Savior Jesus Christ, who has redeemed
us, bring us all. Quo vivit and regnat cum deo patre in ^nitate sancti spiritus
per omnia secula seculorum, Amen.

FJNJS.

