The Doctrine of the SYNOD OF DORT And ARLES, reduced to the practice.
With a consideration thereof, and representation with what sobriety it
proceeds.

I devide This discourse into two parts 1. Preface. 2. Treatise.


1. The preface likewise has two parts.

1. A rule of Trial, to wit, by reference to practice in 3 cases. 1. The
converting of a stranger. 2. The correcting of a lewd Christian. 3. The
comforting of the afflicted.
2. The doctrine to bet tried.
2. The treatise is the trial it self of the former doctrine, according unto
the former rule, and accordingly divides it self into 3 parts, and each of them
I devide into several sections.

Praeface.
Seeing the doctrine of the Gospel, tyeth not the disciples unto bare
speculation and mere knowledge of the history, but also binds them to the
practice and aedification of their ne^ghbours, every man will say that the use
thereof consists principally in these 3 things, which every Christian, but
more especially a faithful Pastor, ought to procure so far forth as in him
lies; where The 1. Is the conversion of a stranger to the faith. 2. The
amendment of a bad-living Christian. 3. The consolation of the sick or
otherwise afflicted.


2. If then that doctrine established and canonized in the two Synods, the one
held at Do^t in Holland 1618. 1619. the other at Arles in Cevenes in France in
1620. cannot serve to any of these. 3. ends; nay, if they are directly
contrary thereunto, no Christian can doubt but that it is quite different from
the doctrine of the holy Scripture, which is given by inspiration of God, and
is profitable for reproof, for correction, for i^struction in righteousness. 2.
Tim. 3.16.

Consid.
What this Author is I know not* but by conjecture he seems by certain
passages mentioned in this discourse, more naturally to speak French then
English. Neyth^r can I well tell in what ^a^ke to place him of the three here
mentioned, for whose aed^fication principally he pretendes the doctrine of the
Gospel to be useful. For first he seems not to be a stranger unto Christian
faith, for as much as here at the first he mentions a passage out of 2 Timothy
3.16* concerning the profitablenes of holy scripture; though thencefoorth he
quotes not one place of scripture throughout: no, nor a stranger to Calvin's
doctrine, for he quotes one passage also out of him; and not one more
throughout (as I remember) out of any author ancient or modern. But he takes
liberty to cry out upon a prodigious Labyrinth of Divinitye, belike of those
who desire to mould their faith in conformity to the word of God in the first
place, and then also to take notice of what has been the most received
doctrine of the Church of God in the several ages thereof. And to take such a
course in this authors judgment, belike, is for a man to cast himself into a
Labyrinthe or maze. I confess it is a sweet thing to wanton wits coelo
liberiore frui. And it may be the nature of man repines more against limits of
faith, then against limits of life and conversation. Yet Adam found more room^
when he was cast out of Paradise, then within; but his condition I suppose was
nothing more comfortable for that. Neither is it likely this Author is of the
rank of bad-living Christians, for it is not their course to trouble their
brains about points of faith: well they may rail against religion, but they
do not use to dispute divinity. Neither does he seem to stand in need of a
physician, he seems rather to feel the pulses of others, and to profess out
of deep judgment the dangerous condition wherein others are, through error of
faith in tender points, and in this censure of his, he caryeth himself like a
very confident divine all alonge: whence it follows that the doctrine of the
Gospel is not so principally useful for the aedification of such as himself:
For if it were, I see no reason why such a condition should be omitted, for, I
praesume, he will not say that every doctrine of the Gospel should be alike
useful to all conditions of men. There is good use to be made of terrors, good
use to be made of comforts. But comforts are not fit to terrify, nor can
terrors be of use for consolation. And truly our Church of England in her
articles of religion, artic. 17, teaches us that the godly consideration of
Predestination and our election in Christ is full of sweet, pleasant, and
unspeakable co^forts to godly persons and such as feel in themselves the
working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of the flesh, and their
earthly members, and drawing up their mind to high and Heavenly things; As
well because it does greatly establish and confirm their faith of aeternall
salvation to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does fervently kindle
their love toward God: But that for curious and carnal persons, lacking the
Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the sentence of Gods
praedestination, is a most dangerous down fall, whereby ^he divill does thrust
them into desperation, or into ^^chlesnes of most unclean living, no less
perilous then desperation. And I r^member to have read in the History of the
Council of Trent, that the first opinion there mentioned concerning
praedestination, whith was the opinion of the Swinglians, as there it is
reported, as it is mystical and hidden, keeping the mind humble and relying
on God, without confidence in it self, knowing the deformity of of sin and
the excellency of divine grace (which undoubtedly are excellent uses for
aedification in an eminent d^gree) so the second opinion (contrary to the
former) was plausible and popular cherishing humane praesumption and making a
great show; and it pleased more the preaching friars, then the understanding
Divines. And the courtiours thought it p^obable, as, consonant to polit^que
reason: ^t was maynteyned by the Bishop of Bi^on^o, and the Bishop of Salpi
showed himself very partial. The defenders of this, using humane reasons,
praevayled against the others, but coming to the testimonies of scripture,
they were manyfestly overcome. But to return, I had thought the written word
of God had principally concerned believers, and tended to the aedification of
the body of Christ; according to that we read Ephesians. 4.11, 12. that Christ gave
some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers, now observe the end of their ministry in the words followinge,
for the ^epayring of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the
aedification of the body of Christ. As for Bad living Christians; they have no
delight in Gods word at all; the ministry of the word is but a vexation unto
such; and Gods ministers are accoumpted by such, as Elias was, no better then
troublers of Israel, and why? But because they can prophecy no good unto such
but evil. And as for the sick, though weak in body, yet if not weak in faith,
we can afford them abundance of consolation in God even to the assurance of
their election. If weak in faith, and oppressed under the burden of their
sins; yet is there no cause why they should despair by reason of any
doctrine of ours; but rather good hope that these troubles of mind may prove
as panges of childbirth to deliver their souls into the world of grace.

2. Of any doctrine Canonized either in the Synod of Dort, which we know; or
in the Synod of Arles which I know not; I am utte^l^ ignorant. The course of
comprehending the doctrine of the Church concerning certain points, in
several theses, and denominating them canons, has been anciently of use, in
Counsels and Synods; but of canonizing any doctrine thereby* I never heard, nor
read till now. But if the Church be the pillar and butteresse of truth; the
authority thereof is of no small force for the establishment thereof; albeit we
acknowledge no infallible rule of faith but the word of God.

The quaestion in praesent is, whether election be upon the foresight of man's
obedience, or according to the mere pleasure of God? and in the issue it comes
to this (as in due place I will show,) whether God has mercy on whom he will,
by giving faith and repentance unto them, and whom he will he hardens by
denying faith and repentance? Or rather in the dispensation and distribution of
these graces proceeds according to men's works? Now to me it seems a strange
course, when a quaestion is moved as touching two contrary opinions, which of
them is true and to be embraced; to draw the resolution hereof to the
consideration of the usefulnes of the opinions or doctrines quaestioned. As if
because an opinion is useful, therefore it is to be concluded that it is true;
and not rather in case it be found to be true, yea the very truth of God, the
rule whereof alone is Gods word, therefore we ought to conclude that it is
useful; and be careful to make such use of it, as it does bespeake. Nay is it
not most indecent for man to presume, ^o ob^rude opinions upon Gods word, upon
a bare praetence of the usefulnes of them in man's judgment, to serve turns as
he thinks good? And do not as many as take such courses for the mayntenance
of their own way, manifest hereby that their cause is desperate, and that it
seems they have very little or no ground for their opinions out of the word of
God, when they run out unto such divinations as these, for the supporting of
their laboring and wavering cause? As for example, if the Apostle shall
plainly profess that election is not of works; shall not we embrace this for
truth, unles we find it to be more useful to the purposes here specified then
the contrary; and if we seem to find the contrary doctrine more useful then
this in our phantasy; shall we therefore contradict the Apostle in express
terms, or set our wits on work so to fashion the Apostles meaning by a
forced interpretation as to make him to contradict his own words? In like
sort, if the Apostle says, God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens, Romans 9.18. And withal manifests that by obteyning mercy at Gods
hands he understands the obteyning of faith, Romans 11.30. that, even in the
former place being manifest enough by the antithesis of it unto obduration;
Shall we hang still in suspense as touching the acknowledging of S. Paul's
meaning, until we have well weighed and considered the usefulnes of this
doctrine, in comparison, with the usefulnes of the contrary doctrine; and
according to the weight of each, by such weights, and in the scale of our
judgment, pronounce judicially either for Paul, or against him; or at least
make the holy Apostle by some practice or other to eat his own words, as
Saturn did his children?

And verily in the cause of such a trial, a good wit will serve a disputant
in good stead; who can, if he list, bring forth pleasant ejaculations in
commendation of a bald head, or of folly with Erasmus, or of a louse with
Daniel Heinsius; and with our English Sonnetters of a st^awe^ to witness the
song: O the straw the straw! and then let them take forth and singe: Now
here is a jolly course, quoth the minstrill. And others, like e^ough, will be
furnished with as good wit to the contrary, in displaying the unnecessary
condition of ought; ^ike him, who having f^^st made an excellent speech in the
commendation of justice; afterward spoke as wi^^ily to the contrary, showing
that there was no justice at all in the World. And I have heard of a Gentleman,
that would discourse against any need we have at all of fire; saying that at
the end he was driven to a non plus, for as much as he could not devise how his
horse could be shod without it. And, in like manner, I have with admiration
received a relation concerning a Gentleman in an Assembly of States, such as we
call Parliaments; namely, that he was absolutely the best speaker, yet nothing
respected; and that for a most sufficient reason, which was this: They knew
full well, that he could speak as well, and as movingly to that which was
quite contrary. And I willingly profess, the Author of this discourse seems
to be a wit^y Gentleman, and to enterteyne his readers in the following
treatise with a pretty interlude; and no mervail if he makes choice of a fi^t
scene, wherein to show the feats of his activitie: Wherein how well he caryeth
himself, when he comes to the trial of our Doctrine, by the serviceablenes
thereof to the three ends here proposed, we shall by Gods help inquire in due
place. But surely, though it be not serviceable to any of these ends, yet if it
be as serviceable to other ends, above specified out of the history of the
Counsel of Tre^t; as also out of the 17. article of our church of England, as
also to the glorifying of God, in acknowledging the prerogative of his grace,
as only effectual to every thing that is good, and the prerogative of Gods
soveraintie over his Creatures, in making whom he will Vessels of mercy, and
whom he will Vessels of wrath, ^o wit, by showing mercy on whom he will, and
hardening whom he will; This I hope shall be sufficient to uphold the
reputation of it, yea albeit it be found contrary to other ends (which yet I
deny) like as comforts are contrary to the use of terrifying, and terrors are
contrary to the use of comfortinge; and yet Gods word co^taines both kinds of
discipline. Like as Martin Luther and Melancthon were of different
dispositions, and Erasmus his censure of them was this, that Melancthon
followed Luther, as Litae follows Atae in Homer, yet Chytraeus in his
Historiae confessionis Augustanae, as I remember, professes, that God in his
gracious providence made good use of both, for the service of his Church, and
propagation of the Gospel in these latter days. And I well observe as
touching S. Paul's testimony here alleged concerning the profitablenesse of
Scripture Doctrine, (which is the more considerable I confess, because this
whole treatise is like an Hen with one chicke, having not any one quotation
out of holy scripture besides) that he takes no such course as this divine
does, from the profitablenesse of a doctrine, to conclude it to be the doctrine
of holy scripture, but rather supposing a doctrine to be a doctrine of holy
scripture concludes the^hence that it is proffitable for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness. How can it be otherwise, as
touching the doctrine here impugned, but that if it be the doctrine of holy
scripture, instruction therein must be instruction in righteousness, and shall
be a just reproof to them that refuse to receave instruction, as in the whole
Counsel of God, so in this particular among the rest, and lastly serve for the
correction of the^ that do not live ansvverably unto their profession, as in
other things so in reference unto this, as namely, when professing of God
works in us the will and the deed of every good work, and that not
according to the good pleasure of man, but according to his own good pleasure,
they are not so careful hereupon, as they should be to work out their
salvation, with fear and trembling, in conformity to the holy Apostles
exhortation, Phil. 2.12.13. work out your salvation, with fear and trembling.
For God it is that works in you both the will and the deed even of his good
pleasure.

Thus I have considered the rule of Trial: I come to the consideration of the
doctrine to be tried, whether it be in a right manner proposed.

The second Section.
THe principal points and doctrines of which Synods are contained in these 5.
Articles. Praeface. Sect. 2.


1. That God, by an absolute decree, has elected and chosen to life a very
small number of persons, without the least regard, either of their faith and
obedience; and excluded the rest of mankind from all saving grace, destined by
the same decree, unto aeternall damnation, without the consideration of their
incredulity or impaenitencie.

2. That Jesus Christ dyed for no other then the elect only, not having the
least intention of his own, or commandment of his Father, to make a
propitiation for the sins of the whole world.

3. That by the sin of Adam, his whole posterity has lost their free will,
being subject by an inevitable necessity to do or leave undone, that which
every man acts or omitteth, being good or evil, being thereunto
predestined by the aeternall and efficacious decree of God.

4. That God, to draw his elect out of that, produces a faith in them by a
power aequall to that, whereby he created the world, and raised up the dead, so
that they, to whom he gives grace, are not able to reject it, and that the
reprobates cannot obtain it, although it be offered unto them, in the
preaching of the Gospel.

5. That they who have once received this grace by faith, can never fall
totally or finally, notwithstanding the most enormous sins they can committ.

2. That this is the doctrine of the Synods, they who have been, and still are
persecuted for ref^sing to subscribe, have so plainly and sufficiently
demonstrated by their public writings, that none of their persecutors durst
hitherto undertake to ^^fute or answer them; yea, and who are always ready,
before impartial judges, to make it good, that the Articles, above mentioned,
are to be found in the writings of their chiefest Doctors, even in the self
same terms, nay far more scandalous.

Consid. When the Apostle says, that Election is not of works, and prooveth it
by this, that before Esau and Jacob were borne etc. it was said of them, the
elder shall serve the younger; Let every sober Reader judge, whether it be not
more agreeable to the Apostle, to profess, that election proceeds rather
without any regard had to man's faith and obedience, then with any respect
thereunto: as also whether by the same reason, which the Apostle uses, it be
not apparent, that as election is not of good works, so likewise reprobation
is not of evil works.

Yet that God did decree to damn no man, but for sin is the unanimous
confession of all our divines. Neither is there any of them that I know, who
denies that God did ordain to bestow salvation on none of ripe years, but, by
way of reward of their obedience. And accordingly Tilenus himself, when he was
on our side, took exception against Arminius his stating the decree of
predestination and reprobation, according to our opinion, to proceed citra
omnem considerationem resipiscentiae and fidei in illis, aut impenitentiae and
infidelitatis in hisce. For mark, I pray, how he excepts against it, At
postrema haec particula perperam and praeter menternostram hvic sente^tiae
adjicitur; And he gives his reason on both parts: on the part of reprobation
thus: Quandoquidem quoscunque damnat Deus, Consid. sentent. I. Armin. cap. 1.
p. 6.7.
non aliam ob causam, quam propter impaenitentiam and infidelitate^ atqu^
adeopropter peccatum damnat, ac proinde neque damnare decrevit seen hujus rei
intuitu. On the part of election thus: Sicuti neminem in tempore serv^^ nisi
resipiscentem and credentem (which yet is untrue, unless understood only of
men of ripe years); Ita nemine^ ab aeterno servar^ decrevit nisi resipiscentem
and credentem. In like sort, Piscator denies not, but that there is such a will
of God revealed in the Gospel, as namely to save such as persevere in faith,
and damn them that persevere in infidelity and impenitency; Resp. ad
Apologet. Berti^. p. 150.
only he denies this to be the whole will of God revealed in the Gospel, as
touching the salvation of some, and damnation of others. And accordingly in the
conference at the Haghe, when the first Article of the Remonstrants came to be
discussed, which was: Deum ab aeterno decrevisse fideles perseverantes salv^s
facere; Their adversaries denied not this, nay they professed, that no
Christian denies this, Praefat. ad Synod. Dordrac. fol. 10. p. 1. And therefore
they urged them to declare, whether this Article of theirs contained the whole
decree of predestination; which when they affirmed, herein their adversaries
thought good to oppose them, and to encounter with them upon that point. But
let us distinguish that which such, as this Author is, affect to confound. The
absoluteness of Gods decree may be considered two ways, either on the part of
the act it self of Gods decree, or on the part of the the things decreed.
According to this distinction: Aquinas professes, that no cause can be
assigned of the will of God, quoad actu^ volentis, 1. q. 23. art. 5.1. cap*
but there may be assigned a cause thereof, quoad res volitas; His words are
these: Dictum est supra quod non est assignare causam divinae voluntatis ex
part actus volendi, sed potest assignari ratio ex part volitorum. And
applying this doctrine to predest^nation in special adds, saying: Nullus
fuit ita insanae mentis qui diceret merita esse causam divinae
praedestinationis ex part actus praedestinantis. Sed hoc sub question^
ver^itur, vtrum ex part effectus pr^destinatio habeat aliquam causam. And
whereas the distinction of voluntas absoluta and condition^lis, is interpreted
by Vossius, as all one with voluntus antecedens and consequens; both Vossius
himself interprets voluntas conditionalis, as making the cause thereof to be
only quoad res volitas. Hist. Pelag. p. 368.
For he defi^es a conditional will in this manner: A^iqua vult cum cond^tione*
que id^ir^^ in effectum non prodeunt, nisi condition impleta. Qu^modo ^^nes
^om^nes salvari vult, sed per, and propter Christum fide approhensum. And
doctor Iackson, in his last book of providence, acknowledges that the
distinction of voluntas antecedens and consequens is to be understood quoad res
volitas; Now the consequent will is such a will as derives the cause thereof
from man. But this, says he, is to be understood as touching, the things
willed; which we willingly grant, and accordingly acknowledge that some things
willed by God have the cause of their being from m^n. As namely, faith, we ^ay,
is the d^sposing cause of salvation; final infidelity or impaenitency are the
meritorious causes of damnation. Yet some thing there is willed by God which
has no cause from man, but (...) the cause thereof is from the mere pleasure of
God, and that is the giving or denying of grace, according to that of the
Apostle: He has mercy on whom he will and whom he will he hardens. Romans
9.18. As for the decree of God considered as touching the act of God willinge,
that it can have no cause from man, I prove, both as touching the decree of
salvation, and touching the decree of damnation. And I willingly challenge all
the nation of Arminians to answer it. And the argument is this; If faith be
the cause why God ordeynes a man to salvation; then, either by (...) necessity
of nature it is the cause hereof, or by the mere constitution of God. Not by
necessity of nature, as appears manifestly, (and I have found by experience
that Arminians themselves have confessed as much) therefore if any way it be
admitted to be the cause hereof, this must be only by the constitution of God.
Now mark the absurdity hereof; for herence it follows that God did
constitute, that is, ordeyne, that, upon the foresight of faith, he would
ordeyne men unto salvation; where the very aeternall act of Gods ordination, is
made the object of Gods ordina^ion, a thing utterly impossible; and every man
knows that the objects of Gods ordination are things temporal only, and by
no means, things aeternall. In like sort, if sin be the cause why God
ordeynes men unto damnation; then either by necessity of nature, or by divine
constitution; not by necessity of nature, for surely God is not necessitated
to damn any man for sin If therefore by constitution divine, mark the
absurdity unavoydably following hereupon, namely, that God did ordeyn that
upon the foresight of (...) he would ordeyne men unto condemnation; where
again Gods aeternall ordination is made the object of his ordination. Yet do
not I affirm, that in any moment of nature does the decree of salvation go
before the consideration of men's faith and obedience; or the decree of
damnation before the consideration of final incredulity or i^poenitencie. For
as much, as the decrees of giving faith and crowning it with salvation; and, in
like sort, the decrees of permitting final incredulity and impenitency* I
make to be, not subordinate one to another, bu^, simultan^ous and coordinate
one with another. I proceed to the second.

2. The holy scripture, in designing unto us those for whom Christ dyed, uses
different forms, Matthew. 20, 28. it is said that the son of man came not to
be served but to serve and give his life a ransom for many, and 26, 28. This
is my blood in the New Testament, which is shed for you and for many for the
remission of sins. This is a very indefinite notion, yet nothing so prone to
signify a comprehension of all, as an opposition to such an universality. But
in other places these Many are defined, and therewith all the benefit of
Christ's death confined to some, as namely the people of Christ, Mat. 1.21. to
the Church, Act. 20.28. Ephesians. 5.25. Christ's sheep, Ioh. 10.15. the Children
of (...), Ioh. 11.51. Christ's freindes, Ioh. 15.8. to Israel, Act. 13.23. to
the body of Christ, Ephesians. 5.23. And accordingly our Savior prayed for those
only that his Father had given him, Ioh. 17.9. and for those whom hereafter he
should give unto him, v. 20. and that with exclusion, from the world, v. 9. and
for their sakes he sanctified himself, v. 19. which, in like manner, is to be
understood with exclusion of the world. Now, by sanctifying himself, is
understood the offering up of himself upon the Cross, by the unanimous
consent of all the Fathers, whom Ma^^o^ate had read, as himself professes in
his Commentaries on that passage in John. Yet we are willing to take notice of
those places also, which extend the benefit of Christ's death unto all, as Romans
5.18. As by the offense of one the fault came upon all unto condemnation; so by
the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward all men, to justification
of life; But for the clearing of this, observe but the limitation, going
immediately before, v. 17. If by the offense of one, death reigned through one;
Much more shall they, who receave the abundante of grace of the gift of
righteousness reign in life through one, Jesus Christ. It is further said
that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2. Cor. 5.19. That
he is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, Ioh. 1.29.
That he gave his life for the life of the world, Ioh. 6.51. That he is the
Savior of the world, Ioh 4.42. and 1. Ioh. 4.14. Yet this admits a fair
exposition, without all contradiction to the former limitation, namely, of men
in the world, which being an indefinite term, is to be expounded by other
places, where it is defined who they are, as Ioh. 13.1. He loved his own that
were in the world, to the end he loved them; Now, who are Christ's own but
those of whom he speaks, Ioh. 17.9. For they are thine, 10.11. and all mine
are thine, and thine are mine, and thou art glorified in them. Now, these are
proposed with an exclusion of the world in that very 9. verse: I pray for them,
I pray not for the World, for they are thine.

It is further said, that Christ is the reconciliation for our sins, and not
for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world; which may fairly admit
this construction, for the sins of men dispersed throughout all the world,
which is most true of Gods Elect, like as Ioh. 11.50. They are called the
Children of God, which were scattered; and Matthew. 24.31. God shall send his
Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, who shall gather together his Elect
from the four Winds, and from the one end of the Heavens to the other. But
suppose it be understood of all and every one, yet that place, Ioh. 3.19. gives
a fair exposition of this also, whence it is said: So God loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, shall
not perish; And we willingly confess, that Christ dyed to obtain salvation
for all and every one that believe in him.

And indeed our Adversaries do usually please themselves in the confounding
things that d^ffer.

And in the stating of this thesis we have a miserable confusion, as if these
men delighted to fish in troubled waters. For when we say Christ dyed for us,
our meaning is that Christ dyed for our good, and a benefit redoundes unto us
by the death of Christ, now, it may be, there are diverse benefits redounding
unto us by the death of Christ, and they of so different nature, that, in
respect of some, we spare not to profess, that Christ dyed for all, and, in
respect of others, the Arminians themselves are so far from granting that he
dyed to obteyn any such benefit for all, as that they utterly deny them to be
any benefits at all redounding to any by the death of Christ. Though we
willingly acknowledge them to be benefits redounding to us by the death of
Christ, albeit not redounding unto all, but only to Gods elect. Now if this be
true, is it not a proper course which this author takes in confounding things
so extremely different? And that it is so as I have said, I now proceed to
show in this manner. We say, that pardon of sin and salvation of souls are
benefits purchased by the death of Christ, to be enjoyed by men, but how? not
absolutely, but conditionally, to wit, in case they believe, and only in case
they believe. For like as God does not confer these on any of ripe years
unless they believe, so Christ has not merited that they should be conferred on
any but such as believe. And accordingly profess that Christ dyed for all,
that is, to obtain pardon of sin and salvation of soul for all, but how?
not absolutely whether they believe or no, but only conditionally, to wit
provided they do believe in Christ. So that we willingly profess, that Christ
had both a full intention of his own, and commandment of his Father to make a
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, so far as thereby to procure
both pardon of sin and salvation of soul to all that do believe, and to
none other being of ripe years, according to that Romans 3, 24. we are justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. v. 25.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation (or reconciliation) through
faith in his blood. But we further say, that there are other benefits
redounding to us by the death of Christ, to wit, the grace of faith and of
repentance. For like as these are the gifts of God wrought in us by his holy
Spirit, so they are wrought in us for Christ his sake, according to that of the
Apostle, praying for the Hebrews, namely, that God will make them perfect to
every good work, working in them that which is pleasing in his sight through
Jesus Christ. Now, as touching these benefits, we willingly profess, that
Christ dyed not for all, that is, he dyed not to obtain the grace of faith and
repentance for all, but only for Gods elect; In as much as these graces are
bestowed by God, not conditionally, least so grace should be given according to
men's works, but absolutely, And if Christ dyed to obtain these for all
absolutely, it would follow her hence that all should believe and re^^^^ and
consequently all should be saved. And do our adversaries blame us for denying
that Christ dyed to procure faith and repentance unto all? Nothing less; nay
it is apparent that the Remonstrants nowadayes openly profess that Christ has
not merited faith and regeneration for any. For when this is laid to their
charg as themselves profess in these words: At (inquit censor) si hoc tantum
meritus est Christus, Censura Censura p. 59.
tum Christus nobis non est meritus fidem nec regenerationem, mark their
answer following, Sane ita est. Nihil ineptius, nihil vanius est quam hoc
Christi merito tribuere. So that their plain meaning is that Jesus Christ dyed
for none, so as to obtain the grace of faith and regeneration for them, no,
not for Gods elect, not having the least intention of his own, or commandment
of his Father to purchase these gifts these blessings for any. Proceed we to
the third.

3. Of freedom of will in the creature we may dispute, and divines do uswally
dispute different ways, and upon different considerations; as namely in
respect, either of the state of the creature from within, as under corruption,
or free from it; or in respect of the divine decree from without. This author
very judiciously, Arminian like, confoundes these into one.

It is utterly untrue that any of our divines, of my knowledge, say that by the
sin of Adam, his whole posterity has lost their free will; In the time of
my minority in the University, in divinity disputations we heard concerning
free will such a distinction as this of common course. The actions of men are
either natural or moral, or spiritual; the resolution of the truth, as
touching free will, according to the foresaid distinction, was this; we have
not lost our free will, in actions natural, nor in actions moral, but only in
actions spiritual, 1. Cor. 2.14.
So that the natural man perceaveth not the things of God, for they are
foolishnes unto him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually
discerned. And the affection of the flesh is enmity unto God, Romans 8.7.8.
for it is not subject to the law of God no^ can be. So that they which are in
the flesh cannot please God. Of heathen men the Apostle professes that their
minds are blinded, their hearts hardened, 2. Tim. 2. last.
and they estranged from the life of God Ephesians. 4.18. that they are in the snare
of the divill, led captive by him to do his will. That the Ephesians were dead
in trespasses and sins before the time of their calling by the Gospel; Ephesians.
2.1.
and the like is affirmed of the Colossians Col. 2.11. Yet that which follows
in this Author is more unt^^e imputing unto us, as if we maynteyned that every
m^n is subject by inevitable necessity to do or leave undone that which every
man acts or omitteth, being good or evil. This imputation, I say, is utterly
untrue; we say that every one does freely whatsoever he does, and omitteth
freely whatsoever ^e leaves undone. Only this is to be understood aright, to
wit, in respect of means tending unto ends, wherein alone and in the election
thereof consists the liberty of man's will, and not in the appetition of the
end; it being natural to a man to be carried to the liking of his end
necessarily; according to that of Aristotle. E^hic. 4. cap. 5.
Qualis quisque est, ita finis apparet. And does it become these men to dictate
unto us, not only a new divinity, but also a new Philosophy at pleasure? As
for the reason here added, fetched from the aeternall and efficatious decree of
God, this is so far from confirming their premises as that it utterly
overthrowes them, and confirms ours. For we say, with Aquinas, that the
efficacions will of God, is the cause why some things come to pas^e
contingently and freely, as well as it is the cause why other things come to
pass necessarily. Was the burning of the Prophets bones by Josiah performed
any whit less freely by him, then any other action of his? O^ the proclamation
that Cyrus made for the return of the Jews out of the captivity, was not
this as freely done by him as ought else? Yet both these were praedetermined by
God. Nay I say more; that every thing which comes to pass, in the revolution
of times, was decreed by God, I prove by such an argument, for answer
whereunto, I challenge the whole nations both of Arminians and Jesuits. It cannot
be denied but God foresawe from every lasting whatsoever in time should come
to pass; therefore every thing was future, from everlasting, otherwise God
could not foresee it as future. Now let us soberly inquire, how these things
which we call future, came to be future, being in their own nature merely
possible and indifferent, as well not at all to be future as to be future. Of
this transmigration of things out of the condition of things merely possible
(such as they were of themselves) into the condition of things future, there
must needs be some outward cause. Now I demand, what was the cause of this
transmigration? And seeing nothing, without the nature of God, could be the
cause hereof; (for this transmigration was from everlasting, but nothing
without God was everlasting,) therefore some thing within the nature of God must
be found fit to be the cause hereof.

And what may that be? not the knowledge of God: for that rather presupposes
things future, and so knowable (...) in the kind of things future, then makes
them future. Therefore it remains, that the mere decree and will of God is
that which makes them future. If, to shift off this, it be said, that the
essence of God is the cause hereof, I further demand, whether the essence of
God be the cause hereof, as working necessarily, or as working freely. If as
working necessarily, then the most contingent things became future by
necessity of the divine nature, and consequently he produces whatsoever he
produces by necessity of nature, which is Atheistical: Therefore it
remains, that the essence of God has made them future, by working freely, and
consequently the mere will and decree of God, is the cause of the futurition
of all things. Act. 4.24.
And why should we doubt hereof, when the most foul sins that have been
committed in the World, are in scripture phrase professed to have been
predetermined by God himself? Upon supposition of which will and decree divine,
we confess it necessary, that things determined by him shall come to pass,
but how? not necessarily, but, either necessarily, or contingently and freely;
to wit, necessary things necessarily, contingent things, and free things,
contingently and freely. So that contingent things, upon supposition of the
will divine, have a necessity secundum quid, but simply a contingencye; and
that the same thing may come to pass, both necessarily secundum quid, and
simply in a contingent manner, ought to be nothing strange to men of
understanding, considering that the very foreknowledge of God is sufficient to
denominate the most contingent things, as coming to pass necessarily secundum
quid.

I come to the consideration of the fourth.

4. As touching this Article here objected unto us, we have no cause to decline
the maintenance thereof, but cheerfully and resolutely to undergo the defense,
as of the truth of God clearly set down unto us in the word of God. The
illumination of the mind is compared to Gods causing light to shine out of
darkness in the creation, 1 Cor. 4.6. God that commanded the light to shine
out of the darkness, is he which has shined in (...) heart, to give the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ: And for God
to say unto Sion, thou art my people, is made aequivalent to the planting of
the Heavens, and laying the foundation of the Earth, Es. 51.16. I have putt my
words in thy mouth, and defended thee in the shadow of my hand, that I may
plant the Heavens, and lay the foundation of the Earth, and say unto Sion: Thou
art my people* Ps. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, says David, and renew
a right spirit within me. Yet was David a regenerate child of God, but when he
fell into foul sins, and sought unto God, to restore him, he acknowledges
this his spiritual restitution, to be a creation; giving thereby to
understand, that the very children of God have savage lusts, and wild
affections in them, the curing and mastering whereof is no less work, then was
the work of creation or making of the world, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature (...); and Gal. 6.1^. In Christ Jesus, neither
circumcision avayleth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. Now,
this new creature is all one with faith working by love, Gal. 5.6. For there
the Apostle expresses the comparison antitheticall in this manner: In Jesus
Christ, neither circumcision avayleth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith
working by love. And Ephesians. 2.10. We are said to be Gods workmanship (...)
created in Jesus Christ (mark a new creation) unto good works, which he has
ordained, that we should walk in them. God made the world with a word, but the
new making of man cost our Savior Christ hot water, the very blood of the
Son of God, agonies in the garden, and agonies upon the Cross, and he must
rise out of his grave, to work this. The Schoolmen do acknowledge this,
namely, that grace is wrought in man, by way of creation; Otherwise, how could
it be accoumpted supernatural. And, as for the power whereby God raises the
dead; It is expressly said, Col. 2.12, that faith is (...), who raised Christ
from the dead; whereupon Cornelius de Lapide acknowledges, that faith is
wrought by the same power, whereby God raised Christ from the dead. And Ephesians. 1
19. the Apostle tells us of the exceeding greatness of Gods power toward us,
which believe, adding that this is according to his mighty power, which he
wrought in Christ, whom he raised from the dead. And therefore most congruously
does the Apostle take into consideration that work of God in raising Christ,
when he prays for the Hebrews, that God would make them perfect to every
good work, working in them that which is pleasing in his sight through Jesus
Christ, Heb. 30.20.21. The God of peace that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus Christ, the great sheapheard of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant: Make you perfect in all good works to do his will, etc.
It is called the work of faith in power, 2. These. 1.11.

And as for perseverance therein with patience, the Apostle requires such a
strength as is wrought by Gods glorious power. Col. 1.11. and 2. Pet. 1.3. we
are ^ayde to be called (...) Piscator, not knowing well what good sense to make
of it as it lies, interprets it unto glory and virtue, as if it were in the
original (...), Daniel Heynsius in the preface to his Aristarchus Sacer, on
Nonnus upon John, makes bold to censure this interpretation; and shows whence
it proceeds, to wit, herupon, because he knew no other signification of (...)
then virtue, and that in the sense as we usually take it. But, says he, in the
Greek Etymologicum we find that (...), in the notion thereof, is as much as
potentia, and accordingly we are called as Saint Peter says by glory and
power, as much as to say by Gods glorious power. And does not the scripture
clearly profess that God found us dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. and Col. 2.13? And
is not the work it self called regeneration, Ioh. 3. and 1. Pet. 1. and in
other places? Is it not a new life wrought in us? we were before estranged from
the life of God Ephesians. 4.18. now we are not. And is not this life the life of
faith according to that Gal. 2.20. The life that I now live in the flesh is by
faith in Christ who loved me and gave himself for me? Austin, in plain
terms, professes that God conver^eth men omnipo^ente facilitate; therefore he
used his almighty power therein, though he did it with case, like as he both
made the world and shall raise the dead with ease: For he speak the word and
they were made, he commanded, and they were created; Ioh. 5.
and, in like sort, the time shall come when they that are in the graves shall
h^are the voyer of the ^one of man, and shall come forth, some to the
resurrection of life, some to the resurrection of condemnation. And power less
then the power of God is not able to regenerate man; For can an Angel
regenerate man, or can man regenerate himself, and make himself pertaker
(...) of the divine nature? Or breath the life of God, the life of grace, or
the Spirit of God into him? Consider but soberly the importance of faith that
is so much slighted by this generation; Consider it a^ touching the object
thereof, and the things believed; consider it as touching the form of it; and
the confidence of the creature ^n his creator; and judge indifferently, whether
any created power, can suffice to create faith in man. The things believed,
are the mystery of the Trinity; the incarnation of the Son of God, God
manifested in the flesh, and to what end? that his soul might be made an
offering for sin, the just dye for the unjust, that so God might justify the
ungodly, (...) Romans 4. What wisdom is there in this, by the judgment of flesh
and blood? Are not these things of God foolishnes to the natural man, 1. Cor.
2, 14. then the resurrection of the dead, the aeternall judgment the powers of
the world to come; what reason can draw a natural man to the embracing of
these? Then as touching our confidence in God and dependence upon him according
to these mysteries. Is it in the power of nature a man should be brought to
repose the fortunes of his salvation upon a crucified God? which was a scandal
to the Jews, foolishnes to the Gentiles, but to us that are saved, it is the
very power of God and wisdom of God. For a sinner to be assured that God is
his Father in Christ, and receaveth us unto him as sons and daughters, and,
if sons, then heirs also, even heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Jesus
Christ. To say, with Job Though he kill me, yet will I put my trust in him, not
only mangre his judgments, by which he fights against us, causing his arrows
to st^ck^ fast in us, and the venom thereof to drink up our Spirits; but
also, in despite of our own sins, whereby the best provoke him, too often,
even the eyes of his glory.

Yet these disputers would not have it thought that they denied faith to be the
work of God; but they have come so far as to deny, in express terms, that
Christ merited, either faith or regeneration for any. Censura Censurae ^. 59. A
time may come for them to open their mouths, (...) little wider, and deal
plainly and openly profes that faith is merely the work of man, and not the
work of God. But as yet they think it not seasonable to divulge this mystery
of State. They praetend acknowledgement, that it is the gift of God; only they
will have it wrought in such a manner, that man may reject it; and they
reproach us for saying that they, to whom God gives his grace, are not able to
reject it. Forsooth, they will have God to work faith in a man, no otherwise
then by way of suasion. For Arminius professes, that there are but two ways,
whereby God works upon the will, Exam. p. 150.
the one, as he expresses it, is per modum naturae, the other secundum modum
voluntatis and libertatis ejus: The former he calls a Physical impulsion,
the latter he says may fitly be called suasion. By the former operation, the
effect comes to pass necessarily; and this they cannot brook. So that it
remains, that Gods operation, in bestowing faith, is only by way of suasion.
Now, here they dash themselves upon a rock of manifest heterodoxy, even in
Philosophy. For he that persuades works immediately upon the understanding,
representing the object whereunto he persuades in the most alluring manner that
he can; Suadens agit (says B^llarmine) per modum proponentis objectum. And
consequently leaves it to the object thus set forth, to work upon the will.
Now, the object works only in genere causae finalis, not in genere causae
effi^ientis. And the end is well known to moove only motu metaphorice dicto,
not vero motu; and herehence it follows, that God while he persuades only, is
no efficient cause at all of faith; which indeed is the most genuine doctrine
of these divines, though they are loath the world should know so much.

Secondly, observe their language more narrowly; here is mention of Gods giving
grace, yet so as they to whom he gives it, are able to reject it; and withal
that this ability is very often exercised in such sort, that albeit God gives
it, yet they, to whom he gives it, do reject it. Now, this may be understood
two ways, as namely, that after God has given it, and they received it, they
do reject it, or that they so reject it, as not at all receaving it. The first
sense includes a sober notion though the truth of it may be questioned. But in
that sense it belongs to the next Article, but in the latter sense only it
belongs to this present Article; Now, say I, in (...) this sense there is no
sobriety; For it mainteynes some thing to be given, which is not at all
received; which is clearly non sense, and no merveyl, if in opposing Gods
grace, they carry themselves as destitute of common sense. A thing may be
offered and rejected; but that cannot, with sobriety, be said to be given,
which is not received. Especially of gifts given to the soul: For a gift given
to the soul, must either be a quality permanent, or an act immanent, both
which are inhaerent in the soul, and unless they are made inhaerent in it,
and the latter also produced by it, cannot be said ^o be given unto the soul:
As, for example, the praesent quaestion is of producing faith in the soul of
man; Now, this may be understood, either of the habit and quality of faith,
or of the act of faith; but neither of these can be said to be given, unless
the one be made the quality of the soul, and the other the act of the soul.
Which supposed, they are not rejected, nor can be rejected in such sort, as not
at all to be received. And this inconvenience the Author seems to have been
sensible of, and accordingly desirous to avoyde; and therefore observe in the
third place, he does not say, that they, to whom God gives faith, are able to
(and accordingly some times do) reject it, according to our opinion, which
would imply that, in his opinion, though God gives faith to men, yet they, to
whom he gives it, do sometimes reject it. But he makes our doctrine to be
this, that to whom God gives his grace, they are able to (and accordingly
sometimes do) reject, implying thereby, that the grace, which God gives man,
may be, and is sometimes rejected.

And indeed, this grace being not faith it self, but an ope^ation tending
thereunto, and that no other then suasion, this may in a good sense be said to
be rejected, though it be both given by God, and received by man, though the
like cannot be said of faith, which is not received but by believing; and unles
it be thus received by man, it cannot be said to be given by God. In like sort,
if God exhort a man to faith, it cannot be said, that that man is not exhorted
thereunto; and therefore, to whom God gives exhortation, it cannot be but that
the exhortation given, be received so far forth, as the man is justly said to
have been exhorted thereunto. But besides, the receaving of suasion and
exhortation in this sense, which cannot possibly be denied wheresoever it is
given; there is another sense hereof, namely, of receaving it so, as to obey
it, and yield unto it.

And, in this sense, we confess, that the grace of suasion and exhortation,
though it be made by God, yet may it be rejected by man; for though it cannot
be denied but he has received it so far forth as whereby he has heard it,
which is sufficient to denominate him a man exhorted unto faith; yet he has
not received it in such sort as to embrace it and obey it. And upon this
ambiguitie of sense and aequivocation, do these impostors proceed first
willingly cheating themselves, their affections being possessed with a love of
error, which will always to use the judgment from the truth, and afterward
laboring to cheat others, as many, as do not discern their juglinge Now we
clearly profess, that like as, in case the Sun does inlighten the world, it
is not possible, but that the world should be inlighteyed: so if God inlighten
men's minds, the mind cannot choose but be enlightened. For the understanding
is a power natural, not free. And consequently, if God make it appear to a
Christian soul that God is his summum bonum, not only summum bonum, but his
summum bonum; it is not possible but he should be enlightened with this light
of his loving countenance, which is called, in scripture, the glory of the
Lord, 2, Cor. 3. last, and it is signified to be the glory of his grace
appearing in Christ Ioh. 1.14. which we are said to behold in Christ with open
face, 2. Cor. 3. last. Again, this glory of Gods grace appearing unto us as
our chiefest good, it is not possible but we should love it; (For we love him
because he loved us first. 1. Ioh. 4.19.) and our wills should be fixed upon
him as on our supreme end. For the liberty of the will consistes not in
appetitione finis, but only in electione mediorum, which is a rule of
Schools, acknowledged by Aristotle, and received generally, without control,
sealed unto us by the light of nature. And accordingly we are said by the very
beholding of the glory of the Lord, with open face, to be transformed into the
same image; what is that but the image of Christ (as by the Lord there Christ
is meant, in whom appears the glory of Gods grace, and of his love to man) and
that has two parts, the one Christ crucified, the other Christ raised from the
dead, and ascended into heaven, and there sitting at the right hand of God, to
make requests for us. And our transformation into this image, is our
regeneration, consisting in mortification, which is a conformity to Christ's
death, and vivication, which is a conformity to Christ's resurrection; thus we
feel the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his passions, Phil.
3.10. And in this work of regeneration, consisting in the illumination of our
mind, and renovation of our affections, we are merely passive, and so changed
as to discern our chiefest good, and to have our heart set upon it, as upon
our end, all which is natural, not free; Freedom having place only in the
election of means unto our end; wherein we fail often, partly through
weakness of judgeme^t, partly through perverseness of our affections. For we
are regenerate but in part, and both darkness, in part, possesses the
understanding; and in our hearts and affections there is a principle of the
flesh, which inclines inordinately to the creature, as well as a principle of
the Spirit, which inclines to God our creator.

And whereas, in the last place, it is said, that the Reprobates cannot obtain
this grace of God, although it be offered them in the Gospel; this either has
no sobriety, or being brought to a sober sense, is utterly untrue. And nothing
but the ambiguous notion of grace serves their turn, and gives them liberty
to prate they know not what. For as for faith it self, that is not offered at
all in the Gospel; men are called upon to believe, and promised, that upon
their faith, they shall obtain the grace of remission of sins; and
salvation; and these graces may be said to be off^red unto all, upon condition
of faith; but faith it self, in no congruity, can be said to be offered;
though by the preaching of the Gospel the Lord works faith in the hears of
whom he will; as it is said, that he has mercy on whom he will and whom he
will he hardens. But as for suasion and exhortation unto faith, this grace
the reprobates in the Church of God are pertakers of, as well as Gods elect. I
come unto the fifth and last.

5. That they who have once received this grace by faith can never fall totally
or finally, notwithstanding the most enormous sins that they can committ. Here
are three things to be considered. first his phrase of a certain grace
received by faith, in reference to the premises, for he calls it this grace by
faith; whereas in the premises there is no mention at all of any grace received
by faith* much less any such grace particulated; but this is their juggling
carriage throughout. First he spoke of Gods producing faith, then of Gods giving
his grace; now he supposes he has spoken of a certain grace received by
faith, this is their cogging course; when no such grace, as received by faith,
was at all mentioned before. We speak plainly in saying of faith not of a
grace (I know not what) received by faith, that it cannot totally or finally
perish.

The scripture plainly professes, that it is not possible the elect should be
seduced by false Prophets; matthew. 24.24.
now the practice of false Prophets is to corrupt their faith; but it is not
possible they should herin prevail over Gods elect. Now by the elect are here
to be understood the regenerate elect; for before regeneration, it is apparent,
they are as obnoxious to errors of faith and errors of life as any other; And
the reason why they cannot be thus seduced, our Saviors signifies Ioh. 10.29.
to be this, that they are in the hands of God the Father. My Father which gave
them me is greater then all; (now to be given to Christ by God the Father, is
to be brought unto faith in Christ by God the Father Ioh. 6.37.44. compared
with verse 35, and 47. and Ioh. 17.9.20) And none is able to take them out of
my Fathers hand. So that, when we say they cannot fall from grace, this is
spoken, not in respect of any absolute impossibility, but merely upon
supposition, to wit, manutenentiae divinae, of Gods upholding of them. And
accordingly they are said to be kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation. 1. Pet. 1. Now this impossibility of falling away from grace, in
Scholasticall accoumpt is but an impossibility secundum quid; like as we say,
it is impossible that Antichrist should fall, or the Jews be called till the
time, which God has appointed, is come, for bringing forth these great and
wonder full works of his; but the contrary is* simply possible on either part.
As for the last clause; not withstanding the most enormous sins which they
can committ, this is most calumniosly annexed; as if we maynteyned, that the
children of God cannot fall from grace, allbeit they should let the reins
loose to their lusts to committ sin, and that with greedines; whereas, to the
contrary, we teach, that God keeps them from falling away by putting his
fear into their hearts according to that Ierm. 32.40. I will put my fear in
their hearts that they shall never depart away from me; so that the right state
of our Tenet is not, that God will keep them from falling away in spite of
their praesumptuous courses, but that he will keep them by him, through an
holy fear, which is as much as to say he will hold them fast by him by
keeping them from presumtuous courses; and accordingly David after he had
prayed that God would cleanse him from his secret faults, he entreates God that
as touching presumpt^ous sins, he would keep him from them, that so he might
be innocent from the great offense.

And as this was David's prayer, so answereable hereunto was Paul's faith: He
will deliver me from every evil work, (to wit, either by obedience or by
repentance, 2. Tim. 4.17
or else from every pr^sumptuous course) and preserve me to his heavenly
Kingdom; And accordingly the Saints of God, as they are styled his called ones,
his sanctified ones, so likewise are they denominated his reserved ones in the
Epistle of Jude; For his course is to make them meet pertakers of the
inheritance of Saints in light; not to save them in spite of their unfitnes
for it, but to make them first sit for it by holiness, and then to make them
pertakers of it.

Never any of our divines maynteyned any such presumtion in Gods children as to
say with them, Deuteronomy. 29.19. I shall have peace though I walk according to the
stubbornne of mine own heart, thus adding drunkenes unto thrist; but rather
their faith is like unto that of Paul's formerly mentioned. The Lord will
delive^ me from every evil work and preserve me to his heavenly kingdom. It
is true, David once committed adultery and that drew after it a greater sin,
a practice to take away Vriah, that so he might cover the shame and scandal of
the first, but we know the first occasion of it was by improvidence happening to
spy Bathsheba from the battellments of his house, going to wash her self; but
he never committed the like afterward.

And as for these sins of his, Bertius the chiefest maintainer of the
Apostacye of Saints, professes, he will not say that David by these sins did
expel the Spirit of God, and that for weighty reasons.

Peter likewise sinned fowly in the progress of the temptation, deny^ng his
Master ^h^ise, and that in a strange manner; but if we look into the orig^nall
of it, we shall find how, through improvidence, he cast himself into the
devils mouth, ere he was aware, but our Savior had prayed for him, that his
faith should not fail, and remembering his promise, (though Peter remembered not
as yet the fair warning our Savior gave him of Satan's desire, to winowe him
as wheat) looked back upon him; and he went forth, and wept bitterly; And
immediately, upon his resurrection, word was sent hereof to the Apostles, and,
by name, to Peter, that he should not think the worse of the love of God and
of Christ toward him for this. Thus, He that is borne of God sins not (to
wit the sin unto death or the sin of apostacye) for his seed remains in
him, neither can he sin (that sin) because he is borne of God. But yet as I
said this impossibility is not absolute or simply so to be called, but only
secundum quid, and, upon supposition, to wit, of manutenency divine.

And, as for the true state of our Tenets, and the truth of our Doctrine, I may
be bold to say, that it is sufficiently cleared to the world, and that with
better authority then any they have brought to the contrary. And that as many
writings of ours remain at, this day, unanswered by them, as of theirs, are
unanswered by us.

Howsoever, if that were sufficient for this Author, why does he take pen in
hand to write at all? I come to answer what he brings in this, and not to be
putt off to the writings of others: I may deal with them, upon their own
ground, one after another, as God shall give opportunity; and hitherto, God
knows, I have enterteyned no thought or purpose, to decline any of their
writings, not their Anti. Synod. Dordrac. nor Vossius his history of the
Pelagian Heresy; but I have made choice to beginn with their Goliath first
against Perkins, then in his Conference with Iunius, and after that, to set my
self against Corvinus, the chiefest of his Lieutenants, and therein to meet
with Arminius, his twenty reasons delivered in the declaration of his opinion
before the States, and that in a particular digression at large. Neither do I
desire, in any greater respect, to live and breath on earth, then to deal with
every one of them, as I can. For, I conceave them to be no less then
mountebankes in Logic, in Philosophy, in divinity, full of ostentation, I
confess, but void of all true learning throughout; and it grieves me to see
the Christian world nowadayes, to be in danger to be cheated of their Christian
faith, as Celestinus sometimes was of his Popedom. But it is just with God thus
to give us over; For superstition increases with an high hand, and
profaneness has gotten a whores forehead: and holiness and sinceritye are
set up as marks to shoot at, and as signs to be spoken against.

THE TREATISE, Treat.
Consisting of three parts.
1. part.
The first part touching the conversion of a stranger to the faith. This I
devide into 3. Sections.

The first Section.
Sect. 1.
LEt us see now, what profitt arises from this doctrine, and how it serves to
the 3. ends and uses hereabove mentioned.

First then, if he that is of this opinion will go about to convert an
Infidel, the Infidel will tell him that he knows not how to love, nor yet
to believe that God to be good and just, which only for his own pleasure has
destinyed the greatest part of mankind to everlasting torments, without the
least consideration of any sin, at least only for the sin of one man, who
notwithstanding obtained pardon for himself, after he had wilfully committed
it. That herein he sees not the least trace, either of goodness or wisdom,
or justice to use them so cruelly, that are destitute of certain graces and
benefits, which this God has never willed to have given them, and which these
miserable wretches could obtain no other way, and to whom by an irrevocable
decree, he has imposed a necessity as well of sinning without having any
power to repent, as of perishing aeternally, which are the very words of
Zanchy, one of the principal Doctors of that Synod.

That it cannot be, that God, who in his word does make himself the lover of
mankind, who would, that all men should be saved, and that none perish, who
swears by himself, that he will not the death of a sinner, but that he
repent and live. Yea he will still the more abhor that doctrine, when it
persuadeth him, that God uses double dealing, and has a double will, the one
exterior, whereby he inviteth a sinner, making as though he were desirous of
his salvation; the other interior and hidden, which is always accomplished,
whereby he leads him, by inevitable means, as well unto sin as unto
damnation.

The infidel will say unto his converter, that Homer were sooner to be
believed then he, when he says, that: He who speaks contrary to what he
thinks ought to be held as an enemy, and hated as the gates of Hell. And
that, in the judgment of these Apostles of Dort and Arles, the most wicked
Hypocrite and Traitor in the World, would most lively repraesent the image of
that God, which he speaks of.

Consid. We read of a strange judgment of God, in sending strong delusions
amongst men, that they should believe lies, 2. These. 2.11. And the reason
hereof also is discovered unto us, v. 10. namely, because they did not receve
the love of the truth. This judgment of God seems to have course in these
times as much as ever; or rather in far greater measure then ever. The
Apostle tells us of false teachers in his days, who were but (...), vain
discoursers, Tit. 1.10.
yet were they (...). For even illusions do praevayle too often. And is it not
very strange, that our Churches, our reformed churches; our Universities, our
reformed Universities, should be carried away with such base and senseless
discourses as these. Let us then cease to wonder at the simplicity of Savages,
which are taken with coppar in steed of gold; and receave vitre^s pro gemmis,
and make as much reckoning of beads, made of glass, as others do of pearl.
For observe, I pray, the force of this Autors argument comprised in brief. An
infidel is no way likely to brook this doctrine of ours, as touching absolute
reprobation; therefore this doctrine is unsound and nothing agreeable to Gods
word.

Is it possible, that a Christian should be so far infatuated, as to make the
judgment of an infidel to be the rule of his faith in matter of salvation,
and as touching the myst^ries of godliness? And if some French wit lea^ened
with Arminianisme be carried away with such vile phantasyes, shall i^ spread so
far, as to sour the wits of our University also? why then do they not
proceed to turn Atheists? For it is well known, that the Gospel of Christ
crucified, was both a scandal to the Jews, and foolishness unto the
Gentiles, 1. Cor. ^^.

What a base opinion had the King of Assure, concerning the Religion of Samaria,
and of Jerusalem, preferring all others before it, Esa. 10.10. Like as mine
hand has found the Kingdoms of the Idols, seeing their idols were above
Samaria, and above Jerusalem, v. 11. Shall not I, as I have done to Samaria,
and to the Idols thereof, so do to Jerusalem and to the Idols thereof? Where
was found a more wise writer amongst Heathens then Taci^us? And why should not
his judgment be made the rule of our faith in matter of Religion, Hist. l. 5.
as soon as the judgment of any infidells. And what was his judgment, 1.
Concerning the Jews: Omnia (says he, speaking of the Jews) profana illis,
quae apud nos sacra. Rursum concessa apud illos omnia, quae apud nos incesta,
and comparing their rites with the rites of Bacchus, praeferres those of
Bacchus before these of the Jews. Liberum patrem coli, domitorem Orientis
quidam arbitrati sunt, nequaquam congruentibus institutis; Quippe liber festos
lae^osque ritus posuit; Iudcorum mos absurdus sordidusque. 2. Concerning
Christians, whom he describes to be Hominum genus propter flagitia invisum;
This is delivered of Christians in the days of holy Paul, who teaches us not
to do evil that good may come thereof; nor to recompense evil with evil,
but to overcome evil with goodness. Yea, and commandes every soul to be
subject to the higher powers, even then, when souls were at best, and powers
at worst. And then, let us proceed a little further, and turn direct
Atheists, maintaining the world to have been from everlasting* and that all
things come to pass by necessity of nature, because fo^sooth, in the
judgment of Aristotle, God being goodness it self, not good by a concrete
denomination, but essentially goodness naturally and necessarily communicating
it self, does bring all things to pass by necessity of nature, as Iacobus
Naclantus observes in the first of his 4. Tractates, which is of the creation
of all things by God, and that according unto Aristotle, but by necessity of
nature, which utterly overthrowes all providence divine.

Again, Zosimus that bitter Atheist, and enemy to Christians, who writes so
basely of Constantine the great* Does he not reproach our Christian profession
upon these very terms, that we offer the free forgiveness of all sins to
all them who shall embrace Christian faith? And shall we think the worse of
Christianity, for his distasting the doctrine of free justification of all by
faith in Christ? which distastfullnesse of his, is not a thing feigned by us,
or barely presumed of, as this Authors course is merely to represent the
fictions of his own brains, but left upon record by the real profession of
Zosimus himself in his history. I have read of an Arrian, executed at Norwich,
for blasphemy against Jesus Christ, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, that
being moved to repent that Christ might pardon him, should reply to this
effect: And is that God of yours so merciful indeed, as to pardon so readily
those that blaspheme him, then I renounce him and defy him.

Now, shall such a wretches judgment any thing moove us, so much as to waver
in our faith, as touching the Deity of Jesus Christ the Son of God, as also
touching his facility even to pardon blasphemies delivered against him, in case
of true repentance? What is the Socinian Tenet, at this day, concerning Christ?
do they not professedly deny, that he came into the world, to make
satisfaction for sin? For as much, as God, they say, can pardon sin without
all satisfaction. So that the preaching of satisfaction made by Christ, is no
way fit to work upon the^, it is so distasted by the^. But shall we think the
worse of our doctrine in this particular for that? Consider what is the
general judgment of infidells concerning Original sin. Do they think it
just for God to condemn an Infant, dying in original sin unto aeternall
fire? Or can they digest our Christian doctrine, concerning the general
condition of all mankind as borne in original sin, and therewithal borne
Children of wrath? Especially, in case the soul of the child proceeds not
from the parents, but immediately from God, as who by infusing it creates it,
and by creating it, infuseth it? Shall therefore we be awed by their
judgments* from harkening to Gods word, both touching the sinful condition,
wherein we are all borne, and touching the condign punishment thereof? Nay
rather, as the Apostle professes of the Gospel in general, so let us be
bold to profess of every mystery thereof in particular, that If it be hid it
is hid from them that perish, in whom the God of this world has blinded their
minds, 2. Cor. 4.3.4.
even of Infidells, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is
the image of God, should not shine unto them. Yet that God, who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness is he which has shined in the hearts of many
Infidells, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ. And in like sort has God caused the light of this truth, as
touching the absoluteness of Reprobation, to shine in the hearts of many, who
in the state of nature were no better then Infidells, being borne children of
wrath as well as others.

But come we to grapple with this man of war, and try the metal he is made
of. The Infidel (he says) will tell him, that goes about to convert him,
that he knows not how to love, nor yet believe that God to be good and just,
which only for his own pleasure has destined the greatest part of mankind,
to everlasting torments, without the least consideration of any sin, or at
least only for the sin of one man, etc. Observe first, how this Tragaedian
caryeth himself in the making of his plea, to serve his own turn. (For,
Po^ta, cum primum animum ad scribendum appulit, id ^ibi negoti credidit solum
dari* populo ut placerent quas fecisset fabulas.) And therefore he feigneth
that, before any man setts hand to the converting of an Infidel, the Infidel
is acquainted already with our doctrine, concerning absolute reprobation. This
is like the making of his own bed, that he may lie the more easily. Secondly,
what if he will not love such a God, or believe such a doctrine? shall the
doctrine be the less true, for this? In the sixth of John we read how some
distasted the doctrine of our Savior, concerning the eating of his flesh, and
said that this was an hard saying, and thereupon many of his disciples
departed from him, was our Saviors doctrine the less true, or did it deserve
the less credit for this? If a man should preach unto an Infidel, that
doctrine of Paul, where he says: Before the children were borne and when they
had neither done good nor evil, that the purpose of God according to election
might stand, not of works, but of him that calls, it was said, The elder
shall serve the younger; As it is written, I have loved Jacob, and have hated
Esau. If an Infidel will not believe this, nor love such a God as is set
forth unto us herein; what therefore shall not we believe it, and acknowledge
God to be good and just, notwithstanding this? what Christian that is not
infatuated, does not perceive the vanity and absurdity of this Authors
argumentation? and that in the investigation of divine truth, we are not to
regard, how an Infidel is likely to be affected with it in our fancy, but
whether such a doctrine be agreeable to Gods word or no?

Now, by the Apostles argumentation, which is this; Before Esau and Jacob were
borne or had done good or evil, it was said, The elder shall serve the
younger, ergo election is not of works (to wit of good works) but of the
mere pleasure of God who calls whom he will, as afterward it is said that,
he has mercy on whom he will. It does as manifestly follow:

1. Concerning Election that as it is not of works, so neither is it of faith;
seeing before they were borne, they were aequally as incapable of faith as of
works, and consequently that Gods ordeyning men unto salvation, proceeds
merely according to the good pleasure of God, and not upon consideration either
of works or faith.

2. As touching reprobation, that it is no more of evil works then election
is of good works, for as much as before they were borne they were aequally
incapable of the one as well as of the other, and the doing of evil is
expressly excluded as well as the doing of good; whence it follows
manifestly, that Gods ordeyning men unto damnation proceeds as much of the
mere pleasure of God, and with as little consideration of sin, as Gods
ordeyning men unto salvation, proceeds of the mere pleasure of God, and
without consideration of any righteousness in man; though flesh and blood be
far more apt to tumultuate and make insurrection against this doctrine of
reprobation, then against the proportionable doctrine of election.

Thirdly, consider the vanity of his amplifications in two particulars.

First, in that he aggravates the matter by the circumstance of the greatest
part of mankind; whereas it is manifest by reason, that if it be just with God
to deal thus with the least part of mankind, yea with any one; it is as just
with God to deal in like manner with the greatest part of mankind, yea with
all and every one.

Secondly, he aggravates it by the circumstance of the least consideration of
sin which we are said to deny to have place in reprobation; whereas divine
consideration has no degrees at all whereby it may be capable of greater or
less; sin indeed has degrees in man, but divine consideration has no
degrees at all.

Fourthly, to come nearer to the point, and to discover their juggling in
stating our Tenet most calumniously. Consider, I pray, do any of our divines
meynteyne, that God did ordeyne to damn any man but for sin? It is apparent
they do not; all acknowledging that like as God does damn no man but for
sin, so does he ordeyne to damme no man but for sin. For do they not all
profess that the end intended by God in the reprobation of certain men is the
manifestation of Gods justice; which if God does intend, how can it be
otherwise, but that whom he ordeynes to the suffering of everlasting torments,
those he ordeynes to the suffering of everlast^ng torments for their sin, and
for nothing else. And, to add one thing more, not for their sin which they
sinned in Adam only (for thus I had rather express my self according to
scripture phrase, then as this obscure Author does in calling it only Adams
sin) but for those very actual sins and transgressions which they are
guilty of. Now this Author caryeth the ma^ter so, as if our doctrine were, that
God ordeynes men to be tormented not for sin, but merely for his own
pleasure. And to this purpose he caryeth himself very judiciously for the
advantage of his own cause, in confounding the cause of the decree with the
cause of the execution thereof. Confounding the most received distinction of the
Schools, concerning the will of God as considerable; either quoad actum
volentis, as touching the act of God willing, or, quoad res voli^as, as
touching the things willed, by God.

The act of God willing can have no cause, says Aquinas, neither do I find
any crossing of this amongst School divines until the Jesuits arose. And the
same Aquinas, applying the same distinction to praedestination, which is the
very will of God in a certain kind, spares not to profess that Never any man
was so mad as to affirm that merits are the cause of predestination, quoad
actum praedestinantis as touching the act of God predestinating. It seems, he
knew of none so mad as to affirm this, but, since his days, there has
risen up a sect of Jesuits, a sect of Arminians more then enough, that are so
mad, and yet carry this mad doctrine of theirs in such a confidentiary
streyne, as if they were the only sober men of the world. Then again the
things willed by God in predestination are of different condition, and that so
different; that look what alone is the cause of Gods decree, that, and that
alone is the cause of the execution; look what alone is the cause of the
decree quoad actum decernentis, that and that alone is the cause of the decree
quoad rem volitam or decretam; but not so of the other, as for example, the
things willed by God in predestination are grace and glory; by grace I
understand the grace of faith and repentance. Now like as the act of Gods
decree is of the mere pleasure of God, no temporal thing being fit to be the
cause of the aeternall decree of God; in like sort, the giving of faith and
repentance proceeds merely of the good pleasure of God, according to that, God
has mercy on whom he will, Romans 9.18. and to obtain mercy at the hands of
God is to obtain faith, Romans 11.30. But as for glory and salvation, we do not
say that God, in conferring it, proceeds according to the mere pleasure of his
will, but according to a law; which is this, whosoever believes shall be
saved; which law we willingly profess he made according to the mere pleasure
of his will, but having made such a law, he proceeds according to it. No such
law has he made, according whereunto to proceed in the dispensation of grace,
of faith, of repentance. And, in like sort, though God finds men aequall when
he bestows grace on some and not others; yet he finds them not aequall, when
he comes to bestow salvation on some and not on others. The like distinction
is co^siderable on the part of reprobation, which also is the will of God in a
certain kind; I say we must distingu^she in this decree, the act of God
decreeing, and the things decreed by him. And these things are of a different
nature, and so d^fferent, that look what alone is the cause of the act, that
alone is the cause of one thing decreed by it, but not so of the other. As, for
example, the things decreed by reprobation are: 1. The denial of grace, (by
grace I mean) faith and repentance whereby that infidelity and hardness of
heart which is natural to all, is cured. 2. The denial of glory, together
with the inflicting of damnation. As touching the first of these; look what is
the cause of reprobation as touching the act of God reprobating, that and that
alone is the cause of the denial of Grace, to wit the mere pleasure of God:
For the Apostle plainly teache^h us that as God has mercy on whom he will, to
wit, in giving faith and repentance; so he hardneth whom he will, by refusing
to give them faith and repentance.


But as touching the denial of glory and inflicting damnation, God does not
proceed according to the mere pleasure of his will, but according to a law,
which is this, whosoever believes not shall be damned. And, albeit God made
that law according to the mere pleasure of his will; yet no wise man will say,
that God denies glory and inflicts damnation on men according to the mere
pleasure of his will: the case being clear, that God denies the one and
infl^cts the other merely for their sins, who are thus dealt withal. And
indeed, albeit men are found aequall in their morality, when God denies the
grace of faith and repentance unto some, which he bestows on others, yet, when
he comes to deny glory and inflict damnation on men, dealing otherwise with
others, he does not find all to be aequall, but some he finds to have ended
their days in the state of faith and true repentance, others to have finished
their days in sin, in infidelity or impaenitencye. And accordingly we
distinguishe between absolute election unto salvation, and election unto
salvation absolute; absolute reprobation unto damnation and reprobation unto
damnation absolute; we grant absolute election unto salvation; and absolute
reprobation unto damnation; but we deny either election to be unto salvation
absolute, or reprobation unto damnation absolute. Yet there is a considerable
difference between these; for as much as final infidelity and impenitency
are the meritorious causes of damnation; but faith, repentance and good works
are but the disposing causes of salvation. Yet like as God inflicts not
damnation but by way of punishment, so he does not bestow salvation, on any of
ripe years, but by way of reward. Yet here also is a difference; for
damnation is inflicted by way of punishment for the evil works sake which are
committed: but salvation is not conferred by way of reward for the good works
sake which are performed, but merely for Christ's sake. All this, this Author,
as I said, does very judiciously confound for the advantage of his cause;
taking no notice at all of these distinctions, whether wittingly dissembling
them, or ignorantly not discerning them, albeit the genuine condition of our
Tenet rightly understood, does clearly bespeake them. So that, if he would
fairly set h^mselfe to the impugning of our Tenet as touching the absolutenes
of Gods decree, he should leave the consideration of election and reprobation
as touching those things willed by them which we call salvation and damnation,
and insist upon the consideration of election and reprobation, as touching
those other things willed thereby, which we call the giving of faith and
repentance unto some, and the denial of faith and repentance unto others;
wherein we willingly profess, that God caryeth himself absolutely throughout;
not only decreeing th^se according to the mere pleasure of his will, without
all consideration of ought in man; but giving them also unto some and denying
them unto others, according to the mere pleasure of his will, without the
consideration of ought in man. Now in this point, this Author is content to be
silent; for he finds no such harshnes imputable unto us, in this Tenet of
ours: Neither indeed can he stand to maynteyne his own Tenet, without
plunging himself into manifest Pelagianisme. For, if God does not give faith
and repentance unto men according to the mere pleasure of his will, but upon
consideration of somewhat found in man, then grace shall be given according
unto works, which was condemned in the Synod of Palestine above 1200. years
ago, and all along impugned, by the orthodoxe, in opposition to the Pelagians
and Semipelagians. But I am willing to proceed further with this Author and to
prove that God should not be unjust, though he inflict torment upon a
creature though never so innocent. For, consider, shall it not be lawful with
God to do what he will with his creature?

Has not man power to do what he will with the workmanship of his own
hands? And shall this power be denied unto God? How did he afflict his most
holy and innocent Son only to make his soul an offering for the sins of
others? And what power has God given us over inferior creatures, that are not
capable of sin, are capable of pain enough through diseases, and through our
employment of them to do us their faithful services; we put them to death
after such a manner as whereby they may prove beneficial unto us, either for
food, or physic, neither do we offend God in this, though some kinds of
death prove more paynfull unto them, yet so long as hereby they prove more
useful unto us we do not transgress.

And now adays all sides confess, that it is in the power of God to
annihilate the holiest Angel in heaven, and that in the execution hereof, he
should execute no other then a lawful power. And who had not rather be
content to suffer a continual pain (so it be tolerable,) then to dye, much
more then to have both body and soul turned into nothing?

When the old world was drowned, how many thousands of infants perished in that
deluge, choked in the waters, which were guilty of no other sin, then what
they sinned in our common Father Adam? So in the destruction of Sodom and
Gommorrha by fire, how many Infants were burnt to ashes, some in their mothers
womb, some hanging on their mothers breasts; when the earth opened and
swallowed up the congregation of Dathan and Ab^ram, their little ones were
swallowed up together with their rebellious parents; and shall we say that God
was unjust in the execution of these and such like judgments?

Yet Medina professes that God, as Lord of life and death, has power to
inflict any pain on any creature be he never so innocent, and this he delivers
ex concordi omnium Theologorum Sententia. And indeed, no reason can define
those bounds and limits of pain and sorrow, either as touching intension, or
duration, within which, in the execution of pain, God must consist, and beyond
which he cannot proceed incolumi justitia. And will th^s Author deny that by
the sin of one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin has
spread it self over all, even over those that did not sin after the
similitude of Adams transgression, that is, over Infants? Is this the fruit of
God his making us after his own image, that herupon we should circumscribe
and l^mit the execution of his power over us in comparison with others, and
that only by rules devised by flesh and blood? And if he does execute no other
then a lawful power, can he be justly censured of cruelty? But seeing he
ordeynes no man to damnation but for sin, and that to the manifestation of
his justice, which is his glory; is he less good, or wise or just in this? The
scripture plainly teaches us that God made all things for himself, even the
wicked against the day of evil, Prove. 16.4
and shall we suspende our judgments, as touching our adherence unto this
divine and sacred truth, until such time as we have made trial how this
doctrine will relish with infidells? What if they are destitute of certain
graces, and that it was Gods will never to bestow any such grace upon them.
What disparagement (I say) is this to Gods goodness, wisdom, or justice, in
damning men for sin voluntarily and freely committed by them? Or, is his
meaning that God does damn them for being destitute of such certain graces?
Why did he not speak it out plainly? Was he ashamed expressly to deliver so
shameful an untruth? would he rather have the propitious Reader, to apprehend
by (...) way a belief of that which he was ashamed to utter? What divine of
ours was ever known to affirm, that God does damn a man, because God does not
regenerate him, or for the want of regeneration? God damnes no man but for
sin, and that actual, most freely committed by him, in case he live to the
committing of sins actual. It is true, that all are born children of wrath,
by virtue of that sin, which we all sinned in Adam; This is as true as the
word of God is true, and that the Epistles of S. Paul to the Romans, and to the
Ephesians are a part of Gods word. And if he has a tooth against our doctrine,
touching original sin, either touching the nature, or touching the guilt of
it, even the guilt of aeternall death, why did he not show his strength in the
impugning of it? Yet, what are these graces, which God (he says) has never
willed to have given them who are damned, according to our opinion, implying
that, according to his opinion, God did well to bestow them even on those, who
never enjoyed them? Why does he scu^k in this manner, and conceal himself, for
fear of coming to the light? Is it because he cherishes an evil conscience
in hugging some erroneous points in his bosom, therefore he hates the light?
Is faith one of those graces, which God did will to bestow on them, who yet
never had faith? If God does will to bestow faith on them, how comes it, that
they have not faith? Is not God able to give them faith? Look but upon our
selves, whatsoever we will do, and are able to do, that we do; if then God
be able to work faith in any man, if withal he will work it, how is it
possible that such a one should want faith? Who has resist^d his will? Again,
to give a man faith, is to show him mercy, for to obtain faith, is to obtain
mercy, Romans 11.30. If then God will give faith to any, he does give faith unto
him; For, he does show mercy on whom he will, Romans 9.18.

But let us devise what is this Authors meaning, as touching God his willing
faith to them that never have it; It may be, his meaning is, that God is ready
to work faith in man upon a condition; Now, what is that condition? Can it be
any other thing then some work of man? And what follows herehe^ce? but that
God gives faith according to men's works, which is pure Pelagianisme, condemned
for heresy in the Church of God from time to time. Or will they say, that God
is ready to work faith in man, provided that man will; but let them speak
out, and say plainly, that God is ready to work faith in man, provided that he
does first work it in himself. For even the will is Gods work, Phil. 3.13.
and God works in us every thing that is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ. And what shall be the condition of Gods working in us the very will?
Yet still they frame themselves to the Pelagian Tenet, as if grace were
conferred according unto works, directly contrary to the doctrine of S. Paul,
2. Tim. 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according unto our works, but according to his own purpose and grace.

Lastly, is their meaning this, God will concur with us to the working of
faith, so we will concur with him; And do any of our divines deny Gods
concurrence to every good work? though this concurrence we hold to be merely
impossible; For in like sort it is as true, that man will concur to the
working of faith, if so be God will concur with him; and this is mainteyned
by Jesuits and Arminians, and Gods foresight of this is their scientia media.

Now, consider, I pray, the absurdity hereof. For, upon this mutual
supposition on both sides, it is utterly impossible any action should proceed.
As, for example, if you say you will go to London, if so be, I will go with
you; and I say likewise, that I will go with you, if so be you will go with me;
so long as neither of us do absolutely resolve to go to London, it is
impossible either of us should go to London at all.

Again, if God does thus only concur to the working of faith, and this be
sufficient to make him the Author of faith; why may he not as well be accounted
the Author of every evil act, that is committed throughout the world? For, do
not your selves mainteyne, that God in like sort concurres to the producing of
every evil act?

But perhaps by Gods will, in this place, is meant Gods commandment, For, it
is a juggling world, wherein we live, and aequivocation is most congruous to
their courses, who desire to play fast and loose.

Now, do any of our divines deny that God commands all in the Church, all that
hear the Gospel to believe, whether they be the elect of God, or whether they
be reprobates? But will it follow herehence, that Gods purpose is to give them
faith? Or will they deny faith, to be the gift of God, and oppose Paul to his
face, Phil. 1 29. and Ephesians. 2.8?

Yet you will say, God punishes them for refusing to believe; I grant he does:
For this refusal is the free act of their wills; and by mere power of nature,
they might absteyne from this refusal, and have believed as well as Simon
Magus did, as well as profane persons do, as many an hypocrite do; which is
only fides acquisita; And, it is well known, they believe many a vile legend.

But then he will say, such a faith shall never save them; and I willingly
confess, it shall not; For it never brings forth any love of the truth, any
conformity thereunto in their life's. Yet are they never a whit the less
inexcusable that refuse to believe.

Secondly, why do they not believe but quia no^^^^^, and Austin, both in his
lib. 3. de Genesis ad literam cap. 1. and his retraction thereof, both says and
justifyes, as omnino true, that even natural men may both believe, if they
will, and from the love of temporal things convert themselves to the the
keeping of Gods commandments, if they will. For, indeed, this impotency, which
is found in all, of doing that which is good, is not so much natural as
moral, having the the root thereof either only or che^fly in the will of man;
And, if they may believe if they will, is it not just with God to punish them
for not believinge? Therefore, if a quaestion be made, why the wicked do not
this or that, which is good, his answer is quia nolunt; but, says he, if you
further demand, Quare nolunt? Imus in l^gum, says Austin, yet without
prejudice to a more diligent inquisition of the truth, I answer, says the
same divine, that the reason is, either because it appears not unto them what
it is, or, appearing what it is, yet it does not delight them; Sed ut
innotescat quod latebat, and suave fiat, quod minime delectabat, gratiae Dei
est, quae humanas adjuvat voluntates. But, to prosecute this argument farther
then this Author dreams of, we say there are but three sorts of supernatural
acts, and they are either faith devine, or hope devine, or charity divine, all
other acts are natural and performable by a natural man, whether they be the
acts of all moral virtues, or an ^xterior conformity to the means of grace,
whereby it comes to pass that some do proficere ad exteriorem vitae
emendationem; but none of these acts are acceptable with God unles they
proceed from, and are rightly qualified by those three theological virtues,
faith, hope, and love, all which are divine and supernatural; the love of God
being such as is joined with the contempt of our selfs; as for faith and hope
it appears how supernatural they are, by the supernatural condition of their
objects. Now suppose that a man were so exact, both in natural morality, and
in an outward conformity to the means of grace, as not to fail in any
particular, as he has power to perform any particular hereof naturally; in
this case, I say, if there were any such, he should be in the same case with
those that are guilty of no sin, but sin original, which yet the word of
God teaches us to be sufficient to make all men to be borne children of wrath;
though, as Austin speaks, their poena be omnium mitissima; and that such
perhaps (for so as remember he proposes it) ut mallent paenamillam subire,
quam non esse: As for the necessity of sinning, which, he says, God has
imposed upon them, Corvinus confesses that all men, by the sin of Adam, are
conjecti in necessitatem peccandi, and that out of the opinion of Arminius; his
words are these; Defens. Armin. p. 394.
Fatetur Arminius hominem sub statu peccati necessario peccare, nisi Deus istam
necessitatem gratiose tollat. And this he calls, a little after, necessitatem
peccandi. But yet, to clear this necessity, which he does not, we do not say
that any man sins any particular sin, as the sin of lying, whoring,
swearing, stealing, necessarily; for undoubtedly it is in the power of man to
absteyne from any of these; but this we say, whatsoever they do, they sin in
some sort or other; whether they committ fornication, or whether they absteyne
from fornication, or from any other act forbidden, in as much as they do not
absteyne from it in a gracious manner and acceptable unto God. For they that
are in the flesh cannot please God; as in not absteyning from it, for Gods
sake, in conscience of his word, in reference to his glory, out of the sense of
his love toward them in Christ, in acknowledgment that all power of doing
things pleasing in his sight proceeds from him, etc. As for the imposing of
this necessity of sinning upon man* When a man, by defiling his body through
incontinency, bringes some filthy disease upon him which he propagates to his
posterity, shall we say God imposes this disease upon him and his? though it
cannot be denied, but even the course of nature is the work of God; in the
like sort, when Adam, by sinning against God, corrupted his own nature, and
therewithal his whole posterity, shall we lay the blame of this on God, and
call him the imposer of it, and not on Adam, yea on our selves, who sinned in
Adam, as the Holy Ghost teaches us to speak? We speak plainly, in saying
that the love of God to the contempt of our selves, is not natural to any man,
unless he be endued with the Spirit of God, but Adam was created, (and we in
him) in the state of grace, and endued with the Spirit of God; by virtue
whereof the soul of man was fixed upon God, as upon his end, to enjoy him, and
to use all other things even our selves, and all for him, and in reference to
his glory.

But when man, by the practice of Satan circumvented, did voluntarily avert
himself from God, and converted himself first inordinately to the love of
himself, and then to the eating of the forbidden fruit for the acquiring of a
state of better perfection; It was just with God to withdraw his Spirit from
him, and leave him in that condition wherein he found him, that is averted from
God as his end, and convert to the love of himself, and to the creature, ^o
use, not for Gods sake, but for his own sake, and for the satisfying of his
own lusts, 1. Thus were we all in Adam averted from the love of God to the
contempt of our selves, unto the love of our selves joined with the contempt of
God, and, consequently, in an inordinate manner converted to the creature,
which is the original corruption, wherein we are all borne, bereaved, and that
justly, of the Spirit of God. Wherefore let us not blaspheme God, and blame him
as the imposer of this necessity upon us, but blame our selves, as the
corrupters of our selves; Or, at least, if we cannot concoct this, yet let us
deal plainly, and deny original sin, and give Paul the lie to his face, in
saying we were all bo^ne children of wrath. Yet know and consider, that Gods
power, in thus abandoning all mankind for their sin (...) Adam, is far
inferior to that power he showed in cruciating his own Son, his most
innocent and holy Son, in making his soul an offering for our sin. And
that God has power, not only to annihilate the holiest, (which is without all
question) but to inflict upon him any pain. Medina is bold to profess, Ex
concordi omn^um Theologorum Sententia; And Vasques the Jesuit acknowledges as
much, though herein, they say, he should not carry himself as Iudex, but as
Dominus vitae and mortis.

What that Zanchy is, who is here mentioned, as one of the principal Doctors
of that Synod of Arles (for so I presume is his meaning, and not of the Synod
of Dort) I know not; but had he alleged the book, and quoted the place, I
would have returned my answer thereunto, and shall be ready to do as much, as
soon as I shall be made acquainted with the particulars, out of the Author
Zanchy himself.

It is as clear as the Sun, that God in his word makes himself the lover of
Jacob, Romans 9.11.12.
and the hater of Esau before they were borne; and that as the Potter at his
pleasure makes of the same lump vessels, some to honor, some to dishonor,
so God takes power unto himself of the same lump, 20.21.22.
to make some vessels of mercy, other vessels of wrath, and in many places is
this acknowledged by Austin.

And no more is required to this then to show mercy on some, V. 1^.
and deny mercy unto others; and the scripture is express in testifying that
God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.

No such text of scripture is to be found, that God would have all to be saved;
and none to perish. And, if this were true, then all should be saved, or his
will altered; For, none can resist his will, Romans 9.19. And Austin has long
ago professed, Enchirid. cap. 96.
that, to say as this Author does, is to deny the first Article of our Creed,
concerning Gods omnipotency.

The Apostle says, indeed, that God will all to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of his truth, which is given as a reason, why we must pray for all
even for kings, and such as are in authority; Now, this special, is a special
condition of men, and therefore the general term All must be understood
suitably of all conditions of men, that is, of all sorts some, like as Peter
saw in the vessel let down unto him (...), that is of all sorts some; and thus
omne animal was in Noah's Arc; And in the same sense, it is said, that all
Jerusalem, and all Judea went forth to John, that is of all parts some; and this
is enough to animate every Christian to pray for their own King; For why may
not he be of the number of Gods elect as well as an other*

As for reprobats, if they were known unto us, we should by Austins advise no
more pray for the^ then for the devils themselves. De civit. Dei. l. 21. c. 24.
Si de aliquibus ita Ecclesia certa esset, ut qui sunt illi etiam nosset, qui
licet adhuc in hac vita sint constituti, tamen praedestinati sunt in aeternum
ignem ire cum diabolo: tam pro ijs non oraret quam proipso. And as Paul, as
before said, so Peter professes of God, that he is (...) not willing that any
of us shall perish; is this to be the lover of all mankind? then let that
place also witness God to be a lover of all mankind, where it is said: 1.
Ioh. 2, 19.
They went from us but they were not of u^; for had they been of us, they had
continued with us. Yet because we do not love to carry our selves (this Author
like) through aequivocation, in hugger mugger. We consider the common doctrine,
that passions are not attributed unto God quoad affectum, but quoad effectum.
And accordingly we distinguishe of the effects of Gods love in respect whereof
he is said to love his creature. For they may be considered either in respect
of life temporal, or of life spiritual, or of life aeternall. The first
effects of love, as touching life temporal, God communicates to all that have
life; thus he is ^ayde to save both man and beast, and the eyes of all are
said to wait upon him; he hears the cry of ravens; the sparrowes fall not to
the ground without the providence divine; The very Lions roaring after their
prey, do seek their meat at God.

Thus he may be said to be as the Savior, so the lover of all men; 1. q 23.
art. 2. ad 1.
but especially of them that believe, to wit, both in respect of the comforts
of life spiritual, and the joys of life aeternall which he affoordes unto
them. Thus in effect, Aquinas answered long ago, Deus omnes homines diligit and
etiam omnes creaturas, in quantum omnibus vult aliquod bonum, non tamen
quodcunque bonum vult omnibus. In quantum igitur quibusdam non vult hoc bonum
quod est vita aeterna, dicitur ^os habere odio vel reprobare. As for that of
swearing by himself, that he will not the death of a sinner, there is no such
text at all; or if in France there be any such text received, yet it becomes
not our universities to follow outla^dishe translations before the most
authentical translation of our own Church; who read it thus; I have no
pleasure in the death of a sinner. And as Piscator observes, a man may will
that, wherein he takes no pleasure; like as a sick man takes no pleasure in a
bitter potion, yet he is willing to take it to recover his health. So ^s man
willing to loose a limme, (though he takes no pleasure in it) to save his life.
And then again as the words lie, they are directly contrary to Christian
reason; For does not God inflict death on thousands and does not the scripture
expressly testify, that God works all things according to the counsel of
his will, Ephesians. 1.11. And allbeit he takes no pleasure in the death of the
sinner, yet the scripture is as express in acknowledging that God delights in
the execution of judgment, Ier. 9.24
as well as in the execution of mercy. I am the Lord which shows mercy,
judgment, and righteousness in the earth, for in these things I delight,
says the Lord. Indeed he is said not to punish willingly, or to grieve the
Children of men; but understand it aright, this is as much as to say, he does
not these things animi causa, for mere pleasure sake, but being provoked
thereunto by somewhat, even by the sins of men, whereas favors he many times
distributes according to the mere pleasure of his will, not so punishments:
but therein he caryeth himself as a tender Father, chastising his Son, who is
dear unto him. And, albeit Earthly Fathers sometimes chasten their children
after their own pleasure. Heb. 1^.10.
Yet God always chasteneth us for our pro^ite, that we might be partakers of
his holiness. Yet this dealing of God is with his children only Father like,
not with others.

Indeed, God takes pleasure in a man's repentance, but not in his death. As for
the double will which he pretends, we make in God; we, to the contrary,
acknowledge but one will in God in proper speech; and that is voluntas
propositi, his purpose or decree; in which sense the Apostle speaks, in
saying who has resisted his will, Romans 9.10. And the Psalmist, whatsoever the
Lord will, that he does both in Heaven and in Earth: but we find in scripture
phrase, that his commandments are also called his will. But the object of the
one is far different from the object of the other; which this Author, and
such like, desire to confound throughout; and no mervail, if an evil
conscience makes them to hate the light.

Now, we say, even Gods commandment notes the will o^ God also in proper
speech, to wit, what shall be our duty to do; for undoubtedly whatsoever God
commands us, it is his will in proper speech, that it shall be our duty to
do it. But by the will of God in distinction from that will which is signified
by his commandment, we understand his purpose to have this or that to be
brought to pass. As for example, God commanded Abraham to sacrifice Isaac,
therefore it is Gods will to bind him to the doing hereof, and to make it his
duty to do it; But it appears by the sequel, that it was Gods purpose, that
Isaac should not be sacrificed. In like sort he commanded Pharaoh to let Israel
go; this then was Pharaohs duty; and it was Gods will to oblige him hereunto,
and to make it his duty to let Israel go; but withal he revealed to Moses,
that he would harden Pharaohs heart, the consequent whereof was this, that he
should not let Israel go for a long time.

Now, let every sober man judge whether there be any double dealing in this* or
if it be double dealing, whether the Scripture it self do not attribute it
unto God; and whether they may not as well charge the scriptures for
attributing double dealing unto God, as they do charge us with the like.

As for desires and velleities, we acknowledge no such imperfections in God,
being such as are incompatible with his omnipotency.

As for Gods invitation of a sinner unto grace, we know not what he means by
grace, unless it be faith and repentance; and by grace heretofore he meant
nothing less, for ought I could perceave, but the more aequivocall a term is,
the fitter it is for their turn, that desire to play fast and loose. Now, Gods
invitation hereunto is no other the^ by professing, that by faith and
repentance they shallbe saved, without faith and repentance they shallbe
damned. And hereupon by his ministers he commands them, entreats them,
beseeches them, that they will believe and repent, that they may be reconciled
unto God and saved. But what is the ministers aim in this? Surely, though they
become all things to all men, 1 Cor. 9.22.
yet their scope is only to save some by all means, even by entreating,
obt^sting, beseeching. And who are these some? None but the elect, 2. Tim. 2,
10. I suffer all things for the elects sake.

And this he learnt of the Lord Jesus, when he came to Corinth, Act. 18.9.10.
for there the Lord spoke unto him in a vision by night, saying: Fear not, but
speak and hold not thy peace, for I am with thee, and no man shall lay hands
on thee, for I have much people in this ci^te. And indeed, therefore Christ
dyed, not for the Jews only, but that he should gather together into one the
children of God, Ioh. 11.52 Ioh 10.16
which were scattered, all the world over. According to that profession of his
formerly made: Other sheep have I, which are not of this fold, them also must
I bring, and they shall hear my voice: and there shall be one sheepefolde and
one shepherd.

And indeed, how could it be otherwise, then that Gods ministers should carry
themselves indifferently toward all, inviting all, entreating all, beseeching
all; For can they d^stinguish between elect and reprobate? (...) was God bound
to reveal unto them, who were elect, and who were not?

Then again, Gratia and de lib. arbit. cap. 2
we know full well, that man is of a presumptuous nature, presuming of the
power and liberty of their wills, Dicere solet humana superbia Sifecissem
fecissem, and accordingly they are as apt to say, Si audivissem Evangelium etc
didissem Evangelio.

The Arminians are acquain^ed with this full well. What then can they expect
more at the hands of God then to cause his Gospel to be preached unto them.
But if withal God reveals unto us the natural impotency that is in man,
contracted unto him by the sin of Adam, to the end he might beat out such
presumptuous thoughts out of the hearts of man, that so as many as to whom he
is pleased to afford the grace of faith, and repentance might give him the
glory of it. Shall proud man take adva^tage of the ministry of the word, as
Proceeding indifferently toward all that hear it, thereby to outface the
prerogative of Gods grace only effectual to the working in us both faith and
repentance; and to nourishe the presumption of their own works, concerning
the power and liberty of their own wills to that which is good; whereas those
revelations of our natural impotency should rather humble us, and move us to
wait upon God for the curing of it, not by heating only, but by the sweet
irradiation and inspiration of his holy Spirit.

But let Arminians continue to abhor this doctrine, we by Gods grace shall
continue to abhor the contrary; and why should their abhorring of ou^s be any
better argument on their side; then our abhorring of theirs is an argument on
our side; yet our cause, God be thanked, is not so desperate, as that we
should be provoked to make use of so base argumentations; much less of
running unto Infidells to beg their approbation; though commonly on the
contrary we are charged, to have too great correspondency herin with the
Stoickes of ancient times, and with the Turks in these days; And indeed I
read in Busbequins, that when the Turks hea^d him discourse of Gods loving
Jacob and hating Esau, they herupon conceaved a good opinion of him, as likely
to embrace their opinion; and indeed we are nothing ashamed to embrace the
doctrine of S. Paul in that, not for the Turks sake, but for the word of Gods
sake, we discourse with the Apostle of leading men unto repentance, but where
do any of our divines discourse of leading men unto damnation? As for means
of damnation; we know none; we know God has given us means of grace. Means
of damnation on man's part can be none but sins, yet these cannot be called
his means, or intended by him as means, for as much as the intention of
means arises from the intention of the end; but no man or devil intends to
bring upon himself damnation as the end whereunto he intends to sin. Again,
the sin of man cannot be any means intended by God; For as much as means
are intended but by him who is the Author of them: but God neither is nor can
be the Author of any sin, for sin, as Austin long ago professed of Malum,
has not causam efficientem, but only deficientem; and the cause of sin
deficient, is deficient culpabiliter, which is not incident unto God. He could
I confess keep any creature from sin if it pleased him, but if he will not,
and does not, herin he committs not any culpable defect, for he is not bound
to preserve any man from sin. The permission of sin, I willingly confess
is Gods work, and this he may and does intend, and that as a means to his
own glorious ends, which is the manifestation either of his mercy or his
justice, and not the damnation of any. For the damnation of the creature
neither is nor can be Gods end, but his own glory; Prove. 16.4
and accordingly Solomon tells us God made all things for himself, even the
wicked against the day of evil. So he has created some, both Angels and men,
and permitted them to sin, and will damn them for their sin, to the
declaration of his glory in the way of justice vindicative. Much less is the
sin of man Gods end that by certain means he should lead them herunto
which means this Author disembles throughout, contentinge himself (as I
suppose) with his own ignorance herin, or which is worse, dissembling what he
means herby, by the generality and indefinitenes of the term, giving way to
the affections of his propitious readers to shape them and specify them as
they please* and so it be with a congruous accommodation to their own Tenet,
it shall be accepted with him, though their conceytes prove never so
contrariant one to another.

The cause of sin I know none, but the will of the creature; occasions hereof
are many, all which (as Arminius confesses) are brought to pass and
administered by Gods providence; and these God makes the matter of exercising
the virtue of his children ordinarily; strengthening them against the
temtations of Satan, who labors to corrupt their souls by such occasions,
with others he deals not in like manner, but leaves them unto themselves
either according to the mere pleasure of his will, who is not bound to give
strength to any, whereby he shall resist temptation; Or, as in some cases, most
deservedly, namely, when out of the pride of their hearts, they think
themselves able enough both to resist occasions unto sin, and to keep
themselves undefiled by them; and also the temptations of Satan.

And it is just with God to deal in like manner with his own Children, when
they grow wanton, and the fear of God is not so quick in them, as it should
be to wait upon God, and committ themselves and their ways, to Gods good
providence, to be protected and ordered by him.

What Homer said in the person of Achilles, speaking to Ulysses, as concerning
Agamemnon, we are reasonably well acquainted with. (...).
(...).
But wherein can we be justly taxed for imputing any such hypocrisy to God? By
his commandment he signifies what is our duty to do, but by his purpose he
decrees what shall be done or not done, God commanded Abraham to sacrifice his
Son Isaak, and thereby made it his duty to offer Isaak; but withal he
determined that Isaak should not be sacrificed, but when Abraham came to the
point to sacrifice him, to hold his hand: do we read that Abraham complained
of any hypocrisy in God herupon, or of his double dealinge herin? Nothing but
gross ignorance hinders our adversaries in not discerninge so plain a
difference and that most just without any color of doublenes or hypocrisy; or
nothing but gross dissimulation is performed by them in not taking notice of
it.

The second Section.
NOw, Sect. 2.
if this new Evangelist do tell him, that the passages of Scripture, which
say, that God would have all men to be saved, ought to be understood of some of
every nation and condition; the Infidel will reply, that then the Scripture
ought with much more reason to say, that God would have all men to be damned,
because that in every nation there are far more of these then of them, and how
that in all reason the denomination should be taken from the greatest number.
But then the Catechist perchance may say, that God indeed wills the
conversion of all men, yet only so, as he approoveth of those things in
themselves, and not that he gives all men the means necessary to obtain them,
whereupon our Catechumenist will be the more astonished, and demand how it is
possible that God by any absolute and irrevocable decree, should have ordained,
that those things which he naturally detesteth and hates, should come to
pass, and yet that those things, which he loves and likes, should not, And if
it were possible, his Catechist would make him turn Manichee, and think that
this evil God, or evil beginning, that is the Author of all evil, has
continual war with that good God, which loves righteousness, and hates
wickedness. And that an honest man should have just reason to be angry with
him that did interpret his words in that manner, that this Catechist
interprets those of holy Scripture, whereby it follows, that God is the
Author of all the wickedness, that has been, is, or shall be in the world.
But then again the other will reply, that he confounds the sin with the
act, and that God causes the second, but not the first: Whereas the other,
perceaving the mystery will again tell him, that the greatest Doctors of both
the Synods have written, that God has praedestinated men as well to the means
as unto the end, and that the act is not the cause of damnation, as it is the
act, but as it is the sin; and that those miserable men, that are under the
decree of reprobation, are no more able to absteyne from sin, then shun their
damnation.

Consid. I have read, that some in Scotland, about the beginning of
Reformation, hearing speech of the New Testament, suspected it to have been
Erasmus making, and rejecting it, called for the old, but this Author, who
terms us new Evangelists, caryeth himself so, as if he cared not much, either
for new or old: His writing throughout, savoureth so little of the word of God.
Yet here he mentions passages of scripture at large, and all that he imputes
hereunto, is to say, that God would have all men to be saved: He alleges or
quoteth none, neither do I know any passage of Scripture that affirms this.

That God will have all to be saved S. Paul says, 1. Tim. 2. but no where that
I know does it say, that God would have all men to be saved.

And as for that passage, 1. Tim. 2. S. Austin, 1200 years ago, interpreted
it of genera singulorum, and prooved it to be according to the analogy of
scripture phrase, and disproved the sense which this Author embraces, as
overthrowing the first article of our Creed, as touching Gods omnipotencye. So
then S. Austin by this Authors Criticisme is the new Evangelist, and this
Author is the old Evangelist, if any Evangelist at all. And what sober
Christian would not affect to be accoumpted a new Evangelist with Austin (if to
concur with him be to be a new Evangelist) then to be an old Evangelist, or
none at all, such as this Author.

Nay, Gerardus Vossius, who is conceaved to have labored most in communicating
unto us the new Doctrine of Antiquity on these points; Vossius in trist.
Pelag. p. 638.
interprets this will of God, touching the salvation of all, of voluntas
conditionata thus, God will have all to be saved, to wit, in case they
believe. Which voluntas conditionata in this sense neither Austin did; nor do
we deny. Though we think it nothing agreeable to this place of Paul, who
attributes unto this will of God not only the saving of all, but their coming
also to the knowledge of his truth; The condition whereof Vossius (for ought I
remember) does not explicate. But the same Vossius confesses that the Apostle
in that place, in saying* I will that prayers be made for all men, for Kings,
etc. does herein subijcere speciem generi, as much as to say, that by the word
Kings, he setts down the specialty of that general ( all men) which formerly
he mentioned, Now, the specialtie, here mentioned, is clearly a special
condition, and consequently by the general (all men) is to be understood all
conditions of men, as Pisca^or a^gu^th. And so when giving a reason of this his
exhortation, he adds, that God will have all to be saved; in congruitie to
the former we may very well understand thereby all conditions of men, which is
enough to just^fie, that it is the duty of every Christian congregation to
pray for their rulers and governors, because even amongst Kings, God has some
that belong unto him, and therefore their own Kings may be some of them, for
any thing they know to the contrary.

So (...), which Peter in the Linen Vessel let down unto him, at the
farthest extent, could but signify of all sorts of fourefooted beasts some.
And if we extend S. Paul's words to signify all and every one, we must be
necessarily cast upon one of these two manifest absurdities, as either to
maintain that Gods will is changed, or to deny that God is omnipotent, seeing
he can be resisted; for most certain it is, that all are not saved, most
certain that all do not come to the knowledge of his truth.

Now, God cannot be changed, Mal. 3.6. I the Lord am not changed, Iac. ^. With
him is no variableness, nor shadow of change, neither can his will be
resisted, Romans 9.19.

And if this Author think good to mainteyne the contrary, let the indifferent
judge, which of us is to be accoumpted the new Evangelist, this Author, or we;
or rather whether he be not to be reckoned a plain Atheist rather then any
Evangelist.

But then, says he: The Infidel will reply, that the scripture ought with
much more reason to say, that God would have all men to be damned, because that
in every nation and condition there are far more of these, then of them, and
how that in all reason the denomination should be taken from the greatest
number. Whereto I answer, that the Infidel here mentioned, is this Author, for
he alleges none that thus disputed before him, either Infidel or other; But
I deny, that the scripture ought with much more reason, or with any reason to
say, that God would have all men to be damned; although put the case that in
every nation and condition, there be more of these then of them. And his reason
drawn from the denomination to be taken from the Major part, is nothing to the
present purpose.

For the question here about the interpretation of S. Paul's phrase, is only
this, whether the word All be to be interpreted of all sorts, or of all and
every one; so that the rule of denomination taken from the Major part, is
nothing pertinent to this. The question being only, whether genera singulorum,
or singula generum, be here meant; not whether some of all sorts, or all of
every one of all sorts. Which being resolved, and that hereby is meant genera
singulorum; It may be farther quest^oned, whether genera singulorum do imply
every particular of these kinds, or only some of them; For it is well known,
that the phrase is ind^fferent to the one as well as the other: and that genera
singulorum, are aequally preserved inti^e in some particulars, as in many, or
most, or all. Like as the Species of the Sun is mainteyned exactly as well in
that one Sun, which shines by day in the Firmament, as if there were twenty
Suns.

Secondly, though the reason here given from the denomination to be taken from
the greater part, were pertinent, yet were it nothing pertinent to the Apostles
purpose in this place, to say, that God would have all men to be damned; For,
this were no agreeable reason to moove them, to pray for all, for Kings, and
all tha^ are in authority. As if the Apostle should say thus: I will have you
to pray for all, for God will have all to be damned; Austin. d^ civit. Dei. l.
21, c. 24.
For, says Austin, if Gods Church knew who were predestined to be sent into
aeternall fire with the devil and his Angels, they would no more pray for
such then they would pray for the devil himself; so that this Author does
miserably overlashe in this his subtiltye, and betrays more nakedness then
any sober and wise Infidel were like to do. Then again, the Instances of
scripture are clearly against him. For, when every footed beast, (as the
scripture speaks) was seen by Peter in a vision; In all likelihood, they were
not the most part of every kind, but the smallest rather of every kind; and
accordingly this Author might conclude, that considering denominations are
taken from the Major part, therefore it is rather to be said, that every
fowre-footed beast was not seen by Peter, for certeynely the Major part of
every kind was not; Yet in this sense to speak of it, in that case was
nothing pertinent, but rather contrariant to that which follows: Rise Peter,
kill, and eat.

In like sort, seeing in all likelihood more people stayde at home, both in
Jerusalem and in Judea, then were they who went out to John, and according to
this Authors rule it were more fit to say, all Jerusalem, and all Judea stayde
at home, when John the Baptist preached: Yet was it nothing congruous, but
contrariant rather to the Evangelists scope to write so; his purpose being to
set down of what aestimamation was the Authority of John by the confluence
of people from all parts unto him, and therefore when he writes that all Judea
and all Jerusalem went forth unto him; the meaning can be no more then this,
namely, that from all parts, of Judea and of Jerusalem some flocked unto him;
thus we see how this Authors Spirit affecting to transform himself into an
Infidels opposition of the grace of God, becomes in the issue destitute of
common sense, such be the success of those, that prefer the dictates of
their own brain before the oracles of God.

In the next place he desires to meet with a distinction of our divines
concerning voluntas approbans, and voluntas decernens, which distinction this
Author either understands not, at least the right accommodation of it, as
touching that member he insists upon, or dissembles it, so that partly the
ignorance of his mind partly the corruption of his will, is that leprosy
wherewith this his writing is defiled throughout. For, voluntas approbans in
our sense, is subordinate to voluntas praecipiens; look what God commandes to
be done, the same God approves when it is done, and would approve of it in any,
if it were done by him; and thus the will of approbation is in like manner
distinguished from the will of Gods decree as the will of Gods commandment;
Only here is the difference between the will approving, and the will
commanding; For Gods commandment precedes the doing of that which is
commanded, but Gods approbation follows the doing of it. But this Author
takes voluntas approbans in a different sense presupposing it to precede the
doing of a thing as if it were all one with that will, which the Schoolmen
call voluntas beneplaciti; which is nothing so, for that voluntas beneplaciti
is all one with voluntas propositi, or voluntas decernens. the will of Gods
decree, denoting that which God thinks good shall come to pass whether it be
good or evil: good by his effection, evil by his permission; For even the
Jews and Gentiles, Herod and Pilate when they were gathered together against
the holy Son of God, did but that which Gods hand and Gods counsel had
foredetermined to be done. So that taking Gods will of approbation as this
Author takes it, to wit, preceding the thing done, it is all one with Gods
decree, and therefore cannot make a member distinct from it. Undoubtedly the
sacrificing of Isaake had been accepted with God, and Abraham's obedience
therein, had not God restrained Abraham from execution of that which God
commanded him; albeit by Gods restraint it appears that God had determined,
that, when it came to the issue, he should not sacrifice him, which will of
God was voluntas beneplaciti, as Schoolmen call it: In like sort had Pharaoh
let Israel go in obedience to Gods command, God had approved it; albeit it
appears, by the revelatio^ made to Moses, that God hardened Pharaohs heart,
that he should not let Israel go; this with us is as true as the oracles of
God, whatsoever this Author conceytes, new Evangelist like, out of the oracles
and dictates of his own brain. In like sort, that God ordeyneth that many
things which he naturally detesteth and hates, shall nevertheles come to
pass, is no new Gospel of ours, but the very doctrine of the new testament;
For the ignominious usages of the Son of God and Savior of the world,
wrought by Herod and Pontius Pilate, together with the Gentiles and people of
Israel, were as naturally detested and hated by God, as ever any courses were
from the beginning of the world unto this day; yet the holy Apostles with one
consent profess, that both Herod and Po^tius Pilate together with the Gentiles
and people of Israel, were gathered together against the holy Son of God, to
do that which Gods hand and Gods counsel had (not only determined, but)
predetermined to be don. What courses are more naturally detested and hated by
God, then for Kings to use their power to the supporting of Antichrist? O what
bloody courses were these! take but a scantling of them by the martyrdomes of
Gods Saints in the days of Queen Mary, when this land was made another
Aceldama, a field of blood. Yet has the holy Ghost testified that God it was
who put into the hearts of those Kings to fulfill his will (not his will of
commandment, but only his decree) and to do with one consent, for to give
their profess, that Non aliquid sit nisi omnipotens fieri velit (he does not
say, nisi quod omnipotens fieri praecipit) and, because amongst such things as
come to pass, some are evil and some are good, and in this saying of his he
comprehendes them all, therefore he adds, by way of explication, vel sinendo ut
fiat, vel ipse faciendo. Therefore even evil things God will have come to
pass in Austins judgment. But how? Only by suffering them; and good things by
effecting them. So that this doctrine of ours is as old as the doctrine of
Austin, yea, as the doctrine of the holy Ghost. And let this Author look unto
it how he will clear himself from coining a new Gospel, and that neither
out of the new Testament, nor out of the old, nor out of any tolerable monument
of Antiquity so much as pretended by him, but merely out of the invention of
his own brain.

Yet we want not clear demonstration of the truth of this, manifestly provinge
that, either they must deny Gods foreknowledge of evil, or be driven to
acknowledge that God decrees it shall come to pass by his permission: For it
cannot be foreknowne by God as future, and that from everlasting, v^les it were
future, and that from everlasting, as all confess. Now let us soberly inquire
how the crucifying of the Son of God became future, and that from
everlasting; Not of its own nature; for, if so, then should all things even
the most contingent things become future by necessity of nature. But if of
their own nature, they were things merely possible, their transmigration out
of the condition of things merely possible, into the condition of things
future, could not be wrought without a cause. And what could be the cause
hereof? Not any thing without God, for as much as this transmigration was made
from everlastinge; for, from everlasting they were foreknowne by God as future,
therefore from everlasting they were future. But without God nothing was from
everlastinge, and consequently could not be the cause of that* which was from
everlastinge. Therefore the cause of this transmigration must be found within
the nature of God, or no where. Inquire we therefore, what that is within the
nature of God that may be a fit cause here of; Now the knowledge of God alone
cannot be the cause hereof, as which rather supposes things future, then makes
them so; It remaynes then that the decree of God, and that alone, is the cause
of this transmigration. If to avoyde this, they fly to the essence of God as
the cause hereof; I farther urge, that if the essence of God be the cause hereof;
then, either, as working necessarily, or as working freely. Not as workinge
necessarily, for then all things shall proceed from God working by necessity
of nature, which is Atheistical utterly overthrowing all divine providence: if
as working freely; this is as much as to confess that Gods free will is the
cause hereof, which indeed is most true. But this Author, like his fellows, is
very cautious, for he does not deny that God has ordained that those things
shall come to pass which he naturally detesteth and hates; but only seems to
deny that God has ordained it by an absolute and irrevocable decree. So that
he seems willing to confess, that what evil soever was, or is, or shallbe
found in the world, comes to pass by Gods decree; only he denies that this
decree whereby he decreed the crucifying of Christ, and such like abominable
courses was an absolute and irrevocable decree. So that the question between
us, according to this Authors judicious stating of it, is, not, whether evil
things are decreed by God or no; but rather, supposing on both sides that they
are decreed by God, the question between us is only about the manner of this
decree, or about the nature of it; as whether it be absolute or conditional
(for what other member they devise in this case contradistinct to decree
absolute, I understand not) and, in like sort, whether the decree be
irrevocable or of a revocable nature.

Now, as for this latter distinction, to justify some decrees of God to be of
a revokable nature, he must be driven to coin, not only a new Gospel, but a
new word of God throughout. For, if Gods decrees be revocable, then is he also
changeable, which is contrary to the testimony, both of the old Testament, and
of the new, as before has been showed.

In like sort, Bradwardine has long ago demonstrated, that no will of God is
conditional, but absolute throughout, which I understand quoad actum volentis,
or decernentis. And his demonstration is this. If there be any conditional
will in God; he condition of that will of God, is either willed by God, or no.
If not willed by him, then that must be acknowledged to come to pass in the
world, without the will of God, which he holds for a great absurdity; but if
that condition be also in some sort willed by God, then either absolutely, or
conditionally; If absolutely, then also the thing conditionated shallbe
absolutely willed by God.

As for Example. if God does will that a man shall be saved in case he believe,
and withal does absolutely resolve to give him faith, and make him believe,
this is in effect absolutely to resolve to save him

But if it be said, that the condition spoken of, is willed by God, not
absolutely, but conditionally: then a way is open to a progress in infinitum,
which all disclayme. For, as touching that second condition, I will renew the
former argument, inquiring whether that be also willed at all by God or no, and
if it be, whether it be willed absolutely or conditionally, so that, either we
must subsist in some thing that is absolutely willed by God, and, consequently,
all that depend thereupon, as conditionated, shall in like manner be absolutely
willed by God, or a progress from one condition to another, and that without
end, cannot be avoided.

Lastly, if any will of God be not absolute, but conditional, then surely the
decrees of salvation and damnation are conditional, even as touching the very
acts of Gods decrees; but I will evidently demonstrate, that, in Christian
reason, this can not be. For if any thing be the condition of the decree of
salvation, then, either by necessity of nature, or by the constitution of God:
not by necessity of nature, as is evident of it self, and all confess; but
neither by the constitution of God, as I prove thus. If by the constitution of
God; then God did constitute, that is ordeyne, that upon the position of such a
condition (to wit faith, etc.) he would ordeyne men unto salvation.

Mark, I pray, the notorious absurdity hereof. God did ordeyne that he would
ordeyne, or God did decree that he would decree. Where the aeternall act (...)
of Gods decree and ordination, is made the object of his decree or ordination;
whereas it is well known, that the objects of Gods decrees, are only things
temporal, and not things aeternall.

The same argument may, with the same evidence, be applied to the disprooving
of the conditional decree of condemnation. As for this Authors reason, wherein
he rests, namely, that thus the things, which God hates, shall come to pass,
and the things he loves, shall not com to pass: Observe the vanity of this
argumentation, plausible only to ignorants, or such as shutt their eyes against
truths evidence. For the things here spoken of, are not things considered in
their kind, but only in the particulars of certain kinds.

God will have obedience to every commandment of h^s come to pass, but not
every particular obedience possible, For, if God would prolong the life's of his
Children, more particular acts of obedience should come to pass then now there
do.

In like sort, if Saul had been converted many years sooner, which
undoubtedly was not impossible unto God, many gracious acts had been performed
by him more then were.

In like sort, if God had cut shorter the life's of wicked men, many evil
actions of theirs had been praevented.

But will any wise men hereupon challenge God, for suffering those things to
come to pass, which he hates, or for decreeing them to come to pass by his
suffering; or for hindering many good acts in particular which he loves?
Especially considering that the evil actions, he is able to make them fit
matter for the demonstration of his glory, either in the way of mercy, or in
the way of justice. And, on the other side, his glory is sufficiently
manifested by that obedience, which is performed by his children.

Lastly, if God loves obedience, does he not most of all love perfect
obedience? Yet it is not his pleasure to give any of his children, in this
life, such a measure of grace as to keep them from all sin. And, if he gives
them not longer life, they cannot perform more, though, as long as they live,
they want not the means of grace, no, nor reprobates, neither, living in the
Church of God, where the Gospel is preached: and other means of performing
obedience unto God I know none.

Now, will any wise and sober man find this any thing strange in the course of
Gods providence? But such like are the argumentations of this Arminian sect,
right like unto the fruit of Sodom, fair to see to without, but, if you
crushe them, in cineres abeunt, and vagam fuliginem, as Solinus writes. Yet
this Author is so in love with this his Juno of invention, like as Ixion was
with his cloud, that he adds furthermore, that, if it were possible (and why
not possible for an Infidel to turn Manichee, and an Arminian to turn
Atheist, if so be he be not one already?) His Catechist will make him turn
Manichee, and think that this evil God, or evil beginning, that is the
Author of all evil, has continual war with that good God, which loves
righteousness. This is like the cogging of a dye, which he foysts in, when
substantial matter fayles him, to cheat his reader, when he cannot inform
him; and to humor his proselyte, when he wants all good means to strengthen
his faith. He supposes an evil God, as the Author of all evil mainteyned on
our side, and that he warreth with the good God that loves righteousness;
whereas no mention was made of any such imputation before, yet here he brings
it in, as though it had been, not only mentioned before, but prooved. This is
the frothe of his affection, whereby he is in love with his former
argumentation, though as vile a one, as ever sober man breathed. Belike Austin
was a Manichee, when, considering all things that come to pass throughout the
world, he was bold to profess that, Non aliquid fit, nisi omnipotens fieri
velit, vel sinendo ut fiat, vel ipse faciendo. The Apostles were all Manichees,
when, with one consent, they professed that both Herod and Pontius Pilate
together with the Gentiles and people of Israel, were gathered together against
the holy Son of God, to do that which Gods hand and Gods counsel had
foredetermined to be done. Belike Arminius himself was a Manichee in this
shallow caps judgment, when he said: Deus voluit Achabum mensuram scelerum
suorum implere; and that, when God permits a man to will ought, whether good or
evil, necesse est ut nullo argumentorum genere persuadeatur ad nolendum. Brad
wardine; no doubt, shall, in th^s Authors deep and judicious censure, be
reckoned for a Manichee; where he professes, that, Circa quodcunque versatur
Dei permissio, circa idem versatur eius volitio actualis. Yet the Manichees
denied the books of the old Testament to be the word of God, at least of the
good God; and indeed they do afford plentiful testimony of the secret
providence of God in evil; and, to my judgment, the Nation of Arminians are
far more likely to concur with the Manichees, in this particular, then we.
As for the interpretation of that passage of Scripture intimated by him, but
untruly represented, I have already spoken thereof, and justified our
interpretation by the analogy of the Text of Scripture Phrase, by clear
reason, and by the authority of Austin concurring with us herein. As for his
argument, here intimated, that an honest man might be angry to have his words
so interpreted, I willingly grant it. For truly my desire is, that all, and
every one in my congregation would believe and repent, that he might be saved;
but I have no power to work this; but God is armed with power to effect this;
and therefore were it his will or desire to save all, all should be saved;
For who has resists his will?

But this is the usual course of Arminians, to compare man with God; and not
so only, but to build arguments upon such a comparison, as if the weak desires
of man were very decently to be attributed unto God. Yet this Author comes not
directly to obtrude upon us such consequences, but cunningly insinuates them,
so to creep serpentlike upon a man's affections to infect them.

He talks, how that it follows, that God is the Author of all wickedness,
yet gives no premises where hence to conclude it, leaving it to us, to pick
them out of his drossy warehouse, be like, from Gods decreee, whereby things
are decreed by our opinion, which yet he brought in Musis and Apolline nullo;
not so much as mentioning the Author by whom, or place where this is delivered.

And indeed these men are so zealous in opposing Gods decree, as that they have
an edge (so far as we may guess by the face of their discourse) to deny that
foolish repentance and obedience is decreed by God. And some have not blushed
to profess, that God decreed contingency, but not the contingent things
themselves: which is as good as, in plain terms, to profess that God
decrees no man's faith and repentance.

But Austin is express, Non aliquid fit, nisi omnipotens fieri velit; The
Scriptures are express concerning the betraying, mocking, scourging,
buffeting, crucifying the Son of God; to wit, Aug. de civit. Dei, lib. 12.
c. 7 Ne quaerat efficientem causam malae voluntatis. Non enim efficiene sed
deficiens.
that in all these things they did what God had foredetermined to be done.

Hence he infers, that God is the Author of all wickedness. I have met
with many dissolute discourses of this sect, but like to this I have not
hitherto met with any. Of wickedness we say with Austin, that none can be the
Author of it, by way of a cause efficient; the cause thereof being only a cause
deficient. Now man may thus be the Author of it, to wit, either in doing what
he ought not to do, or leaving undone what he ought to do; but this cannot
possibly be incident unto God; namely, that he should, either do what he
ought not to do, or leave undone what he ought to do; and, if to determine
that the crucifying of the Son of God be to be Author of the wickedness
committed, in the crucifying the Son of God, the scripture in testifying
this, makes God the Author of wickedness, by the learning of this divine.

That the act which is sinful and the sinfulnes thereof are to be
distinguished, and that God is the cause of the one, and only the permitter of
the other, is not our doctrine only, but of Arminius also. As for the
exception herunto proposed, of the Doctors of the Synods, namely, that God has
predestined men as well unto the means as to the end, is of so base a
condition, as if this Author came not so much to dispute, as to vent spleen
and gall, and therefore cared not much whether he spoke sense or non sense, this
being the fitter to confound things, and he little or nothing cares to
explicate ought. That he who intends an end, does also intend the means,
the very light of nature suggesteth unto us; Now the end that God aims at, is
his own glory; for he made all things for himself. And if he means to
manifest his glory on any, in the way of vindicative justice it stands him
upon, both to create them, and permit them to sin, and finally to persevere
therein, and to damn them for their sins. Here we have the end and the
means intended by God; this Author talks of predestinating men to the end
and to the means, in his own language. The sinful act is the cause of
damnation, as wrought freely by them; and though the sinfulnes be only from
man, yet the act is not, but as well from God as from man, as all sides now a
days confess; even Arminius himself; but this Author so caryeth himself, as
if he would deny the act it self to be from God, not by any strenght of
argument, but merely by a loose discourse; and I have a long time looked that
they should come to this; but withal I look they should bring reason with
them, and not in a base manner, (this Author like,) to beg the question. That
reprobates have no power to absteyne from sin, we grant, as reprobation
signifies the denial of grace; which this Author denying, he must be driven to
confess that men may absteyne from sin without grace; and that of themselves
they are able to regenerate themselfes. Yet the Apostle tells us, that they who
are in the flleshe cannot please God, and our Savior that none can come unto
him, except the Father draw him; and that therefore men hear not his words
because they are not of God. And this discourse, in the face of it, tends
plainly to the maynteyning that neither faith nor repentance are the gifts of
God, but the works of man's free will. Yet we do not like this comparison that
a man can no more absteyne from sin, then shun his damnation; For, though a
man would, he cannot shun his damnation; but, if a man would absteyne from
sin certainly he not only could, but, de facto should, in good measure,
absteyne from sin; For as sin is chiefly in the will; so is the absteyning
from sin; but such aliene comparisons are as frequently seen among
Arminians; as lice among beggars.

The third Section.
Sect. 3.
THe Cathechumenist will the^ further ad. If the Gospel according to the
doctrine of the Synods, be preached unto the most, not to any other end but
only for their greater damnation, that he will no longer hearken to it, seeing
that it is most likely, that he is of the greatest number, and not of the
small; that he remembers that he has read in Calvin, that God directs his
word to them, whereby he makes them more deaf, and shows them the light of
the Gospel, to blind their eyes, and that, therefore, they, who never heard
the word, are less miserable then they who could not therefore believe, because
God would not give them grace sufficient to believe. Finally our Catechumenist
will say, that, if the decree of God be such as the Catechist proposes, it
must necessarily follow, that they both labor in vain, seeing that every man,
before he is come into the world, is already enrolled in one of the two
Registers, either of life or death, and that it is no more possible to be
blotted out, either of the one or other, then it is for God to deny himself.

The Catechist then fearing that his proselite will fall from him does tell him
farther, that it is not for us to search into those secrets; that there is no
visible mark whereby to discern the elect from the Reprobate. That the elect
themselfes know not their election before their calling which is deferred
sometimes; even to the last hour of their life's, that every man ought to be
ready to answer and obey God, when he calls; that there are none but
profane, and reprobates who say, that men labor in vain, seeing that they
whom God has elected to salvation, are likewise elected to faith and good
works.

But these things will the more provoke our Catechumenist. For he will not
say, or at least think, that it is no matter to be able to distinguish in
particular the elect from the Reprobates; of that it suffices to know in
general, that everyone is necessarily either of the one or of the other, seeing
that no man is able to do any thing (before his vocation) which may avayle
him: that therefore we should defer all things till then, and seeing that our
saving vocation works with such a force, that it is impossible to disobay, it
would be extreme folly to hasten the execution of God by man's industry and
study: yea and that our prayers too were likewise hereto vayn, in as much as
we cannot make any thing pleasing unto God without faith, which is never to be
had before our calling: that the question is not of the quality of him who so
speaks, whether he be profane or no, but of the quality of the doctrine,
which necessarily makes him so.

Consid.
Vniversus mundus exercet histrioniam, says one; this was never more true (I
think) then of the nation of Arminians at this day. And this Author seems to
be his craftsmaster in this kind; great pity, he is not preferred to be the
master of the Revells. Here he feignes his Catechumenist (being an Infidel) to
be well studied in the Synods of Dort and Arles, and well read in Calvin's
institutions, thus he promotes his present interlude.

But where I pray is it that these Synods of Dort and Arles do teach, that
the Gospel is preached unto the most, not to any other end, but only for
their greater damnation? For I am utterly to seek of this in the Synod of
Dort; and as for the Synod of Arles this writing has first caused the noise
thereof to sound in mine ears. Had he alleged their words, without quoting of
the place, we might have had somewhat to work upon. The Gospel we all know
is preached by man, but at the command of God; is the ministers end in
preaching it, the damnation of them to whom they preach it? or does he deliver
this of Gods end only? Did it become him to confound these? I cannot believe,
that any of our divines are found to deliver any such thing of Gods end in
preaching the Gospel. Gods end is so express in Scripture to be his own
glory, that even there where he professes that God made the wicked against the
day of evil; he does no way signify the damnation of any to be the end he
intends, but rather his own glory; for, in the same place, it is said that
God made all things for himself; which is as much as to say for his own
glory. Indeed I find that Gods manifestation of his aeternall power and
Godhead, by his works, was, that they might be without excuse; and in like
sort the preaching of the Gospel, may justly tend to the bereaving men of all
excuse; according to the explication of the former g^ve^ by Austin de Gra^^^
and lib. arbit. cap. 2. Quomodo dicit inexcusabiles, nisi de illa excusatione,
qua solet dicere humana superbia, Si scissem, fecissem, ideo non feci, quia
nescivi: In like sort, by preaching the Gospel, the like excuse is taken away,
whereby a man might say, si audivissem, credidissem, or refipuissem; ideo non
credidi, non resipui, quia non audivi, vel admonitus sui. Now this excuse is
not taken away from the most only, but from all and every one that hear the
Gospel. For as God sending Ezechiel unto the Jews says; they shall know,
Ezech. 2.5
that there has been a prophet amongst them; so by this they cannot be
ignorant that some preacher or other has been sent unto them. It is true; all
have no need of any such excuse, to wit, as many as do obey it, but only
such, as in the hardness of their hearts, stand out against it. But the excuse
is her by indifferently taken away from all. Again, I am of Austins opinion,
that the Gospel may be preached to many a reprobate, ut proficiant ad majorem
vitae emendationem, quo mitius puniantur. Then again I see no reason why we
should conceave that in every congregation where the Gospel is preached, the
most part of them should be supposed to be reprobates; Nay I see no cause why
we should despair of any in orthodoxe congregations; albeit the most part of
them, to whom the Gospel is preached, are reprobates. For consider, how many
various sects there are amongst Christians, some of them, if not most of them,
maynteyning dangerous, yea damnable heresies.

Christians in Egypt, and in the Empire of the Abyssines, are all of them
Coptites, joining circumcision with the Gospel of Christ; And S. Paul has
confessed to the Galathians: If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing. Then there are Nestorians and Armenians in the East.

The Greek Church denies the proceeding of the Holy Ghost from the Son;
Besides, they are full of superstition.

The Church of Rome, how do they derogate from the office of Christ? What
corruption of the truth of God, with error and heresy is found amongst them?
what corruption of the worship and service of God with superstition and
idolatry? Yet amongst them all is the Gospel preached. What color of reason
then is there to conceave, that in joining with us, any should suspect himself
to be of the number of the Reprobates rather then of Gods elect, although, the
most part of them, to whom the Gospel is preached, were reprobates? But
suppose that in every congregation the most part were reprobates; If they are
so already before the Infidel comes to join himself unto us, the number of
the most being up already on the reprobates part, what reason has he to
conceave that he is of the number of them rather then of Gods Elect? Again,
his case is different from all the rest, for all the rest have been borne and
brought up in the Church of God; and therefore it is more hard to distinguish
between true faith and hypocrisy: But in case an Infidel convert and become
a Christian; This alteration is so great, that it is more likely to afford him
better evidence and assurance of his election, then others have, whose
conversion has not been from Infidelity to Christianity. For all that are
brought up in the Church of God, whatsoever their hearts be, yet they have
always concurred in the profession of Christianity. Add to this: why should
it be more likely, that he is of the number of Reprobates, then any other, upon
this ground, that the most part are Reprobates? And if it be as likely for all
and every one; then it were most likely, that all and every one were
reprobates, which is contradictious to the suppositio^. Lastly, what if it were
more likely, as he speaks, shall this be a sufficient motive, not to hearke^
at all to the doctrine of the Gospel? The common practice of the world does
manifest this to be most untrue; as it appears by men's forwardnes to venture
in lotteryes; where it is most certain that the greatest part by far sit
down with loss. At the poole of Bethesda how many waited for the mooving of
the waters by an Angel, yet but one could be cured, namely he that prevented
all the rest in stepping into the poole. Nay, we read how that a creeple
waited there amongst the ^est; and how unlikely a thing was it that he could
get in before the rest, yet there he waited in hope. And what if some are more
hardened upon the hearing of the word? is this any discouragement to us to
present our selves before the Lord, and to be humbled at his feet to hear the
word? In the course of his fiction, he feignes his proselyte to remember
somewhat out of Calvin, namely, that God directs his word unto them, whereby
he makes them more deaf, and shows them the light of the Gospel to blind
their eyes; but he tells not where Calvin says so. But are not these the words
of Calvin which here he shows his teeth at, Ecce vocem ad eos dirigit, Instit.
l. 3. c. 24. number. 13.
sed ut magis obsurdescant: lucem accendit sed ut reddantur caeciores. Now
Calvin here in speaks, not out of his own Spirit, but represents the word of
God as plainly signifying so much in his judgment; and gives reference to the
place immediately related by him; in the first word Ecce; and the places
immediately before alleged by him partly out of Esa. 6 9. and partly out of
Ioh. 12.34. His words are these: Sed magis etiamnu^ premit I saiae prophetia.
Sic enim a Domino dimittitur. Vade and dic filijs Israel, Audiendo audite, and
ne intelligatis. Videndo videte and nesciatis. Obstina cor populi hujus, and
aures eius aggrava, and oculos eius obline: Vt ne forte videat oculis suis, and
cord intelligat, quo conversus sanetur. And hereupon he says: Ecce vocem ad
eos dirigit, sed ut magis absurdescant: lucem accendit, sed ut reddantur
caciores.

Now, this Author blames not Calvin, either for false translation of the
Prophets, or for false interpretation of them, only takes his words a part
from the place quoted by him, as if he delivered this at large, out of his own
doctrine, without reference to any particular passage of holy scripture; and by
concealing the place where Calvin writes this, thought himself safe from having
his unconscionable caryage herein discovered.

Yet Calvin says no^, that God, by his word, does make them more deaf, or
blindes their eyes, as this Author forgeth Calvin's words. He signifies only
Gods intention that they should herupon be more deafened and blinded; and
Saint Peter as good as in express terms professes as much, where he says of
some, 1. Pet. 2.8
that Christ is a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, to wit, to them
that stumble at the word being disobedient, and that, to this thing they were
even ordained. But how come they to be more deafened and blinded upon hearing
the word, as Act. 19.9. it is said that some herupon were hardened, and
disobeyed, speaking evil of the way of God before the multitude; surely after
the same manner that Saint Paul says, some are the worse for Gods law, Sin,
says he, took occasion by the commandment and wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence. Romans 7.8.
So then their own corruption is it that blindes them, deafens them, hardens
them, more and more, together with the God of this world 2. Cor. 4.3. God only
refuses to cure that natural infidelity and impenitency he finds in them, and
in this respect only he is said to harden them, to blind them; that is, in
denying mercy, according to that Romans 9.18. God has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardens. And our Savior was not ashamed to profess to the
faces of the Jews. Therefore we hear not my words, because ye are not of
God. And Ioh. 12.39. Therefore they could not believe because that Isaias says
again. He has blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts, that they should
not see which their eyes nor understa^d with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them. Yet this Author, to show of what Spirit he
is, and how opposi^e to the Spirit of Christ and his Apostles, as if he were
neither new nor old Evangelist, but a very Atheist rather, and would as much
oppose them all as he opposes Calvin, if he d^^st, repro^heth us with this
very doctrine, as namely, that therefore men cannot believe because God would
not give them grace sufficient to believe; which is as much as to reproache us,
for saying that all men are born in sin, and that infidelity and impenitency
is natural unto all; and God alone can cure it. I wonder they do not call
Moses to a reckoning also, and reproach him for saying as he does unto the
Jews: Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the Land of
Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all his Servants, and unto all his Land: The
great temptations which thine eyes have seen, those great miracles and wonders.
Yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceave, and eyes to see, and
ears to hear unto this day. And is it possible, that men can see, that have
no eyes, or hear that have no ears; And yet, on the other side, it is true as
Gods word is true, that, It had been better for some never to have known the
way of righteousness, then, after they have known it, to depart from the holy
Commandment given unto them.

Now, this Authors practice is, to set these doctrines of holy writ together
by the ears; because, forsooth, it is not suitable with the Spirit of this old
Evangelist.

Indeed, if men would believe, but could not, would repent, but could not,
would obey, but could not, then this their impotency should not improve their
condemnation by resisting the means of grace; but we say, this impotency is
mee^ely moral, consisting in the corruption of their will, wherein they take
such delight, and are so well pleased with it, that they are ready to fly in
their faces that tell them of it; they will not be known of any such
impotency. They think themselves able enough, to discern the things of God,
to be subject to the law of God. For they find themselves to have will enough
in all their courses, I would they had not too much; for Libertas sine gratia
non est libertas sed contumatia.

And in all the sins that we committ, we find our selves free enough; yet we
have learnt to give God the glory of ruling ou^ wills, and keeping us from any
sine by his grace. That every one before he comes into the world; is already
enrolled in one of the two registers, either of life or death, I had thought no
Christian had the face to deny.

Does not the Apostle profess, that God has chosen us before the foundation
of the world, Ephesians. 1.4? And is not reprobation as ancient as election, which in
the formal notion thereof connotates reprobation? But Paul belike, was a new
Evangelist, and this Author affects to be an old one, or an Atheist rather; for
in disputing against this, what does he but dispute against the express word
of God? Surely, it is no more possible that Gods decrees should be changed,
then that God should deny himself; neither yet does it follow, that labor is
in vain; for God who ordeynes man unto salvation ordeynes him unto faith also,
to be wrought by certain means.

Had not God ordained what Children a man should have before he came into the
world? What therefore is it vain for him to k^epe company with a woman; as if
by virtue of Gods decree he should have children, whether he companyed with a
woman or no?

This vile sophistry was confuted long ago, as Cicero shows in his book de
Fato, acknowledged by Carneades himself though, a great stickler against the
Stoics; and by Origin after them, as Turnebus shows on Cicero de fato. Act.
27.22. Be of good cheer says Paul to those that sailed with him: for there
shall be no loss of any man's life among you, save of the ship only. This was
spoken to heathen men; but did they herupon accoumpt all labor in vain to
save themselves? Nothing less; for first the mariners, they practiced to
provide for themselves, by stealing out of the ship; and S. Paul professed v.
31. except these men stay in the ship, ye can not be safe, and verse 42. the
Centurion commanded that they that could swim should ^ast themselves first
into the Sea and go out to land. And the other, some on boardes and some on
certain pieces of the ship, and so it came to pass, that they all came safe
to the land. These heathens were better acquainted with Gods providence, as it
seems, then this old Evangelist.

This is our Answer, and not as this Author feignes it to serve his own
stage. For what secret is there in this that all are enrolled in one of the two
registers of life and death, before they come into the world? Who they are that
are enrolled in the one or in the other is a secret indeed; Yet that our names
are written in heaven is a thing knowable in this life; otherwise to what
purpose should our Savior admonish his disciples not to rejoice in this that
devils were subdued unto them, but in this rather, that their names were
written in heaven. And to what purpose should S. Peter exhort us to make our
election and vocation sure, if it be not possible for a man to be assured
hereof, as long as he lives in this world? And the Apostle was assured of the
election of the Thessalonians by observation of the work of their faith, the
labor of their love, and the patience of their hope. And the Evangelist
professes Act. 13.48. that as many believed as were ordained to everlasting
life.

But, as for assurance of reprobation, we know none but final infidelity or
impenitencye, and the sin against the holy Ghost.

What the infidel, or the Arminian Catechumenist will say or think, we have
no reason to regard; but with what judgment and soundnes he cary^th him self
in his discourse. We say it is very material for the confort of a man's
conscience, to be able to distinguishe himself in particular from a reprobate;
Act. 13.48 Act. 11.18 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
and this he may be enabled to do by faith, repentance, and holiness, and by no
means else. Neither is it sufficient for a man's comfortable walkinge to know in
general that every one is necessarily either of the one or of the other. We
willingly profess that before God has called a man out of darkness unto
light, and from the power of Satan unto God, he is able to do nothing that may
please God, or further his salvation: For in that state he is led captive by
the devil to do his will 2. Timo. 2. last, and the divill works effectually
in the children of unbelief Ephesians. 2.3. and S. Paul has testified that they
that are in the flesh cannot please God; 2. Cor. 1.14.
Romans 8.8. that the natural man perceives not the things of God, they are
foolishnes unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. That the affection of the flesh is enmity against God, it is not
subject to the law of God, nor can be. As for the deferring of all things till
the^, Romans 8.
if it be spoken of vocation outward by the word of God, it is a very absurd
speech, considering that till such a vocation comes, man neither knows God,
nor Christ, nor the powers of the world to come, any more then an infidel
does, no nor so much as the name of Gods election and reprobation. If it be
delivered of vocation inward and effectual (for we are driven to distinguishe
for this Author, who affects to walk in the clouds of confusion, and if
confusion be his portion it is nothing strange) it is as absurd in another
respect: For does he know the time of his vocation, that he speaks of
deferring his labor till then? Why may not this present be the time, why
should, he defer the hearing of Gods word, whereby alone is our calling
wrought, though every one that hears it, is not effectually called unto faith
and repentance. And a man may hear it with a purpose to oppose it, either in
general or in some particular truth thereof. Yet this humor of opposition
cannot hinder Gods word and the operation of his Spirit where he will, in
spite of their co^ceytes, who thought the Apostles were filled with new wine
when three thousand were converted that day; and Austin acknowledges that God
converteth not only aversas a vera fide but adversas verae fidei voluntates. We
read in the 7. of John, that some who were sent to take Christ, were taken by
him. And Father Latimer observing that some came to Church only to take a nap;
yet says he, let them come, for, it may be, they may be taken napping. If it
be impossible for man to disobey, it is as impossible for man, in like manner,
not to be industrious, when God will have him to be industrious. Yet I know no
industry of man required to his effectual vocation, but the hearing of Gods
word; neither is the execution of Gods goodness toward him hastened by his
harkening to Gods word; For though men do hear it daily, yet are they not
forth with brought to faith. As for effectual vocation, we take it to be all
one with regeneration, in effect; and this Author will have God so to work
herein, as to leave it to man whether he will be regenerated or no, this is
their sobriety. Austin, I am sure, professes, saying: Deus omnipotente
facilitate converti^, and ex nolentibus volentes facit. This Author seems, by
his discoursing here of prayers, either to be poorly exercised in Antiquity,
or richly exercised in the contemning of it. For he would have men to be
effectually called by virtue of their prayers. The Apostle says how can they
call upon him, in whom they have not believed; but this Author is able by his
prayers to obtain faith, nay he makes show as if he could obtain faith also
before his calling; and fears not to maynteyne that grace is obteynable by
men's works; yet the contrary was condemned in the Synod of Palestine, and
Pelagius himself driven to subscribe unto it. We nothing regard the quality
of the person, who speaks, thereby to condemn his doctrine; but we judge of
his doctrine, and thereby of the quality of his person. Here he has run
himself out of breathe, as touching the first part of his performance. We come
unto the second.

The SECOND PART.
The first Section.
Sect. 1.
LEt us now see whether the practice of this doctrine has more power over a
debauched Christian, to bring him to repentance and amendment of life.

To him then, he will show the filthiness of his sin, the scandal to his
neighbor, the ingratitude to his Creator and redeemer, the menaces of the law,
and the vengeance of God prepared for all impenitents, etc.

Whereupon this man having more knowledge of our Doctrine of the Synods, then
of a good conscience, will send his Censurer to the Maxims and Principles
thereof, and will much muse how the other should be ignorant, that every thing
which is done by men on Earth, be it good or evil, comes not to pass but by
the most efficacious decree and ordinance of God, which does all in all. That
the first cause does in such manner moove and direct the second, among which is
the will of man, that they cannot otherwise stir then they are stirred. That
he is very sure, that he is given to such a vice; but his comfort is that God
would have it so by his secret will; that God has predestined him thereunto,
having as much willed and procured the treason of Judas, as the conversion of
Paul. That he has no power to reteyne grace, when he that gave it, will take
it away. That the Spirit blows where it lists, inspireth whom it will,
withdraws when it pleases, and when it pleases, returns again. And if it be
with an intention for his amendment, it shall be as impossible for him, to
withstand, or else delay it, as it is now to work or hasten it.

Consid. We have considered how well this Author ha^h instructed an infidel to
play his part in opposing the doctrine of the Synod of Dort and Arles, Now, we
are to consider how a debaucht Christian is fashioned by him to play his part
in the same humor of opposition.

To such a one it is fit we should apply the hamm^r of the law, which has
power to break the bones, we will labor to bring him thereby to the knowledge
of sin, not only of the nature of it, but of the power of it; Even of the
power of that sin, which as the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.8. takes occasion by
the law to work in man all manner of concupiscence; and withal we will
endeavor to bring him acquainted with the wrath of God, and how in the course
thereof a fire is kindled, that burns to the bottom of hell. Against this how
he strengthens his Disciple from our doctrine, we are to consider in the next
place.

Now, here first he supposes his Factor to have more knowledge of the doctrine
of the Synods then of a good conscience. So that all debaucht Christians
throughout the world, he packs them together, and makes them very judiciously
to be of our side; This is to hold up the interlude of his own making.

He is no Darby-shire man belike, for their tales commonly end with woodcocke
on the one side, as well as with woodcocke on the other side. And we willingly
confess, that our doctrine teaches men not to trust to their selves, for the
doing of ought that is good, but merely to the grace of God, and to give it the
glory of working us to every thing that is pleasing in the sight of our
heavenly Father; Now this, our adversary conceaves, is it which makes us
dissolute, because we have learnt of S. Paul that God is he who makes us
perfect to every good work, Hebr. 13.21.
and works in us that which is pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ. As
for these old Evangelists, they have a better opinion of their sufficiency
then so, and Aristotle has taught them another lesson, and it stands them upon
to maynteyne their credit and reputation in this point, by the exercise of
their morality in a very accurate manner; least otherwise they should seem
to vaunt much in words, but to preforme little or nothing when they come to
deeds. Therefore they provide accordingly to hold up the credit of their
Tenets, and very artificially and histrionically they turn over all the
debaucht Christians in the world on our side; we must father them, or at least
our parish must keep them, and that for good reason, because they can no
where be maynteyned so conveniently as by our trenchers. For we must not be
ignorant, that every thing which is done by men on earth, be it good or evil,
comes not to pass but by the most efficacious decree and ordinance of God,
which does all in all. Now what follows here hence, by this Authors artifice,
but that therefore there is either no filthiness in sin, no scandal thereby to
our neighbor, no ingratitude to our creator and redeemer, and that the menaces
of the law and vengeance of God are represented in vain; or at least that they
are not to be reproved for their sin. Now since, by this Authors confession,
we maynteyne that good comes to pass by Gods efficacious decree as well as
evil, it follows as well, either that there is no beauty in goodness or
obedience, no benefit thereby redoundes to our neighbor, no tha^kfulnes
manifested thereby to our creator and redeemer, or at least no man is to be
commended for it, and that the promises of the law and the rewards of God are
represented in vain, either to be moved thereby unto obedience, or to be
comforted, and rejoice therein upon obedience.

To avoyde which inconvenience, if we will be advised by this old Evangelist,
it were very fit that we deny either evil or good to come to pass by Gods
efficacious decree, but left to the wills of men, namely, to believe, if they
will, and repent if they will; and that a man is as well able to repent with
Paul, as to committ treason with Judas. And albeit to obtain mercy be clearly
to believe Romans 11.30. and the Apostle as clearly professes that God has
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens; yet Aristotle does not,
neither do these old Evangelists, seem to acknowledge any such oracle;
neither does that give any satisfaction to their argument.

Now, Peter dealt with the Jews in convicting them of crucifying the Son of
God Act. 2. But this Author did not appear in that assembly or any of his
Spirit; But if they had been indoctrinated by this Author, they might have
said, being better seen in Saint Peter's doctrine then in maynteyning a good
conscience, and they would have sent S. Peter to his own principles, and
maxims, and would much muse how Saint Peter should be ignorant of his own
faith, namely, that Both Herod and Pontius Pilate, together with the Gentiles
and People of Israel, were gathered together against the holy Son of God, to
do what Gods hand and Gods counsel had predetermined to be done. Act 4.28,

And, indeed, Peter feared no such colors, nay he was so far from fearinge
it, that he tells them as much to their face in that very sermon of his, verse
22.13. Ye men of Israel (says he) hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth a man
approoved of God among you with great works and wonders, and signs, which God
did by him in the midst of you, as ye your selves also know.

Him being delivered by the determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God after
you had taken with wicked hands, you have crucified and slain; In the same
breath, both convicting them of crucifying Christ, and withal acknowledging
that he was delivered by the determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God: The
meaning whereof is fully set down, Act. 4.28. To this effect, namely, that
what contumelious outrages soever they committed upon the person of the Son
of God, in all this they did but that which Gods hand, and Gods counsel had
praedetermined to be done.

In like sort, Moses feared not the like colors of opposition, which are so
plausible to this old Evangelist, who derives his Gospel from antiquity,
beyond either Paul or Moses, seeing such as concur with them, he accoumpts no
better then new Evangelists. For, Moses reprooving the Jews for their
unprofitablenesse and hardness of heart; as who neither by Gods word, nor by
Gods works, were hitherto brought unto repentance, unto obedience; feared not
at all, least some of them should answer him in the like manner, and say: Good
Sir, remember your self, what do you mean to blame us for this? Do you
expect that they should hear who have no ears, or that they should see who
have no eyes, or that they should perceave, who have no hearts? Or can you be
ignorant, that hitherto God has given us none of all these? And as he has
given us none of all these, so he determined by his efficacious decree, to give
us none of all these, which is, in affect, as much as by his efficacious
decree, to determine that we should neither hear nor see, nor perceave
hitherunto.

I say, Moses was so far from fearing any such opposition, that he seemed
rather to fear, least they would not take notice of the hand of God in this;
And therefore acquaints them with it particularly in this manner: Ye have seen
all that the Lord did before your eyes in the Land of Egypt, unto Pharaoh, and
unto all his Servents, and unto all his Land.

The great temtations which thine eyes have seen, those great miracles and
wonders, yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceave, and eyes to see,
and ear to hear unto this day, Deuteronomy. 24, 2, 3, 4. Yet let us not suffer this
Author to pass unconvicted of his ignorance and vnlearnednes. First that
nothing comes to pass, which God did not decree should come to pass, we are
ready to enter the lists of disputation herabouts with this Author, which he
declines throughout, taking the contrary for principles, and laying them as
foundations of his cause most congruosly (for fit it is that a rott^n cause
should have a rotten foundation) and to prove our Tenet by clear and
invincible demonstration, and make it appear, that, in respect of whatsoever
future thing they deny the decree, in respect thereof they must withal be
driven to deny the foreknowledge of God and turn direct Atheistes.

But furthermore, we discourse not of this decree of God, as this Author
supposes, as if it passed upon all things, without distinction. For first, we
distinguish between good and evil; Good things, we say, God decreed, should
come to pass by his effection: but evil things he decreed they should com to
pass only by his permission. And therefore he deals falsely in imputing unto
us, that God works all in all: by all that he works, understanding both good
and evil.

We teach with Austin, that, Malum, non habet causam efficientem, but
deficientem; If God will not work a man unto faith, or to that which is good,
this is enough to prostitute him to infidelity, or unto any thing that is
evil.

Further, we distinguish of things that are good: For, either they are good
naturally, or good spiritually. Such things as are good only naturally, Gods
decrees shall come to pass by his effection, and that only by a single
influence, which we call influence general, unto the act of every thing. But
as for such things as are good spiritually, we say, God decrees such things
shall come to pass by his effection, and that by a double influence, one
general unto the substance of the act, another special, as touching the
manner of performing it.

Lastly, as touching the manner how all things shall come to pass, by virtue
of Gods decree, this Author lurkes purposely under a miserable confusion; which
we clear thus. All things come to pass we say by Gods decree, whether they
are such things as come to pass necessarily by second causes working
necessarily; Or such, as come to pass contingently by second causes, working
contingently and freely.

And accordingly upon supposition of Gods decree, we say, it is necessary that
such things as God has decreed shall com to pass, but how? Not necessarily
always, but either necessarily or contingently and freely, according to the
condition of second causes, some of them only working necessarily, but others
working contingently and freely.

All this, this Author most judiciously confoundes, as whose end is to serve
his own turn, and the advantage of his own cause, but not the cause of God
in the sincere and faithful investigation of his truth. As in the very next
sentence he manifests himself deep in this confusion, as when he says:

That the first cause does in such manner moove and direct the second, among
which is the will of man, that they cannot otherwise stir then they are
stirred. For here he confoundes the different manner of Gods mooving and
directing second causes, as if there were no difference herin, whereas indeed
there is a very vast difference. For whereas of second causes some work
necessarily, some contingently, God mooves them all not after one manner, but
differently, that is, agreably to their different conditions.

Second causes working necessarily he mooves and directs to work necessarily
in such sort as they cannot otherwise stir then they are stirred; but as for
second causes working contingently and freely, he mooves and directs them to
work accordingly, that is, contingently and freely, to wit so, as they have
power either to suspende their operation, which is their liberty quoad
exercitium, or to produce another operation, which is their liberty quoad
specificationem; Thus he moved Cyrus to build his city, and let go his
captives, as he had foretold long before; thus he moved Josiah to burn the
prophets bones upon the altar, which was foretold in the days of Jeroboam many
hundred years before: and no sober man makes doubt but that these works of
theirs, though predetermined by God, yet were performed as freely by them as
any other works of theirs. In like manner he moved the soldiers to absteyne
from breaking of Christ's bones, prophesied of about a thousand years before;
and the bordering nations to forbear to invade the land of Israel, when all
the males came up thrice in the year before the Lord in Jerusalem, according
to the promise made unto them, Exodus 34.24. I will cast out the nations before
thee, and enlarge thy coasts, so that no man shall desire thy land, when thou
shall come up to appear before the Lord thy God thris^ in the year. Yet who
doubts but they did as freely forbear this as ought else, and that the
soldiers as freely absteyned from breaking Christ's bones, as they did freely
break the bones of them who were crucified with him: But these Lucifugae
delight in confusion, like owls that are in love with darkness, that is their
best time for prey.

In that which follows I confess he deals clearly, saying, that though a man
be given to sin, yet in case he knows God would have it so by his secret
will, and that God has predestined him thereunto, this is a comfort unto him;
and truly I do not envy him such a comfort, and I see no reason but in the
midst of the torments of hell it should be likewise a comfort unto him, that
God did predestinate him thereunto by his secret will. Only he is pleased to
speak in his own phrase, when he talks of predestinating unto sin. Of
predestinating unto damnation the Ancients spoke, acknowledging such a
predestination.

But they acknowledged no predestinating unto sin, for as much as they took
predestination to be only of those things which were wrought by God, not of
sins which are only permitted by God. Yet these, even as foul sins, as
were committed Herod and Pilate together, with the Gentiles and people of
Israel, when they were gathered together against the holy Son of God, are in
the mouths of the Apostles confessed to have been foredetermined by the hand
and counsel of God; which we understand thus, God did foredetermine they
should come to pass by his permission as touching the sinfulnes of them: Now
as for the Spirit of this Author, how well it suiteth with the Spirit of Gods
Saints, we may easily judge by the word of God. For when they do expostulate
with God in this manner, Lord why have thou caused us to err from thy ways,
and hardened our hearts against thy fear? it seems apparently that they took
no comfort at all in this that God hardened their hearts against his fear, Esa.
63.18
and caused them to err from his ways. And when the Lord revealed unto Moses
that he would harden Pharaohs heart, whereupon he should not let Israel go for
a long time; I never perceaved that herby any comfortable condition was
denoted, that should be unto Pharao, in case he had known so much. Romans
9.28.19.
It seems also S. Paul took no notice of any such comfortable condition,
when having taught that God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens, he bring^s in one herupon expostulating thus, why then does he yet
complain? For who has resisted his will? Neither does the Apostle take any
such course to pacify him, as by representing any comfortable condition
redounding unto him hereby, namely, in as much as God it is who has hardened
him unto disobedience. But the course he takes to stop his mouth is of another
nature, thus; O man who art thou that disputest with God? Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the
potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one a vessel unto
honor, and another unto dishonor? And whatsoever a debaucht Christian may be
feigned to conceave; for mine own part (and so I think I may be bold to say
of every one of our profession, whose hearts God has seasoned with his fear,)
I may be bold to profess a truth, that albeit I take notice of Gods hand
sometimes hardening me against his fear, yet God knows I take no comfort in
it: but rather in this, that God knows how to work it for my good; according
to that of Austin; Audeo dicere, vtile est superbis in aliquod apertum
manisestumque cadere peccatu^, etc. and when I find that my sins do not make
a final or a total separation between my soul and God, this may well tend
to the corrobaration of my faith, and persuade my soul that nothing shall be
able to separate me from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord; and I have
good cause to take comfort in this. But it is unt^ue that God has as much
willed the treason of Judas, as the conversion of Paul, though Bellarmine has
so calumnated us long ago. For albeit the treason of Judas in betraying his
master, is one of the things meant by the Apostle, which Jews and Gentiles
did against the holy Son of God, and which, they say, were foredetermined by
the hand and counsel of God: And Austin is bold to profess that Iuda^
electus est ad prodendum sanguinem Dominisui; notwithstanding which, as another
Father speaks, etiam Judas potuisset consequi remedium, si non festinasset ad
laqueum, yet there is a vast difference between Gods willing Judas his treason
and Paul's conversion. For as for Judas his treason, his will was, that should
come to pass only by Gods permission; And Arminius is bold to profes, that,
Voluit Deus Achabum m^nsuram scelerum implere; but as for Paul's conversion,
that was not only willed by God, but wrought by God, and that in an
extraordinary manner, appearing unto him in the way, and striking him down
with a light from heaven, so with a strong hand taking him off from his
persecuting courses, when Ferox scelerum quia primo provenerat, and flesht in
the blood of Steven, Iehu like, he ma^ched fu^iously against the Church of God.
As for no power in man to retain grace, when God will take it away; First,
where man is found willing to reteyne grace, I know no just cause to complain
of the want of power for this. And where there is no will to reteyne it, I see
no likelihood that any man should complain of want of power to reteyne it. Yet
like as man is not Lord of his own Spirit, nor able to reteyne it, so I wonder
it should seem strange, that men should have no power to reteyne the Spirit of
God, in case God should withdraw it from them. And as for grace of
sanctification, which God should take away from man, we know none, as who
mainteyn that God will deliver his children from every evil work, and preserve
them unto his heavenly Kingdom; and that they are kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation. That the Spirit blows where it lists, is the
doctrine of our Savior to Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. That God inspireth whom he will
with the Spirit of faith and repentance, we take to be all one with that, Romans
9.18. He has mercy on whom he will; And accordingly he denies this inspiration
to whom he will, as much as to say: He hardens whom he will. But as for any
actual withdrawing of the Spirit of sanctification, we acknowledge not. It is
true, even his own Servants he hardneth sometimes against his fear, as the
Scripture speaks, Esa. 63.17. Whereupon their peace of conscience is
disturbed, and they have cause to pray unto God, to restore them to the joye of
his salvation, Psalm. 51. as David there did; But David did not pray that God
would restore him to his Spirit, but rather that he would not take it from him:
And Bertius professes that he will not say, that David by those foul sins
of his, was wholly bereaved of Gods Spirit, and that propter graves causas. As
for Gods permission of men to sin for their amendment, Arminius himself
acknowledges in effect in the particular case of David; His words are these:
Permisit Deus ut ille in negligentiam istud incideret, Exam. 166.167.
and peccatum istud illa occasion perpetraret, quo diligentius seipsum
observaret, peccatum suum exemplo aliorum defler^^, egregium humilitatis
resipiscentiaeque specimen and Exemplar praestaret, and gloriosius ex peccato
resurgeret. As for the impossibility to withstand Gods operation, the
Scripture does expressly justify, Eze. 20.32.33.37. Neither shall that be
done which comes into your mind: For ye say, we will be as the Heathen, and
as the families of the countries, and serve wood and stone. As I live, says
the Lord God, I will surely rule you with a mighty hand, and a stretched our
arm, etc. And the issue follows, which is this: I will cause you to pass
under the rod, and bring you into the bond of the covenant. Yet what is the
issue of this impossibility? Is it only in respect of the thing, which God
will bring to pass, as these Arminians most superficially conceave? and not as
well in respect of the manner how it shall come to pass? Nothing less, but as
God will have it come to pass, and come to pass contingently, and
voluntarily, and freely, So it is impossible, upon this supposition, but that
it shall come to pass, but how? not necessarily, but contingently, and
voluntarily and freely. And as it thus comes to pass, and no otherwise, when
the time, which God has appointed is come; So before that time, it shall not
come to pass, but how? contingently also, and voluntarilly and freely, and
impossible it is, that it should be otherwise.

The second Section. Sect. 2.

THat it is not for him to prescribe the time and hour of his conversion,
Treat.
wherein a living man does no more then a dead man in his resurrection. That
God is able to quicken him, and endue him with his Spirit, though he were
already dead 4 days, as stinking in the grave as Lazarus: yea and that
perhaps it shall not be until the last hour of the day. That as yet God
gives him not the grace to cry Abba Father. That he so abhors the doctrine
of those that are styled Arminians, that he dares not use the least endeavor
to do well, for fear of obscuring that grace, which works irresis^ibly, and
attributing of any thing ^o the will of man. Yet he remembers that he had
sometimes good motions, proceeding doubtless from the spirit of God, which
has given him the true faith, which can never fail, and that for the present,
he is like the Trees in Winter, which seem dead, though they are alive. That
being of the number of the Elect, as every one is bound to believe by the two
Synods, if he will not be declared perjured, by that at Arles, his sin it
self (how enormous soever) works together to his salvation, yea and that he
has already obtained pardon for it.

That his Censurer cannot deny it, seeing that he instructs him unto
repentance, which is nothing worth without faith no more then faith it self, if
it believe not the remission of all sins, both done, and to be done. And
though he were of the number of the Reprobates (a thing which he will not
affirm, for ^^are of being so held indeed by the Synod) yet notwithstanding
his Censurer would gain nothing by it, who by his exhortings and threatenings
could not any way alter the decree of Heaven, but only molest him with the
torments of Hell, and stir up a w^rme in his conscience to gnawe him to no
purpose.

Consid. Were it in the power of man to change his own heart, who is not able
to change one hair of his head; he might well prescribe the time and hour of
his conversion. But seeing it is Gods work alone to circumcise our hearts,
Deuteronomy. 30.6. to take away the stony heart, and give us an heart of flesh, and
put his own spirit within us, Ezech. 36, 27. to quicken us when we are dead in
trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.15. Surely, it belongs to God alone, to prescribe
the time and hour when a man shallbe converted. And accordingly our Savior
gives us to understand, that some are called at the first hour of the day,
some at the third, some not until the last.

And the Apostle exhorts Timothy, in effect by his meek carriage, to wait when
God will give them repentance that are without, that so they may acknowledge
his truth, and come out of the snare of the devil, by whom they are led
captive to do his will, 2. Tim. 2. last.

And albeit men are living as beasts, why should they be thought to have any
more power to raise themselves, or quicken themselves unto life spiritual,
then a dead man has to quicken himself to life natural. Now, that men are
dead in sin; the scripture teaches evidently, and that the work of
conversion is called regeneration; but the Scriptures are a strange Language to
these Arminians; They are diserti lingua sua; And they discourse amongst
Christians, as if they should discourse among Cannibals. Yet there is a
difference between him that is dead naturally, and him that is dead
spiritually. For he that is dead naturally, can perform no natural action at
all; but he that is dead only spiritually, is able enough to perform any action
natural. And some natural actions are required, without which a man cannot be
converted. As for Example, it is requisite a man should be acquainted with Gods
word, which alone is the ordinary means whereby the Spirit works in man's
conversion. Now, it is in the power of man to hear the word: And albeit he
cannot hearken unto it in a gracious manner pleasing unto God, yet shall not
that hinder the efficacy of Gods word, if God be pleased to show mercy on him;
No, though he comes to the hearing of it with a wicked mind. As they that came
to take Christ, John. 7. yet when they heard him, were taken by him, and
returned without him, saying: Never man spoke as this man speaks. So is it in
the power of a man to read the word. Now, suppose he exercise this power, and
that with a mind averse from it; yet may this word prove a word of power to
the changing of his heart. As Vergetius took Melanthons writings, to read
with a purpose to confute them, yet in the reading, himself was confuted by
them, and this was a means of h^s conversion from Popery to the Protestant
confession.

This Author discourses in such sort, as if the power of God to quicken a man
though 4 days dead, and stinking in the grave as Lazarus, were taken up in his
mouth in scorn; For such is the manner and streng^h of his discourse, in the
most hungry fashion that ever I think proceeded from a reasonable man; Our
Savior has given us to understand, that some are not called till the last
hour; and we have an example of it in the thief upon the cross: If God has
not give^ him as yet the grace to cry Abba Father, that Spirit of adoption,
requiring a spirit of bondage to precede it, Romans 8.15. Yet this hour, and
that by our admoni^ion and conviction of his sins, God may humble him, and
make him fear, and thereby prepare him to the Spirit of adoption. For his word
is as a fire and as an hammat that breaks the bones; the Infidel finds this
by good experience, when hearing one prophecy, he is rebuked of all, judged of
all; the thoughts of his heart are made manifest, and he falls down on his
face, and confesses tha^ God is in his ministers of a truth, 1. Cor. 14.24.

The Jews did find this power of the word, when hearing Peter discoursing how
God made him both Lord and Christ, whom they had crucified, they were pricked
in their hearts, and said: Men and Brethren what shall we do? Act. 2. When in
the course of his histrionicall fictions, he feignes his Factor, not daring to
endeavor to do well; He supposes and insinuates that he would endeavor it,
but dares not for his hatred to the Arminian doctrine, which is nothing
answerable to our doctrine, who deny, that there is any such will in a carnal
man. We say the maine reformation of man consists in the change of the will
from evil to good; and we know that God accepts the will for the deed. And
the Saints of God commend themselves in this manner unto God: We that desire to
fear thy name, Nehem. 1. And the desire of our hearts is toward thy name,
Esa. 26. And we desire to live honestly, Heb. 13.

And Austin mainteynes, as I remember, that the Saints of God no otherwise
fulfill the Law of God then desiderio and conatu.

And albeit this Author at pleasure feigneth his prolocutor to embrace our
Tenets, yet if he be but a carnal Christian, he cannot embrace them, or any
doctrine of faith, Fide vera and infusa, but only fide acquisita.

Yet again, it is in the power of any man not only to desire and endeavor to
do well, but also to do indeed, quoad exteriorem vitae emendationem; All the
moral virtues, as they were found in Heathen men, so are they atteynable by a
natural man; For even Heathens were famous and renowned, some of them, not
only for their good rules, but for their virtuous practice of morality, which
yet nothing hindered Austin from passing his censure upon their best actions,
professing them to be no better then splendida peccata, and for a rule of
direction, to judge aright herein, he tells us, non officijs sed finibus
discernendas esse virtutes.

And therefore there is no cause of so superficiary a conceyte forged in this
Authors brains, as if endeavors to such morality should any way obscure the
prerogative of Gods grace, as only effectual to the working of that which is
pleasing in the sight of God.

Such morality shall nothing at all commend the will for any goodness in the
sight of God, any more th^n Socrates or Plato, or Aristides their morality
did, though their damnation shall be far less then the damnation of such, who
among the Heathens have been given to a debaucht life and conversation.

Good motions undoubtedly God can raise by his Spirit in the heart of the most
wicked in the Church of God; but like as the devils suggestions are not our
fault if we resist them, so such good motions of God do nothing commend us in
the sight of God, if we do not give way unto them, but rather one day rise up
in judgment against us to our greater and more inexcusable condemnation. But
that a carnal man is here brought-in conceyted of true faith in him, that
shall never fail is that part which this Comedian has put in his Actors mouth
to play: For it is fit his care should be according to his Art populo ut
placerent quas fecisset fabulas. Yet I nothing doubt but a carnal Christian
may be orthodoxe throughout, and persuade himself of a true faith. But if his
life be not answerable, we will be bold to tell him that his faith is vain:
For true faith works by love Gal. 5. and faith working by love, is as much as
a new creature Gal. 6. and whosoever is in Christ, is a new creature, 2. Cor.
5. and they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts: Gal. 5.24.
therefore where such a new creature is wanting, where the flesh is not
crucified with the affections and lusts, they are not Christ's, nor in Christ,
nor have any faith working by love. Nay we know not how soon, if such an hour
of ^entation shall once come, such a one will turn Turk or Atheist. For
whosoever hears Christ's words and does them not, our Savior likeneth him to
a foolish man* which has builded his house upon the sand, and the rayn felt,
and the floods came, and ^he wind blewe, and beat upon that house and it
fell, and the fall thereof was great, Matthew. 7. 26, 27. The Corinthians were
renowned professors, yet S. Paul calls upon them to prove themselves, whether
they were in the faith and to examine themselves, saying, know ye not your
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? There is a
secret hypocrisy whereby a man may deceave himself, (as indeed the heart of
man is a decei^full thing) all may seem fair, no reygning sin appearing,
whereby the conversation is defiled; and yet good cause for men to put
themselves to the trial of their faith. It is true the children of God may
sometimes be overtaken with some foul sin, as David was, and they may
continue in it too long, without bringing forth so clear and full evidence of
repentance and satisfaction to the Church of God, as the condition of their
sin requires; and in this case they may be for a time as trees in the winter:
but to apply this to every carnal Christian that lives in sin, and goes on
in a debaucht course of l^fe, and conversation may be very suitable to the
scope of such a Comedian as we have to deal with, who is merely Scenicall
throughout, but it is intolerable in a sober divine, whose aim should be to
dispute truth, and not to enterteyne his Readers or hearers with Enterludes of
his own making and poetical fiction? That every one is bound, to believe that
he is elect, I no where find in the Synod of Dort, and this Author loves to
discourse at large as if he had nothing to do but to tell a tale, as for the
Synod of Arles I am utterly unacquainted with the Acts thereof.

But I have read such a doctrine related out of Z^nchy, and Bucer; and I
conceave the meaning to be this, that every one in the Church of God is bound
to believe, that God has elected him to obtain salvation, in case he believe;
And indeed as God has ordained none of ripe years to obtain salvation unles
he believe; so on the other side God has ordained that every one who believes
shall obtain salvation. But as God has not ordained to bestow faith on every
one either absolutely or conditionally; so did I never read it laid to the
charge of any one of our divines, that he should maynteyne, that every one is
bound to believe that God has elected him, to the obteyning of faith either
absolutely or conditionally. But such like confusion of things that differ, is
very agreeable, I confess, with the learning and judgment of this Author, who
seems much better fitted to make a play, then to handle a controversy in
divinity. That all things work together for the good of them that love God,
is as true as the Apostle Paul's epistle to the Romans is the word of God.

And Bishop Cooper a Scottish Bishop, applies this to men's sins amongst other
things, showing how they also do work for a man's good. But that the sins
of a carnal man, a debaucht Christian, works for his good, a Poet may faigne
such a conceyte, I deny not, and pin it upon the confession of whom he will
for Pictoribus atque Poetis, quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas; and
by the illusions of Satan it is possible, like enough, that a carnal person
may be so far transported; but if this Author think good to justify any
such persuasion, he may take his course; surely we and our doctrine do not. No
more then his persuasion of obteyning the pardon of his sin, while yet he
lives in sin.

And indeed so it is, he takes upon him to justify these persuasions, and
that with a face of confidence, saying, that his censurer cannot deny it: what
do I hear! cannot we deny, but that he who lives in sin, and goes on in
fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, cannot but be persuaded, or may nevertheles
be justly persuaded, that his sins (how enormous soever) work together to
his salvation, and that he has already obtained pardon for them? I had
thought impudency it self could not have been so brazen face^ as to impute
this unto us. But, it may be, he has some tricks of wit, and feats of
activitie that way to discharge upon us, though contrary to his own conscience.

And what are they? surely therefore his Censurer cannot deny, but that the
sins of a debaucht Christian (how enormous soever) work together to his
salvation, and that he has obtained already pardon for them, because forsooth
he exhorts him unto repentance, which is nothing worth without faith, no
more* then faith, if it believe not the remission of all sins both done and
to be don. Here we have an hobgoblin discourse, yet it is well we meet with
some show of argumentation to cope withal: I doubt this Author is yet to
learn what it is to obtain pardon of sin, we exhort such men unto
repentance, that they may obtain remission of their sins; we do not suppose
such wicked persons to have already obtained the pardon of their sins. It is
true, repentance determines not upon obteyning the pardon of our sins, but
the sense of that love of God in giving his Son to dye for our sins, and
for his sake pardoning them unto us, of his free grace renewes our repentance;
like as David never repented more fervently then after Nathan had said unto
him from the Lord, the Lord has put away thy sin, witness the Psalm. 51.
Therefore we utterly deny this consequence, we exhort a wicked wretch to
repentance, therefore we acknowledge him to have obtained the pardon of his
sins. But he insinuates a proof of this, after this manner. Whom we exhort
unto repentance, him we suppose to have faith already, whereby he believes the
remission of his sins. But this consequence again we utterly deny; we
suppose not any such faith in him, nay we have it rather most probable that in
case of his debaucht course of life, and conversation that such a one has no
true faith at all. For if the Apostle exhorts such as the Corinthians were to
prove, and examine themselves, whether they were in the faith, writing to the
best of them; why should we conceave a wicked person that lives in manifest
profaneness, and uncleanes, to have any true faith at all? Perhaps he may
reply; why then do you exhort him to repentance, seeing without faith he cannot
repent? I answer, why did Peter exhort the Jews to repentance, who had killed
the Lord of life as he tells them, Act. 3.14.15. and desired a murderer to be
given them: But, says he, v. 18. those things which God before had showed by
the mouth of his Prophets, that Christ should suffer he has thus fulfilled.
Amend your lives therefore, and turn, that your sins may be put away, when the
time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Did Peter suppose
them to have any faith in Christ, when thus he exhorted them to amendment?
Surely he did not, and no more do we: but by Peter's ministry God might be
pleased to work them both to faith, and to repentance, and so he did, for many
that heard the word believed, and the number was about 5000* and the like he
may, and does usually work by our ministry also.

Then again there is a legal repentance, and there is an Evangelicall
repentance. And that legal repentance may be unto desperation, as Judas his
repentance was. Again that legal repentance may be a fruit of the Spirit of
bondage, which praepares for the hearing of the Gospel, and for the receaving
of the Spirit of adoption by the Gospel. Then in the preaching of the Gospel
the tender mercies of God displayed unto us, and how ready he is to pardon
sin in general, and that of free grace, may better our repentance; and when
we are thus by degrees brought to the Spirit of adoption, to cry Abba Father
then our repentance shall be most perfect, as before I said; and when we look
upon him whom we have pierced, and can in assurance of faith profess with the
Apostle saying: I live by faith in him who loved me, and gave himself for me,
this is of power to prick a Master vein, and make us bleed out our
repentance in the sight of our gracious God (whom we have offended, and who yet
in despite of our sins has loved us) more devoutly, and affectionately then
ever before. Yet is it true, as he says, that repentance is nothing worth
without faith? What thinks he of Ahabs repentance, when he put on sackcloth
and wallowed in ashes, upon the word of judgment against his house brought unto
him by the Prophet Eliah? Do we not know what the Lord said herupon unto
Eliah, see thou how Ahab is humbled before me? because he submits himself
before me, I will not bring that evil in his days. The uttermost of the
Ninivites faith was but this, that we read of, who can tell if God will turn,
and repent, and turn from his feirce wrath that we perish not? yet their
repentance was such, that when God saw their works, that they turned from
their evil ways: he repented of the evil that he had said, that he would
do unto them, and he did it not, Ion. 3.9.10. And certienly the morality of
some Heathens was such, that their damnation will be easier then the damnation
of those that lived in all manner of impuritie, and uncleanness.

By faith, we say, the children of God are assured of the love of God toward
them, which was aeternall, and is unchangeable; and, consequently, that God
will never forsake them, but will from time to time pardon their sins,
according to that faith of Paul; The Lord will deliver me from every evil
work, and preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom 2. Tim. 4.18. And no other faith
of remission of sins do we teach or any of our divines, that I know, and
this Author foreseing it likely enough, that his Synodicall adversary will
except against such a ones election, much more against his effectual vocation,
who walks not after the Spirit, but after the flesh; yet, to show his
confidence of holding to hardmeate his wild adversary, being in some degree
wilder himself; though he were, says he, of the number of reprobates, yet his
censurer should gain nothing by it, for as much as his exhortations and
threanings could not any way alter the decree of heaven, but only molest him
with the torments of hell, and stir up a worm in his conscience to gnawe him
to no purpose. Whereto I answer, that, by our doctrine, as we have no
encouragement to conceave such a person as here is brought in to play the part
appointed for him, and whereto this Author promts him to be an elect of God; so
neither have we any reason to conceave him, to be a reprobate; for as much as
there neither is, nor can be any ordinary evidence of any man's reprobation,
but, either final impaenitency, or guiltines of sinning against the holy
Ghost. So that albeit where we observe the work of a man's faith, the labor of
his love, the patience of his hope, we have good reason to conceave of such a
one, that he is an elect of God, as Paul did of the Thessalonians, 1. These. 1
3.4. Yet where we find these to be wanting, and a carnal walking, and
sensual conversation in the steed thereof, we have no cause to conclude
herupon, that such a one is certeynly a man rejected, and reprobated of God.
For we were carnal, and sensual before God visited us with his grace, and
quickened us by his holy Spirit: What a strange race did Manasses run for a
long time in a most si^nefull course, in the way of idolatry, blood, sorcery?
yet God brought him to repentance before he died. Paul, likewise for a time was
a bloody persecutor of Gods Church, yet even then was he a chosen vessel; not
only to be a professor, but a preacher also of that way which formerly he had
opposed, and persecuted even unto blood; whether a man be an elect or
reprobate, we leave that as a secret unto God, only considering that Gods long
suffering is said to be salvation, we hope the best; and it is our duty to
become all things to all men that we may save some, as Paul professes of
himself, 2. Cor. 6. and those some whose salvation he aimed at, he professes
to be Gods elect. 2. Tim. 2.10. wherefore we enterteyne no such thought as of
altering the decrees of heaven, as this Author in his scenicall imagination
shapeth the matter, but we endeavor thereby to take him off from his ungodly
courses, and work him to godly sorrow, that bringes forth salvation never to
be repented of, as in case he may prove to be one of Gods elect, which may be
for ought we know to the contrary; Esa. 49.
And if it prove otherwise, and we have cause to complain, that we have
labored in vain, and that we have spent our strenght in vain; this ought to
be nothing strange to us, seeing it has been the condition of better, and more
eminent servants of God then we are; neither are we to seek how to comfort our
selves but in the Prophets language: Yet my labor is with the Lord, and my
judgment with my God, though we have labored all night, yea, and many days
also, and caught nothing; 2. Cor. 2.15.16.
and in S. Paul's language we are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, in them
that are saved, and in them that perish. To the one we are the Savor of death
unto death: and to the other a Savor of life unto life; and herby we do God
service in bereaving them of excuse; for they cannot but by these means know
that a Prophet has been amongst them; Ezech. 2.
yea, and by molesting them with the torments of hell, and stirring up a worm
in their conscience, to gnawe them, we may (as it were) throw water in their
faces, and quash their furious courses, in satisfying their lusts, so that
hereby they may proficere ad exteriorem vitae emendationem quo mitius puniantur.

Now, judge of the soliditie of this Authors discourse, who conscious of giving
little satisfaction in good earnest, affects to refresh the spirit of his
propitious reader with a jest, saying that his personate Actor will not affirm
himself to be a Reprobate, for fear of being held so indeed by the Synods.

But where does either of these Synods teach, that who so conceaves himself to
be a reprobate, is to be held by them to be such a one indeed? For albeit
either of them did affirm every Christian to be bound to believe that he is an
elect, for which we have no stronger evidence then the honesty of this Authors
word, which of what price it deserves to be, let the indifferent judge, yet
that they should hold every one to be a reprobate indeed, who conceaves himself
to be such a one, is altogether incredible. Yet notwithstanding these and such
like immodest and shameless pretenses, this Author will not want some to
applaude him herein, as a resolute champion of their cause. And albeit he
shapes his Actor such as fear not God, yet to serve his turn, he must shape
him so, as to stand in fear of the censure of Arles, and of their hard opinion
of him.

Sect. 3.
The third Section.
Treat.
IF hereupon the Censurer proceed. That allthough the Spirit alone does
produce repentance in the heart of a sinner; yet notwithstanding, that
exhortations and threatenings are the means and instruments, which it uses in
the work; The other will demand further of him the explication of his saying
therein, observing a most manifest contradiction, in that, on the one side,
repentance is immediately attributed to the holy Ghost, and, on the other side,
these exhortations and threatenings are held as means and instruments of this
work, the operation not being there immediate, where the means are used.
That, if these means of exhortation be necessary, or, at least, if it be
ordinarily required in the operation, how can it be that they who resist it,
and reject the instrument, do not, nay cannot likewise resist the principal
cause, which is the holy Ghost? He that will not suffer the rasour, the
instrument of his cure, does he not therein also reject the Surgeon?

The Censurer will say, that the elect reject, neither the one, nor the other,
the holy Ghost pearcing the ear to make it hear, and opening the heart, to
make it receave those admonitions, which are altogether vain and
unprofitable, until the holy Ghost does so work in them. Thereupon the other
will make him confess, that the word preached for the most part, is destitute
of that operation of the holy Ghost, as it appears by the misprise, that the
most part make of it, which cannot be, when the efficacy of the Spirit does
accompany it, it follows then, that the whole ministry is but a dance, no
more cooperating with man's conversion, then the clay which our Savior, applied
to the eyes of the blind, did unto his sight, or the sole voice calling upon
Lazarus made him to rise out of his grave. He will also demand of him, why it
is (seeing nature does nothing in vain) that the Author of nature did appoint
the ministry of the word, and why those things which the Censurer attributes
only to the Holy Spirit, are yet notwithstanding in the Scripture attributed
likewise to the word preached, and how it is that thereby we are said to be
begotten, renewed, edified, nourished, and purified, etc. whereas the new
doctrine of the Synod leaves it no other function then to serve as an object,
and to represent that, (without which the Holy Spirit has already wrought
within, as well in the will as in the understanding, without any cooperation of
the word) not only unprofitable without the Spirit, but also dangerous, and
aggravating the damnation of its contemners, although it were impossible to
receave and cherish it even as it is unpossib^e for them to add the efficacy
of the Spirit, which is not in their power.

Consid. Here the Censurer is brought in, without any decent occasion, to
discourse of the Spirits operation alone, in producing repentance, and yet,
notwithstanding, that exhortations and threatenings are the means and
instruments, which it uses in the work: so to make way for the discharging of
some shot he has in readiness against this.

By the way I observe, that howsoever he puts upon his Actor in this seen the
name of a Censurer, yet he might be called as well an exhorter and threatner;
The word of God S. Paul tells us, is profitable to teach, to co^vince, to
correct, to instruct in righteousness, but no where do I find any such act,
as censuring attributed unto it. But as for the main, we acknowledge, that it
is the Spirits operation alone, that changes the heart, and yet
notwithstanding that exhortations backed with promises upon our obedience, and
threatenings upon our disobedience are the means; for as much as God works in
all agreably to their natures.

Now, having made man after his own image, endued with an understanding heart
and rational affections, whereby he is fit to be wrought upon unto that which
is good, and from that which is evil, by way of instruction, exhortation,
persuasion; therefore it pleases God accordingly to bring him unto faith,
repentance, and obedience. Now let us consider what he has to say against
this; herupon he says, the other will demand further of him the explication
of his sayings, therein objecting a most manifest contradiction, in that on the
one side repentance is immediately attributed to the holy Ghost, and on the
other side these exhortations, and threatenings, are held as means and
instruments of this work, the operation not being there immediate, where the
means are used. 1. Sam. 18.4.
We read of Jonathan, that he put off the robe that was upon him, and gave it
David, and his garments, even to his sword and to his bow, and to his girdle.
And the reason was, V. 3.
because he loved him as his own soul, In like sort, this bad living
Christian whom here this Author represents to play a part for him, is such a
one as with whom, he is in love for somewhat, though not for his faith; For I
see he is willing to array him with his own sufficiency, and to bestow his
own armor upon him (the best armor of his wit) even to his sword and to his
bow, and to his girdle; and the truth is, he plays his part for him, though
the scene requires, that another should make show to personate him; and so the
Arminian takes upon him the shape, and vizard of a debaucht Christian on our
side. Now I willingly profess he makes the most of his wares in the utterance
of them, that words can, and delivers himself with very great confidence;
which though it be no to pick place, yet usually it is his best strength. And I
have heard of a French Gentleman who in the troubles of France, when it
behooved every man to stand upon his guard, having unadvisedly let into his
house certain freebooters, and perceaving his error too late, set himself to
seek to help it with his wit, and carried himself with such freenes, and
confidence in the enterteyning of them, that thereby he overcame them; and they
parted without doing him any wrong, and, at parting, bid him thank his
confidence that he escaped so well. And truly could the matter bear it, we
might suffer him to en^oy the benefit, and comfort of his confidence. But we
are upon the point of investigation of divine truth, and, to spare him herin,
were to undo him, and others with him. More profitable it is for him by much,
to be beaten quite out of his fools paradise then to suffer him to enjoy his
errors, and so lace himself with them, and to corrupt others also. Now as
for explication of what was delivered as he requires, we see no need thereof at
all, the plain truth thereof is so visible, that he, who will not shutt his
eyes against it, cannot but take notice of it, this is to requite confidence
with confidence: for is it not fit to pay him in his own coin?

And consider, I pray; let exhortation be made unto repentance, let this
exhortation be backed with the most forcible motives thereunto drawn from
promises divine, of no less reward then aeternall life, from menaces divine,
to the impenitent, and that of the wrath of God, and that of such a condition,
as wherein a fire is kindled which burns unto the bottom of hell. Yet is it
not in the power of man to assent to this exhortation or dissent from it? And
in case he do assent; after a while, as he shall think good, and take time to
deliberate; shall not he be accoumpted, and his will the sole cause, yea, and
immediate also in producing this operation? I say, the sole cause, in reference
to the exhortation premised, which still leaves a man indifferent, whether he
will yield thereunto, or no? I should think, the exhortation hinders not the
will of man at all from being the sole, yea, and immediate cause of willinge,
which if it cannot be denied as I should think, it cannot; if withal the
Spirit of God does work the will sooner or later to yeilde unto it, why should
not that be accoumpted the sole cause thereof? yea, and immediate also, though
that term was not specified in the premises. And as for the clearing of the
contradiction, the show whereof is brought in afterward, by foysting in the
term immediate, into the place of the word sole.

I answer, that man, being a rational agent, and working upon deliberation:
the judgment must first be informed before he can work deliberately; Now, the
immediate work of exhortation tendes no farther then to the information of the
judgment.

And as reasons are given on the one side out of Gods word, to urge the
necessity of repentance, so reasons are given on the other sid, partly by
flesh and blood, partly by the suggestions of Satan, to represent the
needelesse condition thereof, either altogether, or at least for the present.
And the will freely makes choice, to follow the one or the other, sometimes
giving way to exhortations divine, sometimes to contrariant suggestions,
carnal or diabolical.

And if God be pleased to rebuke Satan, and to dashe out of countenance the
motions of the flesh, and make the will to yield to the ministers exhortations
unto repentance, what shall hinder him from being the sole and immediate cause
hereof?

Again, this Author considers not, or wilfully dissembles, that exhortations
are only a cause moral, but Gods working immediately upon the will, after
that the judgment is wrought upon by exhortations and instructions (for Austin
comprehends these under one, saying, that if there be any difference between
docere and suadere or exhortari, yet eve^ this doctrinae generalitate
co^prehenditur) this he works as a cause physical, and therefore albeit there
be a presupposall of a cause preceding, working morally, yet the Spirit of God
in striking the stroke, is the sole and immediate cause working physicallie.
Lastly he that persuadeth say the Bellarmine, (and light of nature justifies
it) works only per modum proponentis objectum, only he setts it forth in the
most alluring manner that he can; Now the object proposed is well known to
work only in genere causae finalis, the motion whereof is commonly called motus
metaphoricus, or metaphorice so called. But Gods operation immediate in working
upon the will is in genere causae efficientis; so that albeit a cause working
in genere causae finalis be presupposed, yet still it is clear, that the
Spirit of God, works immediately upon the will in converting it, in genere
causae efficientis. Now the ignorance hereof is it, that makes this Author so
bold and confident, in talking of manifest contradiction; and who so bold as
blind bayard; but I would the scales might at lenght fall from their eyes,
that they might see upon what rotten grounds they proceed in impugning the
precious truth of God; we willingly grant, that information of the
understanding is necessarily required both to faith, and to repentance,
otherwise they were not acts rational; but that this information should be
made by the minister, that is I confess ordinarily required by the virtue of
Gods ordinance, but not necessarily; which whether this Author takes notice of
or no, I know not; I find him little s^nsible of any such distinction; And we
willingly confess that as often as men are found to resist these exhortat^ons
divine, though delivered by Gods minister; they may justly be said to resist
God working morally, and bes^eching them as the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 5.20.
as though God through us did beseech you. So the Jews with their Fathers
resisted the holy Ghost, Act. 7.51. For as much as the words delivered unto
the^ and which they resisted, were sent by the Lord of hosts in his Spirit by
the ministry of his prophets Zach. 7.12. and accordingly God is said to have
protested among them by his Spirit, by the hands of the prophets but they
would not hear Nehem. 9.30. But they do not resist nor can resist the holy
Ghost, working immediately, and physically upon their wills the act of
conversion, and physical or rather hyperphysicall transmutation.

We willingly confess, that the elect resist neither, tending to their first
conversion, provided the time be come, which God has appointed for their
conversion; till then they resist all exhortations, tending thereunto, as well
as others; but as for any divine act for a physical transmutation of their
wills, they are not made pertakers thereof; till the time of their effectual
calling. Yet, after their effectual calling, as they do too often disobey God
in his particular exhortations; So likewise they have cause sometimes to
expostulate with God, for hardening their hearts against his fear.

But in their first conversion he does not only pierce their ears, (the word
of the minister being able enough for that,) but he gives them ears to hear,
and so also he gives them eyes to see; and as for the opening of the heart,
that also I take to be all one, with giving them an heart, Deuteronomy. 29.4.

Now, hereupon this Author tells us, we must be driven to confess, that the
word preached, for the most part, is destitute of that operation of the Holy
Ghost, (as it appears by the misprise, that the most part make of it, which
cannot be when the efficacy of the spirit does accompany it) but this is
untrue, we are not driven, nor need to be driven hereunto, we must willingly
acknowledge it, rightly understood, namely, that God unto the outward ministry
of the word, does not, for the ^ost part, add the efficacy of his Spirit to
work men unto faith and repentance; as it is most evident by experience, and
our Savior in the parable of the sower, that went forth to sow his seed,
teaches us as much; And the Prophet Esaias also, when, prophesying of the times
of the Gospel, he begins thus: Who has believed our report? and giving the
cause hereof in the next words, adds: And to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed?

But as touching the consequence herhence deduced, namely, that the whole
ministry is but a dance, no more cooperating with man's conversion, then the
clay which our Savior applied to the eyes of the blind, did unto his sight, or
the sole voice, calling upon Lazarus, made him to rise out of his grave: Here
this great master of ceremonies is miserably out in his formalities as well as
in his realities. It follows not herehence that the ministry is a dance but
a piping rather, as our Savior signifies in the Gospel, when he says,
whereunto shall I liken this generation? they are like to little Ch^ldren sitting
in the market place, and saying, we have piped unto you, but ye have not danced
we have mourned unto you, but you have not wept; yet piping is a natural
provocation to dance; but the exhortation of the word without a more special
operation of Gods Spirit, is no provocat on at all to believe; how can it be to
natural man to whom it seems foolishnes; and wit wisdom is naturally more
affected by men, then honesty: For qui velit ingenio cedere rariu erit; and
the Italians have a proverb, that wit is aequally divided; and the instance
is given thus; Let a proclamation be made that all Taylers, appearing in an
assembly, stand up; in this case Taylers will stand up, and none but Taylers;
so of shoemakers, so of other ^^ades. But if a proclamation be made that all
wise men should stand up, every one will be ready enough to stand up; men of
the meanest trade, being apt to conceave that they are likely enough to be as
wise as they who are of the best. Yet, by this Authors leave, the minist^ry of
the word confers more to a man's conversion then the clay did (for ought I know)
to the curing of the blind man's eyes, etc. For the word informs what is to be
believed, and likewise what is to be practiced, though to discern the wisdom
of God in the one, and to be in love with the other, and to feel the power of
God in both* requires another operation of the Spirit o^ God, to the
inlightning of the mind, and renewing of the will. He that said, nature does
nothing in vain, sa^de, God and nature do nothing in vain, so that there was
little need of such a gradation, as here is made. N^yther is the ministry of
the word in vain, though all, or the most part are not converted by it; For it
informs all, it takes away excuse from all; they cannot say, si audivissem
credid^ssem, they know hereby a Prophet has been amongst them, though they
who yield obedience to it, have no need of any such excuse: and for their
sakes it is principally intended, as appears, both by the revelation made to
Paul, Act. 18. Fear not, and hold not thy peace, for no man shall lay hold
on thee; to hurt thee, for I have much people in this city; And accordingly by
the Apostles scope in his ministry. For albeit he professes that he became
all things to all men, that he might save some, 2. Cor. 6. Yet he manifests who
those some were, whose salvation he sought, where he says, I suffer all things
for the elects sake, 2. Tim. 2.10.

And lastly, it is not in vain toward any, for as much as the ministers
thereof are the sweet savor of God, both in the^ that are saved, 2. Cor.
2.15.16.
and in them that perish. To them that perish, a savor of death unto death, to
them that are saved, a savor of life unto life, in both a sweet savor unto
God in Christ.

As for the things, which we ascribe only to the Spirit of God, we ascribe
them to that Spirit of God only, in the way of a cause physical, we ascribe
them to the word also in the way of a cause mo^all, as both informing the
understanding concerning them, and persuading thereunto. But the Spirit of God
alone both opens the eyes to discern them, and the heart to embrace them, as
the things of God.

And for the cause, forementioned, to wit, because the Spirit of God does not
inlighten, to discern the things of God, but as revealed in his word, nor to
incline to any thing, as to the will of God, but as proposed in his word,
therefore is the word called the sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. Thus and justly,
are we said to be begotten by the word, renewed by the word, aedified by the
word, fed by the word, cleansed by the word.

And I find it very strange, that when these men will have all that is
preached in the word, in the issue left to the free will of man, to believe or
no, to repent or no, to obey or no; and yet notwithstanding give out, that the
word it is, which converts them, brings them to faith, repentance, and
obedience; and yet cavil at our ascribing those effects to the word of God in
one kind of operation, which yet we ascribe solely and immediately to Gods
spirit in another kind of operation; ^specially considering that it is Gods
word, and not their word; and sent by God in his Spirit, by the ministry of
the Prophets, and not sent by them in their Spirits; and it is the means
whereby Gods Spirit works, as before I have showed, and not a means,
appointed by them, whereby their Spirit works.

But it is nothing strange, that they, who oppose Gods grace, should in the end
fail even of common sense.

The Synod (says this Au^hor) leaves it no other function, then to serve as
an object, and to represent it. When Bellarmine says, that, Suadens agit per
modum proponentis objectum; He delivers this as a dictate of common sense,
known by the very light of nature.

I say a little more, that he who persuades ought, his office is to rep^esent
that wh^reunto he persuades in the most alluring manner, ^o draw the party
whom he persuades to like it, and to labor for it.

Farther, I say, we do ascribe to the word, as much as they do, or can do in
truth. In pretense I deny not, but they may deal with it as they deal with
Gods grace, mak^ng show, as if ^hey ascribed thereunto their faith, their
repentance; When indeed they impute it to their own free wills, not fearing to
mock God, if he would be mocked; And as the Jews sometimes crowned Christ
with thorns, so do these crown the grace of God with scorns.

But the true difference between us is, not in ascribing or denying ought to
Gods word; but in that we ascribe that to the Spirit of God, which they ascribe
to the freedom of their wills.

I say, the difference between us is, whether it be not so indeed as here I
profess, and am ready to make good. But whereas he says, we make the word of
God only to represent that, without which the holy Spirit has already wrought
within, as well in the will, as in the unde^standing, without any cooperation
of the word, this passage is, either falsely copyed, or falsely translated out
of the French: For the first (without) comes out of his place, the sense it
bears being afterward represented at full in these words, without any
cooperation of the word, and besides, it marres altogether the sense of the
words following: therefore I leave it quite out, and read the passage thus, to
represent that which the holy Spirit has already wrought within, as well in
the will as in the understanding, without the cooperation of the word; Now here
is a pretty mystery worth the opening: For he imputes unto us, as if we should
say, that the word persuades, and exhorts to that, which the Spirit has
already wrought both in the will, and in the understanding. Now, I desire to
know, what that is, which the Spirit has already wrought, and when it was
wrought, according to our opinion, as he says; for I willingly profess, it is
a myste^y unto me; namely, that we should maynteyne that God sends his
ministers unto us to persuade us to that, which God has wrought in us, and
that perhaps, long before we heard the word; And, I willingly confess, in this
case, we might well seem to make the ministry of Gods word to be very
unprofitable, and vain. Now, as I said, so I say still; this is very
mysterious unto me. But I must fish it out as well as I can, by Interrogation.
And what is it, trow we, that this Author means by this? Is it the work of
regeneration, consisting in the renovation of all the rational faculties of
man, both the understanding, and the will? Undoubtedly, this is his meaning,
though the Au^hor caryeth himself obscurely, without particulating what he
means, and wherein it consists. Then again, when was this wrought? If before
we are pertakers of the word preached as he plainly signifi^th, is it not
clear that it must be before we come to the use of reason? being as we are,
brought up in the Church of God, and accordingly made pertakers of Gods word,
as soon as we come to the use of reason? And what time of infancy is more
likely to be conceaved as most congruous herunto, than the time of our
admittance unto the Sacrament of Baptism. I am out of doubt that this is his
meaning; whereby it appears that these Arminians, are of a contrary opinion,
utterly denying that the grace of regeneration is conferd in Baptism. Yet
master Hooker, has maynteyned that the grace of regeneration is conferd in
Baptism against master Cartwright, and one I knew in my time (a favourer of
his) that maynteynd in the divinity schools, that Baptism is necessary unto
salvation. And nowadayes our Arminians are eager in the mayntenance thereof,
which our Arminians beyond the Seas (as it seems) do utterly deny; yet they
hug one another in the arms of love, in opposing others. But to make short,
let our English Arm^nians look how they answer this; For my part, I
maynteyne no such opinion; and albeit master Montacute would put such an
opinion upon our Church, out of the book of common prayer, where it is said.
Now this child is regenerate; though the same Author professes, that all that
we read in the homilies is not to be received as the doctrine of the Church of
England. Yet Bishop Carleton has answered master Montacute upon the same
point; and has showed out of Austin, that it is one thing to be truly
regenerate, and another thing to regenerate Sacramento tenus. I willingly
confess that the Sacrament of Baptism, is the seal of the righteousness of
faith unto us Christians, as Circumcision was unto the Jews, Romans 4. which is
as much as to say, that it assures us of the remission of our sins, as many
as believe; and that as a Sacrament in general is defined in the smaller
catechism of our Church to be an outward, and a visible sign of an inward and
invisible grace. And so I conceave baptism to be, and that not of
justification only unto them that believe, but of the grace of regeneration
also, but how? not at that instant collatae; but suo tempore conferendae. To
wit when God shall effectually call a man; and it is very strange unto me,
that regeneration should go before vocation. And therefore we are free from
maynteyning any such unprofitablenes, and veins of the ministry of the word,
as to persuade us to that which God has wrought in us already, yea long
before both in our understandings, and in our wills, as here it is charged upon
us, but causelessly, for ought I know; And if the Synod of Dort or Arl^s,
maynt^ynes any such doctrine it is more then hithe^to I have learned, or can
justify. It is untrue that the word is dangerous by our doctrine* but rather
that it is dangerous for any man to contemn or despise the goodness of God
therein; their cond^mnation it agg^avates only occasionally; it is a man's own
co^ruption causally that aggravates his damnation, when the Lord calls unto
them, and they will not hea^e, admonishes them, but they will not hearken. It
is true that it is not in the power of man to add unto the word the efficacy
of Gods Spirit, and it is as true that a carnal man has no desire that God
would add the efficacy of his Spirit thereunto.

The discipline of Christ's Kingdom is as cords, and bonds unto them, they
desire to break them, and to cast off the yoke of ob^dience unto him. And
again it is as true, that no man is damned for not adding the efficacy of Gods
Spirit unto his word.

They are damned for contemning Gods word, and not harkening to his gracious
admonitions; but they could do no other as this Author intimats; but what
impotency is this? is it any where else then in their wills? which this Author
considers not, nor distinguishes between impotency natural, and impotency
moral; were they willing to hearken hereunto, but could not, then indeed
their impotency were excusable; but they please themselves in their own, and
(...) in their obstinate courses; and if they would do otherw^se I make no
question, but that they should have no more cause to complain of their
impotency to do that good which they would do, then the servants of God have,
yea, and holy Paul himself had. How can you believe says our Savior, here is
a certain impotency of believing, Ioh. 5.44
which our Savior takes notice of; but what manner of impotency is it? observe
by that which follows, who receave honor one of another, and regard not the
honor that comes of God only. Therefore you hear not my words, because ye are
not of God, Ioh. 8.47. this is as true as the word of the Son of God is true,
allthough this Author setts himself to impugn this kind of doctrine all
alonge. But withal consider, do they deplore this impotencye? does the
consideration hereof humble them? nay rather they delight in it as the Prophet
notes, Ier. 6.10. Their ears are uncircumcised ears, and they cannot
hearken; behold the word of God is as a reproach unto them, they have no
delight in it.

The fourth Section. Sect. 4.

THere now remains no other instance for our Censurer the^ to exhort this
profane fellow to pray unto God that he would be pleased to give him the grace
to leave his lewdnes, Treat.
promising that if he pray as he ought to do, that he shallbe heard, and
receave what he demands. But herupon this profaner being well instructed in
the doctrine of Dort, will demand of him, how it is possible to pray as we
ought, if God give him not the grace before hand, and that also so
effectually, that it should be impossible for him not to pray, and therefore
seeing that he fails so to do, the Censurer must needs see that God will be
no more invoked on by him, then he has given him grace whereby to do it.

And that it is no less easy to perceave, that God sent this Corrector unto
him with an intention (not) to better him by his ministry, when he finds more
confusion in the doctrine of the speaker, then ame^dment in the practice of the
hearer, to whom he brings either the pillow of Epicurus, to lull him asleep
in his security, or else the haltar of despair, wherewith he may hang
himself as Judas.

But above all, this profaner will find yet one more singular benefit, to the
flattering of his flesh, by the answ^r which the Synodists do usually make
unto those who ask in what case David would have been, had he dyed in his
adultery, whereunto they say, it was impossible for David to have dyed before
he had repented, because that after this he was to begett a Son, from whom
the Messiah must descend.

But hereunto our profaner will reply, that the impossibility of dying before
repentance, according to the doctrine of the Synods, is founded upon the
general promise, made to all the Elect and not on any particular promise, made
to David, touching the Messiah, whom God had sent into the world, by other
means had he foreseen the impenitency of David, as he foresaw his repentance.
That if the Synod be not deceaved, he is sure to dye never without repentance,
as was David: So that following this doctrine, the true means, to avoyde
death, is to committ, and ever to continue in some mortal sin, it being
impossible for him to be killed in adultery, or perish in any other sin before,
having first made his reco^ciliation with God, who is not angry for ever (to
speak in the language of the Synod of Dort) but only against the Reprobates.
See then the invention of immortality found out, to satisfye the Paracelsians,
and such like fools, who search for this remedy, against death in drugs and
natural causes. Our Synods show the An^idote in a moral cause of so facile
and agreeable execution to their facile Auditors, that the Poets Ambrasia and
Medusaes charms, are fabulous unto it.

Now then our Corrector will either desist his enterprise, in reforming this
man's deboisnes, or else forsake his own principles, and correct the doctrine
of his Synods.

Consid. Surely, we have small reason to exhort a profane fellow, to pray unto
God, that he would be pleased to give him the grace to leave his lewdness, so
long as we find him, to delight in his profanesse, and take pleasure in his
unrighteous courses; had he a desire to leave it, but finds himself unable to
cast off this yoke of sin, o^ to break the bonds of iniquity, then, and in
this case, it were seasonable, to admonish him, to cry unto God, that he would
be pleased in mercy, to loose him, whom Satan has bound so many years, and
that for his Sons sake, whom he sent into the world, to loose the works of
the devil, he would be pleased to set him free, and give him the liberty of
his children; like as the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, by reason of
their sore bondage, and the Lord heard their cry, and considered their
sorrows, and came down to deliver them. Neither are we driven to any such
course, as this Author feigneth; who all along opposes the secret providence
of God, in showing mercy to whom he will, and hardening whom he will, in giving
hearts to perceave, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, to whom he will, and
denying this grace to whom he will, I say this, he opposes all along, to the
very face of it, nothing fearing the judgments of God, nor his power to harden
the^, and to make the^ feel that power, which they will not confess; saving
that these, and such like spiritual judgments; are of such a nature, that
they are least felt where they are most suffered.

And as he opposes this, so does he impugn the doctrine of Gods word,
concerning the impotency that is found in all, to believe, to repent, until
God be pleased to cure that infidelity and impaenitency, which by propagation
of nature, is derived unto us all, and made as natural unto us as flesh and
bone.

As where it is said, that men cannot believe, cannot repent, they that are in
the flesh, cannot please God; That the natural man perceaves not the things of
the Spirit of God, for they are foolishnes unto him, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned; that the affection of the flesh is
enmity against God, it is not subject to the Law of God, nor can be. That we
are all naturally dead in sin; and that our raising therehence, is no less
work then regeneration or new birth.

All this he setts himself purposely to oppose, and that in a vile manner by
base insinuations, to undermine this doctrine rather then by any just argument
to overthrow it. But when we deal about the reformation of such a one, we will
pray unto God, to accept our endeavors, and to show his power, in making his
word in our mouths powerful, as to the convicting of his sin, so to the
humbling of him, and bringing him acquainted with the Spirit of bondage, to
make him fear, and that he may be pricked in the heart, as the Jews were,
when by Peter's Sermon the Lord brought their horrible sin close home unto
them, in crucifying the Son of God; If so be, he may find sin to be as an
heavy burden unto him; and cry out unto us to minister a word of comfort unto
his weary soul; and in this case we will be ^old to apply unto him the
comforts of God in Christ; because our Savior calls unto him all such as
labor and are heavy laden, promising that he will ease them. Yet if we do
exhort him to pray, it follows not that this exhortation is in vain, no more
then exhortation to Infidels is in vain, when we exhort them to faith in
Christ. For albeit, neither the one nor the other can be performed without
grace; Yet upon our exhortation, God can work this grace in him, if it please
him.

Many come to Church with a profane heart, yet in the hearing of it, it
pleases God to convert some of them; and Ekron may be as the Iebusite; and God
is able to turn Lebanon into Carmel, and to make the most wast places
finitefull, even as the garden of the Lord. And Saul was converted in his
heat, and furious persecution of the Church of God. God can convert not only
aversas a vera fide, but adversas verae fidei voluntates, and ex nolentibus
volentes facere, and that omnipotente facilitate as Austin has observed. It is
untrue that grace works a man to pray in such sort as to make it impossible
for him not to pray; for that were not to work him to pray freely. Upon
supposition that God by his Spirit does work a man to pray, it is impossible
he should not pray, but how? contingently and freely. So that impossibility
is not simply an impossibility, but only secundum quid; and joined with a
possibility, simply so called to the contrary; Otherwise it could not be done
contingently and freely. For to produce a thing contingently, is to produce it
with a possibility to the contrary; and to work this or that freely, is so to
work this or that, as joined with an active power, either to forbear and
suspend the action, or to produce a contrary operation. And thus Aquinas most
learnedly shows, how that the efficacious will of God is the cause, why both
necessary things come to pass necessarily, and contingent and free things
contingently and freely; and accordingly he has ordained different second
causes, some working necessarily others working contingently and freely. But
this is more it seems, then this Author has hitherto been acquainted with.
And as he has exercised his Provincial wit, in opposing the doctrine of Gods
word, in the most untheologicall manner, that I think was ever known to the
world; so I wish he would keep his course, and show as little
scholasticalitie, in refuting Aquinas also in this particular.

And albeit God gives him not grace to mock him, yet the duty of prayer does
no less o^lige man, then any other duty; seeing God gave this grace to us all
in Adam; and in Adam we all have sinned, and by that sin our nature is become
bankrupt of grace until God in mercy, and for his sons sake be pleased to have
compassion upon us, and to restore it. But he is master of his own times, and
bestows this grace on some sooner, on others later, on some not at all; When
God sent Ezechiel to his people, it seems by that we read Ezechi. 2.3.4.5. he
sent him not to better them; but that they might not say they had no Prophet
among them, and to cu^ of that excuse; yet I hope this Author is not in such a
measure obdu^ate as to say, there was any such confusion in Ezechiels doctrine
as here he charge upon ours; which yet is merely according to his own
shapinge; and with what felicity he has succeeded in this a^t^fice of his, I
have endeavaured to make it appear unto the indifferent, and unpartiall
Reader. We teach that no man can have evidence of his reprobation but by
final impenitency, or by committing the sin against the holy Ghost; and in
either of these cases there is just cause of despair to Pelagius himself, how
much more to his disciples that oppose the grace of God after the truth thereof
is in such sort cleared; let them look unto it whether not against the voice,
and light of their own conscience. As for security, can the fear of God open
a way thereunto; or do we maynteyne any other perseverance in the state of
grace then by the fear of God? according to that Ier. 32.40. I will put my
fear in their hearts, that they shall never depart away from me? To the
question in what state David had been had he dyed in his adultery, he tells us
of an answer which is usually made by the Synodists, as he says; namely,
that it was impossible for David to have dyed before he had repented, because
that after this he was to begett a son from whom the Messiah must descend.

But who these Syndodists be, whether of Dort or of Arles, he m^ntions not,
much less the place where. As for the Synod of Arles, I never heard of it, but
by this manuscript. In the Acts of the Synod of Dort I have been something
versed, but I have not met with this answer there; nor ever heard of it,
before I read it in this Pamphlet. And to my judgment, it is imperfect in two
particulars, neither of which this Author takes notice of; the one is, in
altering the state of the supposition, without showing cause, why the
supposition is unlawful; yet such an answer was made by King James to D.
Overall his interposition in the Conference of Hamton Court, as I received from
the mouth of one that was an Agent in that Conference; the other is in
feigning, that David must begett a sone, after his repentance, from whom the
Messiah should descend, for which fiction I know no ground. But as for this
Authors exception, that is very vain and frivolous, for certeynly they that
make this answer, meant not to accommodate it to any other then to the
particular of David; on whose part there might be a particular reason of his
repentance, besides the general ground, which is common unto all. As for the
argument it self, I find it in Arminius in the Theses he wrote, ad Hippolytum
de collibus; And I know how our English Arminians do glory in it; but I
answer, that the supposition is most unjust, dividing two decrees of God, which
he has conjoined, in which case no merveyl if absurdities follow upon such
wild suppositions more then enough. For, in case God has ordained both, that
no sin shall cast a regenerate person out of the state of grace; and
nevertheless, that no sin shall be pardoned without repentance; in this case
that a man may be saved, he must not only continue in the state of grace, but
repent also; so that upon this feigned supposition it follows not, that David
dying in the sinnne of adultery unrepented, shall dye out of the state of
grace, only it follows, that, notwithstanding his dying in the state of
grace, he shall be damned, to wit, by our wild suppositon this would follow,
not by any ordinance or constitution of God.

Yet how can he dye in impenitency, that has the Spirit of repentance in him?
though upon the fiction here represented repentance actual is not exercised;
The case is all one of any sin, upon this supposition, vules they will deny
every sin to be mortal.

And to compare this argument of theirs with an argument of ours to the
contrary; what a worthy act was that of Abraham's in sacrificing his son, of
the Martyrs in sacrificing themselves; Nay put all the heroically virtuous, and
religious acts together, that have been at any time performed by the Saints of
God, and suppose them to have been performed by one child of God, yet could
not this root out the flesh, that is, the part unregenerate. How improbable
is it then that one act, to wit of adultery, is able to root out in the
child of God, the Spirit, that is the part regenerate? But against this
doctrine, that a regenerate person shall not dye in any sin unrepented of,
this Author brings an argument wherein he glories not a little; but one of the
wildest that (I think) was eve^ known to the world: To my thinking such a
wild goose dispute^ deserves to be set in the Stocks in the Parvis, that young
sophisters might gaze upon him, as smaller birds do at the broad faced foul
in the day time. There was a time when wit^s did flourishe in Rome, and as some
prooved excellent, and were delivered of material expressions to the
admiration of their hearers, so others affecting applause, and streyning to
surmount the expectation of their Auditors, sometimes discovered most absurd
conceytes, such Seneca censures in his declamations for corrupta, and
corruptissima. And sometimes ba^e floorishes were applaud^d by the people,
which Porcius La^^o observing: when he came to declayme, gave himself
purposely to imitate those absurdities; and once concluding an absurd
gradation, like unto some mountabanke orators that had been in the place before
him, with this Inter sepulchra monumenta sunt: and the people breakinge forth
into ^cclamation or clapping of hands thereupon, he leaves the prosecution of
his oration, and falls upon the people, discovering the absurdity of that his
floorishe, and reproching them as Audithors of no judgment, but applauding such
passages as were nothing worth, but most insipidly delivered without art or
wit or judgment. Now let us see what good metal there is to be found in this
argumentation, and whether it be not of as base an alloy as ever dropped from
the mouth of a sober man. And first if this were a course to prolonge a man's
life, what need he affect to sin, when the corruption of his nature caryeth
him to sin in such sort more or less, that he is driven to profess with
Paul, what I would that do I not, but what I hate that do I; and again I
find that when I would do good, I am thus yoked, that evil is present with
me. For I delight in the law of God concerning the inner man. But I see
another law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading
me captive to the law of sin.

Have we not daily cause to pray unto God to pardon our sins, both morning
and eveninge, yea and every hour? yea and as soon as we have done our prayers,
to pray unto him to pardon the sins of weakness that have had their course in
our very prayers. Abraham when he was sacrificing unto God, was put to drive
away the fowls that fell upon his sacrifice. This Gregory interprets of evil
motions that have their course in us even while we are at our prayers. And in
Zach. 3.1. we read, how while Iehoshuah was standing before the Angel of the
Lord, Satan stood at his righthand to resist him. Certeynly if the Lord should
be extreme to mark what is done amiss even in our best performances, we
should not be able to abide it. Therefore to help this flawe in this argument,
the Author makes it proceed not of sin in general, but of mortal sin;
which if it be delivered only (...) amplificandi causa, accoumpting all sin
mortal, my solution stands still in full force; but if it be delivered (...)
distinguendi causa, as if in his opinion all sin were not mortal, does it
become him to take that for granted, which we generally impugn as an untruth
in disputing against Papists?

Secondly, will he impute unto us by way of exprobration, our doctrine
concerning Gods decre^ing all things, and will he not suffer us to make use of
it? or does he not, or will he not perceave, that upon this supposition his
argument is of no force; nay if we do but acknowledge, that God has power to
hinder any sin, it is of no force; For God can hinder them from accomplishing
any such vile thought that this Author (very fruitful of wild inventions)
feigneth, and imputes to a regenerate person. Like as Ezech. 20.32. the Lord
professes that, that shall not be done which came into their minds: For they
said we will be as the heathen and serve wood a stone; but the Lord professes
he would rule them with a mighty hand; and the issue v. 37. is this, I will
make you pass under the rod, and bring you into the bond of the covenant. Thus
the Lord caryeth himself toward them in their first conversion, and taking
them off from their ungodly and wilful courses, as he took off Saul from his
persecuting courses, even then when he breathed out threats against the Saints
of God, and had gotten him a commission from the high Priests to go to
Damascus, and bind all that called on the name of Jesus. But when he has
converted them, (which is my third answer) then he putts his fear into their
hearts that they shall never depart from him; so that by restrayning them from
sin, and preserving the feet of his Saints, he keeps them unto him, not
suffering such wild thoughts, as these which this Author feigneth, to have
place in them. Fourthly, that which here he fitteneth is incompetent to a
natural man, that has but any spark of natural ingenuitie in him. For
suppose a Father shall be resolved concerning a debaucht, and lewd son,
never to disinherit him, though he should continue to the end in his
disobedient, and rebellious courses: if the Son should herupon take occasion
to be the more riotous, and disobedient, would not the world of natural men
generally condemn such a Son as most unnatural, and void of all sparks of
common ingenuitie?

How much more incompetent is such a disposition to him who is ruled, and
governed by the Spirit of God; an earthly Father being not able to change the
heart of his rebellious child; but God our heavenly Father being sufficiently
armed with power for this, who has gifts even for the rebellious, to make them
a fit habitation for him, that so the Lord God may dwell among them. Fifthly,
albeit the Spirit of this Author should perhaps serve him to be so much in love
with this temporal life as by any vile meames to prolong it, as namely, by
committing one mortal sin (as he calls it) upon the neck of another; yet
why should he be so charitable toward us his adversaries as to think so well
of us as he does of himself, and of those of his own sect, who coumpt it our
duty to endeavor to be so possessed with the love of Christ, and to enjoy
him, as to desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ in such sort that if
he should give us leave to choose, whether we would live Methusalehs years in
all happiness to serve him, and glorify him, or for the trial of our Christian
faith to be burnt at a stake, and as it were in a fiery charet to go to
Christ, we ought to accoumpt that God does far more honor us in this, then
in the other, and we have good reason to make choice of this to suffer for him,
who was so well content to leave, as it were, the glory he had with his Father,
and to empty himself for us, and to take upon him the shape of a servant, and
be crucified upon the cross between two thieves, that so he might overcome
death, and open the gate to us of everlasting life. Let this, Montabanke of
discourse go then, and applaude himself for the subtlety of his invention,
and sacrifice to his wit, and burn incense to his artifice; and cry (...);
and solace himself in the sport he makes amongst his consorts, and make
themselves merry with their Ambrosia beyond Paracelsian drugges; For these are
his inventions, not ours, manifesting withal, how savoury they should be to
his affections, but that he wants faith to embrace our doctrine.

And no mervaile if such, as is their faith, they unadvisedly declare, that
such like are their affections. That God is not angry for ever, is for
substance the phrase of the Holy Ghost; And it is as true of some that their
worm shall never dye, their fire shall never go out, and there is no greater
kind of Gods anger then that; and consequently his Anger shall never end
toward them; and if we devide the world of men into Elect and reprobates, who
can these be but reprobates? and consequently they toward whom God is not
always angry, must needs be his elect, and not reprobates. Yet I nothing
merveyle at this Authors Spirit, who throughout passes his scoffs and scorns
upon that which is the clear doctrine of the word of God, as on that which he
conceaves to be the doctrine of the Synods of Dort and Arles.

And therefore I commend his wisdom, that to avoyde the appearance thereof,
medles so little with taking notice of any passage out of Gods word, alleged by
any of us, to addres any answer thereunto; for if he had, his blasphemous
scoffs had been more apparently terminated upon the doctrine of the Holy Ghost
as well as upon the doctrine of Dort and Arles.

I find, this Author is a very kindhearted Gentleman toward himself, and to
the Helena he cherishes in his bosom. For whatsoever his premises be, he will
be sure to be full for his own cause in the conclusion. Yet will we, neither
forsake our own principles by the grace of God, nor give over our course of
reformation of any that is under our charge, to draw him from his profane
courses; taking our president and direction herein from the holy Apostles
admonition unto Timothy: The servant of the Lord must instruct them with
meekness, that are contrary minded (...), if so be at any time (therefore it
becomes us continually to wayt for this time and not to prescribe unto God) God
will give them repentance, that they may acknowledge his truth, and come to
amendment out of the snare of the devil, of whom they are taken prisoners to
do his will.

The THIRD PART. 3. Part.

The first Section. Sect. 1.

But perhaps he will acquit himself far better in undergoing the office of a
Comforter to one that is afflicted, Treat.
then he did in playing the Converter of an Infidel, or Corrector of the
profane Christian.

The ground of all comfort and consolation to each afflicted soul, has been
ever sought and found in the death and passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, whereby having sati^fyed the justice of his Father, he obtained
reconciliation for all mankind actual^y, appliable to all those who
acknowledging the infinitenes of the benefit, do thereupon embrace the Author
of it with a true and lively faith. Neither can our com^orter find any other
foundation, whereby to consolate and assure his patient against the terrors of
God^ justice, the condemnation of the law, and accusation of his own
conscience. But the sick or otherwise afflicted, can never make this true
foundation of Gods word agree with the false foundations of the second article
of the Synod of Dort, to wit, that Christ dyed not but for a very small number
of persons, already elected unto salvation, by the heavenly Father, who in his
decree did no more consider the death of his Son, then the faith of the
elect.

How shall I truly know (will the patient then say) that I am rather of the
small number then of the great, seeing that you my Pastor and Comforter will
not, that the promises of salvation in Christ are made universally unto all,
and that those places of Scripture, which seem general, according to your
opinion, are to be restreyned only to the universality of the elect. And that
in all the rest of Holy Scripture, there is no more special promise, nor
mention made of my self in particular, who also besides the Holy Scripture,
have no testimony, whether of Angel or Prophet, to assure me thereof. When our
Savior said unto his Apostles: One of you shall betray me. Although this
concerned but one of them, yet were they all exceedingly troubled therewith: So
then were there but a small number of Reprobates, for whom (as you said) Christ
dyed not; yet should I have just reason to fear or think, that I were one of
them, but much rather seeing their number is so great.

Consid. Now, we are to proceed to the third Act of this Authors Comedy, and
the several scenes thereof. We have considered how well he had playde the part
of an Infidel, refusing to be converted by us, as also of a bad living
Christian, refusing to be reformed at our hands; Now, we are to consider how
well he performs the part of an afflicted Christian, refusing all consolation
that we can minister unto him. I find he has a good wit, and Proteus like
can transform himself into the likeness of any condition, and can act more
parts then many.

In this last personation of his, he is well near as large as in both the
former; which whether it proceeds from greater confidence of his cause in this
particular than in the former, and that makes his wit to exuberate the more;
or that he meets with more difficulties in this passage then in the former,
and therefore is put to the more pains in Mastering them, I know not.

He feignes us in his introduction unto this, perhaps able to acquitt our
selves far better in undergoing the office of a comforter; but the fictions
of poetical, and comicall wits are nothing to be regarded as of any force to
discover unto us their true meaning.

As for us, we neither take upon us to convert, or reform or comfort any; but
only to minister a word of comfort to a weary soul, a word of terror to
humble a debaucht Christian, and a word of conversion unto an Infidel: we
leave it unto God, and pray unto him by the powerful operation of his Spirit,
to strike the stroke in any man's conversion, reformation, consolation. Neither
is our doctrine of predestination, and reprobation that word which we minister
either for the conversion of the one, or for the reformation of the other, or
for the consolation of the third; but the terrors of the law we make use of
for man's humiliation, thereby to praepare him for the grace of the Gospel; and
being humbled, the gracious promises of the Gospel, we make use of, to raise
him, by bringing him to faith in Christ; then we instruct him in the duties of
Christianity, exhorting him to walk answerably to his profession; and if he
fail hereof; we set the wrath of God before him, and show him how it had been
better for him he had never known the way of righteousness, then after he have
known it, to depart from the holy commandment given unto him.

Or if in the course of Christianity he walks uncomfortably, according as we
shall find the cause of his disconsolate condition, we will endeavor to fit
our consolations thereunto.

If affliction be the cause, we will represent unto him, how that this is the
common condition of Christians, and that through manifold temtations, we must
enter into the Kingdom of God; that God shows hereby, that he receaves us for
his own Children* and not as bastards.

If conscience of sin, and of walking little answearable to our profession; we
will represent unto him, how that if we judge our selves, we shall not be
judged of the Lord; that grief for this does argue a desire of the contrary*
and that God accepts the will for the deed; and has promised that if we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just, he will forgive them. If
weakness of faith be the cause of disquietnes, without any farther cause we
will represent unto him, how Gods gracious course is not to break the bruised
reed, nor to quench the smoking flax; and stir him up to pray unto God to
increase his faith, or to help his unbelief. That this disquietnes does
manifestly argue a desire to believe; and God has promised to fulfill the
desire of them that fear him, If he has atteyned to faith and holiness, we can
assure him of his election by our doctrine, which the Arminians doctrine
cannot. If he has neither, yet there is no cause of desperation; forasmuchas
his condition is no worse then Saul^ was before his calling, yen, and the
holiest servant of God. God calls some at the first hour of the day, some not
till the last. Nothing but final impenitencie, or the sin against the holy
Ghost, is an assurance of reprobation. But let us proceed along with this
Authors discourse, to examine it as we go.

This Author has but one ground of consolation; I have lately had to deal
with another of his Spirit, that makes three grounds of consolation; to wit,
the universalitie of Gods love, the universalitie of Christ's death, the
universalitie of the covenant of grace. By which it is manifest that he makes a
Christian capable of no better consolation then a Turk or Saracen is capable;
an elect then a reprobate. And if in all three he thrives no better in his
course of consolation, what shall we think of this Authors success in the
work of consolation, who insists but upon one of those three.

Yet I commend him for being sensible of the unseasonablenes of his
consolation, had he rested (as the other does) only in this, that Christ having
by his death and passion, satisfied the justice of his Father he obtained
reconciliation for all mankind. But this Author caryeth not himself so
covertly, but adds that this reconciliation is appliable to all those who
acknowledging the infinitenes of the benefit, do thereupon embrace the Author
of it, with a true and lively faith, whereby it is manifest, that in this
Authors judgment, consolation arising from the death, and passion of Christ, is
appliable to none, and consequently none are capable of it, but such as believe
in Christ, which he calls the embracing of the Author of the benefit, with a
true and lively faith; Now we willingly confess, that we cannot find any
other foundation, whereby to consolate and assure any afflicted soul against
the terrors of Gods justice, the condemnation of the law, and accusation of
his own conscience.

But whereas he says that the afflicted can never make this true foundation of
Gods word, agree with the second article of the Synod of Dort, which he calls
false foundations, but prooves it not; this we deny as utterly untrue, albeit
that second Article did proceed in the very terms here proposed, to wit,
that Christ dyed not, but for a small number of persons allreadie elected unto
salvation, by the heavenly Father, who in his decree did no more consider* that
death of his Son, then the faith of the elect. And this we prove though this
Author keeps his course in prooving nothing, but Comaedian like, feignes at
pleasure both objections, and answers, out of his own brain, and those
commonly of an aliene nature, nothing to the purpose; which yet I will consider
with Gods help in due place, and somewhat else also; but first I will prove
this that here I avouche; namely, that that second Article of the Synod of
Dort, of Christ's dying for a very small number, does nothing at all perjudice
that true foundation of consolation appliable to them that believe. For how
small soever the number be of those for whom Christ dyed, according to the
doctrine of that Synod; yet seeing they deny not, but maynteyne rather that
Christ dyed to satisfy divine justice for all that believe, and to procure
their reconciliation unto God; they make as much of consolation from this
ground, and extend it and apply it as liberally, and as largely as this
Author does; who professes that it is appliable to all those who
acknowledging, the infinitenes of the benefit, do thereupon embrace the Author
of it with a true and lively faith, and dares not plainly profess that it is
applyable to any other, only as it were to confound his Readers attention, that
which might be expressed in a word (Believers) he setts down at large with a
periphrase that takes up two or three lines. As for reconciliation for all
mankind, that is briefly and perspicuously enough set down, whereon alone he
desires to insist, but seeing how shamefully the issue thereof was likely to
fall, had he rested there, as whereby no greater comfort could a^ise to a
Christian then to a Turk; no greater comfort to the virgin mother of Christ,
then to Judas; he adds that this comfort is applyable to none but believers,
whereby he utterly ma^^es his own market. For we willingly confess that this
foundation of consolation, or consolation upon this foundation, is most
liberally applyable to all believers, but to none else; and himself expresses
the one, and caryeth himself in such sort as if he dared not deny the other,
namely, the sole application of this comfort unto believers. So that herby it
is as clear as the Son, that our doctrine not only affoordes as great
abundance of consolation as theirs does, but also that it affoordes the same
consolation to as many as theirs does, namely, to all believers. But yet I have
not done with this passage, I must call my Author to an accoumpt for somewhat
else of Christ's obedience satisfactory, I read in this Author, but of his
obedience meritorious I read nothing.

Likewise of obteyning reconciliation for all mankind this Author discourses;
but of obteyning salvation for all or any, he says nothing, Yet we know that
it pleased, the Father that in, him, that is in his Son Christ, all fulness
should dwell.

But let us consider the satisfactory nature (...) Christ's death here
acknowledged; I suppose his death satisfied Gods justice, by making
satisfaction for sin (I say I suppose this; for the truth is I am not sure
how to understand them in their phrases, and terms of Art.)

Now if Christ made satisfaction for all the sins of all and every one, in
such sort that Gods justice is thereby satisfied; I d^maunde how it can stand
with Gods justice to exact satisfaction at the hands of so many (as de does)
for their sins, and that by aeternall damnation in hell fire? For whether
Christ's death, and passion be satisfactory for all sins, for all and every one,
by its own nature, or by the constitution of God, or by both; I comprehend
not with what justice God can put the damned persons to satisfy for their own
sins in the flames of hell fire.

Secondly if Christ's obedience be also of a meritorious nature, whereby he has
merited both pardon of sin and everlasting life; if he has merited this for
all and every one, whether his obedience be meritorius hereof in its own
nature, or by the constitution of God, or by both; how can it be that any one
throughout the world can in justice fail of obteyning both pardon of sin,
and everlasting life? For shall not God deal with his Son Christ according
to the exigence of his merits?

Then as for reconciliation, which this Author says Christ has obtained for
all mankind, that is, I suppose for all and every one; here we have a word from
him; but for the mystery of his meaning we may be well to seek. In the 2.
Cor. 5.19. it is said, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their sins unto them, here reconciliation seems unto
us to be all one with non imputation of sins, and non imputation of sins
seems unto us to be all one with forgivenes of sins; and so redemtion that we
have in Christ through his blood seems to be all one with forgivenes of sins
Ephesians. 1.7. Now if reconciliation be obtained for all, and every one, by the
death of Christ, then likewise forgivenes of sins is obtained for all, and
every one; and seeing it cannot be said to be obtained unles it does exist; it
follows herence, that all and every one throughout the world, are reconciled
to God in Christ, have all their sins forgiven them. Now in this case how is
it possible that any one of them should be damned for their sins, to wit, in
case not any of their sins be imputed to them?

To this I guess this Authors answer is likely to be; that the reconciliation
obtained for all mankind, is reconciliation potentiall but not actual:
Forasmuchas in the words following, he says, of this reconciliation that it is
actually appliable to believers, he does not say only to believers (for he
desires to confound his reader as much as may be) but I guess, he dares not
profess the contrary.

Now against this carriage of his I have double exception: First, what reason
had he not to express so much, and call this reconciliation obtained for all
mankind, reconciliation potentiall, if that were his meaning, but let his
distinction, (somewhat obscurely here intimated,) fly with one winge;
especially considering that albeit reconciliation may be so liberally extended
as to signify reconciliation potentiall, yet seeing naturally it denotes some
thing actual, when it is thus expressed simply without addition to limite it,
it should be thus taken according to that rule of schools. Analogum per se
positum stat pro significatione famosiore.

But I have somewhat to say in excusing him herin, to wit, sic factitavit
Hera^^es, Arminius his Master was given to such collusions before him* My
second exception is, that the words followinge (actually appliable) do not
sufficiently insinuate any such distinction as of reconciliation potentiall,
and reconciliation actual; it ra^he^ implies a distinction of the appliable
nature thereof, to wi^^, as either potentia^l^ or actually appliable. And
indeed this (...) the genius of the former distinction. For a thing is not
applyable that does not already exist actually; as a plaster or a medicine
must first have existence actual, before it can be applied.

And consequently all and every one throughout the world, must be actually
reconciled unto God by Christ, before this their reconciliation can be applied
unto them. As indeed it may be said to be applied unto us, when God does
reveal it unto us by his Spirit, working in us the faith thereof.

O^e thing more I mu^^ dispatche before I p^sse from this division, and that as
touching the clearing of our doctrine in the ^oint of Christ his dyinge for
all; for as much as in my judgment, nothing but confusion of things that
differ, does advantage the Arminian cause, and hinders the light of Gods truth
from breaking forth to the clear conviction both of of what is truth, and what
is error.

But, first let me touch, by the way, one argument for the mayntenance of our
doctrine in the general. It is apparent Ioh. 17. that Christ professes he
prayed not for all, but only for those whom God had given him v. 9. or should
herafter believe, that is, be given unto him v. 20. And it is as clear that
like as for them alone he prayed, so for them alone he sanctified himself
verse. 19. Now what is it to sanctify himself, but to offer up himself upon
the cross, by the unanimous consent of all the Fathers whom Maldo^ate had
read, as himself professes on that place of John.

Now for the clearing of the truth of this, when we say Christ dyed for us, the
meaning is, that Christ dyed for our benefit. Now these benefits which Christ
procured unto us by his death, it may be they are of different conditions,
whereof some are ordained to be conferred only conditionally, and some
absolutely. And therefore it is fit we should consider them apart. As for
example it is without question (I suppose) that Christ dyed, to procure pardon
of sin, and salvation of soul, but how^ absolutely, whether men believe or
no? Nothing less, but only conditionally, to wit, that for Christ's sake their
sins shall be pardoned and their souls saved, provided they do believe in
him.

Now I willingly confess that Christ dyed for all in respect of procuring
these benefits, to wit conditionally, upon the condition of their faith, in
such sort that if all and every one should believe in Christ, all and every one
should obtain the pardon of their sins, and salvation of their souls for
Christ's sake. And I praesume that no Arminian on the other side will affirm
that Christ in such sort dyed for all and every one that all and every one
should have their sins pardoned, and their souls saved for Christ's sake,
whether they believe or no. What cause then is there of any difference between
us on this point, thus explicated. Yet herby it is manifest that the benefit
of remission of sins, and salvation of souls for Christ's sake, shall in the
end redound to none, but such as believe; as this Author seems to acknowledge.

But come we to faith it self and regeneration, are these benefits redounding
unto us by the merits of Christ yea or no? If they be, as our English
Arminians seem hitherunto to acknowledge; then I demand whether by virtue of
Christ's merits they redounde unto us absolutely, or conditionally?

If only conditionally, let them tells us upon what condition it is, that God
bestows faith, and regeneration upon us for Christ's sake; and let them try
whether they can avoyde manifest Pelagianisme, in saving that grace is conferd
according unto men's works. If absolutely, then either upon all and every one;
or upon some only* If upon all and every one, it follows that all, and every
one shall have faith, and regeneration bestowed upon them for Christ's sake, and
consequently all shall be saved, if upon some only, who can they be but Gods
elect?

But if observing these precipices, they desire to decline them; and therefore
deny that faith, and regeneration is any of those benefits which Christ has
merited for man; let the indifferent consider who they be that streiten the
extension of Christ's merits most, we, or the Arminians. For when the question
is for whom he merited pardon of sin, and salvation of soul, therein we all
agree, as before has been showed, none of us extending the merits of Christ
farther then other; none of us streitning them more then other. But when the
question is, whether Christ merited faith, and regeneration for us; we readily
maynteyne, that even these also Christ merited for his Elect; but Arminians
spare not to profess, that these benefits Christ merited for none at all.

And indeed so we find it expressly in their Apology or Examen Censurae
page 59. For when such an objection was made unto them. Si hoc tantum meritus
est Christus, tum Christus nobis non est meritus fidem nec regenerationem,
mark their answer. Sane ita est. Nihil ineptius, nihil vanius est, quam hoc
Christi merito tribuere. Si enim Christus nobis meritus dicatur fidem and
regenerationem, tum fides conditio esse non poterat, quam peccatoribus Deus sub
comminatione mortis aeterna exigeret, imo tum Pater ex vi meriti istius,
obligatus fuisse dicatur necesse est ad conferendum nobis fidem. Now I come to
follow this Author in his own way.

His objection is this: How shall I truly know (will the patient then say)
that I am rather of the small number then of the great, seeing that you my
Pastor, and comforter will not that the promises of salvation in Christ, are
made universally unto all, and that those places of Scripture which seem
general according to your opinion, are to be restrained only to the
universalitie of the elect.

I answer, thou shall truly know it by thy acknowledging the infinitenes of
the benefit wrought by Christ, and embracing the Author of it by a true and
lively faith. For this Author who promts thee thus to object, does as good as
profess, that no comfort from Christ's death and passion is applyable unto
thee, but in case thou embracest Christ with a true and a lively faith.

Secondly though thou do believe in Christ, this Author cannot assure thee
that thou art rather of the small number, which are Gods elect, then of the
great, which are reprobates, I say he cannot assure thee hereof by his doctrine,
albeit thou should adhere unto it; but we can assure thee as much by ours,
in case thou embracest it; and there is reason thou shouldsten brace it, it is
so agreeable to the word of God, Act. 13.48. As many believed, as were ordained
to aeternall life, and Act. 2. last, God added daily to the Church such as
should be saved; and the Apostle thus collects the Election of the
Thessalonians 1. These. 1.3. we remember the work of your faith, the labor of
your love, and the patience of your hope. 4 Knowing, beloved brethren, that ye
are Elect of God, and 2 Thessalonians. 2 13. we ought to give thanks always to God
for you, brethren, beloved of the Lord, because that God has from the
b^ginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and
faith of the truth.

In like sort thy Prompter, will not have the promises of s^lvation in Christ,
made universally to all, to be made absolutely but conditionally; and we
willingly extend this universalitie to all and every one, provided he believe
in Christ; so that unless thou believe, this Suggester can give thee no
interest in them, as formerly he has signified sufficiently; and in case thou
believe in Christ, we can by our doctrine allow thee as great an interest in
them as he can.

But if it be found that indeed none but Gods elect do believe (which this
Author will not deny, provided that by faith be understood, final perseverance
therein) it will follow herupon; that in the issue none but Gods elect shall
have these gracious promises accomplished upon them.

Neither will this Author I trow, be so bold as to tell thee that in scripture
there is any mention made of thee in particular more then of himself; neither
will he say that any testimony of Angel or Prophet is required to assure thee
that these promises do more particularly concern thee then any other.

Only if thou believe in Christ then he can assure thee that they belong unto
thee, and in that case, so can we; and more then that, that by faith thou shall
receave the Spirit of God, which shall testify unto thee that thou art the
child of God, yea, and that this Spirit shall and does seal thee to the day
of redemtion; as much as to say, give thee assurance of thy perseverance unto
the end; as being kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, which
the Arminians doctrine can no way assure thee of. So that were the number of
reprobates more then it is, yet by faith thou may be assured thou art none of
them, according to our doctrine, without faith no Arminian can assure thee,
that thou are none of them, no nor by faith neither.

And yet consider, there is nothing but sophistry in all this; For consider
thou art one brought forth into the world under the wings of God, and in the
bosom of his Church, what if the number of reprobates were far more then
twelve times greater then the number of Gods elect; yet considering, how great
a part of the world is possessed with heathens, Savages, Turks, and Saracens
and Moors, thou will find Christendom to be but a small number of them,
allthough the Gospel be spread in these days farther then ever it was
hertofore.

Then consider amongst them that bear the name of Christians, how many sects
there be miserably estranged from the true doctrine of Christianity, as
Coptites, Nestorians, Armenians, the Greek Church; and the Church of Rome,
here in the west; what an handful is left of those wherein the truth of God is
not subject to the same corruption, nor the holy worship of God defiled with
the same superstitions; what reason have thou to trouble thy self with
consideration of the small number of Gods elect and great number of reprobates?

To receave comfort the way is plain and short; if thou beleevest in Christ, a
fountain of consolation is opened unto thee by our doctrine; so long as thou
believe not, this Author has as good as expressly signified that no comfort
is applyable unto thee from the death of Christ. And over and above we say,
that by faith in Christ thou may be assured of thine election according unto
our doctrine; not so according to the doctrine of Arminians.

Sect. 2.
The second Section.
Treat.
Thereupon our consolator (instructed in the School of Dort) will allege unto
him, the judgment of charity, which praesumeth well of every one, seeing that
God does as little reveal the decree of reprobation, as that of election.

But this patient will not there find the least assurance, and that for many
reasons. 1. First because this judgment of chariti^ which presumes well, if a
man apply it generally unto all, does necessarily prove false.

The comforter not daring to mainteyne these two propositions together; that
Christ dyed for all men, and that he dyed for a very small number. 2. Secondly
the judgment of charity ha^h never any place, when we must have the certitude
of faith to believe or do any thing with a good conscience. 3. Thirdly the
judgment of charity extends it self no farther then to the suppressing of
sinister opinions and suspicions too lightly conceaved against ones neighbor,
whose infirmities it commands us to conceal, without preaching any falsehood to
him; When I see any one p^esent himself at the table of the Lord, in the
judgment of charity, I think him to be prepared as he ought, seeing nothing to
the contrary. But that they who are thus well p^epared do the^e participate to
their souls health; this I believe with the judgment of faith, which
suffers nothing that is, or may be, to be false. So likewise when I see a
sick man which is giving up the Gh^st calling upon Jesus Christ, I believe in
charity that he dyed a Christian. But that God makes them happy who depart in
the true faith of our Lord and Savior, this I believe with the certitude of
faith, and in such a manner as it is impossible for me to be deceaved, which
yet notwithstanding both may, and often does happen in the judgment of
charity.

In a word, the judgment of charity has no place, but in those things only,
that are between man and man. But when there is a question of the divine
promises, which have their foundation in divine truth, there is then required a
certitude of faith, wherein there is nothing to be found that is either false or
doubtful. If every one should say, we should presume every one to be of the
number of the elect, until he appear to be the contrary; the patient will
answer, that by outward appearence we can know nothing, either of election
or reprobation even by the judgment of the two Synods. And that therefore it is
not sufficient to presume, but that also we must have a full and perfect
assurance that Christ dyed for him, whom we go about to comfort, which
assurance is not to be found in the doctrine authorized at Dort, seeing it
denies that Christ dyed for all men.

This Author may prove a valiant champion, and a^t^yne to very great
achievements upon his enemies; when he prescribes unto his adversaries how
they shall strike; yet this is his course all along. And I commend his wi^t
more then his valor in this; for he were a mad man if he would prompt his
antagonist to strike where he is not able to ward; Now, his former argument I
have already answered without taking any such course as to fly to the
judgment of charity.

I have clearly showed, how that, according to this Authors own grounds of
consolation, we are sufficiently provided to minister a word of comfort to an
afflicted soul, as well as he. For he confesses, that the benefit of Christ's
death (the only ground of consolation, as he says) is actually applyable to
none but such as rely on Christ by a true and lively faith. Now, in this case
we can assure, not only of the favor of God for the present, but also of
final perseverance therein, and of election, and of salvation by our doctrine.
Whereof they can assure none by the tenor of their doctrine.

Indeed, if a man has no faith at all any more then a Turk and Saracen, we
cannot assure him of his election any more then we can assure a Tu^k or Tartar
thereof; nor any Arminian either, I think. But suppose a Christian in
profession is notwithstanding void of all true faith, can such a one be
assured of the favor of God to the pardoning of his sins, and to the saving of
his soul, by any Arminian? I trow no Arminian can or will undertake, to
assure any man hereof without faith. Yet we may be bold to say, that albeit he
has not faith to day, notwithstanding he may have in good time, and that there
is no cause to conceave himself to be a reprobate. We do not say, that he who
has no faith, is in the judgment of charity to be conceaved to have faith.
But look what evidence we have of a man's faith, in the judgment of charity,
the same evidence we have of his election in the judgment of charity. For the
Apostle does clearly conclude the election of the Thessalonians, by his
observation of their faith, etc. 1 These. 1.1, 3.4, and 2. These. 2.13. Let us
consider in this aliene discourse of his, proceeding from his own mere fiction,
how well he overthrowes that which himself alone has builded, as it were
castles in the air. First, he says, this judgment of charity, which
presumes well, if a man apply it generally unto all, does necessarily prove
false. I wonder, he sees not how this prooveth directly against himself; for
has he no^ formally signified, that the number of the reprobats, being far
greater then the number of the elect, therefore a man has just cause to
suspect, that he belongs to the greater number rather then to the l^ss^? which
applied to all, must evince, that all and every one must suspect themselves,
they are reprobates rather then elect, as if there were none elect at all. Now,
look what way he makes the^hence, to get out for himself, the same way will
serve our turns, to answer this argumtnt also. For, we speak of comforting
this or that particular person; we have nothing to do with all men throughout
the world.

Then again, we are conversant in the comforting of an afflicted Christian;
And affliction of soul for sin, is usually as the panges of childbirth,
whereby many a one comes to be brought forth into the world of grace Now,
without the Church there are enough, to make up, and complete the number of
reprobates, not to speak of profane persons within the bosom of the Church,
who go on in their sinful courses, without all remorse of conscience. And
whereas he tells us, we da^e not maintain these two propositions together, 1.
that Christ dyed for all men, 2. and that he dyed for a very small number.
First, observe his retrograde motion; For at the first he manifested that the
consolation, arising by Christ's dying for us, is applyable to none but such as
believe; And we deny not, but that abundance of consolation in Christ's death,
is derivable to all them that believe; Now, he goes back, and treates of the
consolation, arising from Christ's death unto all, whether they believe or no;
as if every one were to be comforted in Christ's death, for as much as Christ
dyed for all and every one by their doctrine; which is apparently to minister
no more comfort to a Christian by Christ's death then to a Canniball.

Secondly as touching those two propositions we can, and do maynteyne them in
a better manner then they; forasmuch as we deliver the truth clearly, and
distinctly on our parts, but they most confusedly, as if they were the sons
of confusion.

For as touching the benefit of pardon of sin, and salvation procured by
Christ's death, we say that Christ dyed to procure these for all, and every one,
but how? Not absolutely; for then all and every one should be saved; but
conditionally, to wit, upon condition of faith; so that if all and every one
should believe in Christ, all and every one should be saved. But as for faith
it self, we say Christ merited this also, (which the Arminians expressly
deny Examen censurae. page 59.) not conditionally, for if so, then should grace
be given according unto men's works which was condemned in the Synod of
Palestine above 1200. years ago; and all along condemned in the Church of God
for mere Pelagianisme, therefore he merited this absolutely, not for all and
every one; for then all and every one should believe, and consequently all and
every one should be saved; therefore he merited this only for some; and who can
these some be, but Gods elect?

And if it appear that but a small number believe and persevere in true faith,
it is manifest in the issue, that but few are saved, and that albeit Christ
dyed to save all and every one conditionally, yet he died to merit faith for a
very few. Now what is become of this Authors ridle, and the pretended
contradiction between these two propositions? I come to his second argument.

Be it so, that the judgment of charity never has place, when we must have
the cer^i^ude of faith to believe or do any thing with a good conscience; but
say I, this is nothing to the case we speak of. For what? is it required of
every man, to believe concerning himself or concerning his brother, that he is
an elect of God? Is this the Arminian Tenet? A man borne in the Church, and
making profession of the Gospel, we are bound to conceave to have true faith
(and consequently to be an elect of God) if we know nothing to the contrary;
1. Cor. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.4.
this I say is required in the way of charity, whose property it is to
interpret all things to the best; so did Paul conceave of the Thessalonians,
and by the leaves of their profession, we must judge them to be plants of the
Lords planting, so long as we have no just cause to think the contrary. To the
third, be it so, that the judgment of charity extendes it self no farther
then to the suppressing of sinister opinions and suspicions, too lightly
conceaved against our neighbor; it is well for us that it extends so far;
therefore without just cause we must not conceave otherwise of them then that
they are in the state of grace, and consequently that they are elect. And no
other kind of certitude is required in the case we treat of; so that this
Author caryeth himself miserably extravagant in his very extravagancyes.

And as for an afflicted soul, we have reason to conceave better of him then
of civil Christians, for as much as his state is not so obnoxious to
hypocrisy, as is the condition of Christians, who are nothing exercised with
the terrors of God, and with the affrightments of a tender conscience.

Be it so that it has course only between man and man, this judgment of
charity; such is the case we treat of; For as for the afflicted soul, we do
not say that in the judgment of charity he is bound to conceave that he is an
elect of God, any farther then he has cause to conceave that he is in the
state of faith. But we come to the application which he makes hereof to divine
promises; Now we willingly profess that divine promises are to be believed by
certentie of faith, we do not say, nor I presume was ever any of our divines
known to say, that the truth of divine promises was to be believed by the
judgment of charity. Whosoever believes shall be saved, we apprehende this by
certeintie of faith, not out of any judgment of charity, what a wild race
does this Author run in his roaving discourse?

We will be bold to affirm, that every one is to believe that he is of the
number of Gods elect, so far forth as he knows himself to have faith in
Christ; which as it is a gift of God Philip. 1.29. and Ephesians. 2.8. so God gives
us his Spirit by the hearing of faith, that we may know those things that are
given to us of God, 1. Cor. 2.12. But this, to wit, whether a man has true
faith or no, though it be known to him that has it, yet is it not known to
others, any otherwise then by the judgment of charity. Yet Paul was confident
of the truth of the Thessalonians faith, and consequently of their election, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.4. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. It is untrue that we must have a sufficient
assurance that Christ dyed to procure pardon of sin, and salvation of soul
absolutely for him, whom we go about to comfort; it is enough that Christ dyed
to procure these benefits for him condi^ionally, to wit, in case he believe
and repent; and of this we have a most sufficient assurance. But these
disputers, like owls, fly abroad only in the night of darkness and confusion;
but let the light of distinction come, and then it is time to hide themselves in
their close harbors for shame.

But over and above we can treat with our Patiens about Christ's dying not only
to procure pardon of sin, and salvation of soul conditionally, to wit, in
case they believe and repent; but also for procuring the gift of faith, and
repentance for them also; whereof we have the better hope when we consider
their afflicted condition; this being Gods usual course to transform them
into the image of Christ crucyfyed first, then rising from the dead; by making
them to feel the fellowshippe of Christ's passions, Philip. 3.
and the power of his resurrection. Now this way of consolation is quite out of
the Arminians element.

The third Section. Sect. 3.

THe minister or Comforter will then ask the patient, Treat.
if he never felt the witness of adoption, which the Spirit of God bears with
the Spirit of the elect. And if he be assured that he once had faith, he may be
certain that he has it still, notwithstanding the small fruit that it
produces. Whereunto the Patient will reply that Calvin himself does much
trouble, and obscure this doctrine of certitude in his Institut. lib. 3. cap.
2. parag. 10. where says he; The heart of man has so many secret corners of
vanity, is so full of so many hiding holes of lying, is covered with such
guilefull hypocrisy, that it d^ceaveth it self, and persuadeth him that he
has true faith when he has it not.

If the patient acknowledges that he never found this testimony in his heart,
his comforter will answer him in the same manner, as he formerly did the
profane, when he took upon him the office of a censurer and corrector, to
wit, how that all are not called at the same hour.

But if the patient do then ask him some assurance that he shall be thus
efficaciously called before his death, the comforter will find none for him
either at Dort or Arles, only he will tell him that assuredly Christ dyed for
him, if so be he believes in him, wherein he will show himself either a
praevaricator of his own side, and an overthrower of the doctrine of the
Synods; or else that he is deprived of common sense. For if he give the self
same consolation to all that are sick, to all that are afflicted, yea, even to
those, who for their greater offenses are led to execution, and if this
consolation be founded upon the truth, does it not then follow, that Christ
dyed for all and every one?

And if he so understands it, that this becomes true by the faith, which
the Patient adds to the disc^urse of the Minister, he has lost his sense, in
affirming that the object of faith, or thing proposed to be believed, receaveth
its truth, and depende^h of the consent and belief of men, who by his
approbation and faith, has no more power* to make that true, which is false in
it self, then to make that false by his incredulity, which in it self is true.
The incredulity of man may deprive him of the benefi^e of this death, yet can
it not make, that Christ suffered not this death, to testify his love unto all
mankind universally, even as all are bound to believe in him, and yet no man
bound to believe that which is false.

The Apostle says, that God will send the Spirit of error upon them that
have not received the love of the truth. And yet according to the Doctrine of
Dort, he would have all men first to believe, that Christ dyed for him, which
is false in the judgment of the Synod, and then afterward for believing this
falsehood, he shallbe punished with the Spirit of error, for giving credence to
a lie.

Consid. That there is a Spirit of adoption, whereby, we cry Abba Father, is as
true as the word of God is true; as also, that his Spirit does testify
together with our Spirit, that we are the Sons of God. And that there is no
falling away from the state of sanctifying grace, we are ready to mainteyne,
according unto Gods word, whenever we shallbe called thereunto. 1. John. 2.19.
Of some Apostates S. John writes plainly, saying: They went out from us, but
they were not of us, for had they been of us, Matt. 16.
they had continued wih us. By faith, we are built on Christ, as on a rock,
and our Savior has told us, 1 Pet. 1.
that the gates of Hell shall not prevayle against them that are built thereon;
and no me^veyle, for they are kept by the power of God through Faith unto
salvation.

And consequently whosoever is assured, that he once had Faith, may be as well
assured that he has it still.

Peter sinned fowly, Luc. 23.
in denying his Master, yet Christ had prayed for him, that his faith should
not fail. An^ not for Peter only did our Savior pray; but for all those,
whom his Father had given him, and that in this form: Father keep them in thy
name, Ioh. 17. Nor for those only, whom his Father had at that time given him,
but for those also, who hereafter should believe through their word, Ioh. 17.

And we know full well what small fruit Peter's faith brought forth at that time
when he denied his Master, and in David also, when he sinned in the matter of
Vriah; yet would not Bertius profess, that David by those sins of his had
deprived himself of the Spirit of God; Bert. de apostas. Sanctoru^.
and that propter graves causas. Neither does it follow, that because true
faith brings forth small fruit at sometimes, as in the hour of temtation,
and when a man sinkes under it, therefore it brings forth small fruit simply,
as this Author caryeth the matter.

It is untrue, that Calvin does tro^ble or obscure this doctrine of Certitude:
and that the Patient will say so, is but this Authors fict^on: if he should say
so, we will be as ready to disproove it.

The words of Calvin are these: Tot vanitatis recessus habet, tot mendacii
latebris scatet cor humanum, tam fraudulenta hypocrisi ob^ectum est, ut seipsum
saepe fallat. He might as well have said, that the H. Ghost troubles and
obscures this doctrine of Certitude, Ier. 17.9.
by saying: That the heart of man is deceitful above all things who can know
it? But the Apostle makes this use of it, 2. Cor. 12.5. Examine your selves,
whether you are in the faith, prove your selves; know ye not your selves that
Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?

There is indeed a secret hypocrisy unknown to a man's own heart; as when he
presumes that all things go well between him and God, when indeed it is not
so; their rightousnes such as it is, is not simulata conterfeyted by them; but
they deceave themselves as well as others; and from such a state a man may
fall, as Austin acknowledges, who nevertheles clearly professes his mind,
that no man falls away from the state of spiritual, and wholesome repentance;
that being such a condition as whereunto God never brings any one whom he has
not predestinate. Istorum (that is non praedestinatorum) neminem adducit ad
spiritualem and salubre^ paenitentiam qua homo reconciliatur Deo in Christo,
five illis ampliorem patientiam, five non imparem praebeat. Contr. (...) Pelag.
lib. 5. cap. 4.

This is not the case of an afflicted soul; the hypocrite is secure, and
without suspicion of the integrity of his condition in the state of grace, but
the afflicted soul is too suspicious of himself, conceaving his faith at the
best, to be but counterfeyte; this is his sorrow, this is the cause of the
disquietnesse of his mind, and whereof we may take good advantage for his
consolation, both in respect that he judges and condemns himself; And in
this case the word of God assures us, we shall not be judged of the Lord; as
also that hereby is clearly manifested a desire to be free from hypocrisy, 1.
Cor. 11.
to be in a confortable condition, by a true and sincere faith in Christ; Now,
these are manifest evidences of the life of grace. Not to speak of general
grounds of consolation, such as these: Blessed are they that mourn, they shall
be comforted; Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
they shall be filled.

It is true, that all are not called at the same hour; and seeing affliction,
especially when it is of a spi^ituall nature, is the ordinary introduction into
the state of grace, in the course of Gods providence, like as the valley of
Achor was a door of hope, Hos. 2.15.
unto the Children of Israel; and our Savior, in going to Jerusalem, (the
vision of peace,) did commonly take B^thany (the house of mourning) in his way,
we have cause to conceave good hope, that th^se pangs may be as the pangs of
childbirth unto an afflicted soul. But yet we will not satisfy our selves with
our Patients saying, that he never felt the testimony of adoption in his heart,
as thereupon to conclude that as yet he is but in the state of nature, and not
washed from his filthiness, we will take notice of all circumstances of his
carriage in this condition, and of such observations as we have made of them in
the course of their conversation for the time past, and not suffer a melancholy
passion to obscure the mercy of God toward them, we will be very loath to be
streitned in our proceedings in the course of our consolation by a Comaedians
wit, that coms to discourse of such tender points, as if he came to make a
play, or to act a part upon the stage, to make his Arminian hearers sport. In
the next place he puts a most absurd demand in the mouth of his Patient,
requiring forsooth some assurance that he shall be thus efficaciously called
before his death; A demand, I am verily persuaded, never brought to light but
by Arminian invention.

Can any Arminian assure their Patients of any such condition? We willingly
profess, we can assure none thereof; but where we find men afflicted in soul
through conscience of sin, and a fearful apprehension of Gods wrath; this
Spirit of bondage makes us to conceave hope, that a child is now come unto his
birth, and that there shall not want strength in good time to bring him forth.
We are not likely to tell him, that Christ surely dyed for him, if so be, he
believes in him; this is a Gossips bowl of this Authors making, to carouse an
health to his companions.

But by the way it appears, that howsoever this Comedian did at the first
entrance hereupon profess, that consolation in Christ's death was not actually
applyable to any, but such as believe in Christ, and consequently that a man
can have no confort in Christ, until he believe in him, by a true and lively
faith; yet he carries the matter so, as if this were comfort enough to a man
to believe that Christ dyed for him, albeit as yet he has obtained no true
faith in Christ, whereas it is apparent; that no more consolation can arise is
this case to a Christian, then to a Turk, to a child of God then to a child
of the divil, to an elect, then to a reprobate. For their doctrine is, that
Christ dyed indifferently for all. Yet albeit this practice of his is base
enough, at pleasure to putt upon us what cause of consolation he thinks good;
I will not spare to examine how judiciously he caryeth himself in elevating
this feigned suggestion of ours. Suppose we should say, that whosoever
believes* Christ dyed for him, I am ready to make it good in spite of this
Authors course taking upon him to represent the absurdity thereof; which
imputation I nothing doubt, shall light in full weight and measure upon his
own head, to the discovery of his shameful ignorance, which he is well
content to cherishe for the advantage of his cause, by the confusion of things
that differ. He says that herin we shall show our selves either as
praevaricators of our own side, and overthrowers of the doctrine of the
Synods, or else that we are deprived of common sense; all which is but the
froth of his own ignorance, as I hope to make it appear to all indifferent,
and unpartiall judges; First he says, that if we give the self same
consolation to all that are sick, to all that are afflicted, yea even to those
who for their greater offenses are led to execution, and if that this
consolation be founded on the truth, does it not then follow that Christ dyed
for all and every one? I willingly profess I am not a little recreated with
confidence of our cause, when I do observe the desperate condition of the
adversary cause, that takes delight in so vile props as this Authors discourse,
and magnify them as unanswerable, and call in others to take notice of them as
(...), as if they were some notable atchievemens, who sees not that now we
are upon the office of ministering consolation to an afflicted soul? Now is
this the condition of all and every one? Alas how few are they that mourn in
comparison to the Ioviall Neds of the world? How few are they that hunger and
thirst after righteousness, in comparison to them that are full? But suppose
it were delivered of all, namely, that if they believe in Christ, certainly
Christ dyed for them.

Dare any Arminian deny this? do they hold it less sure that Christ dyed for
them that believe in him, then that he dyed for all? Even for Turks and
Saracens, for Tartars and Canniballs, not one of them excepted?

Lastly, what does it advantage their cause, that Christ dyed for all and every
one? Surely, this nothing at all advantageth them; but the confused and
indistinct consideration of the true meaning hereof, that is it which brings
water to their mill, and that alone.

To dye for us, is to dye for our benefit; Now, we love to speak plainly, and
distinctly, and accordingly do distinguish of those benefits, which Christ
has procured for us; Now, some of these are such as God uses to confer upon
men of ripe years, not absolutely, but conditionally. And these are the
remission of sins, the salvation of souls; we say therefore, that Christ
merited for us the pardon of sin, and salvation of soul, to be conferred
upon us only conditionally, to wit, provided that we do believe in him; and
thus we may well say, that he dyed for all and every one; that is, he dyed to
procure pardon of sin, and salvation of soul for every one, in case every
one should believe in him; which in effect is as much, as to say, that he dyed
in this sense, for none but such as sometimes or other are found to believe in
him. Yet, whether we believe or no, Gods word does assure us, that he dyed to
procure remission of sin, and salvation of soul, to all that do or shall
believe in him. Now, besides these benefits, there are other benefits, which
Christ has procured for us, merited for us* and these are faith and repentance
which are not conferred by God upon man conditionally, to wit, upon the
performance of some condition by man; for if it were so, then these graces
should be conferred, according to men's works, which is clearly and undeniable,
stark Pelagianism.

And these we say Christ has merited for us, even to be absolutely bestowed
upon us; Now will Arminians assure any man, who yet believes not, that Christ
has merited for him not only pardon of sin, and salvation in case he
believe, but also the very grace of faith and regeneration? I trow, not one
of our English Arminians will undertake this, but rather acknowledge, that it
cannot appear who they are for whom Christ has merited faith and
regeneration, until they do believe, until they are regenerate. As for
outlandishe Arminians, they utterly deny that Christ merited faith and
regeneration for any. Now wherein are we found either p^evaricators of our own
cause, or overthrowers of the doctrine of the Synods, or void of common sense
in all, or any particular of this? Nay does not this Author betray miserable
nakedness throughout, emboldned and made confident by his ^ich ignorance, wherein
he cherishes himself, and steepes sweetly as upon his Arminian pillowe, by
miserable confusion of the meaning of this phrase Christ dyed for us, taking it
hand over head and in the general, without any due consideration of the
particular benefits signified herby which Christ is said to procure for us.
But let us proceed wi^h him who proceeds ^hus.

But if he so understands it, that this becomes true by the faith which the
patient adds to the d^scours of the Minister, he has lost his sense, in
affirming that the object of faith or thing proposed to be believed, receaveth
its truth, and depends of the consent and belief of man, who by his
approbation, and faith, has no more power to make that true which is false in
it self, then to make that false by his incredulity, which in it self is
true. The incredulity of man may deprive him of the benefit of his death, yet
can it not make that Christ suffered not this death to testify his love to all
mankind universally, even as all are bound to believe in him, and yet no man
bound to believe that which is false. Thus he does expatiate in a large field,
nothing at all to the purpose. This argument is Bellarmines argument long ago
but against what? surely against the doctrine of our Protestant Churches,
concerning the object of faith special, which we maynteyn to be the remission
of our sins. Yet absurd enough on Bellarmines part, though very plausible I
confess upon a superficiary consideration of things. For he supposes that
God does first pardon sin, and afterward we believe that God has pardoned
them. But can Bellarmine tell what it is for God to pardon sin? or where it
is that thus he pardons them? Sure I am the nominalls are very much to seek
about the formalitie of pardoning of sin. And I verily believe, Bellarmine
did nothing trouble his brains about either of them, if he had, and well
considered that justification in scripture phrase, especially where S. Paul
disputes of it, is a judiciary act; and all one with absolution, or pronouncing
sentence for a man; And that the pronouncing of this sentence is not in heaven
(though his love was aeternall, and his purpose aeternall as an action*
immanent within him) for to whom should God pronounce it there? should he tell
the Angels of it? and when I pray might that be? at the first conversion of
every one? this were a very pretty fiction, and fit for such a Commaedian as
this Author.

But if God pronounces it no where but in the conscience of man, where he has
erected his tribunal seat, and that by the testimony of his Spirit, which can
be no other then to make the Spirit of man apprehende it by faith; I say if
Bellarmine had seriously considered this, cecidisset^ omnes de crinibus hydrae,
he would not have been so forward to betray his shame by an argument plausible
only through ignorance, in not understanding what that is, whereof he
discourses. So much for Bellarmine whose argument this is, which here is used
by this Author, but nothing at all to his present purpose, we say not here that
any thing becomes true by the faith of him that believes it; but only this,
that the benefit which is procured for all and every one, upon a condition
becomes his, and peculiarly his alone who performs the condition.

Christ dyed to procure pardon of sin, and salvation to be obtained by faith;
so that if all and every one should believe, all and every one should be saved;
which in effect is to say, that Christ dyed in this respect only for believers;
and by the faith of man the benefit of Christ's death is approp^iated unto him;
but till he believes, it is not known either to himself or any other man,
that he shall have any benefit by the death of Christ* Only God knows from
everlasting, who shall have benefit by the death of Christ, and who not, for
as much as he has determined to give faith in Christ to some and not to
others; and accordingly has sent Christ into the world for their sakes, not
only to merit pardon of sin, and salvation, in case they believe, but to
merit faith and regeneration also for them. So that the love of God, and of
Christ to all, goes no farther then this, that whosoever believes in him shall
not perish but have everlasting life. Ioh. 3. but Gods special love to his
elect is to send Christ into the world to merit, not that only for them which
is to be conferd upon the condition of faith, but to merit faith also for
them, which is conferd upon them absolutely, and upon no condition, we do not
say that any man is bound to believe that which is false; but as for believing
in Christ whereunto all are bound that are called by the Gospel, that is no
such believing, the object whereof is capable of truth or falsehood, as this
Author according to his superficiary course, is still in confounding things
that differ.

The Apostle says so indeed, and of Gods judgments in this kind we have
plentiful experience, at this day; how God strikes such persons with the
Spirit of giddines, making them to err in their counsayles, and discourses as
a drunken man erreth in his vomit; yet they think themselves the only sober
men of the world; and glory in their illusions, which are most pleasing unto
them, like unto the dream of an hungry man, who eats and drinks and makes
merry (as he thinks) but when he awaketh, his soul is emtye. Surely the
doctrine of Dort, teaches not that God would have a man first believe that
which is false, when he commands every one to believe that Christ dyed for
him; like enough it is false in the judgment of the Synod that Christ dyed for
every one: but where do they say, or acknowledge that God commands every one
to believe that Christ dyed for him? Can he show this, if he can, why does he
not; but he came only upon the Stage to play some gamboles, which done, his
discourse is at an end. They maynteyne, like enough, that not all and every
one, but all and every one that hears the Gospel, is bound to believe in
Christ, but it is incredible unto me that they should profess that every one
is bound to believe that Christ dyed for him. But it is nothing strange for
this Author to confound these, as if there were no difference between
believing in Christ, and believing that Christ dyed for us. And Arminians, I
willingly confess, do usually confound these; The truth is, we deny that
Christ dyed for all, in as much as he dyed not to procure the grace of faith
and regeneration for all, but only for Gods elect; and consequently neither
shall any but Gods elect have any such interest in Christ's death, as to obtain
thereby pardon of sin and salvation, for Arminians themselves confess, that
this is the portion only of believers. But seeing pardon of sin and salvation
are benefits merited by Christ, not to be conferd absolutely but conditionally,
to wit, upon condition of faith; we may be bold to say, that Christ in some
sense dyed for all and every one, that is, he dyed to procure remission of
sins, and salvation unto all and every one in case they believe; and as this
is true, so way we well say, and the Council of Dort might well say; that
every one who hears the Gospel is bound to believe that Christ dyed for him
in this sense, namely, to obtain salvation for him in case he believe. But
what think Arminians; are we bound to believe that Christ dyed for us in such
a sense, as to purchase faith and regeneration for us?

Surely, not one of them will affirm this, because they do not believe this
(no not one of them that I know) that Christ by his death merited faith and
regeneration for all and every one; Nay, the Remonstrants profess, that he
merited faith and regeneration for none, Exam. Cen^ura, p, 59.

We acknowledge, that Christ merited this for Gods elect, and accordingly, they
are bound as soon as they do believe, and are regenerated to give God the
glory of it, as the bestower of these graces upon them for Christ's sake. For it
is he, who makes us perfect to every good work, working in us that, which is
pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, Hebr. 13.21.

But before God has bestowed faith and regeneration upon them, it is utterly
uncertain by ordinary means, both whether God has determined to bestow any
such grace upon them, and whether Christ dyed for the procuring of any such
benefit unto them.

As for the phrase, this author uses, of believing falsehood; There is a great
difference between the believing of somewhat which is false, and the believing
of falsehood. When God commanded Abraham to sacrifice Isaac. Piscator,
conceaving that Abraham was bound to believe that it was Gods good pleasure,
that Isaac should be sacrificed, which yet notwithstanding was false, as
appeared by the event; and yet I hope Abraham needed not fear any such
punishment for believing this, as to be given over to the Spirit of error.

And I hope this Author will bethink himself, and take heed how he censureth
Abraham, for giving credence to a lie in this, but he runs on, more like a
blind man, then like one, who (as Solomon says) has his eyes in his head. Yet
am not I of Piscators mind in that; like enough, Abraham was apt to think so;
but I see no cause to say, that Abraham was bound to believe that, which
Piscator says he was.

The fourth Section. Sect. 4.

SEe then if this be not a Labyrinth of prodigious Divinity, Treat.
which turns obedience into punishment. For if the Synod speak true, and
that Christ be not dead for those that believe not in him, how can they deserve
to be punished, for not having b^leeved that which is false? And they that have
obeyed his commandment in believing of his death, how should they suffer the
punishment due unto disobedients and incredulous, which is to believe lying.

In a word, to deny the universality of the merit of Christ's death, is
outragiously to dishonor God, as though the Author of truth commanded all men
to believe a falsehood. And the better to discern the fickleness of this
Spirit that did praeside at the two Synods, it is to be noted, how that as on
the one side, this doctrine does forbid to believe that which the Script^
affirm as most true, and in most express terms: So on the other side it
commands every one, to believe that he is elected unto life, although he be a
reprobate in effect. And that he cannot loose his faith, being once had, for
any sin, whatsoever he does committ, which the Scriptures deny, as a thing
most false in the like terms.

If then that this doctrine, which denies that Christ dyed for all, bereaveth
the afflicted of all consolation; the other point, which denies that a man may
fall away from grace and faith does clean overthrow the ministry of preaching,
which consists in exhortations, by promises and threatenings, which can no
longer be means of doing any good work, which is only by the immediate
operation of the holy Ghost, as it has been abovesayde.

So neither is there to be found in all the scripture any one promise of such a
persevera^ce in faith as the Synod intimates; seeing that all exhortations,
whereof the Scriptures are full, do directly oppugn the pretended promise.
They admonish the faithful that they take heed they do not fall, of hardening
their hearts, of receaving the grace of God in vain, from falling from their
stedfastnes etc. And yet the imaginary promise of the Synod does declare, that
they cannot fall, they cannot harden their hearts, that they cannot have
received the grace in vain, and that they cannot fall from their stedfastnes.
By which means, the admonitions which denounce the danger, and begett fear,
do overthrowe the promise, which says, there is no fear of danger, nor cause
of fea^e. If it be not that the Synod would make us to believe, that the
faithful who fear danger that can no more happen then that God should lie,
are more foolish then certain melancholy persons who fear that the havens
will fall, which notwithstanding shall one day pass away.

Consid.
We read of one that while he slept, loosing his eyesight, after he awaked out
of sleep, and had layne long on bed, wondering* that he saw no light, imagined
that the reason thereof was, because the windows were shutt, and thereupon
cried out to open the window?.

In like sort, this Author cries out of the Labyrinth of prodigious Divinity,
when it is nothing but his prodigious ignorance, that makes our doctrine seem
prodigious divinity unto him. It is untrue, that we turn obedience into
punishment, but he feignes the object of obedience, and obtrudes it upon
others, before he does sufficiently understand it himself being disirous that
others should be like himself; in believing they know not what; As in
believing that Christ dyed for them, we willingly confess that Christ dyed not
to procure faith, and regeneration for them that never believe in him, that
never are regenerated. I doubt not but this Author believes this as well as
we; we farther believe that Christ dyed, to procure the grace of faith and
regeneration for some, namely for Gods elect; I doubt whether this Author (who
vaunts so much of Christ's dying for all according to his faith) does believe so
much; and herin I am confirmed in that the Remonstrants spare not to profess,
that Christ merited not faith, and regeneration for any. Exam. Censurae page
59. Yet as touching Christ's dying for all men so far as to procure pardon of
sin, and salvation for them absolutely, I know no Arminian that affirms
that, on the otherside we willingly confess, that Christ dyed for all and
every one so far as to procure them both remission of sin, and salvation,
in case they believe. In all which we do not maynteyne that any man is bound
to believe that which is false; much less that they deserve to be punished for
not believing that which is false. I dare admit Impudency it self to be Judge
between us in this, who of us do attribute more to the virtue of Christ's
death, as also which of us does more believe that Christ dyed for us; let
their own conscience be Judge, now the state of the difference between us is
cleared. For as touching the benefits of remission of sins and salvation, in
the extension thereof unto all, and every one conditionally we are aequall. But
as touching the benefits of grace, and regeneration that we also attribute to
Christ's death as the meritorious cause thereof to all that enjoy those
benefits; whereas the Remonstrants have openly professed to the world, that
Christ has merited faith, and regeneration for none. How then do we at all
deny the universalitie of Christ's merit, when on the one side we extend it as
far as they, on the other side, much farther then they? and who deserves to
be censured as outragiously dishonouring God, let the world judge upon
indifferent hearing of both parts. It is a false suggestion that we charge God,
the Author of truth, to command a falsehood; not only for as much as we esteem
that there is no small difference between believing in Christ, which we
acknowledge to be commanded; and believing that Christ dyed for us, which we
find no where commanded; but also upon supposition that we are commanded to
believe that Christ dyed for all and every one; yet herin should we not be
commanded to believe a falsehood; for as much as in a good sense, and which
alone is tolerable, we believe that Christ dyed for all, and every one as much
as the whole nation of Arminians do, and in another sense believing that
Christ dyed for us, we go far beyond them in extending the merit, and virtue
of Christ's death and passion.

Therefore it is most untrue which this Author does reiterate, charging us to
deny that which the Scriptures affirm in express terms; but in as much as
neither do the scriptures affirm that in express terms which this Author
says they do, to wit, that Christ dyed for all and every one; and if it did
affirm any such thing in express terms, we should be far enough from
denying it; nay we do maynteyne it, not only as far as they do, but much
farther. Where the Synod of Dort does command every one to believe that he is
elected unto life, I know not. Only I have read lately such a thing objected
unto us, as out of the particular opinion of Zanchy and Bucer. Yet they deliver
this only of Christians, who are such as believe in Christ, and for whom they
make no question (I trow) but that Christ dyed; so that the congruitie herin
is accurate without all color of contradiction. And yet if it should prove to
be contradictious the one unto the other; I never observed such a condition to
be taxed for ficklenes in the embracers of such opinions, till now. Ficklenes
is showed in changing from one opinion to another, not in holding the same
opinions still, albeit some one perhaps may seem in the judgment of some
malevalent adversaries, contradictions unto the other. Yet Zanchy who says
every one is bound to believe (speaking of Christians) that he is elected unto
life; was never known to affirm that every one is bound to believe that he is
elected to faith, and regeneration. Now aeternall life we know is ordained by
God to be the portion of men, not whether they believe or no; whether they
persevere in faith, holiness and repentance or no; but only of such as believe,
repent, and are studious of good works; for it is ordained to be bestowed on
men by way of reward for their faith, repentance, and good works.

And will any Arminian deny but that every one that hears the Gospel (whether
he believe or no) is bound to believe that aeternall life shall be his portion
in case he believe, repent, and be given to exercise good works? Now albeit
this Author be for the present upon the pin of disparaging our doctrine as
utterly unsufficient for consolation to an afflicted soul, yet he spares not,
as it were, in the same breath to cry down our doctrine as touching
perseverance in the state of grace, and hold up the Arminian Tenet as touching
the Apostacye of Gods Saints; as if their doctrine in this particular were more
seasonable for consolation then ours.

The sins of David were very foul, adultery and murder; yet Bertius that
zealous maynteyner of the Apostacye of Gods Saints, Psalm. 51.
will not say that David by these foul sins did expel the holy Spirit out
of his heart, and that propter graves causas. And in deed the Scripture
teaches us that albeit David prayed, in his paenitentiall Psalm conceaved in
reference to those sins, that God would restore him to the joy of his
salvation; yet he prays not that God would restore him to his Spirit, but
rather that he would not take away his Spirit from him. And Peter sinned foully,
and shamfully in denying his master with execrations, and oaths, and that as
it were before his Masters face; yet our Savior had told him before, that he
had prayed for him that his faith should not fail.

And we know what promise the Lord made to David, Psalm. 89.30. If his Children
forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments, 31. If they break my statutes,
and keep not my commandments 32. Then will I visit their transgression with
the rod, and their iniquity with strokes, 33. Yet my loving kindness will I
not take from him, neither will I falsify my truth.

The scripture, this Author says, denies this doctrine of ours, as a thing
most false in like terms, that is in express terms. But he quotes no place,
referres to none, nor so much as intimates any such place, where this, which he
pretends should be delivered in express terms.

Yet to the contrary, Matthew. 24.24. our Savior setting down the efficacy of
false Prophets in the seducing of many, expresses it in this manner, so that
if it were possible, they should deceave the very elect; plainly signifying,
that it was a thing not possible that the Elect should be seduced; Now, this
cannot be understood of the elect, as yet unregenerate; for in the state of
nature, who s^^th not that they are obnoxious to the same errors, whereto
others are?

And John the 10.29. he plainly gives us to understand, that his she^pe are in
the hands of his Father, and that none is able to take them out of his hands;
and accordingly S. Peter says, 1. Pet. 1. that they are kept by the power of
God, through faith unto salvation. Yet when we say, that this faith cannot be
lost, we deliver it upon supposition of Gods purpose, to mainteyn them in that
state of grace, against all the powers of darkness; Ier. 32.40.
which purpose is manifest by his promise, I will putt my fear in their
hearts, that they shall never depart away from me; and accordingly the Apostle
promises on Gods behalf, that he will perfect the good work he has begun in
us, Philip. 1.6. that he will not tempt us above our strength, but with the
temtation will give an issue, that we may be able to bear it, 1. Cor. 10.13.

Now, albeit their opposite doctrine of the Apostasy of Saints, savoureth of no
consolatory nature, yet to spitt his poison against that also, though out of
season in this place, he has some what else to obj^ct against that, as namely,
that it overthrowes the ministry of preaching, which consists in exhortations
by promises and threatenings, which can no longer be means to do any good
work, if so be, the good work be wrought by the immediate operation of the
Holy Ghost; as it has been above said; and indeed this coms in here, as it
were against the hair, first, considering that we are now upon the point of
consolation; Now, I presume no Arminian will say, that their doctrine, as
touching the Apostasy of Saints is to be magnified, as a very comfortable
Doctrine.

Secondly, whether good works are wrought by the immediate operation of the
Holy Ghost, is nothing to the present purpose; For that he avoucheth is this,
that the doctrine of perseverance overthrowes the ministry of preaching; not
that immediate working of perseverance by the Holy Ghost, overthrowes the
ministry of preaching: yet if this were the present assertion of this Author, I
have already sufficiently disproved it before. ^f his vineyard of red Wine, the
Lord professes, that he is the keeper of it; Esa. 27.2.
and that he waters it night and day. God keeps it, and waters it, and by
watering it, he keeps it; Can any sober man devise any sober opposition
between these? Yet he can keep it without the preaching of the word, and
where that is is wanting, the Lord is able to keep it, and will keep it. And
where these means are most rife, yet this hinders not the immediate operation
of the Holy Ghost unto every good work, as I have showed. For notwithstanding
all exhortations backed with promises and threatenings, the will for all this is
left at liberty, to obey, or disobey; but God by his Spirit does immediately
work the will, to obey the ministry of the word; He is brain sick with
error, that sees not how the preaching of the word nothing hinders the
immediate operation of the Spirit of God, in working the will to assent and
yield obedience thereunto.

He says, there is not to be found in all the Scripture any one promise of
such a perseverance in faith, as the Synod intimates; yet is it possible that
he should be so ignorant as not to know that many passages of holy Scripture
are alleged to confirm this, and that in the very Acts of that Synod? but
this Author, being of a comicall wit, does not find himself so fit, as to
enter upon a serious encounter. And insteede of deb^litating any one passage of
scripture, usually alleged by our divines for the confirmation of this their
Tenet: this judicious Author outfaceth them all blindfold, saying that all
exhortations, whereof the scriptures are full, do directly oppugn the
pretended promise.

But we utterly deny this; nay nothing but shameful inconside^atenes makes
this Author so bold, as by such base pretenses (which were exploded in the
days of Austin by himself, and others in their disputes against the
Pelagians) to cry down the truth of God. For he considers not that as God
works men to perseverance; so it is fit he should work them hereunto in such
manner, as is agreeable to their natures; Now, this is by admonition and
exhortation. God promised Paul, that he would give him freely all that sailed
with him, Act. 27.24. Yet this hindered not Paul's exhortation to the Centurion,
to stay the mariners in the ship, saying: except these abide in the ship, ye
cannot be safe, v. 31.

And what an absurd thing is it, to conceave that by begetting fear through
admonitions, we overthrow the promise, when the promise it self is not
accomplished but by this fear, as Ier. 31, 40. I will putt my fear in their
hearts, that they shall never depart away from me; For God that he may beat
presumption out of us, and teach us to depend on him, that so we may give him
alone the glory of our preservation, will have us sensible of our own
weakness and fear thereupon; and therefore exhorts us expressly to work out
our salvation with fear and trembling. Philipp. 2.13. That so all our
confidence may be in God, and none in our selves; and thus he leads us along
in all the Holy ways thereof unto salvation, to wit, with confidence in him,
but with no confidence in our selves, but rather with fear and trembling in
respect of our selves.

The promise says not, there is no cause of fear, in respect of our selves,
but rather overcomes those fears, by calling us, to lift up our eyes, toward
our maker; that so we may be a people, saved by the Lord, he being the shield
of our strength a sword of our glory, we fear unto the Lord, Hos. 3. last,
that is come flying with fear and trembling unto him, and Hos. 11.10. They
shall walk after the Lord, he shall roar like a Lion: When he shall roar,
then the Children of the West shall fear, trepidabunt, that is, festinabunt,
trepide ad dominum.

Be it that the danger cannot happen, by virtue of Gods ordinance; yet if God
has ordained that it shall not happen, by means of our fearing it, out of the
sense of our own impotency to guard our selves from it, and thereupon are
stirred up, to make the Lord our strength, whose grace we know is sufficient
for us, are we foolish in fearing it, when our fear makes us fly and cleave to
God, who alone can, and hereupon will preserve us from it?

Nothing is to be done by us, to keep the Heavens from falling, but something
is to be done by us, to keep us from falling, and that something in part is to
fear least we fall* The heavens shall one day pass away, and Gods covenant
with day and night, shall be at an end; but Gods covenant for the perseverance of
his Saints, shall never be at an end, only a time shall come when perfect love
shall supply the place of fear, in our fruition of God, which shall be
everlasting.

Sect. 5.
The fifth Section.
Treat.
FOr sum of all, it will come unto that pass to believe, it were better to
address our admonitions unto God, for him, to finish his work in men, to
convert, correct, and comfort them by his omnipotency, which no person is able
to resist, and that it is his fault that so many persons continue faithless,
profane, and desperate, because it is he that refuses to give, or takes away
the grace necessary, as well to their conversion, as to their repentance and
perseverance in the faith, If any of these Synod^sts were sick of the palsy,
and praesented themselves to some Physician, who by the means of an excellent
potion, promises him to make him leave his bed ere long, and go whither he
pleases; the other having recovered his health, and the use of his arm, and
leg, would he further bind his physician to carry him upon his shoulder from
place to place, for the sparing of his legs, and nourishing of his sloth,
while he in the mean time lies lazy in his bed, and continues the excess
which brought him unto his sickness? and yet not withstanding these men are not
contented, that God should furnish them with necessary and sufficient grace to
preserve, and keep them from all temta^ion, from the divill, the world, and
the flesh, and to continue in that faith, and thereby to conserve this grace in
watching, fasting, and praying, they will also have God immediately, and
irresistibly to produce all th^se things in them.

What remains then but to say, that God himself does believe, repent, and
persevere in well doing, even as Servetus said, that the Fire does not burn,
the Sun does not shine, that bread nourishes not, but only that God does
all these things, immediately in his creatures, not having given them their
properties.

Consid. In the like manner some there were, who opposed the grace of God 1200
years ago, in the days of Austin, and thereupon he wrote his book de
Correptione and gratia; Rursus (says he) ad eosdem scripsi alterum librum,
quem de correptione and gratia praenotavi, cum mihi nuntiatum esset, dixisse
ibi quendam, neminem corripiendum si Dei praecepta non facit: sed pro illo ut
faciat tantummodo or andum.

And in the book it self, and 4. chapter, he represents their discourse more
at large in this manner: Praecipe mihi quid faciam: and si fecero; age pro me
gratias Deo, qui mihi ut facerem dedit. Si autem non fecero, non ego
corripiendus sum, sed ille orandus est, ut det quod non dedit: id est ipsam,
qua praecepta ejus fiant, fidelem Dei and proximi charitatem. Ora ergo pro me
ut hanc accipiam, and per hanc ex animo cum bona voluntate, quae praecipit
faciam. Recte autem corriperer si eam mea culpa non haberem: hoc est, si eam
poss^m mihi dare vel sumere ipse nec facerem, vel si dante illo accipere
noluissem. Cum ergo and ipsa voluntas a Domino praeparetur, cur me corripis,
quia vides me eius praecepta facere nolle: and non potius ipsum rogas, ut in me
operetur and velle.

Now, to all this, Austin in the next chapter answers in this manner: Ad haec
Respondemus: Quicunque Dei precepta jam tibi nota non facis, and corripi non
vis, etiam propterea corripiendus es, quid corripi non vis. Non vis enim tibi
tua vitia demonstrari: non vis ut feriantur, fiatque tibi utilis dolor, quo
medicum quaeras: Non vis tibi tuipse ostendi, ut cum deformem te vides,
reformatorem desideres, eique supplices ne in illa remaneas foeditate. Tuum
quippe vitium est quod malus es, and maius vitium corripi nolle, quia malus es:
quasi laudanda vel indifferenter habenda sint vitia* ut n^que laudentur neque
vituperentur; aut vero nihil agat timor correpti hominis vel pudor vel dolor:
aut aliud agat cum salubriter stimulat, nisi ut rogetur bonus and ex malis qui
corripiuntur, bonos faciat qui laude^tur. Quod enim vult pro se fieri qui
corripi non vult, and dicit, ^ra potius pro me ideo correpiendus est ut faciat
etiam ipse pro se. D^lor quippe ipse quo sibi displicet, quando sentit
correptionis aculeum, excitat eum in majoris orationis affectum: ut Deo
miserante, incremento charitatis adjutus desinat agere pudenda and dolenda, and
agat laudanda atque gratanda. Haec est correptionis utilitas, quae nunc major
nunc minor pro peccatorum diversitate salu^riter adhibetur, and tunc est
salubris, quando supernus medicus respicit. Non enim aliquid proficit, nisi cum
facit ut peccati sui quemque paeni^eat. Et quis hoc dat, nisi qui respexit
Apostolum Petrum negant^m and fecit flentem. Vnde and Apostolus Paulus
posteaquam dixit, cum modestia corripiendos esse diversa sentientes, protinus
addidit: Ne quando det iis Deus paenitentiam ad cognoscendam veritatem, and
resipiscant de diaboli laqueis. Gods omnipotency no creature is able to
resist, and therefore if God will have any man to believe freely, to repent
freely, to do this or that good work freely, it is impossible it should be
otherwise but that look what he does by divine instinct he should do it
freely; And that God is he who works in us that which is pleasing in his sight
through Jesus Christ, is as true as the epistle to the Hebrews is a part of
the new testament, though like enough it is no part of the Gospel of this old
Evangelist.

Now that any in Austins days either amongst the Adrumetine* monks, or
amongst the P^lagi^^s, did from the same ground object that it is Gods fault
that so many persons continue faithles, profane, and desperate, I read not.
For albeit our Savior is bold to tell the Jews to their face that therefore
they did not hear his words, because they were not of God, and Moses to the
Israelites in the wilderness signifies; that therefore they did not profit
either by Gods words which they heard, or by his wonderful works which they
saw, because God gave the^ not an heart to perceave, nor eyes to see, nor ears
to hear unto that day; yet neither the Jews of our Saviors words, nor of Moses
words, the Israelites took any such advantage, as to say that then it was, Gods
fault that so many continue faithles, profane and desperate. For what though
God could cure their infidelity, profanesse, and desperate condition, yet if
he be not bound to cure, it shall he be accoumpted faulty for not doing what
he is nothing obliged to do? how many uncurable diseases are to be found in
the bodies of men throughout the world, as leprosies, gangrenes, the woolfe,
cancers, gouts, dropsies, which no question God is as well able to cure as that
uncurable disease whereof Hezechias sometimes lay sick; what then, shall we not
spare to blaspheme God in saying, It is his fault that so many diseases are not
cured? God deals plainly and tells us to our face, that he will have mercy on
whom he will; yea and that he hardneth whom he will, even to the blaspheming of
him, and his providence in this profane manner. And albeit he will not cure
profanesse, and hardness of heart in many, yet will he take liberty still to
complain of their disobedience; And far more savoury were it to object
against this providence of God and say; If God hardens whom he will, why then
does he yet complain, for who has resisted his will?

Yet in this case, we know full well how the holy Apostle takes such a one
down; first with, O man, who art thou that disputest with God, and then
answers him in this manner: Shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it,
why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the
same lump to make one v^ssell unto honor, another unto dishonor?

In Austins days I read of such an objection, as this: Quomodo meo vitio non
habetur quod non accepi ab illo, a quo nisi detur, non est omnino alius unde
tale ac tantum munus habeatur. They said, it is he alone that gives grace,
and thereupon they built that objection; They said, as this Author does, that
it is he that takes away the grace necessary, as well to their conversion as
to their repentance, we acknowledge, that where God gives the grace of
perseverance, thereby perseverance is wrought* and consequently impossible it
is, that grace should be taken away.

In like sort, of conversion and repentance, neither do we mainteyne, that
there is any falling away from this grace.

The Physician, I willingly confess, does not use to carry h^s Patient upon his
shoulder, after he has cured him, neither does the Patient expect it, or so
much as accoumpt it any courtesy, for it would prove unnecessarily cumbersome
unto them both, and that were not to use his own legs in going, but to have
the soundness of them restored to him in vain.

Man, if naturally sound, is able to go without the help of any Physician: And
is man so sound spiritually taken at the best, that he is able to do any thing
that is good without the help of God?

What is it to contradict the Apostle to his face, if this be not, who
professes, that God it is, who works in us both the will and the deed, and
that according to his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. Yea, that works in us every
thing that is pleasing in his sight; Heb. 13, 21
does the Physician set the man's legs; whom he has cured?

I think he has enough to do, to set his own legs, and members going
according to their several motions, was holy Paul nourished in his sloth, who
both professes that he labored more abundantly then they all yet in the same
breath, 1. Cor. 15 10.
acknowledges that nevertheles it cannot he, but rather the grace of God in
him. Nay how is it possible that God should bring a man to a sermon while he
lies lazy in his bed? How is it possible he should continue that excess which
brought him to his sickness, when God works in him that which is pleasing in
his sight? and fullfills the good pleasure of his goodness toward him, 1. These.
1, 11.
and the work of faith in power? But we may easily proceave the Spirit of his
Author he would not be a child still, he would go on high alone, and not have
any need of the leading of his heavenly Father; his own Spirit serves his
turn to perform any holy duty, any gracious work; And as Plato discerned
the pride of Antisthenes through his patcht coat; so may we thorough these
wild expressions, as if God did man's work for him, while he lay in sleep, we
may easily perceave the pride of his heart requiring no more succor from God,
to the performance of to velle and agere of that which is good, then Pelagius
of old did. Yet the Lord by his prophet plainly professes of himself that
he causes us to walk in his statutes and judgments and to do them; and the
Apostle as plainly teaches us that God works in us both the will and the
deed according to his good pleasure; Ezech. 36.27.
yea that he works in us that which is pleasing in his sight through Jesus
Christ. The meaning where^^ Pelagius his opinion was only this, that suadet
omne quod bonum est; and in all liklihood no other is the meaning of the
Apostle in the opinion of this Author; though he comes not so far as to the
discussing thereof, and to treat of Gods concourse; For which kind of exercise
this comicall wit of his, is nothing accommodated, and like enough this
discourse of his, is plausible to none but such comicall wits as himself is
of, and no merveyle if it be magnified of them; For Lactucas similes labra
simillima habent, like lettice like lips.

Yet he does us wrong in saying we are not content that God should furnish us
with necessary and sufficient grace to preserve and keep us from sin; For
albeit we do require that God should immediately, and irresistibly work all
our good works in us, yet surely we acknowledge this to be necessary unto
every good act, and no grace without this, sufficient ad velle and agere,
though there may be without this a grace sufficient ad posse; and the word of
God it self we acknowledge to be sufficient in its kind, to wit, in the way
of instruction; but the ministry thereof, we willingly profess goes no farther
then Paul's planting, and Apollos wateringe, over and above all, which* unles
God be pleased to give the increase, we shall continue unfruitful still; only
there is a sect, that have a better opinion of their activitie unto that which
is good, 2 Thessalonians. 5 1.11.
then so. Sure I am, the Apostle tells us that God does fulfill the good
pleasure of his goodness in us, and the work of faith with power; and if he
fulfill the work of faith with power, does he not fulfill the work of love,
of repentance, of obedience, of all holy conversation and godliness, and that
with power? Molira will have Gods concourse to be simultaneous with the will,
not antecedaneous in nature to the wills operation, least otherwise God should
not be the immediate cause of the act, of the maintenance whereof he was zealous;
and it seems Armini^^s took his conceyte from him, of making God in the same
manner an immediate cause of every act. But Suares his fellow Jesuit does not
approove of that Molinaes conceyte; and is of opinion that albeit God does
work the will to her operation, yet this nothing hinders the immediate
condition of Gods causalitie. So that all of them stand for the maintenance of
Gods immediate causalitie; which this Author very judiciously and profoundely
out of the depth of his scholasticalitie rejects, and after his manner takes it
in scorn that God should be required to perform an immediate operation in
producing any good work; he would have that left to the will of man; not that
he desires to have whereof to boast; for he will be ready in great plerophory of
words to profess, that he gives God the glory of all, but how? Forsooth of
working him so to that which is good as to leave it to his will at the pleasure
thereof to be the immediate operator in all. Otherwise he should work
irresistibly, which is a phrase of an ill accent in their ears, and sticks as
a burre in their throat it will not down with them; for they are verily
persuaded it would breed no good blood in them, not for fear least herby they
should ascribe too much to God, and too little to themselves; far be that from
the Spirit of their humility, but they would have the Almighty carry himself
decently in dealing with them; and since he has endued them with free will, not
to damnifie the free course thereof, which were to disanull his own
workmanship. For as yet they are not arrived to any such faith, as to believe
that it is in the power of the Almightye to make them to work this or that
freely.

But let me have leave to spur this Author one quaestion. Cannot he endure
that God should so powerfully work them unto that which is good, that the
world should have no ability to resist him nor the divill, and his Angels of
darkness? We know the course and fashions of the one, and the practices, and
suggestions of the other are pressed, and forward enough to hinder us in the good
ways of the Lord, as much as ever the Angel of God was to hinder Balaam in
his wicked courses: Now, why should you be so zealous of maynteyning the power
either of the world or the divill, to corrupt your soul, and overthrowe your
faith? were it not rather chiefly to be desired, that God should so work us by
his holy Spirit unto every thing that is pleasing in his sight, that it should
not be in the power of the very gates of hell to prevayle against us? that is,
I trow to work us unto that which is good irresistibly, that is, so that the
world nor the divill should not be able to resist Gods operation though they
much desire it.

I should think it is not the genius of this Author to oppose irresistible
operation divine in this sense; though it may be he was never cast upon this
distinction until now.

In respect of whom then would he have this divine operation to be resistible?

Is it in respect of the flesh?

But if he be well content that it should not be in the power of the worlds or
the divill to resist Gods operation working us to good, why should he affect to
have it in the power of the flesh?

1. Considering, that if it be in the power of the flesh to resist divine
operation, it is therwithall in the power of Satan; For in fulfilling the will
of the flesh, and the mind, we are said to walk after the Prince that rules
in the air, Ephesians. 2.

2. Why should any man be so zealous for upholding the power of his flesh, is
it not a sign he is in love with it still?

3. Or rather is it in zeal of the honor of his own performances, in doing
good as it were in despite of such a potent adversary?

If so, then let hell be loosed, and the divill, and the world both armed with
the like power, and that honor in withstanding them is likely to be greater,
and you shall have the greater cause to rejoice; but where is your respect to
the glory of God in all this?

Or in fine, would you have your regenerate part to be so strong and able, that
neither flesh within, nor world or divill without, be able to resist its course
in grace; only you would have it free either to yeilde or to resist divine
exhortations?

But consider I pray, is not your unregenerate part, your flesh free enough,
and forward enough yea most prop^ne and propense to resist that; and should
you not rather desire that your regenerate part should be as free, and forward;
as propense and prone to resist them, and to do that which is good?

Otherwise in what a miserable case shall man be even in state of regeneration;
when his worse part is still prone to sin, and wants not the world and the
divill to drive him headlong therinto; and his best part, to wit, his
regenerate part, shall not be as prone to good, but only indifferent to good or
evil.

Beside, do you not consider how you debase the grace of regeneration, making
it inferior to moral goodness? For moral goodness does not leave a man
indifferent to good or evil, but inclines him naturally to that which is good,
and to that alone, but the grace of regeneration is so shaped by you, as to
bring a man but to an indifferent constitution, to do either good or evil.
But perhaps you will say, if regeneration, and the grace thereof, shall carry a
man naturally unto that which is good only; where is a man's freedom? I
answer, as much as in a morally virtuous constitution; For who was ever known
to affirm that moral virtues take away a man's liberty? Again why should any
man be so eagerly set upon liberty to do evil? were it not better for us to
enjoy such a liberty alone as of many good things to choose which we think
good; but must we needs affect such a liberty as to choose evil also if we
think good? and do you not perceave what color of contradiction steals upon
you ere you are aware; and shrewde evidence of the unreasonablenes of your
affections.

Yet take one things more to acquaint you with that which perhaps may seem a
mystery unto you in moral philosophy; for some may be so given to the stage,
and taken up with the obsequies thereof, that they may forget their philosophy.
Therefore I say, that like as moral virtues tend only to the ordering of the
reasonable soul aright, as touching her right end by light of nature, so the
grace of regeneration tendes to the ordering of the degenerate soul aright as
touching her right end discovered by the light of grace. Now, Liberty of will
consists not in appetitione finis, the nature of man rightly ordered, is
naturally carried on thereunto. But freedom of will has place in electione
mediorum.

So that albeit my right end, being once discovered, and my nature so
qualified, as it ought to be in respect thereof, albeit I am necessarily and
naturally carried to the affecting of that end, yet still I am free to choose
amongst many, what shall seem most convenient to the obteyning of that end.
Whether in all this I have not spoken parables and mysteries, in the judgment
of this Author, I know not; yet this I know, God can open his eyes, and the
eyes of those that are in love with these frivolous discourses of his; and make
them to discern the vanity of their ways, in opposing the grace of God, and
withal Gods judgments upon them, in striking them with such confusion, as not
only to shutt their eyes against the light of grace, but run themselves on
ground, and cast themselves away, as touching common sobriety, while the
courses they take are contradictious to the very light of nature. What a
sottish objection is that which follows? and how dissolute a consequence is
this, which here he frames? namely, that because we say, God does work in us
both the will and the deed; Ergo, it is not Man, that wills, but God, not man
that does this or that good work but God; God does repent, in making us
repent; and God does obey his own commandments, in making us obey them? God
has given all creatures their natural properties, and on some he bestows
supernatural qualities, and mooves them all, and that effectually to work,
according to their properties; whose operations, though they are from him, as
the efficient cause thereof, for in him we live, and moove, and have our
beings; and hitherto the Arminians themselves have pretended to concur with
us herein; yet they are not formally to be attributed unto him, but to the
second causes, whose proper operations they are, as for a Lion to roar, for an
horse to neigh, an ass to bray, an ox to low, a dog to bark, and the like.

The sixth and last Section. Sect. 6.

THe preaching of the word being thus made of none effect by the doctrine of
these Synods, Treat.
there will remain no use and profit of the Sacraments of baptism, and the
Lords Supper, unless it be, that the Ministers themselves, in administering
thereof, do destroy this unhappy doctrine. For to every person, whom they
baptize, they apply the promises of the covenant of grace, clean contrary to
their own doctrine, which says, that they nothing belong to the Reprobates of
the World.

The Eucharist is likewise given to all with assurance, that Christ dyed for
all those who do receave it, although their doctrine do affirm, that he dyed
not for those who receave him unworthily, and to their own condemnation, the
number of whom is very great in the Reformed Churches by their own confession.
What then remains? Even their prayers themselves, (the exercise whereof is
common, both to the Pastor and the Flock) cannot be of any profit, either to
the one or to the other, seeing that all are either elect or reprobate, they
for their parts obtain nothing by this means, if that God, as the Synod would
have it, has written their names in the book of life from all aeternitie,
without having more regard unto their prayers, then unto their faith, and that
it is impossible for them to be razed out, and as for these, they are no more
able to get themselves registered therein by their prayers, the^ to undo that
inevitable and unchangable decree of God.

So that by this trial of the practice, each one may see what esteem we ought
to have of that religion, which resists the conversion of Infidells, the
amendment of the scandalous, and consolation of the afflicted, which makes the
preaching of the word to be of none effect, and quite overthrows the use of
the Sacraments, and exercise of prayers, and in a word, which overturneth the
foundation of the ministry, which consists in sound doctrine and good
discipline.

Consid. If the preaching of the word by the doctrine of these Synods be but
thus made of none effect, that is, but by so hungry and comicall a discourse as
this, we shall have very small, or rather no cause at all to think the worse of
the doctrine of these Synods, and we are confident, that the use and profitt of
the Sacraments, will but in the like shallow and superficiary manner be
enervated. And how the ministers in their administration of the Sacraments do
destroy the same doctrine, so unhappy as he conceavs it; for no doctrine, is so
happy with them, as that which maintaynes grace to be conferred, according unto
works, or that look what we call grace, as faith and repentance, is neither
merited by Christ, nor indeed any gift of God, otherwise then by giving them
power to believe if they will, repent if they will, and persuading them
thereunto by the ministry of his word, (for I have good reason to suspect, that
the Author of this discourse is a mere Anabaptist) we are now to consider in
the last place.

Now, for proof hereof, he says, that to every person; whom we baptize, we
do apply the promises of the covenant of grace, which he says is clean
contrary to our own doctrine, which says, that they nothing belong to the
reprobates of the world.

I would he had particulated these promises of the covenant of grace, For with
the practice of their Churches, in the office of baptizing, I am not
acquainted, but only with our own. The promises assured by baptism, according
to the rule of Gods word, I find to be of two sorts: some are of benefits
procured unto us by Christ, which are to be conferred conditionally; others are
of benefits, which are to be bestowed upon us absolutely.

They of the first sort are justification and salvation; For Abraham received
circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness of faith; Circumcision therefore
was an assurance of justification to be had by faith; If such were circumcision
unto the Jews, we have good reason to conceave, that such is baptism unto us
Christians; For as that was unto them, so this is the Sacrament of regeneration
unto us; And good reason, the Sacraments, which are seals of the covenant,
should assure that unto us, which the word of the covenant does make promise of.

Now, the word of the covenant of grace does promise unto us both remission of
sin, and salvation upon faith in Christ.

This by our doctrine we promise unto all, and assure unto all, as well as they
do by theirs. If all and every one should believe, we nothing doubt, but they
should be justified and saved. On the other side if not one of ripe years
should believe, I presume our adversaries will confess, that not one of them
should be saved. But there are other benefits, both promised in the covenant
of grace, and consequently assured by the Sacraments, which are commonly called
the seals of the covenant, whereof there is or may be a question, whether they
are conferred on man by God absolutely, or no? but only conditionally; and the
right solution thereof, I willingly confess, is most momentous, for the
deciding of all those controversies, and setting an happy end unto them. But
that question is wholly declined by this Author, and generally by the Arminian
party. For such a light and evidence of faith breaks forth; herein, that they
are not able to abide it.

Those benefits are regeneration, which in holy scripture is called the
circumcision of the heart, in reference to the Sacrament, that sealed it; and
in the New Testament, it is called the washing and clensing, or sanctifying of
our souls, in reference to our Sacrament of regeneration, which is called
Baptism; under regeneration we comprehend the illumination of the mind, and
renovation of the affect^ons; and these operations we commonly design by faith
and repentance.

Now, let it be enquired, whether regeneration and faith, commonly supposed
amongst us, to be the gifts of God, are bestowed upon men conditionally, or
absolutely; If conditionally, then like as the word of the covenant promises,
these gifts upon a condition to be performed by man, so also shall the
Sacrament of Baptism seal it, and assure us, that upon the performance of
that condition, we shall obtain at the hands of God, faith and regeneration.

Like as justification and salvation is promised in the word, and assured in
the Sacraments upon performance of a condition on man's part.

Now, the condition of justification and salvation, we all acknowledge to be
faith; but what should be the condition upon performance, whereof we should
obtain it, we are much to seek; neither do the Arminians willingly come to
the defining of it; this Author utterly declines the question, though most
proper and critical, by the Orthodox resolution thereof, to set a blessed end
to all the controversies wherewith the peace of Gods church has been of late
years so much disturbed.

Now, whatsoever be devised to be the condition, it must be in general some
work of man, and consequently it must be acknowledged, that grace is given, to
wit, the grace of faith, according to men's works, which is plain Pelagianisme?

So for regeneration, it being acknowledged to be a gift of Gods grace, if so
be, God bestows it conditionally, they must tell us what that condition is,
upon the performance whereof God is pleased to regenerate us; but I never yet
met with any that undertook to notify unto us what that condition is,
certeynly it must be, not only a work of man, but a work of nature, seeing
it precedes regeneration, and consequently the grace of regeneration shall be
conferred, according unto works of nature, and this also is Pelagianisme, and
that in a degree beyond the former; and withal directly contradictious to the
word of God, where it is said, that God has saved us, and called us with an
holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose
and grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. and where the Apostle says, that God has mercy on whom
he will, and whom he will he hardens* Romans 9.16. and to bestow faith upon a
man, is clearly to show mercy, Romans 11.30.

Hereupon we conclude, that faith and regeneration are gifts of grace, which
God bestows absolutely, according to the mere pleasure of his own will,
regenerating whom he will, and denying the grace of regeneration to whom he
will.

Now then, who are they on whom God should bestow faith and regeneration but
his Elect? and accordingly, the Apostle calls it the faith of Gods elect,
Tit. 1.1, and Act. 13.48. The Evangelist clearly tells us, that as many
believed, as were ordained to aeternall life; and Romans 8.29. Whom God
foreknewe, them he predestined to be made confo^mable to the image of his
Son, and whom he predestined, them he called, and whom he called, he
justified, and whom he justified, he glorified. And accordingly, baptism as it
is a s^ale and assurance of performing this promise of justification and
salvation unto them that believe, so it is a seal and assurance of the promise
of circumcising the heart, and regeneration, only to Gods elect.

Yet I confess, that, according to the book of Common prayer, in use with the
Church of England, we profess of every Child, as he comes to be baptized, and
when he is baptized, that he is regenerate and grafted into the body of Christ's
regeneration, whereupon Mr. Mon^acute sometimes took advantage to justify his
opinion, touching falling away from grace, as the Docteine of the Church of
England, but he was answered by D. Carleton, then Bishop of Chichester, that
there is a regeneration so called, Sacramento tenus, and which Austin, as he
showed, distinguished from true regeneration.

And for ought we know to the contrary, every one that comes to be baptized by
a minister, may be an elect of God, and therefore we have no reason to conceave
them to be reprobates; And I would gladly know what this our adversary
conceaves of every one that is brought unto him to be baptized, will he
conceave them in the judgment of charity, to be elect or no? Or does he
believe them in judgment of faith to be elect? In my judgment, his opinion
hereabout is no more then this, that God has ordained, that in case they
believe, they shall be justified and saved; and accordingly, that in Baptism,
assurance hereof is sealed unto them, and no more.

Now, that God has so ordained, we believe as well as they, and that baptism
is a seal of the righteousness of faith and of salvation by faith. But if he
thinks the covenant of grace comprehends no more then this, herein alone we
differ from him; and are ready to mainteyne that all, who are under the
covenant of grace, are such, as over whom sin shall not have the dominion,
Ezech. 20.12. Deu. 29.6 Esa. 37.18. Mich. 7. Psa. 64 18 Ezech. 36.26.27.
Romans 6.14. and that the Lord vouchsafes to become their Lord, and their God
to sanctify them, and to circumcise their hearts, to love the Lord their God
with all their heart, and with all their soul, as he sees their ways, so to
heal them; to subdue their iniquities, to give gifts, even to the rebellious,
that he may dwell among them, to power clean water upon them, that they may be
clean, and from all their filthiness to cleanse them.

A new heart also to give unto them, and a new spirit to putt within them, and
to take away the stony heart out of their body, and give them an heart of
flesh. And to putt his own Spirit within them, and cause them to walk in his
statutes, and to keep his judgments, and do them.

And as in the Prophet Jeremiah the Lord professes: Ier. 31.3^*
This shallbe the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After
those days, says the Lord, I will putt my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And
Ier. 32.39. I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for
ever, for the wealth of them, and of their children after them. And I will make
an everlasting covenant with them, that I will never turn away from them, to
do them good, but I will putt my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. And Ezech. 16.60. Nevertheless I will remember my covenant
made with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will confirm unto thee an
everlasting covenant. 61. Then shall thou remember thy ways, and be ashamed,
when thou shall receave thy sisters, both thy Elder and thy younger, and I will
give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant. And 20.37. I will
cause you to pass under the rod, and bring you into the bond of the covenant.
And 37.23. Neither shall they be polluted any more with their idols, nor with
their abominations, nor with any of their transgressions: but I will save them
out of all their dwelling places wherein they have sinned, and I will cleanse
them: so shall they be my people, and I will be their God. 24. And David my
servant shall be King over them, and they shall have one sheapheard: they shall
also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them.

So that regeneration, and sanctification, faith, repentance, holiness, and
obedience, these be the works which God promises to work in them, and that by
virtue of the covenant of grace he has made with them.

The Eucharist, we confess, is likewise given to all, who for their
profanesse, impuritie, or con^umacy, are not excommunicated, and that with
assurance, that Christ dyed for all those that do receave it worthily, not
otherwise; but as many as receave it unworthily, do receave it to their own
condemnation. And do the Arminians themselves administer it with assurance of
the favor of God toward them, any otherwise then in case they are found
worthy pertakers?

As for Christ's dying for mankind, I have already showed at large how this
Author treates of it hand over head, carrying it in the clouds of generality.

Now, it is a rule of schools, that in genere latent multae equivocationes.

Therefore for the clearing of the truth in this particular, I have
distinguished the benefits, which Christ procured for us; some of them, as
remission of sins, and salvation, are conferred only conditionally, to wit,
upon condition of faith; And herein we extend the virtue of Christ's death, as
fart as they, to wit, in conditional manner; for we willingly profess, that,
if all, and every one should believe, all and every one should be saved by
Christ; On the other side, no Arminian will say, that any man of ripe years
shall be saved by Christ, if he never believe in Christ.

But other benefits there are, which God bestows upon man, for Christ's sake,
as we say, to wit, faith, regeneration, and repentance.

Now, these are conferred not conditionally; for if they were, then should
grace be given according to men's works, which is manifest Pelagianisme;
Therefore these must be conferred absolutely, not on all, for then all should
believe and be saved; but on some, and who can they be but Gods Elect?

Now, as for the Remonstrants, they peremtorily deny, that Christ merited faith
and regeneration for any, Exam. Censurae, p. 59. Now, let any indifferent
person judge by this, who they are who streiten the virtue of Christ's
sufferings most, they or we.

In the last place he tells us, that our Prayers common both to the Pastor
and the flock, cannot be of any profitt, either to the one or to the other,
that is (as I conceave his meaning) either to the Pastor, or to the people: and
why so? Observe, I pray, the strange reason which he gives hereof, to wit,
because they are all, either Elect or reprobates; For does not this Author
believe this as well as we, namely, that all are, either elect or reprobate,
either registered in the book of life, or not registered therein?

To qualify this, he does afterward more advisedly ground his reason, not
upon election and reprobation, simply considered, as being already passed upon
them all; but upon the manner of these; in as much as election is shaped by us,
to have its course without any more regard unto men's prayers, then unto their
faith, and that it is impossible for them to be razed out; we willingly
acknowledge it, and withal show how inconsequent is his inference, which he
makes herhe^ce; God we say has no more rega^d to our prayers then to our
faith, having aequall regard of both; not that upon the foresight hereof he did
elect us; but in that as he did ordeyn us unto everlasting life by way of
reward of our faith, repentance, and good works; so likewise he did ordeyne us
to the obteyning of faith, repentance, and good works, to be wrought in us,
partly by the ministry of his word, therein speaking unto us, and partly by our
prayers, seeking unto him, to bless his word unto us, and fulfill the good
pleasure of his goodness toward us, and the work of faith in power. For God
does expect, that we should seek unto him by prayer for this, as we read Ezech.
36.37. Thus says the Lord, I will yet for this be sought of the house of
Israel, to perform it unto them. Neither do we mainteyne, that God does
ordeyne any man of ripe years unto aeternall life, in any moment of nature,
before he ordeynes him to faith, repentance, and good works, and that to be
wrought in him by the ministry of the word, with Gods blessing thereupon
according to the prayers in common, both of the Pastor and the people.

So that neither our faith, nor the ministry of the word and Sacraments, nor
prayers, are any whit in vain, or without profitt to Gods elect; though I
willingly confess, they are nothing profitable unto reprobates, save that
hereby they may profitt somewhat, quoad exteriorem vitae emendationem quo
mitius puniantur.

Neither do I think, that either this Author, or any Arminian, either on this
side, or beyond the Seas, will affirm, that any of these are any farther
profitable unto reprobates; my meaning is, they will not say, as I presume,
that any reprobate obteynes salvation hereby. For I presume, they hold with us,
that Gods decrees are unchangeable; As for inevitable decrees, that is a wild
phrase, the denomination of evitable or inevitable, being only in reference
unto things possible for the time to come; but Gods decrees, we know full well,
are everlasting, as ancient as the very ancient of days; and therefore it is
very absurd, to discourse of the evitable or inevitable nature thereof.

And yet it may be they have a tooth against the unchangeable and irrevocable
condition of Gods decrees; I know none that speaks so plainly thereof, as one
that has written of divine essence.

And it may be this Author lickes his lips at the revocable nature of divine
decrees.

By this we may see what estimation ought to be made of this vile discourse,
that has nothing in it worthy of the wit and learning of a very vulgar divine.

And with what applause he has played his several parts, laboring to defame
our doctrine, as if it stood in opposition to the conversion of Infidels, the
amendment of the scandalous, and consolation of the afflicted.

The true ground of all which imputations is, because we mainteyne with the
Apostle, that God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens;
bestowing the grace of faith and repentance on some, to cure that natural
infidelity and impenitency, which is common to all; and leaving it uncured in
others, by denying unto them the grace of faith, and of repentance. Forsooth,
if we should mainteyne with them, that God gives faith and repentance, not
absolutely, but conditionally, to wit, upon some condition, to be performed by
man; then our doctrine should be magnified, as they magnify their own, as
very profitable for conversion, reformation, consolation; which is as much as
to say in effect, if with the^ we would directly become Pelagians, the^ we
should prove very profitable and powerful Christians; for then it should be
out of question, that, Pelagianismus est vere Christianismus.

It may be, they would have us come one step farther, and deal plainly, in
denying faith and regeneration to be any gifts of God; for if they be, I wonder
with what face they should deny them to be bestowed upon us for Christ his
sake, being they are such things as accompany salvation in a very special
manner.

Now, they have lately professed to the world, that Christ merited not faith
and salvation for any. But because we coumpt all such Pelagian spirits no
better then inimicos gratiae, as Austin sometimes did; (Prosper went farther in
his Epistle, ad Ruffinum, and in plain terms calls them Vasa irae, in
distinction from vasa misericordiae) therefore it is that this flourishing
divine in putes unto us, that our Religion makes the preaching of the word to
be of none effect, and that it quite overthrowes the use of the Sacraments, and
exercise of Prayers, and all this like a very confident Cavalier before the
combat; he presumes he has very sufficiently demonstrated in this his
interlude, consisting of three Acts, and several scenes, belonging to each;
and in the judgment of some Scholars in the University, he is deemed to have
performed his part so well, ut abducant stultum, that they may well bring him a
stool, ut sit foris eloquentia, that he may sit for his eloquence.

And because he has already atteyned to such credit and reputation among the
learned, he adds in the close upon his word, like a man of authority, that it
overturneth the foundation of the ministry, which consists in sound doctrine
and good discipline; for I do not remember that this came any where in his way
throughout his whole discourse.

And thus I have examined with what judgment this Author has reduced the two
Synods of Dort and Arles unto practice.

FINIS.

