A perfect and easy Treatise of the use of the celestial Globe: written as
well for an Introduction of such as be yet unskillful in the study of
Astronomy: as the practice of our Countriemen, which be exercised in the Art
of Navigations. Compiled by Charles Turnbull: And set out with as much plainnes
as the Author could: to the end it might of every man be understood.

Psalm. xix. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows
the work of his hands. Day unto day utters the same, and night unto night
teaches knowledge. Imprinted at London for Simon Waterson.

INSIGNISSIMO VIRO, AC OMNI VIRtutum genere clarissimo Magistro Henrico Nocllo,
Carolus Turnbullus salutem ac foelicitatem perpetuam comprecatur.
CVM antiquissimorum scriptorum singularem industriam in studijs Mathematicis
iam ante serius, accuratiusque cognouerim: and recentium quorundam deprauatam
lectionem summa cura, summaque diligentia viderim and obseruauerim: ne infestus
error damnum inferret grauius: curaui (vir insignissime) ea facilius explicare,
quae si fideliter discantur, omnis erroris tollent difficultatem. Eorum vero te
patronum esse volui, vt meo exemplo ad eadem vota multos inuitem, tanquam
indicem te, in florentissimo hoc regno non solum tanti negotij virum
celeberrimum: sed omnium regiarum virtutum laudumque patronum. Itaque
minusculam opus hoc A^, qualecunque sit, (quod scio quam sit indignum) tibi
dedico: vt qui imposterum non solum obseruationes astronomicas elaboratas
magis, minusque vsitatas: (sieve sint theorica sieve horalogica) sed opticas
quoque and qua sunt geometriae communis praecepta, (vt tempus postulat) sis
receptarus. Quibus vt es spiritus nobilissimi: ita mirifice quoque delectaris.
Vnum hoc interim precibus etiam atque etiam obsecrans: vt qua humanitate erga
me semper vsus es. (cum maxim possis:) eadem iam indies confirmata magis
(libertissime quoque velis patrocinari.

Vale.
To the Reader.
MEn which are more desirous of public Fame and Renow ne, then studious of
common profit: with great curiosity set a glass upon such things, as being
discovered, would show disme^bred and misshapen. (As for my self I seek no
higher dignity, then to be reported to set forth a truth: and therefore
without any wrested cloquence, I make bold to offer the use of the Globe, to
the exquisite vewe of your curious eyes: (though far inferior as I suspect
to some men's expectation) to the end such gross enormities might be amended,
as often times in diverse have been discovered. Who for want of right conceat of
things by them attempted: have in the air built such fortresses, as have
without assalts wounded their loving enemies. But happily such men will now
retire, and arm them selves better against the next assault, lest they be like
to the dogs in the capital of Rome: which were placed to the end, that if by
night spoylers should ariue, they might sound a warning. For, true it is, that
by night these bark out false Allaromes at their enemies: but if by day, they
bark likewise at friends: I hope ye will judge them worthy to have their legs
broken. which things I leave to your gentle interpretation. Nothing
misdoubting, but if in this tract either anything be escaped contrary to my
will: or omitted not satisfying your expectation: ye will aequally suffer the
same. For if ye receive the fruits of my labor and care of your commodity, I
require no more. Wherefore my travail I bequeath to your discreet
consideration, and your selves to the protection of almighty God.

Farewell.
DEFINITIONS to be praemised necessary for the understanding of the Globe.
THe Sphaere or Globe, is a perfect round and sollide body, contained under
one superficies or face; in whose middle is a point, from which point all lines
that are drawn to the superficies and face of the same: are aequall the one to
the other.

The Center of the Sphaere, is the middle point of the same.

The Axe of the Sphaere, is a right line passing from one side of the same, (by
his Center) to the contrary side, about which line the Sphaere is carried: but
the line it self stands still.

The Poles of the Sphere, be the ends of his Axe.

The Pole of any Circle, is a point without the compass of the same: (and yet
is aequally distant from all points, of the circuit or borders of the Circle
whose Pole it is:) and from which the same Circle is drawn.

OF THE NAME of the Sphaere, and his diverse and sundry kinds of divisions:
together with the motion of each one in his kind.
THE NAME OF the Sphaere, is taken either generally or particularly. Generally,
and so it is said to contain all perfect round bodies, whether they be sollide
or not: whether contained under one only Superficies or more. And so may every
Orb be called a Sphaere. But if we take the word Sphaera, in his particular
and proper signification: then nothing is a Sphaere: but a perfect round body
being sollide, contained under one, etc. as the former definition declared.
This Sphaere is divided either according to his substance: or according to
certain properties and affections which he is capable of.

According to his substance he is divided into two parts: the one Elementall,
the other Aethercall. The Elementall, contains the four Elements, Fire,
Air, Water and Earth: and is subject to alterations, by reason of their
effectual working. The Aethercall, compasses in round, the Elementall part, in
his hollownesse, and is lightsome by nature, and unchangeable: and contains
ten Sphaeres. The first and highest from the earth, being called the first
moveable, contains in his hollownesse all the other: and by his natural motion
is moved directly from the East to the West, and so to East again, in the
space of 24. hours continually, and carries about with him by violence, all the
other Sphaeres. The next under this is the ninth Sphaere, called the Crystal
heaven, and by his natural motion is carried from West toward East, but very
slowly, in many years passing but one degree: and this motion has caused the
Stars to alter their Lo^gitudes. The third Sphaere is the Firmament or
Sphaere of the fixed Stars: whose motion by nature is upon two little
Circles: the one being described about the head of Aries, and the other of
Libra: which motion is called the motion of Trepidation. The other seven
Sphaeres be of the seven Planets: the highest of Saturn, which moves by
nature from West toward East, and that in 30. years one perfect revolution.
The next of Jupiter, moving from West to East by nature, and that in twelve
years. The other of Mars, making his reuolutio^ from West toward East in two
years. Under Mars is the Sun, moving by nature from West toward East,
making one perfect revolution in 365. days and 6. hours almost. Under the
Sun is Venus, and then Mercury, moving from West to East about the same
time as the Sun. The last is the Moon, making one perfect revolution from
West toward East in 27. days. 7. hours. 43. 7. yet all these are carried by
violence of the first moveable from East to West, as is before said.

*OF THE CIRcles of the Sphaere of Heaven, and of their names, and how they be
made.
AStronomers to the end they might show the motions of Heaven, and the
strange and wonderful conclusions of the Celestial bodies: have imagined
certain Circles in the body of the first Sphaere or first mooueable, and
principally ten: whereof some be greater Circles of the Sphaere, so called
because the Center of these Circles is also the Center of Heaven: and every
such Circle divides the whole Sphaere into two aequall parts. Of this sort be
six: the Aequinoctiall, Zodiac, Horizon, Meridian, and two Colures. Some be
lesser Circles of the Sphaere so called, because they have not the Center of
the world for their Center, neither divide the whole Sphaere aequally. Of this
kind be four, the Tropicke of Cancer, the Tropicke of Capricorn, the Articke
and Antarticke.

The Aequinoctiall, called the equator or girdle of Heaven, is a great Circle
of the Sphaere, dividing the Sphaere into two aequal parts, and is aequally
distant from each Pole of the world. And took his name of the equator, either
because it is aequally in the middle of Heaven, as Euclide says in his
Optics: or for that the Sun, coming to this Circle, makes the day and
night aequall. and it is divided in 360. aequall parts, which parts are called
degrees. His Axe is the Axe of the world, and Poles, the Poles of the world.

The Zodiac is a great Circle of the Sphaere, which crosses the Aequinoctiall
in two points, the one being the head of Aries, the other of Libra, and
swarneth from him in all other points, leaning toward each Pole of the world in
ye point of his greatest swarning, 23. degrees, 30. minutes. This Zodiac is of
breadth 12. degrees, and of length, that is to say, in compass 360. degrees, and
according to his length, is divided into 12. aequal parts, which are called the
12. signs. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius and Pisces. And each sign contains of
length 30. degrees. in the middle breadth of the Zodiac, we imagine a Circle to
pass, which we call the Ecliptic Circle or line: For that that when the Sun
and Moon be both under this line in a Diameter: then the Moon is Eclipsed.
Under this Circle the Sun moves daily (without declining any ways) the
quantity of one degree very near in each day. the rest of the Planets are found
some times on one side the Ecliptic, and some time on the other. This Zodiac
takes his name of a greek word signifying a living creature: or as the Latens
will, is called Signifer, for that that it bears the 12. Signs. the Axe of
the Zodiac and the Ecliptic, is all one, being a line diverse from the axe of
the world, and the Poles be two points always so much distant from the Poles
of the world: as the greatest declination of the Ecliptic comes unto.

A Colure does generally signify any Circle passing by the Poles of the
world, and has his name of his imperfect showing himself in the motion of
heaven. But now by the name of Colures, we understand two great Circles, the
one going from the Poles of the world by the points where the Aequinoctiall
and Zodiac cut them selves (which be called the Aequinoctiall points) and is
called the Aequinoctiall Colure. The other passes from the Poles of the
world, by those points of the Ecliptic which swerve most of all others from
the Aequinoctiall line (which points are called the Solsticiall points) and
this is called the Solsticial Colure. And here be you to know that these four
greater Circles which we have defined: be still the same through the whole
world, and are said to be moveable Circles: for so much as in the motion of
heaven, they be also moved. of which, some are moveable perfectly: as the
Aequinoctiall and Zodiac, (for they in the going about of heaven, do ascend
by little and little, till the whole Circle have gone our the Horison) some
imperfectly moveable, as the two Colures, which never show the whole Circle in
any crooked Sphaere. the other two greater Circles which follow, be called
fixed, for that they never move by the motion of heaven. But they be
changeable in every Region.

The Horizon is a greater Circle dividing the half of the Heaven which we see,
from the half which we see not, and is called in Latin Finitor, because it
ends our sight. The Horizon makes four principal points, East, West, North,
and South. His Axe is a line imagined to fall from the point of heaven, which
is directly over our head where we be, down to the ground like a plumme line,
and his Poles be the ends of that line, called the Vertical point, and point
opposite to the Vertical.

The Meridian is also a great Circle, passing from the Poles of the world by
our Vertical point, cutting the Horizon in the North and South points his Axe
is a line going from the East point of the Horizon to the West, and his Poles
be the same points, and these two Circles do always change, and are diverse
in every Region: for so much as the Vertical point of every Region is diverse,
by the which the Meridian of necessity must pass, and is the Pole also of the
Horizon.

OF THE LESSER Circles of the Sphaere, and their names, and of their making.
THe less Circles of the Sphaere in number be four. The Tropicke of Cancer,
the Tropicke of Capricorn, and the two Artickes. The Tropicke of Cancer, is a
less Circle of the Sphaere, which is aequally distant from the Aequinoctial,
lying betwixt the Aequinoctiall and the North Pole, and touching the Ecliptic
in the beginning of Cancer. This Circle is described by the body of the Sun
in the longest day of Summer, at which time the Sun is entered the solstitiall
point, or beginning of Ca^cer. and is called the Tropic, of a Greek word,
which signifies a returning: because the Sun being brought to this point,
falls in his noone height, and returns again.

The Tropicke of Capricorn, is a like Circle betwixt the Equator and the
South pole, and is described by the Sun in the shortest day of Winter, at
which time the Sun is in ye beginning of Capricorn, whereof it is called the
Tropic of Capricorn.

The Articke Circle is a less Circle of the Sphaere, described by the
Northern Pole of the Ecliptic. Proclus says it is described by the foremost
foot of the great bear, and thereof takes his name.

The Antarticke is a like Circle described by the South Pole of the Ecliptic,
and is called Antartick of the Greek word, which signifies Opposition,
because it is opposite to the other.

Of the use of the Circles of the Sphaere or Globle.
THE most principal cause why Artificers invented the Aequinoctiall, was
first, because it is the measure of the first Heaven, by a convenient,
perpetual and aequal swiftness. Secondly, it measures and limitteth the time
of rising of the Signs, as also the length of the Artificial days, and times
of the Aequinoctials, with declinations and right ascentions of Stars,
together with Longitudes of Regions. Lastly, for the exection of the twelve
howsen of Heaven. In like manner, the Zodiac serves for Latitudes and
Longitudes of Stars: for distinction of the times of the year: for the
motions of all the Planers and effects of the same. Not unlike be the uses of
the Colures and Meridian, each showing the greatest declination of the
Ecliptic: but especially the Meridia^, which gives as well al declinations of
Stars, their noone height, and distinguishes the days and nights into two;
aequal parts, and serves for the Horizon of the right Sphaere. It begins
likewise and ends all Longitudes of Regions, and shows Latitudes and
Eleuations of the Pole: It helps to divide the 12. howsen. In like manner
sundry and diverse be the uses of the Horizon: As in seperating the hidden part
of Heaven, from that which is seen, and shows the place of rising and
setting of any Star: how far from East or West, with his height. All which
points are respected of Astronomers, as the Sphaere is secondarily divided:
that is to say, as he is a right, or a crooked Sphaere, which be his
properties and affections meant in the division before specified. By a right
Sphaere is meant such a kind of position of Heaven: as that neither Pole be
r^ised above ground, but that each lie in the face of the earth. And such a
kind of position have they which dwell in Bersera, and the Islands of Molucca,
or such like. Contrariwise, it is said to be a crooked Sphaere, when any one
of the Poles is raised above ground. Such a Sphaere have we at Oxford, and
London: and generally all, which dwell not under the line. All which things
for our better conceate, are showed to the eye in the material Globe, whose
names and divisions appear at the first vewe: two things only being waied.
First, that the mechanical or material Globe which represents the first
mooueable: bears in him the fixed Stars, (not because the Stars be in
the first mooueable) but because their motion is so little in their own Sphaeres
in many years, that they may seem not to have moved at all in a man's his age
from their places under which they be of ye first moveable: therefore they may
be supposed to stand in it. Secondly, the Globe represents the Stars to us
in his connexitie, which appear in Heaven in the concauitie. For that our eye
is not in the Globe but without. Furthermore in the Globe, besides the
aforenamed Circles, be found three others of brass: the one being a perfect
Circle of a little quantity, placed about the Pole which is elevated: and is
called the hour Circle, whose style is called the Index. An other is a thin
rule of brass, representing one quarter of a whole Circle, called the quadrant
of Altitude, and is alwaie to be fixed (when ye use the Globe) on the middle of
the half of your Meridian, which is above the Horizon: that is to say, 90.
degrees above the Horizon. The third and last is a great half Circle lying at
the Horizon, serving as well for the erection of the scheme of Heaven, as any
Circle of position. All which things being advisedly considered of, ye may
proceed in the use of the Globe: As follows.

* HOW THE Globe is to be placed, ready for his use and practice.
THe placing of the Globe ought to be such, that the Horizon of the Globe may
stand parallele or levied to the true Horizon: and the Meridian of the Globe
stand in the Superficies of the true Meridian of Heaven, and the Poles of the
Globe and his Axe, answer exactly to the Poles and Axe of Heaven. Now to the
leuying of the Horizon: there ought to be at your Globe a hanging plummet. and
for the Meridian, a Needle touched of the lode stone, and touching the
rectifying of the Poles and Axe of the Globe, the elevation of the Pole of
heaven is first to be known. the means to perform and accomplish the same,
being such as follow.

Propositio. 1. To find a Meridian line in any place appointed.
SEt up on your Horizon or some plain levied boarde, a Gnomon of any
reasonable length then, (at such time as the same shines, describe from the
top of your Gnomon a Circle by the tippe of his shadow. and make a mark in
the Circle where the shadow ended, at your observation (which must be before
noone.) Then mark in the afternoon at what time the end of the shadow
returns into the same Circle again, and make a mark at his point of
falling, so shall ye have a portion of the said Circle enclosed betwixt the
two points: If then ye divide this portion into two aequal parts, and draw a
line from this middle point, by the point in which the Gnomon stands, it
shall be a Meridian line.

Propositio. 2. To take the height of any Star.
FRrom the point of Heaven, which is directly over our heads (being called the
Vertical point, or Zenith:) are imagined diverse Circles to fall by every
degree and minute of the Horizon: all which Circles are called Verticals, and
serve for the height of Stars, for so much as the altitude of Sun or star
is the portion of the V^ticall Circle, enclosed betwixt the Center of the Sun
or Star (in the time of his observation) and the Horizon, which height is
thus found.

Take your Astrolabe, and let him hang freely by his ring, then turn up his
Dioptral so long, that ye see the Star (whose height ye seek) through his
sights: for then, how many degrees and minutes are enclosed betwixt the
Dioptrall and the line of your Astrolabe, which is parallele to the Horizon: so
many has that Stars of height. as the seventh day of January. Anno. 1585.
under the Meridian of Oxford, at 9. of the clock I sought the height of the
Sun. taking then my Astrolabe, and hanging him toward the Sun, and raising
his Dioptrall till I espied the Sun. I found betwixt the Dioptral and the
line representing the Horizon seven degrees, and 16. minutes, so much was the
height of the Sun at that time.

Propositio. 3. To take the altitude of the Pole in in any place or country.
THe altitude of the pole is the portion of ye Meridia^ Circle enclosed betwixt
the Pole and the Horizon. and is thus found. Find a Meridian line, and draw
him in the Horizon by the first proposition: then take the height of any fixed
Star which sets not (and that at the fore part of the night) at such time
as he is pointed upon your Meridian line, by the second proposition. Again the
next morning, or any other morning take the height of the same star at such
time as he is pointed with your Meridian line: then subduct the less altitude
from the greater, and divide the difference into two aequall parts. Lastly,
add half the difference to the less altitude, so the whole number made
gives the altitude of ye Pole. As at Oxford I took ye height of a star in
the fore part of a night in winter, being the tenth of December. 1584. at what
time he was pointed with my Meridian, and found his height. 55. degrees. 59.
minutes. Again the next morning I took his height, and found it 47. degrees
41. minutes. This less altitude I subourted from the greater 55. degrees. 59.
minutes, and the difference was 8. degrees. 18. minutes, which being parted,
had 4. for his half, and 9. minutes. This half added to 47. degrees. 41. min.
(the less altitude) gives 51. degrees. 50. minut. for the true elevation of
the Pole at Oxford.

Propositio. 4. To rectify the Globe perfectly for to be used.
KNow first the elevation of the Pole of Heaven, for the place where ye use
the Globe, by the third proposition, then erect the Pole of the Globe so many
degrees above his Horizon, as the Pole of heaven is elevated. Again level the
Horizon of your Globe by his hanging plummet, lastly turn his Meridian to the
South by help of his Needle, and put his Quadrant of altitude upon the 90.
degree from his Horizon: for then the Meridian answers to the Meridian of
heaven. Axe to axe, and Pole to Pole as is required. But this way of setting
him South, albeit it be of antiquity: yet has it imperfection by reason of
the variatio^ of the needle. but of that ye shall hear more hereafter.

Propositio. 5. To find the place of the Sun at any time.
BY this place, is understood the degree of the Ecliptic line, in which he
is, and this place is thus found. In the Horizon of your Globe be set, the
winds, the signs, and months with their days. find therefore the day of your
month in which ye would have the place of the Sun in the Horizon of the
globe. For look what sign and degree of sign is right against the day, the
same is the place of the Sun. As on the twelfth day of December: Anno. 1584.
I sought the place of the Sun. this day being had in the Horizon, I found the
first degree of Capricorn, 32. minutes to answare against it, and therefore
that was then the place of the Sun.

Propositio. 6. To find the declination of any point of the Ecliptic or of
the Sun, at any time.
THe declination of any point of the Ecliptic, Sun, or any Star, is the
portion of the Meridian Circle, enclosed betwixt the Aequinoctiall and the say^
point, Sun, or star, and is found thus. Turn the point whose Declination
yet seek, to the Meridian of the Globe, and there see how many degrees and
minutes there be of your Meridian enclosed betwixt the said point and the
Aequinoctiall. For so much is the Declination. so has the Sun in the 5. of
Aries 2. degrees declination. And the 7. of Taurus 13. degrees. 52. minutes.
and this declination is called Northren, when the point is of the North side
the Aequinoctiall, and Southern if of the South side. Here must ye also know,
that two points of the Ecliptic want declination, and are the two
Aequinoctials. Two have greater declination then anyother, and be the two
Solstitials. of the rest four have like declination.

Propositio. 7. To find the right ascension of the Sun, or any point of the
Ecliptic line.
THE right ascension of any Star, Sun, or any point of the Ecliptic, is
the portion of the Aequinoctiall Circle from the head of Aries, (where the
Aequinoctiall takes his beginning) and that point or degree of the same, which
meets with the said Star, Sun, or Ecliptic point, under the Meridian
Circle in a crooked Sphaere: being numbered orderly in the Aequinoctiall, and is
thus found. turn the Star, Sun, or any point whose ascension ye look,
under the Meridian of the Globe, and see then what portion of the equator is
from the head of Aries to that point of the equator which stands then under
the Meridian: for the same portion, is the right ascension of the Star, Sun,
or point looked for. So do I find the right ascension of Boots a Star, to
be 209. degrees. 1. minut. And the right ascension of the Sun when he is in
the first of Taurus, to be 27. degrees. 54. minutes. And the right ascension of
the first of Sagitarie, to be 237. degrees. 48. minutes.

Propositio. 8. To find the crooked ascension of the Sun, Star, or any
point of the Ecliptic.
THE crooked ascension of the Sun, is that Ark of the equator which is
enclosed betwixt the beginning of the equator, and the point of the same which
comes up with the Sun in a crooked Sphaere, and is found thus. Take the
Sun Star, or point, whose crooked ascension ye desire: and put him to the
East side of the Horizon till it touch: Then mark what part of the equator is
enclosed betwixt the beginning of it, and the point now in the Horizon, for so
much is the crooked ascension of the Sun, Star, or point. The do I find
the crooked ascension of the Sun in the first of Taurus, to be the 12.
degrees. 48. minutes. All this being in the Elevation 52. degree. 0. minut.

Propositio. 9. To find the difference of ascension, or increase of the day.
THE Sun being in one and the self same point of the Ecliptic (except in
the Aequinoctiall intersections) has one degree of the equator that comes
up with him above the Horizon in any crooked Sphaere, and an other, (not the
same) that comes up with him in a right Sphaere. And therefore the portion of
the equator, betwixt the point of the said, that comes up with the Sun in
the right Sphaere: and the point rising with the same in the crooked Sphaere,
is called the difference of ascension. As in a right Sphaere the Sun being
in the first of Taurus, there rises with him, the 27. degree. 54. minut of the
Aequinoctiall. (Which point also meets him under ye Meridia^ in a crooked
Sphaere: for that ye Meridia^ of any crooked Sphaere, shows the same that the
Horizon does in the right Sphaere.) but in the crooked Sphaere, where the Pole
is elevated 52. degrees, there rises with the Sun the same day, the 12.
degree. 48. minut of the equator. Subducting now the less from the greater,
the difference is 15. degrees. 6. minutes, and is called the difference of
ascension. And because the Artificial day of the crooked Sphaere, is longer or
shorter then the Aequinoctiall day by twice this difference: therefore the
difference of ascension is called also the increase of the day. And this
difference is thus found. Find the right ascension of the Sun by the 7.
proposition: and again find his crooked ascension by the 9. proposition: then
subduce the less from the greater, for the remains is the difference of
ascension.

Propositio. 10. To find the length of the Artificial day in any Region or
Country.
Find out the difference of ascension of the place of the Sun by the 9.
proposition, and dubble the same then convert is all into hours and parts of
hours, allowing for one hour 15. degrees, and for a half 7. degrees. 30.
minutes, etc. This time which comes of the difference of ascension add to 12.
hours (if the place of the Sun be any degree betwixt Aries and Libra: or
subduct it from 12. if he be betwixt Libra and Aries,) for the number made or
left, is the length of the day. As the Sun being in the first of Tanrus, his
difference of ascension is 15. degrees. 6. minutes: this dubble and converted
into time, makes 2. hours and 12. Aequinoctial minutes. And because Tanrus is
a Northern Sign, ye must ad this difference to 12. hours, so do ye make 14.
hours and 12. Aequinoctiall minutes, for the length of that whole day.

Propositio. 11. To find the hour of the Sun rising, or of his setting.
Know the length of the Artificial day by the 10. proposition: and take half
of the same day, for that shows the hour of Sun setting. But if ye reckon
so much from noone forward, it gives Sun rise. As the Sun being in the
first of Taurus, the day is 14. hours and 12. minutes. The half is 7. hours
and 6. minutes. I say then the Sun sets after 7. of the clock, 6. minutes.
Again, thus much taken from noone forward, shows the Sun to rise before 5.
of the clock, 6. minutes.

Propositio. 12. An other way to find the same more mechanically.
Find the place of the Sun by the 5. proposition, and turn the said place
directly under the Meridian: the^ put the Index of the hour Circle precisely
on 12. of the clock. Lastly, turn the said place of the Sun to the East
side of the Horizo^: for when he is there, then shall the Index show the time
of the Sun rising. And contrariwise, putting the place of the Sun to the
West, it shows his setting.

Propositio. 13. To find how far the Sun rises or sets from the true
East or West point any day.
FIrst find the place of the Sun by the 5. proposition: then turn the same
place to the East side of the Horizon til he touch the same, for then the
number of degrees in the Horizon, (enclosed betwixt ye true East point and the
place of the Sun,) show how far he rises and sets from the true East:
And this portion of the Horizon is called his breadth of rising: and is called
Northern breadth if the Sun rise beyond ye East point toward ye North, and
Southern if contrary. Likewise are ye to know, that of the Ecliptic two
points Aries and Libra have no breadth of rising. Two points also as Cancer and
Capricorn have greater then any other: and of the rest four points have the
like.

Propositio. 14. To rectify the Index of the hour Circle every day as he
ought.
Find the place of the Sun every day in which ye use the Index, by the 5.
proposition, and put the said place under the Meridian: this being done, the^
put the Index on 12. of the clock, for afterward in the motion of the Globe he
will go true as he ought.

Propositio. 15. To find the noone height of the Sun for any day to come, or
gone in any place whose elevation is known.
THe height of the Sun, is the portion of the vertical Circle enclosed
betwixt the Center of the Sun and the Horizon. But for as much as at noone
the Meridian, and the Vertical of the Sun be all one Circle: therefore his
noone height is the portion of the Meridian betwixt the Center of the Sun and
the Horizon. this height is thus to be known. Find the place of the Sun for
the day proposed, and turn the same place under the Meridian, for then the
portion of the Meridian betwixt the said place and the Horizon is his noone
height. Thus found I the height of the Sun at noone in Oxford, whose Pole is
raised 51. degrees. 50. min. on the 2. day of May to be 59. degrees. 47. mi.
and on the twelfth of June, to be 61. degrees. 41. minutes.

Propositio. 16. To find the depression of the Sun at midnight.
AS the Meridian altitude is the portion of the Meridian from the Center of
him, to the Horizon when he is above the earth: so is his depression the part
of the Meridian betwixt the Center and the Horizon when he is under ground, and
may thus be known. Find the place of the Sun, and put it to the Meridian
under the Horizon: for then the portion of the Meridian betwixt it and the
Horizon, shows his depression. So find I the depression of the Su^ne, at
Oxford (his place being the first of Taurus) to be 27. degrees. 40. min. but
his place being the first of Scorpius, to be 50. degrees. 0. min.

Propositio. 17. To find what height the Sun shall have at any certain hour
of any artificial day.
TAke the place of the sun by the 5. proposition: and rectify the Index by
the 14. pro. then turn the Globe, till the Index of the hour circle be on the
hour, for whom ye desire the height of the Sun, and scopping the Globe
there, put the quadrant of altitude to the place of the Sun, for his portion
betwixt the place of the Sun and the Horizon, gives his height. So find I
the height of the Sun at Oxford, at 9. of the clock the 7. day of March. to
be 24. dedrees. 25. min. and at one of the clock the same day, to be 34.
degrees. 51. min.

Propositio. 18. By any height of the Sun given and his place: to find the
hour of the day.
LEt it be, that either ye take the height of the Sun at some time of the
day by the second proposition: or that ye have some height of him given by
supposition, and ye would know by it what it is of the clock that day at that
time. Find therefore the place of the Sun for that day* by the 5.
proposition and rectify the Index by the 14. proposition. Lastly put the place
of the Sun to the Quadrant of Altitude, and move them both up and down,
till ye allow him the same height in your Quadrant, as ye found or supposed
him in truth to have. For then the Index of the hour Circle shows what was
or is of the clock, as finding the height of the Sun before Noone on the
seventh of March, at Oxford, to be twenty four degrees. 25. min. I found it
to have been then nine of the clock.

Propositio. 19. By the hour known, and the height of the Sun at that
hour: together with the Index, rectified as he ought: to find the place of the
Sun at that time.
Move your Globe till his Index stand on the hour which was known before.
Then fix the Globe for remoouing: Lastly turn your Quadrant of altitude to
the Ecliptic line, and look what degree of the Ecliptic agrees in your
Quadrant with the height that was before known, and that is the place of the
Sun on that day.

Propositio. 20. The hour and place of the Sun being given: to find how
far the Sun is gone from the true East point.
THe place of the Sun being given by supposition: rectify the Index by the
14. proposition: then turn the Globe till the Index show the hour given. This
being done, fix the Globe that he move not away, and set the edge of the
Quadrant of altitude to the place of the Sun: and withal mark how many
degrees of the Horizo^ are enclosed betwixt the true East point, and the edge
of the Quadrant, at such time as he stands on the place of the sun: for so
much is he distaunt in the Horizon from true East.

Propositio. 21. The distance of the Sun being given, from true East,
together with his height at the same time, and the height of the Pole for the
same region: to find the true place of the Sun, at any time.
TO the end we make not unnecessary repetitions of the first principles:
know this, that in all the propositions following, we always suppose before
the working, the Globe rightly rectifyed as is specified in the beginning. For
the performance therefore of this practice: first consider diligently in what
quarter of the year ye be in* that is, whether it be betwixt the aequinoctiall
of March, and height of Summer: or betwixt height of Summer, and aequinoctial
of September. Likewise whether betwixt aequinoctial of September and dept of
Winter: or betwixt dept of winter and aequinoctiall of March. For then set the
edge of the quadrant of altitude at the true distance of the Sun from the
East: and turn the Globe till that quarter of the Ecliptic come under him,
which serves for the quarter of the year in which ye be: and see what degree
of that part of the Ecliptic agrees with the height proposed: For that is the
place of the Sun at that time.

Note therefore here, that to the Spring (which is from the aequinoctiall of
March till the height of Summer) answers the part of the Zodiac from Aries
to Ca^cer. To summer which is from the height till the aequinoctiall of
September: answers the part from Cancer to Libra. The Autumn is guided by the
quarter from Libra to Capricorn: and Winter by the signs from Capricorn to
Aries.

Propositio. 22. The distance of the Sun being given from true East, and the
place of the same: to find the height of the Sun which he has at the same
time.
PLace the quadrant of altitude at the true distance from East, so shall he
cut the place of the Sun by the 21. proposition: and therefore the portion of
the Quadrant betwixt the place of the Sun, and the Horizon, is his height.

Propositio. 23. The distance of the Sun from true East being given, and his
place: to find the hour of the day.
FIrst having his place: rectify your Index by the 14. proposition: again
setting the Quadrant of altitude in the distance from true East, reduce the
place of ye sun, till he fall in the edge of the Quadrant, for then the Index
does show the hour.

Propositio. 24. The distance of the Sun being given from true East, and his
height, to find the time of his rising.
THe distance being given, find his place by the 21 proposition: and then
rectify the Index by the 14 proposition: Lastly put the place of the Sun to
the East side of the Horizon: for then the Index will show the Sun rising.

Propositio. 25. The distaunce of the Sun being given from true East, and his
height, to find his Declination.
THE distaunce being given, his place is found by the 21. proposition: and his
place being known, gives his Declination by the 6. proposition: So may we
likewise by the said distaunce (finding his place) find his right or crooked
ascension, or difference of ascentions, and length of Artificial days.

Propositio. 26. The declination of the Sun being known: to find the place
of the Sun.
COnsider first diligently in what quarter of the year ye be in, as was
expressed before: then take that quarter of the Ecliptic which answers to
your quarter of the year: and move it still under the Meridian of your Globe,
till ye find no more of the Meridian enclosed betwixt the equator and
Ecliptic, then the declination that is given comes unto: for then look what
degree of ye Ecliptic is under the Meridian, that is the place of the Sun. As
the declination of the Sun in ye quarter of the year betwixt the
Aequinoctiall of March, and height of Summer was given to be 11. degrees. 50.
minutes. And to this quarter of the year, answers the quarter of the
Ecliptic from Aries to Cancer. Therefore moving the said quarter under the
Meridian, I found the first of Taurus to answer to this declination: and
therefore that was the place of the Sun.

Propositio. 27. The declination of the Sun being known: to find the day of
the Month.
BY the declination given, find the place of the Sun by the 26. proposition:
the^ take the said place in the Horizon of your Globe: for look what day
answers against it, that is the day of the Month.

Propositio. 28. The day of the Month being known, to find the length of the
Planetarie hour.
THE Artificial day is from Sun rise to Sun set: and the 12. part of this
day, whether it be longer or shorter then an hour by the clock, is the
Planetarie hour: and may thus be known. The day being gi^en, find the length
of that day by the 10. proposition: and divide all by 12. The Quotient is the
length of a Planetarie or Artificial hour of that day. As the day being 15.
hours by the clock, I divide it by 12. the Quotient is one hour and a
quarter, and so much is a Planetarie hour of that day.

Propositio. 29. The day of the Month being given: to find the dawning of the
day.
BY the day known, find the place of the Sun by the 5. proposition: and
then rectify your Index by the 14. proposition. Again, take the degree of the
Ecliptic which is opposite in a Diameter to ye place of the Sun: and move
him toward the West together with the Quadrant of Altitude, till ye have 18.
degrees of height: for then the Index shows the beginning of the dawning or
spring of the day.

Propositio. 30. To find the length of the whole dawning.
Find the beginning of the dawning by the 29. proposition, and then the Sun
rise by the 11. or 12. proposition: for the difference of those times is the
whole dawning. And thus far have I followed such conclusions, as have a more
orderly cohaerence: it remains now to show some others, whose cohaerence is
not so natural.

Propositio. 31. An other way to find the length of the Artificial day or
night.
Find the time of the Sun rising for your day proposed by the 12.
proposition: then dubble all those hours and parts of time which be from
Sun rise till noone, for it gives the Artificial day. Or if ye number all
the hours and parts from Sun rise to his setting, it gives the same.

Propositio. 32. To find the hour of the day.
PLace the Globe in the Sun shine, and rectify him to his use by the 4.
proposition, then find the place of the Sun by the 5. proposition. Again,
rectify his Index by the 14. proposition. Lastly, (...) the needle or pin
directly up in the place of the Sun: then turn the Globe up till the pin
cast no shadow, for then the Index shows what is then of the clock.

Propositio. 33. To find the elevation of the Pole, in any place.
Draw in the open air upon some table that is level, a Meridian line by the
1. proposition, and place the Globe so on it, that his Meridian Circle hang
directly ^uer it: then having the place of the Sun, set a pin right up in
it, and put the said place and pin close to the Meridian circle. Lastly, lift
up the Pole and Meridian Circle, till the pin cast no shadow: for then the
degrees betwixt the Pole and the Horizo^, be the true eleuatio^ of that place.
But this practice is to be performed at noone only or height of the day.

Propositio 34. An other way to do the same.
TAke the height of any fixed Star (whom ye know) by the 2. proposition, at
such time as he points with the Meridian line: then take the same Star on
the Globe, and by help of your Quadrant or Meridian Circle, cause him to have
the same Altitude in the Globe, and withal to be under the Meridian of the
Globe: for the^ is the Pole at his true Elevation. So did I find the Pole
Star (making my observation at Oxford, the 11. of December 1584.) by the
plain Sphaere, to have 55. degrees* 59. minutes in Altitude, being the^ in the
Meridian of Heaven: and when I set him at the same in my Globe, I found the
Pole elevated there 51. degrees. 50. minutes. And here ye are to know, that
when soever ye have by any way, the elevation of the Pole in any place: if ye
subduct the same elevation from 90. degrees, it shall leave and she^ the
elevation of the equator in the said place. So then the elevation of the
equator at Oxford, is 38. degrees. 10. minutes.

Propositio. 35. An other way of working the same, with more praecisenes.
FIrst learn by some good Ephemeris the precise place of the Sun at noone in
the day of your observation: then again learn ye exact declination of the
said place. Lastly, with your (...) take the Meridian height of the Sun that
day: And if the declination be Northern, then subduct it from the Meridian
Altitude: but if it be Southern, then ad it to the Meridian Altitude: so shall
we bring forth the Altitude of the equator: and this Altitude being subducted
from 90. degrees, leaves the Altitude of the Pole: but if the Sun in the
time of observation be in the Aequinoctiall point, then is the Meridian
Altitude, the Altitude also of the equator, and it subducted from 90. degrees,
leaves the Altitude of the Pole.

Propositio. 36. To make a Horizontall Dial by the Globe.
A Horizontall Dial is such a one as is made in a plain Superficies, and
lies level with the Horizon. For making whereof ye are to consider, that from
one Pole of the Globe to the other go twelve great Circles, called hour
Circles, and divide the equator into 24. aequall parts: And two of these be
two Colures. Put therefore the Solstitiall Colure precisely under the Meridian
of your Globe, (the Globe being first perfectly rectified) and fix ye Globe so
that he cannot move. Now mark how many degrees of the Horizon are enclosed
betwixt the Meridian and the next hour Circle toward the East (which for
distinction sake I call the second hour Circle) so likewise betwixt the first
and third, the first and fourth, the first and fifth, the first and sixth, the
first and seventh: (which is he that cutteth in the true East point) and set
them all down in tables: then draw on some plain thing a Circle, and divide
it into four quarters, by drawing two cross lines: Now take the one end of
any of the two lines, and term it the North point, so shall his other end be
the South point, and the ends of the other line East and West. Again, divide
that quarter of this Circle which is betwixt the North point and East into 90.
aequall parts, and let 90. stand at the East. So do by the quarter betwixt
North and West. Lastly, reckon from the North point toward East, so many
degrees as your tables show to have (...) betwixt the first and second hour
line: and from the point where they end, draw a line by the Center of the
said Circle: and so do by all the numbers of your tables: for so shall ye
have your hour lines drawn for a Horizontall Dial. In whose Center must be a
style exected, according to the elevation of your Pole. But this I leave
obscure, as meaning to set out an ample treatise of Dialling by it self.

Propositio. 37. How the Stars may be known by the Globe of Heaven.
Rectify your Globe in the open air by the 4. proposition, the^ take the
height of any known Star by your Instrument, afterward look the same Star
on the Globe, and by help of your Quadrant of Altitude put the same Star at
his height taken before, and in the same Coast, and then fix the Globe. Now if
ye would know any other Star of Heaven, then take the same Star his height
with your Instrument: lastly, turn your Quadrant of Altitude toward the same
Coast of the Globe in which the Star was in: and look what Star ye find
in that Coast, to have that Altitude, the same is he whom ye seek. The like is
to be done by all others.

Propositio. 38. To find the Longitude of any fixed Star.
THE Longitude of a Star, is the portion of the Ecliptic line, taken from
the head of Aries, (according to the order of the Signs) to the point of the
Ecliptic, cut by a Circle which passes from the Pole of the Ecliptic, by the
Center of the said Star: and is thus found. Take the Globe from his Horizon,
and take of his Meridian Circle, and fix the same Circle by some means on the
Poles of the Zodiac, then turn the Star whose Longitude ye seek, under the
Circle: and reckon all the Signs and parts from the head of Aries, to that
point of the Ecliptic which is under the Circle with the Star: for so much
is his Lo^gitude. And the same point of the Ecliptic which is so under the
Circle, shall be called the place of that Star. And the Star is said to be
under that Sign, of whom the aforesaid point is a part. The Longitude may also
be taken, if ye do but fix the Quadrant of Altitude in the Pole of the
Ecliptic, and stir not at all the Meridian Circle.

Propositio. 39. To find the Latitude of any Star.
THE Latitude of a Star, is the portion of the Circle that passes from the
Poles of the Ecliptic line, by the Center of any Star, which is enclosed
betwixt the Ecliptic line and the Center of the Star, and is found thus.
Your Circle standing in the Poles of the Zodiac as before: turn the Starr
under the said Circle: for then the portion of that Circle betwixt the Star
and the Ecliptic, is his Latitude. And this Latitude is Northern, when the
Star is North from the Ecliptic: and Southern of contrary.

Propositio. 40. To find what Stars be above ground at any time of the day
or night.
IF ye would know it in the day time when the Sun shines, then take the
height of the Sun by the 2. proposition: afterward find his place by the 5.
proposition: lastly, by help of the Quadrant of Altitude, set the Sun at his
own height and Coast, and then all the Stars above the Horizon do appear
in the Globe. Now if it be in the night, and the Stars appear, then take the
height of some known Star, and place the same Starr at his due height in the
Globe, so shall ye see the same.

Propositio. 41. To do the same without Sun, or appearaunce of any Star.
YE must know what it is of the clock at that time when ye would work this
conclusion: then rectify the Index by the 14. proposition: Lastly, turn the
Globe till the Index come on the same hour as is given by the clock, for then
the Stars appear as they should.

Propositio. 42. To find what Stars will pass directly over our heads in
the motion of the heaven.
AFter that the Quadrant of Altitudes is fixed in his due place, as is spoken
of before, so that he now do show the Zenith or Vertical point: then move
about the Globe, and mark what Stars pass under the Zenith in this motion,
for those be such as go by our heads, and are called sometimes Culminant
stars, sometimes Vertical stars, and have their cheifest use in Astrology.

Propositio. 43. To know with what degree of the Ecliptic any Star rised,
comes to the Meridian: or sets.
Move the Globe till the Star whom ye propose, ascend above the Horizon, and
then mark the degree of the Ecliptic that rises with him. Again move him
to the Meridian, and mark the degree of the Ecliptic, so do by him in the
West side of the Horizon, and ye shall have your intent.

Propositio. 44. To know the hour of any Stars rising.
Rectify the Index by the 14. proposition, then turn the Globe til the said
Star (whose time of rising ye desire,) touch the East side of the Horizon:
for then the Index gives his time of rising. And if ye turn him to the
Meridian, the Index will show his time of coming the there: or if ye turn him
to the West side of the Horizo^, the Index shows his setting.

Propositio. 45. To find in how long time any whole sign arises.
Rectify the Index by the fowerteenth proposition: then put the beginning of
the sign (whose time of rising ye seek) to the East part of the Horizon: and
mark what the Index stands on then: again, put the last degree of the said
sign to the Horizon, and see what the Index shows: for the difference of the
two times by the Index, is the time in which that sign rises.

Propositio. 46. To find in what coast any star is, and how many degrees from
the Meridian.
Find the Stars above ground by the 40. proposition: then the Globe being
fixed: put the Quadrant of altitude to any State. Then shall the foot of the
Quadrant show in the Horizon, how far the same Star is from East, West,
North or South. But if ye first rectify your Index by the 14. proposition: and
then find the stars above by the 40. proposition. Again at the same time
mark where the Index stands: lastly put any Star under the Meridian, and
again note the standing of the Index: the difference of those two times showed
by the Index, is the distance of that star from the Meridian, in the time of
your observation.

Propositio. 47. To find what Stars rise or set any day, Cosmically,
Achronically or Helically.
SVch stars as be near to the sun in any day, and ascend above the
Horizon a little before the appearance of the same: are said to rise helically,
and such Stars as set very little after the Sun, are said to set helically.
Again such Stars as ascend together with the Sun, and such as set at the
same time, are said to rise and set cosmically. Lastly, such stars as set
together with the Sun: and such as rise at the same time: are said to set
and rise achronically, and such may be thus found. Rectify the Index by the
14. proposition: and turn the place of the Sun to the East side of the
Horizon: for the stars going immediately before the Sun, rise helically. and
those in the Horizon rise cosmically: and they that are in the Horizon in the
west, do set cosmically, and such as immediately rise after the Sun, do
set helically. Lastly turn the Sun to the West point of the Horizon, and
look what stars touch the Horizon with him, such set achronically: and such
as are at the same time rising in the East, rise Achronically.

Propositio. 48. To know the hour of the night, at any time by the Stars.
Rectify the Index by the 14. proposition, then again find what stars be
above ground at the same time, when ye would know ye hour, by ye 40.
proposition: for then the Index will show the hour.

Propositio. 49 To find the four Cardinal points of heaven at any time of day
or night.
THe four Cardinal points, be the four degrees of the Ecliptic, where of
one is in the East rising: an other is in the South or under the Meridian,
above at the same time: the third in the West setting, and the fourth under the
Meridian beneath ground, all at one instant, in the time of any geniture, or
motion of any question, and are thus known. If ye seek them in the day (the
Sun shining) then find the stars above ground by the 40. proposition: and
with all mark the degree of the Ecliptic in the East. so likewise in the
South, West and North, for those be then the Cardinal points. Again, if it be
in the night, then find the stars above by the same 40. proposition. and the
points shall likewise appear. Lastly, if nether the Sun shine, or star:
then know the hour by the clock, and afterward find the stars above ground
at the said hour by the 41. proposition. so shall the points be given as
before.

Propositio. 50. To find the bigness of the angle, made betwixt the Meridian
Circle, and any Circle of position.
CIrcles of Position be all such, as are drawn from the North point of any
Horizon by the Center of any star, and so to go to the South point of the
same Horizon, to return to the North again. And every one of these Circles
does make some with the Meridian, and the said angle has his bigness showed, by
a portion of the fixed Vertical: so that to find the bigness of the angle made
betwixt the Meridian and any Circle of position: is to find the portion of the
fixed Vertical, enclosed betwixt the Meridian and the said Circle of position.
that portion is thus found. Put your quadrant of altitude, to the true East
point, then raise up your Brass half Circle as high above the Horizon as ye
please: so that it may now represent some circle of position. for then the
degrees of the Quadrant of altitude from the Meridian to this circle: be the
bigness of the angle made betwixt the Meridian, and the Circle of position. but
if your circle of position fall on the West side of the Meridian, then put the
Quadrant to the West point; and work as before.

Propositio. 51. To find the beginnings and ends of the 12 howses of Heaven.
COncerning the erecting the scheme of heaven, or as we commonly call it the
twelve howsen: though four diverse ways have been received, touching the
howsen, how they ought to be taken: yet it is not our intent to discourse of
that question, but to show how they ought to be erected, according to the
most usual way, set down by Regiomontanus, and called reasonable. Wherefore
first ye are to know, that in any Horizon wheresoever we be, we do imagine
six circles to be drawn from the North point of the Horizon to the South of
the same, and dividing the Aequinoctiall into 12 aequall parts, and the 12.
spaces betwixt these circles, are called the twelve howses. (and two of the 6.
circles are always the Meridian and Horizon.) in every one of these howsen is
enclosed some portion of the Zodiac, and one portion is greater the^ an other.
so that to erect the twelve howsen, is to find out the portion of the Ecliptic
enclosed in each space, and to do it, we thus proceed. First find out the four
Cardinal points by the 49. proposition, for those be the beginnings of 4.
howsen of the twelve: the Cardinal point under the Meridian above ground, is
the beginning of the tenth house. This done, fix the Globe, then reckon from
the degree of the equator (being then under the Meridian) 30. degrees toward
the East point, and raise up your brass half circle to stand on the point of
the equator on which ye left. For look then what degree of the Ecliptic is
cut then by the brass half Circle: the same is the end of the tenth house,
and beginning of the eleventh. Again, yet reckon 30. degrees more in the
equator toward the East, and put the brass half circle to it, and the^ take
the degree cut in the Ecliptic, for that is the end of the eleventh house, and
beginning of the twelfth. Again the Cardinal point of the East, is the end of
the twelfth house, and beginning of the first house. Now if in like sort ye go
from the degree of the equator under the Meridian, by each 30. degree of the
same toward the West point, and still observe the degres cut in the Ecliptic:
ye shall have the beginnings and ends of the ninth, eighth and seventh house.
Thus having erected six howsen, the degrees of the Zodiac which are opposite
to these in a Diameter, (one to an other) be the beginnings and ends of the
other six howsen, which were to be found. And here must ye note, that the
first house begins at the East point, and goes under the ground toward the
Meridian Circle, the second and the third succeed. the fowerth, beginning at
the Meridian under ground coming toward West, the fifth and sixth succeed, the
seventh begins in the West, and goes above ground toward the Meridian, the
eight and ninth succeed. Other conclusions less profitable I wittingly
avoided: and the more excellent, deferred to a more convenient time.

FINIS.
Errata.
Pa: 3. li: 13. indicem, lege iudicem.
Pa: 23. li: 1. same, lege Sun.
Pa: 24. li: 1. lege Ver.
Pa: 46. li: 16. till ye, lege till it.

