YOVTH KNOW THY SELF.

Disce puer virtutem exme, verumque laborem,
Fortunam ex alijs.
LONDON, Printed by AUGUSTINE MATTHEW'S and JOHN NORTON, and are to be sold at
the great South door of Paul's. 1624.

To the Reader.
REader (if that there will be any such,
These vncouth-ragged lines will grace so much)
I do implore of thee this courtesy,
As that thou will not look with Eagles eye.
For though like Delphian Oracles I seem,
My not- Appollo's verses to esteem;
Yet know, I think so great will be their fame,
As that I dare not set to them my name.
Then seeing that I am unknown of thee,
And that thou likewise art unknown of me,
I can report of thee no thing that is bad,
Do but the same of me, I shall be glad.
YOVTH KNOW THY SELF
TO School the weather-beaten wise, and fage,
To check the little pretty innocent age,
Were but presumption, and too curious folly;
Since neither of these ages can be jolly.
Your hoary hairs, like isicles which be,
Strike admiration, and respect in me.
You post unto the layle, your grave, and so
Along to Heauens-Sessions house, to know
From the Celestial Judge, the fatal doom
Of al your sins, done from your mothers womb.
Expect your censure there; I Will not so much,
As how you come bald-pated, give a touch:
Your frowning looks, and wrinckles do infuse
A smoothed brow upon mine angry Muse.
Your frozen members, and infrigidated,
Cannot by Venus star be calculated.
But if amongst you some be children grown,
How for to know themselves it shall be shown.
You with your golden looks, and silver bands,
Like to the Dayses culled by your hands,
Your loving sports, and quarrell-breeding games,
The strictest-rigid'st Cato never blames.
Your euer-blushing cheeks protend, ye fear
That all things which ye do, offensive are.
Ah! it is not you, that for my rage are fuel,
Your smiles, and bablings, make me not so cruel.
It Is he, or she that Venus shrine adores,
That Is in the teenes, and not come to the scores.
It Is those that new, forth from the eg-shell came,
And are become stout cocks, and henns of the game:
This is the blood-warme age, there springs from
The Salamander of concupiscence.
This is the Age that makes my spleen to swell hence
With laughter, and my gall to leave her cell:
Which being vomited up, about does fly,
Bespurtling every body that stands nigh.
This makes mine eyes, like Basiliskes for to pry
Upon the object, till I make it dye.
Oh who has such a foggie-clowdy brain,
That of all ages thinks not this most vain?
Or who is such an A-b-c-darian ass,
That finds not this all former times to pass?
Since Satan belch't out poison first on earth,
Sin nere was practiced with such joy and mirth.
And some's so horrid, that I cannot tell,
Whether he will own it, that inhabits Hell.
Be deaf ye tender ears, whilst I rehearse,
Things that would stain the purest meaning verse:
When Dildoes, Merkins, and sophistications,
With thousands of such lust-full variations,
Must de divulged by a mind that is bent,
To bid the good beware, the bad repent.
Go on my Muse, thou need'st not dread disgrace,
Black is the only color in thy face
Assume thy former spirit, I know thou durst
Say of all earthly creatures, man's the worst.
All have obeyed their Maker but this man,
Who never fully did, nor never can.
Witness this last declining age, wherein
That is thought virtue, which before was sin.
When as Venerious youngsters set on fire,
Dare to their neighbors silent bed aspire,
To drench their itching, and sulpherous flame,
Yet must the wronged bear away the shame.
Since Cuckolding, and head-horning plantation
Is deemed and act of supererrogation.
But those that, like old cuckowes, rob men's nests;
An eating Scab their purest parts inuests.
Oh! that Adultery, fondlings should so hallow,
Which is the deepest sink, the soul does swallow.
And those that make horns on men's heads to dwell,
Should engines make, to toss themselves to Hell.
The winged-chirping songsters of the air,
Upon Saint Valentines day, that use to pair,
May teach these Roysters, if they cannot tarry,
The remedy is very speedy, Marry.
Give to the Parson, and to toule the bell,
He Will soon dispatch ye, be ye impes of Hell.
And if one come the match to disanull,
He Will pull his dagger out, and break his skull.
And if ye fear in Church to show your face,
A barne-like thatched one, may be the place.
Such crimes as these do make me not my self,
But like the spitefull-snaky-headed Elfe:
I pine through envy, when I see, with ease
A ten in the hundred sweltering in grease:
A Fox-fur'd-clouted-pated fornicator,
That Is to his Tenants wife Administrator:
Whom for to keep a wife, the charge debarred,
And that would slice his Father for his lard:
That every day does fear a plague, and dearth,
As some which do Sol's falling down on earth.
Me thinks there is wildfire in my sparkling eyes,
That makes the balls, like bullets, rend the skies:
When that an open-fisted-biggen'd Baby,
That worshippeth the name of Lord and Lady:
That Forma Pauperis thinks is his damnation,
And does esteem demurres, his best salvation:
Should have such takings at Westminster Hall,
And yet his Wifes at home, surmount them all.
Why? sure my brains with madness is so full,
That it flies up and down, and cracks my skull:
To see a weeping Crocodile, when she yells
Louder then Free Schools, or ring of bells;
That sounds: whose neck seems not to bear her head
That wrings her hands, howles out my husbands dead.
Yet scarce shall the Sea-god, which entertains
Phoebus, that all his fiery horses trains,
To visit Neptune, in his Sea-sicke weeds;
Have watered all the foamy sweating Steeds,
And given some fish unto his frying Brother;
But more then monster-like, she will have another.
For if you think the Serpent muttereth hiss,
You are deceiu;d, she treacherously cries kiss)
Let but her lover curse her, she is content,
And thinks his curses are like blessings sent:
So they would be Martyrs which never came toth' stake,
And God chastises, does not Martyrs make.
She loves the wall, the highest seat at meetings,
She would be idolized by poor men's greetings.
Her alms and charity is a three-penny dole,
By cheats, and cogges from careless purses stole:
She grudges this large portion, just like those,
The hundredth grudg, when God the tenth bestows.
She never weeps, but when her Mother's well,
She never laughs, but at her Fathers knell.
Drunkenness is her portion, her purgation,
Is for her burning Ague Fornication:
She needs not the Phisitian's helping hand,
Who freely gives unto his patients land.
Her conversation is amongst wild beasts;
She ever blesses founders of great feasts:
She Will purge her stupid pate with Helebore,
That where she has been once, she may come more:
Stroke her Rhinoceros nose, she will never rest,
Till she sniuels out an Elephantine jest:
And she will engrose up all the Table chat,
And laugh, till every body laugh thereat.
She scorns inferiors, if an heir she be,
By phauning sycophants deifi'd is she.
She e're malignes, because she flattery hates:
Like those, who to renounce all Popish baits,
N'ere pure enough do think themselves to be,
Till they in every thing do disagree.
She has sugar'd-hony-dropping complements,
Of venomous thoughts, the poisoned impleme^ts,
She Will kiss your hand, your picture, shoe-strings, cheeks,
She for bumbasting stuff in Play-bookes seeks:
As that the red-rose, and the Lilly grow,
In your Angelical face, that's white as snow:
And that your teeth are like two rows of pearl,
You may be Concubine to any Earl:
She Will crouch with cap in hand, and pardon crave,
She Will be your servant, varlet, vassal, slave:
You may command her like your 3. pound Jack,
And yet she will cut your throat behind your back.
(These are the golden hooks, with which she angles,
And the not-hyperbolicall wretch entangles)
Her Spanish spit does make her raise much strife,
With which she will hood winck't tilt away her life:
Then may the little field-mouse sup the blood,
Of her who hacster-like-insulting stood.
She that does wear a ribband for a feather,
And quarrels with the fair, and serene weather,
More bawdery has her knauish-leatherne hide,
Then an old Midwife, or an vntusk't bride.
In Colleges, Inns of Court, she fornication
Abhorres, not with the coupled copulation:
To couple with the coupled's Fellow-like,
The law did never against this maxim strike.
Ambition mounts her, as the skipping back,
The water-coffins which do suffer wrack:
And makes her cogitations tower as high,
As the early-Sun-saluting Fiddlers fly:
Then does she think her self some potentate,
When she is begging at another gate.
If she has traveled, that she has been, where
Cambridge, and Oxford never came, she will swear:
And that her Tongus are best (me thinks it is pity,
She hangs not Parat-like out in the City)
She does allure by her disheuel'd tresses,
For to entice she has a thousand dresses.
She Is so insatiate, that in every room,
She does provide a Lackey, Page, and Groom.
She has her Monkies, Marmosets, and such toys,
And much about the age of thirteen, boys.
All her attendants naked come to wait,
Loue-powder and flat witchcraft is her bait.
She Lady-like frequents the Maskes at Court,
Where all the gallant hot-spurres do resort:
And there she sits, like women in Cheape-side,
Who for to sell their wares do there abide.
She without Natures useful preparations,
Can satisfy her tickling instigations.
Cantharides, with Eringos, and such cates,
The fiery coals of burning heat inflates,
Until the flesh be ouer-roasted grown,
And all the liquor from the pot be flowne:
That so much moisture found can scarce be there,
As for to shed the least repentant tear.
She makes her money fly in needless charge,
And for Tobacco her expense is large:
When as she taken has the same so long,
That like an opened vault her breath is strong,
So that Tobacco now she might forsake,
And at one another mouth's she might it take.
She neither heat, nor coldness can endure,
But in the house she does her self immure:
She strives not yet to keep her self from Hell,
Where fire must frost, and frost must fire expel.
She vilifies Universities, and Schools,
And wisdom gets by tearming others fools.
To be above Gods Aarons is her right,
If though her Grandsire clown, her Sire was Knight.
Not in the Hall, she in the Kitchen gluts,
For finesse sake she wainescoteth her guts:
Till from the mincing mouth you may assume
In all your carved meat, her sweet perfume.
To carry her glass to Church, if once she miss,
(And if it please her, she may carry this)
So many Tales she will relate in jest,
Till at the length she will swear she did the best.
For to forswear her self she will use this art,
That she, though not in tongue, has God in heart:
So when the famish't Prophets do foretell,
The wages of Church-broking shall be Hell,
Reply the cursed sacrilegious crew,
God bids all live by him, as well as you.
(But know you damned catyfes, while they want
Their bodies food, your souls is very scant)
When as the fable Night does over spread
Her duskye Canopy, on the drowzie head
Of drooping Titan, then she takes her rest,
Upon her dainty downy feathered nest.
And though she cannot but look up on high,
Yet she never begs for heavens most watchful eye.
Then dismal dreams her wa^dring sense affright,
Till she awakes, and seeks the mornings light:
But the sin-conscious darkness she beholds,
And then her close-pent conscience she unfolds:
But while she searches her sins Catalogue out,
She fears the Devil musters round about.
And dreading his vice-scourging-yron rod,
Perhaps she will carelessly cry out, O God.
At last of other help she does despair,
And therefore spends a Spirit-expelling prayer:
The trickling tears bedew her guilty bed,
She vows she will new conditions firmly wed.
Now she will keep her body chaste as ice,
And not enthrall her self to torturing vice.
But when she see's the Mornes vermillion coat,
She quickly changes this constrained note.
For when her sneaking stalking-horse appears,
She Will say she dreamed his death, and shed these tears.
Then to her former trade she goes afresh,
To warm with fear, her long benumbed flesh.
(But if betimes she does not it forsake,
She may be scorth't in the euer-burning lake,)
The using of her own she thinks so fit,
That all her kindred may have use of it.
She Will make her Father pander, Mother bawd,
Husband doorkeeper, Children to applaud.
(Thus all her sworn alliance is her guard;
And Lust's most-basely-captiuated ward:
So Lust the root of all contagious evils,
Supplies the place of men-possessing Devils)
She loves the means, but yet not procreation,
For to prevent it is her occupation.
If an abortiue birth she chance to have,
She will expose it to a murdering slave.
This sin my Muse to her last gasp has brought,
For it is so foul, that it has stopped her throat.
FINIS.

