The first and second parts of the Herbal of William Turner Doctor in Physic
/ lately oversene / corrected and enlarged with the Third part / lately
gathered / and now set out with the names of the herbs / in Greek Latin /
English / Duche / French / and in the Apothecaries and Herbaries Latin / with
the properties / degrees / and natural places of the same.

Here unto is joined also a Book of the bath of Baeth in England / and of the
virtues of the same with diverse other bathes / most holsom and effectual /
both in Almanye and England / set forth by William Turner Doctor in Physic.

God save the Queen.

printer's or publisher's device HONEY SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Imprinted at Collen by Arnold Birckman / In the year of our Lord M.D.LXVIII.

Cum Gratia and Priuilegio Reg. May.

A sincere testamonie off Cap Will: Hay his real affection too his approved
frind Master Tailour appothecarie in Yoirk. 1643 ye 16 of May

To the most noble and learned Princess in all kinds of good lerninge / Queen
Elizabeth / by the grace of God Queen of England / France and Ireland /
Defender of the Faith / re. William Turner Doctor of Physic / wishes
continual health of both body and soul / and daily increase of the knowledge
of Gods holy word / with grace to live and rule Gods people according to
the same.
MOst mighthe and renoumed Princess / after that I had made an end of ye third
part of my Herbal / which entreats of these herbs / whereof is no mention
made nether of ye old Grecianes nor Latins / and had ouersene again my first
part / and both corrected it and increased it very much / and had also
corrected the second part: and the Printer had given me warninge / there
wanted nothing to the settinge out of my hole Herbal / saving only a Preface
/ wherein I might require some both mighty and learned Patron to defend my
labors against spiteful and envious enemies to al mennis doings saving
their own / and declare my good mind to him that I am most bound unto by
dedicating and giving these my poor labors unto him. I did seek out every
where in my mind / how that I could come by such a Patron as had both
learning and sufficient authority / joined therewith to defend my poor labors
against their adversaries / and in the same person such frendshippe and good
will toward me / by reason whereof I were most bound unto above all other.
After long turninge this matter over in my mind / it came to my memory that
in all the hole realm of England / that there were none more fit to be
Patroness of my Book / and none had deserved so much / to whom I should
dedicate and give the same as your most excellent sublimitie has done: I have
dedicated it therefore unto your most excellent sublimitie / and do give it for
the auoydinge of all suspicion of ingratitude or unkindness unto you as a token
and a witness of the acknowledginge of the great benefits that I have received
of your Princelye liberality of late years. As for the supremitie of your
power / might and authority in this realm / there are none that will deny it
/ saving only the bewitched hipocrites and bound men of the spiritual Babylon.
As for your knowledge in the Latin tongue xviij. years ago or more / I had in
the Duke of Somersettes house (being his Physician at that time) a good trial
thereof / when as it pleased your grace to speak Latin unto me: for although I
have both in England / low and high Germanye / and other places of my long
traueil and pelgrimage / never spoke with any noble or gentle woman / that
spoke so well and so much congrue fine and pure Latin / as your grace did unto
me so long ago: sense which time how much and wounderfullye ye have
proceeded in the knowledge of the Latin tongue / and also profited in the Greek /
French and Italian tongues and others also / and in all parts of Philosophy
and good learning / not only your own faithful subjects / being far from
all suspicion of flattery bear witness / but also strangers / men of great
learning in their books set out in the Latin tongue / give honorable
testimonye. As touching the benefits that I have received in of your Mayestie
/ I must confess that for the obteininge of certain surites and defendinge of
my self against them that troubled me vniustelye / ye have at the lest four
times helped me with your letters patentes / sealed with the great seal of
England / and also restored me unto the denerye of Wells / both by the
deprivation of the usurper of it / that held me out / and admittinge of me^ as
only the lawful deane of Wells by your appointed commissioners and judges
delegate again. Wherefore your Mayestie has largelye deserved to have a
great deal worthier gift for the greatness and manifoldnes of the benefits
that ye have bestowed upon me your poor subject. But although even as I
think my self it be but a small present in comparison of your worthiness state
/ dignity and degree / and benefits toward me: Yet my good will considered /
and the profit that may come to all your subjects by it / it is not so small
as my adversaries paraduenture will esteem it: For some of them will say /
seeing that I grant that I have gathered this book of so many writers /
that I offer unto you an heap of other mennis labors / and nothing of mine
own / and that I goo about to make me friends with other mennis trauayles /
and that a book intreatinge only of trees / herbs and wedes / and shrubbes
/ is not a mete present for a prince. To whom I answer / that if the honye
that the bees gather out of so many flower of herbs / shrubbes / and trees /
that are growing in other mennis meadows / feldes and closes: may iustelye be
called the bees honye: and Plinies book de naturali historia may be called
his book / allthough he have gathered it out of so many good writers whom he
vouchsaueth to name in the beginning of his work: So may I call it that I
have learned and gathered of many good autoures not without great labor and
pain my book / and namelye because I have handled no one Author / so as a
crafty covetous and Popish printer handled me of late / who suppressing my
name / and leuinge out my Preface / set out a book (that I set out of Wells
/ and had corrected not without some labor and cost) with his Preface / as
though the book had been his own. For I am able to prove by good witnesses
that I have above thyrtye years ago / written an Herbal in Latin / wherein
were contained the Greek / Latin and English names of so many herbs and trees
as I could get any knowledge of / even being yet fellow of Penbroke hall in
Cambridge / where as I could learn never one Greek / nether Latin / nor English
name / even amongst the Phisiciones of any herb or tree / such was the
ignorance in simples at that time / and as yet there was no English Herbal but
one / al full of unlearned cacographees and falselye naminge of herbs / and as
then had nether Fuchsius / nether Matthiolus / nether Tragus written of herbs
in Latin. And before that Fuchsius had written his Herball / and set it out / I
went into Italy / and there learned of the lyuinge voice of my masters
diverse herbs / which Fuchsius never saw / the knowledge of certain whereof
after I returned out of Italy / did communicate unto him in a long Epistel /
wherein I did friendly admonish him of certain erroures that were in his
herball / which was then newly set out / and within not many years after I
wrote the first part of my English Herball / and dedicated it unto my Lord and
Master the Duke of Somerset / so that I borrowed very littel or ellis
nothing of Matthiolus / and when as the Herball of Matthiolus came out in
Latin / many things that were thought strange both unto English men and
Germans / were nether strange nor unknown unto me / because I had learned
the same before of my masters in Italye / and namelye of Lucas Gynus / the
reder of Dioscorides in Bonony / of whom Matthiolus in his Herbal in many
places acknowledges / that he learned diverse and sundry herbs to him
unknown before: Yet do I grant yt of his Herbal I learned somthinge / but not
so addicte unto him / but that I wrote against him in some parts of my Herbal
/ where as I thought he erred / and they that have red the first part of my
Herbal / and have compared my writings of plants with those things that
Matthiolus / Fuchsius / Tragus / and Dodoneus wrote in ye first editiones of
their Herballes / may easily perceive that I taught the truth of certain
plants / which these above named writers either knew not at al / or ellis
erred in the^ greatly / as in Absinthio pontico / Oroba^che / Betonica Pault /
Sphondylio / and diverse others. So yt as I learned something of them / so they
either might or did learn somthinge of me again / as their second editions
may testifye. And because I would not be like unto a crier yt cries a lost
horse in the marketh / and tells all the marks and tokens that he has / and
yet never saw the horse / nether could know the horse if he saw him: I
went into Italye and into diverse parts of Germany / to know and se the
herbs my self / and to know by practice their powers and workinge / not
trustinge only to the old herb wives and apothecaryes (as many Physiciones
have done of late years) but in the matter of simples mine own eyes and
knowledge: wherefore I have somthinge of mine own to present and give unto
your highness. And where as they say that a book of wedes or grass (as some
in despite of learning will call precious herbs) is a right unmeet gift for
such a Prince as all men confess you to be / I answer that if the noble
Poet Virgil said well and truly: Si canimus syluas, syluae sunt consule
dignae,
I may also iustelye say / Si canimus plantas, plantae sunt principe dignae.
For the knowledge of herbs / trees and shrubbes / is not only very
delectable for a Princis mind / but profitable for all the bodies of the
Princis hole Realm both to preserve men from sickness / sorrow and pain that
comes thereby / and also from poison and death / but also necessary for
Phisiciones and apothecaries without ye knowledge whereof they can not deuly
exercise their office and vocation where unto they are called / for how can he
be a good artificer that neither knows the names of his toles / nether the
toles themselfes when he sees. Wherefore it may please your graces gentleness
to take these my labors in good worth / not according unto their unworthiness
/ but according unto my good mind and will / offering and geuinge them unto
you / which thing if I can perceive to come to pass / so that I may have
rest and quietness in my old age / and defense from my enemies / which have
more then these eight years continuallye troubled me very much / and holden
me from my Book / and sickness will suffer me / I extend to set out a Book of
the names and natures of fishes that are within your Mayesties dominions / to
the great delight of noble men / and profit of your hole Realm. Almightye God /
whose rome ye occupye here in earth under his son Jesus Christ / preserve
and keep you from all your ennemies / both spiritual and bodily.

From my house at London in the crossed Friars the 5. day of March. 1568.
The Table of the names of herbs.
A
ACanthium 16 Aconitum 19 Affodil 24 Agrimonye 219 Alder tree 28 Alisson 35
Almond tree 38 Aloe 29 Amaranthus 37 Amomum 40 Amy 39 Anemone 41 Anise 44
Antirrhinum 48 Apiastrum 53 Arbutus 55 Archichockes 110 Areche 73 Aristolochia
57 Aron or Cockowpint 60 Asarabacca 65 Asclepias 67 Ascyron 66 Asparagus 68
Asplenum 69 Astragalus 71
B
Bean 220 Berefote 160 Beta 80 Betonye 81.82.83 Bindwede 165 Birche 84 Blewe
bottel 189 Blites 85 Bockes bearde 77 Borage 94 Box 99 Brion thalassion 93
Bulbine or yelow Leke 97 Branck vrsine 18
C
Calaminte 100 Camomyle 46 Capers 109 Caruwayes 111 Centorye 117 Cepea 122
Chamecyparissus 125 Chamepeuce 129 Chestnut tree 115 Chikewede 30 Chrysanthemon
134 Ciche or Ciche pease 137 Cicheling 139 Cirsium 143 Cistus 145 Clematitis
149 Climenum or water Betonye 152 Clinopodium 150 Colocasia 157 Coloquintida
185 Cole or Colewurtes 87 Conisa 158 Coriandre 166 Cornel tree 167 Cucumbers 175
Cyperus 195 Cypres tree 187 Cytisus 196 Cudwed or Chaffwed 119
D
Dasey 78 Daucus 199 Dill 43 Doder 113 Dogs tongue. 192
E
Egle^tine or sweet brere 193 Ernutte 51
F
Fox tail 25 Fumitorye. 108
G
Garleke 26. 27 Gelouer 106 Gladdon or false Acorus 21 Germander 127 Gooshareth
50 Goume succorye 133 Ground pyne. 131
H
Hasel tree 170 Hemp 105 Herb Iue 169 Heth 210 Homloke or Hemloke 140
L
Lauriel or Lowrye 198
M
Marygoldes 104 Marierum gentle 34 Marrish Mallow 33 Mugwurt. 61
N
Nettel tree / or Lote tree 116
O
Oak of Jerusalem 86 Onyons 120 Otes 73
P
Persely 54 Pety whine 45 Perwincle 148 Pimpernelle 41
R
Reed 64 Rocket 211
S
Saffrone 155 Sampere 172 Sea hollye 215 Segge or Sheregres 112 Smallage 209
Sowes bread 119 Sowthistel 136 Sothernwod 15 Spindel tree 217 Stinking horehound
76
T
Tasel 205
V
Venus heir 23 Walwurt 208 Wormwode. fo. 1.
FINIS.
NOMINA AVCTORVM PER QVOS IN HERBARIO MEO PROFECI.
Damocrates. Dioscorides. Theophrastus. Virgilius Maro. Galenus. M. Cato. M.
Varro. Columella. Palladius. Plinius. Aetius. Paulus Aegineta. Macer. Mesue.
Auicenna. Serapio. Rases. Simeon Sethi. Hermolaus Barbarus. Nicolaus
Leonicenus. Georgius Collimitius. Antonius Musa. Ioannes Manardus. Ottho
Brunfelsius. Marcellus Vergilius. Ioannes Ruellius. Ioannes Agricola. Massarius
Venetus. Leonhardus Fuchsius. Hieronymus Tragus. Conradus Gesnerus. Lucas
Gynus. Andreas Matthiolus. Gabriel Gabrielis. Geraldus Delvvicus. Matthias
Curtius.
Peter Turner to the Reader.
AS the wise Philosopher Seneca, counts him to slay or kill, that may well
save and will not: so may I rightly judge after the same fashion, that he is a
great hindrer and hurter that may profit a man and will not. Seeing then that
this my fathers Herball, which he after his long travel, study and experience
has made, is now set forth to profit and pleasure his countrymen withal: and
by the oversight partly of the Printer, and partly of the Scribe that copied
the book out for the Printer, is now so commed forth that the Reader can not
get any profit or commodity thereof: least that I for the cause above
rehearsed be counted a hinderer of the profit of my Countriemen, and not to
set by my Fathers fame and estimation (for I am sure, many that know not that
before his death he went about to correct this book, will blame him for letting
so falsely a printed book to come forth) I have taken some pains, and have
perused and red over this book as my Father began, and have conferred it
with his own hand copy, and have so corrected it and amended it, that a
diligent and a welwilling reader may easily understand the meaning of the
writer, and so take great profit of the same. But peradventure some will say,
if I had minded to pleasure my Countriemen, I might have done better if I had
called in or stayed this print, and caused the book to have been printed here
anew again. In deed if I had done so, I should have eased the reader of this
labor of correcting. But I should have done against Charity to have caused
the Printer by that means to lose all his labor and cost which he has
bestowed in printing hereof. Wherefore gentle Reader bear a little with the
Printer that never was much accustomed to the printing of English, and before
thou read over this book, correct it as I have appointed, and then the
profit thereof will abundantly recompense thy pains. And last of all, take
these my pains also in good worth at this time. Another day when this Herball
shall be printed again (and if it please God to lend me life and health,
augmented and increased) I trust the reader shall be put to no such pains in
correcting of the same, as in no other of my fathers books as yet unprinted
which hereafter as time and occasion shall serve, I entende to set forth. In
the mean time use this Herball instead of a better, and give all laud and
praise unto the Lord.

Faults to be corrected in the first part.
The title at the top of every leaf is the first line, from the which you
shall begin to tell.

Jn the Preface. Side. Line. 1 42 For (although I have both) read, although I
have been both. 1 43 For (pilgrimage never) read, pilgrimage yet I never. 2 9
For (received in of) read, received even of. 2 10 For (surites) read, suites. 2
14 For (admitting of men) read, admitting of me. 2 29 For (many flower) read,
many flowers. 3 3 For (Italy did) Italy I did. 3 8 For (Mathiolus) read,
Fuchsius. 3 47 for (sees. Wherefore) read, sees them. Wherefore. 4 7 For (I
extend) read, I intend. In the first part. Side. Line. 1 3 The figure that is
set for Absinthium ponticum Rome natum, is it not, for it is the figure of Sea
wormwoode, as you may see afterward. Page 10. Look in the first edition, and
there thou shall find the right figure of Absinthium ponticum Rome natum. 2 29
For (colones) read, coloners. 2 39 For (of later) read, of the later. 2 40 For
(medendi that) read, medendi hold that, 2 46 For (excelles) read, excels.
3 41 For (franche) read, france. 3 45 For (which disagreeth) read, which
agrees. 3 45 For (his description. But.) read, his description. And to deny
that it is Pontike wormwood, which disagreeth with his description. But. 4 2
For (agrees not with) read, agrees with. 4 25 For (feminee) read, femine. 4
26 After these words (Hieronymo Trago) put out the little virgula, and make in
the stead of it a full point. And begin the next word with a great letter. For
there begins a new sentence. 5 34 For (Bruthalassij) read, Bryithalassij.
5 35 After this word (describes) make a full point, and begin the next word
with a great letter. 5 35 For (whereas Dioscorides makes no mention But of one
kind) read, whereas Dioscorides makes no mention but of one kind. 5 37 For
(of him) read after him. 5 38 After this word (them) make a full point, and
begin the next word with a great letter. 5 40 After (other) make a full point.
And begin the next word with a great letter. 5 45 After (kinds) make a full
point. And begin the next sentence with a great letter. 6 12 For (de wijck)
read, del wyk. 6 30 For (colors) read coloners. 6 37 For (change) read,
chance. 7 4 For (Apollones) read Apolloes. 7 16 After this word (is) make a
full point. And begin the next word with a great letter. 7 32 For (of that)
read, of it that. 7 32 For (above) read, about. 7 37 For (above) read, allow.
8 5 For (things disagreeth) read things it disagreeth. 8 8 For (cities) read,
city. 8 14 For (set) read fet. 8 39 For (had greater) read, had had greater. 8
47 For (there still) read, their style. 9 2 For (where) read, were. 9 10 For
(report unto) read, report me unto. 9 11 For (has at) read, has suffered at.
9 28 For (condenberges) read condenberges. 9 39 For (Vana) read, Rana. 11 9
For (thirtiest) read thirty. 11 13 For (of Galene. Gallene) read, of Galene.
For Gallene. 11 22 For (herb) read, herbs. 11 22 For heresy, read,
hearesay. 11 23 For (erred writer) read, eared writer. That is to say a writer
that heard it only of others with his ears, and saw it not with his own
eyes. 11 43 For (Lanander) read, Lauender. 11 last At the last word make a
full point, and begin the next word with a great letter. 12 13 For (not) read,
yet. 13 2 For (or bastard) read, or a bastard. 13 4 For (their country when)
read, their country this herb when. 13 26 For (lothsommes) read, lothsomnes.
13 27 For (That broth) read, The broth. 13 34 Put out, of. 14 11 For (ynke)
read, yuik. In the same leaf, and even after, for (Lanander cotton) read,
Lauander cotton. 15 2 For (yet) read, it. 15 9 For (little braunchlings)
read, little branches. 17 16 For (Asinium) read Asininum. 17 19 For (Gymis)
read Gynus. 17 20 For (thereof Diosc.) read, of Dioscorides there. 17 22 For
(of the thistell) read of Ote thistell. 17 31 For (grow) read, grew. 20 12 for
(or) read of. 20 15 For (splengen) read, spleugen. 20 44 For sothernwood,
groundpine) read, sothernwode or groundpine. 20 44 For (hind Calfes) read,
hind or Calfes. 21 3 For (twenty year) read, twenty four years. 21 20 For
(albicantes whitish) read, albicantes that is whitish. 22 14 For (Condie)
read Candie. 24 2 For (whose is) read whose error is. 24 13 For (may) read,
it may. 24 28 For (mirtteyle) read, myrt oil. 24 38 (Also) put it quite out.
24 42 For Narassus, read, Narcissus. 25 4 For (wheat or wheat, or beach)
read, wheat or beach. 27 4 For (craw) read crow. 27 10 For (row) read raw,
28 8 For (pype) read pip. 28 37 After this word (burning) there wants. The
beans are cold and astringent, and so is the bark also. 29 30 For (beat)
read, beaten. 26 44 For (aguayles) read, agnayles. 30 22 For (alsines) read,
alsine. 32 8 After these words (pressed out) there wants the juice, that is
pressed out, is. 32 11 For (months, is) read, months old, is. 32 18 For
(of the aykes) read, and other aykes. 32 21 For (swells) read, swelled. 32
28 For (as for) read, are good for. 32 33 For (eniscus) read euiscus. 32 34
For (malua bis) read, malua bis malua. 32 44 After these words (waterie
meadows) there wants. I have seen in Dorcet shire this herb also growing by
the sea side, as I have seen it growing in Somerset shire a mile from wells
toward the mere, and in Mark within the town. 33 45 For (by this description
it is plain) read, by the description of Dioscorides it is plain. 34 43 For
(fire tree) read fir tree. 35 17 For (alisson) read, alysson, and so in all
other places. 35 25 For (gooshore) read gooshare. 35 47 For (conteyneth)
read, contain. 38 21 For (stere) read, store. 39 47 For (any) read, ammi.
Nota, that the figure that is set forth for ammi is not ami verum, but vulgar.
40 28 For (Brion) read Brionie. 40 30 31 After these words (let him take it
for the true Amomum) there wants. Siluius of Paris writes in his book of
simples that he had the true Amomum. 37 3 For (ganchheil) read, gauchheil. 37
19 For (there) read, then. 41 8 For (in te) read in thee. 43 12 For (muke)
read milk. 44 last For (scarfely) read scarsely. 45 7 For (tops) read
pappes. 46 14 For (cruftes) read, crustes. Nota, that the figure that is set
for Camomill, is not our English Camomill, but the herb which the Germans use
for Camomill. 47 10 For (Lecanthemon) read, Leucanthemon. 47 17 After (agrees)
read, well. 47 36 For (playing) read placing. 48 3 For (gessen) read, gesen.
50 9 For (flower) read flowers. 51 7 For (has) read, if the earthnut had. 52
3 For (men to eat) read, men do eat. 52 21 For (change) read, chance. 52 23
(Have the properties) put out have. 52 28 For (so is not) read, so is it not.
52 32 For (Melissophillon) read Melissophyllon, and so in all other places. 52
last For (citron of) read citron or of. 54 7 For (that it need not) read, that
I need not. 54 11 For Elioselmum) read, Elioselinum. 54 last (From henceforth
not take) put out not. 55 6 For (claustered) read, clustered. 55 25 For (in
the blood veins also) read in the blood veins and wind veins also. 57 14
For (osterlacey) read, osterlucey. 58 30 For (unto a stonecrop) read, unto
stonecrop. 58 46 For (neither do I) read, neither yet do I. 59 11 For (short
wintsobbing) read, short windsobbing 60 6 For (coudung) read, cow dung. 63 6
For (reward) read, rerewarde. 63 34 For (pity) read, pithie. 63 43 For
(Mochlonos) read, Monochlonos. 67 9 For (swalwurt) read, swalowurt. 68 4 For
(are remedy) read, are a remedy. 69 5 For (aspa altilis) read, asparagus
altilis or. 69 36 For (the without) read the ill humors without 70 4 For
(stolopendrium) read scolopendrium. 72 19 For (and a great) read, and as
great. 75 4 For (will I give places) I will give place. 76 10 For (Apiastrum we
call) read, Apiastrum which we call. 77 34 For (clud) read, cloud. 79 13 For
(a herb) read a cold herb. 80 7 For (reason nitrositie) read, reason of
their nitrositie. 80 8 Put out (of their) 80 12 For (nets) read, nittes. 82
11 For (in of ye diseses the) read, in ye diseases of the 84 7 For (loved)
read, loves. 84 10 For (officeres) read, officers. 84 12 For (set out) read
sethe out. 84 17 For (fisherers) read fishers. 85 12 After (shene) there
wanteh, as an vnsowe^ wede 86 9 For (Dill) read, dull. 89 6 For (they are to
abler) read, they are the abler. 89 7 For (row) read, raw. 90 3 After this
word (places) there wants, hard by the sea side. 90 5 Put out (hard by the
sea side.) 90 7 For (flumatilem) read fluuiatilem. 90 16 For (describes)
read described. 90 43 For 'smake, read smack. 91 32 For 'alet, read ciet. 92
17 For 'that it beside, read that beside. 93 1 For 'brionthalassion, read
bryonthalassion, and so in all other places. 93 20 After this word 'Mathiolus,
there wants. In describing of an other kind of Brier than Dioscorides
described. 95 10 For 'their resone, read their resones. 95 22 For 'simphiton,
read simphyton. 95 33 For 'comparison of shorter, read, comparison long, but
long in comparison of shorter. 96 9 For 'that is, read that it is. 97 6 For
'to bulbine, read to be bulbine. 97 13 For 'that holds sede, read that
holds ye sede. 97 17 For 'and close the it Bulbus, read and close them up.
And that Bulbus. 97 22 For 'gardin, read, gardin. 97 23 For 'louge, read long.
98 8 After 'way, there wants, answer. 98 23 For 'hath not the right, read
has the right. 98 27 For 'dumiu^, read bumu^. And so in other places. 98 46
For 'bounian, bounion. 99 4 For 'Plinie. And Mathiolus, read Pliny and
Mathiolus. 99 4 For 'and make of one kind of those herbs, and make of one
kind, those herbs. 99 7 For 'sharpe, read shape, 100 3 For 'vnto another.
Box, read unto another, box 101 20 For 'organ bush, read organ or bush. 101 15
For 'at those days, read at these days. 101 16 For 'calamite, read calamint.
102 6 After 'clinopodium, there wants, as far as I can gather by his figure
in the chapter of clinopodiu^. 102 18 After 'Dioscorides, there wa^teth, And
whether my Calamint agree or no with ye description of Dioscorides 102 35 For 'is
not like, read, is most like. 103 5 For 'with a sumthing, read with sumthing.
103 25 For 'trimble, read tumble. 103 39 For 'drewen, read drawn. 103 45 For
'draweth, read draw. 104 3 For 'brasing, read brusing. 104 19 For 'rucilines,
read rucilius. 104 21 For 'buthalmos, read buphthalmos. 104 21 for 'fructicosa,
read fruticosa. 105 3 for 'besye, read beside. 105 6 for 'hath, read have. 105
34 for 'lenes, read leaves. 107 12 for 'to bring forth, read to bring it forth.
107 15 for 'and use in the, read and use it in the. 109 3 for 'scourie, read
scoruie. 109 20 for 'stretched, read stretches. 111 30 for 'caruwi, read
carui. 112 21 for 'acute, read acuta. 112 36 for 'gallingall, read galinga. 113
10 for 'nother, read neither. 113 last for 'cassntas, read cassutas. 114 16 for
'now here, read no where. 114 23 for 'discharged, read discharges. 114 31 for
'some, read some. 117 4 After 'flix, read and the flix. 118 6 for 'ceutaurum,
read centaurium. 119 5 for 'cartaphilago is, read cartaphilago and is. 119 23
for 'against the common, read against the bloody flix and against the common.
120 4 for 'which has, read which have. 120 6 for 'dreshing, read dressing. 120
16 for 'in this, read in these. 121 13 for 'and substance, read and their
substance. 121 17 for 'supositorie, read suppositorie. 123 8 for 'Ile Porbeck,
read I Will of Porbeck. 123 18 for 'scabbes of farcies, read scabbes or farcies.
123 45 for 'spedeth, read spredeth. 124 24 for 'chamecyparissus it may, read
chameciparissus then it is. It may. 124 33 for 'sabine, read sauin, and so in all other places. 124 41 for 'Plinye, read Plinij. 127 1 for 'chamedris vulgar,
read chamcdris vulgaris 128 17 for 'description, read descriptiones. 128 24 for
'be of on herb, read be on herb. 128 29 for 'of the less, read of the leaf.
129 13 After th^se words 'description of Chameleuce; there wants all this
that follows. But after his complaint he falls into such a fault as lightly
I have seen no learned and honest man fall into, for both contrary to the
open truth and the meaning of the Author he makes Pliny to call Chameleucen
Chamepeucen, and so slideth from Chameleuce, and talks vainlye of the leaves
of Champeuce. His words are these. Sane quam paucis Chameleuces historiam
perstrinxit Dioscorides. Quare difficillime quidem discerni potest quaenam in
vniuerso plantarum genere Chameleuceu referat. Nam etsi. Plinius lib. 24. cap.
15. scribit Chameleucem, quam fortasse rectius Chamepeucen idem appellat,
folijs laricis (ego potius dixissem Piccae) similem esse, tamen neque propterea
facilis inuentu fuerit. I think there is no man that looks upon Pliny in
this place, but he will say that Mathiolus commiteth such a fault against
Pliny and the open truth, as no man has committed, whom he often times does
scornfullye mock and bitterlye check in his book. And it that he shuts up
his talk of Chameleuce withal, declares that he is not of so great knowledge
in herbs as some men do take him to be of, and that there are other borne
beyond the Mountains, if they had dwelled in such an herbrich country as long
as he has done, would have been as well learned in herbs as he is. Let these
words that follow here of Chameleuce be judge whether it be so as I say or
no. Plures equidem herbas me vidisse fateri possum quae Piceae folijs vire
scunt, sed nullam tamen vnquam reperi, quae quod obseruauerim florem roseum
edat. That is, I can confess that I have seen many herbs which are grene with
the leaves of the tree called Picea, but (that I have marked) I never saw any
with a rose flower. Dioscorides upon whom Mathiolus writes Commentaries,
writes that Cyclaminus, Alcea, and Althea have Rose leaves or like unto a
Rose, and that Nymphea the second, whereunto I compare the herb that I set out
to be likest of al other to Chameleuce in Dioscorides. (...) has a yellow
shining flower like unto a Rose. These have I showed not to put Mathiolus out
of all credit, who in many herbs has brought much light, but that some me^
that give to much to him might know that he erreth sometime as well as other,
and that though his learning be no^ little, other men, I mean Fuchsius and
Ruellius, and other whom he often times checketh, are as well learned, if not
better, as he. 130 17 for 'hores tuftes, read horye tuftes. 131 19 for 'that
the name, read that that name. 132 20 for 'semperbiuo which is called trist,
read semperuiuo which is called thrift. 136 18 for 'ciche or peese, read ciche
or ciche peese. 136 last After 'And broad, there wants. After the figure of
the seed. 137 8 for 'wasteth it upon it, read wastes it up. It 138 10 for
'and good, read and is good. 138 19 for 'they also, read they drive also. 138
33 for 'hurt the sores, read hurt sores. 140 21 for 'vnto Percelie and in all
points, read, unto Percelie when they come first forth, though they be
somewhat less afterward, and in all points. 141 4 for 'which a great, read
which are a great. 141 4 for 'shall perceive, read shall well perceive. 143 19
for 'as have, read as I have. 144 7 for 'confuteth him, read confuteth them.
144 14 for 'are at least, read or at the least. 145 12 for 'of other, read of
another. 147 28 for 'chamcedaphne, read chamedaphne. 149 last for
'clematitidis, read clematitis. 150 7 for 'hote, read hole. 151 14 for full of
branches, read full of little branches. 152 7 for 'hanhing, read hanging. 153
17 for 'describeth and grows, read describes, grows 156 4 for 'Colcus,
read Colchis. 156 17 for 'ischew, read eschew. 157 15 for 'be gone, read gone.
157 15 for 'or waspes, read of waspes. 160 18 for 'Germanie, read German. 162
5 for 'of union, read of an union. 162 26 for 'killeth horse, read kills as
me^ report horse 162 26 After 'oxen and swine, there wants. Pliny says that
the black hellebor kills horse, oxen and swine. 162 30 for 'absterciua, read
abstersiua. 162 33 for 'lazuti, read lazuli. 165 5 for 'both a less, read both
less. 166 8 for 'leaues grows, leaves which grows. 167 14 for 'vineger
rose oil, read vinegar and rose oil. 168 24 for 'croy, read troy. 168 40 for
'on very, read on berrie. 169 2 for 'twig or cornel tree, read twig of cornel
tree. 170 3 for 'an choomasi, read en choomasi. 170 10 for 'frenche, read
france. 172 16 for 'now, read not. 172 26 for 'bush, read bushie. 173 2 for
'farther of, read farther part of. 173 4 for 'proue it, read proved it. 173 5
for 'seth te, read sethe the. 173 8 for 'so, read to. 174 36 for 'milch, read
milk^. 174 36 for 'healeth, read healed. 175 3 for 'sikios, read sikyos. 175 4
for sikna, read sikua. 175 4 for 'siknos, read sickuos. 175 7 for 'sickna, and
ons sicknos, read sikua and onis siknos 175 13 for 'sikys, read sikua. 176 1
for 'cucumi turcici, read encumeres turcici. 176 3 for 'siknos and sikna, read
sikuos and sikua. 176 3 for 'siknan, read sikuan. Ite^ for 'siknon, sikuon. 176
4 for 'although he, read although in other places he 176 5 for 'siknon, read
sikuon. 176 12 for 'cutters, read gutters. 178 Nota, that the figure of Cucumis
anguinus, which is in the.178. leaf should be placed in the.180. leaf where
it is also entreated of. 179 15 for 'doe not soon, read do not so soon. 279
44 for 'that have fall, read that have fallen. 180 5 for 'sikys agrios, read
sikuos agrios. 180 25 for 'powren, read powered. 180 31 for 'toth with, read
teth with. 180 31 for the luce in the rote of five grains, read the juice of
the root in the weight of five grains. 180 31 for 'also in the bark, read
also the bark. 181 2 for 'set upon a cup a sieve, read, set them upon a cup,
or vessel in a sieve. 181 7 for 'in the vsie, read in the sieve. 181 14 for
'burned, read burns. 181 31 for 'streight, read strengthen. 181 34 for
'quinsei, read squinsey. 181 36 for 'of Cucumber, read of wild Cucumber. 184
2 for 'weightlye, read weight lie. 184 15 for 'distribute, read distributed.
184 33 for 'is made wholesome, read is made unwholesome. 185 21 for 'ricke, read
ridge. 185 21 for 'loines and hips bone, read loins and hips both. 188 17 for
'in a certain, read in it a certain. 188 31 for 'leanes, read leaves. 188 44
for 'endure, read endured. 188 45 for 'hobles, read houses. 189 13 After 'this
wede, read there is beside this. 189 14 for 'and other, read and another. 190
9 for 'sawes bread, read sowes bread. 190 15 for 'I have Cyclaminum, read I
have seen Cyclaminum. 191 33 for 'slissed read slised. 192 7 for 'a four
leaued, read a three leaued. 193 14 for 'to smell as, read to smell to as. 194
32 for 'other more, read nethermore. 195 8 for 'or round, read and round. 196
12 for 'cytiscus, read cytisus, and so in the.13. line. 196 Nota, cytisus is a
shrub or a high bushe, and not such a little herb as this figure resembles,
but yet thou may take this for a branch of that bushe, and so learn to know
the hole by. If thou look in the second part of the Herball, in the leaf.158.
thou shall find this figure set out for trifolio quinto. 197 35 for 'is a
warm, read is of a warm. 198 3 for 'of a Laurel tree, read or a Laurel
tree. 200 Nota, that these two figures are wrong set, and should be in the
third part. fol. 10. where Pimpinella is entreated of. 200 5 for 'to sundry,
read two sundry. 201 Nota, that the figure that is set for Dauci tertia
species is it not. 201 19 for 'speder, read spider. 202 16 for 'that is hot,
read that it is hot. 202 25 for 'are better, read are bitterer. 202 28 for
'of special, read of a special. 203 39 for 'killed, read kills. 203 26 for
'rating, read eating. 203 35 for 'and it be hanged, read and if it be hanged.
203 35 for 'fase, read false. 206 17 'for whiles the dragon is yet young, the
leaf of it is very like unto ^aron, read this sentence in the.21. line next
following after these words, the true dragon. 207 10 for cacoeth, read cacoethe.
207 13 for 'bitterer, read better. 207 21 After this word 'fern, there wants,
because it is an herb like a fern. 207 33 for 'on that is it that, read on is
that it. 208 last for 'Gotes sweet, read Gotes suet. 209 15 for 'nordenye, read
norden. 209 last After these words 'the hole properties, there wants, of
smallage, read the properties. 210 6 for 'Irica, read Erica, and so in other
places. 210 10 After these words a 'tree, there wants. Pliny in the.xj.
book of his natural history says, that the third kind of honey is wood
honey, and not to be commended, which is called heth honey. 211 6 for 'maketh
ripe, read make ripe. 212 14 for 'rocketh, read rocket. 213 3 for 'on them,
read and them. 213 18 for 'orobus. It, read orobus in no wise. It. 213 19 for
'so like, read something like. 213 36 for 'cicerculus, read cicercula. 214 3 for
'troubled, read troubles. 214 11 for 'suffered, read suffers. 214 17 for
'consumation, read consumption. 214 20 for 'yeck, read yuke. 215 36 for 'and
as, read and is. 215 48 for 'secaul in Arabianes, read secacull in the
Arabianes. 215 last for 'is this, read was this. 216 2 for 'see cachul, read
secacul. 216 16 for 'declaring, read declares. 217 4 for 'This broth of herb,
read The broth of this herb. 218 11 for 'sauing that is, read saving that it
is. 218 18 for 'and within a corn four cornered stick and deadly to beasts,
read and within it, a corn fast and sound, four cornered and deadly to
beasts. 218 26 for 'brid cages, read bird cages. 218 28 for 'euparoriu^ is
named, read eupatoriu^ named 219 7 for 'in a certain^, read in it a certain.
220 12 put out 'first. 220 13 put out 'after. 220 27 for 'set, read fet. 220 28
for 'faba, read fabe. 220 32 for 'oniskos, read oniskot. 220 40 for 'Iuniper
beries, read Juniper with beries. 221 18 for 'it is, read his is. 221 24 for
'franche, read france. 221 29 for 'single, read long. 221 30 for 'reason, read
resones. 221 45 for 'there where, read then where. 221 47 for 'wind and not
windy, read windy and not windy. 222 8 for 'are good, read is good. 222 11
for 'to make fabam, read to make our fabam. 222 15 for 'but by reason, read but
by the reason. 222 25 for 'leues, read leuis. 222 28 for 'plenty yt that fruit,
read plenty of that fruit 222 last After 'arietinum, there wants. Simeon
Sethi a later Grecian, whose manner is sometime to menge Latin names with Greek,
calls (...), whereby a man may gather that in his time Faba of the Latins,
and Kuamos of the Greeks were all one. 223 20 for 'eaten, read chowed. 223 26
for 'alom, read alone.

Of Wormwod and the kinds and places where they grow.
depiction of plant Wormwod Roman.
depiction of plant Absinthium Ponticum Romae natum.


ABsinthium is named in Greek (...) / in Duche Wermut or Alkin / or Elk / in
French Aluin or Absince / in Italian Assenzo / in Spanishe Asentios / in
English Wormwode. There are three kinds of Wormwode after the judgments of
Dioscorides / Galene / Pliny / Aetius / and Paulus Egineta. The first kind is
called Absinthium Ponticum / Dioscorides describes not absinthium Ponticum /
as an herb well known in his time even unto the common people. Which thing
has been the cause / that of late years it has been so little known of the
Phisicians both in Italy and in Germanye / and in many other countrees.
Howbeit a diligent and witty man might have gathered of Dioscorides / where he
compares in diverse places Absinthium Ponticum and other herbs together in
likeness of leaves and branches / that this common Wormwode which has been
long taken for Pontike Wormwode / was not the Pontike wormwode that
Dioscorides meant of. For in the description of our common Sothernwod / he
says that it has small branches like Wormwod / that is to say / Pontike
Wormwode: and in the description of Santonik Wormwod he writes that it is not
unlike unto Wormwode / meaning thereby as I said before / Pontike wormwode.
Then he that knows well by the description of Dioscorides / either Sothernwode
or Santonike wormwode / may thereby metely well know Pontike wormwode / or at
the lest that this common Wormwood is not the right Pontike wormwode / because
the branches are not like. But Galene perceyuinge in his time that the
ignorance of the right Wormwode Pontike began to come in / belyke because that
Dioscorides went over it vndescribed in the eleventh book De methodo medendi /
fulfilleth perfectly it that Dioscorides left out / in these words
followinge: When as there is in every Wormwod a duble pour / in Pontike
wormwode is no small binding propertye / in all other Wormwodes a very
vehement bitter quality. But as for astriction or bindinge / which a man can
perceive by taste / is either very hard to be found / or ellis none at all.
Wherefore Pontike Wormwode ought to be chosen for the inflammationes of the
liver. But it has much less flowers and leaves then other Wormwodes / and
the smelle of this is not only not unpleasant / but resembles a certain
spicines or pleasant savor / all other have a very foul smell. Galene also in
the sixth book of Simple medicines writes / that Pontike wormwod is not so hot
as the other kinds of Wormwode be / and that it is more bindinge then bitter.
By this description of Galene it is plain that the herb which is called in
the West part of England / Herb cypres / about London Wormwod Roman / in
Freseland / Cypreskruyt / or wild Rosmarine / of the Apothecaries of Anwerpe /
and of Mesue Absinthium Romanum / and of the Colones Grave cruyt / is the right
Absinthium Ponticum / and that the great bitter stinking common Wormwod / is
not the Wormwod that Galene takes / and teaches to be taken for Wormwode
Pontike. For the hole description agrees with the little Wormwode Roman / and
disagreeth with the common great leaued Wormwod / as every indifferent man
that has seen / tasted / smelled / and compared the herbs with the
description / can bear witness. But Matthiolus whom the Spanyarde Amatus
follows / holds not withstandinge these words of Galene above rehearsed /
that our common great Wormwod / is right Pontike wormwod / his words are
these: Some of later writers leaninge unto the authorite of Galene libro
secundo de methodo medendi / that Pontike wormwode differs much in kind
from it that grows in our country / even as Santonike and Sea wormwod do
differ. But I for my part do believe / that they differ in no otherwise / but
that Pontike by the reason of the clyme and complexion of the region where it
grows / has less flowers and leaves then ours has / and for the same
cause I believe that it excelles ours also both in bindinge and also in savor
or smellinge / which thing Galene in the sixte book of Simple medicines /
where as he entreats of Sothernwod / does sufficientlye declare / when he
says / there are two kinds of Sothernwod / the one which they call the male
/ and the other which they call the female / which thing is determined by
Dioscorides and Pamphilus / and infinite mo. But Wormwod is an other thing /
differinge from Sothernwode: and of Wormwode we must determine that there are
three kinds / of the which there is one that has his name of his kind or
countreye / as is called Pontike wormwode / the other Santonike / the third
Seriph or Sea Wormwode. Wherefore Dioscorides judged well / where as in the
kind of common Wormwode he gave the chief praise unto Pontike. The same
Matthiolus writes also these words. There are three kinds of Wormwode
entreated of here of Dioscorides / that is to wet / our common Wormwode / Sea
wormwod which they call Seriphium / and Santonike / whereof France next unto
the Alps has great plenty. Because Matthiolus is a learned man / and
therefore by the opinion of his learning even without good reason and
autorite may draw other after him in to his error: for the defense of the
truth / I will confute his error both with reason and sufficient authorite.
Where he says that Dioscorides entreats of three kinds of Wormwod / and
that he entreats first of / is our common Wormwod. In the beginning he
swarueth from the truth / for the first kind of Wormwode that Dioscorides
entreats of / is Pontike wormwode. But the common Wormwode is not Pontike
wormwode: the best Pontike Wormwode / as Dioscorides says / grows in Ponto
in Cappadocia / and in the hill called Taurus / and in the description of
Abrotoni / he makes Abrotonum the female like unto Sea Wormwode / and the male
like in smallnes of the littel branches unto Wormwode. Where as Wormwod
doutles signifies Pontike wormwode / for Wormwod rehearsed alone without any
addicion / is ever taken for Pontike Wormwod / because it is more excellent /
then all other Wormwodes be. But the common Wormwod grows not in mountains
or wild hills / but only about tounes / diches / high ways / and in
tilled and labored ground / nether is it like unto our common Sothernwod /
which is the male in Dioscorides / for it has stalks / leaves and branches
/ ten times greater then Abrotonum the male has / as every man may se / that
will compare the one with the other / Therefore this common great Wormwode
that grows only about tounes / diches / and in tilled grounds with a
leaf and branches / ten times greater then Sothernwod / can not be Absinthium
Ponticum of Dioscorides. It is not therefore truly says of Matthiolus / that
the first kind of Wormwod that Dioscorides entreats of / is the common
Wormwode that grows commonly in Italye / which is the common Wormwode both
of Germanye and of Fraunche / of England / and of Scotland. Because
Dioscorides describes not Pontike wormwode / as an herb in his time well
enough known / even unto the common sort. If any other Autentike author
describes Pontike wormwod at large / we ought to believe him / and to take that
for Pontike wormwode / which disagreeth with his description. But where as
Dioscorides left Pontike wormwode vndescribed / the noble Phisician Galene /
who practiced Physic / not only in Grecia / but also in Rome / described
Absinthium Ponticum very diligently / wherefore we must take that only for
Pontike wormwode / that agrees not with his description. But this common
Wormwode agrees not with the description of Galene of Pontike wormwode /
therefore this common Wormwod is not the Pontike wormwode. Galene in the
description of Pontike wormwode says that in Pontike wormwode is no small
bindinge quality. In all other Wormwoddes the bitter qualite is most
exceadinge and greatest. Pontike wormwode has a leaf and a flower much less
then the other have / the smell also of the same is not only not unpleasant /
but also resembling in smell a certain spice. But all the other have a
stinkinge or foul smell. These are Galenes words: But the common great
wormwod is bytterer then all other Wormwoddes / it has a greater leaf and
flower / then any other / and it stinketh also more then any other Wormwod /
therefore of all other it is farthest from Pontike wormwod. I know three sorts
of Wormwode beside the common / the right Sea wormwode / the small Wormwode
that grows in the old walls and ruins of Rome / and the third sort /
that grows in Gardines in England / and in the fields about Worms and
Spyer in Germanye. All these three sorts have less leaves and flowers / and a
better smell then the common Wormwod has. Therefore if Matthiolus had regarded
as he ought to have done the authorite of Galene / he should have taken any
of these three / or at the lest two of them rather for Pontike wormwod / then
the common wormwode / namely when as he has seen these two sorts of Wormwod /
the one in Rome and the other either in Italy or in Germany / or at the lest
described in the later writers of the Germans / under ye name of Abrotoni
feminee / and especially in Fuchsio and in Hieronymo Trago / where he says
that the clyme or nature of ye countreye makes such diversity and difference
between the wormwod Pontik and the Wormwod of Italy / which he can no other
way prove / but by only gessinge: Then when there is such diversity and
difference of ye clyme and of the nature of ye country between Rome and
Freseland / and ye farthest part of England / then should there be some
notable diversity between ye common wormwod of England and Freseland / and the
common Wormwod of Italy. But there is no difference at all between them / nether
in qualite nor quantite that a man may perceive / ye and if there were any such
notable difference / how chaunseth it that ye Wormwod growinge in Germany both
in the fields and also in gardins / and the Wormwode yt grows in Rome beside
the temple of Peace / and in diverse other places of the old walls and ruins
of the city / are nothing at all / or at the lest but a littel differinge from
the quantite and qualite of Pontike wormwode. And yet the common Wormwod if it
were wormwod Pontike / or a kind of it / should differ so far both in
quantite and also in diverse qualities from the right and natural Pontike
wormwod / Surely even if he could prove yt it were a kind of Pontike wormwod
(which thing he shall never be able to do) it must needs follow that it were
the worst of all ye three kinds yt are in Italye. Then let wise men judge how
rightly Matthiolus judges in this matter / when he refusing either / or if I
should say ye best / not knowinge these two better sorts / aloweth this evil
favored and stinkinge common Wormwode / namelye when as Galene expressedly
condemns this great stinkinge and bitter kind of Wormwod / and aloweth it
with the smaler leaves / and better and pleasanter smell. Matthiolus as though
he had proved his purpos well with his gloss of the diversity of the clymes and
natures of the grounds / says also these words. Galene says in the sixth
book of simple medecines: Sothernwod is a fare other thing from Wormwod / and
of wormwod are three kinds / whereof they call one by the same kind or country
name / where it grows. Whereof the Pontik is the best. The second they call
Seriphium / and the third Santonicum / wherefore me think that Dioscorides
judged well when in the kinds of common Wormwod / he commended Pontike above
the rest. This is the saying of Matthiolus / If that Dioscorides said well /
because Galene said the same after him as though Dioscorides making three
kinds of Wormwod / and praising most Pontik wormwod / had not done well / if
Galene had not allowed it that Dioscorides had written before. If that the
autorite of Galene be so great with Matthiolus / why does he allow amongst the
kinds of Wormwod / for Pontike wormwod that kind that Galene of all other
most disprayseth and commands to excheue / and takes away from the kinds
of Po^tike wormwode / in these words / All other Wormwods / saving Pontik
wormwod have a foul smell and a greater leaf and flower then Pontike has:
wherefore they ought to be fled / and Pontike to be received. But I wot why
he prayseth Dioscorides / that is because he seems to give him a mayor or sure
ground to make an argument that this common Wormwode must needs be Pontike or a
kind of Pontike Wormwod / and he seems to reason privily thus: Both
Dioscorides and Galene make no more kinds of Wormwod but three: but this great
kind of common Wormwode is nether Sea wormwod nor Santonick wormwod. Therefore
it follows that it is Pontick wormwod / or a kind of it. First unto this
argument I answer / that it is no good argument. Dioscorides makes only three
kinds of Wormwod / ergo there are only three kinds of Wormwood / and no more.
For as Dioscorides does severally describe diverse kinds of herbs / that other
have not touched: so diverse autentike and noble writters do describe diverse
kinds of herbs / whereof he has made no mention at all. Theophrastus who
wrote long before Dioscorides / describes a kind Bruthalassij / in likeness
and qualite and quantite / much differing from it that Dioscorides describes
/ where as Dioscorides makes no mention. But of one kind of Sorbus / and yet
describes it not: Pliny that wrote much of him / makes mention of four
diverse kinds / and describes them / where Dioscorides makes but one kind
of Betoni. Paulus Egineta that came after him a long time / makes two kinds
/ whereof the one is nothing at all like the other / Where Dioscorides makes
but one kind of Ash / Theophrastus makes two diverse and several kinds.
Auerrois makes mention of a kind of Wormwode / which he calls Absinthiolum
/ whereof there is no mention in Dioscorides / And Auicenna makes five kinds
of Wormwode / where as Dioscorides and Galene make but three kinds / wherefore
it follows not / because Dioscorides and Galene make but three kinds of
Wormwode / ergo there are but three kinds of Wormwode. Yea if there were but
only three kinds of Wormwod / yet it should not follow straight / that the
common Wormwod should be under the kind of Pontike Wormwod: Nay / it should
follow that it should be a kind of See wormwod / or Santonik Wormwod rather
then Pontike Wormwod or any kind of it / because Galene makes all kinds of
Wormwode greater leued and floured / and more stinkinge then Pontike Wormwode.
Therefore when as this great common Wormwod is greater and more stinkinge then
any other Wormwode is / it must needs be farrest away from the kind of
Pontike Wormwode / and so rather a kind of Sea Wormwod or Santonike Wormwode /
and especially of Santonike / because Santonia is nerer Italye / Germanye /
and England / then Pontus is / in which countres by the more likeness of the
clymes and nerenes of the countres / it is more likely that there should be
more plentye of Santonike Wormwod then Pontike. Gerhardus de VVijck, twelve
years ago / when as he was in Colon at that time the Emperors Secretary /
taught me first the right Pontike Wormwode. This man was well learned in
Greek / Latin / and Hebrew / and was so earnest a sercher of simpels when he
was in Italy / that he went into the mount Appennine with many other / to
find out simplesse / whereof he only with two or three other escaped death /
for all the other dyed either in there yorneye / or shortly after that they
came home. This same man told me that after his laborsum and perilous journey
/ he fell into a dropsy / and that by vsinge of Romish or Pontike Wormwod /
which he found in Italye / he was delivered from his dropsye. But it was not
the common Wormwode / but Absinthium Romanum that the Apothecaries of Anwerpe
use / and is called Grave cruyt. This noble clerk afterward was sent by
Charles the fyft / Embassator to the great Turk / and in his iorneye he came
through Pontus / and brought home with him true Rapontike / whereof many
have douted many a day / The same clerk after he came home from Pontus /
seeing a friend of his writing against them that held that Grave cruyt of the
colors / should be Absinthium Ponticum / reproved him and made him in the
second settinge forth of his book / call back his former opinion / and write
that Absinthium Romanum Antuerpiensium and Coloniensium / was the true Pontik
and Romish Wormwod. Then if it be true that Plautus says / Pluris est
oculatus testis vnus, quam auriti december: men ought rather to believe Gerardus in
this matter then Matthiolus. A certain Spanyard / sometime called Ioannes
Rodericus / and afterward I can not tell by what change named Amatus Lusitatus
/ a very ape unto Matthiolus / but much behind him in learning / who seems
to have taken a great part of his book out of the Italian Commentaries of
Matthiolus / writteth thus of Wormwod Pontike. The common Wormwode is all one
with Pontike and Romish Wormwode / for they differ in nothing but in the
natural place of their growinge / whereby it chaunsed that Galene in his
books De methodo medendi / might seem to make them sometime diverse herbs /
when as they are but all one herb / and caet.

If Amatus had been Pythagoras / and we his scollares / we would have been
content with his only saying / that the common Wormwod was Pontike Wormwode /
without any requiringe of further authorite or reasons to prove this saying
wythall. But seeing that he is nether Pythagoras / nor we his scollares / we
require both authorite and reason to prove that the common Wormwod is Wormwode
Pontike / and because we find nether of both fit to his saying / we do not
receive this saying for Apollones answer: Nay / because it is contrary
both unto Dioscorides and Galene / we take his judgment to be untrue and in
no wise to be followed. He says that the common Wormwode agrees in all
things with Pontike Wormwode / sauinge only in the natural place of
growinge. But this saying is quite against the saying of Galene in vndecimo
libro methodi medendi: where he says that in all other Wormwodes / sauinge in
Pontike / the bitter quality excedeth all other qualities / and they have a
foul smell or stinkinge: Pontike Wormwode has a less leaf and flower / and
a better smell then the other have. Therefore Pontike Wormwod differs from
Sea Wormwod in greatness and in stinkinge smell: But this great Wormwode is both
greater and more stinkinge / and also less bindinge then the Sea Wormwode is /
then when as Sea Wormwode is greater / less bindinge / and more stinkinge then
Pontike Wormwod / and the common Wormwode excedeth the Sea Wormwode in all
these. It must needs follow that Pontike Wormwode differs from the common
Wormwod / not only in the natural place of growinge / but also in bigness /
smellinge / and bindinge / and the place above rehearsed / proves that it is
not true / that he said that Pontike Wormwode is tauler or higher then the
other common Wormwodes be / when as Galen teaches the open contrary. It is a
marueyl to se how many ennemies always the truth has in all kinds of
learning / after that it has been long hyde / and begins to spring up
again / and by a few is set forth to be received frelye of all men. Some of
the Apothecaries of Rome / belyke warned and taught by some learned Phisician
there / began to leave the common Wormwod that grows about diches and high
ways with the broad leaf and the stinkinge smell and bitter taste / and to
use in the stead of that Wormwode that grows above old walls of Rome. These
Apothecaries received the truth and followed it as they were taught.

But two Obseruante freres could not abide the truth / which of late by name
wrote against the Apothecaries of Rome / for holdinge with the truth. The
freres will not above the small leaued Wormwod / for Pontike Wormwode / because
it grows within the walls of the city / and allow the euel favored
stinkinge Wormwode that grows out of the city / because it grows in a
freer air then the other does. In deed if that the broad leaued Wormwode were
Pontike Wormwod / as it is not / and some of it grew within the cite / and
some abroad in the fields. It that grew abroad were the better. But the
freres grant that the small Wormwod that grows in the cite / is of a far
other kind then the common Wormwode is of. Then what comparison can be made
between the herbs of two diverse kinds / except a man will condemn the one
kind / and set out and allow the other kind. The Wormwode that grows in
Rome / is nether Sea Wormwod nor Santonik wormwod / and the description of
Pontik Wormwod agrees with the form and fassio^ / qualities and virtues of
the Wormwode that grows in Rome / therefore it is Pontike wormwode. Look upon
Galene who so list in the eleventh book De methodo medendi, and there he shall
find that the description of Pontike wormwode agrees with the Wormwode of
Rome / and that in many things disagreeth with the common Worwod / which the
freres take for Pontike wormwode. Let then wise men judge whether the right
Pontike wormwod growing within the walls of the cities / ought to be used for
Wormwod Pontike / or Roman Wormwod / or the evil favored stinkinge kind that
grows a littel out of the cite / about diches and beside corn feldes /
ought rather to be used according unto the learning of Galene. The freres
bring diverse arguments / to prove that the Wormwod growing in Rome / is no
good Wormwod: one is because by plantinge and chaunginge of grounds / it will
not change his qualite / an other is set out falsely (as far as I can se) or
else many men lie of Mesue / who (as they say) describes Wormwod Roman to
have brother leaves / smooth and plain. What manner of reason is this Wormwod
growinge in Rome / will not change nether qualite nor quantite / when he is
transplanted into a fatter ground / ergo it is naught? These freres if they
would have taken the pains to have read Theophrastus De plantarum causis, lib.
1. cap. 1. diligently / they might have found there that some herbs are worse
for transplantinge / and for bringing into a fatter and moyster ground. And
whether the right Wormwod be any of those herbs or no / these words of
Theophrastus here after following / can bear witness: Ager agitatus co^fectusque
and plus pabuli praestat, and sapores immutat: ergo ratione optima, cultus
quibusdam commode adhiberi quibusdam minime possit: ceu illis quae sicca,
acria, amara, atque ad summum venenosa sunt, vsumque medicaminis praestant.
Haec enim sublatis viribus, hebetantur atque effeminantur, vt alia fructum
omnino far ne queant, alia humidiorem, deterioremque pariant, quae etiam
aquosa redduntur, ceu absinthium and fell terrae. As for Mesue in his
description of Wormwod Roman / whether he makes Wormwod Roman with broad
leaves or no / I report me both unto the common translacion / which has /
melius est quod nascitur in terris liberis, remotum ab odore maris, folia
habens alba, leuia, and plana: and also unto the translacion of Siluius / which
has these words: Romanu^ eligimus folijs albis, leuibus and planis odore
iucu^do. Here may a man se that the freres allege Mesue otherwise then the
textes have / and that they deserve no credit in there untrue allegacion. Ye
and though Mesue had said that Absinthium Romanum which is the right Ponticum
/ had greater leaves. Yet we should rather believe Galene then Mesue / which
says that Absinthium Ponticum of all other has ye smallest leefe. Here are
the apotecaries to be warned / that they call not with the freres contrary unto
Dioscorides / Galene / Pliny / Aetius / and Paulus / Absinthium Seriphium /
Absinthium Ponticum. They dream belike that Absinthium Marinum / may be
called also Ponticu^ / because Pontus is sometime taken for the sea. But that is
not the use of learned Phisicians to name it so / Wherefore we must call every
herb by the name that the ancient Authors have given it. Where as these
freres have showed in there stille great vnlearnednes in the Latin tongue / and
in the knowledge of old Authors. So they declare them selves to be also
sklenderly seen in Histories / which say that the old Authors / meaning of
Mesue with other as it does appear. Where in the time of the triumphant Rome /
when there was no ruins / wherein Wormwod might grow / but that all the city
was replenished with fair buyldinges / and that therefore they could not
speak of Wormwod Roman growinge in Rome / because there was no place therefore
it in their times. As for the old authors in deed / as they were in the time
of the triumphant Rome / so they never speak one word of Wormwode Roman. But
whether Mesue who flourished about four hundredth years ago and fyftye / might
have seen ruins in Rome or no / I report unto Blondus and other / which have
written of the wastinge and inburstinge / which Rome has at diverse times
from the year of our Lord four hundredth and seven / unto the time that
Mesue flourished. In this must I also warn the Students of Phisike / that
they believe not the freres / which say that Dioscorides called Absinthium
Ponticum / Absinthium rusticum / for that is not in the old Greek textes of
Dioscorides / but has been falselye set to / by some tryflinge and foulish
cockow. Let them also not believe them / where as they say vnlearnedlye / that
Santonicum is a common name for all the kinds of Wormwode / and that by the
authorite of Dioscorides and Plinye / but falsely alleged. For it was never
seen that Santonicum should be taken either for Sea wormwode or Pontike
wormwode. The small leaued Wormwod / called of all the best learned Phisicians
and Apothecaries / Absinthium Romanum / grows in Germanye beside Worms / a
littel from a thorp called Hase loche / and about Spyre beside a place /
called the Holy grave. In England and in Freseland / and in low Ducheland it
grows in gardens only / so far as I can yet learn. The other kind of
Pontike wormwod grows as it is said before / about the old walls of
fallen buyldinges of Rome. A bushe or two of this kind grows in Anwerpe in
Peter Condenberges garden / where as are many other strange and holsom herbs
/ hard to be found in any other place of Germanye beside. This kind has
greater / longer / whyter / and bitterer leaves then the fore said Wormwode of
Germanye has / and also a stronger smell.

Of Sea Wormwode.
THE second kind of Wormwode is called in Greek (...) / and in Latin
Absinthium marinum, or Seriphium, or as I find in some books Seriphum. Howbeit
seeing that Seriphus is an Yland / where as frogs are always dum / where
upon rises the Proverb / Vana Seriphia. It appears that the herb should
rather be called Seriphium Absinthium / then Seriphum. But let every man call
it as he list / either with the name of Seriphium or Seriphum / so that he know
the right herb and the virtue of the same.

depiction of plant Absinthium marinum. Sea Wormwod.


The description of Sea Wormwode.
SEA Wormwode (says Dioscorides) (...) / that is / as Ruellius translateth it
/ Wormwod Seriph is a small herb / but the Greek sounds rather yt it is an
herb with a small fruit / as the old Translator turns in these words /
Herba est tenui fructu, Some herbs that are small / have bigger fruit then
greater herbs have. Therefore it is not all one thing to be a small herb /
and to have a small fruit. The old translator makes the frut only small /
but the new translator makes the leaves / the stalks / and the fruit / and
the hole herb small. But beside it that the Greek word makes for this
purpose / it were not need twice in one description to make the hole herb
small / which thing Dioscorides should have done if he had meant by Leptokarphos
/ that the hole herb should be small / for a littel after in comparinge Sea
wormwode unto the small Sothernwod / he makes the hole herb small. It is full
of little seeds / and it is somthinge bitter and evil for the stomach. It has
a grievous smell / and a certain bindinge / and is hot withal. Plinius libro
vigesimo septimo, capite septimo / writes thus of Sea wormwode. There is also
a Sea wormwode / which some call Seriphium. It is narrower and less then the
former / and not so bitter and an ennemy to the stomach. And in the two and
thyrtiest book / and nynth chapter he describes it thus. There grows in the
Sea a Wormwod / which some call Seriphum / and it is smaller then is the Land
wormwode. This description of Sea wormwode that Plinye has made here / as
far as I can se / is contrary unto the mind and to the open words of
Galene. Galene as I have diverse times alleged before / says in the places
above rehearsed / that Pontike Wormwode has a less leaf and flower / then
other Wormwodes have / and he says that Pontike wormwode is not so hot as
other Wormwodes / and that it is more bindinge then bitter. Then when as Plinye
makes Sea wormwode narrower and less then Pontike Wormwod / and not so bitter
as it is / either must Plinye have erred / or ellis Galene. But it is more like
/ that Plinye being occupied with such an office / that he could not have
just leisure to seek and compare the herb his self / and therefore either
wrote by heresye / or as he red it written in some also only erred writer /
that learned his opinion of other / did err: then Galen who was a Phisician by
his office / and a diligent seker out of herbs / as his saylinge unto diverse
Ylandes to seek and find out the right Simple / in diverse places of his books
bear witness. Wherefore I geuinge credit rather unto Galene then to Plinye /
and to mine own experience / then unto Plinies here say / do hold that Sea
wormwod has a greater leaf and flower then Pontike Wormwode has.

I have seen Sea wormwode in Northumberlande by holy Ylande / in Freseland
beside Norden / in Brabant beside Barrowe. But in no place so great leaued / as
Matthiolus sets out in his figure. I reken that he sets out in the
stead of Sea wormwode / the right Mugwurt which I have seen in Italy by the
sea side / as in the intreatinge of Mugwurt / I intend God willinge to declare.

If that be the right Wormwode that he sets fourth in his figure / then is
it not the right Abrotonum femina / which he sets out for it. For the
leaves of his Sea Wormwod are not like unto the leaves of his Abrotoni foeminae
/ as they ought to be / for they are not tenniter in cisa that is with small
cuttinges or indentinges / as the leaves Abrotoni foeminae be / but are set
fourth long / like unto the leaves of Lauander / or Rosmarye / and not like
unto any other kind of Wormwod / nether about the rotes / nether about the
mids.

In deed such leaves in the top are found in diverse kinds of Wormwode. How
be it I never saw Sea Wormwod grow with such leaves both in the top and in
the mids about the root also. Wherefore a man can not know the right Sea
wormwode by his figure / depiction of plant Common Wormwod.
he grants that when it comes first forth / that the leaves are like
Wormwod / and that afterward they are changed into long leaves. If he had
therefore set but one little bushe by the rotes with iagged leaves like other
Wormwode / it had been easyer for them that come not / nether can come to the
Sea side / to have learned the shape of the true Sea wormwod. For the better
knowledge both of Wormwod Pontike / and also of Wormwod of the sea / before I
leave of writing of the marks / tokennes / and properties that belong unto
Wormwod of the Sea / I will rehearse it that Galene writes in ye viij. book of
his Simples / of Seriph or Sea Wormwod. Seriph Wormwod (says he) is like unto
Wormwod both in shape or form / and also in taste / howbeit it differs not in
taste / for it is not so binding / and is hoter / and tastes of a certain
bitterness with a saltishe taste / and is more hurtful unto the stomach / and
both taken inward and also laid without / kills worms more then Wormwod
does. And a man must judge that it is hot far in the second degree / and
dry in the third degree. As for Santonike Wormwode I can not well tell what
manner of herb it is / for I am not sure that ever I saw it in all my life. For
the herb that I ones supposed to be Santonik Wormwod / I think it was Wormwod
Roman which I knew not at that time. If I should be suffered to guess as many
other do / if the leaves were not so great and evil smellinge / I would reken
that this great kind of Wormwode were either Santonike wormwode or bastard kind
of it. I marvel that of so many learned French Phisicians / as have written of
late years / that none has taken pain to find us out in there country /
when as they have found out so many growyng in other strange countrees / far
from France.

The degrees of the kinds of Wormwod.
POntike Wormwod is hot in the first degree / and dry in the third after
Galene / Aetius and Paulus Egineta / but after Mesue it is dry but in the
second degree / but more credence is to be given unto Galene then to Mesue: Sea
wormwod is as Egineta writes / hot in the first degree / and dry in the
first. French wormwode is weaker then Sea wormwod in breaking of humors / in
hete and in drynes. The juice of the Pontike wormwode is rekened of all
substantial authors more hot a good deal then the leaves are.

The properties of Wormwod.
WOrmwod has astringent or binding together / bitter and bitinge qualitees /
heatinge and scouringe away / strengthing and driyng. Therefore it drives
forth by the stool and the urine also choleric and gallishe humores out of
the stomach. But it auoideth most chiefly the gale or choler / that is in the
vrines. Thus writes Galene: Wormwode makes one piss well / dronken with
Siler mountain and French spicknard. It is good for the wind and pain of the
stomach and the bellye. It drives away lothsummes. That broth that it is
sodden or steped in / dronken every day about five ounces / heals the
Iaundes or Guelsought. It provoke woman's flowers / either taken in / or laid
to without with honye / it remedieth the strangling that comes of eating of
Todestoles / if it be dronken with vinegre. It is good against the poison of
Ixia with wine / also against Homloke / and the bytinge of a shrew / and the
Sea dragon. The squinancye may be healed with this herb / if it be anointed
with it / and honye / and Salt peter natural put together. And so with water /
it heals the wateringe of sores in the corner of the eyes. It is good for the
brusinges and darkness of the eyes with honye. And so it is for the ears / if
matter run out of them: The broth of Wormwode with his vapor that rises up
from it / and smoketh up / heals the pain of the teth and the ears. The
broth with maluasye is good to anoynte the akinge eyes with all. With the
Cyprine ointment it is good for the long disease of the stomach / with figs /
vinegre / and darnel mele / it is good for the dropsye and the sickness of the
milte.

Out of Plinye.
WOrmwode helps digestion with rue peper and salt / it takes away rawenes
of the stomach / old men of old time gave it to purge with a pint and a
half of old sea water / six drammes of sede / three of salt with two ounces of
honey / and two drammes. In the Iaundes it is dronken with raw Persely or Venus
heir. It is good for the clerenes of the sight / it heyleth fresh wounds
before there come any water in them. It heals also the iche or ynke. It is
not good for to be taken in a agewe / laid among clothes / it drives the
mothes away. The smoke of it / drives away gnates or mydges. If the ink be
tempered with the juice / it makes the mise they will not eat the paper that is
written with that ink. The ashes of it with rose ointment / makes black heir.

The quantite out of Mesue.
YE may take of the broth or of the stepinge of Wormwod from five ounces to
eight / of the juice / from three drammes to four of the powder / from two
drammes to three / and so will it make a purgation / but because it works but
wekely / by it self ye may take it with whay / with rasines / the stones
taken out / or with roses / or fumitory. Sea wormwode is not to be used for the
right Wormwode / for it is noisome unto the stomach as Dioscorides and Galene
do testifye. Nether is the common wormwode to be taken for the right / if it
may be had.

Of Sothernwod and of Lanander cotton.
ABrotonum is of two kinds / the female busheth up after the likeness of a tree
and is white about the branches / and has leaves like unto Sea wormwode with
small iagges or indentinges in them with berries / busshing in the top /
shining like gold / and full of flowers. It that comes fu^^^ in Summer /
smells well with a certain vnpleasantnes and a bitter taste. It is plain
that this kind is but of Sicilia.

This description of Dioscorides of Abrotoni femine / agrees well in all things
with Lanander cotton / sauinge that the leaves seem not to be like unto the
leaves of Sea wormwod / nether when they are first commed up / nether afterward
when the herb is full grown / even as the figure of Matthiolus and his
saying / that when they come first forth / they are like Wormwod / do
sufficiently bear witness. Wherefore this seems much to hinder / yt Lanander
cotton should be Abrotonum femina. Howbeit I trust I shall take that dout
away / for when I walked by the Sea side in East Freseland / in the spring of
the year / I found in diverse places of the Sea bank Sea wormwod / as yet
vncummed forth / but only beginning to spruyt out / depiction of plant so like
Lanander cotton that a man would have thought that yet had been Lanander cotton
in deed. Wherefore I think yt Dioscorides compared Abrotonum femina^ with Sea
wormwod / which as yet he had seen not perfitly shot out / which afterward then
in deed is like unto Pontike wormwod / when it is fully cummed forth / as
experience bears witness.

The second kind of Abrotoni is called the male / it is full of twigges graci
libus ramulis vti Absinthium / as Ruellius turns this Greek out of
Dioscorides / (...) / with small branchlinges or little branchlinges as wormwod
/ that is Wormwod Pontike has. But the Greek sounds rather with small fruit or
seeds as wormwod has. Matthiolus redeth with Ruellius / gracilibus ramulis /
which reding is against his opinion in Po^tike wormwod. For if Sothernwod ye
male have little thin branches as Po^tike wormwod has / and the great common
wormwod has great and big branches / the big common wormwod is not like unto
Sothernwode ye male / wherefore ye common wormwod can not be Absinthiu^
ponticu^ / or else our Sothernwod can not be Abrotonum mas in Dioscorides. And
if it be said yt ye nature of Italy makes ye leaves in ye common wormwod so
great / it must be asked again / why does not ye nature of ye ground of Italy
also change ye leaves / branches and seeds of Abrotoni maris / as it does
Absinthij pontici leaves and branches? Well howsoever Matthiolus err in
Absinthio po^tico / he judges well with al other learned me^ / yt ye herb which
is called in English Sothernwod / in duch Stabwurtz / in French Auroune / is ye
right Abrotonum mas in Dioscoride.

The Virtues.
THe sede of Sothernwod / raw / broken / and made hot in water / and so
dronken / is good for the short winded / for the parts that are drawn
together / or shronken / and are bursten / for the Sciatica / for the stopping
of the water / and likewise of weomennes flowers. The same dronken with wine /
is a good preservative against poison. It is good for them that shake and
shudder for cold / sodden in oil / and laid to upon the body. This herb
both strowen in the bed / and also with the smoke that comes from it /
drives Serpens away. It is good to be dronken in wine against the bitinges of
Serpents / and especially of the field spider / and of a Scorpione. It is
good for the inflammation of the eye laid to with a sodden quince or with
bread. The same broken with barley mele and sodden / drives away swellings on
the flesh. It kills worms / for it is bitter. Sothernwod burned / and put
in the oil of palma Christi or radice / makes a berde that grows slowlye /
come out a pace / if it be anointed with it. Sothernwod draws out it that
sticks fast in a man's body: some hold that this herb laid but under a
man's bolster / provoke men to the multiplyinge of there kind / and yt it
is good against cherming and wichinge of men-which by cherminge are not able to
exercise the work of generation.

Of Acanthium.
depiction of plant

DIoscorides describes Acanthium thus / Acanthiu^ is like unto the whit
thistel with pricky leaves about the edges / which are covered with an horry
thing like a spiders web / some take that down and spinne it / and make
cloth of it / as they do of cotton. The herb which I take and judge to be
Acanthium / is a kind of thistell / indented after the fashion of Branke vrsine
/ but the gappes are not so far a sunder / the leaf broken / has in it a
long thing like cotton or fine done / the head is like the head of tasell /
but much less. It has blewe flowers / the hole herb is clammy / and has a
strong savor / I never saw it grow but in gardines in England and in Italye
/ some say that the Herbaries name it Carduum Asinium / but as yet I could
never learn any English name of it / I for a shift therefore am compelled to
name it Ote thistell or Cotton thistell / because the seeds of the herb are
like Otes / and the leaves broken resemble cotton. Lucas Gymis my master in
Bononye the reader / thereof Dioscorides showed and taught me first this that
Matthiolus never saw it in Italye.

The virtues of the Thistell.
I Find no other propertye that Dioscorides says / that this herb has /
sauinge that it is good for them that have their neck bowynge backwarde by
violence of a crampy disease / but not of nature / I have seen it grow in
London in diverse gardines.

Of Branke Vrsine.
ACanthus is called of the Barbarus writers / Branca Vrsina, in English Branke
Vrsine / in Duche Beernklaw. This herb grow plenteouslye in my Lords gardine
at Sion. I never saw it grow wild as yet. Some have abused Bearfote / which
is Consiligo for this herb / but the description of Dioscorides condemns
them. True Branke Vrsine has leaves like a certain kind of Cole / whose
leaves are indented / but the leaves are blacker / grene / and much longer
then Cole leaves are / and also narrower and more deep cut in / toward the
senowe that goes through the mid leaf. The hole herb is very slymy / and
full of slippery juice. They that will have any more of the description of
Branke Vrsine / let them read the description of Dioscorides de Acantho /
Which I do now pass over / because I know that the herb is so perfitelye
known in all countrees.

depiction of plant Acanthus, Branke Vrsine.


The Virtues.
BRanke Vrsines rote is good for members out of yoint^ and for burninge / if
it be laid upon the diseased places. The same dronken / provoke urine / but
it stops the belie / it is wonderful good for burstinges and places drawn
together / and for them that have the Ptysike or consumption. Plinye says
also that this herb is good for the gout / warmed and laid to the place /
which is vexed with it.

Of Aconitum.
depiction of plant Aconitum, Pardalianches Fuchsij Oneberrye.
depiction of plant Aconitum lycoctonum, Blewe Wolfsbayne.


AConitum is of two sorts in Dioscorides / the first is called Pardalia^ches
or Teliphonium / or Theriophonium / This kind has leaves like Cucummers or
Sowes bread / three or four together / but less and somthinge rougher / the
stalk is a hand bread higher / the rote resembles a Scorpions tail / and
shines like Alabaster. Fuchsius with diverse other learned men have thought
that the herb which the Duche men call Einbere / is Aconitum Padalianches /
but I think it is not so / for the herb has ever four leaves lik^ Plantain
/ without any roughnes / and never has three leaves / moreover I have heard of
credible persons / yt children in some places eat ye black berry yt grows in
the top of this herb without any ieopardy which they could not do. If this
herb were Pardalianches / which may well be called in English Libardes
bayne. The herb yt has been taken for Libardes bayne grows plenteously
beside Morpeth in Northumberla^d in a wod called ^ottingwod / and ye same herb
is called of ye Barbarus writers Herba paris / and they say yt it is so far
from poison / yt it is a good and sufferene remedy against diverse kinds of
poison. I never saw growing ye right Aconitu^ / b^t only painted in Matthiolo
ye Italian / whose figure Gesnerus suspecteth to be no natural but a counterfit
figure / and ye same says / yt the herb which is called Tora / is ye right
Aconitum primum Dioscorides. But because I have not seen three or four leaves
in this herb / like unto the leaves of Cucumber or to Pani porcino / and the
rote like unto a Scorpions tale / I can not judge whether his tora be Aconitum
primum Dioscorides or no. In the mean time I can believe well that it has the
properties Aconiti Pardalianchis. The other kind of Aconitum is divided of
Dioscorides into three sorts / of which I know two kinds / one of them has
leaves like a Plain tree / and depely endented with yelow flowers / and with
little short coddes with black seeds in them / This kind grows only in
gardines / as far as I know / and this may be called Wolfes bayne / or yelowe
wolfes bayne / or plain wolfes bayne. The other kind has leaves like a great
kind or Croufoute with a long stalk / and a blewe flower / Germans call it
Monickes cap or Munch cappen / that is Monks hode. This kind grows very
plenteouslye in the very top of the Alps between Splengen and Clauenna.

The Properties.
LEopardes bayne laid to a Scorpion / makes her utterly amassed and number / and
as soon as she touches again Hellebor / or Nesewurte / she comes to herself
again: Some use this herb / layinge it unto the eyes to take away the great
pains of the eyes. This herb hyd in flesh and casten fourth / where wild
beast come / kills as many as eat it. The other kinds called Wolfes bayne
and Monks coule / kills wolfes. And this Wolf bayne of all poisons is the
most hastye poison. Howbeit / Plinye says / that this herb is good to be
dronken against the bitinge of a Scorpion. This is also the nature of Wolfes
bayne / if any credence may be given unto Pliny / that it will kill a man if
he take it except it find in a man some thing that it may kill / with that it
will strive as with his mache / which it has found within the man. But this
fightinge is only / when it has f^und poison in the bowelles of a living
creature / and maruayle it is / that t^o dedely poysones do both dye in a man /
that the man may live.

Remedies against this poison and tokens of it / whereby it may be known who
is poysoneth with it.
WOlfes bayne by and by as soon as it is in drinkinge appears in the tongue
sweet with a certey^e bindinge / and when they that have taken it / begin to
rise / it makes the^ dusey in the head / and drives out tears / and brings
great heaviness unto the breast / and mi^riffe / and much wind goes forth.
Wherefore the poison must be driven out / either with vomitinge / or else beneh
with a clister / we use to give in drink / organe / rue / heehond / or ye
broth of Wormwod with Wormwod wine / or with Houseleke / or Sothernwod / ground
pine. The cruddes found in a kiddes mawe / or an^ hind calfes mawe / or a
Leuerettis cruddes with vinegre / are good for the same. Germander Beuers
coddes aris and rue / do properlye perteyne to the healinge of this poison.
About twenty year ago / certain French men at Anwerp / willing to make a
sallet of Alaxander rotes / gathered the rotes of blew wolfes bayne / and eat
them / but as many as eat of them / sauinge two minstrelles / which vomited
them out again / died all within two days as I heard say / Wherefore if they
had been better learned in the knowledge of herbs / they might have avoided
the hasty death that they came to. Let our Londiners which of late have
received this blewe wolfes bayne / otherwise called Monks coule / take heed /
that the poison of the rote of this herb / one day do not more harm / then
the freshnes of the flower has done pleasure in seven years / let them not
say / but they are warned.

The description of Acorus out of Dioscorides.
depiction of plant Gladdon or false Acorus.


ACorus has the leaves of flower Deluce / but narrower / and rotes not unlike
/ folden together / which go not right down but aside / and are strowed upon
the uppermost part of the earth. Where they grow / they have by certain
spaces certain joints like unto knees / they are (...) / that is as Ruellius
turns it / albicantes / whytishe / but the word may signifye as some judge a
/ little white within / or in under. They are in taste sharp or bytinge / but in
smell not unpleasant / the best is thick and white.

The description of Acorus out of Plinye.
ACorus has the leaves of flour delice / but narrower and with a longer foot
that the leaf grows on / black rotes / and not so full of veins / but in
other things like unto Ireos or flower delice. They are sharp in taste / and
have no unpleasant smell / and the savor of them belcheth quickly out. They
that come out of Pontus / are ye best / next unto them are they of Galacia /
and then they of Candy. But the first or best are in Colchide beside the flood
Phasis / and roundabout in watery places. The grene rotes have a stronger and
greuouser smell then the dried rotes have. They of Condy are whyter then they
of Pontus.

There has been long a great error among the Phisicianes and Apothecaries in
this herb Acorus / for they have used for the true Acorus an herb in deed
like in fashion unto Acorus / but in qualitye so far differing / as one herb
almost may differ from another. Acorus is hot in the third degree / and
Gladdon which they use for Acorus / is cold and wonderfullye stoppinge and
astringent. Among the learned men which have perceived the foresaid error / is
some striffe for this herb / some holdinge / that the common Calamus odoratus
/ is the true Acorus / and other some affirming / that great Galanga is the
true Acorus. Antonius Musa did hold (what he does now I can not tell) that the
small Galanga was Acorus / but it is plain that the common Galanga is not the
right Acorus. For Actuarius / Serapio / and Nicolaus Myrepsus in one
composition of a medicine have both Galangan and Acorum / which they would not
have done / if the common Galanga had been Acorus. Matthiolus holds stiffly
that the common Calamus is the true Acorus / and that nether great nor the
little Galanga is Acorus / by name against Musam and Fuchsium: and in deed some
of his reasones are good / although as his figure of Acorus is contrary to the
description of Acorus in Dioscorides / even so some of his reasones are very
weke / and may be turned against him self / as it that he brings out of
Galene that Acorus is somthinge bitter. When as the common Calamus is very
bitter / and so bitter that it excedeth many herbs / which Dioscorides and
Galene call plainly bitter as Chamepites / whit Endive / and roses / compared
with the taste of common Calamus do testifye / but I leave his other reasones to
be confuted of Fuchsius / who is yet alive and able to answer for him self /
in the mean time as I think that common Calamus Aromaticus draws next unto
the description of Dioscorides of Acorus / so I reken that nether Fuchsius nor
Musa have erred so much / as Matthiolus writes when they used the two
Galangaes for Acoro. For although they differ from Acorus in color and form /
yet they differ either very little or nothing at all from Acorus in pour and
virtue / this must I warn the students of Phisike / that the rotes of the
Acorus that Matthiolus sets out in his picture / go not aside above the
ground / as ye rotes of the false Acorus do / but enter almost right down
toward the ground / nether is one folded within an other as Dioscorides writes
/ therefore his figure is to be suspected.

The Virtues.
ACorus has an hot rote / the broth of it provoke urine. It is good for the
pains of the side of the liver of ye breast / gnawinge in the guts /
drawinges together and burstinges / it is good to sit over for weomens diseases
/ as Aris is. It wastes away the milt / and helps ye strangulion / and the
bitinge of Serpens. It drives away the darkness of the eyes with the juice.
The rote is much used to be put among preservatives or triacles. The broth of
this herb is also good for the swellinge of the stones / if it be sodden in
wine / and laid to / after the same manner is it good for hardness and gatheringe
together of humores. A scruple of this root dronken with four ounces of honyed
wine / is good for them that have been bruised and ouerthrown. Acorus is hot
and dry in the third degree.

Of Venus heir.
depiction of plant

ADianthum is called in Duch / Iungfrawen haar / and in the Pothecaries
shopppes / Capillus Veneris. Many erroures have been about this herb. I have
seen some Pothecaries in Anwerpe use for this herb Dryopteris / in Louan other
use Wall rue / otherwise called Saluia vite / for this herb. And our
Pothecaries of England use Trichomanes which they call Maidens heir / For
Adianto / whose is sounest to be forgiven: for Trichomanes and Adiantum are /
as Dioscorides says / of like virtue. Nevertheless the error remains / for
Adiantum has many little branches / coming forth of a little stalk / with
leaves like Corianders greater leaves / and this herb resembles even so the
she brake / as Trichomanes resembles the male brake / for Trichomanes even
from the rote has continuallye leaves unto the top / as the male brake has.
And Adiantum is bare a good way above the root as the she fern is bare even
to the top / and there is it full of leaves. I have seen this herb diverse
times in Italye / in pittes and wells / but I could never find it / nether in
Germany nor in England. It uses to grow also in watery rocks / where as the
sun comes little / may be named in English / Venus heir or Ladies heir.

The Virtues.
THe broth of Venus heir dronken / is good for the shortwinded / and for them
that sighe much / for the milt / for the yelowe iaundes / for them yt can not
well make water. It breaks the stone / it stops the flixe of the belly /
it remedieth the bitinges of serpents. It is good to drink against the flixe
of the stomach. It draws down the secondes and the flowers of weome^ / and
stops the perbreakinge and spittinge of blood. The herb raw is good for the
biting of Serpents / laid unto the place bitten. It makes thick heir /
where as the scalles have taken it away. It drives away wennes and swellinge
under the chin and in other places / and with lie it takes away scurfe and
scalles of the head / and heals the watering sores of the same. It holds
one ye heir / that would fall of / if Ladanum be mixed with it / and laid upon
the head with Mire teyle / lilye oil / or with ysop and wine. The broth that
the herb is sodden in / poured into lie and wine / does the same thing. This
herb given in / in meat unto quales and cocks / makes them fight more
earnestlye / then they did before. This herb brings forth of the breast
toughe and thick humores. Venus heir is in mean tempre between hot and
cold. Mesue writes / that the broth wherein is sodden a pound of this herb
bey^ ^e / purges yelow choler / and draws forth fleme out of the hole bellye
and liver / and brings forth of the breast and lunges by spittinge / tongue
and ^lammye humores.

Of the right Affodill.
ALbucum is called in Latin also Hastula regia, and in Greek sphdelo, and it
may be called in English right Affodill. Howbeit / I could never se this
herb in England but ones / for the herb that the people calls here Affodill
or Daffodill is a kind of Narassus. The right Affodill has a long stalk a
cubit long / and some thing longer / and many white flowers in the top / and
not one alone as the kinds of Narcissus have. Theophrastus says / that there
grows a worm in Affodilles / and that it grows unto a kind of fly / and
flees out when the flower is ripe. The sede is thresquare like bucke wheat or
wheat / or beach aples / but it is blacker and harder / The leaves are long as
a great leke leaves are / and the rotes are many together like acornes. I have
seen this herb often in Italye and in certain gardines of Anwerpe / and now I
have it in England in my gardine.

The virtues.
THE rotes of the right Affodill are bytinge sharp / and do heat / and do
provoke urine and weomens flowers. A dram of ye rotes dronken in wine / helps
the pains in the side / bursten places and shronken together / and coughes.
The same taken in the qua^tite of the under ankle bone / such as men play with /
helps vomitinge if it be eaten. Three drammes weight of the same / is good for
them that are bitten of a serpent. Ye must anoynte ye biting with the leaves /
flowers and rotes with wine / do so also to foul and consuming sores. The
roots sodden in the dregs of wine / are good for the inflammationes of the
pappes and mennis stones / for swellings and for biles. It is also good for
new inflammations laid to with barley mele. The juice of the rote sodden with
old sweet wine / mirre and saffron / is a good medicine for the eyes. It is
also good for matery ears / bruised with frankince^se / honye / wine / and
myrre / the same put into the contrary ear / swageth the tuthake. The ashes of
the root laid to / makes heir grow again in a skalled head / oil sodden in
ye fire in ye rotes made holow / is good for ye kibes / or moules yt are raw /
and for ye burning of ye fire: poured into ye ear / it is good for defenes.
The root heleth white spots in the flesh. If ye rub them first with a cloth /
and afterward lay ye rote to them. The sede and the flowers dronken in wine /
withstand wonderfully the poison of Scolopendres and scorpiones / they purge
also the belly.

Of Fox tail.
depiction of plant Alopecurus.


ALopecurus grows not in England yt ever I have seen / but I have seen it
grow in Germany / but ye fairest yt ever I saw / grew in Italy. The herb is
like unto a short kind of corn / and has in ye top of ye straw a great thick
and bushye ear full of long dounes / which is very like unto a fox tail /
whereof it has the name in Greek. I have not read any thing worthy the wrytinge
of this herb / nether have I hard of any man which had any experience in the
nature of this herb.

Of Garleke.
depiction of plant Allium.
depiction of plant Allium syluestre.


GArleke is called in Greek Skorodon, in Duch Knoblouch / in French Aul or Aur.
There are three kinds of Garleke / the first is the common gardin garleke / the
second is called in Greek Ophio skorodon, in Latin Allium anguinu^, or Allium
syluestre, in English crow garleke / or wild garleke. This kind has very small
leaves / coming forth like grene twigges / and they are commonly crooked in at
the end / and when it is ripe / it has sede in the top even like unto the
cloves / which grow in the root / but they are less. The third kind is
called in Latin Allium vrsinum, and in English Rams or Ramseyes. The first
kind grow only in gardines in England / and ye second grows in middowes and
feldes in every country / The third kind grows in woddes about Bath.

The virtues of Garleke.
GArleke warmeth the body / and breaks insundre gross humores / and cutteth
in pieces tough humores. Garleke twice or thrice sodden in water / puts away
his sharpenes / and yet for all that it leseth not his virtues in making subtle
and fine it that is gross. But it wins thereby a certain (...) / though it
be not easy to be perceived to norishe the body / which it had not before it
was sodden. Garleke is not only good meat / but also good medicine / for it can
lose it that is stopped / and also depiction of plant Allium vrsinum.
drive it away. Garleke is of that kind of meats / which drive forth wind /
and ingendre no thyrst. Craw garleke as all other wild herbs be / is stronger
then it of the gardine. Garleke dryueth out of the belie broad worms taken
with other meat / it provoke urine / it helps the bytinge of a veper. Both
eaten and also laid to / it is good against the bitinges of mad or wod beasts.
It is also very good for the ieopardies that may come of changinge of waters
and countrees / it clereth the voice and swageth the old cough / taken row or
sodden. The same dronken with the broth of Organe / kills lyse and nittes.
The ashes of burned garleke laid to with honey / heals bruses and blew stripes
folowinge of beting or fallinge / and with the ointment of Spiknarde. It
heals the falling of the heir / and with oil and salt it heleth the
burstinges out of wheles / and with honye it takes away the scuruye evil /
frekelles / runninge sores of the head / and scurfe / and leprosies. Garleke
dryueth away with his smell serpents and scorpiones. It is medicinable
against the poison of libardes bayne. It draws down weomens sickness and
secondes with the perfume of it / and so does it / if they will sit over the
broth that it is sodden in with herbs of like virtue. Garleke sodden with
milk / or broken / or mengled with soft chese / stancheth the fallinge down
of humores / called the catarre. And so is it good against horsenes. Three little
cloves broken in vinegre / and laid to the teth / are good for the teth ache.

It swageth also the pain of the teth if it be roasted and put into the teth /
so that the pain come of to much moisture. One head of Garleke dronken with
ten drammes of the gume of Laserpitium / drives away the quartain ague: for
lack of the true Laserpitium / ye may take the root of Angelica or Pillitorye
of Spain / called otherwise Magistrantia. It provoke sleep and makes the
color of the body read / and stirs men to Venerye / dronken with grene
Coriander and strong wine. It is also good for the pype or roupe of hens and
cocks / as Plinye writes. Garleke helps the Colike that comes of wind /
and the sciatica that is of fleme. It makes subtle the norishment and the
blood. The use of Garleke is euel for all them that are of an hot complexion /
for it hurts the eyes / the head / the longes / and the kidneis / it hurts
also women with child and suckinge childer. Garleke is as Galene says / the
men of the countrees triacle. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree.

Of the Alder tree.
depiction of plant Alnus.


THE Alder tree which is also called an Aller tree / is named in Greek Clethra,
in Latin Alnus, in Duche ein Erlenbaum. The nature of this tree is to grow by
water sides and in marrish ground.

The properties of Alders.
THE tree when the bark is of / is read / and the bark is much used to dye
withal. Pliny says that Alder is profitable to set at Rivers sides against the
rage of the floude / to help and strenghten the bank withal / and that under
the shadow of Alder trees may well grow any thing / that is set or sown /
which thing chances not under many other trees. Some say that the juice of
an Alder trees bark is good for a burninge.

Of Aloe.
ALoe may be called in English herb Aloe / to put difference between the herb
and the juice / which co^pacted together and dried into great pieces / is
commonly called Aloe. Aloe has fat and thick leaves like unto Squilla or sea
union / something broad / round and bowing backward. depiction of plant It has
leaves of each side growing a wrye / prickye / with few crestes and short /
the stalk is like right Affodils stalk / it has white flowers and fruit
like unto right Affodil. It has a grievous savor and a wonderful bitter taste /
it has one root / and sticks in the ground like a stake. I have seen in
Italy in diverse gardines herb Aloe / but it endures not in Italye in
gardines above three years as the Italianes told me. I have seen herb Aloe also
in Anwerpe in shoppes / and there it endures long alive as Orpyne does and
housleke / wherefore some have called it sem per vinum marinum, yt is Sea
aigrene.

The virtues.
THere are two kinds of Aloe / one kind is full of sand / and seems to be the
dross and outcaste of the pure juice. The other kind is like unto a liver /
that ought to be taken that is of a good savor pure / and has no deceyt in it
/ shinning without stones of a read color / growinge together like a liver /
britle / easy to melt / and of a great bitterness. It that is black and hard to
break is not commended. The nature of the herb Aloe is to hele wounds / and
the property of the juice is to dry up / to provoke sleep / and to make
bodies thick and fast together / and to louse the bellye. Two little spounfuls
of Aloe beat into powder / and taken either with cold or with warm water /
purges the stomach / stops the vomitinge of blood / and purges the iaundes
/ taken in the quantite of a scruple and half with water / or a dram in
drink. Three drammes of Aloe taken make a just purgation. Mesue gives in
powder or pills from a dram and a half to two drammes / and in stepe or
infuse from a dram and a half unto three drammes and a half. Aloe mixed with
other purgations helps that they hurt not ye stomach / so much as they would
have done if they had been taken alone. Aloe dried / is sprinkled into wounds
/ and to make them grow together again / it brings sores to a skin / and
holds them in that they sprede no farther / it heals specially the priuye
members that have sores and the skin of. It joins together again the skin
that covers the knoppe of boys yeardes / if it be broken in sunder with
maluesey. It heals riftes and hard lumpes that arise in the fundament / it
stops the over much issuynge of the emroddes / and burstinge out of blood /
it heals also aguayles when they are cut of. With honye it takes away the
blewe marks and tokens that come of beatinge or brusinge / it heals the
scabbie blere eyes / and the itche of the corners of the eye. It stauncheth the
head ache / laid unto the temple and forhead with vinegre and rose oil / with
wine laid unto the head / It holds fast the here that would fall of. It is
good for the swellinge in the kyrnelles under the tongue for the disease of the
goumes / and all other diseases of the mouth laid to with wine and honye. Aloe
is burnt in a clean and burninge hot vessel / and is often stirred with a
fether / that it may be all alyke roasted / and so it is a good medicine for
sore eyes. Some time it is washed that the sand may go unto the bottom. Aloe
washed is holsomer for the stomach / but it purges not so much as unwashed.
Aloe purges choler and fleme / it purges sooner as Mesue says if it be taken
before meat / and if there be menged with it / Mace / Clowes / Nutmegges /
Cinnamum / Mastick / or Folfote. Wine or rose water / or the juice of Fenel /
wherein Aloe mixed with Dragons blood and myrre / heals stinkinge and old
sores. The same mixed with myrre / keeps dead bodies from corruption. Aloe
dissolved with the white of an egg / is a good emplaster to stop blood both
of the emrodes / and of any wound or cuttinge. Aloe is not good for them that
are much disposed to the emrodes / for it opens the mouths of the veins.
It is also evil for them that are hot and dry of nature / but it is good for
them that are moist and cold. Aloe is hot in the beginning of the second
degree / and dry in the third degree. The best Aloe as Galene writes comes
from Indye.

Of Chikewede.
Alsines.
depiction of plant depiction of plant

CHikewede is called in Greek Alsine / and the Latins use the same name / in
Duche Vogelcraut or Mere / in French Mauron. The Pothecaries call it Morsum
gallinae. This herb is so well known in all countres / that I need not
largelier to describe it. They that keep littel birds in cages / when they are
sick / give the birds of this herb to restore them to their health again.

The virtues of Chikewede.
THE pour of this herb is to bind and to cool. It is laid to the
inflammations of the eyes with barlye mele and water. The juice is also poured
into the ears against the pain of them. This herb is profitable for all
thing that Paritorye is good for. It is good for all gatheringes and
inflammationes both of blood and also of choler / if it be not extremely hot.

Of Henbayne.
HEnbayne is called in Latin Altercum, and Apollinaris, or Faba suilla, in
barbarous Latin Iusquiamus, in Greek Hyosciamos, in Duche Bilsen craut / in
French De la henbane. Henbayne has thick stalks / broad leaves and long /
divided / black and rough. The flowers come out of the side of the stalk in
order as the flowers of Pomgranates / compassed with the littel cups full of
sede as poppye has. There are three sorts of Henbayne / one with black sede
with flowers / almost purple with the leaves of French beans / called Smilax
/ with vessels hard and prickye. The other sede is something yelow as winter
cresses is / the leaves and the coddes are more simple. Both these two kinds
make men mad and fall into a great sleep / and therefore they ought not to
be commonly used. Phisicianes have received the third kind as most gentle
full of hoar and soft with white flowers and white seeds / and it grows
about the sea side / and about gutters and ditches / about tounes and cities
/ which if ye can not find / take then it with the read sede / and use it. I
have seen the white Henbayne growyng in Anwerpe in Peter Coudenbergis gardin /
with many other strange herbs / not to be found in any other garden in low
Germanye as I believe.

The virtues.
IT that has the black sede is the worst kind and is not approved. A certain
juice is pressed in the sun out of the fresh sede / stalks and leaves bruised
/ and when as the moisture is dried up / the use of it dureth for a year / it
falls easily into danger of corruption. The juice is also drawn out of the
dry sede / bruised by it self / and laid in warm water / and then pressed out
/ is better and releaseth the pain sooner then it with the milkye humor / that
comes out of the herb by scotchinge or nickinge. The grene herb bruised and
mixed with wheat mele of three months / is made into round littel cakes and
so laid up. The first juice and that which is drawn out of the dry sede /
are conveniently put in the medicines which swage pain / and they are good
against quick and hot issues / the pains of the ears / and the diseases of
the mother with wheat mele and barley mele / they staunche the inflammationes
and burnings of the eyes of the fete / and of other parts. The sede can do the
same. It is good for the cough / for catarres / runninges of the eyes and of
the aykes. The same with poppye sede about the weighte of ten graynes / is
dronken with mede against the excess of weomens sickness and any other issue
of blood that bursteth out. It helps the gout and a man's stones that are
swells with wind / sore pappes / which are after a woman's birth / puffed up
/ and do swell / if it be broken and laid to with wine. They use also to be put
in other plasters which are ordained to swage pain. The leaves are very good
to be put in all medicines / which take pain away / both by them selves and
also with barley mele. The grene leaves are laid to / to relese al kind of pain
/ iij. or iiij. leaves dronke^ with wine / heal cold agues / wherein they that
are sick / are both hot and cold at one time. The roots sodden in vinegre as
for ye tuthake. The smoke of this herb is good for ye cough / if it be
received into the mouth. Plinye says that the oil made of the sede of this
herb / put into a mannis ear / brings him out of his mind. Also mo the^
iiij. of the leaves dronken / do the same. Henbayne is cold in the third degree.

Of Marrishe mallowe.
ALthea is called also Hibiscus and Eniscus / and of ye potecaries Malua bis,
and Maluauiscus, in English Marrish mallow / or water mallow / in Duche Ibish /
in French Guimauues. This herb grows naturallye in watery and marrish
middoes / and by water sides. Althea or marrish mallow has round leaves like
unto sowbreade / with a white down upon them / with a flower after the
proportion of a rose / but in color they are pale purple / much drawing nere
unto white / for the quantite of the herb very small / with a stalk of two
cubits high / with clammy roots and white within. Althea has the name in
Greek / because it is good for many diseases. It is called Marrishe mallowe in
English / because it grows commonly in marrish ground and watery middoes. By
this description it is plain that our common holyoke is not Althea.

depiction of plant Althea.


The Virtues.
MArrish mallow / sodden in wine or mede / or bruised and laid on by it self /
is good for wounds / for hard kirnels / swellings and wennes / for ye burning
and swelling behind ye ears / for impostemes / for the burning imposteme of
the pappes / for the brusinge of ye fundament / for windy swellings / for the
stifnes of the sinnewes / for it drives away / makes ripe or digesteth /
bursteth and covers with skin. Seth it as is mentioned before / and put
swynes grese unto it / or goosgrese / or Turpentine / that it may be clammy as
an emplaster / and then it is good for the inflammations and stoppinges of the
mother / if ye put it into the mother after a suppositorie wise. The broth that
the herb is sodde^ in / is good for the same. It draws out also the burdens
of the mother / and the secondes that abide after the child. The broth of the
root dronken with wine / helps them yt cannot well make water / and the rawnes
of them yt have ye stone / the blody flixe / the sciatica / the trimbling of
any membre / and ye burstinge. Wash the mouth with the same herb sodden in
vinegre / and it will ease the pain of the teth. The grene sede and ye dry
also broken / heals frekelles and foul spots / if they be anointed
therewith in the sun. They that are anointed with ye same with oil and vinegre /
are in no danger to be bitten of venomous beasts. It is good against the
bloody flixe / ye vomiting of blood / and the common flixe. The same sede
sodden in water and vinegre or wine / is dronken against all the stinging of
bees / waspes / and such other like. The leaves with a little oil are laid on
bytinges and burninges. It is evidently known that water will wexe thick / if
this root be bruised and put in it / so that the water stand abroad in the
air without the doors.

An ointment to soften all hard lumpes / swellings and bruses in any place of
the body / whether it come of inward or outward cause / which also is good to
anoint horse fete withal / if they be bruised or swelled a littel / or if this
ointment be not ready / it shall be good to take the iuyces of the rotes / and to
sethe them with the other gere in less proportions / and lay it to warm to
man and beast as they shall need.
TAke of the roots of Marrish malowes / or in the stead of it of Holyhock / or
of common Malowes xij. ounces of Lint sede vj. ounces / a wine quarte full of the
fattes and greses of hens / gese / capones / or of netis fete / vj. ounces of
wax / of turpentine one ounce / of rosin iij. ounces. First of al bruise as small
as ye can the rote and sede / and stepe them for the space of iij. days and
iij. nights in a pottel of water being scalding hot / when it is first put
into it / but if ye would stepe them / and seth them in white wine or in half
water and half wine / the medicine would be much stronger / let them be sodden
ye fourth day until that ye may se the broth al slymy / and then streyne it
through a cloth / and take of that same slymy broth a pint / and seth it with
the fattes / and when as that watery substance as ye can gather / is sod away /
and the only slyme remains / melt the wax / the rosin / and the turpentine
altogether / and seth the^ a littel together / and if there be any foul scome
/ take it away / but it were better to take a littel of the fat / and melt
first therein the wax / then the rosin and the turpentine / and so to mix
them altogether / and seth then a littel / and take the scome away.

Of Marierum gentle.
MArierum is called in Greek Samsychos and Amarokos, in Latin Amaracus or
Maiorana, in Duch Meyeran or Maioran / in French Maiorain, or Maron, some call
this herb in English Merierum gentle / to put a difference between an other
herb / called Merieru^ / which is but a bastard kind / and this is the true
kind. Merierum is a thick and bushy herb / crepinge by the ground with leaves
like small Calamint rough and round / it has little tops in the highest part
of all the stalk much like scales / one growing over another / as the fire tree
nuttes do appear. It has a very good savor.

The virtues.
THE broth of this herb dronken / is good for the dropsy in the beginning /
and for them that can not make water / and for ye gnawing in the bellye. The
dry leaves laid to with honye / take away blew marks which come of beting /
and in a suppository they bring down weomens sickness. They are also good to
be laid unto the stinging of a scorpion with salt and vinegre. The same
received into a salve made of were / are good for the members that are out of
ioynte: and after ye same manner they are good for lose swellings / and they
are laid unto the eyes with ye flower of barley when they have an inflammation.
They are mixed with medicines / which refreshe werynes and such emplasteres as
are appointed to hete. The powder of the dry herb put in a man's nose /
makes him to nese / ye oil that is made of Merierum / warmeth and fasteneth
the synewes. This herb is hot in the third degree / and dry in the second.

Of Alisson.
ALisson has the name in Greek / because it helps the bytinge of a wod
dog. Dioscorides and Plinye do not agree with Aetius and Actuarius in the
description of this herb. For Dioscorides seems to make Alisson like unto
Gooshare / for Dioscorides commonly sets herbs of like form and fashion
together / and he sets next unto Gooshore / which is called in Greek
Aparine Alisson: howebeit this were no necessary argument / if that I had no
more profes then this alone. But Pliny makes Alisson like madder in these
words: Alyssos a rubia folijs tantum and ramis minoribus differt. Alissos
differs only from Madder in that it has less leaves and less branches.
Dioscorides describes Alisson thus: Alissos is a little bushye herb /
something sharp with round leaves / and beside them has a fruit like to
little buckleres / wherein is sede somthinge broad / It grows in hilly and
rough places. The herb which I take to be Alisson of Plinye and Dioscorides /
is a small herb of a span height / and of one small red root / grow many
small stalks / which have many rowelles as it were of spores / set in order:
and at every rowel or round order of leaves nere the top / there springs
forth a little small branch / which has flowers / fruit / and sede. The
stalk is ^oursquare / and something sharp. The leaves in deed are not even
plain round taken severally by them selves / but they taken one with an other
altogether are round in order. If that the roundenes that Dioscorides speaks
of / be not thus to be understand. This herb can not be Dioscorides Alisson.
The flowers are bluish purple / and appear commonly about the end of May.
The fruit grows ever two and two together / wherein is a little black sede /
something flat / in some top a man may find four cople of little vessels /
which conteyneth this sede. There are none of these vessels found alone.

The herb is hot and specially the sede. But the heat appears not straight
way / till that it has been a good while on your tongue / and then it is
evidently sharp and biting. Aetius writes thus of Alisson. The medicine
called Hiera / is to be given every day not as a purgation / but as a helpinge
medicine in the quantite of an Hasel nut / with an ounce and half of the broth
of Salge / or ye herb Sideritis which is called Heraclea. Some use this alone
/ and say that it profits much / and therefore name it Alisson / because it
takes madness away. These words writes he in the helping of the bytinge of a
mad dog. And where he entreats of Simples / he writes of Alisson thus: They
say that Alisson is the herb called Sideritis / which grows every where by
the high ways / it has a purple flower / and thick leaves. Actuarius
describes Alisson after this manner: Alisson is an herb like unto Horehound /
sharper only / and with more pricky round hedes / and with blew flowers.
Horehounde and Sideritis are very like as every man knows / which has seen
both. But between Horehounde and Madder or Goshare / there is no likeness at al
/ sauinge that the leaves in all these herbs stand orderly distinct one from
an other by certain equal spaces. Therefore we may se that Alisson of
Dioscorides and Pliny is not al one with Alisson of Aetius and Actuarius.
Howbeit they do al agree in this that Alissos is good for ye bytinge of a mad
dog. Alisson of Dioscorides and Plinye may be named in English Helebyte or
Heledogge / of the propertye that it has in healinge of the biting of mad
dogs. Some herbaries call this same herb Rubia^ minorem, but it is not Rubia
minor, for that is a great deal longer then Alissos is. I have seen the herb
which I take for Alisson / ones amongst the corn beside Sion / and ones in a
corn field in Dorsetshire in master Baylies merchant of Chardis Lordship /
and diverse times in the hills about Wells in Summersetshyre.

The virtues.
THE broth of Helebyte dronken / drives away the hitchcocke / that is without
an ague. It does the same if any man hold it / or smell it with honey. The Same
broken helps the diseases and frekelles of the face: bruised and taken in meat
/ it is supposed to be good against the madness of a dog. The Same hong up in
houses / is thought to be wholesome / and a defense against inchantinge both unto
man and beast / and bound about in a linning cloth / it drives away the
diseases of cattle. Galene confirms the saying of Dioscorides / Pliny /
Aetius and Actuarius / and says that this herb has the name of heling of
them that are bitten of a mad dog / and that the herb given to the^ that are
mad often times by ye likeness of the hole substance has perfitely heled them.

Of Amaranthus.
AMaranthus is not the same herb in Galene / that it is in Plinye / for their
descriptions of Amaranthus are diverse and differing. Amaranthus of Pliny as he
writes him self / is rather a purple ear then a flower / and that without
smell or savor: and it is to be wondered at / how that it would be plucked
often / and grows better when it is thus handled. The leaves of the herb are
like unto the leaves of a Blyte or the longest leaves of Basyle. Properties it
has none that I know of / but that it dries much / and therefore helps to
stop a laxe. It is called in English / purple velvet flower / or flour amor.
The herb which is named in Dioscorides Elichrison / is also called of Galene
Amaranthus / and thus it is described of Dioscorides. Heliochrison has a little
white branch / grene / straight and strong / and narrow leaves like unto
Sothernwod / certain spaces going between the leaves / the top is al yelowe /
and is full of round knoppes like unto dry berryes / the root is very
small. It grows in uneven places / and in holow places / where as waters use
some time to rinne. Some learned men of this time take the herb called of the
Apothecaries Stichas citrina / and of the Germans Rheinblome / to be
Elichrison. But this herb has not leaves like unto Sothernwod / but unto
Isope. Wherefore Stichas citrina is not Elychrison of Dioscorides. The right
Elichryson grows in Italy / and has so small leaves as Sothernwod has: and
it may be called in English Flower amor / or yelowe flour amor. Matthiolus
says that this herb grows much in Hetruria / I never saw it grow as yet
but only dry. The Germans use their Reinblum for the same purposes that the
Italians use their Heliochryso.

depiction of plant Amaranthus purpureus.
depiction of plant Amaranthus citrinus.


The properties of Amaranthus.
THE top of the herb called Elichrison / dronken with wine / helps the
bitinges of serpe^tes / the sciatica / them that can not well make water / and
burstinges / and it provoke flowers to come down. Dronken with honyed wine /
it wastes up blood run together / whether it be in the stomache / or in the
bladder / given with white wine delayed / to them that are fasting about two
scruples / it stops poses and catarres. It is good to be laid among clothes
to save them from mothes. The nature of the herb is to cut in sonder / and to
make subtle / but it hurts the stomache.

Of the Almond tree.
depiction of plant

AN Almond tree is called in Greek Amigdale, in Latin Amigdala, or Amigdalum, in
Duch ein Ma^delbaum / in French Amander. Almond trees grow much in high
Germanye beside Spyre in a city called Newstat / and great plentye in Italye /
and some grow in England / but I have heard of no great stere of the fruit
of them that grow in England. The tree at ye first sight is like unto a Wilowe
tree / but the leaves are shorter and bigger about the setting on of the
stalk then Wilowe leaves be. The fruit and the kernel of it are so well known
/ that I need no farther to describe them.

The virtues.
THE broth of the rotes of the bitter Almon tree / if they be broken and sodden
/ scoureth away the frekelles and spots of the face. The Almondes there selves
laid to / do the same. And they laid to the convenient place / bring down
weomens sickness. They take away the head ache / if they be laid to the tempels /
or forheade with vinegre and rose oil. And with wine they are good for wheles
and little sores / and with honey they hele rotting and running sores / which
run from place to place / and the biting of dogs. The same eaten takes ache
away / they soften the belly / they make a man sleep / provoke urine / and they
are taken against the vomitinge of blood / taken with fine wheat flower /
called Amilum / dronken with water / or licked in with turpentine / they are good
for them that are diseased in the kidneys / or have the inflammation of the
longes. With sweet wine they are good for the stone / and the stoppinge of the
water / and they taken in with honye and milk after the manner of an electuary
in the quantite of an hasel nut / are good for the diseases of the liver / for
the cough / and for a windy colyke. The gum of an Almonde tree is astringent
and hot / and if it be dronken / it is good for the vomitinge of blood / with
vinegre it heleth scabbes and scuruy euel that runs in the skin. It
helps an old cough taken with delayed wine: it is good for them that have the
stone / dronken with sweet wine or maluasey. Sweet Almondes have a certain
bitterness covered with swetenes: they are of temperate hete and moisture / but
they are much weyker in operation then the bitter be. Some do hold that they
increase the substance of the brain. They make one sleep pleasantly / and
scour and purge ye ways that the water comes through / and they are very fit
for lene folk / and the oil of them is good for a dry crampe. The oil of
bitter Almondes is hoter by one degree / then ye oil of sweet Almondes is. It
is most fit for ears that are stopped with gross wind / for hardness of
hearing / and for the noise in ye ears yt comes of cold. It kills also the
worms of the ears. It is tried by experience / that this oil is more
convenient for the ears then other oils be.

Of Amy.
depiction of plant

AMy is called both of Grecians and Latins Ami. The Potecaries call it Ameos
in ye genitive case. It may be also called in English Ammi. Dioscorides
writes no more of the description of Ammi / because he thought it so commonly
known in his days. But these words Ami has much smaller sede then Cumin /
and resembles organ in taste. The herb that is commonly used for Ammi in all
shoppes now adays / has a long grene stalk full of little branches about ye
top / with long small indented leaves / and a white flower / and a bushy top like
Dill / with a little bitter and hot sede. Although this may be used for Ammi /
and is one kind of it / yet there grows in Italy a better kind / which I have
seen. If we could have plentye of that kind / I would counsel men to use it /
and to leave this / which we use commonly. For I find not the hete in this
sede that Galene requires / for he writes that Ami is hot and dry in ye
extremity of the third degree. Howbeit this common Ami is not to be despised.
This herb grows in many gardines in Germany / and in my lords gardin at
Sion in England. The other kind which is the true kind / is of late found in
Italy with leaves much less then our any has. The sede comes now to Frankeford
to be sold under the name of Amomi / but some call it veru^ Ami, namely ye
grossers of Norinberge.

The virtues of Ami.
AMi is good against the gnawinge in the guts / against the stopping of the
water / against the biting of serpents dronken with wine. It brings weomen
their sickness: it mixed with corrosyues made of the flies called Chantarides / do
help the stopping of a man's water: with honey it takes away blew marks rising
of stripes with rasynes or rosine. In a perfume it purges ye mother. Some hold
ye weomen do sooner conceive / if they smell this herb / when as ye work of
conceptio^ is in doing.

Of Amomum.
AMomum is a small bushe / about the quantite of a mannis hand / like unto a
cluster of grapes folden into him self / little sticks of wood / going one
beside and over an other / and partly it resembles a net / and partelye a
round thick bushe / or rather the head of a mace / if it were al made of
little sticks / or of pieces of silver / as big as strawes in a round form /
it has little flowers as hearts ease has / and leaves like unto brionye. I
saw about six years ago at Colon a little shrubbe / something less then my
hand / which was in all points like unto the shrub above described / a
certain pilgreme which had been at Jerusalem / brought it out of Iewry with
him. The Same is named of the Herbaries Rosa Hierecuntis / that is the rose of
Hierico. The saying is / that it opens every year about Christenmasse /
wherefore some call it a Christenmase rose. This same would I reken to be ye
right Amomum / if it had that smell which Dioscorides requires in Amomo / and
a leaf like unto Brion / for in all other points the description does
wonderfully agree. If any man chance upon any yt has a good sauoure with all
these other properties above rehearsed / let him take it for the true Amomum.
For lack of the true Amomum we may use the common Calamus aromaticus / or
Carpesio called of some Cucuba. Other judge that a man may use for Amomo
Asarabacca / or the right Acorus. The sede that is commonly used for Amomo /
is not of the strenght that Amomum is of.

The virtues.
AMomum has pour to hete / to bind / and to dry. It provoke to sleep /
and laid to the forheade / it swageth ache / it makes ripe / and drives away
inflammationes and impostemes having matter in them like honey / it helps them
yt are bitten of scorpiones / laid to emplasterwise with basil: and it is good
for the gout / with rasines it heleth the inflammationes of the eyes. It is good
for the diseases of ye mother / other in a suppositorye taken before / or in a
bath yt weomen sit over. The broth of it drunk / is good for ye liver / for
the kidnes / and for ye gout. It is fit to be mixed with preservatives / and
precious oyntmentes.

Of Pimpernell.
PImpernelle is named both in Greek and in Latin Anagallis / and Corchorus / in
Duche Ganchheil / in French Morgelina. Pimpernell is of two kinds / it that
has the blewe flower / is called the female / but it that has the cremesine
is called the male. They are little bushye herbs / lyinge upon the ground / and
have little leaves / somthinge round like unto Parietorye / which come out of a
four squared stalk. The fruit of this herb is round / Some very unlearnedly
take Anagallis for Chickwede.

depiction of plant Pimpernell the female.
depiction of plant Pimpernell the male.


The Virtues of Pimpernell.
BOTH the kinds have a propertye to swage and mitigate / and holds away
inflammations / and put out again stynges / and shyueres that are fast in
the flesh / and refrain festringe and rotting sores. The juice gargled in the
throat and mouth / purges the head of fleme / and the same poured into the
nose thrylle / that is of the other side of the head there ye tuth ache is in /
takes ye pain away: With fine honye it scoureth away the white spots in
the eyes. It is good for a dull sight / and the same dronken with wine / is
good for them that are bitten of serpents / for them that are diseased in the
liver and in the kidnes. Some do write that it which has the blewe flower /
holds and stops the falling down of the great gute / and it with the
cremesin laid to / brings it forth. These two herbs have some hete and a
drawinge nature / and dry without bytinge: wherefore they bind together
wounds and heal rotten sores / as Galene witnesses in the sixth book of the
properties and poures of simple medicines. The male Pimpernell grows commonly
in England in the corn and in tilled grounds / and so does the female grow
in Germanye about Bon and Colon.

Of Anagyris.
ANagyris grows not in England that I wot of / but I have seen it in
Italye. It may be called in English Bean trifolye / because the leaves grow
three together / and the sede is much like a Bean. Anagyris is a bushe like
unto a tree with leaves and twigges / like unto Agnus castus of Italy. But the
leaves are greater and shorter / and grow but three together / where as Agnus
has ever five together / and exceeding stinkinge / whereupon rises the
Proverb / Praestat hanc Anagyrim no^ attigisse. It has the flowers like unto
kole. It has a fruit in long horned coddes / of the lykenes of a kidney / of
diverse colors / firm and strong / which when the grape is ripe wexeth
hard.

The properties of Anagyris.
THE tender and young leaves of this bushe broken and laid to like an emplaster
/ holds down wyndye and louse swellings. If the birth stick fast / and
the flowers be stopped / or the secondes abide behind / they are dronken in
the weight of a dram in sweet wine. So are they also good for the head ache
with wine. They are also bound to the weomen that have an hard labor / but so
that straight way after they be taken away. The sede eaten / makes one
vomit sore.

Of Anchusa.
depiction of plant

DIoscorides makes three kinds of Anchusa. The first kind has leaves like
unto sharp leaued Lettis / rough / sharp / black / many growing on every
side hard by ye ground / and full of pricks. The root is a finger thick /
and it that comes forth in summer / is of a sanguine color / it grows in
a rank ground. This kind grows in many places of Germanye / and it is so
like gardine buglosse / that a man can not lightelye discern the one from the
other / sauinge only by the root which is very read without / but not
within. It may be called in English / as the French men do / Orchanet or read
Buglosh. The second kind differs in this from ye first / that it has less
leaves / and sharp likewise / small branches coming out of the stalk: it
has a purple flower turninge toward cremesyne: It has read roots / and
long / which in the harvest time puts forth a sanguine juice. It grows
in sandye places. This herb is called in some places of England Cattes tails
/ in other places wild Buglosse. It grows in grauilly and sandy places / and
in pittes / where as grauel is dug out of. The third kind is like unto
the second / but it has a less fruit or sede / and that of a Cremesine
color. I do not remember / that I have seen this kind.

The virtues of the two former kinds.
THe first kind of Anchusa / is good with oil and wexe against burning and
old sores. It heleth the outrageous inflammation or hete that comes of choler
with barle mele / It is laid on with vinegre against lepres and foul
scurfines. The same put into a womannes mother / draws out the birth. The
broth of it is given for the disease of the kidnes and the mi^te / and to them
that have the iaundis / and if the pacientes have an ague / it must be taken
with mede. The leaves dronken with wine / stop the belly. The second is good
against the bitinges of all serpents / and especially against the biting of a
Vepere.

Of Tutsan.
depiction of plant

TVtsan (as I do judge) is the herb / which is called of Dioscorides
Androsemon / and of our Potecaries Agnus castus. It seems to have had the
name of Tutsan / because it heleth all. And of Androsemon / because it has
juice like unto mannis blood. Androsemon differs from saint John's grass /
and from Asciro / called great saint John's grass / in that it has many
branches / and it has read twigges and leaves like Rue / but thrice or
fourfolde greater / which broken / put forth a winishe juice / they have in
the top two and two leaves ever coming out one against an other /
resemblinge a birds wings stretched forth / as when the bird does fly:
where about there grow small yelowe flowers / and sede in little knoppes like
unto the sede of black poppye / and it is notable with certain small leaves in
it. The small leaves in the top broused or broken savor like rosyne.

The virtues.
TVtsanes sede broken / and dronken in te quantite of two drammes / drives out
cholerike excrementes / it heals most the Sciatica. But after the purgation /
the pacient must drink water. The herb laid to burned places / heals them
/ and stancheth blood in wounds. And not only the herb does this / but also
the wine that the herb is sodden in / as witnesses Galene / which under the
name of Androsemon / conteyneth in the book of his simple medicines / Ascyron
also.

Anemone.
depiction of plant The common Anemone.


MAtthiolus in his commentaries upon Dioscorides has set out two kinds of
Anemonis / whereof nether kind that ever I could se / grows in Germanye and
England / nether in Italy that I remember. Anemone has the name in Greek of
wind / because the flower never opens it self / but when the wind blows.
The Herbaries therefore call the herb commonly taken for Anemone / though it
be not the true herb / but some bastard of it Herbam venti / the Duche me^ call
it Hacket craut / the French men Coque lourdes: and it may be called in
English Rose persely / because there grows a flower like a single rose in ye
top of this herb / which is very like Persely in the leaves that are about
the rote / or it may be called Wind flower. It grows in great plenty about
Bon in Germany / and about Oxford in England / as my friend Falconer told me.
Dioscorides writes thus of Anemone: There are two kinds of Anemone / The one
is wild and the other is tame / or of the gardeine. Whereof are many other
under kinds / one that has a Cremesin flower / and an other a whitishe or of
the color of milk or purple. The leaves are like Coria^der / with smaller
cuttinges or indentinges / nere ye ground: the stalk is all downye and roughe
and small / whereon grow flowers like poppy / and the mids of the little
heads are black or blewe. The roots are of the bigness of an Olive / or
bigger / it is almost compassed about with small joints with knoppes like
knees. The wild Anemone in all points is greater then the tame / and has
brother and harder leaves / a longer head / and a Cremesin flower with many
small rotes. It is more bytinge then it that has the black leaves. This
description of both the kinds of Anemone proves plainly that the common
herba venti / and that the Anemone that Bockius sets out / are not the
right kinds of Anemone. As the common herb may be a bastard kind of
Anemone / and namelye of that / which has (...) / that is / thin or small
roots and many / so it that Bockius sets out / seems to me to be a kind
Papaueris erratici.

The virtues of Anemone.
THey have both a bytinge and a sharp qualite. The juice of the root of them
/ poured into ones nose / purges the head. The root chewed in the mouth
brings forth watery fleme. The same sodden in sweet wine / and laid to /
heals the inflammations of the eyes: and it heals the scarres and dymnes of
the same. It scoureth away filthy sores: The leaves and stalks / if they be
eaten with a tysan / bring milk to the breasts / and bring down a womannes
sickness / if they be laid to the place in woll. If lepres be anointed therewith
/ it scoureth them away.

Of Dyll.
DYll is named in Greek Anethon / in Latin Anethum / in Duche Dyll / in French
Anet. Dyll grows a cubyt hight / and some time half a cubyte higher / It
has many small branches coming forth of a great stalk / with a very
small leaf and long / much like Greneheres / with a yelow flower / and a
broad sede / with a spokye top as fenell has / whom he does represent
wounders nere.

depiction of plant Of Dyll.


The virtues.
THe broth of the leaves and sede of dry Dyll dronke^ / brings make to the
breasts / it stauncheth gnawinges in ye belly / and wind in ye same. It
stops also the belly and vomiting / it provoke urine / swageth ye hichkoke
/ dulleth the eye sight / and often dronken stops the sede. It is good for
women to sit over it in water / which have the diseases of the mother. The
ashes of ye sede of this herb laid to / after the manner of an emplaster / take
away the hard lompes and knoppes that are about the fundament or in other
places. Dyll as Galene says swageth ache / provoke sleep when it is grene /
and makes ripe raw humores. The oil that is made of Dill / is good to be
given unto them that are werye in winter / for it softeneth and moysteth / and
it is good for them that are sick of an ague that comes of small fleme / and
for all diseases that come of a cold cause. Dyll is hot in the beginning of
the first degree / and dry in the beginning of the second.

Of Anyse.
depiction of plant

ANyse is called in Greek (...) in Latin Anisum / in Duche AniS / in French
Anise. The lefe of Anise / when it comes first forth / is round / and
indented about / afterward it is like unto Parsely / high up in the stalk / it
has a flower and a top like fenell / it grows only in gardins in England.
Galene says that Anyse is hot and dry in the third degree: but this that
we use / is not so hot: wherefore I suspect that there is a better kind /
then is commonly brought unto us to be sold. Howbeit in the mean season we
must use this / which appears to me scarsely hot in the beginning of the
second degree.

The virtues of Anyse.
ANyse heteth and dries / makes the breath sweter / swageth pain / makes a
man to piss well / it quenches the thurst of them that have the dropsye. It
is good against the poison of bestes / and against wind. It stops the
bellye and the whyt flowers / it brings milk to the tops / it stirs men
to the pleasure of the body / it swageth the head ache / the smoke of it taken
in at the nose / the same poured into the broken ears with rose oil / heleth
them. The best is it that is new / not full of dross / but well smelling. The
best comes out of Candye / and the next is brought out of Egypt.

Of Pety whine.
depiction of plant Anonis. Pety whine.


PEtye whine / or ground whine / or little whine is called in Latin and Greek
Ononis and Anonis. It is called of the common herbaries Resta bouis / Remora
aratriacutella / of the Duch Stall kraut / or Hawhekel / of the French
Burgraues. In Cambridge shyre this herb is called a Whine / but I putt pety to
it / to make difference between this herb / and a fur: which in many places
of England is also called a Whine Petye. Whine has busshye stalks of a span
length / and longer with many joints like knees with many holow places /
between the leaves and stalk like arm holes / with little round heads and
little leaves / thin as Lentilles be / drawinge nere in lykenes unto the leaves
of Rue or of wild Melliote / some thing rough / and not without a good
sauoure. It is laid up in bryne / before it has pricks / and is afterward
good for meat. The branches are full of sharp and strong pricks. The root
is white and hot / and such as is able to make humors thin that are thick.

The virtues.
THE bark of the roots of ground whyn / dronken with wine / provoke urine
/ and breaks the stone: it byteth away the utter most cruftes of sores /
and the broth of the same in vinegre and honye / swageth teth ache / if the teth
be washed therewyth. The root of this herb / is in a manner hot in the third
degree / after the mind of Galene / in the book of Simple medicines.

Of Camomyle.
depiction of plant Anthemis.


ANthemis / otherwise called Chamemelu^ / conteyneth under it three kinds /
which only differ in the color of ye flower. The branches are a span long
/ all bushye with many places like arm holes / between the stalk and ye
branches / The branches are thin / small and many / the little hedes are
round with yellow flowers in ye mids / and about that round head either
white flowers stand in order or purple or yelow / about the greatness of the
leaves of Rue. The first kind of Camomille is called in Greek Lecanthemon /
in English Camomyle / in Duche Romisch Camillen. The Pothecaries in Germanye
call this kind Chamomillam Romanam. This herb is scarce in Germanye / but in
England it is so plentuous / that it grows not only in Gardines / but also
eight mile above London / it grows in the wild field / in Richmonde grene /
in Brantfurd grene / and in most plenty of all / in Hunsley heth. The second
kind is called in Greek Chrysantemon. I have seen this herb in high Germany in
the feldes / but never in England yt I remember. It may be called in English
/ yelow Camomille. The third kind is called in Greek Heranthemon. Diverse
think / that Heranthemon is the herb / which is called of the Herbaries
Amarisca rubra / and of our Country men / Read math / or Red madewede. The
thing that seems to let this herb to be Heranthemon / is this: It has not a
yelowe head or knop / which is compassed about with purple flowers / as the
other kinds have yelowe knoppes set about / one with white flowers / and the
other with yelow / but the head or knop of this herb / is nothing like the
knoppes of the other / nether in greatness / nether in form / nor yet in
color: and the sede is as great as Spinache sede is / but without pricks / in
many other points it agrees with the description. The leaves are very small
/ but the flowers are cremesin / and they should be purple. Heranthemon has
the name / because it floureth in the Spring. This have I written of this
herb / that learned men should search more diligently for it / which is the
true Heranthemon.

Matthiolus writes that the Apothecaries of Italy only know that kind of
Chamomill / which has whitishe leaves round about ye yelow knop in the head of
the stalk / and says that he has often times seen both the other two kinds.
But it is like that he knows none of them all / for it that he set teth forth
with the white flowers / seems by his playinge of it to be Cotula non fetida /
and not the right Camomile. For the right Camomille grows not in the corn /
but in roughe places and beside high ways / as Dioscorides writes / and
experience has taught them that know the right herb. It is also like if he
be not an unkind man / seeing Heranthemon is known almost to no man in Europa
/ that he would have as well set fourth the figure of it / as he has frelye
and honestlye done in other strange herbs which have been unknown unto the
most part even of the learned sort / or at ye least / if he could not have
come by the herb grene / that he might have caused it to be painted / he
would either have described it / or ellis have told us the Italian name / or
the common name of the Herbaries or of the Apothecaries / that thereby the
ignorant might have cummed to the knowledge of it / inquiring for it by some of
the names which he had known to be named by. Amatus Lusitanus which takes
upon him to teach Spanyardes / Italians / French men / and Germans / the
name of Herbs in their tongues / writes that Camomile is commonly known /
and that the Camomille with the yelowe flowers is gessen / but he nether
describes it nor gives it any name / And of the other he makes no mention
at al. Wherefore it is like yt he knows nether of both: Wherefore he had done
better to have said / I do know nether of both / then thus shortly to pass
by them.

The operation of Chamomille.
CHamomille is hot and dry in the first degree. Chamomyle in subtilnes is
like the rose / but in heat it draws more nere the qualite of oil / which
is very agreynge unto the nature of man / and temperate. Therefore it is good
against werynes / it swageth ache / and vnbindeth and louseth it yt is stretched
out / softeneth it that is but measurably hard / and sets it abroad / that
was narrowly thrust together. It dryueth away / and dissolueth agues / which
come not with an inflammation of any inward part / and specially such as
come of cholerike humores / and of the thycknes of the skin. Wherefore this
herb was consecrated of the wise men of Egypt unto the son / and was rekened
to be the only remedy of all agues. But in that they were deceived / for it can
only heal those agues that I rehearsed / and those when as they be ripe.
Howbeit / it helps in deed very well / also all other which come of
melancholy or of fleme / or of the inflammation of some inward part. For
Camomyle is the strongest remedy / when it is given after that the matter is
ripe: Therefore it is most convenient for the midriffe / and for the pains
under the pappes / whether the herb be sodden or sitten over / or be dronken.
It drives down weomens sycknes / brings forth the birth / provoke urine /
and dryueth out the stone. It is good to be dronken against the gnawyng and
windye swellinge of the small guts / it purges away the yelowe iaundis. It
heals the disease of the liver / it is good for ye bladder to be bathed with
the broth of this herb. Of all the kinds of Camomyle / that kind with the
purple flowers is strongest: they with the yelow and white flower / do more
provoke urine. They heal also laid to emplaster wise / the impostem that is
about the corner of the eye. The Same chewed / heal the sores of the mouth.

Antirrhinum.
THE herb which Dioscorides and Plinye call Antirrhinum / Theophrastus
calls Antirrhizum / for he describes his Antirrhizum thus: It is like unto
Gooshareth / called Aparine with a very little root / and almoost none: It has
a fruit like unto a calfes snoute. But as Dioscorides agrees with Plinye in
the name of this herb / so does he in the description of ye same / differ both
from Pliny and Theophrastus also. For Plinye gives the leaves of Line / or
flackes unto Antirrhinum / and Dioscorides describes his Antirrhinum with
leaves like unto Pimpernel. His words are these: Antirrhinum is an herb like
unto Pimpernel / both in leaves and also in stalk: the flowers are purple like
unto Leucoion or viole albe / but less: wherefore it is called wyld Lichnis /
it has a fruit like unto a calfys snowt. The herb / which is described of
Pliny / grows much in England in the corn feldes / and in fallowed lands:
at the first sight it appears like unto Cocle in the flower / and partly in
the color of the lefe / which is bygger and longer then flax leaves be / but
not unlike them in figure. This herb may be called in English Calfes snowte.
But Antirrhinum that Dioscorides describes / grows not in England / that
ever I saw. For it that was sent me out of Italy / for Antirrhinu^ Dioscoridis
/ has not purple flowers / but yelow: much like unto the flowers of Osyris.
The flowers before they open / are like purple in deed but not afterward / for
then are they fayer yelow / the stalk also is round / and not foursquared:
the buddes out of which the leaves come / and the fruit both / do wonderfully
nere resemble a Calfys snowte. The leaves in deed are like unto ye leaves of
Pimpernel / but much greater. Therefore as yet I have seen no herb where unto
the description of Dioscorides agrees / nether yet any that the description
of Theophrast does agree with. Amatus Lusitanus writeteth that Antirrhino^ is
called in Duche Orant / but Orant / as it is plain by the description of
Tragus is our well / which the diers use to dye yelowe with all / but it has
nether the leaves of Pimpernel / nor ye leaves of flax / nor the leaves of
Goashareth. Wherefore Orant is nether the Antirrhinon of Dioscorides / nor ye
Antirrhinon of Theophrast / nor it of Pliny / wherefore these two writers in this
herb deserve no credit. Matthiolus sets out a kind of Antirrhinon with
sede (as he says) like unto a Calfys head. If he mean by the word semen the
sede alone / and not the fruit with the sede and all together / and Pliny
understand the word semen even so likewise / then I think that it shall be hard
for Matthiolus to find such one. But if he mean by the word semen the fruit
hole as it appears outwardlye: then I think that the herb that Matthiolus
sets out of all other / draws nerest unto the description of Antirrhinon
in Pliny.

The properties of Calfes snoute.
MEn write that this herb is good against all poisoned drinks / and that they
that are anointed with this herb with lily oil / or priuet oil / shall
thereby wexe fair and well fouored. Theophrastus writes that some men have
supposed / that the use of this herb should help men to obtain praise and
worship. But all these are but dreams of sorcerers / for none of these three
learned men above rehearsed / write / that this herb has this propertye / but
only declare the opinions of other men / which wrote or spoke of these
properties by guess.

Of Gooshareth.
depiction of plant Aparine.


GOoshareth called also Clyuer / because it cleueth upon me^nes clothes / is
named in Greek Aparine / Philantropos / and Omphalo carpos: in Duche /
Klebcraut: in French / Grateron. It has many branches small / and foursquare
and sharp / ye leaves stand in a round circle about the stalk / certain
spaces going between / the circles are like unto madder / the flower are white
/ the sede is hard / round / some thing holowe / and white in the mids /
like unto a navel / and it cleueth unto men's clothes. The shepherdes use it
in the stead of a strayner to pull out here is of the milk. This herb grows
in all countres in great plentye.

The virtues.
THe juice of the sede / stalks / and leaves of Gooshareth / is good to be
dronken against the bytinges of Veperes / Phalanges / and other venomous
beasts: The same poured into a mannis ear / swageth the pain / the herb
bruised with hogs grese / dryueth away hard kyrnelles and wennes /
wheresoever they be.

Of Apios.
depiction of plant Apios. Ernutte.


APios is called also Chamebalanos in Greek / in Theophrastus Ischas / and in
Latin after the translation of Theodoro Carica: and the same might be called in
English an Ernut / or an Earth nut / has the properties of Apios. The earth nut
grows in many places of England / and in the most plentye that I have seen
in Northumberland. Apios puts forth two or three branches / which rise a
little from the ground / small / read / and like a rishe: the leaves are like
Rue / but some thing longer / narrower / and yelowishe grene. The sede is
little / the rote is like the root of a white Affodill / and after the likeness
of a Pear / but rounder and full of juice. The bark without is black / ye
root within is white. The herb which Matthiolus has set out for Apios /
might have been taken for the right Apios of all men / if he had proved that it
had had a small sede / and that the root had purged upward and dounwarde as
Dioscorides writes that the rote of Apios does. But whilse he does nether of
both / a man may as well dout of his Apios / as he douteth of the Apios that
Ruellius sets out. Amatus Lusitanus says that Apios is called in Duche
Erdtnuss. But the herb which is called in Duche Erdnuss / has nether a lefe
like Rue / but like a Ciche / nether a small sede / but a great sede in a cod
like unto a kind of Fiche / nether does it purge upward and dounward / for men
to eat them in France as Ruellius cited of Amatus writes / and they are eaten
also in Germany / but they only ingendre a lothsumnes / and stere to vomit
as Tragus writes / but they purge not / nether do any other harm to the
shepeherdes that eat them / wherefore it is plain that Amatus with Tragus and
Fuchsius erreth / which takes the herb / called in Duche Erdnuss / to be
Apion in Dioscoride.

The virtues.
THE upper part of the root draws out by vomiting choler and fleme / and
the under part draws out the same humores by the fundament. The whole
purges both the ways. The juice purges / taken in the quantite of xv.
grains. The words of Dioscorides made me to doubt / whether our Erthnutt were
Apios or no / seeing that many eat the hole root of Erthnut: yea some time
five or six / and yet nether go to stool / nor vomit by the eating thereof:
whether Earthnut have these foresaid properties in Greece or no / and not here:
I can not surely tell / but this profit shall thou have at the least by this my
coniecturing and setting forth of this herb / that with less labor thou
may know the true Apios / if thou change to se it. I would exhort
students to prove / if this Ernut of ours have in any other place of England
/ where as I have not been / have the properties that Dioscorides gives unto
Apios or no. And if they can not find them / let the^ learn of this Ernut in
seking and judging of herbs / not to judge herbs only by the outward
fashone / but also by the qualites and virtue. For as the lykenes of a man
alone in an ape or an image / makes not them men / because they want the
virtue pour and operation of a man. So is not the figure or likeness that
makes an herb / except it have the strenght and operation of the herb /
whose likeness it bears also.

Of Bawme.
BAwme is named in Greek Melissophillon or Meliphillon / in Latin Apiastrum or
Citrage / in Duche Melisson or Hartzkraut / in the Frese tongue Confili / in
French Melisse / the Potecaries call it Melissam. Bawme is named in Greek
Melissophillon / and in Latin Apiastrum / because Bees / which are called in
Greek Melisse / and in Latin Apes / do greatly haunt this herb / and are
delited with it. Right Bawm has leaves and stalks like unto stinkinge Horehound: but they are greater and thinner / but not so rough. They have the
smelle of a Cytrone of a Lymon.

Of Apiastrum.
depiction of plant

The Propertye.
THE leaves dronken with wine / are good against the bitinges of Phalanges and
Scorpiones / and against the bytinge of a dog / for the same purposes it is
good to be bathed with the broth of the same. It is good for women to sit over
this herb / to bring down their flowers. It is good that ye aching teth
should be washed with the same herb. This herb is also good to be put into
Clisteres against the bloodye flixe. The leaves with Salpeter in drink / help
the strangling that comes of Todstolles / with honye in an electuary / it is
good for the gnawinge in the bellye / and for the shortwinded / and if it be
laid to with salt / it drives away wennes and hard keruelles: it scoureth
sores / and if it be laid to / it swageth the pains of the joints. The common
baume that is commonly used in England / is but a bastard kind / and the true
baume grows in many gardines in Germany / but I have not seen it in England
/ that I remember. It may be called in English / Baum gentle.

(...)

Of Arbutus
(...) depiction of plant leaf with the branch / as the quicken trees leaves
are. Dioscorides describes the Arbut tree after this manner. Comaros called in
Latin Arbutus / or Vnedo / is a tree like unto a Quince tree / having thin
leaves with a fruit of the greatness of a Plumme / without any keruell. When it
is ripe / it is either yelowe or read. Pliny describes ye Arbut tree after this
manner: Strawberyes that grow one the ground / have an other kind of body
then the Arbut berryes have / which are like in kind with the other / which
grows on the tree / called in Latin Vnedo / which only fruit is like unto
the fruit of the earth. The tree it self is thick and bushy. The fruit is ripe
in a year / and it that grows in under bloometh / and the other that is
elder / waxes ripe in the tree at one time. It is a fruit of small honor / and
thereupon has the name / that it brings forth but one alone by it self. Yet
do the Grecianes give two names unto it / Comaron / and Memekylon. Whereupon it
does appear that there are so many kinds with us. This is called in an other
name in Latin Arbutus. Ouide also joined tree Strawberry / and ground
Strawberry together in these words; Arbuteos fructus, montanaque fraga legebat.
Theophrastus gives unto his Arbuto a leaf between Ilicem and Lauru^ / as the
leaf of the tree has / whose figure I set forth. And Dioscorides seems to
give unto his Arbuto the likeness of a Quince tree / wherefore this tree that I
set forth / agrees better with the description of Theophrast / then with
Dioscorides / except Dioscorides in comparing Arbutum to a Quince tree / mean
not of the leaves / but of the fashion of the tree and manner of growing of it.

The Properties.
GOod properties / that I know of / this fruit has none / but that it
delyteth some men for the diuersyte / for it is evil for the stomache / and
ingendreth the head ache.

Of Aristolochia.
depiction of plant Aristolochia rotunda.
depiction of plant Aristolochia longa.


ARistolochia is a Greek name / and is so called / because it is very good for
weomen / that labor of child: The Latins use the same name / ye Germans
call Aristolochia in their tongue / Osterlacye. Dioscorides makes three kinds
of Aristolochia / the first is called Aristolochia rotunda / and this is ye
female. The Potecaries both in Germany and in England have abused in ye stead
of the true Aristolochia rotunda / capnophragmite / mentioned in Pliny / which
is very well called of ye Germans holwurtz / because ye rote is holow. But
they have erred far: for this Holwurt is nothing agreyng with the description
of Aristolochia rotunda / for Aristolochia rotunda has leaves like Yuy / and a
good savor with some sharpenes / somthinge round and soft. It has many
twigges / coming forth of one root / long branches and white flowers /
representing little cappes / wherein is a read thing that sauoreth evil: the
root is roundaboute like unto a rape root. The leaves of Holwurtes / which is
their Aristolochia rotunda / are cut and far in indented / and very like unto
our gardine Rue / but ye leaves of our gardine Rue / are not like unto Yuy
leaves: therefore this Holwurt of theirs / is not Aristolochia rotunda of
Dioscorides. I have seen this Aristolochia rotunda diverse times: it has the
same savor and taste / that the other Aristolochia / which is called longa:
but this has a round root / but here and there appear out certain unequal
corners. It may be called in English round heart wurt / because ye leaves
represent a painted heart / or round byrthwurte: because it helps women to
bring forth their birth. The second kind of Aristolochia / is called
Aristolochia longa / which has a leaf some thing longer then the former
kind has: it has little branches of a span long / a purple flower of a
stinking savor / out whereof comes a fruit like unto a pear: but black and
al full of seeds in figure three square / the roots are a finger big / and a
span long / and somthinge longer. This kind grows plentuouslye beside Lake
de come in the vineyardes wallis: it grows also beside Bon about the
vineyardes by the Rhynsyde / of iche side of the high way / but I could never
se the fruytes so perfyt in Germany / as I did in Italy: this may be called in
English Long hartwurt / or long byrthwurte. The third kind of Aristolochia is
called Clematitis / because it has long small branches like a vinde / it has
leaves some thing round / like unto stone crop / and flowers like unto Rue /
longer roots / small with a thick bark which has a good savor. I did se
such a kind as this at Basell / whose leaves are less then all the other
kinds / but yet they were so great and unlike unto a stonecrop / that I dare
not plainly determe / that it was the right Clematitis. Matthiolus writes
that Pliny and Leonicemus do err / because they say that Aristolochia has
the name / because that it is good for weomen with child / when as Dioscorides
writes that it has ye name / because it is good for weomen yt are in labor.
Because Pliny and Leonicemus are dead / and ca^ not answer for the^ selfs / I
answer yt their error is not so great as Matthiolus makes it / if he could be
content to interpret gently their word as they meant by it / for it is out of
all dout / that they knew it as well as Matthiolus / yt Aristolochia was evil
for weomen with child / except ye time of birth were cummed / for they knew both
ye Greek tongue as well as Matthiolus does. Therefore it is out of dout yt they
meant / when they said it is good for weomen with child / yt it was good for them
at ye time of their birth. He yt says yt a spear is necessary for a man of
war / means not that he should occupye his spear at dinner before the time of
fighthinge cumme / but he means that it is good to have it at all time yt he
may occupye it when need requires. I trow yt Matthiolus will not say that
Aristolochia is good for weomen that are well delivered all ready / then seeing
it is good for weomen / it must be good for the^ yt are yet with child.
Wherefore the two noble clerks / are to sore scourged of their sharp
Scoolmaster for so little a faut. Nether do I utterly excuse them / because they
did not translate ye Greek word so properlye and truly as they should have
done.

The Virtues.
THe round is good against all other poysones / but ye long is good against
serpents and deadly venemes / if it be dronken / and laid to in the quantity
of a dram. The same dronken with pepper and myrr / dryueth forth weome^s
flowers / and their birth / and all the burdenes that the mother is charged
with. It does the same ministered in a suppositorye before. The round is of the
same strength. The same dronken with water is singularly good against the
shortwint sobbyng / the shaking / the disease of the milt / the places
shronke^ / and burstynges / the pains of the side. It draws out pricks and
shyuers. If it be laid to it takes away the scalles or scurffe of bones / and
eats away rotten sores / and scoureth the^ that are foul or stinking. With
honey and aris powder / it fylleth up hollow places / it scoureth ye goumes and
teeth. The third kind is supposed to help the same diseases that the other do
/ but more weykelye. Mesue writes that both the round and long hartwurt
purges / that the round purged fleme and thynne water more then the other:
they purge the lu^ges excelle^tly of rotten fleme / ye qua^tite that is to be
given of this herb / is either a dram / or a dra^ and an half. The round
Aristolochia as Galene witnesses / is more subtyle and fine / then the other
kinds be: therefore the round / for as much as it can more perfytely open /
and make more fine: It heals better then the other / such syckenesses as come
of stopping or of gross wind. The round also makes teeth whyt / and makes
the goumes clean. All the kinds are at the least hot and dry in ye second
degree: and if any be hoter then other / Galene rekeneth the third kind to be so.

Of Aron / or Cockowpint.
COckowpynt called also in English Rampe or Aron: is named in Greek Aron / in
Latin / Arum: in Duche Pfaffenbinde: in French Vidchien / of the Herbaries /
pes vituli, and serpenta ria minor: and of the Arabianes Luphminus. It has
leaves like dragon / but longer / and not so full of spots. The stalk is
somethyng purple and like unto a betell / out of which comes forth a fruit
of the color of saffrone. The root is white as dragones is / the which /
being sodden / is eaten / because it is not so bytynge / as it was before.

depiction of plant Cockoupint or Aron.


The virtues.
THE root / sede / and leaves of Aron / have the same properties that Dragon
has. The root is laid unto the goutye members with coudunge / and it is laid
up and kept as Dragones roots are / and because the roots are gentler / they
are desired of many to be eaten in England and in Germany. Dioscorides seems
by his wrytinge to show / that where as he was borne / Aron / was not so
sharp / as it is with us. Galene also writes / that Aron is hot in the first
degree / and dry in the same. But it that grows with us / is hot in the
third degree at the least: Wherefore some perauenture will say / that this our
Aron is not it that Dioscorides and Galene wrote of. But Galene in these words
folowinge / which are written in the second book dealementorum facultatibus /
witnesses / that there are two sorts of Aron / one gentle / and an other
bytinge. In quibusdam regionibus acrior quodammodo prouenit, vt prope ad
Dracontij radicem accedat. etc. In certain regions after a manner it grows
more bitinge and sharp: in so much that it is almost as hot as Dragon is /
and that the first water must be casten out / and the root sodden again in
the second. This herb growinge in Cyrene / is differing from it of our
country. For it that is with us in Asia for a great part / is sharper then it
that grows in Cyrene.

Of Mugwurte.
depiction of plant Artemisia uulgaris.


MVgwurt is called both of the Grecians and Latins Artemisia / of the Duche
Beyfuss / or Byfoet. The true Artemisia is as little known now adays / as is
the true Pontyke Wormwode / and less as I think: for this great Mugwurt is
such an Artemisia / as our Wormwode is Absinthium Ponticum / that is bastard
/ and not the true herb. Dioscorides writes / that Artemisia for the most
part grows about the Sea side / and Plinye writes / that it grows no
where ellis / but in the Sea coasts. This common Mugwurt of ours / grows not
at any Sea side that ever I could se yet: for I could never se it in these
coasts of England / nor Germanye / nor yet of Italye / but always in hedges /
and among the Corn far from the Sea. Artemisia is a busshye herb / like unto
Wormwode / but it has greater and fatter leaves and branches then Wormwood
has. First this great Wormwoode that is common with us / is not the Wormwod
that Dioscorides compares Artemisiam to / but it is Pontike wormwode. But this
common Mugwurt is nothing like Pontike wormwode / Therefore this common
Mugwurt can not be Artemisia Dioscoridis. Galenes Artemisia is hot in the
second degree / and sklenderlye dry in the same. But this common Mugwurte is
scantlye hot in the first degree. Wherefore this common Mugwurt can nether be
Artemisia of Dioscorides / nor of Galene / nor of Pliny. I found in an Ylande
beside Venise / the very right Artemisia / which had leaves greater then
Pontike wormwod a great deal / and fully hot in the second degree / and with
flowers much unlike unto wormwode Pontike / but somethynge agreynge in savor
/ but not altogether. Master doctor Wendy / the Kings Physiciane can testifye
of the same / which did examine the herb with me. This kind may be called
in English Sea Mugwurt. Some do take Feuerfewe for one kind of Artemisia / and
Tansye for an other kind / and in deed I think not / but that Feuerfewe can
do it that is required of Artemisia. Howebeit / me think that the description
of Dioscorides does not agree in all points with Fever few. For Feuerfewe if
it were one kind of Artemisia / ought to be like in figure and fashion unto
right Wormwode / and also unto the right Artemisia / but that it is not. I
report me unto them / which have seen all the three herbs. Wherefore I dare not
pronunce / that Feuerfewe is one of the first kinds of Artemisia. Dioscorides
makes also mention of another Artemisia / which grows in the middel land /
and not at the Seasyde. That says he is a little herb with one single or little
stalk / and full of flowers / of a read Orange color. This herb describes
Dioscorides to be Sphodra micron / yt is very little. Now when as Tansye is a
great high herb / how can Tansey be this herb? Me think that Feuerfew
should be rather this herb the^ Tansey / if it had but one stalk / and
yelowe flowers / as it has white. I think therefore / that it is not best to
pronunce in this herb / till all things be better tried. Matthiolus the
Italiane which checketh diverse by name sharpelye (in deed some worthelye) for
their erringe in Artemisia / erreth his own self in Artemisia / in settinge
that common Mugwurt for the right Artemisia / which nether agrees in natural
place / nor in degree of hete nor in likeness with it yt Dioscorides describes /
as by places and witnesses before brought out / I have sufficiently already
proved: He says yt the first kinds of Artemisia are found both in Hetruria /
and yt they differ in nothing / nether in fashion / smell / nor taste / nor
virtue / sauinge only in bigness. Which saying if it be true / then is the
one kind not it that Dioscorides describes / for the less kind differs
from the bigger in having of a stinkinge flower. Whether he erreth here or no /
let other men judge. He says that the two first kinds grow in Hetruria /
as though he knew them well / but he nether describes them / nor tells
their common names / nor their natural places where they grow / as he does
where he entreats of other herbs. Wherefore and for that / that he knows
not the right Pontike Wormwode / and erreth in it sore / it is most like
that he knows nether of the first kinds of Artemisia / and that he erreth
as much in them / as Plinye / Musa / Fuchsius / and the freres (that write
upon Mesue / whom he cheketh for their errors in the kinds of Artemisia) in
these and other kinds do. If Antonius Musa / and Leonardus Fuchsius had
written of all herbs as Matthiolus does of ye kinds of Artemisia and diverse
other in his book / that is if Musa had said / when he should have taught us an
herb / I know this herb well / it grows in Ferraria / and Fuchsius had said
/ I know this herb / and I have seen it often in Germany / and they had not
told the Italianes names Duche names / and the Herbaries and Apo^^ecaries
names / they might have escaped many a buffet / which of late they ^^ue
suffered both of diverse other / and also of Matthiolus / who by tarying
^^hinde in the reward in wrytinge of many herbs as he does here / seeks
(...) save him self in leuinge out of the common names / natural places and
ye ^^scription and virtues of ye herbs / lest if he erred in any of them / he
should ^e taken with such errors as he takes other men wythall. They that
^re disposed to se the right Artemisiam / let them go to Venise / and from
^hence a little way into an Yland / called Chertosa / where as is a
Chartarhouse / and there may they see it in all points agreynge with the
description of Dioscorides. Amatus Lusitanus where as Dioscorides makes three
kinds of Artemisia / makes but two / and the one he makes the gardin
Artemisiam / and the other the common Feuerfew. Wherein he goes quite away
from the text which he takes in hand to declare. For the text makes one
kind of Artemisia / that grows commonly by the Sea side with bygge leaves
and twigges / and another kind that is less with a small white flower that
stinketh. And then he makes mention of an other kind that grows in the middle
land with a little and single stalk. Beside these three sorts he entreats of
an other which is called Artemisia Leptophyllos / whereof is mention made in
all our common Greek textes / and common translationes of Dioscorides / that
now are / and also in the old translation of Dioscorides / is mention made at
the lest of three kinds of Artemisia / although Galene make mention but of two
kinds. And where he makes his former Artemisia to be a gardin Herb / when as
Dioscorides assigns unto it commonly the Seasyde / and Plinye only the Sea
side: He swarueth ones again from his Author / that he takes in hand to
declare. And to prove against Matthiolus / that Matricaria is Artemisia
vnicaulis / he alleges diverse new Autores / but without name / whom he
him self in diverse places of his book / condemns and refuses their
Autorite when it pleases him / other reason brings he none in this place /
but that a stinkinge herb like Camomile / is Parthenium / and not Matricaria.
Therefore Matricaria is Artemisia Monochlonos. What a pitye argument this is /
every man may se / for he reasons so / as if Mathwed were Parthenium: then
there were no other herb to be Artemisia vnicaulis / but Matricaria. Let young
students of Physike look that they lose not their time in readinge of such
enarrationes / as this man writes / which bring more darkness often times then
light to the text of Dioscorides. Let this little reason be a preservative
against the error that he would led young scolares into: That herb can not
be Artemisia vnicaulis that has three or four stalks / or some time mo. But
Feuerfewe has three or four / and some time mo. Therefore it can not be
Artemisia Mochlonos. As for me / because I will not seem better learned then I
am / I know but one true kind of Artemisia / as for the common Mugwurte. I
think a man may use it in Physike until a better kind may be found /
which thing I trust shall shortelye come to pass in many places / if
Physicianes will take the pains to go forewarde in sekinge out of Herbs as
they have begone.

The virtues of Mugwurt.
BOth the Mugwurtes / both it with the brother lefe and it with the narrower /
heat / and also make subtle / and they made hot upon the fire / are good for
weomen to sit in / for to bring down their sykenes / to bring forth their
secondes / and their birth: They help also the suffocation of the mother / and
the inflammatio^ of the same / they break the stone / and provoke urine that
is stopped. The same laid to the nether most part of the belly / bring weomen
their sycknes. The juice put into the mother with myrre / does ye same yt the
bath does. The tops and leaves of the same herbs / in the quantite of three
drammes / are commonly dronken to bring the foresaid sykenes down. The right
Mugwurt is good to be dronken against the poison of the juice of Poppye /
called Oppium / with wine. Pliny writes yt it was the opinion in his days /
that ye men that had it upon them / should not be weary / and yt no evil
medicine should hurt them / and that no euel beast should noye them.

Of the Reed.
A Reed is called in Greek Kalamos / in Latin Arundo or Calamus / in Duch Even
Roer / or even Reed: in French / Vne Roseau. There are diverse kinds of Redes
/ some are thick redes: whereof Arrows are made in diverse countrees: some
serve for to make tounges for pypes / some serve to make instruments to write
with / which we commonly called pens. Another kind of Read grows about
rivers sides / and this being thick and holowe / is called of some Arundo
Cypria: of other Donax. Another kind is called Phragmitis / or Vallatoria:
because it grows about hedges and diches. This is small and something white
/ and well known of all men: This last kind grows much in England / but
the other kinds grow not in England yt I know of: howbeit they are brought
in of Merchants out of other countrees.

The virtues of the Reed.
THE root of the common hedge Read (called in Latin Canna) by it self / or
laid to with his knoppes / draws out shyueres and pricks. It also swageth
the pain of the loins / and members out of ioynte / laid to with vinegre.
The grene leaves bruised and laid to / heal Choleric inflammacions / and
other inflammacions also. The ashes of the bark laid to with vinegre / heal
ye falling of the heir. The down that is in the top of ye Reed like
flowers: if it come into a man's ear / makes him deaf.

Of Follfoote / or Asarabacca.
depiction of plant

ASarum is called in Greek Asaron / in English Follfote (because it has a
round leaf / like a folis foot) and Asarabacca / in Duche Haselwurt / because
it grows about Hasel tree roots / in French Cabaret. Folfote grows only
in gardines in England / but it grows wild in certain places of Germanye.
Folefoote is a well sauoringe herb / and used to be put in garlandes. It has
leaves like unto Yuy / but less / and rounder by a great deal / with purple
flowers / like the flowers of Henbane / and they grow but a little from the
root / and have a good savor / out of the which comes sede like grapes. It
has many roots full of knottes / small / one lyinge over an other / not
unlike unto grass roots / but much smaler / well savoring / hot / and
bytinge vehementlye the tongue.

The Virtue of Follfoote.
THE nature of this herb is hot / and it provoke water / it heals the
dropsy / and the old Sciatica. The roots provoke down a woman's sickness /
taken in the quantite of six drammes with mede: and they purge as nesinge
powder (called white Hellebor) does. Galene says / that Folefoote is like unto
Acorus in strenght / but that this is more strong and vehement.

Of great saint John's wurt.
depiction of plant Ascyron.


GAlene and Paul conteyne Ascyron under Androsemo: but Dioscorides describes
these herbs severally / and so makes them sundry herbs. Ascyron called also
Ascaroides / is a kind of Hyperici / called in English saint John's grass /
or saint John's wurt: but it differs in greatness / for it has greater leaves
/ stalks / and mo branches / then saint John's grass has. I have marked also
this difference / that Ascyron has a four squared stalk / and leaves with
very few holes in them / which I have not seen in Hyperico. The herb may
be called in English / great saint John's grass. I have seen it diverse times
in Sion park.

The Virtues.
THE sede of this herb is good for the Sciatica. If it be dronken with water
and honye / about the quantite of twentye ounces / it purges largelye choleryke
humores. But it must be taken continuallye / till the pacient be hole. This
herb is also good against burninge.

Of Swallowe wurt.
ASclepias is rekened of Fuchsius to be the herb / which is called of the
common Herbaries Hirundinaria / of the Potecaries Vince toxicum / of the
Germans Schwalbe^wurtz. It grows in Germanye in high mountains / and in
stony ground among the busshes. I have not seen it in England: but it may
be called in English Swallwurte. Some Physicianes Italianes / when I was in
Italye / supposed this herb (which some call Asclepias) to be Apocinum. But
this herb has no yelow juice / nether does it poison with wine / as Apocinum
does. Wherefore this herb can not be Apocinum. Asclepias has long small
branches / out of which come forth long leaves / like unto Yuy leaves / many
small roots / which savor well / The flower is of an unpleasant savor / The
sede is like hatchet fiche / called otherwise Securidaca. But because the
roots of Swallow wurt are not well smelling / a man may not be to bold to
hold that Swallowurt is the right Asclepias. Wherefore I have not as yet seen
the right Asclepias in all points / agreing with the description of
Dioscorides.

depiction of plant Asclepias.


The Virtues of Swallow wurt.
THE roots of this herb dronken with wine / help them that have gnauwynge in
their body / and are remedy against the bytinge of venomous beasts. The
leaves laid upon the almost incurable sores of the pappes or breasts / and of
the mother / heal them. The later writers of Physike / write that this herb
is good to bring down weomens flowers / that it is good against the biting of
a mad dog / and against poison. Wherefore it is called Vince toxicum / that
is / master poison / or overcome poison. They say that the root of this herb
steped in wine / is good against the dropsye / and that the flowers and leaves
broken / and put into wounds / heals them shortelye. They say also that
this herb heals materye and old sores / and is good against burstinges / and
the diseases of the priuityes.

Of Sperage.
depiction of plant Asparagus.


SPerage is called in Latin Asparagus / in Duche Spargen / in French Esperage
/ some Potecaries call this herb Sparagus. Asparagus is of two sorts / the
one is called Aspa altilis / Asparagus alone / and this is the common Sperage
which grows in diverse gardins in England / and in some places by the Sea
side / in sandy hills / as it grows right plentuously in the Ylandes of East
Freselande / and in high Germany / without any setting or sowyng. The other
kind is called in Latin Corruda / or Asparagus syluestris. This kind may be
called in English Pricky Sperage / because it has pricks growing on it.
This kind did I never se but only in the mount Appenine. Gardin Sperage is full
of branches / and it has leaves like Fenell / but much smaller / and a great
round root / which has a knoppe in it. When Sperage comes first forth of
ye ground / it brings forth certain big twigges / and in the tops are
certain buddes like unto round knoppes / which afterward sprede abroad into
twigges / branches and leaves: The sede of this kind of Sperage when it is
ripe / it is read. The wild Sperage in the stead of leaves has nothing but
pricks / in other points not unlike the other Sperage.

The Properties of Gardin Sperage.
THE young stalks of gardine Sperage broken / and taken with white wine /
staunche the pain of the kydnes: Sperage roasted or sodden / swageth and eases
the Strangulion / the hardness in making of water / and ye bloody flixe. The
root sodden with wine or vinegre / helps members out of ioynte. The same
sodden with figs and ciches / and taken in / heal the iaundes / it heals
also the Sciatica and the Strangurian. The prickye Sperage is good to make ones
bellye louse / taken in meat: and it is good to provoke urine: it is also good
for the stopping of the water / against the iaundis / the diseases of the
kidnes / and Sciatica. It is also good for the teth ache. Sperage scoureth
away the with out any manifest hete or cold.

Of Cererache.
ASplenum as Dioscorides writes / is called also Asplenium / Splenium / and
Hemionium / and though Hemionites be a far other herb in Dioscorides then
Asplenum is / and it is called of Asclepiades / in the nynth book of Galenes
work of the composition of medecines after ye places / Hemionites /
Andromachus in the same book gives the same names unto Asplenum. But Galene in
ye first book of Simples / and the xij. Chapter / seems contrary depiction of
plant Asplenum.
unto all these four autentike autours / to make two diverse herbs of
Asplenum and Stolopendrium / whilse he rehearses these words / the greater
diseases of the milte and liver / require stronger herbs / that is to wit /
the barks of Capers / the roots of Tamarisk / Stolopendrion and Scilla /
called Sea onyon / and the herb which represents the same thing by his name
/ called Asplenos. What a man should say in this matter / it is not very ready
at hand unto al men / nether had it ben ready unto me / if that I had not seen
two kinds of Asplenum. Whilse I went by the Ryne side / four miles beneth
Binge: I chaunsed upon great plenty of Aspleno / and there did I se one herb
which had whyter leaves / deper indented / and sharper leaves the^ the other
had: in so much (as I remember) it drew very nere unto the lykenes of a
certain kind of a little thistel / which is indented like Asplenum. This (as
I suppose) was the herb which Galene did separe from Scolopendrion. And yet
is not Scolopendrion Hearts tongue / which agrees nothing nether in likeness /
nether in description with Scolopendrion. Asplenos grows much in Germanye /
in old moiste walls / and in rocks / it grows also in England about
Bristowe: it is named in Duche Steinfarn / in French Ceterache / as the
Potecarye call it. I have hard no English name of this Herb / but it may
well be called in English Ceterache / or Miltwaste / or Finger fern: because
it is no longer then a man's finger: or Scaleferne / because it is all full of
scales on the innersyde. Asplenon has leaves like in figure unto Scolopendra
ye best / which also called Centipes / is not unlike a great and rough palmers
worm. The leaves are some thing like Polipodium / and are indented so that
one indenting is not right over against an other / but against every division
/ cutting / or indenting / stands a round half circle. The inner side of ye
lefe is somthinge yelowe / and rough / with small things like bran / or yelow
scales / which with a light occasion fall of / ye outer side is grene: it has
nether flower nor sede. If this description can not evidently enough declare
unto you Asplenon / take a branch of Polipodium / and take a finger lenght of
ye mids of it / the nether end / and the high end cut away / cut of both
the sides the tops and the leaves away / and make then the remain round / and
then shall ye se the very form of Asplenon.

The Properties.
THE leaves of Ceterach have this virtue / when they are made hot in vinegre /
and dronken of for the space of xl. days / yt they wast up ye milt / but ye
leaves must be bruised and laid unto ye milte with wine. This herb is also good
for ye Strangurian / and ye iaundes or guelsought: it stops ye hichcoke or
yisking / and breaks stones in the bladder. Autors write yt this herb is not
to be used much of such weomen as would feign have many childer. Asplenium
as Galene says is no hot herb / but it has subtle parts / and therefore
breaks the stone / and makes the milt to melt away.

Of Astragalus.
depiction of plant

AStragalus is named about Colon Erdeekelen / in Nederland Erdnutte / in
Ouerla^d Ein Erdtnuss: I have seen it in England in Come park / and on
Rychemonde heth. But I never could learn the name of it in English. I am
compelled for lack of an other name to call it Peese earthnut / because it
has leaves like a little Peese / or a Ciche / and roots like an Earth nut.
Allthough all the description of Dioscorides beside did agree very well unto
this herb: yet when as I had found the root in certain moist places / very
little astringe^t / I began to dout: but after that I found that in dry places
/ and that it had a manifest astriction / I douted no more but that this herb
was the right Astragalus / allthough Fuchsius do contend / that this should be
Apios. Dioscorides described Astragalus thus: Astragalus is a little busshy
Herb / growyng a little from the ground with branches and leaves like unto a
Ciche / the flowers are purple and little. The root is round as a radice / and
a great wythall. There grows certain things unto the root / strong as
horn / and black / and one wounden within an other / and astringent in taste.
It grows in places open to the wind in shadow places / and where as snow
lies long. This description agrees well with the herb that I set forth in
all other things as far as I can se / sauinge in the root / for the hole
root is not like a radice / although it have certain round knoppes / like one
kind of radice. And it that Matthiolus sets forth / has rounder leaves /
and not so long and indented as the leaves of a Ciche are. Let learned men
examine both / and take it for Astragalo / which agrees with the hole
description best.

The Virtues of Astragalus.
THE root of Astragalus dronken with wine / stops the flux of the bellye /
and makes a man to make water. It is good to put the powder of this herb into
old sores. It stops blood: but it is so hard / that it can not well be
beaten.

Of Areche.
AReche or Oreche is called in Latin Atriplex / in Greek Atraphaxis and
Chrysolachanon / in Duche Molten or Milten / in French Arroches or Bones
dames. Areche is of two kinds / the one is garden Areche / which grows
only in gardines / the other kind is called in English Wild Areche / and
it grows abroad in the Corn feldes. Areche is moist in the second degree /
and cold in the first.

The Virtues of Areche.
Atriplex.
depiction of plant depiction of plant

AReche softeneth the bellye / and either raw or sodden / it drives away
shallow sores / which are broad and not deep / called in Latin Pani. The sede
of this herb with a certain mede / made with water and honye / heals the
iaundies or guelsought.

Of Otes.
AVena is named in Greek Bromos / in English Otes or Etes / or Hauer / in
Duche Hauer or Haber / in French Auoine. There are two kinds of Otes / the
one is called in English commonly Otes / and the other is called Egilops in
Greek / and in Latin Auenasterilis / and in English wild Otes. Otes are of a
cold and a stoppinge nature. Otes are so well known / that I need not to
describe them. There is an other kind of Otes / called Pillotes / which grow
in Sussex / it has no husk abydinge upon it / after that it is threshed / and
is like Otemele. This kind grows in no other country that ever I could tell
of / sauinge only in England / nether have I read in any new or old Author
of this kind. The men of the country where they grow / say that they will
not grow well in a fat ground / but in a barun ground / wherein no corn
has grown before.

depiction of plant Auena.


The Virtues of Otes.
OTes are good to make emplasteres of / as Barley is. The gruel made of Otes /
stops the belly. The juice of Otes in suppinges or brothes / is good for the
cough: Galene writes that Otes do dry and measurablye disperse abroad
without any bytinge / if they be laid unto any place.

Of Baccharis / supposed to be Sage of Jerusalem.
BAccharis is a well savoring herb / and used to be put in garlandes / whose
leaves are sharp / and have a mean bigness between the Violet leaf / and the
leaf of Mollen. The stalk is full of crestes and corners about a cubit height
/ some thing sharp / not without little branches growing out of it / the
flower is purple / and something white / and well smelling. The roots are
like black Hellebore roots / and the smell of them / is like Cinnamum. I have
sought much to find this herb which the Latins call Baccharis. But I could
never find any yt did so well agree with the description of Baccharis / as does
the herb that we call in English Sage of Jerusalem / and the Potecaries
Pulmonoria. If any man can find any herb to whom the description of Baccharis
agrees better to / then to this herb / will I give places / and in the mean
season I will take this for Baccharis / until I find a better. Sage of
Jerusalem grows about Collen in woddes in great plentye. Matthiolus
shows an other herb for Baccharis / to whom (if the description of Baccharis
does agree better then to it that I set forth) I will give place unto him / when
I shall se the herb that he describes: In the mean time I have set out it
that I can find to be most lykest unto Baccharis in England and in Germanye.

The Virtues of Baccharis.
THE root of Baccharis sodde^ in water / does help it yt is drawn together
and bursten: it is also good for the^ yt have fallen from above / and are
bruised for the^ yt are short wynded / for an old cough / for the^ yt can not
make water well. It drives down weomens syckenes. It is good to be given in
wine against the bytinges of serpents. It is good for weomen in chyldbed to
sit over: The leaves as they be astringent / are good to lay to the head for
the head ache / for ye inflammation of the eyes / for ye breasts or pappes that
swell to much after the birth / for the impostemes of the corners of ye eyes
when they begin first / and burninges / and inflammationes. The savor makes a
man sleep.

Of stinkinge Horehounde.
depiction of plant Ballote.


STynking Horehound is named in Greek Ballote / in some Greek books Megaprasion
/ and other Melanprasio^ / of ye Latins Marrubium magnum / or Marrubium nigrum
/ in Duche Stinking Andorne / in French Marrubium noir. It is called also in
English Black horehound. Ballote has foursquare stalks / black / and
somthynge rough / many growyng forth of one root / with greater leaves then
Horehounde / rough / and a space going between some thing round / like unto
Apiastrum / we call Baume: wherefore some call it Apiastrum / that is Baume /
white flowers do compass the stalk about after the manner of whorles.

The Virtue of stinking Horehounde.
THE leaves of this herb laid to with salt / are good for the bitinge of a
dog. If the leaves be laid in ashes whilse they faide a little / they stop
the swelling lumpes that rise in the fundament: with honey also they purge
fylthy and foul wounds.

Of Bockes bearde.
depiction of plant

Goats beard is called in Greek Tragopogon or Kome / in Latin Barba hirci / in
Duch Bocks bard / in French barbe de bouc. Dioscorides describes gotes bearde
thus: Tragopogon has a short stalk / leaves like unto Saffron / and a long
root which is sweet / out of ye stalk comes forth a great head / in whose
top is black sede or fruit / whereupon it has ye name given: this is ye text of
Dioscorides / but I do suspecte yt Dioscorides text is corrupted / for I think
yt he would never say yt this herb should be called buckes beard / because it
has a black sede or fruit: for what has a white fruit or a black to do with
ye liknes of a bockes beard? nothing at al. Therefore where as Dioscorides text
is corrupt / it is best to amend it with ye text of Theophrastus / of whom he
borrowed altogether this description. The^ where as Dioscorides says / out of
the top comes out a black sede / whereof Gotes beard has ye name. Let us
read as Theophrastus does. Out of ye top comes a hoar white bearde /
whereupon it is called Gotes bearde: These be the words of Theophrastus. The
herb which we call Goats bearde / in barone places has but a short stalk /
but in gardines and in rank meddoes / it has a long stalk and full of
joints like knees. About London I have seen in the field this herb with a
sweet root and with black sede and a yelowe flower / and after the flower is
gone with a great deal of long white down like tuftes of white heir / but
about Colon I saw it which had white sede and a bitter root all full of milk
as in other places it does appear. Matthiolus marueyleth that the herb now
taken of us for Tragopogon / is thought of Hermolaus Barbarus / nether to be
the right Tragopogon of Theophrastus or of Dioscorides. Surely I think that
it chaunsed unto Hermolaus as it chaunsed unto me: For I saw diverse times an
herb / that in all other points did agree well with the description of
Tragopogon / sauinge that the herb always had a bitter root / which thing
made me still to judge / that the herb was not the right Tragopogon / until
I found an herb with the same figure and fashion in all things like the other
with a sweet root. And so I think that Hermolaus therefore denied that this
herb was the right Tragopogon / because he could never find any with a
sweet root. An other cause might be that he saw the leaves of our Tragopogon
much greater then the leaves of Safron. But Dioscorides looked not unto the
smallnes of the Safron leaves / but to the figure and whytishe list or line /
that goes quite through the mids of the Saffron leaf: In which two things
the leaves of Tragopogon / and the leaves of Safron are very like. I merueyle
much when as both Theophrast and Dioscorides write / that Tragopogon has long
roots / that contrary unto the open textes and minds of these noble writers /
that Amatus Lusitanus dare be so bold / as to give round knoppy roots after
the manner of Bulbus / or of Ascalion / but something long unto Tragopogon /
and says that the roots are of the bigness of an Hasel nutt / and that the
boys of Spain of the lykenes / that they have with a nutt / call them
nozella. I have seen three sundry sorts of Tragopogon / one sort with a
blewishe purple flower / which is called in the West part of England / Star
of Jerusalem / because whilse the Sun shyneth it opens / and when it is
under a clud / the flower shitteth to close again. I know also two sorts
with a yelowe flower / the one with a sweet root / and the other with a bitter
root / and full of milk. All these three sorts had long roots when I saw
them / and I could never se any such round thing in the root / that was
like unto a nut or a oynion. Wherefore Amatus in the root of this herb is
both contrary to the autorite of learned men / and to experience.

The Virtues of Bockes bearde.
DIoscorides writes no more of Bockes bearde / but that it is good to eat /
the newer writers say that it is good for the diseases of the breast and liver
/ for the pains in the kidnes and bladder / and for the ache in the side /
when it comes first forth of the ground / the tender buddes are good and
pleasant in a sallat / and so are also the tender stalks a great while after /
till the knop in the top comme forth. The leaves are not unpleasant
afterward both in sallat and in potage. This herb seems to be of a temperate
warmnes. Matthiolus writes that both the juice and the water of this herb
heals / and binds up new and fresh wounds.

Of the Dasey.
Bellis syiluestris.
depiction of plant depiction of plant

A Dasey is called in Latin Bellis / in Duche Kleintzitlosten / or Monathblumle
/ in French des margarites and pasquetes / of the Herbaries Consolida minor or
primula veris. There are two kinds of Dases / one with a reed flower which
grows in the gardines / and another which grows abroad in every grene
and high way. The Northren men call this herb a Banwurt / because it helps
bones to knyt again. The lefe of the Dasey is some thing long / and toward
the end round / and there are small nickes in ye borders or edges of ye leaves.
Pliny writes yt ye Dasey has 53. and sometime 55. little white leaves which go
about ye yelow knop: it appears yt ye double Daseys were not found in Plinies
time / which have a great deal mo then Pliny makes mention of.

depiction of plant Bellis minor syluestris.


The virtues of Daseyes.
PLiny writes that this herb dryueth away great swellings and wennes. The
common Surgeans use this herb much in healinge wounds / wherefore they call
it Consolida minore^ / and diverse give this herb in drink unto their
pacie^tes yt are wounded / and do them much good. The later writers hold also
yt the juice of this herb is good for the palsy / for the Gout and for ye
Sciatica. This have I proved yt the juice of the read gardine Dasey / put into
a man's nose / draws out water wonderfully out of the head / whereby it can
not be called a herb after the doctrine of Galene.

Of Betes.
BEta is named in Greek Teutlon or Seutlon / in English a Beat / in Duche
Mangolt / in French Porree / or Iotte. Betes have a stalk full of Crestes and
corneres of two cubits heyght / a leaf like Areche or Lettes / small yelow
flowers / and a long root which has many small stringes like small thredes
coming forth of it. There are two kinds of Betes / ye white Beat / which is
also called Sicula / and black Betes / called in Latin Beta nigra.

depiction of plant Beta nigra.
depiction of plant Beta candida.


The Virtues of Betes.
THE black Beat is sodden with Lentilles to stop ye bellye wythall / which
thing is soune brought to pass with the root. The white Beat is good for
the bellye / but they have both an evil juice / by the reason nitrosyte or
bitter saltishnes which they have of their like unto saltpeter: wherefore
their juice poured into a man's nose with honye / purges the head / and it
heals ye pain in the ears. The broth of the root and leaves / scoureth
away scurfe and scales / and nets out of the head. It swageth the pains of
the moulled or kibed heles. The Same helps frekelles and spots / if they be
rubbed over before with saltpeter natural. So it helps the void places /
which the falling of ye heir make / if they be stirred up with a knyfe. It
helps runninge sores / which spread abroad and waste up the flesh as they
goo. It heals also sodden in water / the burstinge out of wheles / the
burninge that comes by fire / the burninge inflammationes that come of choler
or hot blood. The juice of Betes does metelye well scour away / and some
time causes the belly to be louse / and twitcheth and byteth the stomach /
specially in them that have a stomache ready to feel a thing redelye /
wherefore it is a meat noisome unto the stomache / if it be much eaten. It
norisheth but little as other pot herbs or wurtes do: Yet is it good with
vinegre for the stoppinge of the liver and the milt. Betes are of two contrary
natures. The juice is hot and stops the bellye / and engenders thyrst: But
his body is of gross parts / windye / cold / and hard of digestion.

Of Betonye.
depiction of plant Betonica.


BEtonye is called in Latin Betonica / in Greek Kestron or Psychotropon / in
Duche Betonien / in French Betoine or Betoisne. Betonye has a small stalk /
a cubite long or longer / foursquared / with a leaf soft / long / indented
about / and like unto an oak lefe / well smellinge / and greater nere the
root. In the tops of the stalks is sede in a long head like an ear / as
some kind of Saueray has. It has small roots as Hellebor has.

The Virtues of Betonye.
THE roots of Betonye dronken in mede / draw out much fleme by vomit. The
leaves ought to be laid on parts that are burste^ and drawn together / and
they are good for weomen that have the disease of the mother / to releise the
stranglinge of the mother / in the quantite of a dram with water and honye.
Three drammes are to be dronken in xviij. ounces of wine against the bytinges of
serpents. The herb is good to be laid as an emplaster upon wounds made by
venomous beasts. A dram of this herb dronken with wine / is good against
deadly poison. If this herb be taken before / and it chance a man afterward to
drink poison / as Dioscorides writes / it shall not hurt him. It helps to
make water. It loses the bellye / and if it be dronken with water / it
heals the fallinge syckenes / and them that are mad. And with vinegre and
honye / it heals them that are sick in of the diseases the liver or milte /
if it be taken in the quantite of a dram. It helps digestion taken in the
quantite of a Bean / after supper with sodden honye. After the same manner it is
good for them that belche out a sour brethe. It is good for them that are
diseased in ye stomache / both to be eaten / and the juice of it to be dronken
/ if they drink afterward wine delayed with water. It is given in the quantite
of a scruple and a half / in two ounces of cold wine delayed with water to
them that spitt blood. In water it is good for the Sciatica / and for the ache
of ye bladder and kidneys. It is good to be taken in the quantite of two
drammes with water and honye for the dropsey / if the pacient have an ague: If
he have none / it is best to give it for the dropseye in wine mixed with honye.
It helps them that have the iaundis. Betonye taken in the quantite of a
dram with wine / draws down a womannes sickness. Four drammes taken in a
pint and a half of mede or honye water / makes a purgacion. It is also good
for the Tysick / and for them that spitt matter or corrupcion out of the longes
/ if it be received with honye. The leaves use to be dried and broken / and so
kept in an earthen pott. Thus much does Dioscorides write of Betonye / and
Galene confirms the same / writing on this wise: Betonye has the power to
cut in sunder / as the taste judges / for it is somethynge bitter / and a
little bytinge / the which thing his operacion particularlye done / does
testifye. For it deuideth insunder stones in the kydneys / and it purges and
scoureth the longes / breast and liver. It brings down to weomen their
syckenes / and such other operaciones has it which Dioscorides has made
mention of. Plinye writes that wine and vinegre made with Betonye / are good
for the stomach / and the clerenes of the eyes.

Of Paulis Betonye.
PAulis Betonye is much differing from Dioscorides Betonye / as Paulus
witnesses his self. It has small branches like unto Penny ryall / but
smaller / which if ye do taste of / it has allmoost no qualite that ye can
perceive / Gesner supposes that Veronica which is called in English Fluellin
/ is Paulis Betony: but the manifest bitterness of it / will not suffer it so to
be. But the herb which I do set forth here in this figure / having both
leaves and stalks so / like Peneryal / that many does often gather it for
Peneryall / and being without all qualite which can be perceived in taste /
sauinge only a very littel bitterness / after my judgment is the true Paulis
Betonye. This herb grows in Sion gardine / and in diverse woddes not far
from Sion with a white flower mixed with blewe / and with a sede like unto
Bursa pastoris.

depiction of plant Betonica Pauli.


The Properties of Paulis Betonye.
PAulus Egineta / who only writes of this herb / tells no other good
propertye of this herb / but that it is good for the diseases of the kidneys.

Of Birche.
depiction of plant Betula.


BIrche is called in Latin Betula / or as some write Betulla / in Greek Semyda
/ in Duche Birckbaum / in French Boulean or Beula. I find nothing of the
Birche tree in Dioscorides / but thus do I find written of the Birche in
Plinye. The Sorb or Serince tree loved cold places / and yet does the Birche tree
love cold places better. This French tree is of a wounderfull whytenes / and
of no less smalnes / greatly fearful to many / because the officeres make
rods of it. The Same is good to make hoopis of / and twigges for baskettes /
it is so bowinge. The French men set out of it a certain juice or suck /
otherwise called Bitume^. I have not red of any virtue that it has in
Physic. Howbeit / it serves for many good uses / and for none better then for
betinge of stubborn boys / that either lie or will not learn. Flechers make
prick shaftes of Birche / because it is heavier then Espe is. Byrders take
bows of this tree / and lime the twigges and go a batfolinge with them.
Fisherers in Northumberland pyll of the vttermoste bark / and put it in the
clyft of a stick / and set it in fire / and hold it at the water side / and
make fish come thither / which if they se / they stryke with their leysters
or sammonsperes: other use of Byrche tree know I none. Matthiolus writes that
some men hold / that if ye Birch tree be bored / that there will come much
water out of it / which as they say is good to break the stone both of the
kidnes and of ye bladder / if a man drink long of it. The same / as they say /
is good for foul ladies that will be fair / and for the sores of ye mouth / if
they be washed therewith. The juice of ye leaves / as they also tell / menged
with the cheselop / saves the chese from worms breding in it.

Of Blites.
depiction of plant Bliton.


BLitum is named in Greek Bliton or Bleton / in Duche Meyer / in French du
blyte or espinars. I have not heard the English name of this herb / nether
did I ever se in England any gardin Bliton. But I saw wild Bliton growing
in my Lords gardine at Shene / but I could learn there no name of it. It may
be called in English a Blite or a Blete. Bliton has leaves like unto a Beat /
but much less / and lyker unto Amarantho purpureo / called in English Purple
velued flower / yet much greater then Velued flower is. The common Blite has
a grene leaf / but there is an other Blyte / which I have seen in Italy with ye
one half of ye lefe red / and ye other grene. The leaves of Blite are unsavory
/ and are of no qualite / the sede of Blite is as Betis sede is / with a skin
about it / and very plenteous. Blites have mo roots then one / not going
right down but a wrye. The wild blites leaves are smaller then purple velvet
flowers are / and in the top of the herb / there is wonderful great plentye
of small sede hanginge together as it were in clusteres like grapes.

The Virtues of Blites.
BLite (says Pliny) seems to be Dill / and without al savor and sharpenes /
whereupon the husbands in Menander make a rebuke unto the weomen. It is
naught for the stomache. It troubles the bellye so / that it makes choler in
some. Yet some say that it is good dronken in wine against Scorpiones and for
aguayles / and for the milte / and for ye ache of the temples laid on with
oil. Hippocrates supposes that the bloody isshue of weomen may be staunched
with this herb taken in meat.

Of Oak of Jerusalem.
depiction of plant Botris.


OAK of Jerusalem is named in Greek Botris / and the Latin men use the same
name / the Duche name it Trauben kraut / and some French men call it Pymen or
Mygraine. Howbeit other French men say that Pymen is a bushe. Oak of
Jerusalem is an herb all yelow / and all full of branches and spread abroad /
and has many holes between the stalk and lower end of the branches / like
unto mennis arm holes. The sede grows through all the hole branches. The
leaves are like Cichory leaves: and all the hole herb has a pleasant savor /
wherefore it is laid among clothes.

The Properties of Oak of Jerusalem.
Oak of Jerusalem seems to be an hot herb / and dry. Paulus / Dioscorides
/ and Pliny do agree al together / that this herb droncken with wine / is good
for them that are shortwinded / and can not take their breath / except they hold
their neck right up. Other properties of this herb have I not red in any good
author. The herb grows about water sides and in many gardines in England.

Of Cole or Colwurtes.
depiction of plant Brassica prima.
depiction of plant Brassica secunda.
depiction of plant Brassica tertia.
depiction of plant Brassica quarta.


COle is named in Greek Krambe / in Latin brassica / in Duche Kool / in French
Chaues / of the common writers and Apothecaries Caulis / because of all other
herbs it has ye greatest stalk / which is called in Latin Caulis. Beside ye
common cole / there is an other kind which is called in Greek Krambe
kephalote / in Latin brassica / lacuturris / or triciana / or brassica fessilis
/ in English Cabbage cole / in Duche Cappes kraut / in French Capuci. Cole
has a great broad leaf / and thick / with certain swellings / not equal
with the synewes / which are as manifest in cole / as in any other herb. The
stalk is very great / the flower is yelowe / and sometime white / the sede is
in little long coddes black / and greater then Rape sede.

The virtues of Cole.
THE gardine cole is good for the bellye / if it be lightly heted / and so
eaten. If it be thoroughly sodden / it stops the bellye / and much more it
that is sodden in lie. Cole vexes the stomach. The summer cole is the sharper.
The cole of Egypt is so bitter that it can not be eaten. Cole eaten / is good
for them that se not well / and for the trymblinge of the members. Cole taken
after meat / drives away ye euel / or hurt that comes of surffetting / and
of drinking of wine / if the persons use not surfeting / but fall into it by a
chance / the tender and young buddes yt are in the top / are better for the
stomache / then other parts are / but they are sharper / wherefore they are to
abler to provoke urine. But the same laid up in fouse / are evil for the
stomache / and trouble the bellye. The row juice with arise and saltpeter /
especially natural dronken / softeneth the belly. The juice dronken with wine /
heals the bytinges of vyperes. It is also laid with ye mele of Fenegreke and
vinegre unto the members that have the gout / and the pain in the joints. It
is good for fylthy and old sores. If it be put in the nose thrilles / it
purges the head. The same put in with ye flower of Darnell / draws down
weomens flowers. The leaves laid to by themselves or bruised with barley mele /
are good for all inflammations and soft swellings. They heal also burning
impostemes / that come of subtle or cholerik blood / and little sores like
wheles / which broken / send forth bloody matter / and lepres which are
diseases of the skin / with salt they burste Carbuncles. They hold also the
heir that falls of. If they be sodden and mixed with honye / they are good
for consuming sores / which wast up the flesh. The leaves raw are good to be
eaten with vinegre / for them that are diseased with the milte. If ye chewe the
leaves / and swalow over the juice / it will bring again ye voice that is lost.
The broth of Cole / both provoke urine / and also helps weomen to their
syckenes. The sede of it / and especially which grows in Egypt / dronken /
kills worms / purges the skin of the face / and ye frekelles that are in
it. The grene buddes which are in the top of the stalk / burnt with the roots
/ and put into old swynes grese / do help the ache of the side / which of
long time has continued. There are certain harms that come of this herb /
if it be not taken in right time and quantite. This herb to much occupied in
meat / ingendreth euel / and melancolick juice. It dulleth the sight / and it
troubles the sleep with contrary things which are seen in the dream. The
flower of Cole / of a certain propertye that it has / destroys sede / it
hurts also the lunges. Cole is hot and dry in the first degree.

Of Sea Cole.
BRassica syluestris is named in Greek / kra^be agria. It may be called in
English Sea cole / because it grows naturally by the sea side. I never saw
it in all my life / sauinge in Dover clyffes. This is much like the other cole
/ but it is whyter and rougher / and bitter withal. But the leaves of it that I
saw / were much less and narrower / then the gardine cole. Theophrastus
describes a certain kind of wild cole / that has smouth leaves / which
appears to me to be a certain kind of Carloke / that grows in the corn
with other leaves / then the common Carloke has. The Same is called in
Northumberland this day / Wild kele. There are yet two kinds of wild Cole /
whereof I find no mention in any writer. The one is a wounderfull great Cole
/ and has leaves thrice as thick / as ever I saw any other cole have. It
has white flowers / and round berryes like Yuy / wherein the sede is
contained. This herb grows at Dover hard by the Sea side / and in many
other places. The other kind of wild cole / grows ever by water sides /
with a leaf indented / as rocket is / in taste / smell / fashion of flower /
and sede / like unto the gardin cole / hard by the Seasyde. I name the first
of these in Latin Brassicam Dobricam / in English Dover cole / because I
found it first beside Dover. The second kind I call Brassicam flumatilem /
and in English Water cole / because it grows ever by water sides.

The Virtues of the Sea cole.
THE tender buddes of this cole are not unpleasant unto the mouth / if they be
sodden in lie. The leaves of this herb laid to after ye manner of an emplaster
/ do bind and close up wounds: and drive away and scatter abroad
inflammationes and soft swellings.

Of Brassica marina.
BRassica marina named in Greek (...) / is thus describes of Dioscorides:
Brassica marina differs in all thing from the gardin brassica. It has long
leaves like unto Aristolochia the round. Every leaf comes forth alone of
little branches / somthinge readishe / and has but one little foot stalk as
Yuy has. It has white juice / but not much / it has a saltishe taste / and
something bitter / with a fat growinge together. The hole herb is evil for
ye stomache / sharp or bitinge / and it louseth the belly excedingly sodden
with meat: and for the great sharpnes it is sodden with fat meat. Although I
have these xvj. years sought for the right Brassica marina / and have found
one herb yt the common sort of learned men take for it / And another which I
thought alone yt it had been the right Brassica marina / yet when I consider
and wey both the herbs with the description of Dioscorides / I find nether of
both agreynge with the hole description. The herb which I took for brassica
marina / grows within the floodmarke of the Sea / and commonly at ye banks
of crekes that rin throw middowes or grene ground / and in stonye Islands /
whereunto ye saltwater comes to at certain times in the year / as at great
spring tides and tempests. I have seen it in East Freseland about Norden /
where as it is called Leppelkruyt / of the likeness that it has with a spoune.
I have seen it in England at Westchester / at Portlande / and at Porbeke / but
I could never learn any name of it / but Scurby wede / or Scurby wurt / it
may also well be called Spounwurte. When it comes first forth / it has five
or six / sometime mo / and sometime fewer leaves altogether / standing right up
after the manner of Pirola / or of a young Beat / the foot stalk is long and
toward the ground redishe / the leaves are fat thick and round / not unlike to
Asarabacca or Folfoote / but that they are less and grener. They are somthinge
saltish and bitter / and very hot and sharp in taste / and have a certain
smake of cole / which is unpleasant by the reason of the heat and bitterness
that is joined with it. It has a stalk almost a span long / and the leaves
that grow upon the stalk / are much longer and more sharper pointed then they
that come straight way first from ye root. The flower is white / and the sede
is dunnish black. The people of the country use it against the scurbuke or
crippel euel. I have proved that it is not only good against that disease / but
also against the dropsey / as the noble clerk Reinerus the Rector of the scole
of Gruninge / and Henrike Herbart can bear witness. Yet for all this I dare not
give sentence that it is the right Brassica marina of Dioscorides / namely
because a great deal of it purges but a little / when as the true Brassica
marina of Dioscorides purges very sore / and yt at no time that I saw it /
any milk or whyt juice did appear in it. The herb which is commonly taken in
Italy / France and Germany / for Brassica marina / is called of the Herbaries
Soldana or Soldanella. But it that Matthiolus sets out / is not the same
herb / namelye in the root / that our Soldanella is / which grows in
England and Flandres / nether it yt is sold at Frankford and at Anwerp. For as
the rest of the hole herb is like unto wythwinde or wedebind / called of some
Volubilis / of other Helxine cisampelos / in all things / sauinge that the
leaves are rounder and not so sharp / so is the root also like unto the root
of the same herb. Our Soldanella a far of looks like a Mallowe / both in the
flowers and leaves / but when a man comes nere unto it / it looks so like a
Withwinde / that a man would say / that it were nothing ellis / but a Sea
withwinde / The flowers are in all points like ye common with winds flowers /
that is of the fashion of a bell / saving that they are greater and purplish
blewe. And when as all the rest of ye herb crepeth upon the Sea sand / the
flowers stand gallantly right up / and show marvelous well upon the plain
sand or gravel. The sede is like the sede of other winds / blackish and round
/ as great as a fitche / and something greater. The leaves are as round as
the leaves of Aristolochia the round / and Asarabacca are. The taste is not so
sharp as the taste of the leaves of Spounwurte are. They purge beten into
powder in the quantite of two drammes / but nothing so much as Dioscorides
seems to mean that brassica marina does. For Dioscorides says (...) sodden
in meat / it louseth the bellye most vehemently. Plinye writing of Brassica
marina says / vehementisime ex omnibus aluum alet / that is of all other it
louseth ye bellye most vehemently. Nether are they so hot as Dioscorides
writes that Brassica marina is / for he says: (...). The hole herb is sharp
or bytinge / and some for the sharpenes seth it with fat flesh. Then when as
Soldanella has no long leaves / but all round / and is nether so sharp nor
so vehemente a purger / as Dioscorides makes his brassicam marinam to be:
nether has any quality / nether in taste nor smell / wherefore it should be
called brassica marina / and seeing the hole herb is so like unto Helxine
cisampelo / and to smilaci syluestri / and compared it to none of them. A man
may dout whether Soldanella be Brassica marina Dioscorides or no. But if
Soldanella be not brassica marina / yet for all yt it may serve well to purge
water in a dropsey / as other kinds of Helxines cisampelos / and Midlandish
with winds do. Aetius says that Smilax syluestris which crepeth upon busshes
and hedges by water sides / is very good against the dropsey / and Nicolaus
Mirepsus belyke following Aetius / says the same / Dioscorides writes yt
Helxine cisampelos purges the bellye / and Mesue writing of five kinds of
winds or winding herbs / makes them all purgers. Wherefore it is no meruel
that this Soldana being a kind of Wind / purge as other windinge herbs do.
Matthiolus to take all lettes yt Soldanella might be brassica marina / says
that where as the common textes have / Makra phylla / that they are falsed /
and in ye stead of mikra is makra put in / which surely is like to be true /
except in some places of Aristolochia / there be longer leaves / and in other
places be shorter and rounder as are in Leffelwurt / and diverse kinds of
Mallows / and other herbs / and the^ is not Soldanella brassica marina. But
it appears yt either there is no falsifying of ye text at al / or else yt it has been changed very long ago / for both ye old barbarus translation of Dioscorides
/ which is set forth by the order of letters / and also ye translations of
Serapio redeth folia longa. But I find in no Greek text yt now is / or in
any old translation phylla lepta / or folia tennia / as Ruellius has in his
translation / which thing I merueil that Matthiolus spyed not otherwise / a
man well eyed / as in diverse places of his book it does appear.

The Virtues of Brassica marina.
DIoscorides writes nothing of Brassica marina / sauinge that it is euel for
the stomach / and louseth the belly very much / and Galene writes yt it
beside yt it louseth the belly / it will serve laid to without / for such
purposes / as an herb that is something salt and something bitter / will serve.

Of Brion thalassion.
depiction of plant Corallina.
depiction of plant Sea moss.
depiction of plant Slanke.


BRion thalassion / is called in Latin / Muscus marinus. But muscus marinus is
of two kinds / as Muscus is. One kind of Moss is broad / like unto liver wurt
/ which is named in Dioscorides a Moss / in these words: Leichen brion esti
prosechomennon tais endrosais petrais. And that there is an other kind of Moss
/ which is small like heirs. Dioscorides in the description of this herb does
testifye. And even so many kinds are there of Brion thalassion / allthough
Dioscorides do describe but one. Brion thalassion that Dioscorides speaks of
/ grows upon stones / and oysters / and such other like fish shelles / by
the sea side / small and like heirs / and without any stalk: but Pliny and
Theophrastus write of an other kind of Brion thalassion / which Theophrastus
describes in these words. There is another herb called Brion with a lefe
grene and large: not unlike unto Lettis / but fuller of wrinkles / and drawn
in together. Plinye in the xxvij. book and viij. chapter / has the same
description. Wherefore Pliny allthough he erreth often / and deserves to be
confuted as Matthiolus with other learned men confute him learnedly / yet he is
unjustly checked of Matthiolus. The learned me^ of Italy have taken a little
thing like Moss / that grows here commonly upon oysters shelles / which
they call Corallinam / for Brion thalassion Dioscoridis / whose opinion I can
not utterly refell. But I know a Sea herb like Moss in deed / with a taste
plain astringent / which seems to me more like to be Brion thalassion / and
ye Potecaries call this herb Vsneam marina^: and it has woddish matter / when
a man byteth on it. But the other called Corallina / is made of many little
stonye joints / conningly knit together / and if ye byte it with your teth /
it will crashe under your teth / as little stones or grauel do. Vsnea marina
may be called in English Sea moss / Corallina may be named in English
Coralline / The Brion thalassion of Theophrastus and Pliny is called in
Northumberland Slanke / which in Lent the poor people seth / and that with lykes
and oyniones. They put it in a pott and smore it / as they call it / and then
it looks black / and then put they oyniones to it / and eat it. But before it
is sodden / it is wonderfully grene.

The virtues.
BRion thalassion / that is sea moss / is made of an earthlye and waterye
substance / and both cold / for it binds also the taste / and is astringent
/ and the same laid unto any hot thing / cools it / and heals it / it
drives back ye gathering of humores together / and helps the gout / which
had need to be cooled / some use Coralline to kill worms / and hold yt it
kills them in deed / whereof as yet I have no experience.

Of Borage.
depiction of plant Buglossum.


Diverse well learned men / as Leonicenus and Ruellius with other mo / have
supposed yt the herb which is called in Latin Borago / and in English Borage
/ is Buglossum in Dioscorides / and this opinion has long prevailed: but two
freres of Rome / wrytinge upon Mesue / say / that they have found in Spain
the true Buglossum / and that this our Borage is not ye true Buglossum. Their
reason are these / Borage has not leaves like unto Mullen (say they) nether
like Comfrey: but Dioscorides makes Buglossum like them both / therefore
Borage is not Buglossum Dioscoridis. I answer that Mullen when it comes
first up / has leaves like unto the broad leaves of Borage / when they come
first forth: but as the leaves of Mullen yt come out of ye stalk / are longer
then they that come straight way out of the root: so are also the leaves of
Borage longer / which grow on the stalk / then they that come from the root.
Therefore the vnlykenes of Mullen and of borage / shall not hinder borage to be
buglossum. What if mullen have longer leaves then borage has? it follows not
yet but ye borages leaf may be like mullens lefe. Dioscorides / I grant /
writes that the leaves of Simphiton are something long / drawing nere unto
buglossum. The words of Dioscorides are these: Phylla dasea / stena hypomece
prostaton bouglosson. That is / the leaves of Comfrey are rough / narrow / and
somethynge long / like the leaves of buglossum. This does not make borage and
comfrey unlike / because comfrey has longer leaves then borage has. Nether
does Dioscorides say / that comfrey is longer then buglossum: but comfrey has
something long leaves / like unto them of Buglossum. That buglossum need not
to have so long leaves as comfrey has / Dioscorides does partelye signifye /
where he says that Cirsion (which I take to be our Langde befe) has longer
leaves then buglossum. Dioscorides also makes those leaves makra / that is long
/ which are not without comparison of shorter and rounder / so does he call ye
leaves / of Brassica marina long / which are not long / but in comparison of
other rounder and shorter leaves: therefore that reason will not serve. Is it
not possible that there may be two or three kinds of an herb / whereof
Dioscorides describes but one? Dioscorides describes but one kind of Brion
thalassion / and yet Theophrastus makes many kinds. Dioscorides makes but
one kind of Cornus / and Theophrastus makes two. And where as Dioscorides
makes mention but of one kind of herb / other autores have found out two /
sometime three / and sometime four. Wherefore if it were so / that this
description of Dioscorides did not thoroughly out agree in all points with this
herb / yet it might be a kind of it / seeing that it agrees both in taste /
and much in lykenes with buglosse / which can not be denied / but it is
agreinge with the description of buglossi Dioscorides. Howbeit / I will not
grant as yet / but ye Borage agrees well enough unto the description of
buglossi. Let learned men judge both my judgment / and also the judgment of
the two freres of Rome / whom I ca^ not so much dispraise / for their
hypocrital kind of living / being in Babylon / as I can allow them / for their
diligent labors taken in sekinge out of Simples / and restoringe of Mesue
unto his right and true text and first writing. Dioscorides describes thus
Buglossum. Buglossum is like unto Mullen / and has a lefe spread upon the
ground / but blacker / and rough / much like unto an Oxes tongue. In the
description of Comfrey he makes it like unto Buglosso.

The Virtues of Buglosse or Borage.
DIoscorides does not speak much more of Buglossum / but that it seems to
make men merrye / if they drink of the wine that is put into Simeon Sethy / a
latter writer amongst the Grecians / says that Buglossum provoke urine /
quenches the thyrst / and that the stalks of this herb / either raw / or
sodden / and so eaten / are good against ye diseases of the liver. There may
be also a good iulep made of it / for men that go by the way.

Of Oxey.
BVphthalmus has no other used name / that I know / nether in Latin nor
English / nether have I seen it in England: but it may be called in Latin
Oculus bouis / and in English Oxey. I have seen it in Italye / and in high
Almanye. There is very little difference between it / and yelowe Camomille /
sauinge that this has greater knoppes and longer leaves then yelowe Camomyle
has. Dioscorides describes Bupthalmus thus: Buphthalmus or Oxey puts forth
small branches / and soft / and has leaves like Fenel / and a yelowe flower
greater then Camomille / like unto an eye / whereupon it has the name. It
grows about tounes and in great playnes. The herb which Matthiolus
sets forth for Buthalmo / has not leaves like Fenell / wherefore it is not
the right Buthalmus Dioscoridis.

The Virtues of Oxey.
THE flowers of this herb broken / and mixed with wexe in a salve / drive
away swellings and hardenes. It is also reported / that if a man drink of it
/ after that he is come forth of the bathe / in continuance of time / he shall
be delivered from the iaundes.

Of Bulbine or yelowe Leke.
depiction of plant Bulbus siluestris.


PLiny makes mention of a kind of Bulbus / which he says / is called of the
Grecianes Bulbine / and has leaves like Leekes / and a head or knoppe. The
herb which I take to Bulbine / grows among the corn / and has flowers
about the beginning of April. It has long small blades like Leekes / but much
smaller and sharper / The blades that come from the root / are very small and
long / but they that come out of the top of the stalk / and grow higher
then the stalks / are brother. The flowers grow out of the top of the stalk /
and they are yellowe. The vessel that holds seed is thresquare / the stalk
is small / and not a span long / The root is round like an oynion with a
dunne husk / and somethynge redish within / and a littel bitter and clammy. It
grows much in Germanye about Bon and Colon. Plinye writes that the
propertye of this herb is to heal wounds / and close the it Bulbus / whereof
this is one kind / has many other good properties. But I will not give no
more unto the herb then my author does / except I had experience that he had
not seen or proved. Some in Duch land call this herb Hundts vllich / and it
may be called in English Corn leeke / or wild leeke. As for the gardiu
Bulbus / and the other called Vomitorius / allthough I have long and
diligently sought for them these twentye years / (...) But he tells not of
which Mirt tree he means of. In deed in thicknes of leaves which are very nere
one unto another. Box is like unto the gardine myrt / but in bigness of lefe it
is more like the wild mirte. Howbeit the leaves of Box are both rounder and
greater then wild myrte leaves are. Box has round little vessels / which
hold black sede in them. The wood of Box is yelowe and pale / and serves for
no use in medicine / that I have red of: The flowers of this tree make bitter
honye / wherefore it is not good to be planted / where as bees are kept. This
writes Pliny in the xvj. book of his natural story. Matthiolus confuteth so
well and learnedly Amatus Lusitanus / for saying / that Box was a kind of
Guaiacum / that I need not to give any warninge of the great error that
Amatus was in / and would have brought other into the same.

Of Calaminte.
depiction of plant Calamitha prima. Rough calamint.
depiction of plant Calamita altera. Corn minte.


DIoscorides makes three kinds of Calaminte / The first kind he describes
thus. It grows commonly in mountains / and has leaves like unto Basil / white
in under / dry branches / and squared stalks / and a purple flower. This
herb grows much in Germanye about Bon / and in England about Sion / It has
leaves less then great Basil / much like unto the common Organe / or wild
Marierum / but they are rough on both sides / but more rough of the under
depiction of plant Calamitha tertia.
part / and white withal / but grene of ye over part: yet not withstanding
mixed with certain horines / and ye stalk is foursquare / andal rough with a
white hoar / where about does grow in equal order / one from another certain
knoppes like whorles / like unto them yt are in horehounde: out of the which do
grow purple flowers / the leaf is hot / and holden under ones teth / brings
forth slauer / and has also a very good savor / but somthinge strong
withal: the roots are small / much like unto ye roots of the common organe /
this kind may be called in English rough Organ bush Calamint. The second
kind is thus described of Dioscorides. It is like Penny ryal / but greater / and
this have some called wild Penny ryal / because it is like in sauore. The
Latins call it Nepita^. This kind of Calaminte grows much in England among
the corn / and it is called in English commonly / Corn mint / and of the
Potecaries Calamentum. Howbeit at those days the Latins call it not Nepita^ /
but use the Greek term of Calamite. The third kind as Dioscorides writes /
is like unto wild minte / with longer leaves / with greater branches and
stalks then the other kinds have / but it has less strenght then ye rest.
This kind is now a days called of the Pothecaries Nepita / in English Nepe /
in Duch Katzenkraut / or Catzenmuntz / in French Herb au chat / ye cattes
commonly / where as they can find it in any gardin / will eat it up / wherefore
some call it in English Catmint. This herb grows far from cities and tounes /
in hedges and in stony grounds. Calamint is hot and dry in the third degree.
Dioscorides writes yt Calamint grows in playnes / high and rockye and in
waterye places. Matthiolus and I do agree in the second kind of Calamint /
which he says / is called even at this time in his country Nipotella. But in
the first and third kind / I dissent from him / for he makes another herb to
be the first kind of Calamint / and he makes my first kind of Calamint / to
be Clinopodium. As for his first kind of Calamint / if it be so of the same
form and fashion / as he has set it out in his figure / it answers nothing
unto the description of Dioscorides / for he would that his first kind should
have leaves like unto Basil / but that herb which Matthiolus sets out /
for Calaminta prima has leaves like unto Penyryal / and not unto basil /
namely to that basil yt Dioscorides compares his first Calamint to. If yt the
first Calamint of Matthiolus had been ye first Calamint of Dioscorides / then
should it have had leaves like unto Heliotropio maiori / to ye right Mercury /
and to purple velvet flower / for these herbs leaves in Dioscorides and other
good autors are made like unto ye leaves of Ocimum or basil. But ye leaves of
his first Calamint are not like unto ye right basil / which Dioscorides
co^pareth his first Calamint to. Therefore ye first Calamint of Matthiolus
agrees not with ye description of Dioscorides / I will be judged by learned men
yt are indifferent. In ye third kind of Calamint / I do not like his
confutation of Ruellius / who in my judgment has more furthered ye knowledge
of herbs for his time / then Matthiolus has done for his time / and yet I
grant yt we are much bound to Matthiolus for his pains taken in the setting
out ye knowledge of herbs. Ruellius says yt ye third kind of Calamint / is
the herb commonly called Nepe or Cat mint / but Matthiolus confuteth him thus:
Dioscorides makes the third kind of Calamint like unto Mentastro / and not
to Baum or a Nettel / as Catmint is. The Same Dioscorides answer I unto
Matthiolus / says not only yt the third Calamint is like unto Mentastro or
wild mint / but he says also that it has longer leaves then wild mint has /
for so has the Greek text / (...). Tertia vero menthae syluestri similis est
folijs oblongior. The third is like unto wild mint / longer in the leaves. And
the same Dioscorides says that the third kind of mint is greater both in the
stalk and blades or branches / then the forenamed Calamintes be. Then when as
the third calamint must have longer leaves then wild mint: That herb that has
longer leaves then the wild mint / called Mentastrum / is not like the third
Calamint. And the herb yt Ruellius sets forth for Calaminta tertia / has
longer leaves then it that Matthiolus sets out: Therefore it that Ruellius
sets out / is lyker to be the third kind of Calamint / then it that
Matthiolus shows. For it that Matthiolus sets out for the third Calamint
/ except his third figure be falselye graued and painted / has not only
shorter leaves and less / then even the Mentastrum / which he sets out his
own self a little before / but also shorter and less leaves then the second
kind of Calaminte has / even after his own figure that he sets forth.
Therefore Matthiolus erreth much more in ye third kind of Calamint then Ruellius
does: put a little piece of a leaf unto Mentastro / and se whether it will not
be as long as some Nettel leaves be or no. If the increase of the leaf then
make Mentastrum like a Nettel / then the third Calaminte / which must needs be
longer leaued then Mentastrum is / may well be like a nettel / as touching the
length of the leaf. An other cause is / says Matthiolus / why that the
opinion of Ruellius ought to be refused and whisteled out / is because he
has seen the right third Calamint in watery places like unto Mentastro / with
something more whitishe leaves / and with a sharper taste / how sufficient a
cause is this / yt the opinion of Ruellius should be refused / al men may
easily perceive. Because he saw an herb in a watery place like Mentastro /
with a some thing more whytishe leaves / and of a sharper taste / as though to
be like Mentastro / and to have more whitish leaves / and a sharper taste then
it has / and to grow in watery places / were the hole description of the
third Calaminte. Doutles Matthiolus was very far ouersene in making of this
description: for it that Dioscorides reherseth as a most necessary mark to
know the third Calamint by / ye leaves he quite out / that is whether the
leaves be longer then Mentastrum or no / and whether ye branches and stalk be
greater then ye other kinds of Calamint or no / and whether ye herb were
hoter then other calamintes or no / and it yt Dioscorides makes no part of ye
description / yt is to have whyter leaves the^ Mentastru^ / yt sets he in to
fill up ye matter wtal. And so with a great number of vain words / he proves
nothing / but unworthily reproves a better learned man then him self in setting
forth ye truth. Mentastru^ / as Auerrois writes / is hot in ye third degree /
if ye herb yt Matthiolus shows for ye third calamint / be hoter then ye
mentastro (as he says it is) then it can not be the third kind of Calamint
in Dioscorides / for it is of less strenght then ye other kinds be of / as
Dioscorides bears witness. Galene in his book de simplicibus writes / yt mint
is good for the^ yt would have children / and yt Calamint is so hot yt it
serves not for yt purpose. I think yt he meant of ye second and first kind
of Calamint / which Dioscorides makes of more strenght the^ ye third. The
cattes both eat up and trimble upon ye herb / called nepe / about ye time of
their catterwawinge / wherefore some think yt nature teaches ye cattes to know
ye herb which serves best for ye purpose yt they go about at yt time. If yt
be the cause why they desire it so greatly / the^ is not nepe so hot as ye
other ij. kinds of calamint be / and so draws nere unto ye nature of gardine
mint / if ye learning of Galene be true / yt ye herbs yt are mesurablye warm
/ serve more for ye purpose above named / the^ right hot and dry herbs do.
Which thing whether it make any thing to prove yt nepe should be ye third
calaminte / I will be judged by them that are in this matter learned / and in
different judges.

The Virtues of Calamint.
THE leaves of all the kinds of Calamint / are very hot and biting. Calamint
either dronken / or laid to ye place / is good for the^ yt are bitte^ of
serpents / ye broth of Calamint dronke^ / drives down weome^s sycknes / and
provoke water / and it helps places bruised / and burste^ / and shronken or
drewen together / and the^ yt are shortwinded / and them yt are vexed with choler
/ or with shakinge: it scoureth away the iaundies. If it be taken aforehande /
it withstandeth poison / if it be dronken with salt and honye / it kills
worms in the bellye / and that will it do as well raw as sodden. The same
herb eaten / heals the common Lazares / if they drink whaye after the
receyuinge of this same herb. The leaves bruised and laid in wolle / and put
into the place of conception / draws down weomens syckenes. Calaminte either
strewed on the ground / or set on fire / dryueth away serpents. If it be
sodden in wine / it makes black scarres to be white / and takes away the
black color of brasinge. Calamint is laid unto the Sciatica / to draw
humores out from the deep botome / and burns the utter part of the skin.
The juice poured in ones ears / kills the worms there. Galen says if it be
taken in sweet honyed wine / it provoke a man to sweat / and that some use to
seth this herb in oil / and anoynte all the body with it to drive away the
cold of agues / and that it cutteth a sundre gross humores.

Of Marygoldes.
depiction of plant Caltha.


CAltha is called of the Herbaries Calendula / in English a Marygolde / in
Duche Ringblomen / in French Soulsie: it is not yet surely known / how that
this herb Caltha was called among the Grecians / for it is hard to find any
mention of this herb purposedlye described: Howbeit I find mention of Caltha
in the description of Chrisanthemon / for Dioscorides after Ruellin^s
translation / says these words: Chrysanthemon aut Caltha non nullis
Buthalmos herba est fructicosa / that is / Chrisanthemon or Caltha / which
some call Buthalmus is a busshy herb / if this text were true / we might be
sure to know a Greek name for Caltha. For besye yt it were a Greek name it
self / it should be called also Chrysanthemon: but my Greek Dioscorides which
Cornarius has set forth / has calcas / where as Ruellins has caltha / which
thing makes me doubt whether the Grecians has made any mention of caltha or
no / for Chrysanthemon or Goldfloure may as well be called chalcas of the
brazen color yt it has (for chalcas in Greek / is brase in English) as it may
be called buthalmus / of the lykenes yt it has of the oxeye / Caltha is but
sklenderlye described of the Latin authors / for Virgil does only call it reed
yelow caltha / and Plinye among yelowe violettes and other yelowe flowers /
makes mention of caltha / and says yt it has a strong savor / of which
places we can only guess that our Marygold should be the Latin men's Caltha.

The properties of Marygoldes.
MArygoldes flowers dronken / draw down weomens sycknes / and so does the
juice of the herb / which is a present remedy for ye toth ache / if ye mouth
be washed with it: some use to make their heir yelow with the flower of this
herb / not being content with the natural color / which God has given them.
A perfume made of the dried flowers of this herb / and put to the convenient
place / brings down the secondes. Some use this herb to provoke sweat in ye
pestilence / sodden in posset ale / or white wine.

Of Hemp.
CAnnabis named both of the Grecians and Latins / is called in English hemp /
in Duche hanffe / in French chanure. Hemp says Dioscorides / is profitable
for many things in man's life / and specially to make strong cables and roopes
of. It has leaves like an Ash tree / with a strong savor / long stalks
and round sede.

The properties of Hemp.
HEmpsede taken largelye in meat / wastes up the natural sede / the juice of
grene hemp / is good against the ache of the ear / if it be poured in. Simeon
Sethy writes / ye hemp sede if it be taken out of mesure / takes men's wits
from them / as Coria^der does / and yt the powder of ye dried leaves of hemp /
makes men dronken. Pliny writes that the juice of hemp put into ones ear /
kills worms and all beasts that are in the ear / but it makes the head
ache / and yt hemp is of such a nature / that it can congele the water / and
make it go together / and yt therefore it is good for beasts mawes / dronken in
water. The root sodde^ in water / makes soft the joints yt are shronken
together and goutes / and like diseases. He says that it is also good to be
laid upon burned places / but yt it must be often changed that it dry not.
Dioscorides makes mention of an other kind of wild hemp / which some reken
to be Eupatorium vulgar: but yt can not be / for it has nether seeds like
unto Marrish mallowe / another may a man make ropes of the bark of it / which
thing belong unto wild hemp / wherefore it can not be wild hemp.

Of wild Gelouer or Gelyfloure.
depiction of plant Cantabrica. Gelouer.
depiction of plant Cantabrica syluestris. wild Gelouer.


Diverse learned men have judged the herb yt we call in English Gelouer or a
Gelyfloure / to be Vetonica in Dioscorides / but seeing ye place out of which
they gather their opinion / is proved to be but bastard / and set to by some
other to Dioscorides: they have no sure ground of their opinion. And where as
some allege / yt Paul makes two kinds of Betonye / yt their opinion might
take place: yet it is nothing to the purpose / for the leaves of the one Betony
are indented like an Oak / and the other is like Penny ryal / and their Betonica
has leaves like a Leeke or broad grass / so that their Betonica can be nether
of Paulis Betonies. And where as Pliny is alleged to have two kinds of
Betonica or Vetonica / it can not be found so in Pliny / that is right
corrected: therefore they have no fundation to build their opinion upon. I
think that our Gelouer is Cantabrica in Pliny / for he describes Cantabricam
thus: In ye self Spain was found Cantabrica / of the people of Cantabria /
in the time of Augustus. It grows every where with a rishy stalk a foot
height / whereupon are long flowers / in long vessels after ye form of a
Lily flower / that is to wit / little at the setting on / and brother ever
toward the end: and in this is very small sede. This description of Pliny
seems unto me to agree very well unto the herb called of the Potecaries
Tunica / and in English / wild Gelouer / for it has a small stalk like unto
an rishe / both in color and quantite / and has such a long vessel upon the
top as represented the form of it / called in Latin Calathus. The gardin
Gelouers are made so pleasant and sweet with the labors and wit of man / and
not by nature.

depiction of plant Cantabrica.


The Virtues of Gelouers.
THE juice of wild Gelouer / as the later writers do hold / is good to break
the stone / and to bring forth / and is also good for the falling sycknes. The
root of the gardin Gelouer is good against the plague: and therefore some use
to make conserues of the flowers / and use in the time of pestilence: they
hold also that it is good against the shakinge of a quartane ague / and that
the juice of it is good for the toth ache / holden in ones mouth fasting / and
that it is also good for synewes that are cut / for the ache of the gout / and
for the bytinge of a mad dog / if it be laid upon the bitten place / brosed
/ or the juice of it.

Of Fumitorye.
depiction of plant Capnos.
depiction of plant Capnos phragmites.


FVmitorie is called in Greek Capnos / in Latin Fumaria / of the Pothecaries
Fumus terre / in Duche Erdrauch / or Duuenkeruel. Fumitorye is a busshy herb
and very tender / and like unto Coriandre / but it has whyter leaves / and
them in great number / which are as though it were of an ash color and
purple flowers. In the top of the herb are little round knoppes after the
flowers begone. It grows in the corn in gardins / in vineyardes / in hedges /
and in all plowed and dug places. Fumitorye is hot and dry in the second
degree / and of a manifest bitterness / which is a witness of the hete of the same.

The Virtues of Fumitorye.
THE juice of this herb / which in deed is sharp / makes clear eyes and
teres to come forth / wherefore it has the name / laid to with gum / it
will not let the double heirs of eye liddes to grow again. The herb eaten /
drives forth cholerike water. The later writers use Fumitorye / to purge and
make clean men's blood / and give it in whaye / or other liquores against
scabbes and scourye diseases / and such other like / which come of Melancholey
and burnt choler. Plinye makes mention of another Capnos / which is named of
Theophrastus Capnos phragmitis / that is to say / Fumitorye of the hedges.
This herb has leaves like Coriander / but greater: a purple flower in the
top of the stalk / and sometime white / the root is round and hollow /
and bitter / wherefore it has ye propertye for to open / and to break in
sundre gross humores. It grows in great plentye in the hedges about Bon in
Germanye / and it is called in Duche Hollworte / and it may be called in
English Howelwurt or Hollow wurt.

Of Capers.
CApparis is a Greek word / which the Latins use as their own also: and
Capparis is called in Theodorus Gaza in Latin inturis / and it is called in
English Capers / in Duche Cappres / in French Capres. Capers is a prickye
bushe / which lyinge upon the ground / stretched forth unto a round circle /
and has pricks as a bramble / crokinge in / after the fashion of a hoke: It
has round leaves like unto a Quince tree / and a fruit like an Olive /
which when it gapeth and is opened / shows a white flower / and when it is
shaken away / there is a thing found in it / like a long Acorne / which
when it opens / has corns like unto the corns of Pomgranates / little and
red: The roots are hard great and many. I have seen Capers grow in diverse
gardins of Italy / but not in the feldes that I remember of.

The Virtues of Capers.
CApers as Simeon Sethy writes / are hot and dry in the second degree / but
they are of diverse and sundry qualitees / one is bitter / wherewyth they
clenge / purge / and cut in sundre. An other is bytinge sharp / wherwyth they
heat drive abroad and make thynne: The third is astringente / or byndinge
together / wherewyth they draw together and bind: wherefore they help hard
miltes / both taken in / and also laid without with vinegre or Oxymell.
Caperes also provoke weomens syckenes: the same sodden with wine and vinegre are
good for the toth ache. But the root is stronger in all these cases then the
leaves / the stalk / and the fruit are. Caperes do make soft the hardness of
wennes and kernelles / and such other like hard lompes: The juice of Caperes
kills the worms of the ears with vinegre: they do open the stoppinge of the
liver and milte / and of a certain natural propertye / They are specially
good for the milte / they are also good for the Sciatica / but they hurt the
bladder and the kidneys. Dioscorides writes that both the stalks and also the
fruytes of Capperes are laid up in pickell to be eaten / and that they trouble
the bellye / and are evil for the stomach / and ingendre thyrst / and that the
fruit of them dronken in wine fourtye days / wastes away the milte / and
dryueth forth bloodye water. But they say also / they are good to be dronken
against the palsy / and against burstinges and places drawn together.

Of Archichockes.
CArduus called in Greek Scolimus after Galene / Aetius and Paulus / is a
sundry herb from Cinara. But other autoures make only this difference / that
Carduus should be wild Archychock / and Cinara should be the gardine
Archychock. Archychock is very sklenderly and to shortelye described of
Dioscorides: for he describes it no largelyer then thus: It has leaves of
Chameleon / or blacker then the white thistel / and thycker. It has a long
stalk / and full of leaves / with the head full of pricks / and a black
root and a thycke. Theophrastus says that Archychocke is marked to have this
propertye by it self / that the root is good to be eaten both raw and sodden
/ and that it is also very good when it flourishes / and that when the root
waxes hard / it sends forth a white juice like milk. Plinye writes that
it is a marvel to see / how that in the kinds of Archychock some bring forth
flowers all the hole summer / some do conceive / and some bring forth fruit.
Archychocke when it is very young / it has very sharp pricks: but when it
is old / it has no pricks at all. Thus far have I rehearsed the words of
Dioscorides / Theophrastus / and Plinye / which are sufficient to declare that
our Archychocke is the herb that they call Scolimus and Cinara. But beside
there description / for the better knowledge of this herb / it is to be added
/ that the leaves of Archychock are very depelye indented / even to the very
synewes / which depart the mydleaues. And the fruit of Archychocke is much
like unto a Pyneappel nut: but the thick leaves of the head / which after the
manner of scales lie one upon an other / are a great deal broader and thicker /
then they that are in pyne apples. The wild Archychock has a great deal
narrower leaves / then the other / and much longer and sharper pricks then
the gardine Archychock has. And the fruit is al prickye and very sharp.

The Virtues of Archychock.
AEtius writes that the root of Archychock sodden in wine and dronken /
dryueth out much stinkinge urine. And therefore that it heals the stinkinge
of all the hole body. He says that it is hot in the beginning of the
third degree / and dry in the second / which qualities in the Archychockes
that we have in England / I could never yet perceive. Galene says that
Archychock has a noughty juice / and gives and makes evil nourishement to
the body / specially if it be hard / for then it has in it a choleric
humore in great plentye / and has the hole substance hard / in so much that
of it / is engendered a melancholyke nourishement / and of the juice of it / is
engendered a thynne and a choleryke humor. Wherefore it is best to eat it
sodden with oil and with wine. Plinye writes / that this herb taken in wine
/ sturreth up the lust of the body. But he affirms that Hesiodus and Alseus
witness / that likewise as this herb provoke lust in women / so it abateth
the same in men.

Of Caruwayes.
CAruwayes is called in Greek Caros and karon / the Latin men call it Carum and
Careum / the Potecaries call it Caruwy / the Duche men call it Matkumell or
Wishen kumel / and the Freses Hofcumine. It grows in great plentye in
Freseland in the meadows there / between Marien hoffe and Werden / hard by the
Sea bank. Caruwayes has many squared stalks and hollow / coming out of
one root. And out of the tops of the stalks grows seeds after the manner
of Fennel or Dille / and it has white flowers and leaves like wild carrot:
The roots are long / small / and yellowe / and pleasant in taste. The sede is
hot and dry almost in the third degree / but the root and the herb are not
so hot.

The virtues and properties of Caruwayes.
CAruwaye warmeth the body / and provoke urine / and is good for the
stomach / and makes one have a sweet breath. It helps also digestion / and
it is mixed among preservatives / and such as easelye goes through one. It
may be used in the stead of Anis / and it is good against wind / both in the
stomach and in the guts. The stalks when they come first up / are wonderful
pleasant eaten in a sallet vnsodden. And the herb serves to make sweet and
well sauored potage.

Of Segge or Sheregres.
CArex is the Latin name of an herb / which we call in English Segge or
Shergres / whereof I find no mention / nether among the Grecianes / nether
among the Latins / sauinge that I have read of it in Vergil / and in
Calphurnius. Calphurnius writes thus of this herb: Ipse procul stabo / vel
acute carice tectus. I will stand far away covered with the sharp segge.
Vergil also in his Georgikes makes this Shergres to be sharp / and in his
Egloges he makes it to grow thycke together in bushes / in these words: Tu
post carecta latebas. Thou lurkedest behind the segge bushes. This herb that
I do take to be carex / grows in fennes and in water sides / and has a
short root / red without / and many little stringes at it. The leaves as
they come out first / are three square / afterward they do go abroad / and
represente a long small knyfe / but not without certain squares. And the edges
of this herb are so sharp / that they will cut a mannis hand / and have a
certain roughnes / which makes them to cut the sooner: of the which
propertye the Northen men call it Sheregres. It has a long stalk / and three
square / and in the top of that is a sort of little knoppes / instead of seeds
/ and flowers much like unto our gardine gallingal. I have not red any use of
this in Physic. The people of the Fenne countries use it in for fother / and
do heat ouens with it.

Of Doder.
depiction of plant Cassuta.


DOder is called of some of the Grecianes Cassitas / of the later Latin men
Cassutha. It is calls of the Potecaries and common Herbaries Cuscuta / and
podagra liny: the Duche men call it Filtzkraut / Doder and wrang / in French it
is named Gout de Line. Doder grows out of herbs and small bushes / as
Miscelto grows out of trees: and another of both grow out of the ground.
Doder is like a great red harp string / and it windeth about herbs /
folding much about them / and has flowers and knoppes / one from another a
good space / wherein is sede. This herb has another leaves / nor stalk /
nether root in the ground. The herbs that I have marked Doder to grow most
in / are flax / and tares / and nettels. We call in England Sauery / that
has Doder growing on it / laced sauery: and Time that has the same / laced
time. The laces that go about Time / is Epithymum of Dioscorides / Galene / and
other old writers. I have seen it in Germany and in England in plenty.
Matthiolus seems to judge / that there is no mention made of Cassuta in Pliny
/ because he makes his Cassutas to grow in Syria / and because he makes it
to wind about trees / when as our Cassuta grows out of Syry / and grows
not about tre^s / but only upon herbs and busshes / and because in all the
Plinyes that he saw it is written / not Cassitas but Caditas. They that
corrected Plinye / and red for Caditas Cassitas / did not without a cause /
for Serapio writing of Cassuta / says thus / as he is translated in Latin
chasuth / id est / cassuta / est res que adheret herbis inuoluens eas sicut
fila / sed in summitatibus habet fructum subtilem / ex ipsa crescit in
arboribus. That is cassuth / that is to say / Cassuta is a thing that cleueth
to herbs / foldinge and winding about them like thredes / but in the tops it
has a small fruit / and it grows upon trees. Out of this place of Serapio /
a man may gather that it ought to be red in Pliny Cassitas and not Caditas /
and that Cassuta grows not only about herbs / but also about trees. It
follows not / Cassitas grows in Syria / therefore it grows only in Syria as
Matthiolus gathers. As little does his other argument follow / our Cassuta in
these countres grows only upon herbs and busshes / therefore it grows now
here upon trees / therefore it is not Cassitas of Plinye. When as the Arabianes
confess in their writings / that it grows in there countres also about
trees. There is no cause therefore / but that we may judge that our Cuscuta is
called in Pliny Cassitas / out of which word when as y is pronunced after u
gallicum / may easelye grow cassutha.

The nature of Doder.
DOder opens the stoppinge of the liver and milte. It discharged the veins
of flegmatyke and cholerike humors by the urine. It heals the iaundes that
comes of the stoppinge of the liver. It is good for childer that have the
ague. But much use of it / hurts the stomach / but that hurt is taken away
by puttinge a little Anis unto it / with wormwood it purges a man of yelowe
choler.

Of Chestnut tree.
CAstanea called Castonos in Greek / and of tome dios balanos / is named in
English Chestnut tree / in Duche Ein Kestenbaum / in French Castaigney. The
fruit of it is called of some Glans sardiana / that is a Sardian acorne.
Chestnut tree is a great tree / and has leaves long and indented like a Nettel
/ The husk of the fruit is all roughe without / and within it has a broune
skin / and white meat within. Chestnut trees grow plentuously in Kent
abroad in the feldes / and in many gardins in England.

depiction of plant Castanea.


The Virtues of Chestnuttes.
SImeon Sethi writes that Chestnuttes are hot and dry in the first degree /
and nourishe the body much. They are long in going down / and in
digestinge: and engender gross humors / and are full of wind / and stop the
bellye / but if they be perched or dried / they put away a great deal of the
hurt that they would have done raw. Dioscorides says that the broune skin
next unto ye meat / stops mightily / and that the meat of Chestnuttes is a
remedy against the poison of the herb Ephemerum.

Of Nettell tree or Lote tree.
CEltis is named in Greek Lotos / it is called in French / as Gesner says /
Algsiez or Ledomier: but how that it is calls in English and in Duche / I
can not tell: for I never saw it / nether in Germanye / nor in England / but
I have seen it in Italy. It has a lefe like a Nettel / therefore it may be
called in English Nettel tree or Lote tree. depiction of plant Lotus arbor
sieve Celtis.
Pliny writes thus of Lotus: Africa in that part / where as it turns
toward us / brings forth an excellent tree called Lotus or Celtis / which
also grows much in Italy. It is of the bigness of a Pere tree. Howbeit
Cornelius Nepos makes it a short tree / the leaf is indented much / ellis it
might seem to be the leaf of Ilex. The fruit of this is of the bygnes of a
Been / and of the color of Saffrone. Before it is ripe it has many diverse
colors as grapes have. It grows in Africa thycke as Myrtelles do / and not
as Cheryes do in Italy. It is so sweet meat / that it did give a name unto the
people there where it grows. They say that the bellyes of them that eat
that / shall feel no syknes: it is better without the inward kyrnels / the
which in a certain other kind seems as hard as a stone. There is also
pressed out of this fruit wine like unto honyed wine: the which / as it is
said / can not endure longer then ten days. We have red / says Pliny / that
hole hosts of men in Africa have been fed with this same fruit. The wood has
a black color / and is much desired of men for to make pypes / to make knyffe
heftes / and such other like things / of the roots of it. Dioscorides
describes an other kind of Lotus / which he says is of a wonderful bigness /
and brings forth a bery bigger then pepper / sweet and pleasant in meat /
and easy for the stomach. Of these autors we do gather / yt there are two
kinds of Lotus / of the which I have seen but the one kind / and yt in
Clauenna a little city / as we enter in at the foot of the mountains / beside
an old castle.

The Virtues of Lotus.
THE berryes stop the bellye / the broth of the shauinges or shyuers of this
wood / either in wine / or in infusion / helps the bloodye flixe of the
mother / it makes ones heir red / and stops the bellye.

Of Centory.
depiction of plant Centorium minus.


CEntaurium is of two sorts / the one is called Centaurium magnum / and it is
called of the Potecaries Raponticum / and in English Rapontike. It grows
only in gardines: I never saw it / saving only in Italye and Germanye. The
second kind is called in Latin Centaurium minus / in English Centorye / in
Duche Tausent gulden / in French Fell terre. Great Centaury / otherwise called
Raponticum / has leaves like unto a Walnut tree / something long / of the grene
color of cole / indented round about / it has a stalk like unto a dock ij. or
iij. cubits of height in ye top / of ye which are hedes like unto poppy / round
and long. The flower is blewe / the sede is like wild saffrone / wrapped in
certain flocks like wolle / the root is thycke / heavy and sound / of three
foot long / and full of juice / biting with a certain astriction / and some
swetenes / the color of it is red. There grow many bastard stalks out of the
root / beside the principal stalk. Centaurum minus / that is the less
Centaury / which is our common Centory in England / is an herb like unto
Organe / or wild Marierum / or saint John's wurte. It has a stalk full of
corners a spanne long and more / with a flower like unto rose Campion / that
is to wit crymesyne / turninge toward purple. The leaves are like rewe / long
/ and small: ye fruit of it is like unto wheat. The root is very small /
smoth / and of no valewe / but it is bitter.

The Virtues and Properties of rewe Pontike.
THE root helps burstinges and drawynges together / those that are sick in
the pleuresye / and them that are shortwinded / the old cough / and them that
spitt blood without an agewe with wine / if they have an agewe / if it be
taken with water in the quantite of two drammes / so that it be brosed and
given to the pacient. So likewise does it help the gnawynge and pain of the
mother. It provoke also weomens sycknes / and dryueth forth the child / if
it be put into the secret place of conception / and the juice does the same /
it heals wounds well if the herb be grene and brosed / or if it be dry /
and then steped and brosed. It binds together and heals up wounds / the
flesh will grow together if it be sodden and brosed with this same herb.
Plinye writes that this herb is good for the diseases of sheep.

The Virtues of Centory.
THE herb bruised when it is grene / if it be laid unto wounds / it does join
them together again / it scoureth old sores / and covers them with skin /
it dryueth out choler and gross humors through the bellye / if it be sodden
and dronken. The broth that it is sodden in / is good to pour in against them
that have the sciatica / for it draws the blood / and eases the pain. The
juice is very good for to put in the medicines for the eyes / for with honye
it purges away the darcknes of the eyes / The same laid in with wolle into
the natural place / brings down weomens syckenes. The juice dronken /
heals properlye the diseases of the synewes. Centorye is good for the
stoppinge of the milte and the liver / for the colyke it kills worms / and
heleth the ache of the mother / some do write also / that it does let the
spittinge of blood / It is also good to lay without upon a hard milte / to
make it soft again.

Of Cudweed or Chafweed.
CEntunculus named in Greek Gnaphalion / is named in Duche Rurkraut / and in
English in some places Cartaphilago. Howbeit there is an other herb which is
ye true Cartaphilago / is much differinge from this same herb. Centunculus
called in York shyre Cudweede / and in Northumberlande Chafweed / because it
is thought to be good for chafinge of any man's flesh with going or rydinge.
Gnaphalion which is described of Dioscorides and Plinye / at the first sight /
is like unto the herb which is called of the Potecaries Stechas citrina / and
in Duche Rindblome. But nether the flowers are so brighte yellowe / nether the
leaves are so long: The leaves of Centunculus have both without a white wolle
or cotton. Beside this kind that Dioscorides describes / there is also
another kind / which has a rough thing like woll / both without and within
the leaves. This has leaves like unto Rosmary / but longer / and all the
stalk thorough is full of broune flowers / growing thick together in knoppes
/ having leaves al about them / but specially in under the flower / the
former kind grows much in heathes and mores / the second kind grows in
watery places / and specially there where as turffes have been dug. And
Matthiolus judges well me think / this second herb to be impiam in Pliny.

The virtues of Cudweede or Cudwurte.
CVdwurte or Chafweede / is good sodden in tarte wine against the common flixe.
It stops also weomens flowers / It is also good to be putt into the
fundament against the void desyer of going to stool / when that m^n can do
nothing / it is good also to lay upon rotting sores to heal them withal.

Of the kinds of Onyons.
AN Onyon was ones called of the old Latins Vnio / because one herb did
grow upon one root / and now it is called cepa or cepe / The Grecians call
it Crommion. The Duche men call it zwibbel / or sepel / the French men call it
oignon. There are diverse kinds of Onyons / the first kind is our common Onyon
/ which has long hollow leaves like pypes / a round hollow and smoth stalk
/ in whose top grows a great knop al full of seeds / the root is round like
a rape: but that it is not so thick / and has a read skin about it / this
kind is called commonly in Latin Cepa or Cepe. The second kind is called in
Greek Crommion ascalonion / in Latin Cepa ascalonia / and in English
ascalion. Ascalion differs from an Onyon / in that it has a great deal
less head / and a longer neck / and thycker.

depiction of plant Cepa.
depiction of plant Scalyon.


Theophrastus in the vij. book of the story of plants / and the iiij. chapter
writes thus of the kinds of onyons: Cepe fissiles (which has their name that
one is cloven from another) and Ascalonie / which have their name of Ascalonia
/ a place in Iewery / differ among them selfs both in dresshing in ye
gardine / and also in nature. The gardiners do leave the cloven onyons in
winter / as of no effect with their leaves. In the spring time they take of
the outward leaves / and trim the rest / when that this is taken away / other
do bude again / and then are they cloven beneth / whereof they have their name
/ and be called cloven onyons. Thus far has Theophrastus / whose words we
may playnelye gather / that the herb which is called of him cepa fissilis /
and in Greek Crommion schiston / is it that we call in English Holleke / and
the Duche men call Sere or Suer / and in Freseland Suerley. And the same opinion
may be confirmed by the auctorite of Pliny / in the xix. book and vj. chapter
of his natural history / in this words: They leave the onyon / called Schiston
cromion / in winter with his leaves / and in the spring they do take of the
leaves / and other rise up in under again with the same divisions / where upon
they have their name: Thus far Plinye. The onyons that we call Hollekes / are
of this nature / yt if one be set alone / that their will a great sort within
a short space grow of that same root / without any sowyng: and if ye take
one of the cluster of / where as there are a dossen together / and set it in
harvest in the ground alone / that one shall bring you a dosen / if the
ground be fruytfull the next year. Wherefore seeing this herb lasts in
the ground all winter / it were better to call it winter onyon / then holleke.
Plinye also puts a very plain difference between the Scallyone and the
Holleke in these words: This is the proper nature of Scalliones / they are
barron in bringinge forth by the root / therefore the Grecianes have conselled
to sow them / and not to set them: These are Plinies words whereof we gather
that one kind of Onyons is plenteous / and makes increase by ye root. But
seeing that nether the common onyon nor the scallione brings forth by the
root / nether any other kind of onyon / saving the Holleke / it follows that
it must only be Cepafissilis. Matthiolus says that Cepa fissilis is called in
Hetruria Cepolla maligia.

depiction of plant Cepa Fissilis.


The Nature of Onyons.
ONyons as Galene says / are hot in the fourth degree / and substance is of
gross parts / wherefore they open ye emrodes / both laid to / and after ye
manner of an emplaster / and also as an ointment with vinegre. Dioscorides writes
yt if it be put in as a suposetory / yt it opens ye emrods / and such other
places as excreme^tes use to issue out by. The long onyon is sharper then ye
round and ye yelow sharper then ye white / and the dry sharper then the grene
/ and the raw sharper the^ ye sodde^ or the roasted. Yet do they al byte and
ingendre wind. The juice of onyons laid to with honey / heleth the darcknes of
the eyes / and dulnes of sight / the hawes and clouds of the eyes / shoting of
blood in the eyes / when they begin / they are good for the quinsey / if the
place be anointed with it: the juice drives out weome^s sycknes / and purges
the head / poored in at the nose thrilles: it is good to lay to the biting of
a dog: with raw honye and vinegre / it is good for the chafing of ones foot
with his shoe / laid to which capons greece: it is good to lay upon their heads
whose heir falls of. Onyons eaten in meat largely make the head ache / when
they are sodden / they provoke more ple^tuously urine / they make them
forgetful / which in the time of their sickness use them out of measure. Onyons
sodden with rasins and figs / make ripe swellings and burste them very
quicklye.

Of the herb called Cepea.
depiction of plant Caepea Brooklyme.
depiction of plant Sea porcelline.


CEpea as Dioscorides writes / is like unto porcelline / but it has blacker
leaves / and a small root. Plinye says that Cepea is like Porcelline / but it
has a blacker root and nothing worth / growing in sandye sea shores with a
bitter taste. Dioscorides makes Cepea like unto porcellaine / saving in
blacknes of leaves. And Plinye making Cepeam also like unto Porcelleine /
writes that the difference which is between them / is in the blacknes of the
root / wherefore if ye books be true / Cepea Dioscoridis and Pliny are not all
one. I have seen ye herb yt Pliny describes often in Freselande / except I be
far deceived / by the sea side with in the sea banks / in such places as the
sea comes / to every spring tide / it may be called in English sea
porcellaine: the leaves are very like porcelline / and are more salt then
bitter as often as I have proved. I found the same herb of late beside the I Will
Porbeck. But when as Dioscorides seems to make one Cepeam / and Pliny an other
/ there must be two kinds of Cepea. As for it of Pliny / I have spoken of it
before: but as touching the Cepea of Dioscorides / I have thought that a
certain kind of small broocklyme was Cepea / but afterward I saw in
Freseland in watery places / and often in poules yt were full in winter and dried
up in summer an herb / which looked much liker unto porcellaine / then
brooklyme does. It had leaves like porcelain / but much less. I dout which of
these two I should take for the right Cepea. Fuchsius which takes brooklyme
but not truly / for Sio / in ye end of the chapter of Sion says / that the
herb is used this day of horseleches to swage swellings and to heal scabbes
of farcies of horses. Tragus has the same meaning and tells also / yt if it
be fried with butter and vinegre / and often laid to / and taken of and renewed
again / that it heals not only any swelling / but also saint Antonies fire
/ or such inflammationes. I have proved it my self by experience / that
brooklyme is very good for a decease that reigns much in Fresela^d called the
Scourbuch. I sod the herb in butter milk / the chese and butter taken away /
and gave the pacientes it so / I made them eat it diverse ways / whereby they
were within a short time healed. But I never proved as yet / what virtue the
other herb that grows in poules has. Matthiolus sets out in deed an
herb not unlike unto porcelline / but he nether tells where it grows /
nether what color it has / nether what taste nor smell it has / nether what
virtue it has / nether what the Potecaries name it / nether the common people.
Wherefore no man can learn of him how to find it again / except a man will go
to the Phisiciane which sent him the herb. For the figure of an herb makes
it not alone / but the qualities also that belong thereto. As with diverse
other learned Phisicianes / Matthiolus refuses herbs having a convenient
figure / yet for lack of the virtues and qualitees yt ye herb should have with
the figures / and will not suffer them to be taken for the herbs which other
of lighter judgment take the^ to be only for the figure and fashions sake.
Wherefore I had lever take Brooklime for Cepea / though it be not so like
porceline as other be / because it is tried to heal scabbes as cepea of
Dioscorides does. Amatus Lusitanus who takes in hand to declare Dioscorides /
being belyke more cunning in the Duche tongue / then in his oune / or ellis
having more help of the Duche writers / then of the Spaniards or Italians /
gives to Cepea nether any Spanish / nether Italian name / but a Duch name /
and he calls it in Duche wild purtzel. But wild purtzel as Tragus a duch
writer of herbs says / differs nothing from ye gardin porcelain / but that
it has less leaves and flowers / and rinneth and spedeth it self upon the
ground / when as the gardin porcelaine has broader leaves and grows righter
up. This wild purtzel did I find thissame year in the montaines of
Wissenburgh / a little from a vineyard / and I am sure yt it was a right kind
of porcelaine. Then when as Cepea is not in Dioscorides a kind of porcellain /
but is only like porcellaine / Amatus gives a wrong Duch name to Cepea.
Wherefore let not the Duche men give any credit unto him in this matter: The
same makes Telephium wild porcellaine / and ye third kind of sedi wild
porcellain / and Cepeam wild porcellaine. It is marvel that he that has been
in so many lands / and professes to teach so many names / in so many
tongues can find for three diverse herbs all differing in name one from an
other / but one name which is in Latin Portula syluestris / which is named in
duch Wild purtzel. And in his enarration of Cepea / which is the 165. he
shows no more but yt this herb grows chefely about the sandye sea shores /
where as the wild purtzel of the duche men grows not as Fuchsius and Tragus
in their Herballes bear witness. Wherefore his enarration is contrary unto his
nominatio^ / and of very small effect / as ye most part of al his enarrations
be.

The Virtues of Cepea.
THE leaves dronken in wine / help the strangulion / and them yt have scabbes
in their bladder / and that does it chefelye / if it be taken in wine wherein
the roots of wild sperage is sodden.

Of Chamecyparissus.
CHamecyparissus is supposed of some men to be the herb that we call Lauender
cotton / whose opinion thought it is not worthy to be condemned with checkes.
Yet I found an other herb in the mountains above Bonne / which being in all
points much more like a Cypres tree then Lauender cotton is: me think yt it
is rather Chamecyparissus / it may be called in English Heth Cypres / because
it grows among Heth / or dwarf cypres. This herb that I speak of / is
little more then a span long / and has leaves as ye shall se in the picture
very like to a Cypres tree / and little knoppes in ye top like unto a Cypres
nut / but some thing longer for their quantite / The leaves are plain
astringent without any heat at al. This herb grows in a Heth beyond Bon /
in the side of a mountain / but I never saw it any where ellis / sauinge
there in all my life. Tragus calls this herb sabinam syluestrem / and
Matthiolus writing upon sabine / says that some in Italy are deceived in the
knowledge of the right sabine / and take this herb for it. He says also that
he has judged this herb to be Silago in Pliny / which he makes like unto
sabine. Now when as Dioscorides says that sabine is like cypress / and
diverse take this herb for a kind of sabine / and is but of a small height /
me think I judge not amiss / that this is Chamecyparissus / namelye / when as
it has astriction beside ye figure / like unto Cypressus. Matthiolus grants
that Lauander cotton is in Dioscorides Abrotonum femina / and entreating of the
cypres tree / says that it is also Chamecyparissus Plinye / which I think
can not be true / seeing that Plinye nether intreatinge of Abrotonum / calls
any kind of it Chamecyparissum / nether whereas he speaks of Chamecyparissus
/ shows that it is also called Abrotonu^ / which manner he often times keeps /
when one herb has many names.

depiction of plant Chamaecyparissus.
depiction of plant Chamaecyparissus Fuchsij.


The Virtues of Chamecyparissus.
THE herb of Chamecyparissus / which may be called ground Cypres or Heth
cypres / dronken in wine / is good against all poison of all serpents and
scorpiones / other properties I find in no autoure of this herb / wherefore I
dare not give unto it all the properties of the Cypres tree / as some men do /
because it has some qualitees like Cypres tree / and has the name of Cypres
tree / and this word Chame / which betokens by the ground or low / for as
Chamemelum has the name of Chame and melon / and one qualite of an appel /
that is to wit / the smelle / and yet has not the nature of an appel. And as
chame daphne / which has the name of chame and daphne / that is a low bay
tree / and has leaves like a bay tree / and yet has not the virtues of a bay
tree: even so it follows not / that because Chamecyparissus has the name of
chame and cyparissus / which is a Cypres tree / and has some qualitees of the
cypres tree / that whatsoever properties the cypres tree has / that
chamecyparissus shall have the same / this therefore have I given you warninge of
/ to read all new writers with judgment / and to try their saynges before
ye put them in practice.

Of Germander.
GErmander / which is also called in Cambridge shyre English Triacle / is
called in Greek Chamedris / in Latin / Trissago / in Duche Germanderlen / in
French Gelimandre: It is called of the Potecaries Chamedrios. Germander grows
in rocks of Germanye / over against Binge / beside Erenfels / and in the
mountains of Wissenburgh. In England I saw it no where / sauinge only in
gardines. It is hot and dry in the third degree / it is a little bushe / of a
span high and more / and has little leaves and bitter / in form and indentinge
of the leaf like unto an Oak leaf. The flower is little / and almost a purple
color. It is best time to gather it / when as it is full of flowers / redye to
bring forth sede.

depiction of plant Chamaedrys vera.
depiction of plant Chamaedrys foemina Fuchsij.
depiction of plant Chamaedrys vulgar faemina Fuchsij.
depiction of plant Chamaedrys vulgar mas Fuchsij.


The Virtues of Germander.
GRene Germander sodden in water and dronken / is good for the cough / for the
hardness of the milte / and for the stoppinge of the water / and dropsyes that
are in the beginning. It provoke also women's sycknes to come down / and the
same dronken with vinegre / wastes away the milte. It is also a special
remedy with wine both dronken / and also in manner of an emplaster against the
bytinges of serpents. It scoureth also old sores with honye / the same laid
on with oil / drives away the darcknes of the eyes. It cutteth in sunder all
gross humors / and opens all the inward parts. The leaves of Germander /
as Theophrastus writes / broken and laid in oil / are good for burstinges /
and against wounds and consuminge sores. The fruit of Germander draws out
choler. The leaves also broken in oil / are good for the white hawe / or the
pearl in the eye.

Of Chameleuce.
CHameleuce / called also populago / Farfagium / and Farranum is not all one
herb in Dioscorides and Aetius / for Aetius seems to make of Chameleuce and
Bechion al one herb / for he writing remedies against ye cough / gives the
same properties unto Chameleuce / yt Dioscorides gives unto Tussilago or
Bechion / and where as Galene and Paulus write in two several places of Bechion
and Chameleuce / Aetius makes no mention at all of Bechion / comprisinge or
holding it also under the name of Chameleuce / as far as I can se. Pliny also
in his time says / yt there was some yt took Chameleuce and Tussilago to be al
one. And in the names that were added unto Dioscorides / Tussilago was called
Chameleuce: howbeit in Dioscorides they are two contrary and diverse herbs:
for he writes contrary description of the^ in two sundry chapters. Chameleuce
has leaves bowynge inward / and has certain branches: but Tussilago has
plain and straight leaves / and wants al kind of branches / for every leaf
comes out by it self out of the root / and not of ye stalk. Dioscorides
says yt Chameleuce is a grene herb with leaves bowyng inward / and with
certain branches / with a flower like a rose / whereupon it follows / seeing yt
Tussilago has whytishe leaves and straight / and no branches / nether any
flower like a rose / yt they can not both be of one herb. This herb yt I
think most like of all other to be Chameleuce / uses to grow commonly about
watersydes and in watery meadows: The proportion of the less is much like
unto a water rose / otherwise called nenufar / but ye leaf is sharper and many
parts less / and there grow many leaves on one stalk / and in ye top of ye
stalk is a yelow flower like unto the Kingcup / called ranunculus: but ye
leaves of ye flowers are thycker / and turn inward again / in the manner of a
knop or little belle / so yt they differ nothing to look to from ye flowers of
the second nenufar with the yelow flower / but yt they are less / and turn a
little more inward as I do remember / but I am sure not much. But there is one
thing / yt will not suffer this herb / yt I call Lucken gollande / to be
Galenis Chameleuce: and yt is / yt this herb is cold / when as Galene makes
his Chameleuce hot almost in the third degree. When as Matthiolus a man well
seen in Simples / and as some judge best learned in them / of al other new
writers / and borne in a country / which is very ple^tuous and full of al
kinds of good herbs / which may have coming to it out of Candy / Turkey
Alexandria / and out of Inde al kinds of herbs that grow not in Italy there:
and has the help of very many learned men in Simples (as his book in many
places does witness) can not tell what herb is Chameleuce in Dioscorides / it
is no meruel that I a poor man without help / dwellinge in a bare and
barbarous country in comparison of Italy / know it not. He compleyneth of the
shortness of the description of this herb in Dioscorides. The description is
short / but not so short as many other be / for he shows three marks /
whereby he might have known it / if he had seen it / that is the grennes of
the leaf / the bowinge of the leaves inward / and the lykenes of the flower
unto a rose. But if this description had been so short as it is not so long
and large as need were / it that wanted / might have been fulfilled by it that
is written more largely of Plinye. For Plinye in the 24. book of his natural
history / and the 15. chapter / describes Chameleucen thus: Chameleuce with us
is called Farranum or Farfugium it grows by water sides with a leaf of a
Popler tree / but greater. And in the 26. book and 6. chapter / he writes thus
of Chameleuce: Bechion stilleth the cough / which is also called Tussilago.
There are two kinds of it / the leaves of the wild are greater then Iuye
leaves / five or seven toward the ground whytish / above pale without stalk
/ flower and sede / and it has a small root. Some reken that the herb which
is called with an other name Chameleuce / is Bechion. Hitherto Plinye. Now when
as beside the notes above marked in Dioscorides / Pliny has put to these
marks above rehearsed / me think that Matthiolus has no such cause to
compleine so much as he does of the short description of Chameleuce.

The virtues of Chameleuce.
I can not find in Dioscorides any other properties that Chameleuce has
sauinge only that it is good for the ache of the loins.

Of Chamepeuce.
depiction of plant

CHamepeuce as Pliny writes / has leaves like unto a larch tree / which is
called in Latin Larix. I can find no mention of this herb in any Author /
which has written of herbs / sauinge only in Pliny / and he describes it
no largelier then ye read before. Wherefore it is hard to tell which is the
herb which Pliny means of. Gesnerus rekeneth yt the herb which is called
in Duche Berentopen / and of other called pata vrsina / should be Chamepeuce the
herb yt he supposes to be chamepeuce / grows in ye top of the alps / and
it is of a finger length and a half / bowinge something down / like a fether
yt stands in ones cap: and it is set about every where from the root unto ye
top with little grene leaves / whereby it does wonderfully represent an ear of
corn: This / whose figure ye se former in order grew in ye top of the alps /
where as I gathered it my self: but there is a much less kind then this is /
which grows in the mountains of Germany and wales / and it crepeth hard by
the ground / al rough and full of small leaves. The uttermost branches whilse ye
herb is not full grown / represent a Crowisfoote / and every end alone is
like a small ear of grene corn. But at the fartherest end of ye herb /
when it is grown as much as it will grow / there comes out of the one of
the branches a little stalk / little more then an inche and a half long /
which is full of small joints / and every iointe has little hores tuftes
coming out: Out of the end of the stalk comes two rough fruytes / much like
unto the long blomes yt come forth of the Haselnut tree in winter: but they
are a great deal smaller and yellower / then the nut blomes are / and something
rough. It may be called in English Heth Crowfoot / or Heth firr / or creping
pine. Amatus Lusitanus writing upon Chameleuce / says yt Chameleuce is called
in Latin Chamepeuce / and in his enarration he says / although this chapter
be red indifferently of Chameleuce and Chamepeuce / yt Pliny makes mention of
them as of two diverse things. I would axe of Amatus / of what one ancient
writer / is the chapter of Chameleuce indifferently red of Chameleuce and of
Chamepeuce both? If there be no ancient author that does so / what new author
is there / that redeth the chapter so: who ought not to give place unto the
autorite of Pliny / which makes two diverse herbs of Chameleuce and
Chamepeuce? But Amatus following Matthiolus / the autorite of Pliny despised /
concludes in these words: Chamepeuce being like in leaves to the Larche or
Larix tree leaves / is good for the ache of the loins and ridge bone / which
herb agrees much in those things yt are spoken of Dioscorides / so that we
may justly say yt Chamepeuce Plinij is the herb that Dioscorides entreats of
in this present chapter / yt is to say Chameleuce. So far Amatus. If ye
Chamepeuce agree with those things yt Dioscorides gives to Chameleuce / then has
Chamepeuce leaves bowyng inward certain branches and a flower like a rose.
Chamepeuce has leaves like a Larch tree / now where is there one thing that
Dioscorides gives to Chameleuce that Chamepeuce has / saving that it is good
for the ache of the loins / and who says yt Chamepeuce is good for ye
loins? Is it not Pliny? If it be Pliny / why does not Amatus believe Pliny in
making Chameleuce and Chamepeuce two diverse herbs / as in saying yt
Chamepeuce is good for the ache of the loins. If Plinye lose his credit / and
be not worthy to be believed in the one thing / he leseth it also in the other /
and so when Pliny is not to be believed that Chamepeuce is good for the ache of
the loins / in what one thing does Chamepeuce of Pliny agree with those
things that Dioscorides gives unto Chameleuce / sauinge that they begin both
in Chame / and end in euce.

The properties of Chamepeuce.
PLiny says that Chamepeuce is good for the ache of the loins and of the
ridge bone / they use it in Denmark and in East Freseland with old wine or
milk / against the scuerbuch / which is called in the Northcountre the scrubby
ill / or the crepel ill / and in Germanye men put it unto wine / when it is
long / or ropinge / or hanginge / and within few days as they say / it
amendeth the wine again. Tragus calls this herb Muscum terrestrem in Latin
/ and in Duch Beerlap / and he says that it is known by experience / yt this
herb dronken with wine / breaks the stone. Some both in Duchland and England
abuse this herb for Spica celtica.

Of ground Pyne.
depiction of plant Aiuga prima.
depiction of plant Chamaepitys secunda.


CHamepitys in Greek / is called in Latin Aiuga or Abiga / and of the
Potecaries Iua muscata / and Iua arthritica / in Duch Ie longer je lieber / as
Fuchsius says / but other reprove him in that / and say yt the name belongs
unto an other herb / and in French Iue muscate: and it may be called in
English Ground pyne. Chamepitys is of three kinds / the first kind has leaves
like unto stone crop / but much thinner depiction of plant Aiuga tertia.
rough and fatt / and thick about the boughs / and has the smell of a Pyne
tree. The flowers be yellowe or white / the roots are like Succore roots.
This herb crepeth upon the ground / and something crooked. The second kind
has branches of a cubit height or length / bowing in after the fashion of an
anchor / and small / with leaves like the other / and a white flower / and a
black sede. The third kind is called the male / and is but a little one with
small leaves / white and rough / with a rough and a white stalk / with yelow
flowers / and a sede coming out at the setting on of the leaves. All these
three kinds have the smell of a Pine tree / I never saw that I remember the
two first kinds / but I have borrowed their figures of them / that say that
they have seen them. As for the last kind I have seen it in very great plenty
about Worms / and in many other places of Germany. It grows also in good
plenty in Kent / and as I think / it grows in diverse other places of
England. But I meruel that Matthiolus makes this that I make the last / the
first kind / when as this kind has in no place that ever I was in any / white
flower. Also it that he sets forth for the last / as he has set out the
figure of it / is more like unto the first kind of Diovorides / for it has
leaves more like unto the less semperbiuo / which is called thrist / then the
third kind has / as any man may also se that Aiuga tertia of Matthiolus has
/ which he sets forth his own self. Let learned men judge which of our
opiniones is more worthy to be allowed.

The Properties of ground Pyne.
THE leaves dronken seven days in wine / heal the iaundies / and the same
dronken xl. days with mede made of honye and water / help the sciatica: they
are also good for ye stoppinge of the water / for ye diseases of ye liver and
kidnes / and ye gnawynge of ye belly: some use ye broth of this herb as a
preservative against the poison of wolfes bayne and leopardes bayne: some use
to put barley mele and ye broth of this herb together / and kneade them
together / and use them for the purposes above rehearsed. The Same herb beaten
into powder / and made into pills with a fig / and then taken / softeneth
the belly. Ground pyne put into the mother with honey / drives forth such things
as hurt the mother. It drives away the hardness of the pappes / or ye breasts:
it closes wounds together. It stops also / if it be laid to with honey /
sores that do run at large / and consume the flesh. Pliny also says / that it
is good against the biting of a scorpion. If it be drunk / it draws out
cloddy or clotted blood. It makes men to sweat if they be anointed with it. It
is also good for a new cough latelye begone. Some do write that this herb
sodden with vinegre / and dronken / will drive out a dead child out of the
mothers womb.

Of Gume succorye.
depiction of plant Chondrylla.


CHondrilla is not in England that I have seen / it is much in high Germanye
/ and because it has leaves like succory / and stalk like rishes / it may be
named in English Rishe succorye / or Gume succory: because it has a clammy
humor in it. There is mention made of two kinds of Chondrilla in Dioscorides /
of ye which the former kind is thus described: Chondrilla which is called of
some men Seris / and of other Succory / it has a stalk / flowers and leaves
like Succorye: wherefore some call it wild succory / but it is hole together
smaller / in whose stalks there comes forth a gume like milk / in a lump
like a bean. There is an other kind of Chondrilla / with a long leaf
indented / and as it were gnawen round about / spredinge it self upon the
ground / ye stalk is full of milky juice / the root is small well lykinge
yellowe and full of juice. The second is it / that I have seen in Germanye: The
leaves of this herb are spread upon the ground / and are indented much like
unto Dandelion: the stalks and branches are small / and in the top of every
branch is a yellow flower / which when it fades / is turned into white down.

The Properties of Gume succorye.
THE leaves and the stalk of Gume succorye have the pour to digest. The juice
boweth back again the hear of the eye brows / that stand not in order. It
grows in rank and mauored grounds / some do reckon that it is good against
the biting of a serpent / because it is known by experience / that when the
feld mouse is hurt / she does eat it.

Of Chrysanthemon.
CHrysanthemon is of two kinds / one of them is spoken of in the entreating of
Camomil / and it is called in English yellow camomille. The other kind is it
whereof I entreat now of. The herb which I take to be Chrysanthemon / grows
plentuouslye upon the walls of Andernake in Germany / it has small leaves after
the figure of Tansey: but many parts less and much indented / it is full of
branches / and every branch has yellow flowers / and wonderful bright.
Dioscorides describes Chrysanthemo^ thus: Chrysanthemon or Calchas which is
called Bupthalmus of some / is a tender herb and full of branches / and
brings forth smoth stalks and leaves / cut or indented: it has flowers
wounderfully shyning yellowe / and resembling the appel of an eye / whereupon
it has gotten the name of oxey: it grows beside tounes / The herb may be
called in English Goldenfloure.

depiction of plant Chrysanthemon.


The properties of Goldenfloure.
THE flowers of golden flower broken and mixed with oil and wax / are
supposed to drive away the fat that is gathered under the skin / after the
manner of a lompe / they heal the iaundies / and restore a man to his color
shortly / if a man after the long use of the bath drink of the^ / after he is
come forth out of the bath.

Of Cicerbita called Sowthistel.
CIcerbita is named in Greek Sonchos / in English Sowthistel / in Duche
Hasenkoel or Gensdistel / in French Lateron: it grows common enough in all
contres. There are two kinds of Sowthistel / there is one yt is a wild one /
and has more pricks upon it: and the other is but soft and tender / much
desired to be eaten in meat / with a stalk full of corners and holow wtin:
sometime red with leaves indented about ye edges of them. The other Sowthistel is
yet tenderer / after the manner of a tree / having broad leaves / ye leaves
depart ye stalk which grows out into branches. The kinds of Sowthistels
are common in every country / wherefore I need not to tell nether their
description largelier then Dioscorides has done / nor their natural places of
growinge.

depiction of plant Cicerbita Sowthistel.
depiction of plant Rough Sowthistel.


The Virtues of Sowthistel.
THE virtue of both is to cool and bind / therefore they are good for the
hoote stomach / and also for inflammations / if they be laid unto the place:
the juice of them swageth the gnawinge of the stomach if it be dronken: it
provoke also milk if it be laid to in woll. It helps the gatheringe
together of matter that is about the fundament and the mother. Both the herb
and the root is good for them that are bitten of a Scorpion / if it be laid to
in the manner of an emplaster.

Of Ciche or Ciche peese.
CIcer is called in Greek Erebinthos / in Duch Kicherns Kicherbs / and zisserne
/ in French Ciche ou pois ciches. Cicer is much in Italy and in Germany. I
have seen the^ in the gardine of the Barbican in London / and I have it in my
garden at Kew. Cicer may be named in English Cich or peese / after ye French
tongue: Cicer is described another of Dioscorides / nether of Theopra. nether of
Pliny / saving that Pliny says / Ciche has a round cod / but other pulse have
long and broad depiction of plant Ccicer.
Theophrastus says that Ciche has the longest root of any pulse / and that
Cicer differs from other pulses by many properties / first in that it is
long in bringing forth the flower / and does hastily bring forth the fruit /
for within xl. days after that it is come up / it may be made perfect as some
say. It is also very fast and hard as wood: it is very ill for new fallowed
ground / by the reason that it wastes it upon / it kills all herbs / and
most and sounest of all other ground thistel / every ground is not fit for
this pulse / for it requires a black and a gross ground. Ciche also as Pliny
says / comes well up with saltnes / and therefore it burns the ground.
Cich ought not to be sowe^ except it be laid in stepe a day before. There
are diverse kinds of Ciches / one is called Cicer Arietinum / which has ye
name of the likeness of a rames head / and this is the most common Cich / and
most used now a days. There is another kind which is called Cicer nigrum /
that is black Ciche / and yt have I seen in Germany / but seldom. There is an
other kind that is called Cicer album / that is white Ciche / much less and
rounder then the common Ciche: This also have I seen diners times in Germanye.
There is another kind yt is called Cicer columbinum and venereum / which kind
I do not remember that I have seen. These be the fragmentes which I have
gathered out of Theophrastus and Pliny / to supplye partly the room of a
description. But I will describe it as I have seen it. The common Ciche has a
very hard stalk / and somthinge rough / and at the first sight it looks
like a pease / but the leaves are a great deal smaller / and lightely indented
about / there grow of every branche two orders of leaves / but they stand not
wingwise / that is one right against an other / but one higher then another /
the branches and the standing and form of the leaves / are not unlike unto
Lichores / the flower is most comenly purple / but sometime white / the code is
short and round / the root is like the color of the earth / and not very
long.

Of the propertyes of Ciche.
CIche as Galene writes / is a windye pulse / and nourishes much / and good
for the bellye / convenient to provoke water / and to ingendre milk and sede.
It provoke also weomens flowers / but it that is called rames Ciche / does
more effectually provoke urine then the rest: the broth of it breaks the
stones that be in the kidneys. The other kind of Ciche has the same power of
drawinge to / of making ripe / of cuttinge in sundre / and in scouring away /
for they are hot and measurably moist / and have some bitterness / by the
which strenght they scour the milte / the liver / and the kidneys / and clenge
away scabbes and lepres / and foul scurfe that is upon the skin. They also
away impostemes about the ears / swellings / and hardness of the stones: with
honey also they heal sores almost incurable. Dioscorides writes that Ciches
amend a man's color / and they help also the birth to come forth. Simeon
Sethy writes thus of Ciches. Al kinds of Ciches are hot and moist in the
first degree / and are hard of digestion / and ingendre superfluities. They
provoke ye pleasure of the body / and norish more then beans do: but they
open and purge and drive down weomens flowers / and they have some salt and
sweet quality with the saltnes. They louse the bellye with their swetenes /
they provoke a man to make water / they ingendre wind / increase milk and do
scour. But the black Ciche is a good medicine against venom and poysone /
and most of al / provoke urine / and breaks the stones of the kidneys and
bladder / the which thing no other pulse can do so well / and specially the
black and little one / and that thing does the broth of them more mightelye /
the which pulse for all that above al other pulses hurt the sores and
exulcerations. But the red Ciche is hoter then the white / and ingendreth
gross humores. Ciches steped in water a night / and then taken / kille worms
in the bellye. But he that has taken them / let him fast six hours after.
The broth of Ciches is good for the iaundies / if black Ciche be sodden with
radishe and parselye / and the broth be taken with Almonde oil / it purges
effectuallye and dryueth out the stones of the kidnes and bladder. But if it
be taken with beans / it makes a good plyte and fatt flesh. Grene Ciches are
very windye / hard of digestion / and make men have an euel color.

Of Cichelinge.
depiction of plant Cicercula.


CIcercula seems to be a diminutiue of Cicera / and not of Cicer / for then it
should be named Cicerculum. Cicera is found in Palladius / which says that
Cicera differs only in this from Cicercula / that the color is
vnpleasanter and blacker. Cicera is called in Greek of Theophrastus Ochros /
and he says that it is hot and dry / and therefore can preserve it self
from corruption: Cicercula as Columella writes / has seeds like a peese / but
full of corners. Pliny says that Cicercula is of the kind of Ciche / which is
not equal / but full of corneres as a peese. Theophrastus rekeneth Cicerculam
among eruilles and peese / which have a stalk falling upon the ground / other
marks or tokens whereby Cicercula may be known / have I not read of: it is
called in Greek Lathyros / and it may be called in English a Cichelinge.
Cicercula which I have seen growyng / has very long and narrow leaves / and
a stalk al full of corners and crestes / and greater and shorter coddes / for
the quantite of the pulse / then peese have: The sede is white and full of
corners. It grows much about Muffendorff / about three English mile above
Bon.

Of Homloke or Hemloke.
depiction of plant Cicuta.


CIcuta is called in Greek Koneiou / in English Homloke or Hemloke / in Duche
Schierlinge / in French Cigne or Secu. Cicuta as Dioscorides writes / has a
stalk full of joints or knees / as Fenel has / great and full of bows in
the top: the leaves are like unto Fenel giant / or herb Sapapene / called
Ferula / but narrower and stinkinge. There grow out of the top both branches
/ and also a spokye top and sede whyter then anise: but Plinye says grosser
and thicker / the root is hollow and nothing worth. Pliny says that the
stalk of Cicuta is smoth and full of joints / and somthinge black / higher
then two cubits / and that the leaves are smaller then Coriander leaves. Here
I think it worthy to be noted that the herb which we call Homloke / has
leaves not very well agreynge unto the description of Dioscorides / for
Dioscorides writes ye Cicuta has leaves like unto Ferula / and Ferula has
leaves like unto Fenel / saving that they are much sharper / and somthinge
broader: But our Homloke has leaves like unto persely / and in all points
unlike unto Fenel / wherefore Dioscorides knew an other kind of Cicuta then we
know. Howbeit the description of Cicuta in Pliny agrees in all points with
our Homloke / for Pliny makes the leaves of Cicuta like unto Coriander / but
smaller and thinner / which a great deal bigger then the leaves of Ferula / as
ye shall perceive when ye compare them both together: therefore I think that this
Homloke that we have here / is the true Cicuta of Plinye. Some would reckon
that therefore it should not be the true Cicuta / because it has not such
perilous properties / as ancient autours give unto Cicuta / to whom I
answer / that al herbs have not like virtues in all places / for Aron in
some places is eaten / and in other it is so sharp that it can not be eaten as
Galene says in his book de facultatibus alimentorum. Helleborus is not always
a like good in every place as Dioscorides writes / and Theophrastus writing
of Cicuta / shows that in some places Cicuta is much stronger then in other
some: Cicuta is strongest in susis / and in all cold and shadowy places.
Therefore if it have not all the hole strenght that it has in Susis / yet it
ought not therefore to be judged for any other herb then Cicuta. Howebeit this
same / if that it were ordered as I know how that it might be ordered / it
would do harm more then enough. Plinye also writes that in some places men use
to eat the young stalks of Homlokes in sallates. But I will counsel no man to
do so / for fear of it that may follow.

The Properties of Homloke.
IF that any man be afraid that he has eaten or dronken Homloke / let him
drink pure hot wine / which is not to subtle. The manner of kepinge of the
juice of Homloke / is this: Take the tops of Homloke / before the seeds and
leaves wexe hard / and bruise them / and press out the juice / and set it in
the sun / and let it harden with sun / and when it is hard / lay it up
and use it. This is good to put unto eye medicines / to quench the ache
withal. It quenches the outrageous hete / called saint Antonis fire / and
runninge sores which sprede abroad very much. The herb with the leaves
broken and laid unto a man's stones / stauncheth the imaginations and dreaming
of the bodily pleasur / which chanse upon the night: but it febleth the member
of generation. The same laid upon a lately delivered womannes pappes / wastes
away the milk / and if it be laid upon maidens breasts in the time of their
virginite / it holds them down / and suffers them not to grow. Homloke of
Candye is of most strength / and it of Magara / after them it of Athenes / and
they that grow in Cio and in Cilicia.

Of the Sea gyrdel.
ALga which is a common name unto a great part of Sea herbs / and is
commonly called in English / Sea wrack / and in Greek phycos / is divided into
diverse kinds / and every one has a sundry form from another. Virgil makes
mention of Alga / where he says: Proiecta vilior alga. Viler the^ ye cast out
Seawrak. Among all other kinds Theophrastus describes one after this manner:
There is a certain kind of Seawrake with a broad leaf / of a grene color /
to the which some give the name of a leeke / other call this gyrdel. The root
is rough / and without it is full of scales / within very long and thick /
and not unlike unto the herb called syue onyon. This kind may well be called
in English Sea gyrdel / it is called in Latin cingulum / and in Greek Zoster.
This herb is plenteously seen in Purbek by the sea side / after a great
tempest has been in the Sea / which commonly louseth such sea herbs / and
dryueth them unto the side. Dioscorides makes three kinds of Fucus or Sea
wrake / one broad / and other kind long and read / and the third kind white
/ I saw the Sea gyrdel this year in July with all the properties that
Theophrastus requires in his Sea gyrdel: in the foresaid place / the roots was
like unto Garleke / many chyues making one great head / and the lenes had
the form of a leke / but they were a fadom long.

The Properties of Sea wrake.
DIoscorides writes that all the kinds of Sea wrake do cool / and help not
only the gout / but also hot burninges / called inflammations. If they be
laid unto the places grieved / yet grene and moist after the manner of an
emplaster. In the Bishopriche of Durram / the housband men of the country that
dwell by the Sea side / use to fate their land with Sea wrake.

Of Cirsion / called Langue de befe.
CIrsium / called in Greek Kirsion as Dioscorides writes / is a tender stalk
of two cubits long / and thresquared / the little leaves that come out beneth
/ resemble in lykenes a rose / the corneres are full of pricks / and it is
soft in the spaces that are between. The leaves are like unto the leaves of
Buglossum / mesurable rough and longer / white in under / full of pricks in ye
extremities or edges. The top of the stalk is round about and rough / and in
that are purple heads which wast away into down at ye length / Pliny
describes Cirsion thus: Cirsion is a tender little stalk of two cubits long
like unto a triangle compassed about with prickye leaves. The pricks are soft
/ the leaves are like unto ox tongue / but less / white in under / and in the
top are purple heads / which consume into down. We have no herb in England
that I know / to whom all this hole description does agree. They do not agree
unto our common Buglosse / for beside that the flower is not resolved into
down / the order of pricks in the leaf does not agree. I know no herb in
England whereunto these descriptions do agree better / then unto our Langue de
befe. Howbeit / it wants certain tokens / that the description does require /
that is purple flowers / for ours has yellowe flowers / and a thresquared
stalk / and as some reckon that the leaves that are vndermoste / resemble not a
rose. As for the color of the flower / I pass not so much of / seeing that it
is consumed into a down / for I know many herbs which by nature should have
blewe flowers / and yet have white flowers / as Cichory violettes and Borage.
As for ye thresquared stalk / it may be so that at some time of the growing /
it has a thresquared stalk which Dioscorides has marked / and not many other
/ or it may be thresquared / where as Dioscorides has seen it / and not here
in England / as have marked in our English Ebulo in Cambridge shyre / that ye
stalk was round and not foursquare / which thing Dioscorides requires in
his country Ebulo. Dioscorides does also require in his Elder purple blackish
berryes / yet all the Elder berries which I saw in the alps and in Retia /
were as read as scarlat: Dioscorides requires in his less Centory creme sin
flowers turning into purple / I have seen an hole field full of white Centory.
Then where as all the other properties and tokens do agree / and no other kind
can be found here so like Cirsion as this herb is: I reken that the color of
the flower / and the squares of the stalk (which is yet squared in deed) ought
not to put forth our Langue de befe / out of the kind of Cirsion / allthough
it be not all the best. As touching the little leaves which should represente
the form of a rose / I reken that Dioscorides means that the leaves
spreadinge on the ground / should have a certain lykenes unto the figure of
a rose / which thing this our Langue de befe does not want. For Dioscorides
makes mention twice of the leaves / and compares them unto two herbs nothing
like at all that is unto a rose and to borage: wherefore to save Dioscorides
from contradiction / we must say yt in ye former place he meneth not of every
one lefe severally / yt it should be like unto a rose leaf / but yt al ye
leaves spread abrod yt are about ye rote on the ground / should resemble a rose
in their fassion and manner of growing out together. If any man understand not
what I mean / let him look upon ye herb which Matthiolus sets out for
cinoglossa / and he shall understand me. Here is to be noted for the^ yt read
Dioscorides in Latin of Ruellius translation / yt they trust him not to much
without ye Grek text / for he tra^slateth in ye description of Cirsion macrotera
maiora / when in other iiij. herbs he tra^slateth ye same word lo^giora. It is
also not to be passed over in silence yt Pliny has here / where as Dioscorides
has macrotera / and Ruellius maiora / minora / that is less leaves / so that
Plinye means yt Cirsion has less leaves then buglossum has. Matthiolus
sets out the figure of an herb / yt my master Lucas Ginus sent unto him /
which he takes for the right Cirsion / but he nether tells the Italian name
of it / nether the name of Herbaries / nor of the Apothecaries / nether
describes it so / that if a man se it again / by his description he might
know it. And because he does lightely pass over it / nether the taste nor
smell / nor the virtue of the herb told / we can nether judge it to be the
true Cirsion / nether perfitlye confute him in saying that it is the true
Cirsion. But by the figure that he sets out / he may be so confuted for
holdinge of that herb to be Cirsion / as he confuteth other that hold that
Buglosse is the true Cirsion / for he confuteth him thus. The little pricky
leaves that come forth from below / resemble not the likeness of a rose in the
common Buglosse / therefore it can not be Cirsion. And even so may Matthiolus be
confuted / the leaves of the herb that are be low next the ground in his
figure resemble not a rose / sed louga et continua prodeunt. Matthiolus knows
these his own words well / therefore by his own reason the herb that he
sets out / can not be Cirsion. Look upon his figure when ye will / and ye
shall find that it is true that I say. The herb which I take for Cirsion /
are at least for a kind of it / grows commonly in gardines in England / and
also abroad in the feld in great plentye between Sion and Branfurd. Our cooks
hold that it is a good pot herb / and so it is in deed / if Buglosse and
Borage be good pot herbs / for in taste it is very like them / and rather
pleasanter in taste then they be. The sede of the herb is read drawinge
toward yelowe. Amatus erreth in this herb as in many other: read his
confutation of Matthiolus / and ye shall find that he says / but nescienter /
among other reasons / to prove that Buglosse is Cirsio^: Exbuglosse floribus
nescio quid euanescit. Out of the flowers of Buglosse / I wot not what
vanishes out or away. If he can not tell what vanishes away / then he can not
tell what herb is Cirsion. He should have said / if he had known it as
Dioscorides says: Soluuntur capitula purpurea in lanugmem. But how should he
say so / except he lied / for he never saw nether any other man / the purple
flowers of Buglosse vanished away in to down / for no honest man will say
that ever Buglosse had any down. Wherefore Amatus writes of it that he never
saw / only following the judgment of other / having none at all in this
herb that we now entreat of.

The Properties of Cirsion.
DIoscorides shows that Andreas the Herbary wrote / that the root of Cirsion
bound to the sick place / swageth the ache of the great veins which being
to much enlarged / send to many humores to one place.

Of Cistus.
depiction of plant Cistus mas.
depiction of plant Cistus foemina.


CIstus is named in Greek Kistos / Kitharos and Kissaros / of the common
Herbaries rosago and rosa canina / and in French rose canine as Gesner says.
I have seen it in Italy in certain gardines / and ones in England in my
Lords gardine at Sion. But it that I saw at Sion / has broader and longer
leaves then it which I saw in Italye. I have not heard as yet any English
name for Cistus / but for lack of other / it may be called Cist bushe or Cist
sage / of the lykenes that it has with sage. Cistus as Dioscorides writes /
is a thick bushe and full of branches / and grows in stonye places / full of
leaves / but not high / the leaves are round and tarte / with a certain
bindinge / and rough. The male has a flower like a pomgranat / the female has
a white flower. Pliny also says that there are two kinds of Cistus / the male
with a flower like a rose / and the female with a white flower. It that I saw
in Italye was the male / and it that I saw in England was the female.

The Properties of Cistus.
CIstus is astringent / wherefore his flowers dronken twyse on the day in tarte
wine / stop the bloodye flixe / they laid to by them selves / stop sores which
eat up the flesh / the flowers mixed and made with wexe after the manner of a
treat / heal old sores / and the places that are burnt with the fire.
Hypocistus called of the Pothecaries Hipoquistida / grows about the roots of
Cistus / and is like unto the flower of Pomgranat / some of them are yellowe /
some grene / some white. The juice is melted out and made thick as Acacia is /
but some dry it / and stepe it when it is broken / and sees it / and do all
other things that is done with Licio. It has the strength of Acacia / but it
dries somthinge more and binds: but dronken and put in / it is good for the
bloodye flixe of weomen.

Of Cistus ladanifera.
depiction of plant

There is (as Dioscorides says) an other kind of Cistus / called of some Ledon
/ which is a bushe / and grows as ye other Cistus does / but it has longer
leaves and blacker / which in the spring of ye year have a certain fatnes. The
nature of ye leaves is astringent / and is of as great strenght as Cistus is /
of this is made gum / which is called ladanu^: for when as the gotes and got
buckes eat the leaves of Cistus / they gather manifestly the fatnes with their
beardes / and carye away with their clammenes it that cleueth upon their heary
and rough fete. The which the inhabiters of the country comb of / and streyne
it / and make it in lumpes together / and so lay it up / other pull ropes
through the bushes / and with them take of the clammines / and make Ladanum of
it. It is most commendable that sanoreth well / and is somthinge grene / and
is soune soft and fat / not full of sand / or evil favored / and full of
Rosin as it of Cyprus is. It that comes out of Arabia and Lybia / is viler
then the other be.

The Nature of Ladanum.
LAdanum as Dioscorides says / has the property to bind together / to warm
/ to make soft and to open the mouths of the veins. Put myrre and myrtell
oil and wine unto Ladanum / and it will hold still the heir that goes of.
With wine laid upon scarres of wounds or sores / makes them look better
favored. Ladanum poured into the ear with honyed water or rose oil / heals
pain of the ears / and the same in a fumigation / draws down the secondes.
Ladan put into the mother in a pessarye / or in a long fashion of a suppository
/ heals the hardness of the mother. It is good to be put into medicines for
the cough and in softeninge emplasters. Ladan dronken with old wine / stops
the bellye / and provoke urine. Ladanum is full hot in the first degree / as
Galene says and reaches nere unto the second.

Of Perwincle / or Perywincle.
CLematis is so named of Dioscorides without any addition / of other it is
called Clematis Egyptia / because it grows plentuouslye there. It is called
of Plinye in some places Daphnoides / in other Chamcedaphne / in other Vinca
peruinca. It is called in English Perwincle / or Periwincle / in Duche Ingrien
/ and in French Dulisseron. Clematis is named in English Perwincle / and it
grows in fatt and well bearinge grounds / It has little branches of the
bigness of a rishe. The figure and color of the leaves / are like unto a
Laurel or Bay leaf / but they are less a great deal. Thus does Dioscorides
describe Clematis. It has pretty blewe flowers / and the herb crepeth upon the
ground very thick / one branch wouen about an other.

depiction of plant Clematis. Perwincle.


The properties of Perwincle.
THE leaves and stalks of Perwincle dronken with wine / stop both the
bloodye and other flixe / with milk and rose oil or priuet oil / the same put
into a pessary / or mother suppositorye / relese the pain of the mother.
Perwincle chewed / staunched the tuth ache. The Same is medicinable to be laid
upon the places that are bitten of serpents. Perwincle grows wild in many
places of Germany / and it grows plentuouslye in England in gardines / and
wild also in the West country.

Of Clematitis.
CLematitis puts forth a long branche / something read / and tough / the
leaf is bitinge in taste / and makes blisteres / it crepeth upon trees as
Smilax does. I never saw this plant / nether in Germany nor in England /
wherefore I know nether ye English nor ye Duch name of this herb / but it may be
called in English Bush perwincle / or biting perwincle. I saw this in a gardin
in Ferraria / and it had leaves not unlike unto the leaves of Clematis
daphnoides. But they were depiction of plant Clematis altera.
longer and sharper at the end / and very like unto the small leaves of the
biting vynde / called in Latin of some Vitis syluestris. Ruellius joins in his
translation of Dioscorides Clematis and Clematitis together / and sets them
in one chapter / when as my Dioscorides in Greek describes Clematis in the
beginning of the fourth book / and Clematitis in the end of the same book.
Which thing Galene makes mention of in the book of Simple medicines / where
as he checketh Pamphilus the Herbary / for confundinge these two herbs
together / whose nature were diverse. Furthermore seeing that the names are
also diverse / and the herbs are described in diverse places / it should not
belong unto a translator to make of Clematitis Clematis / and to take an herb
out of the place / where as Dioscorides has set it / and bring it by force
into an other place where it should not stand / if he follows his Greek
exeample / that led him to that which he did / he is excusable: but if he did
it of his own head / he is worthy blame / and not to be followed. Matthiolus
has now in his Latin commentaries upon Dioscorides / marked the same thing
that I noted long before I saw his commentaries. But he makes another herb
then I do to be Clematitida / for he makes ye wind with the douny thing in
the top about the sede / to be Clematitida / If the plant that I set forth /
crepe upon hedges and trees / as the other of Matthiolus does / doutles it is
more to be taken for Clematitidis then the other is / but I dare not hold that
it does crepe upon bushes / like as Smilax does / for I never saw it / but at
one time in one place. But as far as I remember it did crepe upon other bushes
/ as Smilax does. This am I sure / that when I compared the leaves of my
branches that I brought from Ferraria with the hory vinde / I found no
difference between them at al / saving that mine had hoote leaves without any
cuttinge / and the other was indented about the edges.

The Nature of Clematitis.
THE sede of Clematitis broken / and dronken in honied water / dryueth forth
thynne fleme and choler. The leaves laid to lepres / scour them away. Some use
to condite this herb with Dittany to eat it. Galene says that this herb is
hot in the beginning of the fourth degree.

Of Clinopodium / called Horse Time.
depiction of plant Clinopodium.


CLinopodion called of the Latins Clinopodium / may be called in English
Horse time / because it is like unto wild time / but a great deal greater.
Clinopodion is thus described of Dioscorides / Clinopodium is a little bushe
full of twigges / having the lenght of two spannes / it grows in stones: it
has leaves like unto wild Time / and flowers representinge a Bedfoote / and
one standinge from an other / certain spaces going between / as we se in
Horehounde. Pliny describes Clinopodium after this manner: Clinopodium is like
unto wild Time / full of branches a spanne long. It grows in stonye places
/ and with the round circle of flowers / which go about the little branches
/ it resembles Bedfete. Dioscorides and Plinye differ something in the length
of this herb / as they differ in the lenghte of Ornithogalon. For Dioscorides
makes this herb to be two spannes long / saying Thamnion esti dispithamon.
And Plinye makes it to be but one spanne long. I have seen this herb diverse
times growing in Germanye: first in the walls of Colon / hard by the Rene /
and afterward in great plentye above Bonne by the Ryne side among stones.
But I never saw it above a spanne long. Wherefore the lenght may seem to
hinder it to be Dioscorides Clinopodium / but no other part of the
description. Yet if it may not be Clinopodium Dioscoridis / it may be right
well Clinopodium Plinij. Beside the tokens that Dioscorides and Pliny mark in
this herb / I mark that it has fouresquared branches and something rough /
and the flowers are purple with a certain whytishnesse. The greatest leaves
have a little indentinge about the edges / but not very thick / nor orderlye
set together: I found this herb of late right over against Sion. The herb
that Matthiolus sets forth for Clinopodium / is the first kind of Calamint
/ for it has leaves like unto Basil / white under / squared stalks / and a
purple flower / and commonly grows in mountains. But it is not Clinopodium /
for it has not leaves like unto Serpillo / as his figure of Serpilli will prove
/ if it be looked upon. Matthiolus says also / that his herb is not only
like unto Serpillo / but also unto Calaminte montane. Which saying can not be
true / for Calaminta montana / which has leaves like unto Basil / is nothing
like unto Serpillo / as I will be judged by his oune figure / which he has set
out of Serpilli / compared with the leaf of Heliotropij maioris / which is
like as Dioscorides says unto Basil. Wherefore Matthiolus is deceived in his
judgment / making one herb like unto two herbs / nothing like / but one
differinge from an other.

The Properties of Horsetyme.
BOth Clinopodium it self and the broth of it / is good to be dronken against
the bytinges of serpents / against places that are bursten and shronke
together / and against the strangury. It dryueth forth weomens syckenes / and
if it be dronken certain days / it puts away hanhing wartes. It stops
the belly sodden to the wasting of the third part of the broth that it is
sodden in / in an ague taken with water / without an ague with wine. Galene
says that Clinopodium is hot and dry in the third degree / but our
Clinopodium is not also hot / or ellis my taste fealeth me.

Of Climenum or water Betonye.
depiction of plant Water Betonye.
depiction of plant Wood brounwurt.


CLimenum as Dioscorides writes / puts forth a fouresquared stalk like
unto the right Bean stalk / but it has leaves like unto Plantaine / it has
little sede cases about the stalk turninge one into another / not unlike unto
the claspers or the fish / called Polipus. This description of Dioscorides
agrees well in many things unto ye herb which we call in English Water
betonye / or Broun wurt / The Duche men name it Braunwurtz / and the Herbaries
Scrofularia^ maiorem. But Pliny seems to make an other kind of Climenos / in
these words: Climenos is an herb that has the name of a King / with the leaves
of Iuy full of branches / with an empty stalk compassed about with joints / it
has a strong savor / and seeds like Iuy. It grows in woddes and mountains.
There is small lykenes between Plantayne and Iuy / Dioscorides says / that his
Climenon has leaves like unto Plantayne / and Plinye makes his Climenos with
leaves like Iuy: therefore it appears that they be not al one herb. Pliny also
confesses after the description of his Climenos / that the Grecianes make
their Climenos like unto Pla^tayn. Dioscorides says that his best Climenon
grows in mountains / where upon I gather that his Climenon grows not
always in mountains / but in other places also. Yet in this he agrees with
Plinye / that Climenos grows in mountains: The common water betony grows
commonly about water sides. Howbeit I have seen it also in other places. The
herb which I take to be Climenos Plinij / and a kind of it that Dioscorides
describes / and grows much in Germany / in woddes / hedges / and has
leaves somthinge like long Iuye leaves / but longer and indented: and therefore
more like a nettel. The savor of this herb is stronger then the other / and
has reder color in diverse places then the other. This Climenos of Pliny may
be called in English Wood brounwurt. Some of the common Herbaries call it
scrophulariam. The fashion of the leaves of both these herbs that I set forth
/ is more like unto it yt Plinye describes / then it that Dioscorides writes
of / but the greater agrees a great deal better then the other / but not so
perfitlye as I do require of it. Wherefore I dare not give sentence that either
of them both is the right Climenum.

The nature of Climenum or water Betonye.
THERE is a juice pressed out of the hole herb / which is very good in
drink against the spittinge forth of blood / and the same stops the read
issue of weomen / and the flixe of the bellye by coolinge. It stops also the
blood that bursteth out of the nose. The leaves bruised or the sede cases laid
upon fresh wounds / bring them to a perfyte amendment / and cover them
with skin. Plinye says that his Climenos dronken / makes even men barun /
and to be without childer. The common Herbaries write that Scrophularia
heals rottinge sores / and the swellinge sores of the fundament / called
figs of some writers. The juice is also good for the deformity of the face /
much like unto a laseres sycknes.

Of bastard Saffron.
depiction of plant Cnecus.


CNecus or Cnicus is called in Greek Knikos / in English bastard saffrone / in
Duche wild saffron / in French Saffron bastard. It is named of the Potecaries
and common Herbaries Carthamus. It grows much in high Germanye and in
certain gardines in England. Bastard saffrone has long leaves / and indented
about / sharp and prickinge. The stalk is a foot and a half long / it has
heads of the bigness of a great olyue. The flower is like Saffrone / the sede
is white / something read / long and full of corners.

The Virtues of bastard Saffron.
THE juice of the sede bruised and streyned out of honyed water / or with the
broth of a cock / purges the bellye / but it is not good for the stomach. Of
bastard saffrone are made little cakes by putting to the juice of it / almondes
nitre / anise / and sodden honye / which also louse the bellye. These are
parted into four parts which are of the bigness of a walnut / whereof it is
sufficient to have taken two or three before supper. The manner of temperinge of
this confection is this: Take of the whytest sede of bastard saffrone one
sextarye / of perched almondes and blanched iij. cyates / of anyse one sextary
/ of aphronitre one dram / and the flesh of thyrtye dried figs. The juice of
the sede makes milk go together and to crud / and makes it more mete to
soften the bellye. Mesue writes that bastard saffrone purges thin fleme and
water both by vomit and also by purgation if it be taken inward / and yt does
it likewise put into the body by a clister / and therefore it is good for the
colyke and such like diseases / it scoureth the breast and the longes /
specially with this electuarye that follows / and his own oil: wherefore it
makes the voice clear / and by much vsinge of it / increases the sede / it
scoureth and opens. The flower of it with honyed water / heals the iaundies
/ and because it hurts the stomach / ye must mix with it anyse or Galanga /
or Mastick / or such like that are comfortable for the stomach. Such things
that be biting and sharp as Cardomomum / Ginger / and Salgemmy put unto it /
makes him work souner / and save the guts from harm: so ten drammes of the
kernelles of bastard saffrone with a drame and a half of Cardomomum made into
pills of the bigness of small peases / in the quantite of v. drammes purge
sufficiently / the same kyrnelles bound in a cloth / and put into oxymel / and
specially of squylla / whilse it is sodden / makes it purge well. Take xviij.
drammes of the kyrnelles of bastard saffrone / six drammes of penydies / of
Cardomomum / of Ginger / of each a dram and a half / make of these mixed
together lumpes of the bygnes of a walnut / and give one or ij. The same
kyrnelles sodden in the broth of a cock or a hen with the forsaid spices /
have the foresaid strength and operation. This sede is given in medicine from
four drammes to five. The flower is given from one dram to iij. Galene says
that bastard Saffrone is hot in the third degree / if any man will lay it
without. Mesue says that it is hoote in the first degree / and dry in the
second.

Of middow Saffrone.
COlchicon / otherwise called Ephemerum / is named of the Potecaries / but
falsely / Hermodactylus / in Duche zeitlos / and herbstblum / hundshodeu and
wild Saffran bloome / in French au chien / it may be called in English middow
Saffrone or Dog stones. I have seen it much in Germanye both in woods and
in middowes / and I have seen it grow in the West country beside Bathe.
Colchicon as it is describes in Dioscorides / brings forth a whytish flower
like unto Saffrone in the end of Autumn / after that time it brings forth
leaves like unto Bulbus / but a great deal fatter / it has a stalk a span
long / bearinge read sede. The root is blackish read / which when it is a
little bared / and has the utter skin scraped of / is white and soft / and full
of white juice and sweet in taste / his round root has in the mids of it a
depiction of plant Wild Saffron.
depiction of plant Wild Saffron with ye flower and sede.
ryft / out of the which the flower comes forth / it grows most in Mecena
and in Colcus. The flower of this herb is white bluish and not white / the
husks that hold the sede / are like unto dogs stones / wherefore the Duche
men call this herb hunds hoden / that is dogs coddes or stones. The warning
that Matthiolus gives unto Apothecaries / that they should use no more the
roots of Colchicon for Hermodactilis / is worthy to be heard and taken head
of / of al honest Apothecaries and Physicians to / that make any pills or any
other medicines of them. Let them that are syke in the gout / take heed that
they take not in the pills of Hermodactilis / except other Hermodactili go to
the making / then the common Hermodactili they are sterke poison / and will
kill a man within one day. Matthiolus gesseth that an herb in Italy / called
there commonly Palma Christi / should be the right Hermodactylus: but he will
not give sentence.

The Nature of wild Saffrone.
IT is good to know this herb that a man may isschewe it / it will strangell
a man and kill him in the space of one day / even as some kind of Tode
stolles do. The root is sweet and provoke men there by to eat of it / if
any man by chance have eaten any of this / the remedy is to drink a great
draught of cow milk.

Of Bean of Egypt.
depiction of plant Colocasia.


COlocasia called in Greek Cyamos Egyptios / and in Latin Faba Egyptia / may
be called in English / a bean of Egypt. I have seen the right Colocasia in
Italye / and a kind of the same in Germanye / and ones growing in England.
It that I saw in Germany grew upon three English miles from Bon beside
Siberge. Bean of Egypt has large leaves like unto butter burr / called in
Greek Petasos or Petasites / a stalk of a cubit long / and an inch thick / a
flower after the lykenes of a rose / twice as big as the poppy flower has.
And when as the flower is begone / it has little vessels like unto the honye
combs or waspes (as Ruellius translateth thylakiskais) or like unto little
places or caskettes / wherein any thing is laid. In them is a little bean
above the coueringe / coming out like a littel belle / as ryseth on the water
/ The root is stronger then a read root is. The bean whilse it is grene / is
eaten / and when it is dry / it is black and bigger then the common bean.

The properties of Bean of Egypt.
THE nature of the bean of Egypt is to be astringent and binding. It is good
for the stomak / for the bloody flixe / for the other flixe in the bellye / or
the small guts taken with bean mele after the manner of grewel / the barks
sodden in honied wine / if iij. ciates thereof be taken / profit much more for
the same purpose: that grene thing and bitter in taste / which is in the mids
/ if it be broken and sodden with rose oil / and poured into the ear / is
good for the ache of the ear.

Of Coniza.
depiction of plant Conisa magna.
depiction of plant Conizae alia species.


COniza is of two sorts / ye greater and the less. I have seen both ye kinds
in Italy between Cremonia and Ferraria by ye Padus bank / ye less grows
much in Germany by ye Ryne / it may be called in English Conise: the less of
them has the better savor. But ye greater is more bushy and has broader
leaves: both their leaves are like unto an olive tree rough and far / the greater
has a stalk two cubits long / and the less but one foot long / the flower
is brittel / and in color yellowe or redish / which is consumed at length
into a down: the roots are nothing worth.

depiction of plant Coniza parua.


The Properties of Coniza.
THE hole herb either strowed upon the ground / or in a perfume with the smoke
of it / dryueth away serpents and gnattes and kylle flees. The leaves are
good to be laid upon the bytinges of serpents / and upon swellinge lumpes and
wounds. Men use to take the leaves and the ffoures / and to give them in wine
to be dronken for to drive down weomens sycknes / and the birth also if need
be. They are also good against the strangulione / and the iaundies / and
against the gnawinge of the bellye. The Same also dronken with vinegre / is
good against the fallinge sickness. If the herb be sodden / and weomen sit in
the water that it is sodden in / it is good for the diseases of the mother / if
it be sodden in oil and so laid unto: It is good for them that shake for
cold: the small one laid unto the head / is good for the head ache. Coniza is
both hot and dry in the third degree.

Of Berefoote.
depiction of plant Consiligo.
depiction of plant Consiligo syluestris.


BErefoote is called in Latin both of Plinye and Columella Consiligo / the
Duche men call it Christwurte / the French men call it Pate de Lione. Some
abused this herb for Branke vrsine / and some have taken it for black
Hellebore / but it is nether of both / for Branke vrsine has far other manner
of leaves then Berefoote has: But the lykenes of names in signification has
deceived them that took Berefoote for Branke vrsine. There has some ben of the
learned sort / whom I have followed in opinion my self for a time / which
have taken Berefoote for black Hellebor. When I was in Ferraria / the best
learned that I could mete withal / taught me that the kind of Berefoote /
that dies every year with the yellower and broader leaf / was black Hellebor
/ and that the smaller was Helleborine. Howbeit by the communication that I had
with a certain wise Germanye / yet unlearned in the Latin tongue / and by more
diligent examininge of the herb with the description of Dioscorides / I
perceived that nether of both those kinds of Berefoote was Helleborus niger /
but Consiligo. Fuchsius also called both these kinds / false black Hellebor.
But one Riffius not content with Fuchsius / holds that our common Berefote
should be the true black Helleborus / but because diverse set much by his
judgment / I will examine his judgment with Dioscorides. Hellebor the black in
Dioscorides has grene leaves like unto the leaves of a plain tree / but less
drawinge nere unto the lykenes of Cow persnepe called sphodilion: but more
divided and blacker / and something rough and sharp. The stalk is also rough
and sharp / the flowers are white and purple. But our common Berefote has
leaves not like unto a Plain tree or to sphondylium / but like unto hemp or
true Agnus castus of Italy / wherefore our common berefote can not be helleborus
niger. The Germane of whom I made mention of before / when he perceived that I
was desirous to know herbs and the natures of the same / asked me whether I
knew an herb called in their tongue Christwurtz or no. I said ye: But know you
says he / all the properties that it has. I showed him of certain properties
yt it had. Well says he: I know more properties yt it has beside this / and
so he told me that a piece of the root of this herb which they call Christ's
wurtz / and we berefote / put in after a botken into a beasts ear a round
circle made about the hole / heleth the beast of any inward disease / whose
saying made me call to remembrance it that I had read in Pliny and Columella
of Consiligo / and so after that / I had read it yt Pliny and Columella had
written of Consiligo / and had some conference with learned men / touching this
herb / thought that it should be no more Helleborus niger but consiligo: this
also did confirm my opinion / yt when I came into England / yt I did hear ye
diverse housband men with whom I spoke / used to put the root of berefote into
beasts ears / and called the putting in of it / sytering of beasts / and in
some place called ye herb syterwurte. Matthiolus writing upon Helleborum in
his commentaries upon Dioscorides / strives stoutli against all men yt hold yt
our common berefote / which the Potecaries use for Helleboro nigro / is not the
true Helleborus niger / but that it is consiligo / and he also holds / that
ij. other herbs where of the one is called in Duche LeuSkraut / and ye other
which I have not seen in Duche land / are also right kinds of Hellebori nigri.
He answers to the^ that say that ye common hellebor is not the right hellebor
of Dioscorides thus: They use no other reason: but this I think / because
Columella and Plinye have written / yt consiligo put into a beasts ear /
heals it / and the hirdes of this time have marked no other thing yt will do
the same / saving the common hellebor / whereupon they gather that it is
consiligo. But in my mind they are far deceived / for Absyrtus and Hierocles
hold / that Hellebor ye black will do the same. Plyny also teaches the same
lib. 25. cap. 5. Surely it were very folishnes to say / that Sauin were
Calamint / or Calamint were Sauin / because they both bring down a woman's
flowers as nature were so niggishe and sparing yt she had made but one remedy
for every kind of disease. Nether have I read in any autour that I have seen
any description of consiligo / nether any mark / whereby it might be known.
Therefore I can not se how yt the commonly used Hellebor / should be co^siligo.
To answer Matthiolus / I think that he judges wrong of them that hold that
the common Hellebor is consiligo. For I have read no man as yet that was led
into that opinion / by ye only relation of hirdes or cowleches / for all the
learned men yt I could either speak with / either read which held that the common
hellebor was consiligo first thought that the description of Helleborus the
black in Dioscorides did not agree unto the common black hellebor / and therefore
seeing that it had the propertye and virtue which belong unto consiligo /
judged that it was consiligo. For an example / Solerius thought yt this common
black Hellebor for lack of two things which Dioscorides does require of
Helleboro nigro / was not the right Helleborus niger in Dioscorides. The one
is that it has not ye head of union / the other was that it makes not a
mannis head ache / when it is dug up. Tragus writing upon this herb / says
/ yt this is one cause why he thinks yt the common black Hellebor is not the
right Helleborus niger in Dioscoride. It is not says he / so noysom as the
black Hellebor / whereof the old autours have written / for I have seen / says
he / many take this herb without any ieoperdye / and the wives in this country
use it commonly without al peril. As for me whether I was only led by ye virtues
of the herb / to think yt it was consiligo / the reason that I make against
Riffius in my former edition / will bear witness. Wherefore Matthiolus judged to
lightly of us / that we were so lightly as he means / brought to believe / yt
ye common black Hellebor should be consiligo. Whether his answer yt he makes of
the Bulbishe root to Solerius satisfice other men or no / I can not tell / but
it does not throwly satisfice me: for I never saw as yet / nether in England /
nor in Germanye any root of ye common black Hellebor / having any thing like
an union / out of which ye small black berdes spring out. For allthough I have
seen a long knop often times somthinge big in the common black Hellebore / yet
I could never think yt it could be judged like unto a bulbe / without a great
perdon and a large interpretation of a bulbe. But yt letten pass / I se not
yet how yt he has answered sufficiently unto the autores yt say yt black
Hellebor can not be taken without ieoperdy / when as the common hellebore is taken
always without ieoperdy. Theophrast writes yt the black hellebor kills horse
/ oxen and swine / in these words: Nigro, equi, boues and sues necantur,
itaque cauent id, cum candido vescantur. Auerrois in these words folowinge /
takes both ye hellebores for poison. Hellebori ambo sunt calidi and sicci in
tertio gradu. Secu^da eorum virtus est absterciua, and ideo valent contra
scabiem, ignem sacrum, and similia, and non est tutu^ eo vti, quia est ex
genere venenorum, sed antiqui vtebantur nigro ad euacuandam melancholiam: sed
est fortius in laedendo epar and pulmonem, sed noui ponunt loco eius lapidem
lazuti. Mesue although he does prefer in holsomnes the black before the white
hellebore / yet he says these words of the black. Niger sumendus, omnium
consensu praesertim castigatus natura and art, solis to bustis and animosis
dandus. The common Hellebor is given always without ieperdy / as not only
Phisicianes / but old wives and daily experience do testifye. But the right
Hellebor was not taken without ieperdy / wherefore it is no argument to be
laughed to scorn yt the old writers Helleborus niger / and it that is used now
for Helleboro nigro / are not all one. Dioscorides as I said before makes his
black hellebor leaves / like unto a Plain tree lefe / and most likest of al unto
the leaves sphondylij / called cow persnepe / but less and with mo divisions /
sharp in under and blacker. The leaves of the Plain tree / are like unto the
leaves of Aconitum alterum after Dioscorides / and after Plinye the lefe of
Sorbus torminalis / called in English / a Service tree / is also like unto a
Plain tree lefe. Dioscorides makes also the lefe Ricini / called in English
palma Christi / like unto a Plain tree. But where has Matthiolus seen the common
Helleborus lefe like unto the leaf of the second Aconito / or the leaf of the
service tree / or like the leaf of palma Christi? If he has not seen it like
unto any of these / where has he seen it like unto the leaf of Sphondylij /
or cowpersnepe / but rough in under / or somthinge rough blacker / and with mo
diuisiones or cuttes? If he has seen no where any such / let him cease to
say that the common Hellebore is the true hellebore. If he say that the common
hellebores lefe in all places of Italye is like unto a Plain tree lefe / or to ye
lefe of palma Christi / or to the lefe of Aconiti secundi / or if he say that
it is most like in all places unto the leaves of sphondylij / sauinge that the
leaves are less / blacker / and more cutted or divided. I desire no other
witnesses against him / but his own figures of these fore written herbs /
whereof never one is like unto the common hellebore / for it has leaves like
unto hemp / or Agnus / and not to these. As four fingers and a thumb /
coming from one palm / make not five hands / but altogether with the rest
of the hand / out of yt which they cum make but one hand / so although in the
Plain tree leaves / in the Service tree leaves / in the Aconite leaves / and in the
leaves of palma Christi / certain long things like fingers come forth / yet
every one of them is not a lefe alone / though five or seven come from one
vnclouen piece / but they make but al one leaf / because they are joined
altogether unto an undivided piece of leaf / out of the which they come. But
in the Agno casto and Hemp / although five or seven leaves come out of one
foot stalk: yet for all that / because they are not joined together at the
botome / and come not out as it were of one palm / or hole portion of a leaf
/ every long thing is taken for a leaf alone. For Dioscorides compares the
leaf of Agnus to an Olive leaf / and the leaf of Hemp unto the leaf of an
Ash tree / which he would not have done / if all the five or seven long
things had made but one leaf. The leaves of the common Hellebor come eleven /
or there about all forth of one common foot stalk. Wherefore there are so
many leaves / for they are not joined together at the botom / nether come out
of one piece of leaf / or thing like a palm of a mannis hand. Also these
leaves of common Hellebor severally taken / are nothing like a Plain tree
leaves / nor the leaves of sphondylij / nether all the leaves taken together /
are like unto the leaves of a Plain tree / nor of sphondylij / for they are
divided one from an other / when as the long things like fingers in the Plain
tree leaf are not divided away from the portion of the leaf / out of the
which they come / if the leaves of the common Hellebore leaves had been joined
/ as I have above rehearsed in the bottom / to one portion of the leaf / like
as it were the palm of an hand / then I would have said that they had been
like to the leaves of the Plain tree and of Sphondylij. But seeing they are
not / I conclude that they are nether like unto the Plain tree leaves / nor to
the leaves of Sphondilij / and therefore that the common black Hellebor is not
the black Hellebore of Dioscorides. Then when as the common Hellebor has the
virtues of Consiligo / and no other herb is known to have the like / sauinge
true Helleborus / and Helleborus is not Consiligo / and this common Hellebor is
not Helleborus niger / it is no vain gatheringe / that this herb commonly
called Helleborus niger / is Consiligo.

The nature of Consiligo after Columella.
WE know (says Columella) a present remedy of the rote / which the
shepeherdes call consiligo / yt grows in great plentye in Mersis mountains /
and it is very wholesome for all cattle. They say it should be used thus / The
brodest part of the ear must have a round circle made about it with the blood
that rinneth forth with a brazen botken / and the same circle must be round
like unto the letter O / and when this is done without / and in the higher part
of the ear / the half of the forsaid circle is to be bored through with the
forsaid botken / and the root of the herb is to be put in at the hole / which
when ye new wound has received / holds it so fast that it will not let it
go forth: and then all the might and pestilent poison of the disease is
brought so into the ear. And whilse the part which is circled about / dies
and falls away / ye hole beast is saved with the lose of a very small part.

The nature of Consiligo out of Pliny.
THE root of the herb called Consiligo which we said was found but of late
/ has his property to hele ye disease of the longes of al beasts / only put
through ye beasts ear / it ought to be dronken with water / and to be holden
continually underneath the tongue. We can not tell as yet whether yt ye over
parts of the herb be profitable for any thing or no. Fuchsius writes that
Christwurt which we call Berfote purges the belly of fleme and choler / yt it
is good for ye falling sickness / for melancolike persons / or mad folk: for
the pain in the joints and the palsy / if it be put in a suppository to the
convenient place / it brings down weomens sycknes: The wild kind kills
life / and not only life but also sheep and other beasts / if they do eat
it: wherefore men had need to take heed how that they take it.

Of Withwinde or Bindwede.
COnuoluulus is a kind of helxine cisampelos / is called of the Herbaries
volubilis / in English Withwinde or Bindwede / in Duche Winde^ / in French
Lizet / Lizeron / or Campanet. Helxine has leaves like unto Iuy / but less
and small twigges / wherewith it claspeth about whatsoever strong thing it
does tuche. Pliny describes conuoluulus thus: There is a flower not unlike
unto a lylye in the herb / which is called Conuoluulus: it grows among
shrubbes and busshes / and has no savor nether any little chyues like
Saffrone as a lyly has / only representinge a lily in whytenes / and it is as
it were an imperfect work of nature / learning to make lilies.

depiction of plant Conuoluulus.


Mesue describes diverse kinds of Conuoluulus / one kind says he is great
and has milk in it / and it is called funis arborum / with a white flower
like unto a belle: The second kind is a little one / and has both a less
flowers and leaves then the other / and it crepeth upon the ground / and the
branches of other herbs. The third kind is also full of milk / and has
leaves somthinge whyt horye / vnmeasurably hoote / it cutteth and pulls of the
skin / and in purgationes brings out blood / wherefore as a venomous thing
it is to be avoided: his fourth kind is hoppes. The fifte kind has a root
like Britonye or rather greater / as big as a great gourde / his stalk is
two cubits long / the leaves are narrow and little / and has the form of an
arowe with fetheres on it.

The Properties of Bindweed.
THE juice of Weedbinde purges the bellye. Mesue gives four ounces of the
broth of the first Weedbinde / and a hole pound of the infuse of the same in
whaye.

Of Coriandre.
depiction of plant Coriander.


COriandrum or Corianum is called in Greek Corion and Corianon / in English
Colander or Coriandre / in Duche Koriander / in French Coriandre. Coriander
has leaves like the first kind of Crowfoote / and unto herb Robart with the
small leaves / grows in ye woddes / and unto ye third kind of Daucus / and to
the right Venus heir / called Adianton. The leaves beneth are some thing big
like unto Venus heir / and those above are very small like unto Fumitorye: the
leaves are wonderfully stinkinge when they are grene: the stalk is a cubit and
a half of height / full of little branches / the flowers are white / and ye
sede is round and bare / and when it is dry / it is of a good savor and a
good taste.

The virtues of Coriandre out of Galene.
COrianon or Corion / or howsoever ye will call it / the older Grecians call it
Corianon / yt newer Physicians call Corion / even as Dioscorides does / which
says that the herb has a cooling nature / but there he missed / for it is
made of contrary powers / having most of bitter substance / which we declare
to be of subtle parts / and of an earthly nature / nether has it a little of
a waterye moyster / which is of a warm power: and unto this is joined a little
astriction or bindinge together: out of all the properties it works
diuerselye all those things / that Dioscorides writes of / but not by no
cooling virtue that it has. Dioscorides writes that Coriandre laid to with
bread or barley mele / is good for saint Antonies fire / and for sores ye sprede
sore abrod / it heals also sores yt arise on ye night yt have bloody matter in
them / ye inflammacions of the stones and carbuncles / with honye and rasynes.
It dryueth away with beans broken / hard swellings / kernels and wennes. The
sede drives forth the worms of ye guts / dronken with maluesey. It
increases the sede: but if it be taken out of measure / it does trouble a
man's wit / with great ieopardye of madness. Wherefore ye must not
continuallye use it / and out of measure. The juice of Coriandre with white
led or lythargery and vinegre / rose oil laid to / heals the inflammations
of the uttermost skin. Auerrois writes yt Coriander has a property to
hold meat in the stomach until it be digested / and that it makes flesh
wherewith it is sodden / to have ye taste of spice. Simeon Sethi writes that
Coriander is good for the stomach / and when it is perched at the fire / that
it stops the bellye. In drink it stops the ishue of blood / and also if
it be bruised and laid upon it that bledeth.

Of the Cornell tree.
depiction of plant Cornus foemina.


COrnus is called in Greek Crania / and in Duche Thierlinbaume / in French
Cormiez or Cornier: There are two kinds of Cornus / ye male and the female.
Cornus as Dioscorides says is a hard tree / bringing forth long berries / like
an Olive / which first are grene / and after when they are ripe / are read / or
of the color of wax: and this is the male kind which is also described of
Theophrastus / he writes of both the kinds of this manner: There is one Cornel
tree which is the male / and an other ye female: it has leaves like an almond
tree / but that they be fatter and thicker / it has a bark full of synewes and
thin / the body of the tree is not very thick / but the female puts forth
small twigges / out of the side as the right agnus castus does / and it is
fuller of branches / they have both knottes as agnus has / both two one
against another / and one meting with an other. The wood of the male has no
pythe (I call so the soft thing that is in any tree / as in Elder and such
like) but it is sound and fast like unto a horn / both in thicknes and
strongnes. The female has a pythe in it / and is soft / and made hollow / the
length of the male is at the most of xij. cubits / of which lenght the
longest huntinge staves were of yt were in Macedonia: the hole body of the
tree is nothing excellent: They ye dwell in Ida beside Croye / hold that the
male is barrone / and that the femal is fruyteful / the fruit has a kernel
like an olyue / and the fruit is sweet in eatinge / and pleasant in sauoure:
The flower is like an Olive tree / and it blometh and brings forth fruit
after the same manner / so that out of one stalk grow many / they agree also
in time: but the Macedonians say that they bring forth both fruit / but the
females fruit can not be tasted / and yt they have a strong root out of the
danger of corruption as agnus is. It grows in moist places / and not only
in dry places / both by sede / and also by sticking in of slippes / which are
slipped of the tree. I have seen the first Cornus which is the male /
plentuouslye in Germany / and the second which is the female / both in Germany
and England: the male may be called in English a Cornel tree. The female is
called of some Dog berrye tree. some call it Corn tree / some because
bucherers use to make pricks of it / call it prick tree: it were best to call
it with one common name / wild Cornel tree. The leaves are much broader then
the Almond tree leaves are / and they are almost round / sauinge that toward
the end they are small and sharp. The male has as far as I remember / but
one very growinge upon one stalk alone: but the femal has many growing
together.

The Properties of the Cornel tree.
COrneles in meat do bind and stop / and are wholesome both for the bloody flixe
/ and also for the other / whether they be given in meat or sodden in wine:
they may be kept in bryne as Olives be: the matter that comes forth of the
grene tree or bows / when it is in burninge / is good to lay unto the scurfe
like leper. Plinye says that the sweet of a twigge or Cornel tree / received
upon a burning hot plate of iron / which the wood touches not / heals the
scuruy euel in the beginning if the rust of the iron be laid upon the scurfe /
I have kept the beryes of Cornel tree very long in the juice of Corneles a
little sodden upon the fire: I hear say that there is a Cornel tree at Hampton
court here in England.

Of herb Iue.
depiction of plant Coronopus.


COronopus or Coronopodium is called in English herb Iue or Crowfoote
plantayn / in Duche Rapfulz / in French Capriole / ou dent ou chien / Theodore
Gaza / calls it Silago / it grows much about Shene in the high way / and
about the sea side in the banks / which are made by man's hand. Coronopus is
a little long herb / creping upon the ground with cloven or cut leaves / it is
sodden with other eatable herbs / the root is astringente and bindinge: it
grows in vnmanerd grounds in heaps of earth or stones / as are made to
defend ye sea banks / or ye fresh water banks / from ouerflowing and in high
ways. My Greek Dioscorides has en doomasi / it appears by the translation
of Ruellius / that his Greek example had an choomasi / and that lyketh me
better / for experience teaches me that herb Iue nether grows about houses
/ but very plentuouslye upon artificial banks and heaps of earth or stones /
which are called in Greek Cheomata. Theophrastus rehearses Coronopus among
the herbs which have only leaves from the root / and from no other part /
and so grows herb Iue / and the stalk is like Plantayn / and has such an
head as it has. The manner of dressinge this herb / and puttinge it into
sallettes / when it is a little sodden / endures yet still in French / and in
some places of England.

The Nature of herb Iue.
I Read of no other medicin of this herb in Dioscorides / but that it is
astringent and stops a laxe. Paulus Egineta writes that it is thought to be
good against the cholyke / if the translation be true / which I do partlye
suspect both / because Galene and Aetius say / that it is reckened to be good
/ and not colicis cruciatibus / but celiacis / that is for them that have the
flixe of the bellye / which comes commonly of the long debilite of the
stomach.

Of the Hasel tree.
depiction of plant Corilus Auellana.
depiction of plant Auellana domestica.


COrylus is called in Greek Karya pontike / or Leptokarya / in Latin Nux
pontica / parua et auellana / in English an Hasel tree or an Hasel nutt / in
Duch Hasel nuss / in French Noisette ou Anelme: There seem to be two manner of
Hasel nuttes rather then two diverse kinds / the one is the gardine nutt tree
/ called the Fylberd tree / and the other is the woodnut tree. The Hasel is so
well known that we need not any description of it.

The Properties of the Haselnut.
HAsel nuttes as Dioscorides says / are evil for the stomache / but they
broken and dronken in honyed water / heal the old cough / the same roasted and
dronken with a little Pepet / make ripe the catar or reume. The ashes of burned
nuttes with hogs grese or bears grese / laid upon a head / from which the
heir falls of / it will restore the heir again. There are some that hold
that if nutt shelles be burnt and made like ashes / if they be laid to the
hinder head of the childer that have graye eyes / that they will make them
black. Galene also grants in his book de alimentorum facultatibus / that
hasel nuttes nourishe but little / and that they are worse for the stomache /
then walnuttes are. The Hasel nutt as Galene says / has a more earthly and
colder substance then the walnuttes have.

Of Arssmarte or Culerage.
CRateogonum has leaves like unto Melampyrum / and many stalks like Corn /
coming forth of one root / and many knobbye joints like knees / and a fruit
like Millet: it grows in shaddye places / and among busshes. Galene also
says that Crateogonum is like unto Millet / and very sharp on ye tongue.
Crateogonum says Pliny is like whete / and has many strawes or stalks
coming of one root / and has many joints like knees. Conradus Gesnerus
thinks that this herb is it that we call in English Arsmart or Culerage
with the spots in it like half mownes / and the properties and description
agree well / sauinge that our Arsmart grows rather in watery places then
among bushes. I marvel much that Matthiolus does say / that the common
persicaria follows in no marks or tokens Crateogonum / when as it is clear as
middaye light / that Persicaria has stalks like Corn / with many joints /
and a fruit like Millet / and a bytinge taste / as Crateogonum has.

The virtues of Crateogonum.
CRateogonum is very biting and hot / some do write of this herb / that if a
woman drink fasting a scruple and an half of this herb thryse on the day /
in two ciates of wine / for the space of xl. days / after that she have her
sycknes / and the man do likewise before he lie with the woman / that the
child which shall be gotten / shall be a man child.

Of Sampere.
depiction of plant Crithmus.


SAmpere is called in Greek Crithmo^ or Crithamon / the Latin use the same
terms / the common Herbaries call it Cretam marinam / some reckon now
without a just cause / that it is also Batis in Plinye / and I think yt this
herb is called in Columella Olus cordum / it is called in French Bacil or
Fenoyl marine / in Italian Fenechio marino / and santi Petri herba / from
whence we have the name Sampere. It grows plentously beside Dover in Sussexe
and in Dorsertshyre / by ye sea side. Samper is a little bush herb / and of
every side full of leaves / almost a cubite high. It grows by the sea side and
in stony places. It has fatt leaves and many / and something whytish like the
leaves of Porcellaine / but thicker and longer with a saltish taste. The flowers
are white. The fruit is as Rosemary fruit is / well smellinge soft / round /
and such as when it is dried / will burst and open / and it has within it a
sede like unto wheat / the roots are a finger thick in nombre about three or
four / and they have a goodlye and pleasant savor.

The virtues of Sampere.
THE root / sede / and leaves sodden in wine and dronken / help them that can
not make water / and them that have the iaundies. They bring down also to
women their sycknes. Sampere both raw and sodden / is eaten as a wurte / or a
common mete herb / that is eaten in sallet / or otherwise: it is also kept in
bryne. This manner of keeping of Sampere that Dioscorides speaks of here / is
at this day kept by the sea side in England. But dwelling in the farther of
Summersetshyre / not far from the sea side / where as I had good plentye of
Sampere / I found an other way of keeping of Sampere / which lyketh me and all
them that have prove it / much better then the other. I seth te sampere in
white wine / which is best or in water until it be metely tender: then I put it
into so much white vinegre or veriuyce (but vinegre is better) as will cover it
/ and then take out of it as I need. If it be so sharp of the vinegre / then
stepe it a little either in white wine or warm water / and it will take the
sharpenes away. Galene says that Sampere is salt in taste with a little
bitterness / wherefore it has the power to drive and scour away / yet both
these virtues are weyker in this herb then they are in plain bitter herbs.
Pliny writes that Sampere is good against the strangury / if the leaves /
stalk / or root be taken with wine. The use of it (says he) makes a man look
fresher / and it louseth the bellye with the broth that it is sodden in / and
it draws moisture out of the kidneis.

Of Saffron.
depiction of plant Crocus.


SAffron is named in Greek Krokos / in Latin Crocus / in Duch / Saffran / in
French Safron. Theophrastus describes Saffron thus. Saffrone is of the nature
of the^ / that are as ye forsaid kinds of Narcissus are / and comes forth
so. But it has a narrow lefe / for the leaves come forth like heir / it
bloometh late / it buddeth late or else to early / howsoever ye take the time /
for it floureth at the falling down of the sterres / called Vergilie / that is
about the xv. day of October / and that but for a short time / and by and by
it puts away the leaf with the flower / but rather souner. The root is
manyfolde and thick and well living / it loves to be trodden on / and so it
thryueth the better if the root be broken beneth. Therefore it comes farest
forth beside paths and fountains. Pliny writes the same of Saffrone.

The virtues of Saffrone.
THessalus was of that judgment / that he thought that Saffron should
only be well smellinge. Other reken that the quantite of three drammes dronken
/ does kill a man / but doutles / it has the propertye to digeste / to soften
/ to bind together / and to provoke urine / it makes a good color in them
that use it with woman's milk / it stops the runninge or watering of the
eyes. It is convenient to be put into the emplasters which are made for the
mother and for the fundament. It provoke to the pleasure of the body. It
swageth the inflammations which are in turninge unto saint Antonis fire / it
is good for the gatherings that are in the ears. The root droncken in seck /
makes a man make water well. Pliny writes thus of Saffrone: Saffron drives
away all inflammationes / but specially the inflammations of the eyes with
the white of an egg. It helps the suffocation of the mother. It is excellent
good for the exulcerations and going of of the skin of the stomach / of the
breast / of the kidnes / of the liver / of the longes and bladder. It is also
good for the cough and pleuresye: it takes away iche: it is good for weak
brains that can not well bear drink: it provoke sleep. Simeon Sethi
writes these words of Saffron: Saffrone is hot in the second degree / and
dry in the first: although some have said that it was hot in the third
degree: It is good for the stomach / and helps the meat to be souner digested.
It has the power to open. It heals flegmatike diseases and the drousye or
the forgetful sycknes called Lethargus. It is profitable for the interalles or
inward parts / and for them that can not well take their breath. If any
person use Saffron measurablye / it makes in them a good color / but if
they use it out of measure / it makes him look pale / and makes the head
ache / and hurts the appetite. But if it be mixed with opium or popy juice /
milche and rose oil / and the fete be anointed therewith / beat leaves laid
upon them / it swageth the pain of the fete. It is perilous to take to much
of it at ones. Auerrois says also that Saffrone comfort the heart / and
Auicenna says that it scoureth the morphew / and healed broad swellings.

Of Cucumbers and such like fruytes.
depiction of plant Cucumis. The Cucumber.
depiction of plant Cucumis citrullus.


CVcumber is called in Greek Sikios of Theophrast in viij. places / that I have
marked / sikna in three places after the judgment of Theodore and of Galene /
and also siknos / of Aetius onis sikna / and onis siknos. But I red not in any
of these Sikys / as it is only now in the common Greek text of Dioscorides:
let them yt have any written textes of Dioscorides se whether it be in any of
the^ also sikyos / as it is in all the other Greek autours above named. Simeon
Sethi seems to call the cucumbers sykys in the neuter gendre / and also
anguria. Wherefore Fuchsius writing that cucumers are called also anguria / and
that by the autorite of Aetius / which I have not yet read in Greek in Aetius /
is unjustly reproved of Matthiolus for so doing / it is called in Latin /
Cucumis or Cucumer / in Duch Cucumeren / in French Cucumbre. Dioscorides
makes mention of Pepones in the intreatinge of Cucumberes / wherefore pepones
are under the kind of Cucumbers / as it does appear in the manner of his
intreatinge of Pepones in the same place. But other autores make difference
between Cucumbers and Pepones / as there is in deed. For Galene in several
chapters writes of Cucumberes / Pepones / and Melopepons. Cucumi Turcici.
depiction of plant depiction of plant Theodorus Gaza / where as there are
together siknos and sikna / commonly turns siknan cucumerem and siknon
peponem / although he translateth commonly siknon cucumerem. The cucumbre is
not described of Dioscorides in ye chapter of cucumis / but in the chapter de
cucumere syluestri / a man may gather which knows it / how to know the
gardin cucumbre / for he writes of it thus: The wild cucumbre differs in
nothing from it of the gardine / sauinge in the fruit which it has not unlike
unto long acornes. It has leaves and branches like it of the gardine. The
lefe is almost round / but about the edges full of nickes. The flower is yelow
/ the fruit is long / and without there are certain long cutters that go
from the one end to ye other / and certain swellings like rigges / where
upon grow certain little lumpes like ploukes or scabbes. The common kind of
Cucumbre / when it is young / is grene / but when it is ripe / it is yelowe.
Theophrast writes in the vj. book and the xiiij. chapter / that the uttermost
part of a Cucumbre is bitter / which thing as yet may be true / so as yet I
could never find in those Cucumbers that I have proved / specially when they
are ripe. Theophrast and Plinye make three kinds of cucumbres / howbeit they do
not describe them or tell of any difference in likeness between one another.
After Dioscorides time by handeling of the fruytes after diverse fashones /
there rose up Melopepones and Melones / and Anguria / which are all contained
under Cucumis / as some new writers judge and have there names of their form
/ and bigness / and color.

Cucumeri marini.
depiction of plant depiction of plant

The virtues of Cucumbers / Pepones / and of all other that are contained under
the Cucumbre / or that be of like kind.
A Cucumber is good for the belly and stomach / it cools / and it is not
soune corrupted / it helps the bladder / it calls again them with the
savor of it which are fallen into aswoune. The sede provoke urine measurably
with milk or sweet wine: It heals the exulceration or rawenes of the bladder.
The leaves laid to with wine / heal the bytinge of a dog / and with honye the
ploukes or wheles that arise commonly upon the night. The flesh or substance
of Pepones taken in meat / dryueth out water / and the same heleth the
inflammations of the eyes / if it be laid unto them. The over parts of Pepones
laid unto ye hinder part of the head of a child / heals his burning /
called syriasis. The Same laid upon the forhead / turns an other way the
running or issues of the eyes. The dry root dronken with honied water in the
quantite of a dram / makes a man vomit / if any man will vomit measurably
after supper / let him take no more but one scruple. If the same be laid to
sores which are grown like honye combs / it will heal them.

Out of Galene de simplicium facultatibus.
THE eatable Cucumbre Pepon / that is to say ripe / is of a fine substance:
but the same unripe is of a grosser substance. They have power to scour and to
make shynninge / but much more is the same brought to pass / if the seeds be
broken / and beat into powder / and laid upon the place that needs scouringe.
There is an abundant cold and moist temperature in them / but not so much that
they do excede the second degree.

depiction of plant Cucumis anguinus.


Out of Galene de alimentorum facultatibus.
THE hole nature of Pepones is cold with plentuous moyster: they have a
certain scouringe propertye by the help whereof they drive out urine / and go
quicklyer down then gourdes and Melopepones: but that they scour / thou shall
evidently perceive / if thou rub the foul skin with them / wherefore if any
man have any scurfines in the face or any frekelles / or any morphew in the
utter part of the skin / ye pepones scour them away. But the sede scoureth
more mightelye then the flesh / for it scoureth away / so much that it is
good for kydneys that are vexed with ye stone. Pepones ingendre in the body a
noughty juice / and that specially when as it is not concoct or ouercummed of
nature / by reason whereof it makes men in danger of the choleryke disease /
moreover before it be corrupted if it be largelye taken / it provoke men unto
vomit / except they eat afterward some other meat that has a good and an
wholesome moisture or juice in it. Melopepones are less moist then the Pepones
are / nether have they so evil a juice / and they provoke water less and go
slowelye down / and they do not so much further vomit as Pepones do /
lykewye they are not so soune corrupted in the stomach / when as an evil
humoris gathered in it / or any other cause of corruption takes it.
Furthermore mn use to absteyne from it that is next the sede in pepones / and
eat the same n Melopepones / and that is good for them to provoke them to the
stole. They that eat only the Melopepones flesh / do not sone put forth by
the plac^ of excrementes it / as they do the Pepones flesh / Cucumbres also
provoke water as Pepones do / but less then they / because their substance is
to moiste / and therefore they are not so sone corrupted in the stomach as they
be / ye s^all find some that can digeste them as many other things that
other me^ can not digest / by the reason of a certain familiarity that is
between their ^atures.

Out of Simeo^ Sethy.
CVcumbers are cold and moist in the second degree / and they make an euel iuy^
and norishement in a man. Ye must choose the least rather then the greatest
kind. They which provoke water ^f they be steped in vinegre / and taken into
the body / swage the heat of an ague / and specially of them that come
hastelye. The often vsinge of these fruytes minishe a m^nnis sede / and quenches
the lust unto the pleasure of ^he body. But the sede of Cucumbres dried /
purches there by a certain ^eate / and has contrary operations to the moist
and vndryed parts / and p^ouoketh water much more. There is an other kind of
the same / which is th^ught to be Languria / that is cold vehementlye in the
second degree / and some reckon it should be cold in the third degree. This kind
ingendreth tough fleme in the stomach / which is sprede abroad raw by the
veins. Therefore they that eat often of the great kind / called Tetranguria or
Languria / in continuance of time have in their veins and other hollow places
/ euel humores grown together which ingendre long agues. The sede of these /
provoke urine / but less then Pepones sede / for it is souner corrupted in
the stomache. But the best of these is it that has the lest sede. They help
dry and hot stomakes / and if they be taken in a burning ague with vinegre /
they are very good and wholesome. Ye must eat the inner part of this kind /
and not the outer part / for they are of euel juice / and are hard of
digestion and almost poison. They have also an other property / that they call
again them that have fall into a swoune by the reason of heat / but if they
find any fleme in the stomach / they ingendre a desire to vomit / and the
colyke / and the disease in the sides by the pappes.

Of wild Cucumbers.
CVcumis syluestris / named of some Cucumis anguinus / of the common Herbaries
Cucumis asininus / is named of Dioscorides in Greek Sikys agrios / of Galene /
Theophrast / and Aetius Sikys agrios / it may be called in English wild
Cucumber / or of the property that the sede has / lepinge or springinge
Cucumber / for if ye tuche the fruit of it / when it is ripe / it will burst /
and the sede will spring all abroad out of the fruit: it grows plentuouslye
about Bononye abroad a little out of the town / but in England it grows
only in gardins. Wild Cucumber does differ from the gardine Cucumber only in
the fruit which it has a great deal lose / not unlike unto long acornes /
it is like the gardine Cucumber both in lea^es and in long runninge branches /
it has a white root / it grows in sa^dye grounds / and in feldes nere unto
houses / all the hole bushe is bitter.

The Properties of wild Cucumber.
THE juice of the leaves of wild Cucumbre poured into ye ears / swage the
pain of them. The root laid unto any old swellinge with barley mele after the
manner of an emplaster / dryueth it away. If it be laid to with Turpentine upon
hard swellings / it bursteth and breketh them. It is powren in against the
sciatica. If it be sodden with vinegre and lay^ to / it drives away the gout.
The broth wherein this he^be is sodden / is good to wash a man's toth with /
for the toth ache. The po^der of the dried herb / scoureth away the foul
scurfynes / the leprosy and the white spots that are deep in ye flesh. It
restores black scarres unto the ode color again / and it scoureth away
spots that are in the face / the juice in the root of five grains / and
also in the bark in the measure of half an vice / purge out choler and fleme
/ specially in them that have the dropsey. It ^useth the bellye without any
grefe of the stomache / half a pound of the ro^te is broken in ten ounces of
wine / and specially of Libya / and three cyates that is about six ounces / are
given for the space of three days / whylse the humor may be manifestly
perceived to be fallen. The Greek text that Lacuna saw / has when ye have
taken half a pound of the root / ye must beat it small with two sextarios /
that is about two English quartes of sweet wine / and specially of Egypt /
and give three ciates of it fasting unto the pacient / for the space of three
days until the humor sufficiently fall away. There is made of the fruit of
wild Cucumer a medicine / which is called Elatherium / the manner of making of
it / is largelye taught in Dioscorides / who so list to learn it / let him
read these words of Dioscorides: The medicine called Elaterium / is thus made
of the fruit of wild Cucumbre: Choose out wild Cucumbres / which when as they
lepe away / put forth juice / and let them lie one night / and on the next
day following set upon a cup a syue that has very fine holes / and take in
your hands every Cucumbre by it self / and divide it with a knyffe / having
the edge turned upward / and press out the moisture into the cup that is set
in under / press also out that fleshy thing yt cleueth unto the syue that it
may go down. Cast as much as is ready into the basin ordened there to for the
nones. Pour sweet water upon them which are in the vsy / and press and cast
them away. Styre the humor in the basin corner with a linning cloth / and set
it against the sun / and strain through the water with thick grounds until
it stand / and do this often until the water that swimmeth above / fall to the
ground / which after that thou have diligently streyned out / break in a
mortar ye gross grounds that remain / and make trociskes or balls of it.
The best is smoth not heavy / somthyng moist / with a certain whytnes exceeding
bitter / which if it be put into a candel / burned easelye. But that which is
grene like a leke / sharp or rough / or dark / and full of ashes / and little
things like little pieces / is grievous and noughty. From the time that it be
kept two years until it be ten year old / it is good for purgations. The
hole measure or dosis that may be given / is xij. granes / the least is vj.
granes. A good big grane is enough for a child / for if it be taken in any
greater quantite / it is ieperdous. It drives out fleme both upward and
dounewarde. It is a good purgation for them that are shortwinded. If ye will
purge the bellye / put twyse as much salt and as much stibium as will color it
/ and give a pyll in the quantite of a little pese. And afterward drink an ounce
and five drames of warm water: But to provoke vomit / take the water that
Elaterium is steped in / and stroke ye inward part of the tongue beneth with a
fether / which is dipped in the stypinge. And if any man be hard to vomit /
resolve it with oil or with ointment made of flower deluce / and forbid sleep.
But wine and oil are convenient to be given unto them continually / that are
to much purged / for that helps them again. But if the vomit will not stay
or leave of / ye must give cold water / barley mele / vinegre and water / appels
/ and such as in making thick and fast together / do straight. Elaterium
helps weomen unto their sickness / if it be put in the place of conception in
a suppositorie. It heals the iaundies or guelsought / if it be poured into
the nose with milk. It is very good against old head aches. It is very
excellent good for the quinsey / if it be laid to with old oil and honye / or
the gall of a bull. Mesue says that the juice of Cucumber may be given from
ten granes unto the third part of a dram / that is a scruple. The powder of
the root may be given from fyftene granes unto half a dram: the broth that
it is sodden in / may be given from two ounces unto four. It is hot and dry
in the third degree after Mesue. But Galene says / that it is extremelye
bitter and lightlye hot / so that it is hot but in the second degree.
Dioscorides is contrary both unto Theophrast and Plinye in the nature of
Elaterium / concerning the puttinge out of the candel or making it burn / as
you may easelye find in their works if ye will read them.

Of the Gourde.
A Gourde is called in Greek Kolokyntha / in Latin Cucurbita / in Duch KurbS /
in French Courge. A gourde has long runninge branches / which naturally
endeavor upward / but for lack of strenght / except they find something to
stay and uphold themselfes by / they crepe by the ground. It has a round
leaf / not unlike the leaf of Abur / or Asarabacca. The flower is white / the
fruit is first grene / and after yelowe / after the lykenes of a pear. The
bark of the fruit when it is young / is tender and soft: but when it is old
/ it is hard / and some take the meat out of it / and use it in the stead of a
bottell. Columella and Pliny write that by art a man may make diverse forms
and fassions of Gourdes. If ye will have long Gourdes / then take and sow the
sede that is next unto the neck. If ye will have gourdes that will stand /
and after that they are emptied / fit to put wine or oil in to serve in the
stead of flackettes or bottelles / then take the sede that is about the sides
in the mids / and sow them. If ye would feign have very large and great
gourdes / then take seeds that grow there / and turn the over part
dounewarde / and let weomen nether touch the young gourdes / nor look upon
them / for at certain times in the month the only touching and sight of
weomen / kills the young Gourdes as these above named writers bear witness.

depiction of plant Cucurbita mayor.
depiction of plant Cucurbita longa.
depiction of plant Cucurbita minor.


The virtues of the Gourde.
THE Gourde which men use to eat / bruised and laid to after the manner of an
emplaster / swageth swellings and impostemes. The sticks or branches of
Gourdes / are laid upon the moulde of chylders heads to relese ye hete of them
/ which is called Syriasis. They cool also the inflammations of the eyes and
of the gout. The juice of ye branches bruised by it self / or with rose oil
poured in / swageth the pain of the ears. If it be laid upon the burning of
the skin in hot agues / it heals it. The juice of the hole herb warmed and
pressed / and dronken with a little honye and saltpeter / does gentlye lose the
bellye. If any man make hollow a raw gourd / and will put wine into it / and
set it abroad under the sky out of the house / and then drink it fasting / it
will louse the bellye gently. The Gourde (says Galene) is of a cold and moist
complexion / and is moist and cold in the second degree. Wherefore the juice
of ye branches is good for ye pain of the ears / which is with an
inflammation / if it be laid to with rose oil. And so if it be hole laid to /
it cools metely well hot inflammations. When as it is eaten it is moist and
drives thryst away. The Gourde whilse it is raw / is unpleasant and hurts
ye stomach / and is very hard of digestion in so much that if a man for lack
of other meat be feign to eat a gourde (as one presumed to do) he shall feel
an heavy weightly in his stomach / and shall turrne up his stomach / and be
desirous to vomit / from the which grefes a man can only be delivered by
vomiting: Therefore men use to eat this (as they do with all other vndurable
fruytes) either sodden or fried in a frying pan / or roasted: The gourde (as much
as lies in it) gives unto the body a moist and coold / and therefore small
norishement / but it goes easily unto the bottom of the stomach / both by the
reason of his slyperines and also moisture. Furthermore it is not hard to be
digested / if it be not corrupted before. And that chaunseth unto it when it is
noughtely dressed or any evil humor is gathered in the stomach / and sometime
because it taryeth to long in the stomach / which thing chances unto al
other vndurable fruytes yt are of a moist complexion / for they putrefy
quicklye in the stomach / except they come first unto the bottom of it.
Therefore even as the gourde as much as is in it / has a juice that can not be
discerned by any sense what quality it is of / and is easy to be distribute
into the hole body / so when as it is mingled with any other thing that has
any great notable qualite / it is made like it very easily / as if it be taken
with mustarde / the juice which comes of these two mixed and divided / and
sent into the body / shall be sharp or biting with a notable heat. Even by
the same reason if it be eaten with any salt thing / it will ingendre in the
body a salt humore. And so is it a very pleasant meat if it be dressed with
ye salt fishes of pontus / which are called in Greek mela. But if it be sodden
and seasoned as it ought to be with quinces / it will have an excellent tarte
taste in the distribution. If it be fried or roasted / it puts a great deal
away of his own moisture. Therefore because it is so moist if ye will boil
it / it is best to boil organ or wild mergerum with it. For all such as this
fruit is / had need to be mixed with other things that are biting / or sower
/ or tarte / or salt / if ye would have them delectable in eatinge / and not to
make one to be ready to vomit. Simeon Sethy says that the gourde provoke
urine / and makes a man go to the stole / and it is good for hot and dry
complexions. It stancheth the burning heat of the stomache and liver. It
hurts them that are flegmatike and waterishe / and it is euel for the colyke.
And if it find euel humores in ye stomach / it is corrupted therewith / and is
made holsom norishment. It dryueth away the desire unto lechery / and minished
sede and engenders thin blood. It is good for the breast / for the longes /
and the bladder.

Of Coloquintida.
COloquintida is called in Greek Colokinthis / in Latin Cucurbita syluestris /
the Potecaries call it Coloquintida / it grows only in gardins in England and
Germanye. Coloquintida puts forth branches and leaves like a Cucumbre /
creping by the ground divided a round fruit like a balle / excedingly bitter /
which ye must gather when it begins first to be turned into a pale
yelowishe color.

The virtues of Coloquintida.
depiction of plant Coloquintida.


THE inner part of the fruit of Coloquintida has the nature to purge / if ye
take two scruples / made in pills with honyed water / sodden honye / myrre /
and nitre / or salt petre. The balls bryed and broken / and poured in by
clister / are good for the palsy / the sciatica / and the colyke / for it
pulls forth choler and fleme and shauinges / and sometime also blood. It
takes away the tuthache / if a man purge it and cover it with clay and heat
it with vinegre and nitre / and wash his tethe with the broth that this is
sodden in. If any man sethe in it honyed water or sweet wine / and drink it
after that it is cooled without the door abroad / it purges away gross
humores of the bellye / and things like shauinge or scrapinges of the guts.
It is exceading hurtful unto the stomache. If it be put into a suppositorye /
it will pull forth the excrements of the bellye. The juice of the grene
Coloquintida is good to be rubbed upon the place that is vexed with the
sciatica. Plinye writes thus of it: Coloquintida poured in by a clyster /
heals all the diseases of the guts / of the kydnes / loins / and the
palsy also / if the seeds be casten out. The flesh of Coloquintida with salt
and wormwod / heals the tuth ache. The juice of Coloquintida made warm with
vinegre / makes fast / louse teth. The same heleth the pain of the ricke bone
/ loins and hyppes bone / if they be rubbed with it / and with a little oil:
let them that use the fruit of Coloquintida / take heed that they beat it into
very fine powder / or ellis it will frete the guts very sore.

Of Cummyne.
CVmmyne is called in Greek Kyminon / in Duche Kummine / or Comin / in French
Cumine. The sede of gardin cummyn is well known in England / but the herb
grows not with us that ever I could se. Dioscorides describes not the gardin
common / belyke because it was so well known in his country: but he describes
two kinds of wild cummyn / the first after this manner: Wild cumyne has but a
small bushe / and has a stalk a span long and small / out of which come out
four or five little leaves / like as they were indented after the manner of
Gingidium. It has in the top five or six round and soft little heads /
wherein is chaffye sede / hoter in taste then the gardin cumyn. It grows in
little hills. The second kind of wild cumyn is not unlike unto the gardin
cumyn / it puts forth of every flower long horns where in is sede like
unto Git or Nigella romana. The former kind of wild cumyn have I not seen that
I can remember: but the second kind I suppose I have seen. Some there be in
Italy which think / the pale nigella to be the second kind of wild cumyn /
other reckon the little black nigella (which is common in the stobble in Germany
after the corn be carried away) to be the second kind of wild cummyn. But
nether the pale nigella / nether the other wild kind can be wild cummyn /
except the gardin nigella romana be also wild cummyn / for they are all of one
figure in leaves and seeds / and of like smell. The second kind of wild cummyn
puts forth of every flower long horns / wherein are sede like unto
nigella. The kinds of nigella have horns in deed / but no sede in them / for
their sede is contained in the mids of the head / one nombre divided from an
other by thin partitions: Therefore nether the wild nigella / nether the pale
can be cummum syluestre alterum. I rather hold with Conradus Gesnerus / which
thinks that the herb / called of the herbaries Consolida regalis / of the
Duche Ridders sporen / and in English Larkis hele / is the second kind of
wild cummyn. The leaves of that herb are like nigella / the flowers are blewe
/ and there comes forth of it a long white thing like a little horn: when
the flower is gone / there comes out a little vessel like a short horn /
where in is black sede contained like unto nigella. It grows in Germany
commonly among the stuble and the corn / but it is not ripe until the corn
be carried away / and a good while after.

The virtues of Cummyne.
CVmmyn as Dioscorides writes / heals / binds / and dries. It is good for
gnawyng and for wind / both sodden and put into oil / or laid to after the
manner of an ointment with barley mele. It is given to them that are shortwinded /
in wine and water: and in wine to them that are bitten of a serpent. Cummin
laid to with rasynes / or the flower of darnel or with a little wexe after the
manner of a salve / helps the swellinge of ye stones. It stops the overmuch
abundance of weomens natural sickness. And the same broken and laid to in
vinegre / to the nosethrilles / stops blood: it makes the color of them
that use it much pale. Simeon Sethy writes that cumyn both dried and also
springeled with vinegre / dries a moist stomache / and stops laxes / and yt
it is good to lay upon weomens pappes / which have clustered or clodded milk
in the^. Some write yt to much use of this / ingendreth the stone / and yt the
smoke of it / drives away gnattes. Pliny says that cumyn is good with honyed
vinegre for the falling sickness. Cumin is hot and dry in the third degree. The
second kind of wild cumin is a remedy against the bitinges of serpents / it
helps the^ that have the stone or strangulian / and them that piss clodded
blood / but persely sede made hot must be taken afterward.

Of the Cypres tree.
depiction of plant

THE Cypres is called in Greek Cyparissos / in Duch ein Cypressenbaum.
Dioscorides does not describe this tree / for he tells only the properties
of it: the tree is of a good hight / but it is not all of one piece / as the
Fire tree is / but it divides it self into diverse branches of this side of
the top / and it is not straight as the Fire tree is / but often times crooked /
notwithstanding as Pliny writes and experience teaches us. The tree from that
part whereas it has first leaves unto the top / has the figure of a steple
/ that is great beneth / and the higher up / the smaller it is.

The leaves are like unto the leaves of Sauin / specially when they are young:
but the savor discerns them / and the sharpnes of leaf / and so does ye
heat likewise / for Sauin has a more pricking / stinking and hoter lefe then
cypres has. The lefe of Cypres never falls / but is ever grene / it has a
fruit like unto a Pyne tree / but many parts less / and something longer in
figure. Pliny makes two kind of Cypres trees / one with sharp steply top /
which is called the female / and another with branches spread abroad at large
/ which he called the male. The female grows right plentuouslye in the
gardine of Sion / but I do not remember that ever I saw the other.

The Virtues of the Cypres tree / out of Galene and Dioscorides.
THE leaves of Cypres tree / the buddes and the fresh and soft apples join
and bind together great sores in hard bodies / whereupon it is evident / that
it has the power to dry without any sharpenes / or bitinge heat / as even
the taste does testifye. For there appears in a cerraine light bytinge
sharpnes / but much bitterness / and much more harrish tartnes. But it has so
much bytinge sharpnes and heat in it / as is able to lead his tartnes into the
depnes / and yet works it no bytinge or heat in the bodies. Therefore it
eats out and consumes safelye / and without any ieopardye / in rotting
diseases / moystures that are deep in the body. But when as they that heat
and dry / do consume the humores that are contained in the body / yet with
there bytinge sharpnes and heat / they draw unto them other. And therefore it
helps the^ that are bursten / and have the guts fallen into their coddes /
for it dries and gives strength unto the parts of the body / which are to
loose by the means of to much moisture / and that comes to pass / because
binding goes to the ground by the help of the heat that is mixed with it /
which leads it thither / and keeps such a measure that it can heat without
any biting. The Cypres tree (as Dioscorides writes) cools and binds / the
leanes of it dronken with bastard and a little myrre / help the issue of the
bladder and strangury / but the Cypres apples broken and dronken with wine /
are very good for the bloodye flixe / for the other flixe / and against the
issue of blood / and against the stoppinge of the breath / when as a man can
not take his wind / except he hold his neck right up / and against the cough.
The broth wherein they are sodden / have the same effect. If they be bruised
with a fig / they soften hardness / and heal the stinking disease of ye nose
called Polypus. And if they be sodden in vinegre / and broken with lupines /
they bring away scabbye nails. They heal also the burstinge that falls
into the coddes / laid to as an emplaster / the leaves have the same strenght.
The leaves broken and laid to in an emplaster / join and draw wondes
together: they stop blood / and ye same if they be mixed with wexe / and laid to
ye stomach / do strenghten it. Theophrastus writes yt the bordes or ye door of
Dianas temple / endure iiij. ages / wherefore it is good for to take of ye wood
of it / to put in such hobles or implementes as ye would have to last long time
without corruption. Pliny also writes that ye Cypres tree nether rotteth /
nether is in any ieoperdy of age / and that ye leaves of Cypres bruised / and
laid upon seeds / keep them from the worms.

Of the Blewebottel.
depiction of plant Cyanus.


BLewbottel / otherwise caled Blewblawe / is named in Greek Kyanos / in Latin
Cyanus / or Ceruleus / in Duche Blaw cornblumen / in French au fioin or
blaueole / or bleuet / some herbaries call it baptisecula / or blaptisecula /
because it hurts sicles / which were ones called of old writers seculae.
Blewbottel grows in ye corn / it has a stalk full of corners / a narrow
and long leaf. In the top of the stalk is a knoppy head whereupon grow
blewe flowers / about midsummer the chylder use to make garlandes of the
flower. It grows much among Rye / wherefore I think that good ry in an
evil and unseasonable year does go out of kind in to this wede. This kind and
other which grows only in Germany in gardines like unto this / saving in all
points it is greater and namely in the leaves.

The Properties of Blewbottel.
BLewbottel is of a cold nature / for it shows no token of hete in it: The
later writers hold that this herb is good for the inflammation of the eyes /
and other parts / which are out of tempre by the means of an inflammation /
other properties have I not read that blewbottel should have.

Of Sowesbreade.
depiction of plant Cyclamenus.


SOwesbread called in Greek Ciclaminos / is also in Latin Ciclaminus / rapum
terre / vmbilicus terre / et panis porcinus / of some tuber terre / in Duche
Sewbrodt / in French Pain de porceau / I have not seen it in England / wherefore
I know no usual name for it / but least it should be nameles / if either it
should be brought in to England / or be found in any place in England / I name
it Sawesbread / or rape violet / because the flower is like a violet / and the
root is like a rape. Dioscorides describes Cyclaminum thus: Cyclaminus has
leaves like unto Iuy / purple / and of diverse colors / wherein are up and
down somthinge white spots / a stalk four fingers long and bare / out of
which come purple flowers like roses / and a black root / somthinge broad
like unto a rape. I have Cyclaminum both in Italy and also in Germany: but
there was great difference between them / for the Italian was thryse as big as
the Duche was / and much longer / and lyker unto Iuy. The Duche Cyclaminus
according to his name / had leaves as round as Asarum has / but much less /
and the flowers draw nerer the lykenes of a violet then a rose. There are many
deceived in England / which abuse tryfling other herbs for Cyclamino / as
Erthnut / and such like which nether agree with Cyclamino in virtue / nether
in description.

The virtues of Sowesbread.
THE root of Sowbread dronken with mede made with honey and water / dryueth out
beneth fleme and water / and either dronken or laid to / it dryueth down
weomens natural sycknes. It is perilous for weomen with child to go over this
root. The same laid unto a woman in a convenient place / helps her more
spedely to bring forth her birth. It is dronken against dedlye venom with wine
/ and specially against the fish / which is called in Latin Lepus marinus /
that is to say / the sea hare. It is also a remedy against serpents / if it be
laid unto the place. If it be put in wine / it makes a man dronken / it
dryueth away the yelowe iaundies / taken in the weight of three drammes with
bastard / or well watered honied wine. But he that shall drink of this / must
be in a warm house well covered with many clothes / that he may the better
sweet / for the sweat that cummeth forth / is of the color of gall. The juice
is put into the nose with honey to purge the head. It is put in wol to the
fundament / to drive forth the excrementes of the belly. The same laid upon the
navel / and the nether part of the belly unto the hockelbone / softeneth ye
belly. The juice laid to with honye / helps the perle or haw of the eye / and
the dulnes of sight. The juice laid to the fundament with vinegre / restores
it again to the natural place / when it is fallen down. The root is beaten
/ and a juice is taken out / and made with sething as thick as honye: the root
scoureth and purges the color of the skin / it holds down the bursting out
of wheles: and it heals wounds with vinegre by it self / or with honey. If
it be laid to after the manner of an emplaster to the milt / it will wast it
away: it amendeth the evil colored scurffines that is in the face / and
fallinge of the heir with the read scalles. It is also convenient that members
out of ioynte and gout members / the little sores of the head and kybes be
bathed in the broth of this root. The root made hot in old oil / heals
up sores / and brings them to a scar / if that oil be laid upon them. The
root made hollow / is filled with oil / and set in hot ashes / sometime a
little wax put unto it / yt it may come unto the thicknes of an ointment / is
good for ye kybes or moules. The root is slissed / and laid up as scilla is.
Cyclamenum grows much in shaddowy places / and most under trees.

Of Dogs tongue.
ALthough Dioscorides writes but of one kind of Dogs tongue / yet it is
evident by Pliny yt there are three kinds of Dogs tongue. For Dioscorides
describes his Dogs tongue to be without any stalk / which kind I could
never se that I remember in all my life. Matthiolus and Pliny describe two
kinds / which both have stalks and sede / for he gives stalks and seeds
unto them in the xxv. book and viij. chapter: but the latter kind that he
speaks of / seems unto me to be our common Dogs tongue / for he says
thus:

depiction of plant Cynoglossa.


Est alia similis ei and quae ferat lappas minutas / that is / There is an
other like it which bears also little burres. The common Cynoglossum has
long leaves like unto a Dogs tongue and a long stalk / in whose top are three
rough things that cleue unto a man's clothes joined altogether to a little
prick / which is in the mids / the form of all together is like unto a four
leued clauer with a prick in the mids. The root is somthinge read and long
withal / and astringent. This is the same herb which is called in Dioscorides
Lycopsis / whose description is this: Lycopsis has leaves longer then lettes /
rougher and broader / and thick / fallinge down again unto the head of the
root / a long stalk / straight and roughe / with many to growers / a cubit
long / the flower is little and purple. The root is read and astringent / it
grows in plain grounds.

The virtues of Dogs tongue.
THE root laid to with oil / heals wounds / with barley mele it heals
saint Antonies fire: the same if a man be anointed with it and with oil /
provoke sweat. Fuchsius gives these properties unto the common Dogs tongue
/ which I reckon to be Lycopsis. It heals the almost incurable sores of the
mouth and of other places. It is good for the bloodye flixe / therefore it ought
to be used against all sores and wounds / and against the French pox / and
such like diseases. It helps also the issue of sede and catarres / wherefore
this herb is put into the pills / which are good for every catar or reume.
Now seeing that the properties that Dioscorides gives unto Lycopsis / are
like unto them that the common Doggis tongue has / and the lykenes do very
well agree. We may the more boldelye say / that Lycopsis is our common
Dogs tongue. But of this matter we will speak more at large in the intretinge
of Lycopsis.

Of Eglentine or sweet brere.
depiction of plant Rubus canis.


EGlentine is named in Greek Kynorhodos / in Latin Rosa camna / in Duch wild
rosen / in French rose sauuage / or Eglentier. The Eglentine is much like the
common brere / but the leaves are sweet and pleasant to smell / as the brere or
heptree leaves are not. There is commonly a spongious ball found in the
Eglentine bush / as Pliny writes. I reken that this bushe is nothing ellis but
a sweet kind of Cynobatos.

The virtues of Eglentine.
PLiny writes in the xxv. book of his natural history / that ye root of
Eglentine is good against the biting of a mad dog / and yt ye spongious bal
that grows in the bushe burned into powder / is good to fill up that is
fallen from the head by yt red scall. Eglentine seems to have been first
called in Greek kynorhodos / because the rote heled them that were bitten of a
mad dog.

Of Adders grass.
CYnos orchis is called in Latin testiculus canis / in English Adders grass /
or goukis meat or dogs coddes / in Duche Knaben kraut / in French La coil au
chien. Testiculus canis has leaves sprede flat upon ye ground / which grow
about the stalk and the nethermoste part of this herb / like unto the leaves
of a soft olyue tree / but smother / and narrower / and longer. The stalk is
a span long / out of which spring purple flowers. The roots are round and
something long / two together small as an olyue / the one is higher up / which
is the fuller / and the other which grows lower / and is softer and fuller of
wrinkles. The other testiculus which is called serapias / has leaves like a
leke / somthinge long / but broader and thycke / bowynge in the hollow places
between the leaves and stalk. The stalk is a span long / the flowers are
somthinge purple / the roots are like unto dogs stones / both these kinds
with diverse other not much differinge from them / grow plentuouslye in the
middowes in every quarter of England.

The virtues of Adders grass.
THE first kind of dogs coddes has two stones / whereof the ouermore eaten
(as it is supposed of men) makes boys and the other more eaten of weomen /
makes wenches. The weomen of Thessalia eat the soft root with gotes milk
to provoke pleasure to venery / and the wythered one to swage the same
appetite. Galene writes also as Dioscorides does / that this herb provoke
the appetite of venerye. The second kind with the smaller and longer leaves
as Dioscorides writes / provoke also the lust of the body. The roots of
this herb laid to after the manner of an emplaster / drives away soft
swellings / scoureth sores / and hinders them to sprede any further: it
wastes away fistulas / and if it be laid to inflammations / it swageth the^ /
the dried roots stop consuming sores for to sprede any further / and they hele
putrefactions and rottinges / and the old and almost incurable sores of the
mouth / if they be dronken in wine / they stop the bellye.

Of English Golangal.
depiction of plant Cyperus.


CIpeirus / called also Cyperus / has leaves like unto a leke / but longer and
smaller / and a stalk a cubit long or longer / with corns in it like unto
squinantum / in whose top little leaves with sede spring out. The rotes are
somthinge long like unto an olyue or round / one cleuinge unto an other /
black in color and sweet in sauoure / and bitter in taste. Although this
common Galangal of ours / be a kind of Cyperus / yet it answers not in all
points unto the description / for although the roots have in them certain
knobbes like unto Olives / yet are they not such as Dioscorides describes. The
true Cyperus is now common in Rome and other parts of Italy / whereunto the
hole description of Dioscorides agrees. But we may use this Cyperus that we
have well without ieoperdye / in the stead of the other / for it is of the same
kind and virtue that the other is of.

The virtues of Cyperus.
THis herb is hot in operation / louseth ye mouths of the veins / and
provoke urine / it is good to be dronken against ye stone and ye dropsye: it
is a remedy against ye bitinge of a scorpio^ / it is good for ye coldness and
stopping of ye mother if it be bathed with it.

It dryueth also down weomens natural sycknes. The powder of this herb is
good for runninge sores in the mouth / allthough they eat and wast ye flesh.
The root of this herb which is only used in Physic / is custumablye put
unto hot softening emplasters and the thicknes of oyntmentes. There grows an
other kind of Cyperus in Inde / which is judged to be Curcuma of the common
writers by the consent of the best writers that write of herbs in this time:
and it is like unto Ginger / and when it is eaten / it is like Saffron: in the
taste it is bitter / and if it be laid to any place / it has the power to pull
of heirs.

Of the Cytisus tree.
depiction of plant Cytiscus.


CItiscus as Dioscorides writes / is an hole white bushe as Rhamnus is /
spredinge abroad branches longer then a cubit: whereupon grow leaves like
unto the Fenegreke / or three leued Lotus / but less / the back of the leaf
stickinge out: the leaves broken sauoure like rocket / and in taste they
resemble a Ciche. I never saw this bushe any where ellis growyng naturally
without setting or sowing / saving in the mount Apennine beside Bonony / where as
I saw great plentye of it: but I have had it growyng ones at Collon / and now
I have it growing here in my gardin at Wisenburg. The bushes were like little
trees / and were as high as a man / the branches and twigges was whytish /
and had a white hoar on them / there grow little coddes in the branches like
unto tares / but shorter as I remember.

The virtues of Cytisus out of Dioscorides.
THE leaves do cool / and in the beginning drive away swellings if they be
broken and laid to with bread. The broth of them dronken provoke urine. Some
do sow them beside behyues / because they allure bees to come to them. Varro /
Virgil / Pliny and Columel write all with one consent / that Citisus is good
for bees: but Columella writes more largelye of Cytisus after this manner: It
is very expedient to have much Cytisus in the feldes / because it is
wonderfully good for hens / bees / bullockes and al kinds of cattle / for by
the eating of it / they wexe shortly fat / and it makes sheep have much
milk: ye may use it viij. months grene for meat to your cattle / and
afterward dry. Moreover it takes root shortly in any field / be it never so
lene. It can not lightlye be hurt with any iniurye. If weomen have scarsenes
of milk / ye must take the dry Cytisus / and stepe it a night in water / and
take three pintes of the water that it is steped in / and put wine to it / and
then give it to drink / then shall the nurses be lustye / and the chylder
strong. The time of sowyng of Cytisus is in Autumn / about the xiij. of
October. Plinye writes almost the same sentence after this manner. Cytisus also
is a bushe or a shrub / greatly commended of Aristomachus the Atheniane to be
fode for sheep / and when it is dried for swyne. It has the same profit that
Orobus or bitter fitch has / but it fills sooner / and the beasts wexe fatt
with a little / so that the cattle had rather have it then barley / for they
leave barley and take it: There comes of no other meat greater plenty and
better milk then of Cytisus / nether is there any better medicine then the
same for cattle taken al manner of ways. He commanded also the same to be
sodden in water / when it is dried / and to give the decoct or broth of it with
wine unto nurses / when they want milk: and he says that there by the childer
grow greater and longer. Paulus Egineta writes that Cytisus is a warm and
temperate nature / as the mallowe is / and does lightly drive away.

Of Lauriel or Lowry.
DAphnoides is called of some Herbaries Laureola / in English Lauriel or Lowry
/ or Lorell. I never saw the true Daphnoides in Germany / wherefore I know not
his true Duche name. Daphnoides is a bushe of a cubit hight and has many
branches / which are tough / and bow much / and in the tops they are full
of leaves. The bark yt covers the bows / is exceeding tough and hard to
break: depiction of plant Daphnoidos.
The leaves are like a baye / of a Laurel tree / but they are tougher which set
in fire their mouths that taste of them. The flowers are white: the berrye
when it is ripe / is black / the roots are nothing worth. It grows in
mountains and hylly places / Hitherto Dioscorides. Some abuse the berryes of
this bushe for Mesereon / some for Coccognidium. This bushe grows commonly
in England in hedges / as beside Cambridge / Barkway / and at Sion I have seen
it growing.

The virtues of Lauriel.
LAurielles leaves either grene or dry dronken / draws out by the bellye
waterye fleme / provoke flowers / and makes a man vomit / the same chewed in
the mouth / bring forth fleme that way / and it makes a man nese: fyften of
the berryes dronken / make a purgation.

Of Daucus.
depiction of plant Daucus.
depiction of plant Daucus alter.


DAucus in Dioscorides is of three kinds / in Pliny of four kinds / but
Galene / Paulus Egineta / and Aetius / make but two kinds. Theophrastus seems
to make three kinds after the interpretation of Gaza / which he disseuereth
only by the color of the root / he makes one kind grene like a Baye tree /
and other kind redish yelowe after the color of Saffron / and the third
kind black or rather redishe black / or as it is in Greek (...), that is read.
Simeon Sethi makes two kinds / the yelowe and the black / and he puts no
other difference between them / sauinge only by color of the root.
Theophrastus and Simeon Sethi seem to me to understand under the name of
Daucus / the kinds of Carot / for it is evident / that at the least there are
two kinds of Carottes / the yelowe and the black which are taken for Daucus
of them. Gregorius Gyraldus the interpretor of Simeon Sethy turns Daukion in
pastinacam into Latin / which is called in English a Carot. Theodorus Gaza the
translator of Theophrast turns Daucon into pastinacam / Galene says yt some
call Daucus / staphilinos / and Paulus follows him. Aetius does not only say
that Daucus is called staphilinos / but also writing of Staphilinus says that
Staphilinos is called Daucus / and although all these three make depiction of
plant Pipinella mayor.
depiction of plant Pipinella minor.
two diverse chapters of Daucus and pastinaca / yet they give like virtues unto
both the herbs / that is the nature to provoke flowers and urine / wherefore
although Daucus and Staphilinos were to sundry herbs and diverse in form / as
I deny not / but they be: yet for as much as they agree in virtue / the error
of them can not be great / which take the one for the other / specially seeing
that Aetius writes that Daucus is called Staphilinos / and Staphilinos Daucus.
But it is out of doubt that in Theophraste and Simeon / Daucus is our Carot /
howsoever Dioscorides do separate Staphilinos and Daucus. Daucus creticus as
Dioscorides writes has leaves like Fenel / but less and smaller / a stalk a
span long / a white flower bytinge / hot sede and that white / rough / and of
a pleasant savor / when it is in eatinge / the root is a finger thick / and
it grows a span long. It grows in stonye places / and where as the sun
cummeth. There is an other of the same kind / like unto wild perselye / biting
/ well smellinge / having the smell of spice / and hot in taste. The best is
in Candy. The third is set forth with leaves like Coriandre / with white
flowers / with a head and sede like Dill / with a spoky top like Carot / with
long sede as Cumin has / and that biting. These three kinds are thus described
of Dioscorides. Matthiolus although he talk of iij. kinds of Daucus / he
sets forth but one figur which he tells not whether it be of the first or
second or third kind. But it varieth not from the description of the first
kind / if it have the taste and other virtues belonginge unto Daucus.

depiction of plant Daucus tertia species.


If Matthiolus had told us the Italian name of his Daucus / it had been much
easier for us to come by it / and also to judge whether it were the true Daucus
or no. As for the first kind of Daucus that I remember / I never saw it. For
I reke^ that Berwurtz is not Daucus criticus / but rather Meon Dioscorides. As
for the second kind I know no herb that agrees with the description of it
better then the herb does / which is called in Duche Bibernel / and of some
Duche writers Pimpinella Germanica / and of some Italianes Saxifragia /
although they give that name unto an other herb. It may be called in English
Pimpinel or rough Saxifrage. But I dare not say that it is the true Daucus of
the second kind: As for the third kind of daucus / I can not surely tell
what herb it is.

The virtues of Daucus out of Dioscorides.
THE sede of all the kinds dronken / heateth / provoke flowers and urine /
and helps to bring forth the birth: it heals gnawynge in the belly / it
swageth ye old cough / it is good dronken in wine against the bytinges of a
feld speder / with ye layinge to it drives away swellings. Me^ use only ye sede
of other kinds / but they use ye rote also of it of Candy / and yt specially
in wine against venomous beasts

The virtues of Daucus out of Galene.
DAucus the wild / whom some call Staphilinon / that is Carot / is less
conuen ent to be eaten then the gardin daucus / but in all other things
stronger / but it of the gardin is more fit for to be eaten / but it is weaker
and has the power to heat / and therefore to extenuat and make subtle. The
root beside the forsaid virtues / has a windye propertye in it / and
prouocatiue to venery. The sede of the gardin daucus has a certain propertye
also to provoke pleasure. The sede of the wild daucus has no windines in it
at al / and therefore it provoke flowers and urine. The sede of Daucus has a
vehemente pour to heat / so that among the chefest / it is able to provoke
urine / and weomens flowers. If it be laid without / it will greatly drive
forth by euaporation. The herb it self has a like nature / but weaker then
the sede / by ye reason of the mixture of a watery mixture / for all that is
hot.

Simeon Sethy of the nature of Daucus.
CArotes which he called Daukia / are hot in the second degree / and moist
in the first. These norishe less then rapes: they provoke urine and pleasure
of the body / and ingendre wind / and are hard of digestion / and that
specially if they be eaten raw. They move the belly to the stole and bring
down flowers / but they ingendre not very good blood / they make a man's
sede thin / and hete the kidneys. The black are better then the yellow /
wherefore they have a measurable heat and sharpenes to break / and to cut in
sundre gross humores. The sede makes men make much water / and with honey
it brings down weomens sickness. It is good of special property (as some
men write) for the legs / but it hurts the bladder.

The properties of Pimpinell / or rough Saxifrage / out of the later writers.
PImpinellis juice is good to be dronken against the bytinge of serpents /
and the same dronken in wine / breaks the stone. It swageth also the
strangurye. The water of Pimpinel is good against the darcknes of ye eyes. Some
do hold that the juice of Pimpinel takes frekelles and spots out of the
face. The virtue of this herb is so great against all venom and poison / that
the root only holden in a mannis mouth / defends him wonderfully against the
poison of the pestilence / as men of good experience do testifye. Now seeing
that Pimpinel does both agree with the second kind of daucus in description and
also in virtues (for both Dioscorides and the later writers do give like virtue
unto these) my opinion can not be vain / which do suppose that Pimpinella is
the second kind of Daucus in Dioscorides.

Of Dictamnye of Candye.
DIctamnus is named in Greek Dictamnos / of some Potecaries Diptamus / it is
called of Pliny Dictamus. I have seen it growing in England in Master Riches
gardin naturally / but it grows no where ellis that I know of / saving only
in Candy: therefore I know no English name for it. I think yt it is best to
name it Dittany of Candy. Dictamnus is an herb of Candy / bytinge fast / smoth
/ and like Penyryal. But the leaves of it are greater / which have a certain
thick down upon them like as Gnaphalium (called of some Cudwede) has. It
brings forth nether flower nor sede as Dioscorides writes: belyke he saw it
at that time / when it had nether flower nor sede. But it is known this day
to bring forth flower and sede / both in England and Germanye / places much
colder then Candy is. And Theophrast older then Dioscorides writes evidently /
that Dictamus has flower and fruit / and Virgil the nobelest of all Latin
Poets writes the same in the book of Eneidos. Many have abused Fraxinella
for this herb / and some have taken Lepidium / which the common people called
Dittany for this herb / but their error is manifest.

The virtues of Dittanye of Candye.
DIttanye of Candye does al those things that Penyrial does / but much more
mightelye / not only in drink / but also laid to / ye and also in a perfume
with the smoke of it. It casts forth dead childer out of the mother. It is a
common saying / that in Candy when the goats are stricken with arrows / that
by the rating of this herb / they shake out arrows again. The juice either
laid to / or broken with barley mele / has the nature to purge. The herb will
pull forth again pricks of the fete / or any other part of the body if it be
laid to. It is good for the pain of the milte / for it makes it less. They
cut it down in summer and in Autumn. The root has an hoote taste / it
spedeth the deliverance of children / that are in the birth. The juice dronke^
with wine / is a remedy against the bitinges of serpents. The herb is of so
great virtue / that if the smell of it come unto venomous beasts / it drives
them away / and it behanged about them / it killed them by touching of them.
The juice poured into wounds / either made with iron / or the bytinge of
venomous beasts / is a present remedy if it be taken streyghtwaye in
drink. The kind of Dittany called safe dittany / is like this foresaid
dittanye / but it is not so bytinge hot as the other is. It has the same
properties that the other has / but not so mighty. There is brought out of
Candye an other kind of Dittanye with the leaves of Sisimbrium or Baume mint /
with greater branches / wherein are flowers like wild organ or wild Merierum
black and soft. The sauoure is between Baum mint and Sage very pleasant. It
is good for the same things / but it smyteth not up in the nose. It is mingled
with emplasters and medicines / which are made against the bytinges of
serpents / and are called triacles.

Of the wild Tasell.
depiction of plant Dipsacus. Fullers tasil.
depiction of plant Dipsacus syluestris. Wild tasel.


DIpsacos / called in Latin Labrum Veneris / that is Venus basin / because it
holds always water / it is called in English wild tasil / in Duche Karten
distel / in French Chardon or Carder. It is named of the Potecaries and
Herbaries virga pastoris: wild tasel is one of the pricky herbs. It has a
high stalk / and full of pricks / and leaves like lettes / full of pricks: two
ever together which go about every ioynte / and the leaves are something long /
and have as it were certain belles or swellings like unto the bublinges yt
rise in the water. When it rayneth sore / in the mids of the back / both
within and without / they have an holowe thing at the cumminge out of the two
leaves / which come one forth against an other / wherein is gathered water
both of the rain and also of the dew: and here upon it is called dipsacos /
that is thyrstye. Out of the top of the stalk grows forth in every
branch a pricky head / sharp / and somthinge long / and when it is wythered
/ it appears white. If ye cleue the head in the mids / ye shall find a worm
in it. This description of Dioscorides agrees also unto our gardin tasel /
which the fullers dress their cloth with all. The wild tasel grows commonly
about diches and watery places / in the beginning of winter the Goldfinches use
much to haunte this herb for the seeds sake / whereof they are very desirous:
the other grows in gardins. In the wild tasel is found a worm when the head
is full ripe / which fisherers use for a bait. Beside all other tokens and
differences whereby these ij. kinds do differ / is one that the pricks of the
wild tasell grow not hokedly inward as the pricks of the other do.

The virtues of wild Tasel.
THE root of wild tasel sodde^ in wine / and bruised whilse it be as thick as
an emplaster / laid upon the riftes and fistulas of the fundamente / heals
them. This medicine ought to be kept in a box of copper. It is also a good
medicine for all kinds of wartes. Some hold that the worms which are found in
the head / hong either about ye neck or arm / heal the quartane ague. Some
use to lay the water that is in the leaves about the stalk upon wartes. Wild
tasel as Galene writes / dries in the second degree / and it has some virtue
/ or pour of scouringe.

Of Dragon.
depiction of plant Dragon.
depiction of plant Wild Dragon.


DIoscorides makes but one kind of Dracunculus / which he calls Dragontion /
but Pliny makes three kinds of the same / in these words: lib. 24. ca. 16. Id
autem quod Graeci Dracontium vocant, triplici effigy demonstratum mihi est,
folijs betae, non sine thyrso, etc. It that Grecians call Dracontion / was
showed unto me after three diverse likenesses / one with leaves like a beat / and
not without a smoth stalk / and a purple flower / this is like unto Aron. An
other showed me one with a long root like as it were marked and full of joints
/ and it had but iij. little stalks. The third which was showed me / had a
greater leaf then the Cornel tree lefe is / with a root like a read: and they
said it had as many joints in the root / and as many leaves / as it was years
old. The first kind that Pliny describes / might seem to be our common dragon
/ if that the leaves of our dragon were not smaller / then the leaves of a
Beat / whereunto Pliny compares the first kind of Dracontion / but Pliny
says that the first kind is like unto Aron / for whiles the dragon is yet
young / the leave of it is very like unto the lefe of Aron. Dioscorides also
makes Dragon like unto Aron in the description of Aron. Galene also writes
that Dragon is like Aron / both in lefe and root / wherefore I doubt not but
that our common dragon is the true dragon. Howebeit when the stalk is great
and ready / within a short while to bring forth the flower and fruit: the lefe
that is in the top of the stalk / goes away from the first lykenes / and
has many leaves together / but al joined together in one lefe / and not
cumming forth of diverse stalks or branches. And most commonly / one of the
leaves which is the ouermost / and as it were the master lefe / does something
resemble an Iuye leaf. The second kind of Dragon that Plinye describes /
except my memoyre fail me / I saw it ones in the land of Drent / not far from
Meppel in a marrish ground. The third kind is now adays well known / and it
grows in diverse places of Germanye / where as it is called Klein schlangen
kraut. But I have not seen it in England: and therefore I know no common
English name of it. Howbeit / it may be called in English Water dragon.
Dioscorides describes his Dragon thus: Dragon has a leaf like Iuy great and
notable with white spots / and a straight stalk / two cubits long of diverse
colors / sprinkled with diverse purple spots / so that it does resemble a
serpent very nere / it is as thick as a staf. The fruit grows after the
manner of a cluster / in the top of the stalcke first grene and afterward read
/ hot in taste and bytinge. The root is somthinge round / and has a round
head like unto Aron / covered with a thin filme or skin. It grows in dark
and shadowy hedges. Matthiolus makes mention of an other kind of Dragon /
whereof is no mention made in any good textes of Dioscorides. Nevertheless I
think that it is a kind of Dragon / even perteyning unto it that Dioscorides
writes of. Mathiolus also his self grants yt that chapter is set unto
Dioscorides by some other writer.

The virtues of Dragon out of Galene.
DRagon has a certain likeness unto Aron / both in the lefe and also in the
root / but it is both more biting and bitterer then Aron is / and therefore is
he hoter and of finer parts. It has also a certain light astriction or
binding / the which because it is joined with the other qualites that is
sharp and bitter / it must needs be a strong medicine: for the root purges
all the inward parts / making thin and breakinge tough and gros humores / and
it is a special good medicine against the almost incurable sore / called
cocoeth. It purges and scoureth away mightelye both other things that need
scouringe / and also the frekelles with vinegre. The leaves also having like
quality / are good for fresh wounds / and grene sores / and the less dry
they are / the bitterer do they join together / and close up wounds. For
those things yt are dry / are hoter then that they can be convenient for
wounds. Some there be of that believe / that they think if chese be covered
with dragon leaves / yt they preserve it from corruption by the reason of their
dry complexion. The fruit is mightier then the root and the leaves. The juice
scoureth away the disease of the eyes.

Of Dryopteris.
DRyopteris has the name of an Oak and a Fern / and grows in Oaks.
Dioscorides describes Dryopteris thus: Dryopteris grows in the moss of old
Oaks like unto a brake / but not so much cut or iagged in the leaves. It has
roots wound one with an other / rough and astringent / and tarte in taste /
turning something into swetenes. The herb which ye se here entitled with the
name of Dryopteris / draws nerest unto the description of Dryopteris of any
herb that I know. Howebeit / beside diverse other things / there be two
things that make me think that it should not be the perfect Dryopteris: one
is it yt grows in walls with maidens heir / and in many bushe roots / and
chefely of them that are in dark laynes / and not in the moss of old oak
trees. The other is that I can not find the virtue that Dioscorides speaks
of that / to pull of here and to putrefye. Many have used this herb for the
true Adiantum / and namelye the Potecaries of Louan when as I was there. It is
proved by experience that this herb is very good for the stone / either with
wine / or with almone milk made with maidens heir.

Of Wallwurte.
WAlwurt is named in English also Danwurte / in Greek Chameacte / in Latin
Ebulus / in Duche Attich / in French Hieble. Walwurt is a great deal lower then
Elder is / and more like an herb / it has a foursquared stalk and full of
iointes / ye leaves are like unto ye leaves of an almond tree / but longer / and
grow (certain spaces going between) about every iointe stretched forth
standinge out like two wings / depiction of plant Ebulus.
one against an other / indented and stinkinge. It has a spoky or a bushy top
as Elder has / like flowers and fruit. The root is long and as great as a
finger. Walwurt grows much about Cambridge / and in many other places of
England / and also in many places of Germany. Howbeit I could never se the
stalk in any place as yet vnsquared. Notwithstanding I know well that it is
the true Ebulus or walwurte.

The virtues of Walwurte.
ELder and Danwurt have al one strenght and one virtue to dry up / they draw
water forth of ye belly / and are euel for ye stomache. The leaves are sodden
like wurtes to draw out choler and fleme. The tender stalks sodden in pannes
or dishes / bring the same thing to pass. The root boiled in wine and given
in meat helps ye dropsy. After ye same manner dronken / it is good for the
bytinges of viperes. The broth of it softeneth the mother if a woman sit in it:
It lets also ye wind go forth of the^ / and amendeth ye fautes of the^. The
berries dronken in wine / are of the same effect. If they be laid to / they
make black heir. If the leaves being as yet tender and soft be laid to after
the manner of a pultes / they swage an inflammation and hot burning: They are
good to be laid unto burned places / and to the places yt are bitten of dogs.
They draw together the wounds that gape and become a fistula. The leaves are
good for the gout if they be laid to with bulls talow or gotes sweet.

Of Smallage.
depiction of plant Elioselinon.


ELioselinon after the translation of Theodore / is called in Latin Paludapium
/ in English Smallage or March / in Duche Eppich. And the Potecaries have
long called this herb in Latin apium / but unjustly / for apium is not
Smallage / but Perselye / which thing I have sufficiently proved / where as I
have written of perselye. Dioscorides writes that Elioselinon is greater then
apium is / and that it grows in moist places / whereof it has the name. I
have seen it grow often times by brook sides and in a certain Island of East
Freseland / called Nordenye / by the seasyde. The savor of smallage is a great deal stronger and worse sauoringe then perselye is / and diverse practicioners
hold yt the herb both smelled and eaten / is ieperdous for them that are in
danger of yt fallinge sycknes. For it makes them fall straight way that have
smelled or eaten of it / as they report.

The virtues of Smallage.
DIoscorides writes yt persely and smallage ar al of one virtue and stre^ght.
Howbeit for ye cause above rehearsed / I would advise me^ rather to use persely
the^ smallage. If yt ye be desirous to know the hole properties of perselye /
and there shall ye find the properties of smallage. But although Persely be
less hurtful then smallage is / yet there are good writers that hold that even
ye leaves of persely also are euel for them that have ye fallinge sickness.

Of Heth.
depiction of plant Irica. Heth.


IRica is called in Greek Erice / in English Heth hather / and Ling / in Duche
Heyd / in French Bruyer. Irica says Dioscorides is a busshy tree like unto
Tamarisk / but much less / of whose flowers bees make noughty honye.
Dioscorides calls Ericam a tree / which is rather so named for the forms sake
then for the hyghte / for it never ryseth up unto the length and hyghnes of a
tree. Pliny in the xv. chapter of the forsaide book writes that Erica grows
in woddes / which I could yet never se in any such plentye as in plain
grounds and wild feldes and some hills. For our heth grows in playnes and
in wild grounds / and in moist places / and upon some wodles hills. The highest
heth that ever I saw / grows in Northumberland / which is so high that a man
may hyde him self in it.

The virtues of Heth.
BOth the small leaves and flowers heal bytinges of serpents. Galene writes
that the flowers and leaves are most chefely to be used / which have pour by
ventinge out or transpiration makes ripe and digesteth. I read in Paul
Egineta / among the receytes which are made against ye diseases of the milt often
times mention of Heth. Wherefore seeing that both Dioscorides sets next unto
tamarisk heth (who uses to set herbs of like fashion and property together)
and Paul Eginete uses it with tamariske. I think that it is much better to
use it for tamarisk / then Quickboome / otherwise called rountre or Quickentre
/ seeing Quickboom has no such qualite in it / as are convenient for the
diseases of the milt / saving in only stopping.

Of Rocket.
depiction of plant Eruca hortensis.
depiction of plant Eruca syluestris.


ERVCA is named in Greek Euzomos / in English rocket / in Duche Roket / in
French Roquette. After Dioscorides and Plinye there are two kinds of Rocket.
The one is a gardyne Rocket / and that is much greater then the other / but
like both in taste / smelle and fassion of indentinge or cuttinge of the leaves
unto the common Rocket with the yelowe flowers. This greater rocket has white
flowers with small black lines like synewes going through them. The second kind
is called in Latin eruca syluestris / and that is now common in our gardines /
and is used for gardin rocket. Some use the great rocket for white mustard /
but they are deceived / for white mustard is in all points like unto the other
mustarde / saving that it has white sede / but not all white / but some thing
pale and yellowishe. The leaves of great rocket are not like the leaves of
mustarde / but unto the leaves of ye common rocket. Ye shall know the
difference that is between gardin rocket and wild rocket by the figures / which
ye se here lively set forth.

The virtues of Rocket.
IF rocket be eaten raw in great quantite / it stirs up ye pleasure of the
body. The sede is good for the same purpose. Rocketh makes a man piss /
helps digestion and is very good for the bellye. Some use the sede for sauce:
the which that it may last the longer / they knede it with milk or vinegre /
and make it into little cakes. Dioscorides writes that the wild rocket is
hoter then the other / and provoke water more largelye / and that some use it
for mustard sede. Rocket as Pliny writes / cares nothing for the cold / for
it is of a contrary nature unto lettes / for it stirs up the lust of the
body. Therefore is it joined in all meats with lettes / that like heat
mengled with to much cold / should make like the qualite of both. The sede of
rocket remedieth the poison of the scorpion / and the feld mouse called a
shrew. It drives from the body all kinds of little beasts that grow
therein. It heals al ye fautes in the face laid to with honey / and it takes
away freckles or fayrntikles with vinegre. It makes black scarres of bruses
or wounds / white / with the gall of an ox.

Of Eruilia or pese Eruile.
ERuiala or Eruilia / called in Greek okros / is a pulse like unto a pease: and
Theophrastus in the vij. book of the history of plants writes / that Eruilles
/ Cichelinges and peasen have a stalk falling upon the gronde. Plinye also in
the xiij. book of his natural story compares Eruilles and peasen together in
likeness of leaves / and says that they have longer leaves then other pulses.
But this difference have I marked between this and pease: The cod or shale of
an Eruil is smaller and rounder then the cod of a pease is / and the Eruil is
rough within / and the seeds have little black spots in them / and they are
dun and ronder / and less then gray pease are. I never saw this pulse grow in
England / but I have seen it growyng in Germany / but there only in gardines.
The properties of this herb agrees with peasen / and as for any qualite yt it
has for Physike / truly I have read none. But to whatsoever use that
phaselles will serve for / Eruilles will serve for the same / as Galene
witnesses in ye first book de alimentorum facultatibus / where as he says
that phaselles and Eruilles are in a mean between them which make good juice
and bad / and them that are of hard and light digestion on them that are windy
and windles / and them that norishe much and little.

Of bitter Fitches.
ERuum is named in Greek Orobos / it may be called in English bitter fitche /
of the lykenes yt it has with a fitche. Dioscorides does not describe Eruum so
perfitly as he does other herbs / and therefore it is less known then many
other herbs be. For he says only these words of Eruum: Eruum is a little
thin bushe / known of all men / with a narrow leaf / and sede in coddes: mo
tokens whereby Eruum may be known from other pulse / Dioscorides reherseth not.
The Germans call pisum which we call a pease / ein Erbis / which word seems
to have commed of Orobus / and though pisum is not Orobus: It does appear that
they gave the name of Orobus unto a pease / because the one is so like the
other. Galene / Paulus Egineta / and Aetius with one consent / hold that the
black Orobus is bitter. Galenis words are these: Orobus dries in the second
degree / and that far / and it is hot in the first degree. As far forth as it
is bitter / so much does it cut / scoureth away / and opens it that is
stopped or bound: Then when as Eruum is bitter / the herb which grows in
woddes with long narrow leaves / with flowers like unto a pease / can not be
Orobus: nether is the herb that Fuchsius takes for Orobus the true Orobus.
Some peradventure will say that Eruum Fuchsti is the true Eruum / because it
has narrow leaves / and that not withstanding that Galene gives unto Orobus
the yelowish and the pale a bitter qualite: yet he says yt the white are not
so bitter as the other. Whereunto I say / that although Galene write / that the
white Erua be less medicinable then the yelowishe and the pale / that is less
like unto a medicine / by the reason of any exceeding and unpleasant qualite as
bitterness is: yet does he not take away all bitterness from any kind of
Orobus. Therefore seeing that there is no bitterness at all in the herb that
Fuchsius sets forth for Eruo / it can not be Eruum. I take the pulse that
Fuchsius takes for Orobus / to be Cicerculas / which is called of Galene
Lathyris. Matthiolus describes Orobus thus: Eruum which we call Mocho / puts
forth leaves like unto Cicercula or Cicheling a flour like a pease / very
redish / coddes in fassion round and long wherein is sede / in some pale / in
other white / in other some redishe. He says that it grows also wild in
Italy / and is taken for a fitche: Wherefore I think that long ago before
Matthiolus set out his Herbal / that I gave no unfit name unto Orobus / when I
named it a bitter fitche.

The virtues of bitter Fitche.
BItter fitche burdeneth the head much / the same eaten troubled the bellye.
It draws out blood by the water. This pulse well sodden / makes oxen fat.
Eruum helps a man to piss well. The Same makes a man have a good color / it
dryueth out blood with gnawing / both out of the bellye and out of the bladder
/ if it be eaten out of measure / or dronken more largely then is convenient.
It scoureth sores with honye / so does it likewise scour away the frekels of
the face and other spots / and it scoureth also the hole body. It suffered
not deadlye burninges and hard swellings to go any further / it makes soft
the hardness of women's breasts / it scoureth away black little angrye sores and
byles / it breaks Carbuncles or plage sores: If it be kneden with wine and
laid to / it heals the bytinges of viperes / dogs / and men: with
vinegre it heals them that can not make water / but with great pain / and
the vain appetite to go to the stool / and can do nothing there. Bitter
fitches or bitter tares are very fit for them that are in a consumation / and
feel not their nourishment / if they take of the biggenes of a nut with honey.
The broth of them is good for kybes or moulde helles / and for itche or yeck
that goes over the hole body.

Of Sea hollye.
depiction of plant Eringium marinum.
depiction of plant Eringium mediterraneum.


ALthough Dioscorides makes mention but of one kind of Eringium / yet both
experience and autoures teach us / that there are diverse kinds of it / for
there is one kind by the sea side / and an other in plain grounds for the
most part not far from great rivers / and an other kind that grows in
mountains / and Pliny says Eringium grows in rough places / in stony places
/ and by the sea side. The sea Eringium is a common herb in many places of
England by the seasyde. It is called of the common people Sea hulner / or Sea
holly / because it has sharp leaves like unto an holly / and grows hard by
the Seasyde. Eringium as Dioscorides writes / is of the prickye kind of
herbs / and has broad leaves / sharp roundabout / and they taste like unto a
certain kind of spice. Many crestes of sea holis branches / when as it is
grown up / are read. In the tops of the branches come forth knoppy heads /
which are compassed about with many sharp and hard pricks after the fashion
of a star. Whose color is some time grene / sometime white / and sometime
blewe / the rote is long and broad / black without and white within / of the
bigness of a mannis thumb / and a pleasant savor. These are the proper tokens
or marks of Eringium that Dioscorides writes of: then when as the herb which
Riffius sets out for Eringium / agrees not with this description / it can
not be the true Eringium of Dioscorides. The leaves of Eringium that Dioscorides
describes / are round and broad / and have a pleasant taste / but the leaves
of Eringium which Riffius sets out / are very narrow / and are without a
pleasant savor. The herb also which Fuchsius sets out / has not such
broad leaves in any place of the ^^lke / as Dioscorides requires of his
Eringium / for yt leaves of Fuchsius Eringium are indented / long and small /
and nothing broad about the stalk / as the figure set out here / will testifye
/ not withstandinge that I know that it is the true Eringium of Dioscorides /
for at the first cumminge out of the leaves in the spring before the stalk
grows up / I have of late seen even as broad leaves growing from the root
of that Eringium / as Dioscorides requires: The common Eringium which Fuchsius
sets forth / and as in deed the true Eringium of Dioscorides / grows by
the Ryne side / and also in places far from both salt and fresh water. As for
the Eringium Riffij / is an ill favored pricky wede / and grows about tounes
and diches / in such like places as commonly Henbane grows. Aetius makes
mention of a kind of Eringium / which he calls Eringiu^ montanu^ / and says
yt it has narrow leaves and little flowers / of yt color of gold / which in
figure are like unto an eye. I do not remember yt I have seen any herb agreing
unto this description. Nevertheless I have set it forth here / yt men if they
happen upon it / may by this description know it. As for ye Eringium yt
grows in the middelland far from the sea / I never remember yt ever I saw it
in England / wherefore I know no English name for it: but it may be called well
herb holly / or Ryne thistel / because it grows so plentuously in all places
about ye Ryne side: some take secaul in Arabianes to be Eringium in
Dioscorides: but they are deceived and metely well confuted of Matthiolus / for
holdinge of that opinion. The cause of the error is this: The translater of
Serapio set before the chapter of See cachul. This title de Secachul and
Eryngis, And the translater of Auerroes / where as he writes of Asteraticus /
wrote thus: Elgatzaria quod Hispani vocant Panicald, and in Arabico Alchartama,
and alij Secacul, and in Latino Eringi dicuntur. But if men would have
considered the textes better then the bare titles / they should have found
that the textes in the chapters did not agree with the description and
properties of Eringium in Dioscorides / Galene and Pliny. For wherein Serapion
has in his title de secacul et eryngis / within the chapter he describes his
see cachul to have roots wouen in together beside the ground / and a black
sede in the quantite of a Ciche / and that it grows in moist places / and
shaddoish under great trees / and that it is hot and moist in ye first degree
/ which marks and properties are quite contrary unto them that Dioscorides /
Galene and Pliny give unto their Eringio / also in the chapter of Auerroes
which has the title of secacul and eryngium / it is as euidente as may be
unto him that will read the text both of Galene and Auerroes / that Auerroes
there entreats not of Eringium / but of Asteraticus. The same Auerroes in an
other place speaking of Secacul in these words: Secacul, id est, eringi calidi
sunt and humidi. Declaring in gyuing like moisture unto heat in secacul / that
he writes not there of the Eringij of Galene / whom he knew well to give unto
his Eringio a manifest dryenes / and a temperate hete / or not far from
temperat. But Rasis writing of secacul allone / without any such additions
as Serapio and Auerroes have / says if secacul be condited / yt is seasoned
and souced with honey or suggar / makes lothsumnes / and destroys a mannis
stomach or appetite / but it increases mannis sede wonderfully / if a man use
it often. But eryngium condited and preserved with honey or suggar / is not
lothsom for the stomach / nether hurts it as daily experience can bear
witness. Therefore secacul is not eryngium Dioscoridis in the writings of the
Arabianes / notwithstanding that the interpretours have confunded the one with
the other.

The virtues of Sea holly.
SEA holly as Dioscorides writes / has power to heat / Paulus Egineta says
that Sea holly heateth / but not manifestly: Aetius writes that Sea holly
differs from temperate herbs / in heat either little or nothing at all. But
it is very dry and of subtle and fine parts / as the same author witnesses.
The root of sea hulner dronken / dryueth forth weomens sycknes / and water out
of the bladder. It scatters away gnawynges and wyndes. It is good with wine
against the diseases of the liver / the bytinges of serpents / and poison that
is dronke^. It is dronken with a dram of Carot against many euels. Some hold
that if it be hanged or laid to it / dryueth away wartes or swellings. If the
rote be dronken with mede / it heals them that have their neck bowynge
backward / and them that have the fallinge sycknes. The root of Eringium made
hot in water / and taken with the same water / heals the pain of the colike.
The same taken with mede where in it has been made hot / heals them that
have the stone and stranguriam / the stopping of the water / and the diseases
of the kidnes. This broth of herb is to be dronken xvj. days fasting in the
morning / and when ye go to bed. If ye put water persely called Sion to it / it
will work the better. A certain man told me that by the often vsinge of it /
that he left of puttinge forth of stones by his water / when as before he was
often vexed with that disease. If ye dwell by the Sea side / you may make a
goodlye medicine of the root of Sea hollye condited / and so ye may make a
goodly and wholesome mete of the grene stalks / when they come first out. The
same may ye also conserve and keep in vinegre brine or sugar / or honye / as
Asparagus / called Sperage and Sampere / are kept and condited.

Of Spindel tree.
depiction of plant Euonymus.


EVonymus is reckened not without a cause to be the tree which is called of
some common Herbaries Fusago or Fusaria / although I have seen this tree often
times in England / and in most plentye between Ware and Barkwaye / yet for all
that I could never learn an English name for it / the Duche men call it in
Netherlande Spilboome / that is Spindel tree / because they use to make
Spindels of it in that country / and me think it may be so well named in
English / seeing we have no other name. Theophrastus describes Euonymus after
this manner. The tree named Euonymus / grows both in other places / and also
in the I Will of Lesbus in the Orkin mountain / called Ordinus: it is of the
bigness of a Pome granate / with a leaf of the same / but greater then is the
leaf of Perywincle / and soft like the Pomegranate lefe. It begins to bud
in September / and blossemeth in the spring: the flower is like the herb
called viola alba / of which are many kinds / but the most common viola alba
is the herb that we call commonly hartsease: the savor is unpleasant: the
fruit with the husk is like to the cod of sesam or oil sede / within it is
hole and sound / not hollow / saving that is divided into foursquared rows.
This if it be eaten kills beasts / and the same does the lefe / and specially
goats / except they be purged. Pliny writes thus of Euonymus: The tree which
is called Euonymus / is no luckier then ostria: It is not unlike a Pomegranat
tree / and it has a leaf of the bigness between it and a Bay tree. The
fashion and the softness is like the Pomegranate / but ye flour is whyter /
and by an by declares the plage to come. It has coddes like unto sesam / and
within a corn four cornered stick and deadly to beasts. The leaf has
the same might. Sometime a hasty laxe is a remedy against ye poison of this tree.
This have I marked beside all that Theophrastus and Pliny have written / that
the young twigges or wandes that grow out of the root beside the tree / are
very fair grene / and so well fouresquared as if it had been done with a plane.
The vessels that the seeds are in / are red / and ye tree has much heart or
pith in it. The wood in color is somthinge yelowishe / not unlike the color of
Berbery tree. I know no good property that this tree has / saving only it is
good to make spindels and brid of cages.

Of Agrimonie.
EVpatorium is named in Greek Eupatorion / is called in English Agrimonie / in
Duch Agrimonien / in French Aigremoine. The Potecaries have used for the true
Eupatorium a wild herb with leaves like hemp / which grows about watersydes
and ditches / which differs much in virtue and fassion from the herb named
of Dioscorides Eupatorium / as ye shall know in the description of Eupatorium
of Dioscorides. Mesue makes also mention of a kind of Eupatorium / which does
nothing agree with it of Dioscorides / as ye may se in Mesues description of that
herb. This herb is supposed of some learned men to be Eupatorium Auicenne.
Dioscorides describes his Eupatorium after this manner: Eupatorium is a bushy
herb / bringing forth one stalk like wood / blackish / straight small / rough
/ a cubite long / and sometime more. It has leaves like five leued grass: yet
more lyker hemp / divided in five parts or more / something black / indented
about the edges like a saw. The sede comes forth of the middle of the stalks
/ and so grows up full of down / and it boweth douneward. The Same when it is
dry cleueth upon mennis clothes.

depiction of plant Eupatorium. Agrimonie.
depiction of plant Eupatorium vulgar.


The virtues of Agrimonie.
EVpatorium is an herb of subtle and fine parts / and it has pour to cut
insunder / and to scour away without any manifest or perceiueable hete.
Therefore it scoureth away the stopping of the liver. There is also in a
certain binding / whereby it gives strength unto the liver. Thus far has
Galene spoken of our Agrimonie. And Dioscorides writes thus of the virtues of
Agrimonye: The leaves of this herb broken and laid to with swynes grese / heal
sores that are hard to be cured and covered with a skin. The herb or the sede
dronken in wine / delivers men from the bloodye flixe / from the diseases of
the liver and the biting of serpents. Agrimonye grows among bushes and
hedges and in middowes and woddes / in all countries in great plentye.

Of the Bean.
depiction of plant Faba.
FABA is called in Greek kyamos / and these many years we have englished Faba
a Bean in English as the Duche have named it ein Bonen in their speech / from
whence our spech came. But first a certain Duch man of late named Hieronymus
Tragus / after with diverse reasons and autorities goes about to prove that faba
called kyamos of the Grecianes / is not the pulse that is called in Duche
bonen. His reasones are these: The first is that where as Theophrast and Plinye
write / that the faba or kyamos comes not out of ye ground before xv. days /
that the common bean appears in Germany in ye v. or vj. day An other reason
is / that where as Pliny writes / that al other pulses saving the Faba / has
but one root / where as Pliny seems to give mo then one to ye faba. The third
argument is also set out of Pliny / which says that faba are so fruytful /
that one stalk has been laden with an hundredth fabis: but there is no such
plenty in the Duch bonen: therefore the Duche bonen can not be faba. He fetched
an other argument out of Galene the xj. book of Simple medicines / Galene says
there that oniskos / which are called in Latin millipedes / (and in English
are named Horse lice or Hobtrushes lice) are round bestes / when as they draw
themselves into a round figure like a boule or balle / some with us call them
kyamous / because they are like unto fabis: after that they have drawn them
selves in to the round figure of a boul or a balle / or such a round thing.
But the common bean is not round like a boule / therefore the common bean can
not be kyamos or faba. And this argument he confirms by the autorite of
Dioscorides / who in the chapter of Juniper (as he alleges Dioscorides)
makes one kind of Juniper berries like a faba / but they are round / therefore
the faba ought also to be round. These and certain other such arguments does
Tragus bring forth to prove that the Duch bonen / which is al one with our
bean / is not the Latins faba / and the Grecianes kyamos. Now when as
Dioscorides describes not fabam / where as he entreats of the nature of it /
of a purpose it is mete that we fetch out of other places of Dioscorides / and
out of other autores / so much as we can that belongs unto the description of
Faba. Dioscorides entreating of Climenon / says that it has a foursquared
stalk like to the stalk of faba. Theophraste lib. 7. cap. 3. writes that the
stalk of kyamos or faba is hollow within / and that it grows right up.
Plinye says also that of pulses only the faba with lupines has but one
stalk. The Same Theophrast says yt it has a round lefe / as Pliny does also.
Pliny says that in the flower are certain letters of murning or weping /
which is nothing but a black or brounish spot that is in the flower /
Theophrast says that the skin of the bean is very thick.

Dioscorides makes ye sede of Xiris like unto the sede of faba or kyamos / and
Galene in ye book de alimentis makes round the kyamos of faba / non nititur
numerosa radice / yt is faba leneth not upon many roots / says Theophraste
contrary unto Pliny / which would yt the faba only should amongst pulses have
many roots. Theophrastes words in Greek are these: (...), that is / it is
weike and empty / and has not many roots. Theophrast compares the fruit of
Lotus unto fabe. Now let us se in how many points our common bean does agree
with the above named marks / ye old autores give unto fabe. Our bean has one
rote as faba has / single and but one. Our bean has a straight foursquared
and hollow stalk / and as faba has the leaves round / and the flower have
spots as Pliny writes / that the faba has in them: But in the figure and
form of ye sede / our bean agrees not with the bean ye Galene in diverse
places writes of / for where as it is round / our is long and somthinge flat.
If I could answer unto this point / the reasones yt Tragus and other bring /
were son answered to. Howsoever the matter be / I think that such a faba as
Galene writes of / can not be found in this country with the marks yt other
autores give also unto it. Well if our bean be not the faba of old writers / I
would some body would show us what pulse is there either in Italy or Spain /
England or Almany / or Franch / which is the old writers Faba. Hieronymus
Tragus takes the herb yt is in deed Cicercula / but unknown to him to be
faba antiquorum. But Cicercula because it is not round / and grows not right
up / but aside / can not be faba: Cicercula has also long leaves / when as the
bean by the authority of the same Theophrast are single / therefore it can not
be faba antiquorum. Amatus Lusitanus as he names him self / and Rembert
Helped with the reason of Tragus / deny yt our bean is the faba antiquorum /
but they tell not what pulse yt is in this part of Europa. And so they take
fabam away from us / but they set nothing in the stead of it / as Tragus more
boldelye then lernedly did. Two of the same men hold yt our common bean is
faselus. But yt our common bean can not be faselus / first I will prove by ye
words of Rembert / which says both in his duche and French herbal / yt
faselus is phasiolus of Dioscorides / but Faseolus can not grow up without stakes
or poules / and the bean can / therfofe the bean is not faselus. Galene also
de alimentorum facultatibus in ye chapter de dolichis, says these words:
Dicere posset quis, oi^a haec eruilias, cicerculas and phaselos vnum esse
genus, verum pluribus nominibus appellari, and a little after writing of ye
same / says: Sieve haec vt dixi vnu^ genus, sieve vnius generis differentiae
sint. But Theophrastus writes Cicercula and Eruilia grow aside and not right
up / as the faba does / then if faselus be either one kind or of one kind as
Galene writes with Cicercula and Eruilia / then grows faselus a side as ye
other ij. do / which differ as Galene says only in name. There where as our
bean grows right up / it can not be faselus. Galene also says ye phaselus
is of a mean quality between wind and not windy. But our common bean as
Re^bert says alleging Dioscorides / is windy. Then when as phaselus is in a
mean between windy and not windy / and the bean is so windy yt it had need to
have comine put to it / to put yt windines away / our common bean can not be
faselus. But I meruel Rembertus cites Dioscorides for the properties of
faselus / seeing yt he never made any mention of it / except Rembert take
faselus and phasiolus to be al one / which if he do / I meruel again why he
makes ij. chapters of faselus and phasiolus / if they be al one. I meruel also
yt he gives the property of ye fabae vete ru^ unto our common bean faselo /
which no author gives unto phaselus / and yet will not give the name of fabae
veterum unto our bean also / for nether Galene nor any other author says yt
faselus are good for inflammations and for ye diseases of ye stones and pappes /
but Galene and Dioscorides both give these virtue and property peculiarly
fabae veteru^: wherefore Rembertus seems against his will in giving ye peculier
virtues fabae veteru^ unto our bean / to make fabam faba^ veteru^ / as
willingly he takes the description of it from ye same / to lightly giving
credit unto Tragus / who has made him err in diverse herbs / as ye
reuocation of certain errors yt he had committed in folowinge of Tragus / can
bear witness. But by reason above brought / ye may se plainly yt our bean can
not be nether phaseolus nor faselus veteru^. Now let us answer to ye reasons
yt Tragus and his folowers make. As touching ye long coming up of ye faba / I
need to make no other answer then Theophrast makes. For Theophrast in ye
same place immediately after in these words makes sufficient answer to this
reason. Sed an ea quae tempore verno serantur, celerius exea^t cogitandu^ est.
Non nunqua^ enim and quibusda^ in locis vel intra pauciores dies co^fi ci
possunt: vt in Aegypto enim tertio aut quarto die prouenire affirma^t: apud
alios vero pluribus quam retulimus opus sit, nec temere ita eueniat, quu^ and
tellus and caelu^ discrepat, cumque maturius seriusque aratu^ sit, quaeque
superuenerint dissimi lia constant. Tellus enim rara and leaves and benigno
caelo subiecta, celeriter and faci le reddit lenta vera and ponderosa tarde.
Pliny concerning ye multitude of rotes is answered al ready by Theophrast / who
writes yt ye faba has not many rotes. As touching ye plenty yt ye fruit of
faba yt Pliny speaks of / yt is to be adscribed unto ye plentuousnes of some
grounds / whereas such plenty is. As for the heuines of our beans / it comes
also of ye diversity of ye ground / and not of ye diversity of ye kind: for
diverse things of one kind are many parts heuier then an other / by ye reason
of the goodness or plentuousnes of ye ground / wherefore Agricola like a wise and
learned man / writes yt ye right old weightes can not be restored again by
granes and pulses by reason of their diversity in diverse countrees and
regiones. As touching yt which he brings out of Dioscorides / for the rondnes
of ye faba / in ye chapter of Iuniperus it is not found in any good text of
Dioscorides / nether greek nor latin. If any will allege me ye text of
Dioscorides after Serapions alleging / I desire no better argument to prove yt
faba ought not to be round / then it yt may be made by Serapions alleging of
Dioscorides / for he writes thus: Quaeda^ reperitur cuius fructus est paruus
sicut faba, nisi quia ipse est rotundus. Ye se here yt Dioscorides as Serapio
allegeth him / makes ye faba^ not to be round / for he says yt the fruit of
ye less Juniper is little like a faba / saving yt it is round as ye faba is
not. As for ye reason brought of Galene for ye roundnes of ye faba / I answer
yt either Galene contains his fabam under some kind of pulse / yt we take for a
kind of pease / as some think ye Dioscorides contains under ye bean ye
pease / because no mention is made thereof in Dioscorides / or ellis his faba
can not be found in this part of Europa / or ellis I am far begyled. Pliny
makes peason to have corners / then by him our round white pease is either
Galenis faba / or ellis cicer albu^ / which Pliny makes white and round / and
less then cicer arietinum.

The virtues of Beans.
Beans make wind / and are hard of digestion / and make troublesome dreams.
They are good for the cough / they ingendre flesh of a mean nature between
hot and cold. If they be sodden in water and vinegre / and eaten with their
shelles / they stop the bloodye flixe / and the common flixe of ye guts. They
are good to be eaten against vomiting. They are less windy if the first water
whilse they be in sething / be cast out / and be sodden in fresh water again.
The grene bean troubles the stomach more / and is more windy then ye dry
bean. The flower both by it self / and also laid to with barley mele / swageth
the burninges called inflammations / which come of a wound / it makes the
scarres to be of one color with the rest of the flesh about it. It helps the
pappes that swell with clodded milk: yea though they be vexed with an
inflammation or hete: it stops milk: it drives away swellinge empostemes
/ blewe brosed blood / and swellings behind the ears with the mele of
fenygreke and honey / but with roses / frankencense / and the white of an egg /
the eyes that fall outward / swellings both windy and other / are stayed /
the same kneded with wine / helps the eyes that have a perle / and ye stripes
of ye eyes. The bean eaten without any husk / is good to be laid to ye
forehead / to turn away the humores that fall down into it. Beans sodden in
wine / heal the swellings gathered in the stones. Some use to lay it upon
childers / nether parts of their bellies / to stop the coming forth of the
first heir. Heirs which spring out again after that the former heir is
pulled out / if they be anointed with the husks of beans / wexe small and fine
and receive less norishment. The barks of beans with barley mele / cloven
aloin / called of some allom plume / and old oil / dryueth away hard
kirnelles. Woll is died with the barks of beans. Beans the skin taken of /
and divided into those parts / whereinto they are divided by their own nature
/ use to be laid / to stop blood which is rased by an horseleche / for it
stops blood / if it be half cloven and laid to. Aetius writes even as
Galene and Paulus write also: that it draws very nere unto the middle temper
between hot and cold. The substances of ye bean as Galene writes / has a
little virtue to scour away / as the skin has the property to bind a little
/ beans laid without as a medicine do dry without hurt. Galene writes that
he has often used beans sodden in water / and laid them to with swines grese
upon places / vexed with the gout. He also used the leaves against the
brusinge of synewes / and the wounds of the same / and namely the mele of them
with honye and vinegre.

Goodly Reder / this following matter shall be adds unto the virtues of Dill /
which you shall find at the number / Folio 43. and 44. The manner of making of a
fat or butter like in strength with the oil of Dyll / or the oil of Chamomill.
TAke of the flowers of Dill or Chamomil flowers / the white circle taken away
/ a quart or a pint as ye will have the quantite of the medicine to be great
and pour upon the flowers / either so much fresh melted butter / and scomed /
or so much of the fattes of a gose / hen / hog / or capon / or al mixed
together as will cover all the flowers / being in a pottel pot / or a greter
vessel / which pot or vessel ye shall set in an other vessel full of hot
sethinge water / and let the pottel pot stand so long in the water / until
that the flowers begin to faide or change their color and wax soft / the^
streyne altogether and cast away the flowers / and put as much fresh flowers
unto the butter or fat / as ye did before / and so do three times / and then put
up your butter in a close vessel well stopped / and use it when ye have need.
This butter or fatt if it be dressed with Chamomil flowers / is good for the
diseases that are in the synewes / or the ache that is in parts full of
sinowes. It is good to anoint the^ withal yt have been long sick in an agewe
a little before the fit come. It is good to lay to any part that acheth in
the body: it is good for them that are werye / either by great labor or with
riding / so that it may be laid very warm on with a hot hand / specially
about the joints / it will also ease the pain of the stone / something if the
diseased place be anointed therewith being hot. If ye make it of Dill / it
does also swage ache or pain that comes of windy matter / and is good for
all other things that Chamomill is good for / and specially for driving away
of the cold of an old agew / if the ridge bone be anointed therewith as hot as
the patient can suffer / an hour before the fit at the fire side or in a hot
bed. It is also good for swellings and impostemes / and hardness / and partly
it helps a man to sweet if a man be anointed therewith as hot as he can
suffer / and so will ye butter of Chamomil do likewise / laid to after ye same
manner. Ye may make a medicine with butter / and the flowers of Lauander / as I
taught you to make of the flowers of Dill and Chamomill / and it will be good
for a cold stomache / for the head ach that comes of cold / and for the ache
of any part of the body that comes of cold.

FINIS.
The second part of Vuilliam Turners Herball / wherein are contained the
names of herbs in Greek / Latin / Duche / French / and in the Apothecaries
Latin / and sometime in Italiane / with the virtues of the same herbs with
diverse confutationes of no small errors / that men of no small learning have
committed in the entreating of herbs of late years.

God save the Queen.

printer's device consisting of the English royal blazon HONEY SOIT QVI MAL Y
PENSE

Imprinted at Collen by Arnold Birckman / In the year of our Lord M.D.LXVIII.

Cum Gratia and Priuilegio Reg. May.

The Table.
ABrecock tree 48 Agarick 29 Alleluya 74 Alkaking or winter chirres 142 Aspe and
kinds of Pepler 90 Auenes 9
B
Barley 16 Basil 66 Bay tree 32 Bech tree 1 Bramble bushe 118 Brere bushe 119
Brionye 166 and 167 Broume. 7
C
Carob tree 136 Carot 80 Cattes tail 259 Cheruel 10 Cinkfoly 110 Ciue or Ciuet
8 Citron tree 49 Clare 70 Clot bur 170 Comfrey 148 Cottenwede 11 Cotton 13
Cresses or karsse 64 Crowfoot 114 Cicory and Endive. 21.
D
Darnel 41 Date tree 74 Ded nettel 27 Dittani 35 Dock. 121.
E
Elder or bourtre 124 Elecampane or Alecampane 22 Elm tree. 169.
F
Fenel or Fenkel 5 Fenegreke 5 Fern or brake 3 Feuerfewe 79 Fiche 162 Fig
tree 2 Fig bean 43 Fistick nutt 91 French or Spanish brom 144 Flower de
lice. 23
G
Gelouer 163 Gentian 7 Gethsemin or Iesemin 19 Grass 13 Great bur 82 Groundel
132 Grummel or graymile. 40
H
Haris foot 26 Harstrang 38 Hartis tongue 86 Haukwede 14 Herb ferula, or fenel
giante 1 Hoppes 42 Horehounde 51 Horse tongue or double tongue 15 Horse houe or
bullfote 159 Housleke 133 Hysop. 19
I
S. John's grass 18 Juniper or Iuneper. 25
K
Kidney bean 140 Knot grass 97 Kowe persnepe. 145
L
Lampsana 27 Larix 28 Laserpitium 30 Lathyris 31 Lauer or Sion 32 Leke 101
Lentil or lentilles 33 Lentisk or mastick tree 34 Lettes or lettuce 26 Ligustrum
35 Lily 38 Limonium 39 Linden tree 153 Liver wurte 36 Lint sede 39 Lotus vrbana
42 Lycores 12 Lysimachia. 44
M
Madder 118 Mallow. 44 Mandrage 45 Maidens heir. 6. and 157 Medica 52 Medler
tree 56 Meon or Mew 56 Mercury 55 Mile or Millet 57 Mint 53 Missel or Misselto
tree 165 Mulberry tree 58 Mustarde 137
N
Nettel 169 Nigella Romana 10 Night shade. 142
O
Oak tree 109 Oleander 56 Olive tree 67 Organ 69 Orobanche 71 Oxyacantha. 73
P
Palma Christi 116 Panik 76 Parietorie or Pilletorye of the wall 14 Phalaris 85
Peonye 84 Persnepes and skirwurtes 138 Pear tree 108 Pease 92 Penny rial 107
Pepper 90 Plain tree 95 Plum tree 103 Poppye 76. and 77 Pomgranat tree 49 Pinke
nedle or starkis bill 8 Polipodium ot walferne 4 Porcellayn 102 Prymprint 37
Psyllium or flea sede 105 Ptarmica 106 Pyne tree. 87
Q
Quickbeam tree 143 Quince tree. 48
R
Radice or radish 111 Rape or Turnepe 112 Raspis or hindberry 119 Rise 72 Rose
116 Rosemary 35 Rue 122 Rye. 129
S
Sage 126 Sauin 124 Scala caeli 97 Scandix 120 Sea union 130 Sea trifoly. 12
Sea wartwurt 81 Securidaca 133 Settwall 86 Sesamum 134 Siler mountayn ibidem
Si^imbrium 140 Sison 139 Spelt 131 Spiknarde 62 Spourgwurt 171 Squynant 24
Stauis aker 147 Strawberrye 6 Sumach. 115
T
Tamarisk 59 Tithymales 154 Todes flax 73 Tribuli 156 Triacle mustard 152
Turpentine. 151
V
Veruine 162 walnuttes 24 wall barley or way bent 17 waybrede 94 water persely
138 water germander 132 water rose or water lily 65 white Satyrion 127 wild
Thyme 132 wild cresse 20 wild grape 25 wodbinde. 82
FINIS.
Of the bech tree.
FAgus is named in Greek Phegos / in Duch / ein Buchbau^ / in French fau.
Fagus is thus described of Plinye: The nut of a Beche tree being like unto
kyrnels / is enclosed in a three cornerd skyn or husk / the leaf is thyn and
exceeding light / like unto an aspe or poplere / it wexith yelowe very
hastelye / and often times it bryngethe furthe in the mids in the upper part
a little grene berye / sharp in the top / the nuttes are very sweet.
Thrusshis desire greatly to eat of the beche nut / and myse eat gladlye of
the same. Thus much does Plinye write of the description of a beche tree /
Virgill in his Egloges makes beche tree to have a great and a broad top /
which makes such a great shadow / that both men and bestes may be
defended therbye from the heat of the son: which thing we see to be true
by daily experience / and specyallye in great old Beches.

The propertyes, use, and commodytes of the beche tree.
DIoscorides writes that the leaves of the oak and the beche tree and of such
other like bruised and broken are good for soft swellings / and to strengthen
those parts that are weke. The leaves of the beche tree / are good to be
chowed for the disease of the gummes / and the lyppes. The powdre burned of the
beche nut / is good with honye for askalde and a skuruye head / when the hear
goethe of / if it be laid to. Plinye rekenyth the same good for the stone.
Palladius writith that the beche tree is good tymbre / if it be kept dry /
but that it is sone rotten / if it be in moisture or in weate places / in
Virgilles time men used much to make cups of the beche tree as a man may
gather by his Egloges.

Of the herb Ferula.
FErula is called in Greek narthex / but how that it is named in English / as
yet I can not tell / for I never saw it in England / but in Germany in
diverse places. It may be named in English herb ferula / or fenell gyante /
because it is like fenell / but a great deal higher and larger in all parts
then fenell is.

Ferula bryngith furthe a stalk of three cubytes long / and leaves of fenell
/ but rougher and brother. I find no larger description of ferula in
Dioscorides / but Theophrastus describes it thus: Ferula has but one stalk
/ and that full of joints or knees / The leaves and branchis come out of the
joints / one out of one side of the ioynte / and another out of the other
side / as the leaves of the read do. The leaf is great / soft / and much
divided or iagged / so that it that is next unto the ground / does much
resemble here. The flower is yelowe / the sede is dark and like dyll sede /
but greater it is cloven in the top / and is divided into small styckes which
hold the flowers and the sede. The small branchis want not their flowers nor
sede / but have both as dill has. The stalk lasts but for one year. It
has but one single root / and that goes deep into the ground.

The virtues of Ferula out of Dioscorides.
depiction of plant Ferula Herb Ferula, or Fenelgiante.


THe heart taken out of the grene ferula / and dronken / is good for the
spittinge of blood / for the flixe: it is given in wine against the bytinges
of vipers. The Same put into ye nosethrilles / stoppith blood there. The sede
dronken is good for the gnawinge of the belly / if the body be anointed
therwyth and with oil / it provoke sweat. The stalks / if they be eaten /
make the head ache / they are sawced in brine.

The virtues of ferula out of Plinye.
HHe stalks of ferula are used to be eaten / when they are sodden / they are
the better taken with must and honey / and so they are good for the stomach /
if a man take many of them: they bread the head ache / a dram of the root
dronken in two ounces / and a half of wine / is dronken against serpents / and
the root is laid to it self / so is it good for the gnawinge in the bellye:
with oil and vinegre / it is good to stay swetinge even in agues. The juice
of ferula taken in the quantyte of a bean / does stop the bellye.x. graynes of
the seed broken / are good to be dronken in wine to stop blood. The heart or
the pithe of the herb so taken / is good for the same purpose. The nature of
Ferula is the sorest enemy that can be to La^preys / for if it ones touch
them / they dye therwyth.

The virtues of Ferula out of Galen.
THe sede of ferula heateth and makes thyn or subtle / but it that is within
/ which they call the marye / the pythe / and the hatte / has a byndinge
nature in it. By reason whereof it is good for the flixe and them that spyt
blood.

Of the Fig tree.
FIrus is called in Greek syke / in English a fig tree / in Duche / Ein feig
bau^ / in French vng figuez. A fig tree is no great high tree / for the
most part / but in some places some are found as big and as high / as a
pere tree. The leaves are cut or indentid / and every leaf has three parts /
of the which every one resemblith a finger. Therefore depiction of plant Ficus
Fig.
every fig leaf / semith as though it had three fingers. The fig tree is
so well known / that it nedith no farther description.

The virtues of the Fig tree.
New figs that are ripe / as Dioscorides writes / hurt the stomach / and
lose the bellye / but the flixe yt comes thereof / is sone stopped. They
provoke sweat and draw out wheles and pockes: they quench thirst and abate
heat / when they are dry / their nature is hot / they norishe the strenghth
/ but the^ they make a man more dry / and they are good for the bellye / and
are contrary to the rumes or flowinges of the stomach / and the belly. Yet
Galen wrytith that the figs both grene and also dried / loose the bellye.
They are very good for the throat / for the wind pipe / for the kidnes / for
the bladder / and for them that are evil colored with a long sycknes / and
for them that are short wynded / and for them that have the dropsye / and for
them that have the fallinge sycknes / The same made warm / and dronken with
Isope / do purge the breast / they are good for the coughe / for the bellye /
and for the old diseases of the lunges / The Same bruised with niter and chartan
saffron / and then eaten / do softe^ the bellye. The brothe of figs / is good
for the swelled kyrnells beside the throat. If a man gargill therwyth / they
are good to be put in softenynge implaysters / mixed with barlye meal / the
same brothe is good to be mixed in woman's bathes with Fenygreke / and sodden
barlye. When they are sodden with rue / they are good to be powered in / against
the gnawinge of the bellye. Figs sodden and laid to drive away hardnessis /
they softe^ swellings behind the ears / and other angrye swellings. They
make ripe wheles / called Pauos / specially if there be put unto them niter
aryce / or lime: if raw figs be beaten with these / they are of like
effect. With the shell of a pomegarned they purge away anguaylles and such
hard swellings: with copperus they heal the runnynge yssues of the leg /
which are almost incurable / if they be sodde^ with wine worniwode Roman
and barlye meal. They are good to be laid upon them yt have the dropsye /
burnte figs laid one with a plaster of wax / are good for kybed or mooled
heles / and for ytchynges. The mylkye juice of both the wild and the garden
fig: even as runnynge or chese lope / makes milk run together into
cruddes / and louseth it that is grown together / as vinegre: it takyth the
skin of from the body / it openyth the poores / and losith the bellye. The
same broken with an almonde and dronke^ / openyth the mother. The same laid to
with the yolke of an egg or Tyrrinicall wax / bringith down women's
sycknesses. It is good to be put into playsters with the flower of fenygreke
and vinegre for the gowte. It scowryth away lepres / frekles / skuruynes and
the disease of the face / stables / and runnynge sores in the head / if it be
laid to with barlye meal: It is good for them that are bytten with a scorpion
or of any other venemens beast / or of a mad dog / if it be dropped into the
wound. The same received in wulle and put into the holowe tothe / is good also
for the tothe ache. If it be laid to with fatt / it takes away wertes. Dry
fygges are hot in the first degree fully as Galen writes. They are hot in
the beginnynge of the second degree / and of fine and sutil parts. The fig
tree as both the juice / the leaves and the tree does testifye / is very
hot / for they do not only byte or vehementlye scour away / but also / do
pull of the skin / and open the mouths of the vessels / although figs
with other fruits have some evil juice / yet this good propertye they have /
that they go quicklye thorough the bellye / and easelye go through the hole
body / for they have a notable virtue to scour away / wherefore it chaunseth
that they that are grieved with the stone / after that they have eaten figs
void out sand in their urine: they norishe more then the commen sort of
fruits do / but they make not fast and styffe flesh as bread and swynes
flesh do / but something lowse and emptye flesh as beans do. Figs are
wyndye / but their wyndynes endurith not / if a man eat out of measure of
ripe figs / they will fill him excedinglye full of lice. They have virtue to
cut in soudre and to make fine / by reason whereof they provoke a man to stool
and purge the kydnes.

Of the Brake or Fern.
FIlix is called in Greek Pteris / in English Fern or a Brake / in Duche ein
walt farne / in Frenchefauchier. There are two kinds of brakes / the one kind
is called in Latin Filix mascula / and in Greek Pteris / without any
addicion. It growyth commenlye upon stones. It is all full of little wings even
from the wot. The second kind is called in Greek Thelipteris / in Latin
Filix femina: this is the commen fern or brake which the Norther men call a
braken / It has a thing like a long bare stalk / and the leaves are only
on the top of that. Dioscorides wrytith of the Fern or Brake thus / It has
leaves without any stalk or fruit / which leaves comme out of a thing like
a stalk / and the same is a cubite high / the leaves are many ways divided
and full ol branches like feathers. The savor of it is somewhat rauke / the
root of it is black / and that goes even by the ouermoste part of the
ground. It is also long / and puts forth many branches / the taste thereof
is somewhat byndynge. It grows in montaynes and in stonye placyes. The female
brake has leaves like unto the male full of branchis / hyer from the ground /
which grow not all upon one herbs synnewe as it were / as the other
depiction of plant Filix.
depiction of plant Fern or a Brake.
does / but upon diverse and many lytlen synnowes like stalks. This kind has
many long roots writhen one by an other / which being somthynge yelow turn
toward a black. Some also are found red. Dioscorides denies that the Fern
has any fruit / and therbye that it has also no seed / but not only the
opinion of the commen people is / that the Fern has sede / but also it is the
opinion of a Christen Physician / named Hieronymus Tragus / who does not only
say that Fern has sede / but wrytith that he found upon mydsomer even sede
upon Brakes. I have taken out of his herbal his words concerning that matter
/ and have translated that into English after this manner folowinge. Although
that all they that have written of herbs / have affyrmed and holden / that the
Brake has nether sede / nor fruit: yet have I diverse times proved the
contrary / which thing I will testefye here in this place / for there sakes
that be students in the knowledge of herbs / I have four years together one
after an other upon the vigill of saint John the Baptiste (which we call in
English mydsomer even) sought for this sede of Brakes upon the night / and
in deed I fownde it earlye in the morning before the day brake / the sede was
small black and like unto poppye. I gatherid it after this manner: I laid
shetes and mollen leaves underneath the brakes which received the sede / that
was by shaking and beatynge brought out of the branches and leaves. Many
brakes in some places had no sede at all / but in other places again: a man
shall find sede in every brake / so that a man may gather a hundred out of
one brake alone / but I went about this busynes / all figures / coniurynges /
saunters / charms / wytchcrafte / and sorseryes set a side / taking with me
two or three honest men to bear me company / when I sought this seed / all
the villages about / did shyue with bonfyers that the people made there / and
sometime when I sought the sede / I fownde it / and sometime I fownde it not.
Sometime I found much / and sometime little: but what should be the cause of
this diuersyte or what nature means in this thing / surely I can not tell.
Thus far has Tragus written of the brake seed. But as he has not told
wherefore the sede is good / even so have I no experyence as yet wherefore it is
good / saving that I do gether by no vain conjecture / that in healynge of
diverse grefes / it is of greater pour and strength then either the root or
leaves be.

The virtues of the male fern.
THe root of the male fern dryueth out the broad worms of the bellye / if
you take it in the qua^tyte of four drames of mede / otherwise called hunyed
water / but it will work more effectuallye if ye take it with xij. graynes of
Diagredy or Scamonye / or black Hellabor / but they that receive this medicine
/ had need to take garlyke before / and it is good for them that have a swelled
mylte / The root is good to be dronken / and also to be laid to in playstre
wise for the wondes that are made with an arrowe of reed / whereof they say
this is the trial. The fern will peryshe / if ye set reeds round about it
in good plentye / And like wise ye reed will vanyshe away if ye compass him
about with fern round about. The roots of the femall fern taken with
honye after the manner of an electuarye / drive broad worms out of the gutter
if they be dronken with wine / in the quantyte of three drammes / they drive
out round worms. They are not good to be given unto women which would have
many children / nether are they good to go much over for women that are
alredye with child. The powdre of them is good to be sprynkled upon moist
soores which are hard to be couerid with a skin / and ill to be healid. It
is a good remedy for the necks of such beasts as are accustomed to the
yokes / Sum use to seth the grene leafes of Brakes with other wortes or pot
herbs / to receive them to soften their bellye wythall. The later writers do
affirm that the juice which is pressyd out of a Fern root / laid to with
rose water / or with other cold water / if ye can get no rose water / is
good for all manner of burnynges and skaldinges / but ye must two or three
times streine the water and powdre together / and then it will be slymye / and
then it is perfectlye good for the purposes above rehearsed / when as no other
remedy will help as men of experience do testyfye. This is a marvelous nature
that the Fern has namelye the male / that if a man cut the root of it in the
mids / it will show of each side a black egle with two heads out of white
/ Plinye also wrytith / that if the root of the Fern be broken and laid to /
pulls forth the sheuer of a reed that styckith in the flesh / and likewise
that the root of the reed laid to / pullyth forth to sheuers of a Brake that
is in the flesh.

Of Polypodys or Vuallferne or Okeferne.
depiction of plant Polipodium Filicula Polipody or Vualferne, or Okeferne,


FIlicula is called in Greek Polipodiu^ / in English Polipodium or Wall fern
/ in Duche Engelsaet / or engelsuS / in French Polipode. It grows in ache
trees and in old walls. It dries whythoute bitinge. Dioscorides says yt
Polipodium grows in mossye walls / and in old bodies or bellyes of trees /
and specially of oaks / it is of a spann length / and like unto a fern /
somethinghe roughe / but not so finelye divided / the roothe is full of hears
wherein are contained certain long things like the feet or claspers of ye
fyshe / called Polipus / and they are of ye thicknes of a man's little fingre /
grene within and something russet.

The virtues of Polipodium out of Dioscorides.
POlipodiu^ has the pour and virtue to purge. It is good to be given sodden
with a henn / or with fish / or with betes / or with mallows to make a
purgation. The poudre of ye root myxed with mede / does purge coler and
fleme: it is exceeding good to be laid one those members yt are out of ioynte
/ and against the chappes or ryfles that are in the fingers.

The virtues of Polipodium out of Mesue.
POlipodiu^ is the root of an herb that grows upon stones and trees /
which ye Grecianes call Dendropterim / yt is tree Fern. It yt grows upon
the stones is full of superfluous / raw / and wyndye moisture / which
ouerturneth ye stomach. It is better yt grows upon trees / and namely /
such as bare acornes or maste / specially if it be great / sownde / fresh
and well fastened together / full of knottes without blackyshe read and grene
within as fistikes be / with a sweet taste / astringent / something bitter and
somthinge spicie. It scowreth away gross and tough humors: it makes ripe and
dries up. It purges ye eue^ from ye iointes / mela^choly or gross / or towgh
fleme. It is good for these causes for all diseases yt arise of mela^choli as
the quartayne if it be taken with mede / doder of time salt Indian. Al manner of
ways it is good for the colike and for ye hardness of the mylt. Polypody dries
and lesseth or thinneth the body. To avoid that / that shall not bring the
stomach to vomitinge / it must be given with mede or barley water / or the
brothe of rasines / or with the broth of cocks / or he^nes / or sodden with
whay. It is good to drinck it mixed with well sauoringe sede / and other spycye
things as anise / carua / fenell / ginger / and such like that comfort the
lyffe or the natural power of the stomach. Polypody can bide long sethinge
enough. It may be given from ij. drames unto six. Thus farmesue / an ounce and
an halffe of our English Polypody will scarsely purge / some use to dry the
rote / and to give a dra^ of the powder at the lest for a purgatio^ / and bid
the patient after it iiij. hours. The stylled water of Polipodiu^ as Tragus
writes / is good for the quartayne / for the cowgh / for yt short wind /
against melancholye / against grievous and heun dream / if it be dro^ke^
certain co^tynuall days together. But I think that the wine that ye rotes
are sodde^ in / and made a little sweet with sugger or honey / should work
much better / for the above named purposes / then ye water / which of
whatsoever herb it be of / has no such strengh as ye juice and broth of the
same herb. Is there any water better then rose water is / and has more stre^gh
of ye rose / and yet ij. ounces of the juice of roses / works more in purgynge
/ the^ xvj. of water. Wherefore I can not so much commend the distilled waters
of herbs as I do the juice and brothes / of the same / wherein the herbs are
sodden.

Of fenel.
FEniculu^ is called in Greek Marathro^ / in English fenel or fenkel / in
Duche finchell / in French fenonil. Fenel is a great and a long herb /
sometime higher then a man / the stalk is great and full of joints / ye leaves
are very long and small / the flour is yelow / ye top is like unto the top of
dill / the sede grows thick in the top without any coueringe / it is
somthinge crooked like a horn / the outsyde of it is full of gutters and
crestes / the rout is long and white.

The properte of Fenell out of Dioscorides.
FEnell / if the leaves be eaten / or if the sede be dronken with a ptisame:
fills weomens papes with milk / ye brothe of ye tops of the leaves is good
to lay unto ye back / for the ache in ye kidnees / for it dryueth forth water.
It is good to be dro^ke^ in wine against ye bytynge of serpents. It provoke
flowers / in an agew dro^ken with cold water / it slaketh the lothsunnes / and
the heat of the stomach. The rotes of fenel broken / and laid to with honey /
are good against the bitynge of a dog. The juice which is pressed out of the
stalk and leaves / and dried in the son / is put unto those medicines that
clear and bryghe the eysight. In some places men use to cut the stalk of fenell
/ and to take out of it a juice like a gum which is very good for the eyes

Out of Macer.
FEnell provoke men to the procreation of childer / the serpe^tes chow this
herb / and purge and clear their eyes therwyth / whereof learned me^ did gather
yt it should also be good for man's eyes. The juice of fenell put into a man's
ears / kills the worms therein: the use of fenell with wine is good against
the swellynge of the dropsye. It is also good both depiction of plant
Feniculum, Fenell or Fenkell.
for diseases of the liver and the longes. The broth that the roots of fenell
is sodden in / wheter it be wather or wine / is good for the diseases of the
bladder and kidnens. It dryueth forth water / if it be laid upon the belly a
little above the priuites. The broth of the rote helps ye ache of the yearde /
if it be therwyth bathed. It will do the same put unto oil and laid to: seth
fenel and vinegar together / and it will swag any swellinge that comes suddenly
by bytynge. The sede stirs mankind to the procreation of childer. And the
same is good for a pleuresy / and so is ye broth of the herb. Autours write
that serpents wax young again by tastinge and eating of this herb /
wherefore sum think that the use of the herb therefore is very mete for aged
folk.

Out of Aetius.
FEnell is so hot that it may be rekened to be hot in the third degree / and
it dries in the first degree / and therefore it engenders milk.

Of Fenegreke.
FEnum grecum is called in Greek Telis / in English Fenegreke in Duche Bucks
horn / in French Fenecreke. It grows in Italy and Germany. This herb is
also called in Greek Keratitis / yt is horned / aigo^keros / yt is gotis horn
/ and bonkeros that is cowishorne / it is also called in latin siliqua /
silicia and silicula. Fenegreke runs up with small little branches and
stalks / which are read / ye lefe is like unto trifoly three leaued grass.
The flour is little and white / the sede is read / and it is contained in a long
cod / like a horn / the rote is round and su^thinge long.

The virtues of Fenegreke out of Dioscorides.
THe flour or meal of Fenegreke has power to soften / and to drive away. The
same sodde^ in mede / if it be laid to / is good both against inward and
outward infla^mations or burnynges with salpeter depiction of plant Fenum
Grecum Fenegreck.
and vinegar: it minisheth the milt: the juice of the broth is good for womans
diseases / if they sit in it and be bathed therewith / whether the mother is
stopped or is swelled. The broth that it is sodden in / streyned and laid to
the head / purges the here and scoureth away scurf and the runnyngh sores of
the head / if that the natural place of conception be hard and streyte (by
reason whereof sum women bring forth there childer with great ieperdy) if ye
mix Fenegreke and gose fat / and put them together in the convenient place /
according unto the discretion of an honest midwyff: enlarges and softeneth
it. If it be laid to grene with vinegar / it is good for raw places that have
the skin of. The droth of it is good against the often vain desire of goinge
to stole / and against the stinkinge fylthe of the blody flix. The oil that is
pressed out of it and of myrtilles / scoureth away the stars of the priuitees.

Of Strauberries.
FRagraria is called in English a Strawberye leaf / whose fruit is called in
English a strawbery / and in Latin Fragu^ / in Duche Erdber / in French
Fraisue. The strawbery rynneth upon the ground / and has a little roughe
stalk / and in the top of it grow white flowers / after the which flowers
be gone / there grow berries / which are grene first / depiction of plant
Fragraria Strauuberrie
and afterward read. The leaf is inde^tid / and always three of them grow
together / ye rote is in some place blake and some place redyshe.

The virtues of Strawberries.
STrawberies leaves taken in meat / helps the^ that are diseased in the milt
/ and so does also the juice dronke^ with honey. The same is good to be given
with peper for them that are short winded. Strawberryes quench thirst / and
are good for a cholerike stomach. There is a juice pressed out of strawberries /
which by continuance of time increases in stre^gh / and that is a present
remedy against the sores and wheales of the face / and against the blodshotten
eyes. The brothe of the rothe swageth the heat of the liver / dronken the
morninge eueninge. Many use this herb to join together grene wounds / to
stop laxes / and ishewes of women / to strenghehen the gu^mes / and to take
away the sores or wheales of ye mouth / and the stinkinge of the same. The frut
seems to have some warmenes in it / but the leaf is cold.

Of the Ash tree.
THe tree is called in Latin fraxinus / in Greek melia / and is named in
English an ash tree / in Duche ein Esch baum / in French fraisne: as
Theophrastus writes there are two kinds of ashes / of ye which the one is
very high and tawlle^ / and the wood of it is white / and has as it were
gross veins or synewes / and it is softer / smouther / and more curled then
the other is. The other kind is lower and grows not so high / and more
rowghe / harder / and yelower. The leaves are like unto the brodder bay leaves
/ but they are sharper and inde^tid round about the edges / the hole little fot
stalk / that all the leaves grow on / is a grene herbishe thing / and not
woodyshe / and upon that the leaves grow / in a distinct order a small space
goinge between one another / and they grow of each side of the little stalk by
coples one right over against another / after the manner of the sorbe aple tree
leaves do grow. The sede of the ash tree grows in long things like burdes
to^ges / which are called of some writers even for that cause / linguae auium,
and they are called in English ash keys / because they hangh in bunches
after the manner of keys.

The virtues of the ash tree.
THe^ juice of the leaves of an ash tree / either / in ointment / or dronken in
wine / is good against the bitynges of vipers or adders. The ashes that are
made of the bark / laid to with water / taked away lepers. Sum reke^ that the
powder or clippes / or scrapinges of the wood / will destroy a man.

Out of the later writers.
THe water yt is distilled out of the barks of the ash tree / is a singular
remedy against the stone and against the jaundes: The leaves of the ash sodden
in wine / and dronken / are good for them that have the disease of the mylte /
and of ye lyuers / sum do hold that the juice that is pressed out of the ashen
leaves / if it be dronken with wine / is good to make fat men lean: but of
this thing as yet I have no experiens. There be sum also of that opinion /
that they judge that the continual drynkinge in an ashen cup / lesseth the
mylte as the old Autors write / that the drinking in tamarisk does.

Of the herb called Gallion.
depiction of plant Galion Maidens heir.


GAlion or Gallion is named in English in the north country Maidens heir /
in Duche vnser lieuen frawe^ betstro / in French / petit muguet. There are two
kinds of Gallion / the greater are the less / the less kind agrees better
with the description as here after ye may se. Galion has the name of that
propertye that it has in cruddynge of milk / it may occupye the place of
cheslope / or a runnynge. Gallio^ has a branch and a leave very like unto
cleuer / or gooshareth / and yt right up / it has a small yelow flower in the
top / thick plenteous and well smelling.

The virtues of Gallion.
THe flour is good to lay to burnt places / it stops the gusshinge out of
blood / me^ge this herb with a cyr-ope or oyntement made with rose oil and
wax / and laid in the son until it wax white / and then it will refreshe
them that are weary / the rotes provoke men to the natural office of matrimony.

Of read Archangell.
GAliopsis says Dioscorides has a leaf and stalks in all points like unto
a nettell but smother / which if he be bruised / has a strong stinking savor
/ and it has a small purpell flower / and it grows about hedges / and about
howses / and oftymes in gardynes among other herbs without setting or
sowynge.

The virtues of Galeopsis.
THe leaves / the stalks / the sede / and the juice of read archangell scatter
away hard lunpes and cancres / and drive away / and disperse hard wennes /
and swellings / called in Latin Panos / and the inflamed swellynges behind ye
ears. Ye must twyse on the day lay the emplaster warm to with vinegre / and
bathe ye place with ye brothe of it. It is very good to lay it to rottynge
soores / etynge sores / and to deadly burnynges / called Gangreues.

Of Browme.
GEnista is called in English Browme / in Duche Genist or Pfrim / in French
Dugenet. Many well learned me^ have judged the busse ye we call browme / which
is called of ye Latins Genista / to be Spartio^ of the Grecianes / and Plinye
ye noble clearke writing of Genista in the xxiij. book / of his natural
stories / in the ix. chapter / dowteth wheter Genista be Spartium of the
Grecians or no. But if they ye of late have co^funded Genista^ with Sparto /
and Plini / which douted whether Genista were Spartum or no / had seen both
our comen broum that grows in the feldes / and it that grows only in
gardines / which because it came from beyounde ye Sea / wy call French browme:
they would not have confounded the^ / nether Plinye would douted / whether ye
one had been the other or no. The French brou^ / which of late years came to us
out of Spayn / is much tauler / then the comen brom is: the twigges are long /
grene / and smothe / resemblyng in all things a rishe / saving that in some
there appear little leaves / and so little that scarsely they deserve to be
called leaves. I think that because Dioscorides saw them so little and so few
/ that he would not call them leaves. The broum which is called in Latin
Genista / has cornered and roughe twigges / even as the Poet Calphurnius in
this verse witnesses: Molle sub hirsuta latus exposuere Genista.
They have streched forth their soft side under the roughe broume.
Then when as our gardin french broume is smouth / it can not be Genista
whereof Calphurnius makes mention. The leaves of the brom are of two sorts /
they that are in the ends / are very small like unto them that are in ye
Spanishe brom. But they that are benethe / are somthyng like rue leaves / the
twigs are roughe and fiuesquared. Which marks are for differyng both from
the description of Dioscorides / and the lykenes of our French or Spanishe
brom.

The virtues of Browme.
BRowme sede taken in the quantite of a dram / or a dram and a half / purges
waterishe humors. If it be taken with a draught of mede or whay / it drives
such matter from the joints / both by vomit and purgation. It suffers not
any towgh humors to abide in the bladder or kidnes. The later writers use the
water against the stone. Other take the leaves and twigs of it / and stepe
the^ a five or six days in vinegar / and then bruise them / and press oud a
juice / the which they give in the quantyte of two onces and a half to them
that have the Sciatica. I think it were better to mix it with oil / and so
to lay it upon the grieved place / then to take it inward / except the pacient
were very strong / ye vomit yt is provoked by browme / is good for the
diseases of yt gowt / yt sciatica and the disease / and the kidnes. It hurts
ye stomach and ye heart / wherefore if ye take it inward / you must take it with
rosed honye / or with rose leaves / with fenell sede and anyse sede. The
flowers of browme sodden in the quantite of three drames in whaye or in mede /
purge as the sede does. Ye may take more or less according to the strenghe of
the pacient. Browme is hot and dry in the second degree.

Of Gentian.
depiction of plant Gention.


GEntian is called in Greek Ge^tiane / and in English Gentian / in Duche
Entian / in French / de la Gentiane. Ge^tius the king of the Illyrians was ye
first fynder of this herb / which he of his name called Ge^tian: the leaves
which grow about the rote / are like the leaves of a walnut tree / or the
leaves of plantayne / and they are some thing read in the part which is above
ye mids of the stalk / they are somthinge iaged. The stalk is smothe and
empty within / of the thicknes of a man's finger / full of joints / and at
every joint come out leaves. It is some time two cubits high: it has a broad
light sede / in little vesseles / some thing rowghe or chaffye like unto the
sede of the herb called Spo^dilion. The rowte is like unto yt rowthe of long
Aristolochia / it is thick and bitter / and it growethe in yt high tops of
montaynes and in shadow and waterishe places. I have seen it in the alps
growinge between Italy and Germany / it grows also plenteously in many places
of high Germanye as they told me that saw it there.

The virtues of Gentiane.
THe virtue of the root is hetinge and byndynge together. If it be dronke^ in
the quantite of ij. drames with peper rue and wine / it helps the bytinge of
serpents. A drame of the juice helps the side ache / them that are bruised
with a fall / the places that are bursten and shronke together. It is good for
the^ that have the disease of the liver and stomach / if it be dronke^ with
water. If the rote be conveniently laid to the natural place of conception /
it helpethe women more easily to bring fourth there childer. It is also good
for wounds / and it is also a remedy against sores yt eat inward and make
deep holes. The juice is good for the same purpose. The same is good or to
anoint sore eyes which that are infla^med. The rote scowreth away the frekilles
and soul spots. I have seen some make a lee or an asshy water of the rotes of
Gentian / wherwyth they took out spots very well out of clothes. The root is
much used in such compositiones as are made against poysones and venomes.

depiction of plant Geranium I. Pinke nedle.
depiction of plant Geranium alterum, Cranes bill.
depiction of plant Geranium III.
depiction of plant Geranium IIII.
depiction of plant Geranium V.
depiction of plant Geranium VI.


Of Pinke nedle and Cranes bill.
GEranium after Dioscorides / has leaves like unto Anemone / but the cuttynge
is ferther in and deper / the rowte is somthinge round and sweet when it is
eaten. This kind is called in English / Pinke nedle or starkis byll. The
second kind of Geranium has a small rowghe stalk a foot and a half long /
and it has leaves like unto a Mallowe in ye high top of ye herb / or
things like Cranes heads / there bills are like dogs tethe.

The virtues of Geranion.
A Drame of Geranium dronke^ with wine / drives away and scatters the
wyndenes of the mother. The later wrytters have found yt these kinds of
Geraniu^ are good for wounds and for many other things that Dioscorides
makes no mention of / but I do not make mention thereof / because I dowt
whether they have such properties or no / as they give unto them.

Of Ciues.
depiction of plant Getion.


GEtion is called in English a Cyue or a Ciuet or a Chyue / the Duche men call
it BriSelauch and schnitlauch / it is called in French cyues and Ciuons / it
is called in Latin Cepa Pallacana / Fuchsius has erreth much in taking of
this herb for Porro sectiuo / and meny other have erred with him / for this
herb is not of ye kind of lekes / but of ye kind of an union / for it has
hollow rownd leaves of an union / and not the broad leaves of a leke / but that
herb which is called in Latin / Porru^ sectium / is called in English /
French / leke / and is well known both in Cambridge and in London and in many
other places of England by that name / and that has the very leaf of the
come^ leke / sauinge it is smaller / and that leke grows not by seed / but
by the rote as in the description of the leke I shall more ple^tuouslye declare.
Thus herb grows not in England that I know out of garde^s / but in Germany
it grows wild by the Renis side a little from Bonne / where as I have seen it
in plenty.

The virtues of Getin.
IF ye be desirous to know the virtues of synes or sweth / look in the chapter
of vnyons / and there ye shall find them hole at the lest in the third degree /
for it has the same property that vnyons has / sauinge that they are some
thing greater and hoter as experience does teache us / and Pliny does say also
/ whereas he calls a cyne a union / that it is fit for to make sauce of.

Of Auenes.
depiction of plant Geum. Auenes.


GEum is called in English Auenes / in Duche benedicte^ kraut / in French
salmondes / it is named of the herbaries / Gariophillata / Sana mu^da / and
benedicta. Geu^ says Pliny has little small black rotes and well sauorynghe /
and more co^cerninge ye description of Geum / can I not find in any ancient
writers / the leaf of Auenes is depelye cut and iagged / and it is rowgh /
and blackishe / grene in a manner after ye fassio^ of Agriony / ye stalk is
rownde / all hery and rowgh / ye flower is yelowe / and in form like a little
eye / when the flower is gone / there ryseth up a great knop all full of little
rownde things like berryes of a purpell color.

The virtues of the herb called Geum.
PLini writes that Geum does not only heal and take away ye pain of the
breast and of the side / but also takes away rawnes with his pleasant taste.

The virtues of Auenes out of the later writers.
THe common property and use of this rote is such / that if men put it in to
wine / that it makes it pleasant both in smellinge and taste. Many new writers
hold yt wine wherein the rote of this herb is steped / refresseth the heart
and makes it merry / and that it opens / the stoppinge of ye liver / and yt
it helps ye stomach which is hurt with cold and gross humors / ye wine also
wherein ye rote of this herb is sodden / clengeth and scowreth wounds / and
namely fistulas and cankers / the same scowreth out foul spots / if the face
bewasshed daily therwyth.

Of the herb called Gingidion.
GIngidio^ is a little herb like unto wild carret / but smaller and bitterer /
the root is small / whitishe / and somewhat bitter / this is the fassion of
Gingidio^ / and the description of it after Dioscorides / depiction of plant
Gingidion, Cheruel.
Rewellius / Fuchsius / and Gesuerus / three great learned men hold in there
books / that Gindion is the herb which is commenly named of the commen
arberies Cerefolium / in English Cheruell / in Duche Keruel oder kerbel kraut
/ in French Cerfuile. How be it / I dare not give sentence with them / because
I can not find the bittenes and the astriction or byndynge in our cheruel
that Dioscorides and Galene require in their Gingidion. How be it / the form
and fassion of the herb it agrees well jnough with the description of
Gingidion. Columella in his x. book / which is de cultu hortorum / that is of
the trimynge or dressinge of gardens in this verse. Iam breue cherephylum, and
torpenti grata palato. Seems to call that herb cherefilon: which the come^
herbaries call cherephyllion / which is in English our cheruell.

The virtues of Gingidion out of Dioscorides.
THe leaves of Gingidion both raw and sodden / or kept in sucket or sauce, is /
good for the stomak / and they are good to provoke vryne / ye brothe of it
droncken with wine is good for the bladder.

The virtues of Charuell, out of the later writers.
THe juice of the herb and the water which is stilled / if it be dronken /
dissolueth and breaks in sounder the blood which is run together / either
by the reason of betinge or by a fall / the leaves of cheruel bruised and laid
to after the manner of an implaster / drive away all swellynges and bruses that
come of betinge or of falls / even as the herb called scala caeli does.

Of Nigella Romana.
GIt / otherwise called Melanthion / and also Melaspermon / is called in
English Nigella romana / as the apothecaries call it also / in Duche /
Schwartz kummich / in French Nielle. Git has small branches / some time
exceeding two spannis in lengh / it has little leaves like grownsell / but
much smaller: in the top of the herb there grows a little thynne head like
unto popy / but it is somthinge long / there rynneth thorowgh the head
certain fylmes depiction of plant Git or Nigella Romana.
or skynnes / wherein is contained a black seed sharp and well smellinge. All
this description of Dioscorides agrees well unto our Nigella romana / sauinge
that there is no such lyknes between it and grownsell / as Dioscorides seems
to make by comparynge of these two together / which two herbs now in our
time are unlike one to another / that no man will say there is any lyknes
between them at all / wherefore it appears that either we have not the same Git
that Dioscorides has seen in his time / or else this word Erigero^tos is put
in Dioscorides Greek text in the stead of some other word. How be it the
properties of our Nigella romana does agree well with it ye Dioscorides
describes / and therefore jow may be bold to use it.

The virtues of Git or Nigella Romana.
NIgella Romana laid unto a man's forhead / releaseth the head ache / it
helps blodshotten eyes / if the disease be not old / if it be broken and put
into the nosethrilles with the oil of flour delice or Ireos. It takes away
lepers / frekelles / hardness and old swellings / if it be laid to with
vinegre. The same laid to with stale pysse will take away aguayles that are
scotched about after the manner of a circle. The broth of it with vinegre is good
for the tothe ache. Anoint the navel with the water that this is sodden in /
and it will drive out the round worms of the belly. It heleth them that have
the pose / if ye break it and lay it unto your nose. If it be taken many
days together with wine / it brings down flowers / and causes a man make
water better / and draws forth milk into the breasts / and it is good for
them that are short wynded. A dram weight of it / dronken with water / heals
the bytynges of the field spyder. The smoke of it / dryueth serpents away.
Take heed that ye take not to much of this herb / for if ye go beyond the
mesure / it brings death.

Of Vuadde.
VVadde is called in Latin Glastu^ / in Greek Isatis / in Duche wayd or weyt /
in Italien Guado / in French Guesde: There are two kinds of wadde / the garden
or sown wadde / and the wild or vnsowen depiction of plant Glastum.
depiction of plant VVadde.
wadde: the diers occupy the garden wadde / or that kind of wadde which is
trimmed with man's labor in dyenge of wull and clothe. And it has a leaf
like unto playntayne / but thicker / and blacker: the stalk is more then two
cubits long / the wild wadde is like the sown wadde / and it has greater
banes like unto Lettyce / small stalks / and much divided / some thing
redyshe / in whose top there hang certain vessels / much like unto little
tongues / wherein the seed is contained / it has a small yelow flower. This
herb is called in England / new ash of Jerusalem. The former kind grows
much in the country of Iulyke / and in some places of England. The wild
kind grows not in England that I know / saving only in gardens / but it
grows plenteouslye without any sowynge in high Germany by the Renes side.

Of the virtues of wadde.
DIoscorides / The leafes laid to after the manner of an emplaster / swage all
kinds of swellinge. They join together grene wounds / and stop ye runnynge
out of blod. They heal saint Antonies fire / or cholerike inflamationes /
consumynge sores / and rottynge sores / that run at large. The wild wadde
both dronken and laid to emplastre wise / helps the milt.

Of Cottenwede.
depiction of plant Gnaphalium, Cottenvvede.


DIoscorides says that Gnaphalium has little soft leaves / which some use
for down or stuffinge of beds / and other description of Gnaphaliu^ / can I
nether find in Dioscorides nor Plinye / but I have seen the herb often in many
places of Germany / and in some places of England: It is a short herb not a
spanne long / and at the first sight it is like a branch of rosamary / but
that the leaves are brother and whiter: in yt top is a small yeolowe flower:
ye leaves / when they are dried and broken / are almost nothing else but a
certain down / wherwyth because men in times past did stuff pillowes and
quishions / it was called of the Latins Ce^tunculus / and herba Centuncularis.
It may be called in English Downewede / because the leaf broken / is like
Down or cotton.

The virtues of Cottenweede.
IT is good to be given in tarte and bindynge wine / to them that have the
blodye flixe / or other commen flixe / and it is good to stop the bloddy
issue that weomen use some times to have. It is good to be put into the
fundament against the disease which provoke a man oftentimes to go to the
stole / and when he comes there / can do nothing. It is also good to be laid
upon old rotten sores. I think that the herb which is called in England
Cartifilago / is a certain kind of the same herb / for their properties are
like / and their figures are not much unlike.

Of Sea tryfoly.
GLaux / otherwise called Engalacton / because it makes good plentye of milk
in those weomen that take it / grows by ye seasyde / and in the leaves it is
like to the tree tryfolye / called in Latin Cytisus / and to lentylles / which
leaves in the over part are grene / and in the nether part white. There comes
fourth from the ground five or six small branches a spanne high / and they
come out of the earth from the rote: the flowers are purple and like unto a
kind of stoke gelauore flowers / but they are lesser. I never saw it in
England / sauinge only in master Falkonners book / and that had he browght
out of Italy / except my memory do fail me / I saw it depiction of plant
Glaux, Sea trifoly.
ones in Flaunders by ye sea side about three miles beyond Dunkyrke / there is
an herb in England / which some call Fenum grecum syluestre / which
answers in many things unto the description of Glaux in Dioscorides /
howbeit I think it is not the true Glaux that Dioscorides wrote of.

The virtues of Sea trifoly called Glaux.
THis herb sodden with Barley meal / salt and oil in a suppinge / is good to
bring milk again to them that have lost the plenty of it.

Of Lycores.
GLycyrrhiza in Greek / is called in Latin Radix dulcis, in English Lycores /
in Duche SueS holtz / or licoris / or clarish / in French Erculisse / or
Rigolisse. It grows in the rocks of Germanye / without any settinge or
sowinge. I never saw it grow in England / saving only in gardens. Licores
grows very thick and busshy / and has branches rysinge two cubittes high
/ the leaves are like unto Mastycke tree leaves / thick and fatt / and full of
gombe / when they are touched. The flower is depiction of plant Radix dulcis.
Licores.
like unto the flower of Hyacinthus / the fruit is of the bigness of the pills
of the plain tree / but rowgher / and it has little read coddes like unto
Lentylles. The rotes are long as Gentians be / and of the color of box / a
little tart sweet.

The virtues of Lycores.
THe juice of Lycores is good for the harishenes or rowghnes of the throat /
but it must be holden under a man's tongue / until it be moulten / it is good
for the heat of the stomach / breast / and liver / drink it with maluesy /
and it will heal the scabbes of the bladder / and the pain of the kidnes /
the same moulten quenches thyrst / it is good to heal wounds / if it be
laid to / it heals the mouth if it be chowed in it / the brothe of the grene
root is good for the same purposes / the powder of it is good to cast upon
anguayles.

Of Cotton.
COtton is called in Greek Xylon / in Latin Gossipium / in Duch Baumwoll / in
French du Cotton: in barbarus Latin Cottonum / and bombax bombacium / and
cottum. Cotton is a small busshy herb with a lefe like a vinde / but less /
It has yelowe depiction of plant Gossipium. Cotton.
flowers / which are some thing purple in the mids / the fruit is like a
felberde / all full of Down. I never saw it / sauinge only in the
university of Bonony. It grows as I read in good autours in great plenty in
Egypt / in Candi / in Appulia / and in the yland Maltha.

The virtues of herb Cotton.
THe juice of Cotton leaves / is good for the lax of young children / and for
the gnawynge / or (as some call it) the grindinge of the belly. The sede is
good for the cough and the diseases of the breast. The oil that is made of the
sede of cotton / is good to take away frekelles and spots out of the face.
The sede also used in meat as the Phisicianes of Arabi do testifye /
multiplieth and increases the sede of man.

Of Grass.
Grass is named in Greek Agrostis / in Latin Gramen / in Duche grass / in
French Deuteronomy de chien. Grass crepeth with like branches / and they come from
sweet roots / of full joints / ye leaves are hard / as ye little riedes
leaves are / also broad / but they are sharp toward the end. The leaves of
grass feed as Dioscorides says / both horse and oxen / and all such like
beasts as are called in Latin boues and iumenta. Then when as the herb that
we call in English stychewort / grows only in hedge sides and in woddes and
shadowy places / and that very thin / so that xl. acres of the wodde or of any
other places where as it grows / most plentuouslye would not feed one power
calffe iiij. days: I can not think / that stichewort is the grass that
Dioscorides speaks of. He presupposes it to be in such plenty / that it
were able to feed great nombers of beast and cattle in a small space of ground.

The virtues of the right Grass.
THe root of the right Grass bruised and laid to / byndeth wounds together
an closes them up / the broth of grass dronken / heals gnawinges in the
belly / provoke urine and breaks the stony matter of the bladder.

Of Scorpiones tail.
HEliotropium the greater has a flower like the Scorpiones tail / by reason
whereof he is called scorpiuros / that is to say / scorpiones tail / and
because it turns the leaves about with the son / it is called Heliotropion
/ that is / turned with the son / or son flower. It has leaves like unto
basil / but rowgher and whyter / and greater. There come three branches out of
one root / some times four / and some times five / it has a white flower in
ye top / or some thing redishe that turns in again like a scorpiones
tail. The root is small and good for nothing: it grows in rowghe places. I
never saw it growing in England / nether in Germany / saving only in my
garden in Collen / and in my garden at Wellis in England. in Italy I have seen
it in great plenty in the feldes about Bonony / they are far deceived / and
have deceived many other / which have written that our English Marigolde is
Helitropion / for the description of Helitropion / which a little before I have
taken out of Dioscorides and translated unto you / is nothing agreinge with
our Marigolde. Wherefore trust no more the unlearned self made Phisitianes /
which teach you to call a Marigolde Helitropion.

The virtues of Heliotropium.
AN handful of this herb dronken / dryueth fleme an choler by the belly. It
is good both dronke^ with wine / and also laid to emplaster wise / for the
bytinge of a scorpion. Some write that iiij. granes of the sede taken an howr
before the fit / ends a quartayne / and that iij. granes heal a tertiane.
The sede laid to emplasterwise / dries away hanginge wartes / flesshy
swellings like tops of time / and little running sores / the leaves are very
good to be laid to / for the distillation of children / which is called the
siriasis / it is good also for the gowte / and for places that are out of
ioynte / it is good to bring down men's flowers / if the leaves be broken and
laid to / they are good to drive forth the birth of a woman.

Of Parietori or Pillitore of the wall.
HElxine or Parditio^ is called in English Parietorie / or Pilletorie of ye
wall / in Duche saint Peter's kraut / or tag vnd nacht / in French du
parietaire. The herbaries call it Parietariam. It grows on walls and about
the roots of hedges / it has leaves like Mecuri / but rowghe: it has little
stalks some thing redyshe / and about them are as it were rowghe seeds which
cleue unto men's clothes.

The properties of Parietori or Pillitore of the wall.
THe leaves have power to cool and to make thick / by reason whereof by laynge
of it to / it heals hot inflammationes / called saint Antonies fire / burnt
places / hard lumpes / in the fundament wheles / called Panos / when they are
in the beginning / swellings and hot burnynges / called inflammationes.
depiction of plant Parietaria Parietori or Pellitore of the wall.
The juice of it with white lead / is good for choleryke inflammationes / and
for spredinges or runninge sores. It is also good for the gowte to be laid to
with gotis sewett / or with the ointement made of wax and oil of priuet. The
same dronken / in the quantite of an ounce and a half / is good for the old
cough. It is good both to be gargled / and also to be laid unto for the in
flammation and heat of the kirnelles under the jaws. If it be pours into
the ear / it slaketh the ache thereof / so that rose oil be mixed therewith.

Of Hawke wede.
HIeracium is of two kinds / the one is called in Latin Hieraciu^ magnu^. It
may be called in English great hawkewede / or yealow succory. The great
hawke wede puts forth a rowgh stalk some thing redyshe and full of pricks
/ the leaves are indented / but every cut is a great way from another /
after the manner of sowthistell: it has heads / and in them yealow flowers. I
have seen this in great plenty both in England and in Germany in the feldes
about Bonne / in England in the medowe a little from Shene / the less
hawkewede has leaves standing a good way from another / iagged in the edges:
it has small little stalks which are grene / and in the top of them grow
rownde yealowe flowers. This herb have I seane both in Germany and in England
great plenty / I can not guess why this herb should have the name of a hawke
/ saying other herbs have the same properties that this has: except it be for
this cause that the down that grows in the top of this herb after the
flowers be gone / be good to be taken of the hawke to make him cast his gorge
with it.

The virtues of Hawke wede.
THe nature of Hawke wede is to coule and partly to bind / wherefore it is good
to be laid unto the stomach that is very hot. The juice / if it be dronken /
swageth the bytinge or the gnawinge of the stomach. The herb laid to with
the root / heals the stingginge of a scorpion.

Of Horse tongue or double tongue.
depiction of plant Hippoglosson.


HIppoglosson is called of some poticaries and herbaries Vuularia and Bonifacia
/ the bushe Hippoglosson has leaves in figure like unto the leaves of knee
holme / otherwise called prickel box: the tops of the leaves are sharp and
about the higheste depiction of plant Hypoglossum. Horse tongue or double tongue.
part of the leaves come forth certain little leaves like unto tongues: this
bushe is very like unto it that is called Laurus Alexandrina / but this has
tongues and sede in the leaves / and the other only the fruit among ye leaves
/ and not little tongues / wherefore this seems to be some difference between
them. I have seen Hippoglosson many times beyond the sea in high Germanye /
and in Italye / but I never saw it growinge in England.

The virtues of Vuularia or horse tongue.
A Garland made of the leaves of horse tongue / and set next upon unto the bare
head as Dioscorides writes / is good for ye head ache. The rote and the
juice is often put into softinge playsters. It has been found by the experience
of Phisicianes of late years / that a spounful of the leaves of horstong
beaten into powder / are good against the stranglinge of the mother / and also
against burstinge of chylder in the quantite of a dram and a half.

Of Selendine.
SElendyne is named in Latin Hirundinaria / in Greek Chelidonion / in Duche
Schelwurtz / in French Chelidoine or Esclere. The great Selendine has a
small stalk a cubite hye / or higher with many togrowinges full of leaves /
the leaves are like crowfote leaves / but softer and bluish gray in color. The
flower is like the flower of wall gelauore / otherwise called hearts ease /
which comes out about the settinge on of every leaf. The juice that is in it
/ is like saffrone / bitinge sharp / and some thing bittre and stinkinge. The
root in the ouermoste part is single / but beneth it has many yealowe iagges
or berdes like here is. It has a small codde like unto horned popye and long /
but it is ever smaller and smaller from the root / till it come at the top /
and in it is contains a sede greater then popye sede. There is an other kind
of Hirundinaria called in Greek Chelidion minus / whose description in my
judgment agrees well in all points unto the herb which we call in English
Figgwurt / saving that it wants the heat which Dioscorides depiction of
plant Chelidonion. Selendine
depiction of plant Chelidonium min^^.
and Galen require in their less Chelidonio. Dioscorides describes it thus.
It is a little herb hanginge upon little twigges / which come out of the root.
It has no stalk / ye leaves are like yui / but rounder / less / tender and
some thing fat / it has many roots that come fourth of one hard lompe /
little and growinge together like wheat corns / whereof iij. or iiij. grow
long. It grows beside waters and lakes. It has a bytinge pour even as
Auemone has / in so much that it will pull of the skin / if it be laid to.
This herb of ours called figwurt has all these properties / sauinge that it
is nothing hot at all that ever I could find / wherefore as this herb by the
lyknes may teache us to find out the true Chelidoniu^ minus / so I counsel no
man to use it for the less Celendine / though he use it for other purposes
which the later writers have written that it is good for.

The properties of Selendine.
THe juice of Selendine sodde^ in a copper vessel / with honey / makes the
eysight clear. In the beginning of summer there is a juice taken out of the
leaves / stalk / and root / and the same dried in the son / is made up in
to little cakes. The root dronken with white wine / and anise sede / heals
the guelsought or iaiundes / and runninge sores. The same chowed or laid to /
swageth the tothe ache.

Of Barley.
depiction of plant Hordeum polystichum.
depiction of plant Hordeum distichum.


HOrdeu^ is called in Greek Crithe / in English Barley / in Duche Gerst / in
French Orge / it is of diverse kinds. The first kind is called in Latin
hordeum distichum / in English Barley. The second kind is called in Latin
hordeum tetrastichum / in English big barley / or bear or big / alone.
This kind grows much in ye North country. The third kind is called in
latin hordeu^ hexastichum / I have not seen this kind in England / sauinge at
Wellis in my garden / but often times in high Germanye / wherefore it may be
called in English / Duche Barley. The fourth kind is called of Galene in the
greek tongue Gimnochritho^ / in Latin hordeum nudum / of other some / hordeum
mu^dum / it may be called in English / wheat barlye / because it has no more
husks on it / then wheat has. It grows in Italye and also in certain
gardines in England. Theophrast writes thus of Barley and wheat in comparinge
them together. Amongst the kinds of corn / wheat has a narrower leaf then
Barley has / and a smother straw and tougher. Wheat is covered with many
cotes / but Barley is naked and bare / and of all kinds of corn / it is most
destitute of a coueringe. Barley will some time change into daruell / and some
time into wheat.

The virtues of Barley.
THe best barley is white and clean / but that norisshet less then wheat: but
for all that the ptisane by the reason of the moist juice that comeh to it in
the sethinge / norissheth more then the perched barley. It is good for the
sharpnes and harrishnes of the throat and against raw places / If it be sodden
with fenell and supped up / it makes milk increase largely. Barley scowreth
away / dryueth fourth water / makes wind / it is euel for the stomach / it
makes ripe swellings. It is good to set barley mele with a fig in mede to
scatter and drive away hot burninges and such gateringes together or
risinges. It ripeth all hardness with rosen and douedonge. It stancheth the
sideache / laid to with Melilote and the tuppes of poppy. It is good against
the windenes of ye gutres / with lint sede / fenegreke and rue. Barley with
tarr / wax / oil / and ye water of a young boy / brings wennes and hard
swellings to a ripenes with myrtilles / or wine / or po^granet pills / or
wild tarte pears / or with the bramble / stops the runninge of the belly
with quinces or vinegre / it is good for burning heates or inflammationes of
the gowt. The same dressed after the manner of an emplaster and laid warm to /
heals lepres. The juice drawn out of barley mele / sodden with water piche
and oil / is good to ripe and make quickly matter / or corruption. The same
knodden with vinegre and piche / is good against flowinge of humores down in
to the joints.

Out of Galene.
THis sede of barley is much used among men / but it has not the same
property that wheat has / for wheat is evidently hot / but barley not only
heateth not / but howsoever ye use it / whether ye make bread of it / or make
a ptisane of it / or ye make perched barley of it / always it coleth / but
according unto the manner of dressinge / it moisteth for polenta / which is
made of fried or perched barley / is tried to be dry / as the ptisane is known
to moiste.

Of wall barley or way bent out of Dioscorides.
Phoenix has the leaves of barley / but shorter and streiter / with an ear like
unto daruell. The stalks are six fingers long / and it has seven or eight
ears. It grows in feldes and in howses lately couerid. This herb which is
called of Dioscorides Phoenix / is named of Pliny / Phenicea / and he says that
it is called of the latins Hordeu^ murinu^ / yt is wall barley. I mark yt
Dioscorides makes his Phoenix like unto barley / only in ye lefe / and in ye
ear like unto daruell / and that his phoenix grows both in feldes / and also
upon howses lately covered. I mark yt pliny calls his Phenicea Hordeu^
murinum / where upon I gather that Plines Phenicea in ye ear is like barley /
for it has not the name of the leaf alone / which disseuereth not barley from
other corns depiction of plant Phoenix
depiction of plant Hordeum murinum.
/ but of the ear. But ye barley ear and the daruell ear are not like / for
the one is without aunes / and the other has long aunes / therefore it
appears yt Phoenix in Dioscorides / and Phenicea in Pliny are not al one. If
there be any difference between the^ (as there seems to be) then Phoenix
Dioscorides is called in English Way bent / and Phenicea Pliny is called Wall
barley / and house barley. The way bent has a leaf like grass / and grows
ple^tuouslye in Ca^bridgeshire about high ways / and ye ear is like daruell
/ and it were like the common barley yt has but two orders / if it had awnes
as barley has. The wall barley is much like tho be barley which is called
hordeum tetrastichon / and it grows comme^ly upon mud walls that are lately
made. I meruel that Matthiolus redeth in his Pliny loliu^ murinum / when as mi
Plini corrected by Erasmus and prynted by Frobemus / has hordeum murinum / and
not lolium murinum.

The virtues of waybent.
Wal barley dronken with tart wine / stops the flix of the belly ye
runninge of the mother / and the burstinge out of man or woman's water. Some do
write that this herb bound to / and hanged up in a cremesin flece / stops
blood.

Of Hiacinthus.
depiction of plant Hiacinthus maximus.
depiction of plant Hiacinthus ceruleus mayor.
depiction of plant Hiacinthus Ceruleus minor.
depiction of plant Hiacinthus albicanus foemina.


HYacinthus has leaves like unto ye herb called bulbus / it has a stalk a
span long / smaller then a man's little finger / of grene color / the top of
the herb ha^geth down / full of purple flowers / ye root is like unto the
rownd head of a Bulbus. The best kind of Hiacinthus yt ever I saw / was it
that Lucas Gynus ye reader of Dioscorides in Bonony showed me about a xiiij.
years agoo / hard by the mount Appennine. Hiacinthus is also commen in
England / though it be not of ye best / and it is called crowtowes / crowfote
and crowtese.

The virtues of Hiacinthus.
THe rote of this herb dronken / stops the belly and drives forth water /
it is a remedy against the bytinges of a field spider. The sede is more
bindinge and desired for triacles / with wine if it be dronken / it heals the
iawndes. The boys in Northu^berlande scrape the root of the herb and glue
their arrows and books with that slyme that they scrape of.

Of Hiosyris.
HYosiris is like unto succory / but it is less and rowgher / the herb that I
take for Hyosiris / has a rowghe leaf / growinge hard by ye ground indented
/ after the manner of succory or dandelion / but the teth are not so sharp /
the stalks / flowers / and down are like unto the^ that are in Dandelio^ /
sauinge that they are roughe in this herb / and smothe in Da^delion. Wherefore
I name it roughe Dandelion. It grows in sandy baron grounds / and about
casten diches that have much sand in them.

The virtues of Hyosiris.
PLiny writes / if the leaves of Hyosyris be bruised and laid to wounds / it
heals them wounderfull well. It does appear by the taste of this herb / and
certain qualities that I find in it / that it should serve for the same
purpose that succory and Endive serve for

Of saint Iohans grass.
THe herb which is called in Greek Hipericon / in English saint Iohans
grass / or saint Iohans wurt / in Duche saint Iohans kraut / of some herbaries
fuga demonum / grows come^ly in woddes and in hedges / and in some gardines
without any settinge. Dioscorides writes thus of Hyperico^. Hipericon is named
of some Androsemo^ / of other Corio^ / of other Ground pine / because the sede
of it has the smell of rosin / it has a bushe like ferula / that is to say /
fenel giant a span long / read / it has a lefe like rue / a yealow flower like
unto wall gelouer. Which if it be bruised with a man's finger / puts forth a
blodi juice / wherefore some have called it man's blood. It has a cod that is
roughe and round of ye bigness of barley. The sede is black and depiction of
plant Hypericon. S. Iohans grass.
of the smell of rosin. This herb is called of some of the later writers
perforata / that is throw holed / because if ye set ye leaf between you and
the son / there shall appear an infinite nombre of holes in the leaves.

The virtues of saint Iohans grass.
SAint Iohans grass drives forth water / if it belaide to / it brings down
flowers. It delivers from tertia^ and quartan agues if it bedronken with
wine. The sede dronken the space of xl. days / heals the sciatica. The
leaves laid to emplasterwise with the sede / heal burninges.

Of Hysop.
DIoscorides leueth Hisop vndescribed / belike it was so well known in his
days yt he thought it neded not to be described but by that mean it is now
comme to pass that we dowt whether this Hysop that we have / be the true Hysop
of the ancient writers or no. Dioscorides in the description of Ograne /
compares organe in likeness unto the hysop / but no organ that ever I saw /
whether it came out of Candi or out of Spain / or grew here in England / like
unto our Hysop / for their is broad leaued / and our hysop has long leaves /
wherefore either we have not the true hysop / or else we never saw the true organ.
The Hysop that Mesna also describes / is not agreinge with this our Hysop as
ye may perceive by this his description that follows here. Hysop is of two
sorts / there is one mountain Hysop / and an other gardin Hysop. The gardin
Hysop is halff a cubit high / and has fewer stalks and branches the^ time
has. It has leaves like unto time but greater / the flour is purple / the
wild is shorter and has less leaves. Ye se here that Mesne makes his
hysopes leaves like unto ye leaves of time / but we have no such hysop and
time that agree either in figure or bigness together / wherefore it is to be
suspect that there is some better Hysop / then this that we have. Howbe it / I
think in virtue and property that it differs nothing from the hysop of the
old writers. We have in Sumershire beside ye co^me^ Hysop that grows in all
other places of England / a kind of Hysop that is al roughe and hory / and it
is greater much and stronger then the common Hysop is / some call it rough
Hysop.

depiction of plant Hyssopus.
depiction of plant Hyssopum montanum Cilicium.


The properties of Hysop.
HYsop has the virtue to make fine and to hete. The brothe of Hysop made with
figs / water / honey / and rue / dronken / helps the inflammation of the
longes / the old coughe / the shortwinded / rheumes or poses / and them that
can not well take their breath. It kills worms. It has the same power if it
be licked in with honey. The brothe of it dronken with a drink made of honey and
vinegre / called oximell / draws out gross humores through the belly / and it
is good to be eaten with grene figs to make you go to the stole / but it
works better if Aris be put thereto / or Cardamome or Ireo. It keeps and
makes the color of the body continewe still. With a fyg and nitre / it is good
for the mylt and for the dropse. It is used to be laid unto burninge hears or
infla^mationes with wine. It druleth and scatters away the blue marks of
brusinges. It is good to be gargled with the brothe of figs against the
quinsey. The broth of Hysop with vinegre swageth the toth ache if the mouth be
washed there with. The brethe or vapor of Hisop drives away the wind that is
in the ears if they be holden over it.

Of Gethsamine or Iesemin.
IEfemin or Gethsamine / as I suppose is called in Greek iasme / and it is the
flower / where of the oil called in Dioscorides oleum iasminum is made. But I
find nether any description of iasme in Dioscorides nor in Plini nor in any
other old writer / sauinge that Dioscorides makes a little mention of it / as
also ye Arabianes do. I think that ye Arabianes / call this bushe Iesemin /
fetchinge that name corruptly out of Dioscorides Iasmino^ / for the same
virtues that Dioscorides assigns unto the oil of Iasme / the Arabianes give
unto their Iesemin. But that ye may judge ye matter more plainly: I will
rehearse unto you what Dioscorides writes of his oil called iasminum / and
what the Arabiane write of there Iesemine.

Out of Dioscorides.
There is an oil made amongst the Perseanes / which is called Iasminu^ / of
the white flowers of a violet / whereof two ounces are put into a quart of oil
sesanime / and the violettes must be often changed / as we have told before in
the making of lily oil. It is miche used in the land of the Persianes / when
men be at meat to make a good smell: for it agrees well with all ye hole body
/ and then specially when a man goes into a bath: but it is best for such
bodies as had need to be made hot / and to be loused and set more at large /
for it smells strongly / for it smells so strongly that some can not abide
it. Thus much has Dioscorides written of Iasme. Some do hold that Dioscorides
writes here of the oil that is made of the herb called Lencoion in Greek /
and in English white stock gelouer. But I am of the contrary opinion / for
Dioscorides speaks not in my judgment here of that kind of Leucoion with
the white flour: for that kind of Leucoion with the flower has nether any
such smell as Dioscorides gives unto Iasme / nether any such heat /
Dioscorides speaks of: for Serapio writing of the kinds Leucou says these
words. Et oleum quod ex eo fit, est temperatum subtle, and proprie illud quod
fit ex eo, cum oleo amygdalarum dulcium, and coeleste, est debilis caliditatis,
and album est debilius propter aequitatem quae in illo est. Wherefore if the
autorite of Serapio be to be received and allowed / Matthiolus erreth / which
writes Iasminu^ to one oil made of Leucoio with ye white flowers. If any man
reply that our common iesemine is no violet. I answer that I think that
Dioscorides called that flower of Iesamin a violet flower / of the likeness that
it has with the flour of a violet / as he calls of times the pricky toppis
of great thestelles echinos / that is vrchens / of the likeness that they have
with an vrchen.

Out of the Arabianes.
IEsemin otherwise called rambach is of two sorts / the one has a yealow
flower / and the other has a white flower. The yealow is not so hot nor so
mighty in operation as the white is. The flower is also found in some place
blewishe gray. Iesemin is hot in the beginning of the second degree / and it
is good for moystenes and for salt fleme / and for old men of a cold
complexion / and it is good for aches that com of a cla^my or towgh humores /
when as the very and right natural iesemin either dried or grene / if it be
broken and laid upon any tetter or foul spots / it will drive them away and
will resolve all cold superfluites. It is good for the pose / but it makes
and engenders the head ache in them that are of an hot complexion / and the
oil of it is very good in winter / but it is to be ferde / if that any man of
a very hot complexion smell of it / lest it make him blede at his nose.
Compare these properties with the^ that Dioscorides give unto iasmino / and ye
shall find that in propertes / iasme does agree very well with the iesamine of
the Arabians.

Of Sciatica cresse or wild cresse.
depiction of plant Iberis.


Because Dioscorides describes this herb Iberis / in such place as no herbs
but trees are described / and it is contrary unto his custom to mix ye
intreatinge of herbs wyh trees: some hold yt this herb is not Iberis
Dioscorides. And some gather yt for this cause yt this herb that I entreat of
/ is not Iberis / because there is an other herb called of ancient writers /
namely / of Paul and others Iberis / and it is cleave contrary in proportion
and likeness unto the herb that Paulus sets forth for Iberis: to who^ Iberis
I answer / yt although it were not Iberis Dioscoridis. Yet it follows not /
but that it may be some other learned ma^s Iberis / though it be nether Iberis
Paulinor Aetij. This herb out of dout is Iberis of Democrates / where of Galene
makes manifest me^tio^ in the / x. book De compositione medicame^torum
secundum locos, and there he brings it in Democrates describing after this
manner. This herb says Democrates / grows much every where / beside graves
and old walls / and about high ways which are not commenly plowed. It is
always grene with a lefe like gardin cresses / and this leaf is less then
cresses lefe / and it comes forth in the spring time. The stalks are a
cubite long and some time longer / and some time shorter. The leaves grow on the
stalk all summer even unto the deep winter / which with the frost wastes the
leaves away / and brings the hole herb unto the likeness of a twig or busshy
rod. Yetit grows unto ye root / other buddes / which make a new herb
again in the next spring. It has a small white flower / the sede is so small
that a man can scarslie se it. The root has a very hot and sharp smell
much like unto gardin cresses. Thus far has Democrates described his Iberis.
Now let us se how that Dioscorides or some other in his name describes his
Iberis. Iberis / otherwise called Cardamantica / has the leaves of cresses /
but in the spring grener. The stalk is a cubit high and sometime less / it
grows in vnplowed grownde. In summer it has a white flower / at what time it
has most virtue / it has two roots like unto crosses / heatinge and burninge.
Ye may se how that in the description of Iberis both these autoures do agree.
Wherefore this herb must not therefore be spoiled of the name of Iberis /
because other autours have in their works an other kind of Iberis. This is
the herb as I suppose that Fuchsius describes for shlaspi minori: and it is
called in Duche besenkraut. I have seen the herb in all points agreinge with
the descriptiones above showed beside the walls of Bon in Germany and in east
Fresland in the sea banks. But I have not seen it in England that I remember
of. It may be called in English waycresses / wild cresses / or sciatica
cresses / because the herb is good for the sciatica.

The virtues of wild cresses.
GAther in somer good plentye of this root / for then it has most virtue /
and beat it hard / for it requires much betinge / and mix it with swines
gresse / and beat them in a mortar well / till they be both come into one body
/ then if any man or woman have any pain in the hauche or huckelbone / bind
this ointment upon the place that aketh: if it be in a woman / for the space of
two hours: if it be in a man / for the space of iiij. hours / nether shall ye
mix or put any oil to it. But it alone provoke the patient to sweet a little /
and then let him go into a bath / and bid him abide patiently there the bitinge
of the ointment continewe a while therein / and when he is well bathed / then
let him out / and after that he becomed fourth / let him put a good deal of
oil to a little wine and anoynte the diseased place withal / and afterward
that the place is made clean and the fat is scoured away / cover the diseased
place with warm woole / and if any grudge of the same disease chance to rise
again / let him use the fore said medicin again after the same manner: many
have been brought in by other me^ into the bath / being lame / by the sciatica
/ which after they have used this ointment and bath / have commed out by the^
selves strong and lustye.

The mind of Galene in this matter.
DEmocrates used ye same medicine after the same manner against the old and
long head ache / and against all old diseases of the body / and against
palseis / and against such diseases as can not be healed with out blystringe
mustarde plasters / and he says / that he healed therwyth all that were sick
in that disease / which he took in hand. Archigenes says also in his second
book of medicines after the kind / that Iberis which he calls Lepidium / is
good for the^ yt are sick in the milt / or grieved with the sciatica. Hipparcus
also writes / that Iberis is good for ye sciatica and for ye extreme cold.
After this manner gather yt herb Iberis / which some call Lepideum or wild
cresse / and stamp it with swynes gresse after ye manner of an emplaster / lay
it to the akinge place for the space of iij. hours / and then let the patient
go into a bath afterward / and this will h^lpe him / ye may use the same
remedy against the old head ache / as Democrates the Phisiciane in his verses
does testify.

The virtues of Iberis out of Dioscorides.
THe roots of Iberis are burninge hot / and they are good against the
sciatica / with salted swines greece / laid to the place after the manner of an
emplaster / for the space of iiij. hours / but the patient must afterward go
into a bath / and after that he must anoint the place and cover it with woll.
This herb is hot and dry in the second degree at the least.

Of Cycory and Endive.
depiction of plant Intubus,
depiction of plant Intubum satiuum angustifolium.


INtubus which is named in Greek seris / is of two sorts / the one is called
Intubus hortensis / and the other is called intubus syluestris. Intubus
hortensis is also of two sorts / the one is called Endive or white Endive /
and the other is called garden succory. Intubus syluestris is of two sorts /
the one is called in Latin Cichorium / and in English succory or hardewes /
and the other is called of Theophrasstus Aphaca / of Pliny Hedipnois / in
English Da^delion or priests crown / in Duche pfaffenblat. Seris / is of two
kinds / the one is wild as Dioscorides writes / and it is called picris and
cichorium / and the other kind is of the gardin / and it has brother leaves /
the wild is better for the stomach then the garden is / the garden endive is
also of two kinds / the one has broad leaves like unto lettis and the other
has narrower leaves / which has a bitter taste.

The virtues of Cycory and Endive.
BOth Endive and Cyco^y coul and bind together / and are very good for the
stomach. The herb sodden and taken with vinegre / stops the belly. The
wild is better for the stomach / for if it be eaten / it swageth the burninge
stomach that is feeble. It is good to lay the herbs either by them selffe or
with polenta perched barley to the place convenient for the disease called
Cardiaca passio. They are good for the gout and the infla^mationes of the eyes
if they be laid to: The herbs laid to emplasterwise with the root / are
good against the stinginge of a scorpion with perched barley / the herb is
good against the cholerike inflammationes called of some saint Antonies fire.
The juice of these herbs with white lead and vinegre / are good to be laid
unto such places to have need of coolynge.

Of Elecampane.
INnula is called in Greek Helenion / in English Elecampane or Aleca^pane / in
duche Alantzwurtz / in French and in ye poticaries shoppis Enula campana.
Eleca^pane has leaves like unto mullen / but much narower / sharper and
longer. In some places / it puts forth no stalk / it has a root under /
some thing white / and some thing redishe / and it has a good savor / it is
some thing bytinge / well grown / and of a great bigness out of the which come
certain buddinge knoppes / which may be sown after the manner of lylye or
aron.

The virtues of Elecampane.
THe broth of the rote dronken drives forth urine and flowers. Elecampane
taken in an Electuary with honey is good for the cough / for shortness of breath /
for places bursten and shronken together / for windenes and for the bytinge of
serpents. The leaves / if they be sodden in wine / are good to be laid unto
the depiction of plant Enula. Campana
sciatica. Elecampane seasoned and laid up in maluasey / is good for the
stomach / the succot makers and saucemakers / take the root and dry it a
little first / and then seth it / and afterward stepe it in cold water / and
lay it up in sodden wine for diverse uses. The root broken and dronken / is
very good against the spittinge of blood.

Of the herb called in Latin Irio.
Diverse learned men have diverse opiniones of the herb that is called in
Latin Irio / and in Greek Erysimon. Fuchsius rekeneth yt the herb which we
call in English Carloke or charloke / or wild cole / to be Ireo Dioscorides.
Ruellius judges that the herb which we call in English female veruine / is
Irio / and Gerardus Delwike rekeneth that ye herb yt is called in Duche winter
cresses / or which we may call in English bank cresses / because they grow
always about the banks of ryuers / to be the right Irio. But let us first se
the description of Dioscorides / and then we shall be able to judge whose herb
agrees best unto the description of Dioscorides.

The description of Irio.
depiction of plant Irion.


IRio grows beside cities and amongst old rubbishe and remna^tes of old
walls and in gardines / it has leaves like wild rocket / the stalks are
after the manner of a bay tree / bowinge and towgh / it has a yealow flower: and
it has small coddes / in the top horned after the manner of fenegreke / it
has a small sede like unto gardin cresses / and it has a burninge taste. The
herb that Ruellius takes for Irione / draws nerest of all other unto the
description of Dioscorides / sauinge that the coddes are not horned very like
unto the coddes of Fenegreke. It that Fuchsius sets forth / does metely well
agree sauinge yt the twigges are not so tough and bowinge as Dioscorides
describes his Iriones stalks to be. It yt Gerardus takes for Irione /
agrees also well with the description / sauinge that it grows not in places
about cities and in wast places where howses have been / but only of his own
nature about water sides. All their iij. Iriones do so well agree in virtues
with Irion Dioscoridis / that a man may use any of them for it of Dioscorides.
I saw ones in Germany about Andernake an herb in my judgment in all points /
agreinge with the description of Dioscorides: but because I lost the stalk
that I gathered / and could learn no Duche name of it / I could not set
forth the figure of it here at this time. The herb that Matthiolus sets
forth for Irio / has not horns like fenegreke / wherefore nether can not it
be the right Irio.

The virtues of Irio.
IRio is good against the flowinges or issues / that fall out of the head in
to longes / and against that disease / when as men coughe out foul matter / it
is good for the iaundes and for the sciatica / it is good to be taken in honye
against poison / it is good to be laid to with water or honey unto blind
cankers / swellings behind the ears / hardness of the papes / and the
inflammation of the stones / generally it makes fine and heateth.

Of flour Delyce or flour Deluce.
depiction of plant Iris.


IRis is known both of the Grecianes and Latins by that name / it is called
in Duche blaw Lilien / and blaw Gilgen / in French dula glaien / and de la
flambe / in English flour de lyce or flour de luce / the poticaries and
barbarus writers call it Irios in the genetiue case.

The description of Irios.
IRis has his name of ye likeness that it has of ye rayn bow / for Iris is
called ye raynbow. It has leaves like unto the herb called Gladiolus / that
is to say / the gladdon or swerdlynge / but greater / brother / and fatter.
Flowers of diverse colores stand in like space one from an other / and come out
of the stalk / for the flowers are seen white / pale / yealow / purple / or
blew / by the diversity of the which colores it resembles a raynbow. The
roots run in the ground full of iointes / hard well smellinge / which are
cut in little shiues or cakes / and are dried in the shadow / and then are put
upon a threde / and so kept. The best flower de Lyce or Aris in Slauonia or in
Macedonia / and there that is best / that is the least / that we may call the
dwarf flour de luce / and comenly has a thick root / hard to break of a
some thing read color / of a bitter taste / and of a right pleasant sauore / so
that it smells nothing of mouldnes / and the same whilse it is in stampinge
or beatinge / it makes the beters neese. The next praise is to be given to the
Iris or flour de lyce of Barbaria / which is some thing white and bitter in
taste. The roots when they are old use to be worm eaten / and then use they
to smell best. The flower de lice that grows here in England although it be
not so good as it that grows in Illyrico / and in Slauonia / and Macedonia /
and in Barbaria / because this our country is colder and moystier then the
other countries be / in the which the flour de luce is singularly good: yet
Aris is not to be despiced for it has many good and excellent qualites. I have
seen a little flour delice growyng wild in Dorsetshyre / but hole carts full
in Germany beside Wormis in the middowes not far from the Rhene.

The virtues of Aris or flour de Lyce.
ALl kinds of flower delice have the property to heat / and to make subtle.
Iris is good for the coughe. It makes ripe gross humors which are hard to
be cast or avoided outward / vij. drammes of Aris powder dronke^ with mede /
purge color and gross fleme. It provoke sleep / and brings out tears / it
is good for the gnawinges in the belly. The same dronken with vinegre is good
against the strikinge of serpents / for them that have the disease of the milt
/ for the crampe / for them that have taken a through cold / for quiueringe or
shakinge / and for them that suffer the issue of sede. If Aris be dronken with
wine / it brings down weomen their siknes. The broth of Ireos is good for to
bathe a woman's mother with / to soften it / and to louse the breath holes of the
veins of it. It is good to be poured into a clister for the sciatica. It
fills up fistulaes and holow corners with flesh. The root of flour delice
dressed with honey / and made after the manner of a suppository / and put in the
convenient place / help to down forth the birth in time of labor. Also the
roots laid to soften hard wennes and hard lumpes. The dry powder fills
sores / and with honey it scowreth them. It fills the naked bones with a
flesshy body. It is very good to be laid unto ye head / for the head ache
with vinegre and rose oil. If it be laid to with white hellebor and ij.
parts of honey / it will scour out frekles / spots and such other foulenes
in the face / that come by son burninge. Matthiolus redeth (...) / where as my
Greek Dioscorides has (...). My text means that the flowers grow upon the
stalk: But his word (...) / as he expounds it / will ye the flowers shall
only grow in the ouermost part of every stalk: which interpretation / seems
to me contrary unto the mind of Dioscorides and to our daily experience / and
to his own figures which he sets forth. Caulis that is to say / a stalk /
is that part of the herb / whereby the norishement is carried / and ryseth up
from the ground alone. If this be true / then should there be but one flower
upon every stalk of the flower Delice / or all should stand together in the top
/ and none should by equal distance as Dioscorides means stand one beneth
an other. Matthiolus sets out ij. figures of Iris / the olye is of the wild
/ and therein are vj. flowers / in the tame are iiij. flowers / and in both
the figures are but ij. caules or stalks / except he take pediculos / called
in Greek (...) to be all one with caul / which is contrari to all learning /
therefore the flowers grow not always in the top of every stalk alone / but
some above in the topp / and some beneth / and com out of the stalk and stand
super petiolos or pediculos suos / that is upon their styles or foot stalks.
Therefore his annotation is nothing worth.

Of the walnut and the walnut tree.
NVx without any farther addition is called a Walnut or a walnut tree. It is
called also Iuglans / nux persica / glans iouis / nux bisilica / and nux regia
/ in Greek Carya basilica / in Duche Eyn nuS baum / oder ein WelshnuS / in
French Vng noier. The walnut and the walnut trees are so well known in all
countries / that I need not to describe / wherefore I entende to leave the
description and to go to the properties of it.

The virtues of the Vualnut.
depiction of plant Iuglans.


WAlnuttes are hard of digestion / not good for the stomach / and inge^dre
choler / and they make ye head ache. They are evil for them that have the
coughe. They are fit to be taken fasting of them that would vomit. If they
be taken before hand with rue and figs / and also after meat by and by / they
wythstande poison. They do no less / if they be eaten after that a man has
dronke^ poison. If they be eaten in great plenty they drive out broad worms.
It is good to lay them to / with a little honey and rue for the burninge heat or
inflammation of the papes / for impostemes / and places out of joint. If they
be laid to with an onion / salt and honey / they are good for the bytinges both
of men and dogs. If they be burnt with their utter husks and laid unto the
navel / they sta^che the gnawinge of ye belly. The shell burnt and broken in
oil and wine / is good to anoint childers heads wythall to make the here grow
/ the same is also good to fill up the bare places of scalled heads. The
kernels burned / if they be broken and laid to with wine / they will stay the
blody yssew that some time women have. The same are good to lay to old
carbuncles and crepinge sores / tetters and impostemes that are in the corners
of the eye. The same chowed and laid upon the head / are a present remedy for
the falling of the hear. A man may make oil of the kirnels of walnuttes / if
he will press them / specially when they are old: they that are grene / are
not so ill for the stomach as the old nuttes be / because they are sweter. If
they be mixed with garleke / they take away the sharpnes. And they do if they
be laid to emplasterwise / drive away the blew marks that come of stripes.
The walnut tree both in his leaves and buddes has a certain bindinge / but
the bindinge is most evidently perceived in the utter husks / both moist and
dry / and therefore fullers dorse them. But I / says Galen / press out the
juice of the husks as I do out of the Mulberies and bambleberes / and set it
with sodden honey / and use it in the stead of a mouth healinge medicine / as I
use the forsaide juice of mulberes and brambleberes. The kirnell of the nut /
when it is wythered / is of subtle parts and a dryinge medicine with out any
bytynge.

Out of Pliny.
THe Gretians have named the walnut of that / that it brings the head ache /
for the strength of the trees and the leaves perch into the brain / if the
nuttes be taken a fore hand / they break and quench the might of poison. They
are good to be laid to the squynsie with rue and oil. Cneius pompeius when he
had ouercomed the mighty king Mythrydites / he found in his most secret
treserhouse in a little book by it selffe written with his own hand with this
preservative / the composition whereof is this. Take two dry Walnuttes / and
ij. figs and xx. leaves of rue / break them together and put a corn of salt
tho them / and if you eat this medicine fasting / there shall no poison hurt
you that day: the kirnels of the nuttes if they be chowed / of a man fasting
/ is a present remedy if they be laid unto the bytinges of a mad dog. Some
use to make succat with honey or sugar of the young nuttes / which are palled
of the tree about midsomea. Tragus writes that the water which is destilled
out of the grene nuttes gathered at mitsomer / is good for the inflammation of
the pappes / impostumes / and for places out of joint / the oil that is
pressed out of the walnuttes / says Tragus / is good for the purposes above
rehearsed.

Of Squynant.
IVncus odoratus sieve rotundus / is called in Greek (...) / in English
Squynant / in Duche Kamelhewe / in the potecaris shoppis Squinantu^. Squynant
grows in Aphrica and in Arabia / the best comes out of Nabathea / the next
in goodness is it that comes out of Arabie / the worst comes out of Africa:
the best and the most wourthiest to be chosen / is that which is read /
fresse and full of flowers / but small / and has read pieces in it / which
being robbed in a man's hands / will smell like a rose. It byteth the tongue
also like fire. We use no part of it / sauinge the flower / the stalk and the
rote. We have not in Europa such squynant as Dioscorides describes. I never
saw squynant growinge / sauinge only dried.

The properties of Squynant.
SQuynant has the virtue to bring down flowers to drive fourth water / it
drives wind away / makes ye head heavy / and binds a little / breaks
and rypeth / and makes louse the vessels that the wind may comforth. His
flower is good in drink for them that void blood / for the pain of the
stomach / longes / liver and kidneys. The rote is more astringent bindinge /
therefore it is good to be given in the quantite of a dram with so much peper
for a few days unto them that have the lothsumnes of ye stomach to them that
are sick in the dropsy / and to them that have the crampe. The broth is good
to sit over against the burning heat of the mother.

Of the Juniper tree.
depiction of plant Iuniperus.


IVniperus is called in Greek Arke^thos / in English Juniper or Ieneper / in
Duch wachhold / in French du genefure.

The Description.
DIoscorides makes ij. kinds of Juniper / the greater kind and the less /
which only differ in bigness. Juniper both the greater and the less is always
grene and has in the stead of leaves pricks rather the^ right leaves / and
every such leaf or prick is very like unto ye end of the tongue / of an
hueholl or wodspike / but it is grene / the wod is redish / which if it be put
into the fire / makes a very good smell. The berries are first grene and
afterward black. Some hold yt ye berries are ij. year in ripinge upon the
tree. This tree grows commenly in great wast and wild mores and baron
grounds / but sometime it grows in metly good grounds / In England it
grows most plentuouslye in Kent / it grows also in ye bysshopryche of
Durram / and in Northu^berlande. It grows in Germany in many places in great
plentye / but in no place in greater then a little from Bon / where as / at the
time of year the feldefares sede only of Iunipers berries / the people eat
the feldefares vndrawe^ with guts and all / because they are full of the
berries of Juniper.

The virtues of Juniper.
There are ij. kinds of Juniper / the greater and the less / they are both
hot / and stir men to make water / and if yt they be set a fire / they drive
away serpents. The berries do measerablely hete and bind / and are good for
the stomach. They are good to be dronken against the diseases of the breast /
against the cough / against wind / gnawinges and bytinge of serpents. They
drive fourth urine / they are good for places burst and shronken together and
for the stranglinge of the mother. The leaves are bytinge and sharp. Therefore
both they / and also the juice of them are good to be dronke^ with wine or to
be laid to against the bytinge of a veper.

Of Labrusca.
LAbrusca / which is called in Greek Ampelos agria / or Omphax / is of ij.
sorts / the one kind is so wild yt it has only flowers / and goes no
ferther / and this flower is called Enanthe. The other has flowers and also
little grapes. I have seen of both ye sorts plentuously in Italy in diverse
places by the floude Padus / and in high Almany also. It may be called in
English a wild vine. All things both leaves / flowers and grapes / are less
in this kind then in the gardin vinde / or else in figure and fasshon they are
all one.

The nature of the wild grape.
THe leaves of the wild grape / and the stalks / and claspers have the same
virtue that the other has. The flowers of the wild grape / have a stoppinge
or bindinge power / wherefore in drink they are good for the stomach / and to
drive fourth urine. They stop the belly and the castinge out of blood / if
they be dried and laid to / they are good for the lothsomnes of the stomach
and sournes of the same. They are good to be laid upon the head / either grene
or dried with vinegre and rose oil. A plaster made of them / heals bloody
wounds / the impostemes in the corners of ye eye when they are in beginnynge /
the sores of ye mouth / and the fretinge sores of ye priuities. If they be
broken with honey / saffron and myrr and rose oil / they save from inflammation.
They are good to put in pessaries to stanche blood. They are good to be laid
to with wine and the mele of perched barley against ye wateringe of ye eyes / and
ye burninge of ye stomach. The ashes of them / burned in a vessel with hot
coals are good for medicines for the eyes / and with honey it heals whit
flawes / aguayles and goomes bledinge / and vexed with impostemes.

Of Lettes.
depiction of plant (...). Lactuca.
depiction of plant (...).
depiction of plant (...).


LActuca is called in Greek Thridax / in English Lettes or Lettuce / in Duche
Lattich / in French / vng Lactue. Lettis is of diverse kinds / one kind is
called Lactuca hortensis / and in English gardin Lettis / the other kind is
called lactuca syluestris / which is called in English grene endive / and
this is the herb that the Israelites eat with there passover lamb. There are
diverse sorts of gardin lettes / for one is called Lactuca capitata / that is
cabbage lettes / because it goes all into one head / as cabbage role does /
an other kind is the common lettes / some kinds of lettis have white sede / and
other kinds have black sede.

The description of Lettice.
THe commen gardin lettice has broad leaves like unto white endive / and the
stalk ryseth straight up / about the top are diverse branches / which have
yelow flowers. The wild lettes is like the other after Dioscorides / but the
root is shorter / the stalk is longer / the leaves are whyter / smaller and
sharper and bitter in taste / and when as they perfect / they are full of
prickel.

The properties of Lettis.
THe gardin lettes / which is of a coolinge nature / is taken to be good for
the stomach: it brings sleep / softeneth the belly and called fourth milk:
but when it is sodden / it norisseth more. But they that have an evil stomach
/ were best to take it vnwasshed. The sede were good to be dronken of them that
are combred with unclean dreams: and it is good against the rage of venery.
Much use of lettes / hurts the eysight: it is good against inflammationes
and hot burnynges. It is laid up of some / and seasoned and sauced in brine.

Of Haris foot.
LAgopus may be called in English Haris foot / or rough clauer / the Duch
call it Katze^kle / ye French call it Pede de leure.

The description.
depiction of plant Lagopus.


DIoscorides shows no mark whereby Lagopus differs from other herbs /
saving that it grows among the corn. Which place is come^ to many other
herbs. Wherefore we can not gather by that one word / what herb in our
feldes is Lagopus in Dioscorides. But because it has the name of an Haris
foot / and no other herb growyng in the corn / is so like an Haris foot as
this herb is that I set forth / I think not with out a cause that Fuchsius (of
whom I learned this herb as I have learned certain other) judged it well to
be Lagopus / and chefely because it agrees in virtue with it that Dioscorides
speaks of. The herb which I take for Lagopus / has a round stalk / and
roughe leaves of the form and fasshon of a clauer / or a threleued grass. The
sede is very bindyng / and it growethe in roughe and horye knoppes / or hedes /
which are not unlike unto an Haris foot. Amatus Lusitanus accusyng Otho
Bru^sfelsius / for making trinitariam to be a kind of hepatica / Mattheum
Syluaticum for iudgyng auenes to be- Lagopus / falls in to as great an error
as any of them both did / whillis he makes trinitariam montanam / to be the
right Lagopus. For the herb called trinitaria of the herbaries in Italy / and
edel leberkraut or guldenkle in Duche / is not the right Lagopus. Which thing
may very easily be proved by Dioscorides which says that Lagopus grows in
the corn / when as trinitaria is never found in the corn / but in high
mountains and in such wild and untilled places / where as not corn at any
time has grown.

The virtues of Lagopus.
THe herb Lagopus dronken in wine stops the belly / but if a man have an
ague / he must drynk it for the same purpose in water. The same is good to be
laid unto the share / when it is inflammed or brought into a great heat.
Lagopus as Galene says / has so drying a power / that it can dry up well
the flix of the belly.

Of the herb called Lamium or deed Nettel.
depiction of plant Lamij tria genera.


LAmium is called also vrtica iners / or mortua / vrtica alba / and of some
Archangelica / in English Ded nettel / in Duch tod Nessel / in French / orti
morti.

The description of deed Nettel.
LAmium has leaves like unto a Nettel / but less indented about / and whyter.
The downy things that are in it like pryckes / byte not / ye stalk is
foursquare / the flowers are white / and have a strong savor / and are very
like unto little coules / or hoodes that stand over bare heads. The sede is
blak and grows about the stalk / certain places going between / as we se in
horehound.

The virtues of ded^ Nettel out of Pliny.
THat kind of Nettel also / which among other I named Lamium / being most
gentle of all other / and having leaves that byte not / with a corn of salt /
heals such places as are bruised / or beten / or burnt / and wennes / and
swellynges / goutes and wounds. It has a white thing in the mids of the
leaf / which is a good remedy against saint Antonies fire or hot burnynges.
The later writers hold that the deed Nettel is good to stop blood / if it be
laid either unto ye lowest parts of the neck / or to ye shoulder blades: They
say also yt it is a good remedy against foul sores and fistulaes or false
wounds.

Of the herb called Lampsana.
LAmpsana / as Dioscorides writeh is a wild worte or eatable herb / and more
largely does not he describe Lampsanam. But Pliny describes his Lampsanam
thus. Amongst ye wild koles is also Lampsana a foot high / with roughe
leaves like unto napo or a yelow rape: but ye flour of Lampsana is whyter. When
I was in Bonony / Lucas Ghinus the reder of Dioscorides there / showed me the
right Lampsanam / which afterward I have seen in many places of Germany in the
corn field / much lower then carlok / but in taste and in depiction of plant
depiction of plant fashon of lefe much like it. But it has a white flower with
a very little purple in it / in some places as I remember / yet most come^ly it
is all clear white.

The virtues of Lampsana.
DIoscorides makes no other mention of any virtue / that Lampsana has /
saving that he makes it good for the pott / and says that it norisheth more
then the dock does / and is better for the stomach. Galene says that
Lampsana eaten / ingendreth euel juice / if it be laid to without / that it
has some pour to scour away / and to digest or make ripe.

Of the tree called Larix
DIoscorides describes not the tree which is called of the Latins Larix / and
of the Duche ein Larch bau^. But Pliny described it and makes mention of it /
but not always according to the truth as men of great experience and of no
less learning / not being encumbred with such besines as Pliny was / have of
late found out. Pliny writes that the leaves of the larche tree / never decay
nor fall of / which thing both Matthiolus and Bellonius have found by
experience depiction of plant Larix.
to be untrue. For they write both that the larche tree leaves fall of in
winter. But herein I can bear no wytnes / for allthough in summer I have seen
infinite larche trees / yet I was never in winter where they grew. But I trust
them which have seen them both in summer and winter. And out of these men's
wrytinges I have gathered this description of Larix following.

The larche tree commonly is lower then the fyrre tree / but in some places it
is found as high as ye fur tree is. The lowest part of the boli or body of
the larche tree / next unto ye ground / has a bark very hard / and it is
full of ryftes and gapynges / which appear like certain deep furrows. If ye
hew it / and cut it / with an hatchet / ye shall find it very read / and
until ye come unto the bunghes it is roughe / but after yt ye come to the
place where the bows grow / then it is smother and in color / is out of an
asshy whytishe. The bunghes are less the^ any other kind conenutberyng tree
has / and they are tougher and more bowyng / and their color is out of yelow
redishe / and of a very pleasant savor. The leaves are blunt / soft and bowyng
/ two fingers long / a little broad / and of ye bygnes of fenel leaves. About
thyrty grow together about one knop / after the manner of a beam. In taste they
are not so byndyng as other leaves of trees of like kind be. In smell they
resemble ye leaves of a pyne tree. The larche tree is very like unto the cypres
tree / in the fruit or nutt. For the larch nut is as great as ye Cypres nut is
/ and somthinge longer / and has a short stele or foot stalk / whereby the
fruit is joined unto ye tree. The nutt is compassed about with thin husks one
growyng over an other / after ye manner of scales of a fish / and within are
seeds of the bygnes of a Cypres kyrnell. This tree grows largely in the
mountayes in the land of Cour / and in the alps that are between Itali and the
country called Rhetia / where of one part is in the diocese of Cour.

The nature and virtues of this tree.
I Find great diversity of opiniones and debat between the old writers and
the new / concerning the nature of this tree. For the new writers hold that ye
wod of this tree / will burn as well as ye wod of other trees. Which thing this
day / is perfitly known in many places by daily experience. But ye old writers
hold yt the larche tree will take no flame / and that it will no more burn the^
a stone. Amongst many old writers that hold opinion / I will bring forth but
two to bear witness of yt matter. The one is Palladius / which writes thus in
his book of husbandry of the Larche tree. Larix says he / is very profitable
to make bordes of / and to lay them under the tyles / in the utter part of ye
house. If thou do so / thou have made a sure defense against al burning: For
those bordes will nether receive any flame / nether will they make any cole.
The other old writer is named Vitruuius / who in his second book of bylding
writes these words of the larche tree. The larche trees / says he / are
touching the leaves / like unto the pyne tree leaves. The tymbre is long and as
tractable for any inward werck as Sapin is. And it has moist or liquide
rosin of the color of the honey of Athenes. And it is good for the^ that have
the tisick in their lunges. The Larche tree which is not known / but only unto
the proper inhabitants / that either dwell about the banck of Padus flood / and
about the sea shores of the Venetiane see / not only is not hurted / with rottyng
or muldring / or with worms / by the means of the great bitterness that it
has / but also it will receive no flame of the fire. Nether can it burn any
otherwise the^ a stone does in a lyme kill. Yet by other wod it burns. And
yet not even then does it receive the flame / nether gives any cole / but in a
long time it is slowly burnt. And this is the cause / yt there is in it a small
temperature of the principales of the air and fire. For the wod being thick
and hard fastened together / with an earthly moisture / and not having void
spaces for holes / by the which the fire may entr in: it puts back the pour
of the fire / and suffers not it self to be hurt of the reason of ye heaviness
/ it is not holde^ up of ye water / but when it is born either in ships / or
is set above the fyrr raft: How that this tymbre was found / there is a cause
to know it. The renowned and noble Caesar / when he had an host about the alps
/ he commanded ye inhabitants there that were under him / to find vitales.
But there was a fast town / named Laringum / and the me^ of the town trustyng
to their natural defense / would not obey the commandment of Caesar. Therefore
the chief captain commanded ye garisones to besedge it. But there was before
the gate of the town / a tour made of this tymbre / made of diverse beams /
one going cross over an other. And it was very high / and in fasshon after the
making of a broche or a steple / that is great beneth and small above / so that
a man might put back agyn them that came up / both with stones and clubbes. But
when it was perceived that they had no other wepenes but stones and clubbes /
and yt they could not cast far from the wall / by the reasone of the heaviness /
the commandment was given / yt faggoters made of small brusshe / should be set a
fire / and laid to the hold. The souldyers did that spedely. But as soun as
the flame had taken hold of the faggottes / beside the tymbre / and went up in
to the air a loft / it made all menn thynck that all the hole heap should fall
by and by. But when the flame went out of it self / and so was quenched / and
the tour appeared untouched / Caesar woundering greatly / commanded yt they
should be compassed round about / with out the castyng of darts. But when the
towns men compelled by fere / had given up and yielded them selves / it was
demanded of them from whence the wodde came / which would not be hurt with ye
fire. And then they showed the^ those trees where of was great plenty in yt
place. Thus far has Vitruuius written of ye larche tree. Ye may se now yt either
ye old writers have erred sore in tellyng ye properties of ye larche tree / or
else ye new writers know not ye right larche tree. But I thynck ye lightly
there is no tree better known unto ye most part of ye new writers of plants
this day / the^ the tree called larix is. The high duche call this tree cin
lorchbau^ or ein lerchbau^. They yt dwell about Tride^t call ye rosin of it
larga / and there is a place as Bellonius ye Fre^chma^ writes yt is called at
this time vallarix. Which thing may be taken / yt ye Larix tree is not gone out
of knowledge nether in Itali / nor in France / nor in Germany: wherefore it is
rather to be thought yt ye old writers markyng not so diligently as they ought
to have done one example / have fallen into a false believe / out of which as
of a great tree many branches of errores have spro^g out afterward. Beside yt
ye tymmer of ye larche tree which is very good beutuus and profitable for
bildyng: it gives also ij. exceeding holsom and profitable medicines / where of
ye one is ye come^ turpe^tine / and ye other is ye famus medicine called
Agarick. Matthiolus writes / yt where as he has been / yt the me^ yt gather
ye moist rosen of ye larch tree / use to bore a hole with a long perser eue^
unto ye heart of the tree / and under yt hole to set a vessel made of ye barck
of ye pichetre / to receive ye rosin yt comes forth there in. But in Rhetia
where as I have seen the manner of gathering of ye come^ turpe^tine / is this:
They cut an hole depely dou^warde in ye larche tree / with an hatched and a chisel
/ so great yt will hold a great olial of ye rosin. When yt hole is full / they
take it out with ladles and spownes / and put it into vessels. Antonius
Trauersus a right Ge^tlema^ of ye country of Rhetia / when as I lay in his
house / restyng me after my great labors yt I had taken in seking of herbs in
ye alps / told me for a suertie / yt ye carpe^ters of that country knowing
the holsomnes of the rosin / when they chance upon any plenty of it / whilse
they cut the larche trees / drinck largely there of / and become as dro^ken
therewt / if they had dronken a great deal of strong wine. Dioscorides writes
that the rosine larche tree received in / by lycking / is good for the old
cough. Many use it now / with great profit against ye stone and the diseases of
the kydnes in the stead of the right turpe^tine. Aetius writes thus of all
rosines. All kinds of rosine / hete / drive away / softe^ / drawfurth and open
/ and heal wounds and bynd them together / much more then wax does. And
Galene in his book de simplicibus medicamentis writes thus of rosines. All
rosines do heat and make dry. But they differ one from other. The rosine of
ye lentiske tree called mastick / deserves worthily ye chese praise amongst
the^ all. Amongst other rosynes / it of ye turpe^tinetre is best. It has an
open or manifest byndyng / but not so much as mastick has / but it has
joined with it a certain bitterness / whereby it rypeth more the^ mastick does.
and by ye means of ye same qualite / it ca^ scour so yt it ca^ heal sores and
scabbes / and it draws more the^ other rosines / because it is also of finer
parts. And ye same Galen in ye third book de medicame^tis secu^du^ gn^a
writes this sentence. Of these kinds of rosin is / is yt which called larigna
/ yt is rosin of ye larche tree which is moyster / or more liqued / but of ye
substance of ye moist rosen of ye pichtre / which ye grossers sell for
turpe^tine the^ yt know not ye one from other. But yt rosyn both in smell and
taste and working is sharper and quicker the^ turpe^tine is. There fore the
rosin of the larche tree has a like virtue with this and with the turpentine /
but it has a greater pour in dryuing away and a more subtle / or fyner
substance.

Of Agarik.
BEllonius woundereth that any man dare hold ye Agarik does grow in other
trees then in the larche tree / but his meruelyng is again to be merueled at /
seeing yt good autores write / yt it may be found also in other rosin bringing
trees. But this do I think / that the best Agarick that is this day / is
found in the Larche tree. Agarik is soulde very dear both in Itali / France /
Germany and England. Wherefore they that would take ye pains to sail to Norway
(which is nerer unto England / the^ is either Rome or Compostella) they might
bring many things from thence more profitable for the realm of England / then
that which some bring from the above named places. For beside many diverse
kinds of herbs and roots which grow there in great plenty / and may be
gotten with a small cost / the values of the symples well esteemed / there may
a man have not only most excellent turpentine of the come^ sort / but also the
most precious Agarick. If no other men will take the pains to bring this
commodite unto their contre / I will advise the falconers that go to Northway /
that both for their own profit and for their countries / that they learn to
know ye Larch tree / that they might bring into England not only good comen
turpentine / but also costly and precious Agarick. If any man will take the
pain to gather Agarick / let him first learn well by the forewriten description
to know the Larch tree / and then mark it that I shall tech him in these words
immediately following. Agarike is the same / in a larche tree that brueche as the
Northern Englishmen call it / or as other call it / a todstole / is in a birche
or a walnut tree / where of some make tunder both in England and Germany for
their gunnes. Agarick as it is very precious / so is it not very common nor
good to find / for sometime a man shall se in some places a thousand trees /
erhe find one that has Agarick growyng upon it. It grows most commenly in
old trees and in such / as are growing in highest cliffes rocks and tops
of mountains of al other. It grows never in ye bughes of the tree / but upon
the bole or body of the tree / some time higher and some time lower / as other
things like mushrum mes / todestooles or bruches do. The only time of
gatheryng of Agarick is in the end of harvest / when as it is dry and full
ripe. It that is gathered in the summer and in the spryng / except it be of the
last yearis grouth / is both unwholesome for man's body / and the same can not be
gathered without the great ieperdy of the gatherer / for then it is full of
water / which when it comes forth / with a perillus vapor yt it has / it
smites in to the head and makes him very syke. And as the waterish unripe
Agaricke is unwholesome / so it that is passed two years old / is of no price
nor value.

Of Agarick out of Dioscorides.
THere are two kinds of Agarick / the one is the male / and the other is the
female. The female which is ye better / has right or streygth orders / or
lines / of veins / going within it. The male is round and faster fastened
together. Both ye kinds have a sweet taste at the first tastyng / but
afterward / it turns into a bitter taste. The nature of Agarick is to bind
together and to heat. It is good for ye gnawinges in ye belly / for rawnes and
for bursten places and for the^ yt are brusen and hurt with falling. The use is
to give a scruple in honied wine / to them that have no ague / and with mede to
them that have a fever. It is also good for them that have ye blody flix to
the^ that have the guelsought or iaundesse / to them that are shortwynded / and
to the^ that are diseased in the liver and the kydnes. We use to give a dram
when a man's water is stopped / if the mother be strangled / or if a man be ill
colored. It is taken with maluasei when a man has co^sumption or tisyck and
with oxymel or honied vinegre / when a man is cumbred with the disease of the
milt. If the stomach be so flashe and louse that it can hold no meat / then is
it best to be taken alone / without any moisture. After the same manner is it
given to them that belche out a sour breath. If it be taken in the quantite of
two scruples and an half / with water / it stops vomityng of blood. If it
be taken with honied vinegre / in like weight / it is good for the sciatica and
the pain in joints and the falling siknes. It brings also down to women
their syknes. In the same quantite it is good to be taken against the wyndenes
of the mother. If it be taken before the shaking of an ague / before the fit
come / it takes the shaking away. The same taken in the qua^tite of a dram or
two with mede / purges the belly. It is a good remedy against poison taken
about the qua^tite of a dram with a drinck well dilayed with water. It is a
special remedy against the styngyng of serpents and for ye biting of ye same
if it be dro^ke^ in ye qua^tite of one scruple and an half with wine. Galene
writes also that if Agaricke be laid unto with out / that it is good for the
bytyng and styngyng of a serpent. Mesue writes that Agarick is hot in ye
first degree and dry in ye second. It is given in powder says Mesue / from
one dram to two / but in broth from ij. drammes to five.

Of the herb called Laserpitium.
I Have nether spoken with any man / nor read in any writer of this our time /
that durst say that he had seen ye right Laserpitium / whereof Theophrast and
Dioscorides make mention of. But Ruellius judges that the virtuous herb
called Angelica is Laserpitium gallicum. If there be any Laserpitium either in
France or Germany / I would rather take Pillitori of Spayn called of the Duche
meister wurtz / to be Laserpitiu^ then angelica / because it has leaves more
like persely the^ Angelica has. If any man trauayl in to far countres / and
would learn to know the right Laserpitium / let him well mark these
descriptiones which I shall now translate out of Dioscorides and Theophrast /
and he shall the sooner come by the true knowledge of it. Laserpitium grows in
Syria / Armenia / Media / and Lybia / with a stalck like a ferula or fenelgyant
/ which stalck they call Maspetum. It has leaves like Persely / and a broad
sede. The juice that comes out of ye stalck and root is called Laser. The
stalcke is called Silphio^ / ye root Magudaris / and some call the leaf also
Maspetu^. Theophrast describes Laserpitiu^ thus. The root of Laserpitiu^ is
manifold and thick. It has a stalck as ye ferula has / and a leaf which
they call Maspetu^ like unto Persely. The sede is broad / and is of ye fassho^
of a lefe such as yt which is called the lefe. The stalck depiction of plant
Laser seu Laserpitium.
perished every year as the stalck of ferula does. The rote is covered with a
black skin. I can find no more in these two ancient writers concerning the
description of Laserpitiu^ / but these few words wiche I have now rehearsed
unto you. By these words of Dioscorides and Theophrast / Matthiolus and al
other that hold yt Benzoin is ye sweet Laser of Cyrene / are reproved and
found fauty in a great error. For Dioscorides and Theophrast make Laserpitiu^
an herb / and such one as dies every year concerning the stalks and top at
the least / and Laser to be the dried juice of an herb / when as we know by
the sticks and pieces of wod yt we find often in Benzoin or Belzoin / and by the
experience of Lodouicus Romanus (whom also Matthiolus allegeth / gyuyng thereby
other men wepens to feight against him self) yt Belzoin or Benzoin is the rosin
of a tree / and not the juice of any herb. But as for assa fetida / I will not
deny / but yt it is Laser medicum or Syriacum / as Matthiolus and other writers
have taught in their wrytinges.

The properties of Laser and Laserpitio.
THe root heateth / and in meats is hard of digestio^ / and noysum to the
blader. If it be laid one with oil / it is good for bruised places and with a
cerote or treat made of wax: it is good for hard lumpes and wennes / with oil
of Ireos it is good for the sciatica / or with the cerot of priued flowers. If
it be sodden in vinegre and laid to with a pomgranat pill / it is good to take
those things away that grow to much about the fundame^t. If it be dro^ken /
it withstandeth poison / it makes the mouth smell well / if it be menged with
salt or with meat. The best Laser is read throw shynyng like unto myrr / not
grene / mighty in smell / of a pleasant taste / and when it is steped / it
waxes easily white. The juice dried and hardened it is best. The leaves
deserve the second praise / and the third the stalck. For it has a sharp
pour / it makes wyndenes / it heals a scald head / if the place be
anointed with it / and peper wine and vinegre. It sharpeneth the eysyght / and
if it be laid to with honey / it heals the cataract of the ey / or the haw in
the eye when it is in the beginning. It is good to be put into the holes of the
tethe / for the tuthe ache / or to be bound about in a cloth with Olibano or
Fra^ckincense. It is also good to wash the mouth with it and hysop sodden with
fygges in water and vinegre. It is good to be pu^ into the wound of them / that
are bitten of any wod or mad beast. It is myghtely good against the poison of
arrows or darts / and against all beasts / that cast out venem either dronken
or laid to with out. It is dabbed about the stynginges of scorpiones / with
oil well menged / or tempered. It is laid unto deadely burninges / if they be
a little holde^ and constreyned together before / and with rue nitre and honey /
or by it self / it is also laid to carbuncles. If ye cut a circle round about
aguayles or any hard lumpes / and make this medicines soft with the broth of
figs or menge it with a cerot / it will pull them away. With vinegre it
heals the foul skurf of the skin. It heals also outwaxynges or to
growinges in the flesh and the swellyng flesh about the nose thrilles which
is called polypus / if that it be laid to a certain days with coperus or
verdgrese. It helps ye old roughe scurfenes of the jaws. If it be taken
dilayed with water / it heals quicly ye horsenes of the voice. If it be laid
to with honey / it heals ye Vuula. It is good to be gargled against ye
squinsey with mede. They that use to eat of it look much more freshly / the^
they had won to do / and with a better color. It may be given with great profit
against the coughe / in a soft eg / and against the pleurest in suppinges /
and against the iaundes and dropsey with dried figs. The same dronken with
wine peper and olibane or right frankincense dryueth away the trymlyngh and
shaking of agues. It is given in half a scruple weight to them whose head
stands backwarde. If any horsleches or lougheleches cleue to a man's wesand /
this / if it be dronken / will drive them down / if a man will make a gargle
with it / and with vinegre. It is good to be dronke^ for milck that is clodded
and run together in lumpes. It is good for the falling sickness / dronken with
oxymel or honied vinegre. If it be dronken with peper and myr / it brings
down flowers. If it be taken with the kyrnelles of grapes / it stops the
belly. If it be given with lieghe / it is good for places that are suddenly
shronken together and bursten. It is resolved or melted with bitter al mondes /
or with rue / or hoote bread for to make drinks of it. The juice of the leaves
will do the same / but not so effectually. It is good to be chowed with oximell
or with honey and vinegre to help the throat / when as the voice is horse or
dulle. It is said that there is an other Magudaris in Lybia / and that the
root is like Laserpitio / but that it is not so thyck / sharp and spongous /
out of which no juice flows forth. It has like virtue with Laserpitio. If a
man will compare these virtues with them that the later writers give to
maisterwurt or pillitori of Spayn / he shall find yt there is as great agreement
between their properties / as is between their forms and descriptiones. But of
this matter I intend God willing to speak more largely an other time.

Of the herb called Lathyris.
LAthyris puts forth a stalck of the length of a cubit / and a fingre thyck
/ and holow within. There grow in the top things like wings / and there grow
out of the stalcke / long leaves like almondes leaves / but brother and
smother. They that are in the highest tops / are found less / in the licknes
of Arestolochia or of a long Iuy lefe. It brings forth depiction of plant
Lathyris.
fruit in the top in the highest branches / which is notable by the reason of
iij. cases or vessels that the sede is in. The fruit is round as capers /
where in are contained round corns divided one from an other / by filmes yt
rynne between. The seeds are bigger the^ great bitter tares called erua / and
round. And when ye barckis taken from the^ / they are white and sweet in
taste. All the hole bushe is full of milck / as the herb called Tithymalus is.
This description agrees well with the herb which is called in English
spurge / in Duch springkraut / in French espurge / of the apothecaries
catapucia minor / not because it is little / but because it is less then
ricinus / which is called catapucia mayor. But the figure which that
Matthiolus sets for Lathyri / agrees not with this description. For the
leaves are not very like almonde leaves / nether brother then they be: But
perauenture his karuer has begyled him as karuers and paynters have begyled o
/ there men before this time.

The virtues of spurge out of Dioscorides.
Six or seven granes of spurge taken in pills with figs or dates / purge
the belly. But he that has taken them / must afterward drynck cold water.
They draw down choler / fleme / and water. The juice taken out / as the juice
of Tithymal: is taken forth / and dressed / has the same workyng. The leaves
are sodden with a cock for the same purpose.

Out of Actuarius.
SPurge purges thynne fleme vehemently. Fiftene of the greater corns / are
given at ones / and xx. of the less corns. They that would be effectually
purged / let them chow them. Let the^ that desire not to be so gretely purged /
swalow them hole over specially / if he that takes them have a weke stomach.
Aetius has ye same words and sentence of Lathyris that Actuarius has.
Wherefore it appears that Actuarius a later writer then Aetiu^ / took it that
he wrote out of Aetius.

of the herb called Lauer or Sion.
SIon otherwise called lauer / is found in waters / with a fat bushe right up
with broad leaves / like unto the herb called Hipposelino / but less and well
smellyng. The herb called in some place of England belragges / agrees in all
points with this description. But so does not the herb called in English
brooklyme / and in Duche bauch pung / for when as Sion is described to be a
right up growyng herb with leaves like hyposelino: broock lyme crepeth most
come^ly by the ground and has a lefe nothing like unto hipposelino. Wherefore
Amatus gives an unright duche name unto Sio^ / when he calls it bauchbunge^
or pu^gen / as the Duche me^ also did before him of whom he learned to call
Sion bauchbunge^. I meruell that Matthiolus makes Syon with seeds in little
coddes / when all the Syon that ever I could either se / in England / Germany /
or Itali / had ever sede in ye top after the manner of Persely / with out any
coddes. Wherefore I reken that his Syon is not the right Sion. Syo^ is not only
so like a kind of Selinon / called hipposelinon or olus atrum in the leaves as
Dioscorides writes / but also so like Selino or Apio in the stalck and top /
and sede / that some have taken it for Elioselino / and have named it
waterpersely. Which name were good to be received in England that the herb
might ye better there by be known / the^ by ye name of belragges.

The virtues of water Persely.
THe leaves of Syon either raw or sodden / if they be taken in / they break the
stone and drive it forth. They move men to make water. They are good to help
women to their sycknes. They are also good for to help the birth to come forth.
If they be taken in mete / they are also good for the blody flix.

The Laurel or Baytre.
LAurus is named in Greek (...), in English a Bay tree or a Laurel tree / in
Duche ein lorben baum / in French vng laurier. The leaves of the Bay tree are
always grene / and in figure and fashon they are like unto scala celi / and to
periwincle. They are long and brodest in the midst of the lefe. They are
blackishe grene / namely when they are old. They are curled about the edges /
they smell well. And when they are casten unto the fire / they crake
wonderfully. The tree in England is no great tree / but it thryueth there many
parts better and is lustier then in Germany. The berries are allmoste round /
but not altogether. The kirnell is covered with a thick black bark / which
may well be parted from the kirnell.

The virtues of the bay tree, and it that grows out of it.
THe bay leaves have the virtue and strength to hete / and to soften /
wherefore the broth of them is good to sit in / for the diseases of the mother
and of the blader. The grene leaves of the bay tree bind some thing. And if they
be laid to when they are broken / they hele the styngyng of bees / and waspes.
The same laid to with perched barley and bread / swage al infla^mationes or
hoote burninges / but if they be dronken / they make all that is in the stomach
go forth / and move a man to vomit. Bay berries hete more then the leaves:
therefore if they be bruised and put into an electuary maid with honey / and
sodden with Maluasei / they are good for a consumption / and for them that are
short wynded / and for all reumes that fall into the lounges and breast. They
are good to be dronken in wine / against the bytyng of scorpiones. They weish
out frekles. The juice of the berries with old wine and rose oil / is good to
be poured into the ears against the ache of them / and the hardness of hearing.
Men use to put them into medicines which refreshe them that are weary / or
tyrede / and unto oynmentes that scatter or drive abroad. The bark of the
root / breaks the stone / and it is perilous for weomen with child. It
helps them that are sick in the lever in the quantite of a scruple and an
half if it be dronken in wine. Beside these virtues that Dioscorides gives
unto bay berries. Auicenna writes that the oil of bay is good for the head
ache / for the Morpheu / for the syngyng in the ear. The oil also makes men
vomit. It is good for the shaking of an ague: the bay berry is also a remedy
against all poison. Dioscorides writes of the oil of bay or Lauriell oil thus.
The bay oil is better that is fresher / and has a greater color / and that is
most bitter and sharp. The pour of it is to heal and tho soften. It opens
the breath holes of the veins. It drives away werynes. There is no better
remedy against all the diseases of the synewes / coldes / fallinge down of
humores / the ach in the ears / the diseases of the kydnes or neres / that
come of coolde / then this oil is if it be laid to. But if it be dronken it
stirs a man to vomit. Mesue writes of bay oil thus. The oil of Barberries
is good for the ache of the liver / and for the migram or ach of the one side
of the brayn / when as they come of could cause. It is also good against the
pain of the great gut / of the mother and of the milt. The later writers hold
that it is good against scalles and skurfe / and worms / scabbes / scalles an
wheles / and ploukes.

Of Lentilles.
LEns is called in Greek Phacos / in English a Lentil or Lentilles / in Duch /
Linsen / in French Lentille. Lentil is a bushy and thick pulse with leaves like
unto a fitch or a tare / but less. The flowers are purple in white. It has
little coddes somthyng depiction of plant (...). Lens.
flatt / wherein are contained in every one / about iij. or iiij. granes in
figure flat / like an half pe^ny / but somthyng rysyng in bigness toward the
mids / as a little cake or bannock is / which is hastily baked upon ye harth /
the sede is redish. They are far deceived / which have used ye great gardin or
Spanishe lentilles / whereof some are white / for ye white Orobo / for they want
both figure and also ye virtues of Orobus. Lentilles grow in great plenty in
Cambridge shyre / and all throw Germany where as they are husked and used for a
meat.

The virtues of Lentilles.
THe often use of Lentilles in meat / makes dull the eysyght. They are hard
of digestion / and vex the stomach and fill it with wind. If they be sodden
with their shilles untaken of / they stop the belly. They are best to be
eaten / yt are most easily digested / and when they are steped make the water
nothing black. They have a property to bind together / by reason whereof they
stop the belly / if the shelles be taken away before / and they be throwly
sodde^ / and the first water be caste^ away (for the former brothe louseth the
belly. They make a man dream troublesome dreams. They are euel for ye head /
for the synewes and the longes. They will work better in the stopping of the
belly / if ye put unto them vinegre / Endive or porcellayn / or read betes or
myrtilles / or the shell of pomgranates / or dried roses / or medlers / or
services / or byndyng peers or quinces / or succory / or plantayn / and hole
galls / or ye berries of Sumach. And all these things must be casten away
after the sethyng. But the vinegre must be very sore sodden therewith / or else
it will trouble the belly. Thyrtye granes of Lentilles shelled / are good
against the over castyng of the stomach. If they be sodden with perched barley
mele and be laid to / they swage ye ache of ye gout / and glueth together
corners and hollow places of wounds laid to with honey. They burst up crustes
and scour sores. If they be sodden with vinegre / they drive away we^nes and
hard swellynges. With a quince of Melilote / they help the inflammationes of
the eyes and fundament / so that rose oil be put thereto. With few water they
are good for wheles / and for rynnyng and freting sores / and for the wyldefire
and for the kybes. They are also good for the pappes or breasts that have
clodded or clustered milck in them / and for to much plenty that rynneth out /
if they be sodden in water of the sea / and laid to. Auicenna writes that
Le^tilles make gross blood and thick / and that much using and eating of
them brings the lepre.

Out of Galene.
NO man makes bread of Lentilles / for they are dry and brittel / and have a
byndyng husk or skin / the which is as it were their flesh. And it has a
gross and erthly juice / and a small tarte qualite. But the juice that is
within the Lentilles / is contrary unto bynding. Wherefore if any man set the^
in water and season / the water with salt fish bryne / or oil / and take that
water / the same will make a man louse in the belly. Twyse sodde^ lentilles
stop the belly / and strenghten the guts / and all the hole belly.
Wherefore they are good both for the comen and the blody flix. But the shaled
or husked Lentilles as they have lost their streynght in byndyng and such
things as follow there upon / so do they norishe more then they that have their
husks upon them. But they make a gross and euel juice / and they go through
slowly.

Of duckes meat.
LEns palustris is called in greek phakos epit^n telmat^n / in English duckes
meat / in Duche mer linsen. Lens palustris / as Dioscorides says / is found
in waters that rynne not / but stand still / and that it is a certain moss
like unto a Lentill. This wede is well known in England / and specially of
them that have pondes / for in the later end of summer / if men take not great
pain / all the poudes will be covered over with duckes meat.

The virtues of duckes meat.
DVckis meat has a coolyng nature / wherefore it is good to be laid to
empostemes and gatheringes of humores that ryn to one place / to the wild fire
or great burninges / to the gouty both members alone and also with the mele of
perched barley. It gleweth or binds or makes fast the bowelles of young
childer. Galene writes that duckis meat is of a could and a moist
temperature / and in a manner is both could and moist in the second degree.

Of the Lentisk or Mastick tree.
depiction of plant Lentiscus.


THe Lentisk tree is not described of Dioscorides / nor of Theophrast that I
have seen as yet nether of Pliny. Therefore I will describe it as well as I can
/ according to the sight that I had of it where as I saw it growyng in Bonony.
The tree that I saw / there was but a low tree / and the leaves of it stand in
such order as the ash tree leaves do / that is every one / all most right over
in order against an other / saving that one stands a little beneth it / that
stands on the other side. With their manner of standing every pa^^
represents a cople of birds wings stretched forth ready to fly / and
chefely then / when as they are pressed forth upon a book. The proportion and
color of the lefe is not unlike unto the lefe of periwincle / saving that it is
much less. Pliny in the xviij. book of his natural History / and in the
xxv. chapter / alleges these iij. verses of Cicero / where by a man may know
some properties of the Lentisk tree. Iam uero semper uiridis semperque grauata,
Lentiscus triplici solita est grandescere foetu,
Ter fruges fundens, tria tempora monstrat arandi.


The meaning of these verses is this. The lentisk tree which is always grene /
and burdened / and has used to wexe great with a threfold fruit / whilse it
brings forth fruit thryse / it teaches or shows three times of plowyng.
Matthiolus the Italiane describes the lentisk tree thus. The lentisk tree is
thyck both in bows and in leaves / and ye twigs yt are in the top / bow
downwarde again toward the earth. The leaves are like unto the leaves of the
fistik tree / of a grievous smell / fat and brucle and blackishe grene. But about
the edges they are read as it were with little veins. It is always grene. The
bark is somthyng redishe / bowyng and toughe. It brings forth after the manner
of the turpentine tree / beside the berries / little coddes writhen inward after
the fasshon of an horn / where in is enclosed a clear moisture / which in
continuance of time is turned into little beasts / like unto them that come out
of the coddes of the elm and turpentine tree. All the hole tree has an ill savor.

The virtues of the Lentisk tree.
THe hole Lentiske tree has a byndyng pour / for the leaves / the boughs /
the sede / the bark and the roots are all like in property. The sodden juice
of it may be made thus. The leaves / the bark / and the root are sodden in
water / when they are sufficiently sodden / and couled afterward / the leaves
are casten away / the water is sodden again until it be as thyck as honye. The
mastik tree with his bindyng property is good against castyng out of blood /
against the come^ laxe / and against the blody flix / if it be dronke^. It is
good for ye rynnyng out of blood from the mother and for the falling down of
the mother / and of the fundament. In all things it may be taken in the stead
of Acacia or Hypocistis. The juice of the broken leaves does the same. The
broth by layng it to in bathyng / fills up hollow places / and fasteneth
together again broken bones. It stops fretyng sores / it dryueth forth
water. It fasteneth ye louse tethe / if they be washed with it. The grene
twigges are good to pik teth with all in the stead of sticks and strawes and
other tooth pickes. There is an oil made of the sede / which is good to be
used when any thing had need of stoppyng or bindynge. The mastick tree brings
forth a rosin which is called Lentiscina or masticke / of the common sort
Mastix / or mastik. Mastik is good to be dronke^ of them that spit blood / and
for an old host or coughe. It helps the stomach / but it makes a man belche.
If it be eaten / it makes a man's brethe savor well / it byndeth well together
the goumes that are to louse. The best and the greatest plenty of it / grows
in Chio or Sio as it is now called. The best is it that is clear / and shyneth
/ and is white as virgin wax is / britle / well smellyng / and crackyng: the
grene is not so good. Some use to conterfit mastick with frankincense and with
the mixtur of the rosin of a pinaple. Galene writes thus of mastick. That
which is white and comenly called Chio or of Sio / is made almost of ij.
contrary qualites / that is to wet / of a byndyng and a softenyng property. And
there for it is good for the inflammationes of the stomach / guts / and liver
/ as a thing that is hot and dry in the second degree.

Of the herb called Lepidium or Dittani.
LEpidiu^ is called in English Dittani / but foulishly and unlearnedly / in
Duche Pfefferkraut that is peperwurt / because it is so exceeding hot / which
name were more fitter in English for this herb then the name of Dittani /
that the name of Dittany might abide proper unto ye right Dittano / which
begins now to be set and sown in England. Dioscorides leuyng out the
description of Lepidium / says these words / gnorinion batinion esti / yt is
to say / it is a well known herbelynge / which word herbelyng seems to
privily warn us that the herb that Dioscorides means of here / is rather ye
Hiberis Democratis / the^ ye Lepidium yt Pliny describes. For Lepidiu^ yt
Pliny describes is no herblyng / but a long and a great herb. Pliny
describes his Lepidium thus. Exit in bicubitalem altitudinem, folijs laurinis,
sed mollibus. Vsus eius est, non sine lacte. Lepidium goes up into the length
of ij. cubits / and has leaves like bay leaves but softer. It must not be used
without milk. depiction of plant Lepidium magnum.
This description agrees very well unto our Dittany. Paulus Egineta calls ye
herb Hiberis / which Pliny calls Lepidium as his words here following will
bear witness. In totum hos (says he) sanitati restituit, Iberidis herbae vsus,
quam lepidium, alij agrio Cardamum appella^t. Quae vero apud nos fruticosa
nascitur, similibus lauri folijs and multo amplioribus, respondere, multa
experimenta testantur. That is / the use of the herb is Iberis restores these
men perfitly to their health again / this herb is called of some Lepidiu^ / of
other agrio cardamum. But many experimentes or profes bear witness that the
bushy one that grows with us / with leaves like bay leaves but greater /
answers not only in the sciatica / but also in other old diseases. This
Lepidium that Pliny / and Paul describe / grows plentuously about the water
side that rynneth through Morpeth in Northumberland / in such places as great
heaps of stones are casten together with the might of a great spat or floode.

The virtues of Lepidium.
I Need not to write any more of the virtues of Lepidium / that I have done
before / seeing yt Pliny and Paul give the same virtues to Lepidium that
Democrates / Galene and Archigenes give unto Iberis. Therefore they that will
know more of the virtues of Lepidium / let them read ye chapter of Hiberis. The
Germans in some places take the juice of this herb and menge it with vinegre
and salt / and make a sauce there of for rostedfleshe as in Freseland / some
make a sauce of redco for sodden meat.

Of Rosmary.
LIbanotis stephano matike / called in Latin Rosmarinus / is named in English
Rosemari. Rosemari (as Dioscorides says) puts forth small branches / and
about them small leaves / thyck / long / white in under / and grene above / with
a strong savor.

The virtues of Rosmary.
depiction of plant Rosmarinus.


ROsmary has an hetyng nature / Rosmary heals ye iaundes / if ye broth or
water that it is sodde^ in / be dronken before a man exercise him self / and
after that he has exercised him self / enter into a bath / and drink
vnwatered wine after. Men use to put Rosmari in medicines yt drive werisumnes
away / and into the ointment called Gleucinum. The Arabianes as Serapio
witnesses / give these properties unto Rosmari. Rosmari is hot and dry in
the third degree / it is good for the cold reum that falls from ye brayn /
it heateth and makes fine or subtle. It dryueth wind away / and stirs a
man to make water / and bryngeh down weomens flowers / it opens the
stoppynges of ye liver of the milt and the bowelles. Tragus the Germany writes
that Rosemary is a spice in the kitchines of Germany / and not without a cause.
The wine (says he) of Rosmari / taken of a woman / if she will fast iij. or
iiij. hours after / is good for the pain in the mother / and against the white
flowers if they come of any inward imposteme. It opens the lung pipes / and
it is good for them that are shortwynded. It helps digestion / and
withsta^deth poison. It stancheth the gnawyng of the belly / it scoureth the
blood / and if a man will go into a warm bed after that he has dronken of it /
it will make a man sweet. If that Rosemary leaves be sodde^ in wine / they will
do ye same. The ^^nserue made of the flowers of Rosmari / is good for them that
swoun / and are week hearted. The water of Rosemary as the same Tragus writes /
is good for them yt for horsenes have lost their speech. Rosemari is also
good^ withstand trynblyng of the members / and ye dusines of ye head.

Of the herb called Ligusticum.
LIgusticum which some call Panaceam / and other Panaces / grows much in
Liguria in the mount Appennine / nere unto the alps / where upon it has the
name. The inhabitants there about call it not without a cause Panaces /
because both in the root and stalck / it is like Panaci heracleotico / and
has the same virtues that it has. It grows in high and sharp or rough
mountains / and in shaddowy places / and specially about ryuers / or as other
textes have / about diches. It has a small stalk full of joints / like unto
dill / and leaves in the going about like unto Melilote / but softer / well
smellyng / smaller about the top / and much divided. In the top there is a
bushy or a spoky top / where in ha^geth black sede sound and somthyng long like
unto fenel / sharp in taste / in smellyng like spyce. The root is white / and
well smellyng like unto the root of Panacis heracleotici. This herb did I
never se in England / nether in Germany / but it that I saw in Italy / was not
like it / that Matthiolus sets forth. For it that I saw / had leaves thrice
as byg as it yt Matthiolus shows. There grew in it that I saw / all most in
every place three leaves together / which were like unto a kind of lotus / or a
clauer / or a trifoly. As far as I can mark as yet / the herb that I saw /
agrees better with the description / then it that Matthiolus has caused to be
painted / but let other that have seen ye right Melilote (where of I meruel
that Matthiolus has not set out the figure as he does of other herbs / which
he grants that he knows / be judges which of our two herbs is lyker unto
Melilote / and let that be the ryghter herb that has the lyker leaves unto
Melilote.

The virtues of Ligusticum.
THe nature of the sede is to hete and to make ripe. It is good for inward
aches and swellynges / and for inflammationes / specially of such as have
their stomach swellyng up / It remedieth styngyng of serpents. In drynk it
draws down weomens sickness / and stirs a man to make water. The root laid
to / has the same effect. It is very good for the mouth / wherefor the
inhabiter there / where it grows / use it in the sede of peper / and put it
in meats.

Of Lyuerwurt.
LIchen which comenly grows upon stones / is also called bryon / it cleueth
unto watery stones / or such as at the least are sometime sprynkled with water
as a moss. The color is for the most part grene / but sometime yeloweshe
grene / namely i^ the place be dried where it grows. To this description
agrees well the herb which is called in English Liuerwurte / in Duch Stein
leberkraut or Brunleberkraut / in French Hepatique / of the apothecaries
hepatica. If any man can not know this Liuerworth by this short description /
let him know it also by these marks. It rynneth like a grene lefe not only
upon stones / but also upon a moist ground / with certain bellishe swellynges /
aperyng above the rest of the lefe. There grows out of it a certain little
twig / like as it were a stalk / in ye top where of are little things like
sterres. At the first sight the hole herb looks like unto a lefe of the
crympled lettuce.

The virtues of Liuerwurt.
depiction of plant Lichen.


IF Liuerwort be laid to / it stops blood / it stops or holds back
inflammationes or burning where with the places begin to swell. It is a good
remedy against the foul skurfe of the skin / If it be laid to with honey it
heleth ye iaundes / and it stops ye flowynges of humores that vex the tongue
and the mouth. Tragus writes that liuerwurt sodden in wine is good for the
diseases of the liver and longes / and that the powder of it taken with suggar
/ is good for the same / and it is much better then the come^ people thinks
/ against great hetes and burnynges.

Of the little tree called Ligustrum or Cypros.
CYpros (as Dioscorides says) is a tree with leaves / about the bows / like
unto the leaves of an olive tree / but brother / softer / and grener. It has
white flowers / mossy / or as some books have growyng thyck together like
clusters. The fruit is black / like older berries. The leaves have a certain
byndyng in the^. This description as I thynk and judge with many other agrees
in all points with the herb / which is called in Latin Ligustrum / in
English prym / depiction of plant Ligustrum.
or pryuet / in Duche Beinholtzlin / in French troesne. But Massarius Venetus
in his book that he writes of fisshes / denies styfly / that Cypros is
Ligustrum. But his reasones that he brings to prove his purpose with al: are
not so strong / but that they may be confuted. His first argument is this.
Both Dioscorides and Pliny make Cyprum a strange tree / and assign to it far
and strange countres to grow in / as in Canope / in Ascalone / and in Egypt.
But Ligustrum grows every where / therefore Ligustrum is not Cypros. First
Massarius says not truly in sayng that Dioscorides and Pliny make Cypros a
strange tree / if he mean by sayng so that they meant / that it grew not in
their countrees. For allthough Dioscorides says that the best Cypros grows
in Canope / and in Ascalone: yet it follows not / that Dioscorides denies
that there is any Cypros growyng in Grecia or in Italy. The same Dioscorides
writes that the best Iris grows in Illyrico and in Macedonia: does it follow
therefore that he says that Iris grows nowhere else but in Illyrico and in
Macedonia. This first argument therefore as ye se / is of no effect. And where
as he says / that Pliny makes Cyprum a strange or foren tree / which grows
not in Italy: he reports not truly of Pliny / for Plinies words of Cypros
are these: Ligustrum eadem arbor est quae in orient Cypros. Ligustrum is the
same tree that Cypros is in the East. How shall a man then gather that Pliny
says / that there is no Cypros in Italy / when as he says thus plainly as
ye have heard that Ligustrum is the same tree that Cypros is in the East /
then if Ligustrum and Cypros be all one as he says: then / when as Ligustrum
grows in Italy / then grows also there Cypros. But Massarius expounds
these words: Ligustrum is the same tree that is Cyprus in the East / after
this manner: Ye must understand that where Pliny says the same: that this
word the same / is as much to say as the same in lyknes. For if he would that
Cypros should have been Ligustrum / he would not have said in the xij. book /
Cypros is a tree in Egypt with leaves of iuiuba / when as Ligustrum grows
every where in Italy. Nether does he hold in that place / that Cypros is
Ligustrum / where he says: Quidam dicunt Cyprum esse arborem, quae in Italia
Ligustrum vocatur. Some say that Cyprus is the tree which is called in Italy
Ligustrum. These be his arguments where with he would have proved that Cypros
and Ligustrum were not all one. But to answer unto to his reasones / I axe of
him or any other that holds his opinion / where or in what place Theophraste
/ Dioscorides or Pliny / or any other good writers of herbs / used any such
phrase or manner of speaking as this. The lefe of Berony is an oak lefe / or the
lefe of veruyn is an oak lefe / because the oak leaves are like unto the leaves
of veruyn and betony. Who did ever say that an ape was a man / because he is
like unto a man? surely that I remember / I have not red any such phrase in
Pliny nether in any other good author. But what if this where a ryfe phrase in
Pliny / yet for all that / it should not follow in this place that eadem /
should betoken like. And that shall I prove by this reasone. Ye grant that
Ligustrum is very like Cypros / and so like that the one may be named with the
others names / because they be so like. Then if Ligustrum have also the
properties of Cyprus as it has. The perfect likewise / where in differs the
one from the other / when as they agree in all points both in lyknes and in
virtues. But Pliny gives the same virtues unto Ligustro that Dioscorides
gives unto Cypro: read the places in the forsayde autores / and ye shall find
that I say true. Wherefore seeing that Ligustrum is Cypros both in lyknes and in
virtue / the interpretation of Massarius is not to be allowed. And as for the
meaning of these words of Pliny / Ligustrum is the same tree that Cypros is in
the East / it has his profits / uses and commodites in Europa etc. Me think
/ that this is the right understanding of them. The tree that is called in the
East Cypros / is called Ligustrum in Italy. But allthough Cypros in the East
be much stronger in operation / yet our Ligustrum is not altogether without
virtue in Italy / for it has these virtues folowyngs / which in deed
Dioscorides as I said before / gives unto Cypro. But yet I must answer to an
other reason that Massarius makes / which is this: If Pliny had meant that
Cypros had been Ligustrum / then would he not have said in the xij. book /
Cypros is a tree in Egypt / when as Ligustrum grows every where in Italy. Tho
whom I answer / by this question / in what book writes Pliny that Ligustrum
is Cypros: Writes he not so in the xxiij. book? This ones granted that
Cypros is Ligustrum / and that Ligustrum grows in Italy / I trow when as
Pliny holds both these sentences / that he gathers not truly of Pliny that
he should mean that Cypros were not to be found in Italy. Pliny in the sam
place where he says that Cypros is a tree in Egypt / he says also: Quidam
hanc esse dicunt arborem quae in Italia Ligustrum vocetur. Some say yt this is
the tree which is called in Italy Ligustrum. Then when as to say that Cypros is
in Egypt / is not to deny that it is in Italy and to allege that some men say
that Cypros is the tree which is called in Italy Ligustrum / is much less to
deny that Ligustrum is in Italy: this reasone of Massarius is found to be as
weke as his former arguments be. If that any ask of me how chances that
Pliny seems to dout in ye xij. book wheter Cypros be Ligustrum or no / and
that in the xxiij. he pronunceth and gives sentence of it that he seems to
dout of before. I answer that Pliny when as he wrote the xij. book / douted
wheter Cypros was Ligustrum or no / either because he had heard it so to be
either of some uncertain report / or had red it in some author / whose autorite
deserved not full credit / and that when he wrote a good season afterward the
xxiij. book / he had in the mean time learned of credible and learned men / or
red in credit worthy autores / that Cypros was Ligustru^. Between the twelft
book and the xxiij. ten books are contained / and some one book contained in
printe ix. large shetes of papyr: What time will a reasonable man give unto
Pliny for the studying setting in order / and writing of these x. books: If ye
grant him a month for every book to perfect it / as ye can grant him no less:
seeing that he was the admiral or chief rueler of the Emperoures Naui / and so
cumbred with many weighty besinesses which belonged unto his office / ye must
grant that in the space of x. months Pliny might not only have learned the
certaynte of Cypros / but of many other things where of he was uncertain
before. Therefore this ought to trouble no man that Pliny in his later book
does hold boldly / it where of in his former book / he was doutfull. The other
reasones of Massarius I pass over as so weik that even the young students of
Physic are able inoughe to confut by them selves. These reasones I thought
that it was mete / that I should answer to / lest any man by redyng of
Massarius Venetus / who writes learnedly of fisshes / should by his arguments
bring him from the truth / which Ruellius / Fuchsius / and Matthiolus defend /
in holdyng that Cypros is Ligustrum. Pryuet grows very plentuously / in
Cambrich shyre in the hedges / and almost in every gardin in London.

The virtues of Priuet.
THe leaves have a byndyng nature / wherefore they are good to be chowed in the
mouth to hele the sores of it. If they be laid to emplaster wise / they are
good against great burnynges or inflammationes and carbuncles. Whatsomeuer
thing is burned with the fire / may be healed with the broth of Priuet leaves.
The flour of Priuet laid unto the forheade / swageth the ache thereof. The oil
of Priuet / heateth and softeneth the synewes if it be menged with those
things that are of an hot nature.

Of the Lily.
LIlium is called in Greek Krinon or Lirion / in English a Lily / in Duche wyS
Lilgen or Gilgen / in French du Lis. The Lily has a long stalk and seldom
more then one / how beit it has sometime ij. It is ij. or iij. cubits high.
It has long leaves and somthyng of the fasshon of the great satyrion. The
flour is excedyng white / and it has the form or fasshon of a long quiver /
that is to say small at the one end / and byg at the other. The leaves of the
flowers are full of crestes. The ouermost ends of the leaves bow a little
backwarde / and from the lowest part within / come forth long small yelow
things like thredes / of an other smell then the flowers are of. The root is
depiction of plant Lilium.
depiction of plant Lilium purpureum.
round / and one piece grows hard to an other allmoste after the manner of the
root of Garleke / but that the clowes in the Lily are brother. There is also a
redish purple colored Lily beside the white / where of Dioscorides also makes
mention.

The virtues and properties of the Lily.
THe ointment made of Lilies softeneth the synewes and also very well the
hardness of the mother. The leaves of the herb laid to / are good against the
styngyng of serpents. The same made hot / are good for places that burned. If
they be laid vj. and seasoned in vinegre / they heal wounds. The juice sodden
with honey or vinegre in a brazen vessel / ^is a good medicine for old sores
and for grene wounds. The root roasted and broken with rose oil / heals
places burned with the fire. It softeneth ye mother. It brings weomen their
desired sickness. It covers wounds with a skin. If it be broken and bruised with
honey / it heals out synewes / and places out of ioynte. It heals scurfynes
/ scales / scabbes and Lepres / and it scoureth away the rynning sores in the
head. It scoureth ye face and takes away the wrynkles. It is good to be
brayed with the leaves of henbayn and whete mele / in vinegre to swage the
inflammation or burning heat of the stones. The sede dronken is a remedy
against the bytynge of serpe^tes. The leaves and the sede are good to be laid
unto the cholerik inflammation called Erysipelas.

Of the herb called Limonium.
depiction of plant Limonium.


LImonium has leaves like unto a beat / but thynner and longer / ten in number
/ and often times more / a thyme stalck / and a straight like unto a lily. It is
full of red byndyng sede. Some learned men hold that the herb called pyrola /
of the lyknes that it has with a pere tree lefe / and in Duche Wintergruene /
is the right Limonium. But pyrola has not leaves longer then a beat / nether x.
or more together. Other hold / that bistorta is Limonium / but nether the
leaves are like betes leaves / nether has it such a stalck / as can ryghtly be
compared unto a lilies stalck. But he yt should use either of both these for
Limonio / he should not do amise. For all though they differ from Limonio in
lyknes / yet they agree well it in properties. Matthiolus sets forth ij.
figures of Limoniu^ / but the former has not a stalck like a lily / wherefore
it can not be Limonium. And as for the second / allthough it agrees metely
well with the description / I can not tell whether it be Limoniu^ or no /
because he tells not whether the sede be byndyng or no. If he would have
taught us the Italiane name of it / percha^ce some of us that here after shall
go into Italy / might spear it out and find it by that name. But now have we
nothing to help us with al / saving only the figure wherefore we shall come more
handly by the knowledge of his Limonium.

The virtues of Limonium.
THe sede of Limonium broken and dronken in wine / in the mesure of ij. ounces
or thereabout / is good against all kinds of flyxes / both blody flixes / and
other. And the same is good for the blody isshue that weomen are some time vexed
with all.

Of the herb called Flax or line.
depiction of plant Linum.


FLax is an herb with a small stalk / where upon grow many small leaves /
somthyng long and sharp at the end. It has blue flowers in ye top of the
stalk / and after that they be gone / there come forth round knoppes / saving
that there is in the end a sharp thing like a prick growyng out. These knoppes
or heads are called in Northumberland bowls / and within these heads are
long flat seeds in color redishe / and each sede is contained in his proper
cell diuyded from the rest. The root is very small. Flax which is called of the
Northen men lynt / in Duche Flachs / in French Du line / in Greek Linon / and
in Latin Linum / grows very plentuously in the North part of England / and
should grow as plentuously also in the South part / if men regarded not more
their private lucre then the kings Laws and the comen profit of the hole
realm. I have seen flax or lynt growyng wild in Sommerset shyre within a mile
of Wells / but it has fewer bowls in the top then the sown flax has / and
a great dele a longer stalk. Which things are a sure token that flax would
grow there if men would take the pain to sow it.

The virtues of Lint sede.
LYnt sede has the same virtue that Fenegrek has. It scatters abroad or
dryueth away. It softeneth any thing that is infla^med or very hot / and has
any hardness / whether it be with in / or without / if it be sodde with honey /
oil / and a little water / or if it be put into sodden honey. When it is raw / it
takes away the defautes of the face and frekles / and little swellynges there /
if it be laid to emplaster wise with nitre or salpeter and ashes of a fygtre.
It dryueth away swellynges behind the ears / and hardness and rynnyng sores.
And if it be sodden with wine it scoureth away rynnynge sores / whose matter is
like honey. It pulls away roughe nails with a like portione of cresses and
honey. It draws forth the diseases of ye breast / if it be taken with honey in ye
manner of an electuari / it swageth the coughe. If it be taken in a cake
plentuously with peper / it will stir men to generation of chylder. The broth
of lynt sede is good to be poured in / against the gnawynges / and going of the
skin both of the guts and also of the mother. It brings also forth the
ordur or dung of the belly. It is good for weome^ to sit in water where in lynt
sede is sodden against the inflammationes and hete of the mother / I have red
in a practicioner / that vj. ounces of lynt sede oil a good remedy against the
pestilence if it be dronken all at one time. In other practicioners I read that
the oil of lint sede is good for to be dronken about the mesure of two or iij.
ounces with barley water against the pleuresi. But let the oil be fresh in
anywyse / for if it be old / it is unwholesome / and not to be taken within the
body.

Of Grummel or graymile.
Lithospermon.
depiction of plant depiction of plant

LIthospermon is called of the commen herbaries and apothecaries milium solis /
in Duch steinsamen / in French gremil / and it should be called in English
gray mile and not as it is now called grummell. It is called milium of the
herbaries / and in French mil / and also in English / because in form and
fassho^ it is like the yelow sede / which is called in Latin milium / and it is
called gray mil of the bluish gray color that it has / to put a difference
between it / and the other mile or millet. The Duche men give the name of the
hardness of the sede which is like unto a stone hardness.

The description of Lithospermon out of Dioscorides
LIthospermon has leaves like unto an Olive / but longer and brother and softer
/ namely they that come forth of the root and lie upon the ground. The
branches are straight / small / strong and of the bygnes of a sharp rishe and
woddishe. And in the top of the^ is there a double forth growyng / or a double
thing growing out / and each of the^ is like a stalck / with long leaves / and by
them is there a stony sede / little and round of the bygnes of Orobus. It
grows in rough and high places. Matthiolus supposes that Fuchsius does not
know ye right Lithospermo^ of Dioscorides / because he sets out / as he
says the less milium solis for Lithospermo. As for my part I grant that
there grows a better kind of Lithospermon viij. miles above Bo^ne in Germany
in a wild country called Kaltland / then this common Lithospermo^ called
commenly miliu^ solis is. But it had been Matthiolisses deuty to have proved by
the description of Dioscorides or by some part of it / at ye less / that
milium solis that Fuchsius sets forth / is not the true Lithospermon / and
then might he have laid ignorance unto Euchsiusses charge the better. But in my
judgment Matthiolus is more ignorant of the true Lithospermy / then Fuchsius
is: for it that he sets forth / does nether agree with ye description of
Dioscoridis / nor yet of Pliny. The herb that Matthiolus sets out (he might
have set out ye best Lithospermon / and the hole perfect her be with all his
parts / seeing that he makes Lithospermon so commenly known unto all men in
Italy) has but two small stalks where upon the leaves and seeds grow / and
they are set out / not straight but crooked / and bowyng diverse ways.
Lithospermon of Dioscorides has diverse branches that are right or straight.
The two forth growynges that Dioscorides says / are in ye tops of the
branches / can not be seen in it that Matthiolus sets forth. The leaves of
Lithospermon that Dioscorides describes are longer and brother then an Olive
tree leueis / namely they that are next unto ye ground. But ye leaves of it that
Matthiolus sets forth / seems a like long and broad in all places of ye
stalck or twyg yt they grow on / and resemble very little an Olive lefe as any
man yt knows an olive lefe can bear witness. The Lithospermo^ of Dioscorides
has ye sede in the top / fur Dioscorides says. In ramulorum cacumine duplex
est exortus cauliculo similis, folijs longis, inter quae paruum semen, etc. But
the Lithospermo^ that Matthiolus paynteth has the seeds even from the root
allmoste unto the ouermost top of all. Wherefore Matthiolus accusyng Fuchsius
of an error / erreth in Lithospermo much more his self. If he say yt he
sets forth Lithospermon Plinij / the^ he grants by sayng so / that he
knows no more the right Lithospermon Dioscorides / then Fuchsius lately
checked for ignorance does: for it is evident that the Lithospermo^ of
Dioscorides and Plinij are two diverse herbs. But the lithospermon that
Matthiolus paynteth / does not agree with it that Pliny describes / for it that
Pliny describes / has leaves twyse as byg as rue leaves and diverse twyggy
branches / and certain things like little berdes / in whose tops it has
little stones / of the bigness of ciches. Then when as it that Matthiolus
paynteth / has leaves six times as byg as rue leaves and no twyggy branches /
nether any things like little berdes in whose / tops little stones do grow of
ye bigness of a ciche (for they appear to be many parts less) the herb that
Matthiolus sets forth / is not Lithospermon Pliny. We have in England
growyng among the corn an herb in all points like unto it / that Matthiolus
sets furthe. But that kind does no man that I have seen / take for the right
Lithospermo / but for a bastard kind of it.

The virtues of Lithospermon or gray mill.
THe sede of Lithospermy has this property / that if it be dro^ken with whyt
wine / it breaks the stone and drives forth water. Autores write that it
breketh chefely the stone in the blader if it be broken small and dronken with
wine.

Of Darnel.
DIoscorides describes not lolium / which thing has been the cause that many
have erred in Lolio / and taken other wedes for it. For some have taken tares
for Lolio / and other cocle. But ye words that Dioscorides in other places and
Theophrast write of Lolio / will not suffer that tares or cocle shall be Lolium.
Dioscorides in the description of Phoenix / writes that Phoenix has an ear
like unto lolium. But nether tares nor cocle have any ears at all / wherefore
nether of them both can be lolium. Theophrast in the fifth chapter of his fourth
book de historia plantarum comparyng Lolium and rise together / says. Quod
orizam vocant (id semini nu^cupato simile est) pistumque tanquam alica,
redditur concoctu perfacile, aspectu lolijs simile etc. But nether cocle nor
tares are in any point like unto rise / wherefore nether of the^ ca^ be Loliu^
Theophrasti. Saint Hierome writing upon these words of saint Matthewis gospel
/ says. Inter triticum and zizaniam, quod Lolium appellamus, quam diu herba
est, nec dum culmus venit ad spicam, grandis similitudo est, and in discernendo
aut difficilis aut nulla distantia. There is great lyknes between whete and
zizaniam / which we call lolium / as long as it is an herb / and the stalk is
not yet commed to the ere / either it is not possible to discern the one from
the other or else very hard. But when as cocle and tares come first forth /
they may be easily discerned from wheat. Therefore nether cocle nor tares can be
the Lolium of saint Hieromes time / where upon it follows that cocle and tares
are nether the loliu^ of Dioscorides / nor of Theophrast / nor yet zizania in
scripture. But all these marks above rehearsed agree well unto the wede / yt we
call in English darnel / which the Duch men call lulch / and the French iura
/ thefore our Darnell is the right Lolium.

The properties of Darnel.
DArnel has the virtue to scour away round about / freting sores / rotten sores
/ and deadly burning sores / if it be beten into powder and laid to. With
radices and salt laid to implaster wise / it heals wild scurffes / and with
unburned brymstone and vinegre lepres. The same sodden in wine with lint sede /
and doves dung / resolves hard lumpes and wennes / and breketh such places as
are hard to be made ripe. If it be sodden with mede / it is good to lay upon
the place diseased with the sciatica. If there be made of it a perfume / with
perched barley mele / and myr / or safrone / it helps conception. It is hoote
in the beginning of the third degree and dry in the end of the second degree.

Of the herb called Louchitis altera.
LOuchitis altera / as Dioscorides writes / has leaves like unto ceterache /
which is called Asplenu^ / but greater / rougher / and much more divided or cut
in. And no more does he write of the description of Louchitis. I have seen ye
herb often both in Germany / and in diverse places of Sommerset shyre / and
Dorset shyre. It is much longer then ceterach / and the gappes that go between
ye teth / if a man may call the^ so / are much wyder then the cuttes that are
in ceterach. And the teth are much longer and sharper. I know no English name
that it has. But of the lyknes that it has unto a co^be and a fern / it may
be called comb fern. Hieronymus Tragus calls it Asplenu^ syluestre / and in
Duche walt aspleno^. It grows much in darck laynes / about bushe roots /
and out of the shadow often times alone.

The virtues o^ the second Louchitis.
THe herb which I name combeferne / is marvelous good for wounds / for if it
be laid unto wounds / it is a good defensive for them / for it will defend the
wounds from burning / or inflammationes. If the herb be dried and dronken in
wine / it will minishe the swellyng of the milt.

Of the herb called Lotus vrbana.
DIoscorides writes no more of lotus vrbana / but that some men do call it
trifoli / or clauer / and that it grows in gardines. Wherefore it is very
hard by these few words to gather among so many threleued herbs as we have /
which of them is ye right Lotus vrbana. Matthiolus thinks that the commen
Melilote / is Lotus vrbana / and Amatus Lusitanus holds that / alleluya or
wodsore is Lotus vrbana. But the learned men of Ferraria / when I was there /
showed me an other herb / differyng from both these / and said that it was the
right Lotus vrbana. The herb at the first sight is very like unto the herb
called in English wodsorel / or alleluya. But in these / it and the wodsore
differ. The wodsore grows only in woddes / and in wild places / but this
herb grows only in gardines and in towns as far as I could hither to learn.
The wodsorel / has nothing resemblyng a stalck / for ye flowers grow from the
root upon a long small pediculo / that is a footlyng or footstalcke such as
chyries grow on / and the flowers are white and iij. parts bygger the^ ye
flowers of this herb are / which I set forth for Loto vrbana. But this herb
has a little stalck and in ye top of yt grow ij. or.iij. yelow flowers or more
some time / and some time fewer. It has a sour taste as wod sorel has.
depiction of plant Lotus Vrbana.
This herb do I judge rather to be the right Lotus vrbana then either wod
sorell / or melilote. For as melilote / is not fit to be eaten and is a wild
herb / not therefore to be norisshed in gardines / so the wodsorel all though
it were mete to be in gardines / and is very good to make sallettes of: Yet it
grows not comme^ly in gardines as the other does / where fore it appears yt
this herb which is found as far as I know no where / but in gardines should
rather be lotus vrbana the^ any of ye other ij. herbs. I never saw this herb
/ but twyse in all my life / ones in Ferraria and ones in Claue^na. Wherefore I
know no English name for it: hewbe it / it may be named in English gardin
clauer or sour clauer / or sallat clauer.

The virtue of gardin clauer.
IF that ye will take the juice of this herb and put honey unto it / if ye lay
it to the eyes / it will drive away ye white sores in the eyes called argemata
/ the clouds of the eyes and other darkness.

Of the herb called Lotus syluestris.
LOtus syluestris that is called wild lotus / which some call ye less trifoli /
grows in Libia. It has a stalck two cubits high and sometime higher / it
has leaves like ye meadow clauer or trifoly / and sede like fenegreke / but much
less with a certain taste like a medicine / Theophrast in the vij. book de
historia pla^taru^ and in ye xiiij. chapter seems to make a great sort more
of wild lotus the^ Dioscorides makes. For he writes thus of the kinds of
lotus. Certain kinds of herbs have many forms and fashones / and but one
name / as lotus. For there are many kinds of lotus which are disseuered / and
differ one from an other / in lefe / stalck / flowr / and fruit. Take it that
is called mel frugum / for an example / which differs from all the other in
virtue and in manner of meat that it has. But Theophrast describes never one
of the kinds of lotus / where of he makes so many kinds: wherefore a man can
not learn of him the difference between one potus and an other. He seems to
give some great difference to it that grows in the corn / which he calls
mel frugum. But yet a man cannot gather thereby that it is the lotus syluestris
that Dioscorides describes. But because I have seen our comen melilote both
with a yelow and also with a white flower / growing amongst the corn both
beside Bon / beside Sou^des / and beside Worms in high Germany and no other
kind of lotus so growyng: I take it to be the kind of lotus which he called
mel frugum. And because the herb which is called in high Duchland stundkraut
/ and in Netherland wit nardus / is a long herb of two cubits hight / and
has a certain physic taste in the sede by reason where of it is called white
nardus in Fresla^t / and has leaves like unto ye meadow clauer or trifoly / I
take it to be ye lotus syluestris / where of Dioscorides writes: let other men
judge as they list. It grows not wild nether in England nor in Germany / and
I have not seen it wild in the feldes in Italy / for it that grows in Italy
has a yelow flour / when as this that I take to be lotus syluestris / has a
pale bluish flower.

The virtues of Lotus Syluestris.
Wild lotus heateth and byndeth a little / it scoureth away the deformites and
spots in the face / if it be anointed therewith and with honey. The herb
broken by it self or with mallowis sede / and dronken with Maluasy or any other
wine / is good against the pain of the blader.

Of Hoppes.
depiction of plant Lupulus.
I Can find no mention of hoppes in any old author / saving only in Pliny. But
he does not descrybe it. Ioa^nes Mesue a younger writer / makes our hoppes the
fourth kind of volubilis / and he describes it thus: The forth kind of
volubilis has leaves like a citrul but sharp / and ye flowers are full of leaves
one growyng over an other / after ye manner of scales / and this kind is called
lupulus. It is temperate / or rather cold in the beginning of ye first degree.
All these tokens agree well with our hoppes / saving that where he says that
the fourth wind is cold / for after ye lernyng of Galene because the ripe
flowers are bitter and bite ye tongue not a little / they are hot at the least in
the beginning in the second degree. Let any learned man that will taste of it
that grows both in Italy and Germany / and he shall find that I say true.
Wherefore it is plain that either the fourth wind of Mesue is not our hoppes /
which I will not hold / or else Mesue meaned not of the ripe flowers when he
said that hoppes were cold / but of the yo^g te^dre knoppes / which when they
come first forth like sperages / are temperate or rather cold / as other
buddes and unripe fruits of other hot plants be many / as all learned men
can tell. I never saw better hoppes then I saw growyng wild a little from the
wall that goes from Chertosa to Pauia / by a little rivers side. They grow also
wild in many places both of England and of Germany. The hop bushe is called of
the later Grecianes bryon / of Pliny lupus salictarius / of ye Barbarus writers
humulus / of the later learneder writer lupulus / in Duche hopfen.

The virtues of Hoppes.
HOppes purge or scour the blood mesurably of yelow choler / and clengeth it /
and tempereth it well / whilse they que^che the heat of it. And this do they
most chefely when as they are infused / or steped in whay. The syrop made of
Hoppes is good against the guelsucht or iau^des / and for agues yt come of the
heat of the blood or of choler. The hop with his juice and perched barle is
good for the burning headache and for the great heat of ye stomach / and liver.
Wherefore seeing that it is so holsom a medicine / I meruel yt the Physicianes
of this time / use it no more in medicine. Thus much has Mesue written of
hoppes.

Out of other yet later writers.
HOppes purge forth both choler and melancholy / they drive away impostemes /
and swellynges. They drive out by the stole the water of the dropse. The juice
of Hoppes dronken raw / purges the belly more then otherwise taken. But then
it opens not so much. When it is sodden / it opens more but then it
purges less. The juice poured into the ears / saves them from corruption
and saves them from stynkyng. The roots open stoppynges / and specially of
the milt and liver.

Of the pulse called Lupines.
LVpinus is named in Greek thermos / in Duche feigbon / in French lupin / and
so may it be called in English / or if a man will follow the Duche / he may
call it a fyg been. Lupine has one long stalk / and a lefe with v. or seven
iaggers / which altogether / when as they are grown out / have the lykenes of
a ruel of a spor / or of a sterr. The flower is white / in whose place / when
it is gone / comes after a long cod / wherein are v. or seven seeds in color
white and without / sometime a little redishe / in fasshon flat like a cake: it
has a shord root in color redishe. The leaves of lupines turn with ye son /
as Pliny writes and experience teached.

The virtues of Lupines.
THe mele of lupines / licked up with honey / or if it be taken with drink /
dryueth worms out of the belly. The lupines selves steped / and eaten with
their bitterness / are good for the same purpose. The broth depiction of plant
Lupini albi.
of them has like virtue / dronken with rue and pepper / and so is it good for
the^ that have the disease of the milt. With the same it is good to bathe and
wash wild sores / gangrenes / and the scab / when it begins first to come
burstinges of it of wheles / rynnyng sores of ye head / frekles and spots.
Lupines put into the body after the manner of a suppositori / with honey and myrr
/ all being wrapped in woll / draws both down weomens flowers / and also her
burden yt she goes with if it be ripe. The flour or mele of lupines with lynt
sede / amendeth ye skin and blew marks: with perched barley and water it
swageth infla^mationes / and burnynges. It eases swellynges / and it is good
for the sciatica laid on with vinegre. If it be laid to with vinegre where in
it is sodden / it heleth wennes and bursteth carbuncles. Lupines sodden in rayn
water / until they wexe towgh into a thick broth / scour and make clean the
face. Lupines are also good for the scabbor maugenes of cattle with the root
of black chameleon / so that they be washed with the warm broth that they are
sodden in. The roots sodden in water / provoke or stir a man to make water.
Lupines broken / after that by stepyng they wex sweet / if they be dronken in
vinegre take away the lothsomnes of the stomach and ingendreth an appetit an
lust to eat. The smoke of lupines burned / drive gnattes and mydges away as
Pliny writes.

Of Lysimachia.
LYsimachia puts forth stalks of the lenght of a cubit or some time longer /
busshy / small / and the leaves com out at ye knees or knottes / or joints of
ye herb. They are thin and in fassho^ like wylow leaves and in taste byndyng.
The flour is darck read or of ye color of gold. It grows in watery and in
marrishe and fennish grounds. This is a very comen herb in Germany and
England: I meruell yt Matthiolus could not find it in Italy until it was sent
him from Rome by Vincent Ca^ton to Goritia. But all though it be found in mani
places of England / yet depiction of plant Lysimachiae purpureae primum genus.
depiction of plant Lysimachia luthea.
depiction of plant Lysimachia III.
I could never learn any English name of it. It may be well called after the
etimologi of the word / and also of ye virtue that it has lous strife / or it
may be called herb willow. The Duche men call it weyderich.

The virtues of Lousstrife.
THe juice of the leaves / by there byndyng pour stops the castyng out of
blood. It is either to be poured in / or to be taken inward for ye blody flyx.
If it be put in a mother suppository / it will stop the excessive rynnyng or
isshue of the mother. If ye stop your nose with this herb / it will stop the
rynnyng out of blood of it. It stays also the excessive rynnyng out of blood
out of wounds. It dryueth away serpents and kills flies with his smoke /
for it is wonders sharp in smell. There is an other Lysimachia besyd it that I
have spoken of with a redish purple flower / that grows much about water
sides with an head like an ear: But I red of no other properti that it
should have then it which has the yelow or golden flowers.

Of the Mallow or Maw.
MAlua is named in Greek Malachi / in English a Mallow / in Duch pappel / in
French maulue. There are two kinds of Mallows / the one is the gardin mallow
/ and the other is the wild mallow. And each of these as Pliny writes / is
divided into diverse kinds. Of those mallows that are sowe^ / the Grecianes
call the greater / malopen. Me thynck that the other is called malache /
because it softeneth the belly. Among the wild mallows it that has the
great lefe and the white rote / is called althea / and of the excellent
workyng that it has / it is called of some Aristalthea. The former kind is now
called in English / french mallow: it may be called tree mallow of the great
bygnes that it grows to. And it that is called Malache of the Grecianes / and
is after Pliny the depiction of plant Malua hortensis.
depiction of plant Malua syluestris pumila.
depiction of plant Malua syluestris.
less kind of gardin mallows / is called in English holy ok / in Duche
Winter rosen. The former kind of wild mallow / which as Pliny says / is
called Althea and Aristalthea / is also called of ye Latin writers Hibiscus /
in English marsh mallow / or marrish mallow / in Duche Ibishe of Galene
Anadendron / of Aetius De^dromalache of the apothecaries maluabis malua and
maluaniscus. The other kind of wild mallow is it that grows wild about
towns and high ways / and is commenly called in English a mallow. Theophrast
in the nynthe book de historia plantarum writes that certain things by
dressyng and trymmyng depart from their kind and old nature / as the mallow
does / says he / which when as it is by nature but an herb / yet grows up
into the greatenes of a tree. He says that the gardin mallow within six or
seven months grows so high / that the stalck of it will serve for a la^ce
staff / and that therefore diverse use the stalks of mallows for staves. The
leaves of mallows are known of all men to be round the sede is in a little
round form like a chese / some mallow flowers are read / some blew / and some
white / and if they had the like smell in beauty / might well be compared with
the rose flowers. The root is very long and deep in the ground and somthyng
shymy.

The virtues of mallowe or mawes.
THe gardin mallow is better to be eaten / then the wild mallow is. Yet is it
ill for the stomach and good for the belly. But ye stalks are much better. It
is good for the inward parts / and for the blader. The leaves chowed raw / and
laid to with a little salt / and honey / hele the impostemes in the corner of the
eyes / but when they begin to hele / the salt must be taken away. Mallows are
good to be laid to / against the stynginges of waspes and bees / for he that
is anointed with raw mallows and oil / shall be fre from the styngyng of bees
and waspes. With piss it heals the rynnyng sores / and scales / or scurfe of
the head. The leaves broken and laid to with oil are good for the wild fire /
and burned places. If weomen will sit in the broth of mallows / it will softe^
the hardness of the mother. It is good for the grawyng and of going of the skin
/ of the blader / guts mother and fundament / if it be put in with a clyster.
The broth of the mallow leaves sodden with the root / is a good remedy against
al poysones / if it be dronken by and by after / and be vomited out again. It
is a good help against the bytyng of a field spyder. The sede of mallows
dronken in wine with the sede of wild lotus swageth the smerting of the
blader. Galen and the Arabianes agree not in the complexion of the mallow / for
Galene gives a warm qualite unto wallowes / as these words following do
plainly declare. There is a certain tough and shlymy juice in mallows / which
manifestly differs from coldness / which thing ye may perceive even before ye
eat of the mallow / for if ye lay it to a fyrie inflammation after that ye have
laid lettice unto it / ye shall find / that like wise as the lettice has
cooled / that even so the mallows warm the place that they are laid to. But
Abe^ Mesuai in Serapione / says these words following of ye virtues of
mallows. The mallow is cold and moist in the first degree / and specially the
gardin mallow / and it is euel for the stomach. And whilse it is moist / it is
good for the blader / but yet the sede is much better there to / and it is
good for the roughenes or pain that comes by going of / of the skin / and of
the blader. It is good for the roughnes of the lunges / and breast. It is good
to make a plaster of it with rose oil / and to lay it to the impostemes of the
kydnes and blader.

Of the Mandrage.
depiction of plant Mandragoras masc.
THere are two kinds of Mandrag / the black which is the female / which is
called the letticer / with less leaves and narrower then lettice / which have
a strong savor / and are spread upon ye ground. And this kind bears apples
like unto sorbapples / pale in color and well smellyng / wherein is contained
sede / like unto the kirnelles of peers. It has roots of a good bigness ij. or
iij. one foldyng it self within an other. They are black with out / and white
within / and they are covered with a thick bark. And this kind has no
stalk. The other kind is the white Mandrag / and it is called ye male. The
leaves of this are byg / white / broad and smouth as the beat lefe is. The
apples of this are twyse as byg as the apples of the other be / with a color
turnyng toward saffron. They smell plesantly / joined with a certain greuousnes.
This kind of Mandrage I have often times seen in England / and it is ye herb
that we call comenly Mandrag. The roots which are conterfited and made like
little puppettes and mammettes / which come to be sold in England in boxes /
with heir / and such form as a man has / are nothing else but folishe feined
trifles / and not natural. For they are so trymmed of crafty thieves to mock
the poor people with all / and to rob them both of their wit and their money.
I have in my time at diverse times taken up the roots of Mandrag out of the
ground / but I never saw any such thing upon or in them / as are in and upon
the pedlers roots that are comenly to be sold in boxes. The Mandrag is named
in Latin Mandragoras / in Duch / alram. It grows only in gardines in England
and in Germany / but it is more comen in England then it is there. But it
grows not under gallosses as a certain dotyng doctor of Colon in his physik
lecture did tech his auditores / nether does it rise of the sede of man / that
falls from him that is hanged / nether is it called Mandragoras / because it
came of man's sede as ye for said Doctor dremed.

The virtues of Mandrage.
THe juice of Mandrag / dronken in the quantite of a scruple in honied wine /
draws forth Melancoly and fleme by vomitynge / after the manner of Helleborus.
But if a man take so much of it / it will kill him. It is good to be menged
with the medicines and sawhe as suege ach. Men use to take the barks of the
fresh roots and to stamp them and to pres^e the juice and to set it in the
son until it be grown hard / and then to put it up into erthen vessels /
for to be used when need shall require. They use also to take of the bark of
the root and to put a threde throw it / and so to hang it up / and afterward
to use them. There is a juice also taken out of the apples / but that is not so
quick in operation as the other juice is. Some take the roots and set them in
wine until the third part be sodden away / and when the broth is purified /
keep it / and give one cyat or an ounce and an half of it / to them that can not
sleep / and to them that are in great pain / and to such as must be burned or
cut in some place / that they should not feel the burning or cuttyng. It is good
to be put into the mother to soften it. If it be put into the fundament after
the manner of a suppository / it will make a man sleep. Some write that the root
has the virtue to softene every / if it be sodden six hours with it / and
that it will make it fit to receive easily any figure or form that a man will
grave in it. The grene leaves are good to be laid to the inflammationes of the
eyes / and to gatherynges / stirred up by sores with perched barley mele. It
resolves and scatters away wennes / swellynges and hardness. The same does
away scarres or marks of wounds without ieperdi of fretyng of the skin / if
they be rubbed mesurably therwt for the space of vj. or seven days. The leaves
are kept in bryne for the same purpose. The root broken and laid to with vinegre
is good for cholerik burnynges or infla^mationes. If it be menged with honey or
oil / it is good against the styngyng of serpents / with water it dryueth away
and resolves hard swellynges / and with perched barley mele / it slaketh the
pain of the joints. Wine may be made of ye root of Mandrag without any sethyng
/ after this manner. The pounds of the roots must be put into a small firkin
of sweet wine / there they must lie so long together until the virtue of the
roots is gone into the wine. Ye may give iij. cyates of this wine / to them
that must be cut / burned or fered. If they drynk this drink / they shall feel
no pain / but they shall fall into a forgetful and a slepishe drowsines. The
apples / if a man smell of them / will make him sleep / and also if they be
eaten. And so does the juice that is streyned out of them. But they that smell
to much of the apples / become dum. The sede of the apples dronken scoureth the
mother / and so does it also / if it be laid to with quick brymstone. It
stops the read isshue of weomen. If ye will have the juice / ye must scotche
and pryck the roots in many places / and then set vessels under it / and
save it. The juice that is pressed out / is better then that which droppeth
forth after cuttyng or scotchyng. But that comes not forth in every country
as experience teaches us. Because this herb diverse ways taken / is very
iepardus for a man / and may kill him if he eat it / or drynk it out of measure
/ and have no remedy for it: I will show you also remedy against the poison of
it. If Mandrag be taken out of measure / by and by sleep in sueth / and a great
lousyng of the streyngthe with a forgetfulness. But before that comes / it were
wisdom to vomit with mede / and afterward to take nitre and womwod with
sweet wine or Maluasey: ye must also pour vinegre and rose oil upon the
patientes head. It is good tho stir the body and to smell of Agrimoni / peper
/ mustarde costorium / and rue / bruised in vinegre. It is also good to smell of
tarr / or of the styngkyng that comes from a candle that is put out.

But if the patient cannot be easily waked again / it is mete to use such other
comen remedies. Auicenna would that they that are hurt with this herb / should
vomit with honey and butter. Where as Dioscorides would that a man's head should
have Rose oil and vinegre poured upon it / when a man has taken to much of
Mandrag. Matthiolus says that it is against reason that it should be laid to
the head which is cold / when as the cause of the diseases also cold / and
to take to bores in one wod / he catches Galene and accuses him for a like
fault / that is for conselyng men to pour rose oil and vinegre upon them that
have the drawsy or forgetful euel. And to confute Galene / he alleges Aetius
/ Paulus / and Trallianus / which do not admit oil and vinegre alone / but
would hoter medicines as erthpyne wild time / penin all / castorium / and
such like to be put there to. As for Galene I leave him undefended at this time
until I shall have more leisure / but for Dioscorides I answer / that if iij.
later writers then Galene / were enough to confute him: as many might by good
reason be sufficient to defend Dioscorides from that faut that Matthiolus
lays unto Dioscoridisses charge. But ij. of the witnesses that he allegeth to
confute Galene with all / that is Aetius and Paulus / and with them a learned
laterwryter of the Grecianes Actuarius / counsel that rose oil with vinegre
should be poured upon the hedes of them that have eaten or dronken to much of
Mandrag. But Matthiolus a little after in the same chapter forgettyng what he
had accused Dioscorides / and Galene of before / writes these words
following: Tametsi Mandragorae poma matura, etc. Allthoughe the ripe apples of
Mandrag the seeds taken out / be eaten diverse times with out any grefe at all:
Yet the unripe apples eaten with their sede / bring dedely withfalles. There
ryseth after insufferable heat / which burns all the outer part of the
skin. The tongue and the mouth withere and waxet dry / wherefore they that
are so vexed / are seen always gapyng with their mouth / and drawyng in
cold air. Thus far Matthiolus. Now seeing that he confesses openly here that
men are in such heat as have eaten of the unripe apples which are much colder
then the ripe apples be: how justly was Dioscorides accused a little before for
counsellyng roseoyle and vinegre / because they were cold / to be poured upon
the heads of them that had taken to much Mandrag? And how well does this his
sayng of the hot withfalles that came of the eayng of the unripe Mandrag
apples / agree with it / which he said immediately before the rehersall of the
hete / that aryseth of the eating of the row apples in these words. Ab
assumpta Mandragora (nisi fall lar) caput nullo afficitur calore. The head is
not vexed with any hete (except I be deceived) after the taking of Mandrage.
Now whether that such a forgetful man as this is ought so boldly to chek
anciant autores or no as he does at diverse times / let wise men and learned be
judges. But if he answer that he gives only hete unto the fruit / and not to
the root / beside that it may be said unto him / that so much he accuses
Dioscorides unworthily / as the hot withfalles come to / that come of the
unripe apples experience / is against his accusyng of Dioscorides and the
autorite of him that had the same experience also. For in the book that
Serapio wrote of simples / Rasis / says these words: Dixerunt mihi quidam ex
antiquis Babyloniae, quod puella quaedam etc. Certain of the ancientes or old
men of Babylon / have told me that a certain maid eat five Mandrag apples /
and that she fell in a swowne / and that she becam all read / and that a man
coming by at that time / poured snow water so long upon her head until she
rose again. And I have seen men my self which did eat of the root of Mandrag
to make them selves fat therewith / and it chanced unto them / as it chances
unto men that go out of the bath and drink much wine after their outgoyng.
For their faces was excedyngly read and swelled. These words does Rasis write
in the place above alleged. By which a man may learn that not only the unripe
appels of Mandragora drives a man into a great heat outwardly / but also the
roots / so that it is evidently now perceived both by autorite and experience
/ that Matthiolus was deceived when he said that nomans head was vexed with
hete after the eating of Mandragora. These have written some thing at large to
cause them that are to bold to old and worthy autores / to be advised before
they do so unadvisedly adventure to do the same again. Serapio and Auicenna
write that the sede of Mandrag taken in drynk / clengeth the mother / and so
wrote Dioscorides of the same sede many years before them / whereby it
appears that Rachel knowing the nature of the fruit of Mandrag before all
these writers / for this intent / desired to have the fruit of Mandrag / that
she might clenge her mother therewith / and thereby might be made the fitter te
conceive child her self as well as Lia her sister / and Silfa her maid did.

Mandrag as Paulus Egineta writes cools in the third degree. The apples of
it / seem to have some hea and moisture / by reason where of they may bring a
man into an heavy sleep. But the bark of the root / is strongest of all / and
cools not alone but also dries. The inner part is weyker.

Of the Apple tree.
MAlus in Greek Melea / in English an Appel tree / in Duche ein Apffel / oder
Apffelbaum / in French un Pomer. There are ij. general and principal kinds of
appel trees / The one is called Malus hortensis / in English an Appel tree. The
other is called in Latin Malus syluestris / in English in ye Southe country /
a Crab tree / in ye North country a scarbtre. I need not to descrybe this tree /
because it is known well inoughe in all countres.

The nature of the Apple tree and of Apples.
THe leaves / the flowers / and the buddes / of every Appel tree / and most they
of the quince tree / stop and bind. The tarte and sour appels have the virtue
to bynd / but the ripe apples are of a far other nature. Among apples / they
that are taken in the spring / ingendre choler and hurt all the synewes / and
they bread inflammationes or hot burnynges.

Out of Galene.
THou shall use tarte Apples when as the stomach is weyke by the means of an
hot distemperance / or of much moisture / but very tarte apples when as the
stomach is both to hot and moist. Use sour apples when as thou thynckest yt
there is gross juice in thy stomach / that is not very cold. For sour things
when they find any gross humor in the stomach / they cut it in sunder / and
carry it downwarde. Apples are hard of digestion and cold / and go slowly
down / and they have an euel juice.

Out of Symeon Sethi.
There are diverse kinds of apples one differyng from an other. What soever
apples are byndyng or drawing together they have a cold and an erthly juice.
But they that are sharp or bytyng / have a cold juice / but the same subtle or
fine. The sweet apples are of a mean or middle complexion / and turn somthyng
more to hotenes. Therefore ye must use byndyng apples as often as the stomach is
vexed with a hot or moist distemperance. But sharp apples are to be given as
often as a gross humore / but not very cold / is gathered in the stomach. For
these cut insunder / and carry downwarde. But sweet apples are to be given unto
them that have cold stomachs. For they are good for them / and for such as
are bitten of venemus beasts. All apples whatsoever they be of a certain
natural property hurt the synewes. They also that are unripe / are very
noysum. It is reported that if a man eat his fill of apples that they ingendre
the stone in him. But they are good for them that swoune / and have a weik
hartte.

Of the Quince tree.
MAlus Cotonea is called in Greek Malea kydonia / in English a Quince tree / in
Duche ein Quitten baum / in French un coigner. This tree has leaves brother and
shorter then a medler tree / the nether part of the lefe toward ye grownde is
white / and depiction of plant Malus Cotonea.
the outer part is grene. It has flowers like an apple tree / but they grow
alone and not many together as the flowers are in other trees. The Quince
apples are hory without / and have an other form most come^ly / then apples
and pears have. Yet are they more like pears then apples / and they have
certain gutters and uneven outgrowynges like half columns / which as they are
seldom seen in apples / so are they never seen in pears.

The virtues of the Quince tree and his fruit.
QVinces are good for the stomach / and they make a man piss well. But when
they are roasted / they are counted to be gentler: They are good for both ye
flixes / both for the blody flyx and for the other without blood / and for them
that roughe out foul matter / and for them that are sick of choler / specially
when they are taken raw. The stepyng of them is good to be given to them that
have the flix of the belly or stomach. The juice of row quinces is good for
the^ that are short wynded. The broth is good to bath the mother with all / if
it fall down. The Quinces that are condited in honey / stir a man to make
water. And the honey takes of the Quinces a stoppyng and thyck making pour.
They that are sodden in honey / are more pleasant to the stomach / but they do
not make thick so much. They are good to be put raw into emplasters / to stopp
ye belly / or if the stomach be set a fire / or be turned with vomityng. They
are good for the inflammationes or burnynges of the pappes / and for hard
miltes / and for swellynges about the fundament. Ye may make wine of them if ye
bruise them and streyn them / but it will not last except ye put one quarte of
honey to xv. of the juice. For without the honey it will turn in veriuice. The
wine so made is good for all the things above named. Of Quinces also is made
an oil / which we use as often as we need any byndyng or stoppyng. Ye must
chuese out the Quince apples that are round / little and wellsmellyng. The
flowers both grene and dry are put into emplasters / and are good for all
thing that need byndynge and for the inflammationes of the eyes / and vomityng
of blood. They are also good to be dronken against a louse belly and the
violent rynnyng forth of weomens sickness.

Of the peche tree and the abrecok tree.
MAlus Persica is called in Greek Melea persike / in English a Peche tree / in
Duche ein Pfersich baum / in French un Pechiers. The peche is no great tree in
England that I could se / it has long leaves. The peche tree floureth with the
almond tree / but ye flower is reder then the almondis flour is / The peche tree
is like unto the allmond tree / in ye body or bole / in ye gum / in the leaves
and flowers / saving that the leaves and flowers are bitterer. The apples are
soft and flesshy / when they are ripe somthyng hory without. The stone is very
great / and full of crestes and gutters / and with in that is there a kirnel
like an almond.

Of the Abrecok tree.
depiction of plant Malus Armeniaca.


MAlus Armeniaca is named in Greek Melea armeniake / in high Ducheland ein
Amarell baum as Gesner says: but in the diocese of Colen where as I dwelt /
it is called ein kardumelken baum. It is called in French vng abrecottier.
Galene / Paulus and Aetius immediately after the pech tree / make mention of
Armeniak tree / and Dioscorides keeps the same manner / but he says further.
(...). That is to say Armeniaca / that is abrecockes which are called in Latin
Praecocia, that is ripe before / are less then the other peches and are
holsummer for the stomach then the forsayde peches are. Pliny also a Latin
writer / calls this kind of peches Praecocia mala, and rekeneth it amongst
the kinds of peches. But there is this difference between the abrecok / or
hasty peche tree and ye other / and their fruits. The hasty pech tree has much
brother leaves then the pech tree / and his fruit is a great time sooner ripe
then the peche is. And where as the peche stones are rough / furroed and
guttered / ye stone of the hosty peche is plain and smothe / and the hole
fruit is much less then the peche is. I have seen many trees of this kind in
Almany and some in England / and now the fruith is called of some English men an
abrecok / but I thynk that an hasty peche is a better and a fitter name for it.
But so that the tree be well known / I pase not gretely what name it is known
by.

Of the virtues of peches and hasty peches.
THe Peches when they are ripe / are both profitable for the stomach and belly
/ but hasty peches are better for ye stomach as Dioscorides writes.

Out of Galen.
Learn thou this now / that the juice of peches / even as the flesh is / is
soon corrupted or rotten / and is euel. Wherefore they ought not to be eaten
after meat as some use to do / for they rot and are corrupted / whilse they
swymme above other meats. And this ruel must be holde^ in all those meats
that are of euel juice / and are moist and slippery / and go easily down
throwghe the belly / that they be taken before all other meats: for so shall
it come to pass / that they may more easily pass and prepare the way to other
meats. But if they be taken after meat / they corrupt both them selves and
all other meats that are nere unto them.

Of the Pomgranat tree.
THe Pomgranat tree has many small twigs which have leaves growyng upon them
straight and like unto wylow leaves / but smaller / and somthyng shorter. The
flower is of a cremesin color. The apple is round and full of graynes and
juice. The granes have corners like unto the stones called Granati. I have seen
diverse Pomgranat trees with fruit growyng upon them in Italy. But I have not
seen any growyng with their fruit in England. The Pomgranat tree is named in
Greek Roia / in Latin Malus punica / or Malus granata after some men's Latin / in
Duche ein Granat baum / in French vng Pomier des granades.

The virtue of the Pomgranat tree and his fruit.
THe Pomgranat is all full of good juice / good for the stomach / and it gives
but small norishme^t. The sweet are counted to be better for the stomach / but
they ingendre a little heat / and bread wind / wherefore they are forbidden in
agues. The sour bind / and are good for the burning stomach / and they drow
much more together / and provoke urine. They hurt the mouth and the gumes. The
Pomegranat that has the winishe taste / has a nature between both. The
kirnelles of the sour Pomgranat dried in the son / either sprynkled in meat /
or sodden therewith / are good to stopp the belly and stomach / if they be louse
and to much rynnyng. If they be steped in rayn water / and dronken / they are
good for them yt spitt blood. And they are good / if a man make a bath of their
broth / for them that have ye blody flix / and also for the isshue of a woman's
mother. The juice that is pressed out of the kyrnelles / is good to be sodden
with honey for the sores of the mouth / of the priuites / and of the fundament. It
is good for the whit flaw and for such things as appare out in the body like
lumpes / for the ach of the ears / and for the diseases of the nosethrilles.
The flowers of the Pomgranat tree called Cytini / bynd / dry / hold in / and
ioyn wounds together. And the flowers are of the same effect that the apple is
of. The moist goumes and louse teth are helped / if they be washed with ye
broth of these flowers. If the same flowers be put into an emplaster / they are
good for the burstyng yt comes by ye falling down of the guts. For they
drive the guts back again. Malicoriu^ is ye rough shel of a Po^granat / which
some call Sidion. That has ye virtue to make thick / and serves for the same
purpose that the flowers do. The broth of the root of the tree sodden / dryueth
forth broad worms out of the belly. Balanstrum is the flower of the wild pome
granat / and it is like unto the flour of the gardine Pomgranat / and there are
diverse kinds there of. Some white / some red like gold / some of ye color of a
rose. There may a juice be taken out of it / as is of Hypoquistida / and it
will serve for the same purpose ye Hypoquistida does.

Out of the comen herbaries and practicioners.
THe sour Pomegranat is good for ye heart burn / for the swounyng that comes
of choler. It is good for the inflammation of the liver / and to provoke
appetite. The syrop of Pomgranates is good for weomen with child / and for the
heat of the stomach and liver.

Of the Citron, Orange and Limon tree.
MAlus medica which is called malus Assyria / is also called Citrus / in
English a Citron tree. Under the which tree / are also contained the Orange and
the Limon tree / as perteynyng unto the same kind. The Citron tree as
Dioscorides writes brings forth fruit all times of the year / ane whilse
some are falling of / other are growyng up inunder again. The apple is long /
full of wryncles and of the color of gold. It has a good smell / but a
certain vnplesantnes therewith. It has seeds like apere. Thus far Dioscorides.
But Virgil in the second book of his Georgikes describes the Citron tree thus.
Media brings forth sad juices and a slow taste / of an happy apple. There
is no better remedy that comes / if the cruel stepmothers have poisoned ye
cups / and have menged herbs and hurtefull words together / for it dryueth
black poison out of the members. The tree is great / and in fasshon much like
unto a bay tree. And it should be a bay tree / if it kest not forth abroad a far
other savor. The leaves fall away with no wind / the flower is very toughe. The
Medianes use it against their styngkyng mouth and brethes / and they hele
therewith old men that are shortwynded.

Of the Citron tree out of Pliny.
THe Assyrian apple tree which is named of some medic apple / is a remedy against
poysones. It has a lefe like unto it of the arbut or strawberri tree / with
diverse pricks rynnyng between / but the apple is not eaten. It is also very
excellent in the smell of the leaves which goes into the clothes / if it be
laid up with them / and dryueth away all noysom beasts from thence. The tree is
fruitful at all times / whilse some fall / some wax ripe. And whilse some are ripe
/ other younger grow and wexe up in under. Many nationes have assayed to remove
it and to bring it unto them the excellency of the remedies / in erthen
vessels / leuyng certain brethyng holes unto the root / even as all other
things of that sort / which should be carried far / ought to be straytly set.

Out of Theophrast.
THe plage or part of the world toward the vpspryng of the son / and toward
the south / as it brings forth certain beasts / so (as it apreth) it
brings forth beside the nature of other quarters / certain peculiar or proper
herbs. The land of Media and Persis / beside many other things / brings
forth the apple tree / which some call the Persik tree / and some Medic tree. This
tree has a lefe like and almost equal unto the lefe of the tree called Adrachne
/ and such pricks as the pere tree has / or as the sharp thorn tree has / but
smouth / and excedyng sharp / and strong. The apple is not eaten / but it
excels in smell / the lefe also of the tree is wonderfully well smellyng. And
if they be put amongst clothes / they keep the clothes harmles. It is good
when as a man has dronken a dedly drynk / it is good also for to make a man's
breath savor well. For if any man take the inward of it / and seth it in any
broth or moisture / and put it into the mouth and digest it / it will make his
breath savor sweet. The sede is taken away and sown in the spryng / in forrowes
very diligently trimmed / it is watered every fourth or fifth day / and when it
is a little greater / it is removed. In the spryng of the year it is removed
again into a moist ground / but not very thin: for such one desires it. It
brings forth apples all times of the year / some falling of / some growyng in
under / and other waxyng ripe. The fruit grows only out of such flowers
which have in the mids of them / a thing like unto a rok streched out. They
that want that / are counted unfruitful. It is also sown in erthen pottes
full of holes as the date tree is. Thus far have old ancient autores written of
the citron tree. And they that have seen the Orange tree and the Lemon tree /
thynk truly that they may well be contained underneath the Citron tree as kinds
of ye same. And I would that they which thynck that ye Orange tree is so far
from the Citron tree / should read these words of Nicander in Alexipharmacis.
(...): and I reke^ they will be better content to let the Orenges / which some
call poma aurantia / be a kind of Citron.

The virtues of the Citron, Orange, and Limon tree and of their fruits.
THe Citrone appel / as Dioscorides writes / dronken in wine withstandeth
poison / moves the belly / and makes the mouth smell well / if it be washed
with the juice or broth of it. It is good for greuyng weomen or such as lust
and long for strange meat. It is thought to save clothes from being gnawed of
mottes if it be laid amongst clothes.

Out of Galenes book de simplicibus medicamentis.
IN the sede of the Citrone / is a sour and dry qualite that does excel all
other / so that it is in the third degree dry and cold. The shel or barck also
dries / but it has also much bytyng sharpnes / therefore it is dry in the
second degree / but yet not cold / but temperate or a little of this side. But
the flesh of the Citron is of a gross juice / and flegmatik / and therefore
cold. The flesh is eaten as the shell is / but the sede is no meat to be
eaten. The leaves have pour to dry and to make ripe.

Out of Galenes book de facultatibus alimentorum.
THere are iij. parts of the pome Citron / the first is the sour thing that
is in the mids. The second is it / that resembles the flesh of the fruit /
which goes about it that is in the mids. The third part is the shel or
pill / that covers the hole / and it smells well / and is spycye / not
only in smell / but also in taste. By all reason that same is hard of
digestion / because it is hard and full of brawn. If any man use it as a
medicine / it does some thing help digestion / as all other that have a sharp
byndyng qualite / by the same reason / if it be taken mesurably / it
streyngtheneth the stomach. Therefore some use to break it in pieces and to
press out all the juice / and to meng the pieces with medicines / which are
taken in at the mouth / to scour the belly or to purge the hole body.

Out of Simeon Sethi a later Grecian.
THe bark / pill / or shell of the Citron / is dry and hot in the third degree
hole out / but the flesh is cold and moist in the first degree. The sour gear
that is within / is cold and dry in the second degree: but the sede is hole and
dry in the second degree. The flesh is comenly eaten with honey / because it is
hard of digestion and makes gross fleme. The pill is good in mete to help
digestion / against the Melancholik humor. And all such things as are made
thereof / are good against sadness and good for the stomach / if ye take them in
measure. But if they be taken out of measure / they are hard of digestion.
They that are condite or syroped in honey / help the stomach and cast out his
moisture.

Out the Arabianes.
THe shell of Citron is hot in the first degree and dry in the end of the
second. The flesh is hot in the first degree / and moist in the same degree.
The juice is cold and dry in the third degree. The flesh of the Citro puffs
up with wind / and the leaves drive wind away. And the flour is more subtle /
and the sournes of it is byndyng and holds down read choler. And the sede and
barck of it / are of a resoluyng nature. And the savor of it / amendeth the
air / and the infection that bredeth the pestilence. The sournes of it scour
away euel favored colores and frekles. And the root burned / is good for white
spots and morphewes. And the broth there of holden in the mouth / is good for
the impostemes of the same. The oil of Citrones is good for the weiknes of the
synewes / and for the palsy. And the oil is made of the shelles. The sour
juice is euel for the synewes. The same juice is good for the hole trymblyng of
the heart / but it is euel for the lunges. The flesh of it is naught for the
stomach. But the leaves comfort the stomach. They that would eat Citrones or
such like fruit to have the above rehearsed profits: must nether eat meat
immediately before them / nor shortly after them. The flesh of the fruit bring
them that eat it / into a colik.

Out of Athineus.
THere was a certain sherif in Egypt which took ij. naughty murtheryng robbers
/ and condemned them for their murder and robery to be slain and poisoned to
death of serpe^tes / and such venemus bestes in the great show hall / that all
men might se them dye. But whilse they were led of the souldyers / to the place
of execution / there mete them a woman that had a citron in her hand / the which
the murderers begged of her / and she cloue it in two pieces / and gave each of
the^ a piece. The which they eat very gredely. But when as they came into the
appointed place / and were caste^ amongst the mids of the great hepe of
serpents and aspides / they abode unhurt / and received no harm of them / and
so came hole and sound forth again beyond all men's lokyng for. When as this
strange thing chanced thus / and every man wondered how that this matter should
thus come to pass: and some did phantasey one thing / to be the cause / and some
an other / the sherif axed diligently of them that kept ye thieves / what they
had done / or what mighty triacle or preservative they had taken. But they
answered that the thieves had eaten nothing saving their accustomed potage / and
said further that they eat a citron by the way / whereupon there rose a light
suspicion that it preserved them from the venemus bestes. Yet because men
douted / whether that were the cause or no / the sherif commanded them to go to
the prison again / and the one of theses should eat only his accustomed
potage / and the other should only eat citrones. These things done / the
thieves war brought into the great theater or shewhall again. And there he that
eat the citrones / continewed all the day all most safe and sound / allthough
certain of the serpents had bitten him. And the other which had but eaten his
comen meat / at the bytyng of one serpent / fell down sterk deed. Athineus a
very noble and ancient author writes that he saw this his own self. Wherefore
it were wisdom that noble men / and other that are bydden to dynner of their
enemies or suspected friends / before they eat any other thing / should take a
piece of sulced citron.

Of Horehounde.
MArrubiu^ is called in Greek prasion / in English Horehound / in Duche wyssen
Audorn / in French du Marrubium. Horehound is a whitishe bushe full of
branches and somthyng roughe. The branches are iiij. squared. The lefe is as
byg as a thumb / somthyng roughe full of wryndes / and with a bitter taste. The
sede grows about the stalk / and the flowers which are sharp grow insunder /
by certain equal spaces one from an other. And they are like unto whorles / in
compassyng about the stalck / as a whorle goes round about a spyndel. It
grows about howses / old walls / where have been howses / and about towns /
villages / even in such places as the bourishe wormwod grows. I have seen it
seldum in other places then in such as are above named.

The virtues of Horehounde.
depiction of plant Marrubium.


THe dry leaves of Horehounde sodden in water with the sede or the juice of the
grene leaves / is good to be given with honey unto them that syghg much and are
shortwynded / for the cough / and the tisik. Horehound with the powder of dry
Aris or Ireos / makes gross and tough fleme come out of the lunges. It is
good to be given to weomen after their delyuerance / to draw down the secondes
and their flowers if they need. It is good also for them that have an hard and
long trauale / and for them that are bitten of serpe^tes: But it hurts the
blader and kydnes. The leaves are good with honey to scour filthy and styngkyng
sores. They stay fretyng or etyng sores / and aguayles / and swage ye ache of
the side. The juice that is taken out of the bruised leaves / and streyned / and
afterward dried / and congeled together in the son / is good for the same
purpose. The same laid to with honey and wine / clereth the sight: And if it be
poured in at the nose / it scoureth the iaundes. It is also good to be put into
the ear / either by it self / or with rose oil against the pain of them.

Of the herb called Medica.
MEdica (as Dioscorides writes) when it comes first forth / both in lefe /
and also in stalk / is very like unto the field clauer / or meadow trifoly. But
as it goes forward in grows / so it becomes narrower. And it has a stalk
like a threleued grass or clauer / and it has coddes wrythen inward again
like unto horns / wherein is contained sede of the bygnes of a lentill / and
no largelier is Medica described of Dioscorides.

Out of Pliny.
MEdica is like unto the field clauer or wild trifoly in lefe and stalk / and
it is full of joints. So much as the stalk increseth in length / so much the
lefe decreseth in brodenes.

Beside these marks that Dioscorides and Pliny give unto Medica / I have
marked / that it has a yelow flour / and that the lefe / which stands in
depiction of plant Medica.
ye mids between ye ij. other leaves / yt always grow about it / has a
longer footstalk or stele the^ ye rest have. And the same lefe from the going
down of the son until it rise again / foldeth it self inward / and then goes
abroad again when the son ryseth again. After that the yelow flowr falls away
/ there grows a little thing to conteyn the sede in / which at the first is
like ye end of a writhen gymlet / but after that it begins to be ripe / it
draws him self together / and is made like a little water snayle or a crooked
rammis horn / when it grows much crookedly inward / and the end of it
stands not out of order. Some of the coddes or sede vessels are smouth / and
some are roughe and pricky. The greatest Medica comenly has smouth coddes / and
ye less roughe. The sede is somthyng like in figure and color unto fenegreke.
This herb grows nowhere in England that ever I could se / saving only in
gardin. But I have seen it growyng wild in Germany within an half mile of
Worms in the high way toward Spyer. It is called of them of Aphrica as
Auice^na says in the chapter of Cot / Alfasasat: and some write that it is
named in Spanishe Alfalsa. I have found no name as yet in England for it: but
it may be called horned claue^ or medic fother.

The virtues of Medica out of Dioscorides.
THe sede of Medica / is good to be menged with spyced salt to make it have a
pleasant taste. The same grene is good to cool it that needs coolyng. They that
are grasiers / use the hole herb in the stead of grass and hay.

The virtues of Medica out of Pliny.
THe ground where in medic fother shall be sowe^ in / must be delivered from
stones / and made clean / and the^ turned up in ye latter end of ye last
harvest. But it must be sowe^ in May / and yt very thyck to hold out wedes:
when it is an inche long / it must be diligently wedeth with hands and not with a
weding iron. The time of mowyng of it is when it begins to flower / and as
often as it floureth again / and yt cha^seth six times in a year / or at ye lest
iiij. times: ye must not suffer it to wax ripe until it bring forth sede. For
it is good fother until it be iij. year old. The beasts must not be suffered
to eat so much as they will of it / lest we be compelled to put back the blood
again. It is best when it is grene: when it withered and dry / it waxes full
of sticks / and is turned in to dust.

Palladius of Medic fother.
MEdic fother must be sown in April in beds or ryges / the which as we
have said / thou have prepared before. And when as it is ones sown / it will
abide x. year / so that it may be cut iiij. or vi. times in the year. It
dongeth the ground well. Also it brings the lene beasts into flesh / and it
helps the sick beasts. A romish acre of it / that is ccxl. foot breadth /
etc.xx. foot of length / will serve iij. horses for an hole year. And every ij.
ounces and an half of the sede / will be enough to saw five foot in breadth / and
te^ foot in leingth. But as sown as the sede is casten in to the ground / ye
must take it with a wodden rake / or harrow / that it may be well covered with
earth / or else the sede will burn away with the hete of the son. And beware
that ye touch not the medic with any iron after that it is sown. Let the first
harvest be some thing late / that the Medic may bring forth some sede. Afterward
/ as for other haruestes or cuttyng down of it / let them be as sown as ye
will. Let it be given unto beasts / but at the first time more scarsely / for
it puffs up with wind the bestes / and ingendreth much blood. After ye thou
have mowen it / water the medik that is yet in the ground often times / and
after a few days when it begins to spryng up again / wede out all other
herbs / so shall thou mow it six times in the year / and it shall be able to
continue for the space of x. years.

Columella of horned clauer.
MEdic foother is a very excellent herb / because when it is ones sown / it
dureth for the space of.x. years / and because after that it is sown / it may
be we^^ mowen iiij. times every year / and in some year syx times / because it
fatte^ ^he grownde / and because it fatteth every lene beast / and heleth
every sick beast / because every romish iugerum or acre of it / is sufficient
for iij. horses / to give them meat enough for one year. It must be sown as
herafter I shall teach you. Plowe the place where in ye intend to sow Medic
foother the next spryng / about the first day of Octobre that goes before /
and let the ground rott al winter: and then about the first day of February /
plow it well again / and cast out all the stones and break the clottes.
Afterward in the month of March / plow it the third time and break the
clottes and make the grownd plain. When thou have plowed the grownde / make
beds as the manner is in a gardine: of the which every one shall be in breadth
x. foot / and in length v. foot / that ye may go in patthes to water the
herbs / and that of each side the weders may have a way to come to wede the
herbs. And afterward cast old donge upon the grownde / and in the last end of
ye month of April sow so much that every xiij. drammes and a scruple may
occupy x. foot in length / and v. foot in breadth. When thou have done so /
let the sede be covered by rakyng / with wodde^ rakes / for that is very fit
for it. For if it be not covered / it will be sown burned with the son. After
that he is sown / the place ought not to be touched with iron. And as I have
said / it must be roked with wodden rakes / and weded again / lest any other
kind of herb destroy the young te^dre medic foother. At the first time of
cuttyng of it / ye must tarry somthyng longer / then ye shall need to do at any
cuttyng afterward / that it is to wet / until that it has brought forth some
sede. Afterward ye may cut it down as young as ye will / and give it to your
beasts. But at the beginning / ye must give it scarsely / until they be
aquaynted with it / lest the newnes of the fother do hurt. It puffs up the
cattle and fills them with blood. When thou have cut it down / water it that
stands in the ground often times. When it begins to spryng up again / wede
out allother herbs from it. If it be trymmed thus / it may well be cut down six
times in the year / and it will increase for the space of ten years. And thus
far have I written to you the minds and experience of old autores that they
have had of medic fother or horned clauer. Now it that I have proved my self /
I will not refuse to show unto you my countremen. I have sown iij. kinds of
medic fother / the least kind / ye great smoth kind / and the great rough
kind. The lest kind do I allow lest of all other / because the leaves and
stalks are al very little / and therefore in fedyng of cattle can do but little
service. The great smoth kind as I have proved / grows into a meruelus
great bushe. As for the great roughe kind / how great it will be / I have
not as yet proved / for I never sowed it before this summer. But by all tokens
that I can se as yet / it is like to be as good and great as ye great smoth
kind. If ye have but a bushe or ij. of medic / and would fayn have much sede
ripe before the coming of winter / because the medic bushe is very thyck / and
therefore has many flowers and sed vessels that the son can not come to / it
is best to take the most part of every bushe at the joint of the herb /
about the time that the flower is ready to come forth / and sometime when the
flour is commed forth / and then ye must set the branches that ye have plucked
of / deep in the ground / and water them twyse on the day / and they shall
bring forth sede as well as them that are sown / and much better then they
that are ouershaddowed in the bushe / and want the help of the son. This have I
proved diverse times / wherefore I dar be bold to write it.

Of Mint.
DIoscorides describes not Mint / and makes but of one kind of gardin mint.
Wherefore when as there are diverse kinds of myntes growyng now only in
gardines / it is very hard to know which of them is it of which Dioscorides
writes. Fuchsius makes four kinds of gardin mintes / and the^ he describes
diligently. And Matthiolus makes iij. kinds of myntes / but he describes
them very lightly and barely. And allthough he disprayse the multitude or
diversity of the kinds / semyng thereby to mean / that there is but one right
kind: yet nether in his descriptiones / nor in his figures he tells which is
the right kind that Dioscorides describes / whom he takes in hand to
depiction of plant Mentha satiua.
depiction of plant Mentha satiua altera.
depiction of plant Mentha hortensis tertia.
depiction of plant Mentha hortensis quarta.
expound. The first kind of Fuchsiussis gardin myntes has a four squared stalk
from the root / a little violet redishe with some horynes. The lefe is almost
round / indented about like a saw / soft and well smelling. It has little
cremisin flowers in the knoppes that go about the joints after the manner of
whorles. His second kind is like the former in all things / saving ye it has
in ye top of the stalks a purplishe flour after the fassho^ of a corn ear.
The third kind has a longer lefe and sharper / and purple flowers in the
tops of the stalks / of the figure of ears of corn. His fourth has also
longer leaves / and knoppes about the joints where in are purplishe flowers as
ye first has. He calls the first minte in Duche deyment or krauS deiment.
The second he calls kraus balsum. He says that ye third is called in Duche
balsammuntz / and vnserfrawen muntz or spitzmuntz / and of the herbaries Mentha
Sarracenica or Romana. He calls the fourth / hertz kraut or balsam kraut.
Matthiolus describes his three gardin myntes thus: One has short and curled
leaves / an other has a read stalk and a read flower / and an other has a
whithishe flour. Now will I show you my mind / which of all these mintes
seems unto me to be it that Dioscorides writes of. The two first kinds that
Fuchsius sets forth / can not be the gardin mynte that Dioscorides writes
of / because they have both round leaves. For Dioscorides in the description of
fiueleued grass / writes that it has leaves like unto mint. But the cinfoly
or fiueleued grass has not round leaves / but long and indented. Therefore
nether of them can be it that Dioscorides writes of. But seeing that his third
mynte has long sharp indented leaves like unto the leaves of cinkfoli / I reken
it to be the right gardin mint. As for the figures of Matthiolus I must needs
confess that they are fair / and so like one to an other that a man ca^ not
well discern the one from the other. But yet I reken that the second agrees
better then the former with the leaves of Cinkfoly. This herb is called with us
gardin mynte / and as far as I remember / it is called spear mynte / and if it
be not named so / it may well be called so of the sharpnes of the lefe that it
has.

The virtues of gardin mynt.
MYnt has a warmyng / byndyng and a drying pour. It will stopp blood / if the
juice of it be dronken with vinegre. It kills round worms in the belly. It
provoke man to the generation of chylder. Three branches taken with the juice
of sour pomgranat / stancheth the hitchcok / the choler and perbrekyng. Mynte
laid to the head / swageth the ache thereof. It swageth the breasts or pappes
/ if they be stretched forth or swelled with plenty of milk. It is good to be
laid to the bytynges of dogs with salt. It dryueth away matery rottenfilth /
if it be laid to with perched barley mele: With mede it is good for the pain in
the ear. It smoteth ye roughnes of the tongue / if it be rubbed therewith. It
will not suffer mylck to crud and to be made chese if the leaves be put into be
the mylck that a man drynketh. To be short / it is good for ye stomach / and
has a singular pleasantnes in sawces.

Out of the later writers.
THe smell of mynt streyngthteneth the brain / and keeps the mentory and
increases it. Mint if it be put into milk / will not let it crud. It is good
for the isshue of blood. It is good for the colik with the graynes of a
pomgranat. It has a singular virtue against ye bytyng of a mad dog. Serapio
writes that mint preserves chese from rottyng / or corruption. But ye juice
is best for that purpose. Macer says that if mynt be laid unto a woman's
breast / that it will dissolve and break insunder cruddeth mylk.

Out of Symeon Sethi.
MInt is hot in the third degree / and dry in the second / and it has some
moystenes more then the wild mynte / it is good for a cold liver / and it
streyngthteneth the stomach / and helps digestion. It sta^cheth perbrekyng
and the hitch cough. It helps the gnawynges of the stomach and stirs up an
appetite / and dryueth wind away. It kills worms / and specially the broth
of the wild mynt. It stirs up the lust of the body / and opens the
stoppyng of the milt and liver. But ye must not eat your fill of it / for it
fineth the blood / and makes it waishe / and turns it lightly into yelow
choler / and also because it is of subtle or fine parts / it drives abroad
and wasted it way. But it leueth still it that is gross and melancholishe.
Therefore they yt are hurt with yelow gall / must forbere from mynt. Bruise it
with salt and it is an holsom remedy against the bytyng of a mad dog. When it
is withered and made in powder / and taken after mete / it helps digestion an
heleth them that are diseased with the milt. It is also good for weomen that
have an hard labor / when it is dronken with wine. The sede of it scoured the
belly / but it hurts the lunges.

Of the wild mynte called mentastrum.
MEntastrum called in Greek hediosmos agrios / has a rougher lefe / and in all
points greater the^ Sisymbriu^ has / and is of a more grievous savor.
Dioscorides describes his wild mynte no largelier then ye se. Wherefore when
as there are diverse kinds of wild mynte / it shall be hard to know which of
the^ Dioscorides means of. But by the short description of Dioscorides we are
taught that / that kind which has ye great and roughe lefe / and not any
that has any small or smothe lefe is menthastrum Sisymbriu^ / which is a kind
of wild bau^ mynte / has a brother lefe then mint has / and wild mynt has a
greater lefe then Sisymbrium has / wherefore after the mind of Dioscorides
who teaches it that I have said / ye wild mynte must needs have a great
lefe. This wild mynte grows in moist grounds by watersydes / with a rough
lefe and hory / with certain tops in the ouermost part of ye stalks / like
unto short ears of corn: the herb looks much more whytishe then the gardin
mynt does / and it has a very strong savor. The horse mynt seems also to be
a kind of menthastrum: how be it I take it not for the right kind of
Dioscorides.

The virtues of wild mynte.
depiction of plant Mentha syluestris, uel Mentastrum.


THe wild mynte as Dioscorides says is not so much desired to be used of
holemen as the gardin mint is / grievous because it has a more savor. Galene
writing of this herb under ye name of calamint / in ye proper chapter of mint:
writes yt this mint is not so moist as the gardin mint is / but that it is
hoter and dryer / and therefore that it is not fit for diverse purposes that ye
other mint is fit for. Pliny writes thus of ye wild mynte / Me^tastru^ is a
wild mint / differyng in ye kind of leaves / for they have ye figur of Basil /
and ye color of penny ryall. Wherefore some call it wild penny ryall. It was
found in the time of Po^peius ye great / yt ye lepre called Elephantiasis is
healed with these chowed and laid on / by ye experience or proof of a certain
man yt for shame covered his face therewith. The same are laid to and are
dronken against ye styngyng of scorpiones with salt / oil / and vinegre / and
against scolopendres and stynginges of serpents in the quantite of ij. drammes
in ij. cyates of wine. The leaves are keped in powder against all poysones. If
they be strowed upon the ground and smooke made of the^ / they will drive away
scorpiones etc. Pliny seems to take for his me^tastro an other then
Dioscorides does / whilse he gives the proportion of the le^^ of basil unto it
/ and color of penny ryall / which things agree not with the description of
mentastrum in Dioscorides. It appears that the comen read fish mynt yt grows
about watersydes with whorlish circles going about the stalck / is the
mentastrum that Pliny writes of. But as I have said before / it that
Dioscorides sets out / has long things like ears of corn / in the tops
of the stalks / and long roughe leaves and hory / nether like in figur to Basil
/ nor in color to penny ryall / except I be far deceived.

Of Mercury.
MErcurialis is named in Greek ermou batanio^ / and linozostis / in English
Mercury / in Duche rekraut / or bingelkraut / in French mercurall. Mercury
(says Dioscorides) has the leaves of Basil / but less / and much like unto
Parietori or Pilletori of ye wall / with little branches compassed about with a
dubble knot of joints or knees. The sede of the femall is very ple^tuous / and
resembles depiction of plant Mercurialis foemina.
depiction of plant Mercurialis masc.
/ as it were a cluster of grapes. But the fruit and sede of the male comes
forth between the stalck and the leaves / round / little / and like unto ij.
stones joined together. The bushe is a spa^ high or higher. By this
description it (...) plain / that our forfathers have erred in England / which
hitherto in the most part of all England / have used an other herb in the
stead of the right Mercury. Therefore as many as had lever ete whete / then a
corns / let them use no more their old Mercury / but this Mercury which
Dioscorides describes. The right Mercury grows comen in the feldes and
wynyardes of Germany without any setting or sowyng. And it begins now to be
known in London / and in Gentle mennis places not far from London. I never saw
it grow more plentuously in all my life then about Worms in Germany.

The virtues of Mercury.
BOth the Mercuries are eaten in sallettes or mouses to louse the belly. If ye
drink the water that Mercury is sodden in / it draws choler and water. It is
perfitly known as Dioscorides writes / that the male herb dronken / makes
men childer / and yt the female makes females / if they be taken after the
scouryng or purging / and be laid to the places convenient.

Out of Pliny
IT is wonderful that is told of both ye mercuries / that is / yt the male
makes me^ childer / and ye femal weomen chylder. They say yt this comes so
then to pass / if by and by after the conceptio^ / the juice be dronke^ in
maluasei / or if the leaves be sodden and eaten with oil and salt / or if they
be eaten raw with vinegre.

Of the Medler tr.
MEspilus is named in greek Mespile / in English a Medler tree or an open arss
tree / in Duche / ein nesselbaum / in French mesplier. The mespil or medler tree
/ is full of pricks with a lefe like unto oxiacantha. It has a pleasant fruit
/ but small / which has iij. stones in it / wherefore some have called it iij.
stones. It is long in waxyng ripe / and in eating it byndeth. It is pleasant to
the stomach / and stops the belly. There is an other kind of medler which
grows in Italy / called of some Setaniu^ / and of other epimelis. The tree has
leaves like an apple tree / but less. It bears a round apple / good to be eaten
with a larger nauel. The fruit byndeth and is long in rypyng. The first kind
of mespilus grows not in England nor Germany that ever I could se / but
Matthiolus says that it grows about Naples in Italy and that it is called
in Italian Azarolus. The second kind is that is comen in Itali / Germany and
England / and is comenly called a medler.

The virtues of the Medler.
DIoscorides beside that which I have rehearsed of the properties of medler
before / writes also yt if medlers be condited / they are good in summer
against the hot flixes of the belly.

Out of Galene.
MEdlers / sorbapples / or services are byndyng and astringe^t / but medlers
are more astringent / the^ the sorb apple is. Therefore the eating of medlers
is good for the^ yt have flix. But ye must not eat to much of the se byndyng
fruits / for if ye do / they will stopp your liver and milt.

Of the herb called Meon or Mew.
MEon which they call athama^ticu^ grows ple^tuously in Macedonia and in
Spayn. It is like unto dill in ye stalk and lefe / but it is thicker then dill.
It grows unto the hight almost of ij. cubits. The roots are long / small /
well smellyng / and so hot yt they hete ye tongue. And they are scattered abroad
some right / and some a wry. Thus far has Dioscorides written of the description
of Mew.

The description of Mew out of Pliny.
MEw is not sowe^ in Itali / but of Physiciones / and yt but of a few. There
are ij. kinds of it. They call ye excelle^ter athamanticu^ / some because it
was found of Athama^te / and other because ye most excellent is found in
Athamania. It has leaves like anise (here should we read dill yt is auethu^
and not anisum) and a stalck sometime ij. cubits high. It has many and long
and black roots and some of the^ very deep. The athama^tik is not so read as ye
other is. Hitherto Pliny. I would gladly co^se^t to the^ yt hold yt ye herb
which is called of the apothecaries feniculu^ tortuosum / of ye Northe^ English
me^ spiknel / of the Duche me^ berwurtz / is ye true mew / if yt I could find
any spicknel or betwurtz yt were of ij. cubits high. But allthoughe I have
seen it many times / yet I never could se it one cubit high / wherefore either
this can not be the mew athama^tico^ Dioscorides / or England and Germany will
not bear so long mew as Macedonia and Spayn does. But though it be not Mew
Athama^ticu^ / it may well be the other kind / where of Pliny makes mention.
The freres yt wrote of late years co^me^taries upon Mesue / say yt they found
in Itali in ye mountains of Nursia ye right Mew / and yt ye herb is called of
ye inhabita^tes there about not Mew but spicula: where of we have belyke our
English name spicknell. Thy say also yt they found it in Spayn / and yt it is
called there Sistra and not Men. The same alege Symo^ Lanuensis and ye
pa^dectari / to prove yt sistra is Mew. Matthiolus one of the co^nygest
herbaries yt writes at this time / writes yt allthough he were of late of
another judgment / yt now he judges yt this herb whose figure I set out / is
ye right Mew in Dioscorides. But beside his come^ manner he gives it nether any
Italiane name nor any name of ye apothecaries or herbaries. Amatus Lusitanus
takes feniculu^ tortuosum also to be Mew / but he says / ye herb which is
called of ye Duche root pedlerse of Anwerp / berewurtz / is not the true Mew.
Where at I meruel much (seeing yt most part of all ye pothecaries of all
Germany both in yt over and also Netherlande / know ye right Mew well and call
it Mew) yt ye root cremer of Anwerpe showed him an herb yt was called
berewurtz / and was not yet ye right Mew. Belyke he was some deceytfull fellow
which sold false ware / or else Amatus judges not well of berewurt / or
else there are two kinds of berwurtz in Germany. All ye herbaries and
apothecaries of Germany call their berewurtz feniculu^ tortuosum allthough /
some of the^ take berwurt for dauco / and other for tordilio. The berewurtz yt
Fuchsius and Tragus do set forth are not like ye bear wurtze yt I looked upon /
when as I wrote this chapter of mew. For ye roots of their berewurtz as they
both describe the^ / and paynt the^ have no wrythe^ roots / as ye berwurte had
ye I looked upon. For allthough it had one greater root going right down / so
there grew out above ye straight root certain little roots writhe^ in / one with
in an other like swynes tails. Wherefore either their root gottherers dug
not their roothes hole out of ground: or else their berwurtz is not it yt I
have seen in other places of Germany and England. But ye herb yt Amatus
Lusitanus describes / in ye root is not only much unlike unto it yt
Matthiolus paynteth / but to all other yt ever I could se either in England or
Germany for where as the Mew of Mattiolus / ye berwurtz of Germany and ye
spiknel of England (which peradventure was ones called Spiknard) have a rough
thing like to the Iudish Spiknarde in the highest part of the root / out of
which the stalk comes first forth: the mew of Amatus has ye same rough
tuht like Spiknarde / as he writes in infima part, in the lowest part of the
root / which thing if it be so / nether Matthiolus nor I know the right mew:
And I for my part I would give place unto him in the knowledge of Mew if he
could show me such marks and tokens in his Mew as he shows to be in his
feniculo tortuoso. In the mean time I partly suspect that he took the over
part of the herb / for the nether / and so was deceived / or else I am far
deceived. Which if I shall here after perceive / I will be content to grant to
call again / and to vntech my error / which I have taught before. Feniculum
tortuosum which I take at the least to be a kind of Mew / if it be not
Athama^ticum / grows in the bisshoprik of Durram in wild mores / called
felles / and viij. miles above Bon / in Germany in a country called caltland /
and a little from ye town of Bathe in high Germany. I saw it also ones in
Anwerp / in Apothecaries gardin / but the pothecari named Petrus de virulis /
called it peucedanu^ / not without a great error. I saw it also growyng in New
castle in a gardin in great plenty / where as I learned that it was called
spicnell. And the root of this spicknell / when it is dried / is Spongius and
not hard compact together as Aris is.

The virtues of Mew.
THe roots of Mew made hot in water / or broken with out sethyng / are good
for the stoppyng of the kydnes and blader. They drive away the wyndenes of the
stomach. The roots taken with a syrop made with honey / are good for the
gnawyng of the mother / for the ache of the joints / and for the flowyng of
humores down to the breast / they bring down to weomen their sickness / if they
sit in the water / wherein the roots are sodde^. If they be laid unto al ye
lowest part of ye belly of a young child / they will make him put forth water.
If ye drynk to much of this herb / it will make your head ach. The rote is
hot in taste / somthyng bitter and of a spicie savor. Mew as Galene writes is
hot in ye third degree and dry in ye second. Ye have now heard how good yt Mew
is for diverse diseases of ye mouth. Now harken what the Duche write of their
bear wurtz. Tragus says thus: Our rooteremers call it in Duch berwurtz /
either because it is full of heyr / or else because it is supposed that the
ache of the mother (which is also called bermoter) is stilled thereby / if
weomen hold it in their mouth. Fuchsius wirteth also these words: It is called
in Duch berwurtz for ye heired rotes sake / or else because it heals the
diseases of ye mother / which is also called bermuder. These things compared
together / will give occasion to a wise man to conclude / that berwurtz of the
Germans should rather be Mew in Dioscorides then either Daucus or Tordylion.

Of Mile or Millet.
MIlium is named in Greek kegchros and piston / in Duche hirS / in French du
Millet: it may be called in English mile or millet. The leaves of millet when
they come first out of the ground / are like the leaves of a read / and they are
very rough. Millet has a long stalck where in at ye lest are vij. knottes or
joints. The top of it is like unto the top of a read / and there in are little
round seeds / which have no coueryng without / saving a thin husk.

The virtues of Millet.
MIllet in bread norisheth less then other corns do / and in pottage it
stops the belly / and dryueth forth water. Millet is good to be perched or
put in to a frying pan / and there to be well heated / and to depiction of
plant Milium.
be put in a bag / and to be laid to such places as are vexed with gnawinge or
achyng.

Out of Galene de facultatibus alimentorum.
THe bread that is made of millet and panik / is cold and hard of digestion.
It is plain that the bread is dry and bryttle / and has in it nether clammynes
nor fatnes. Therefore it stops a waterishe belly. Millet is in all points
better then panik is.

Out of Galen de simplicibus.
MIllet cools in ye first degree and dries in the third shlowly or much in
the second. It has also a little finenes. Then whilse it has this co^plexio^ /
when it is taken as a meat / it norishe lest of all other kinds of korn. But
it dries up also the belly. But if it be laid with out in bags / it is a good
fome^t for all such parts as require to be dried without bityng. And if it be
laid to after the manner of an emplaster / it can well dry up. But it is very
brytle or brukle / and therefore it is hard to make an emplaster of it.

Out of the 14. book of Constantinus Caesar de agricultura or of husbandri.
TVrtel doves wax fat with the eating of millet and panik / and also with large
drink. They love also to have whete and clean water. But quales are made fat
with whete / millet and clear water / and darnell. For as much as quales eating
hellebor / or nesyng powder / are not safely enough taken in meat: because the
eating of the^ / brings both a crampishe strechyng out of ye sinews / and
also the dusines of the head / for this cause it is mete to seth millet with
the^. But if any man / by the eating of quales / fall into these forenamed
grefes / if he drynk the broth of Millet in time / it will help him. And for
the same purpose serve ye berries of the myrtel tree. For these are good taken
eue^ in or after dedly mushru^mes or todstooles. But Millet has a certain
other natural property / that is / he that eats of bread made of millet:
shall never ryn in to any danger of poison. Thus far Constantinus Caesar. Millet
is much used at this time in Itali to cra^ capones with all / and to make fat
birds with it. The germans husk millet and eat it with milk / after which fashon
when it is taken as Symeon Sethi says / it is much moyster and eseyer of
digestion.

Of the Indish Millet out of Pliny lib xviij. cap. vij.
A Certain Millet has been brought into Italy / within these x. years / which
has a black and a great corn / like a read in the stalk. It grows up into
the hight of seven foot with a great stele or stalk / they call it (as my text
has) lobas. It brings most fruit forth of all other kinds of corn. Pliny
seems to take culmus here / not for calamo as it is comenly taken / but for
the branchie and thick and busshy thing ye grows in millet and in redes /
wherefore I reken that we should not read in Pliny lobas / which signifies
coddes or shales where in the seeds of pulses grow / but phobas which betoken
the top or thing like a busshy lock of hear / yt grows in ye tops of redes
/ and such like water herbs. Matthiolus says that this herb is called in
Italian Melica or Melega / and in other parts Sorgo / and in Hetruria Saggina.
Some pore men use to grynde this corn and to make bread of it. Other use to
feed hens and doves with it / other use and virtue of it: I know none. Some
call it in Germany Turkish corn / and some call it in England wheat of Turkey /
how be it there is an other kind of corn / which is the right Turkishe wheat
/ wherefore it were better to call it in English / Indishe millet or ried
myllet / then to give it the for said name. I have seen it growyng in Italy in
the feldes / but only in gardines in England.

Of the Mulberry tree.
depiction of plant Morus.


MOrus is named in Greek Morea / in English a Mulberry tree / in Duche ein
Maulberbaum / in French vng Meurier / of the apothecaries morus celsi. The
Mulberry tree has leaves allmoste round / saving yt they are a little sharp at
ye end / they are indented about ye edges after the manner of mynte. It has
hory flowers / and a fruit in proportion / some thing long in color / when it
comes first forth white / in co^tinua^ce of time it waxes read / and
afterward when it is full ripe / it is black.

The virtues of the Mulberry tree.
THe fruit of ye Mulberry tree louseth ye belly and is good for ye stomach /
but it is easeli corrupt or rotten. The juice of Mulberries does the same. If
it be sodde^ in a brazen vessel / and set out in the son / it is made more
byndyng / and it is good for the flowynge of humores / for eating sores / and
for the inflammation of the kirnelles under the chin / with a little honey. But
his streyngthe increases / if ye put unto him alum de pluma / galls / saffron
/ myr / the sede of Tamarisk / Ireos or Aris / and Frankincense. The unripe
berries of this tree are good to be dried and bruised / and put into mete in the
stead of sumach berries / for them that have the flix. The bark of the root
of this tree sodden in water / louseth the belly. It dryueth broad worms out of
the belly. It is also good for them that have dronken the poison called
aconitum pardalianches or libardis bayn. The leaves are good to lay to a
burning. The juice of the leaves taken in the quantite of a cyat / is a good
remedy against the bytyng of the field spyder. It is good to wash the achyng
teth with the broth of the barck and leaves hot / to drive the pain away. The
root being cut / nicked / or scotched / about the last end of heruest / ye
must make a furrow round about it / and it will put forth a juice which ye may
find in the next day after / clumpered or growe^ together. This juice is
excedyng good for the tuthach / it scatters and dryueth away swellyng lumpes
and purges the belly.

Out of Auicenna.
THe leaves of the mulberry tree / are a susseran medicine for the squinsey or
sqinancy / and against stranglyng. The bark is a triacle against the poison of
henbayn.

Out of Galene de facultatibus alimentorum.
THe ripe fruit of the mulberry / doutles softeneth the belly. But the unripe
fruit / after that it is dried / is a very byndyng medicine / wherefore it is
good for the blody flix or for any other flix. But it must be brayed and cast
into your meat / as ye do with some ach: or if a man will / he may drynk it with
wine and water. But that the juice of the ripe mulberries is a good mouth
medicine / by ye reason of ye byndyng that it has / every man knows. But
unripe mulberries beside their tartnes / they have also a sournes. Yea the hole
tree in all his parts / has a mixed or menged pour / made of a stoppyng and a
purging qualite. But in the barck of the root / ye purging virtue excels
with a certain bitterness / in so much that it can kill a broad worm. In other
parts the bindyng or stoppyng qualite passes the other qualites. There is in
the leaves and buddes a certain mean complexion or temperature.

Of Tamarisk.
MIrica otherwise called Tamarix and in Greek Myrike / is called of the
apothecaries / and comen herbaries Tamariscus / of the Duche Tamarischen holtz.
It may be named in English Tamarisk / because as we want the bushe / so also
we have no name for it in England. Myrica is of ij. kinds as Dioscorides
writes. The former kind grows about slow / and standing waters / and
brings forth a fruit like a flower / with a mossy growyng together. Egypt
and Syria bring forth an other gentler the^ this / in other points like ye
wild. It brings forth a fruit next unto a gall / unequally byndyng in taste.

Which we use conveniently in the stead of galls in the diseases of the eyes
depiction of plant Myrica.
and mouth. These ij. kinds are not largelier described of Dioscorides.

The second kind I grant that I never saw / and that is no meruel / seeing that
Dioscorides appoynteth Syria and Egypt for his natural places / where as I
have never been. But as touching the former kind I have seen it in diverse
lands in Italy in an yland between Francolino and Venish in Germany in diverse
places about ye Ren not far from Strasburg / and in Rhetia in a stony place some
time of year used to be over flowen with the Rhene. Theophrast writes that
Myrica has a flesshy or fat or thick lefe. And Pliny writing of leaves of
plants in general / says that ye Cypres tree and the Tamarisk have carnose
or flesshy leaves. Which sayng is not so to be understand that every lefe by it
self were fat or flesshy: but that they are called fat / because they grow so
thyck together upon the twigs. The leaves of the Tamarisk are like the leaves
of Samin or of the Cypres tree / but they are some thing less. And both
Dioscorides and Pliny write that Erica which is called in the North part of
England hather or tyng / and in the South country hethe / is like unto
Tamarisk. Wherefore seeing that there is no liknes at all between the rountre or
quikbem / and the hethe or hather / they have been far deceived in London /
which have comenly used the barks of quickbeme for Tamariske as here after I
intend to declare more at large. The Tamarisk bushe yt grows in Germany is
about viij. foot long / and comenly it is not greater then a man's thum. The
color of the bark in the uttermost part of all is gray / and next unto that /
it is read / but next unto the wod it is yelow / as the wod is whilse it is
grene. The wod is very holow and has very great pith / or heart / somthyng in
that point like unto cloder / or bourtre: The taste of the barck is very
byndyng / as the leaves are also.

The virtues of Tamarisk.
THe fruit of Tamarisk which is like a gall / is unequally byndyng in taste /
and we may use it in the stead of galls / both for the diseases of the eyes /
and mouth. It is good to be given unto them in drynk that spit blood / and to
them that have the flix / and to weome^ that are vexed with their unmeasurable
isshue. It is also good against the iaundes / and the bytyng of the feld
spyder. The same laid to / after ye manner of an emplaster / swageth swellynges:
the barck is good for the same purpose. The broth of the leaves dronken with
wine / wastes up the milt and is good to wash the teth with all / for the
tuth ach. And it is good for weomen that have a louse or weike mother which is
often in ieperdi of falling. It is good for them that have ye lousey euel. The
ashes also of the wod laid to in a convenient place / stopp also the outragius
flowyng of the mother. Some make drynkyng cups of the body of this tree / that
the drynk dronken out of them / may be the holsommer for the milt.

Out of Galene.
TAmarisk has a scouryng and a cuttyng property / without any manifest
drying. It has also some byndyng / by reason of which poures and qualitees /
the leaves or roots or uppermost branches or twigges sodden with wine or
vinegre / are good for the hardness of the milt. It heals also the tuthach:
but the fruit and the barck bind much. Tamarisk has much finesse in the
parts / and is able to scour away / which virtue the gall has not. Then when
as the quikbem tree / which is a kind of sorbus / has only a byndyng pour and
no finesse of parts / nor pour to scour away nor to cut / but only a byndyng
or stoppyng pour. I counsel that from hencefurth the physiciones of England /
and namely of London / that they use no more the barks of quickbeme / for the
barks of Tamarisk: that they use the barks of the roots of heth in the stead
of Tamarisk rather then the barks of quickbeme.

Out of the Arabianes.
THe ashes of Tamarisk dry up all sores and properly them that spring of
burning. Alchanzius an Arabian says these words of Tamarisk. Tamarisk is
good for cold apostemes / if they be perfumed therewith. A certain faithful
man told me / that there was a certain woman / in whom appeared a lepre / and
the broth of the roots of Tamarisk was given unto her often with rasines / and
she was healed of her lepre. And I proved this my self in an other woman: and I
say that the case chanced thus. Her disease was the imposteme of the milt: and
by the reason of the stoppyng of the milt / which was the cause that it could
not draw Melancholy unto it / nether clenge the blood / made the woman to
appear so / as she had been a lepre. Therefore when as the imposteme was
resolved / and the stoppyng was opened / by the workyng of this medicine /
whose virtue was to cut in sunder humores / and to break them / and to scour
away: these weomen was restored unto their former health again. Thus far the
Arabianes. Of whose saynges and experiences Matthiolus gathers well in my
judgment / that Tamarisk would do well to be dressed after the manner of
Guaiacu^ / for the French pockes / and should be like in virtue with Guaiacu^.
But I would not only that Tamarisk should be so prepared for the pockes / but
for all other diseases that arise of the milt. But my counsel is further / that
they that are diseased in the milt / or in any disease that spryngeth out of
the milt / should cause a wine to be made of Tamarisk for such diseases. And I
dout not / but they shall find great ease and help of the use of that wine.
Diverse (...) ^he Germany about the places where as Tamarisk grows in great
(...) / have this year made wine of Tamarisk which is not only pleasant in the
mouth / (for I have tasted it) but also holsum / for the body as reason both
teach / and experience bears witness.

Of the herb called Myrrhis.
depiction of plant Myrrhis.


MYrrhis / as Dioscorides says / is like ye homlok / both in stalk and in
leaves. It has a root something long / soft / round and well smelling / and not
unpleasant in mete. This description by ye judgment of ye most part of learned
men is the herb yt is called of ye herbaries cicutaria. But for all yt I
perceive well / yt even they yt say that Myrrhis is cicutaria / dout or ellis
know not perfitly which herb is cicutaria / amongst ye which is Amatus
Lusitanus / who although he says yt Myrrhis is cicutaria: yet where as he
promises to teache Spanishe / Italiane and French names of herbs as he does
most come^ly when he knows them / he shows only ye Duche name of
cicutaria / as though he has been longer in Duchela^d the^ in Spayn / Italy
or France / or ellis the Duch tongue were rycher the^ the other above named
tongues were / or ye Germans had found a name for cicutaria / where as ye
Italianes / Spanyardes and French men has as yet found none. Matthiolus also
seems plainly to dout whether cicutaria be Myrrhis or no. For he says yt
there is an herb co men in Itali called cicutaria / which me^ thynk to be
Myrrhis / and a little after he says: si Myrrhis in Italia prouenit etc. If
Myrrhis grow in Itali. I have found none yt agrees better with yt description /
the^ this which I have set out. Wherefore ye may se yt this herb is not yet
perfitly known. There are ij. herbs / where of I dout which of them should be
the true Myrrhis. The one is called in English casshes. It grows in
Orchardes amongst ye gras under ye trees very like unto Homlok / I never saw
greter plenty of it / then I have seen in the hortyard of Pe^brook hall in
Ca^brigde / where as I was some time a pore fellow. The other herb differs
very little from the former / saving yt it grows wild about hedges and in
middoes / and is shorter then the other / and has rougher leaves and more like
cheruel. Wherefore I call it mok cheruel / but for all yt when it is growe^ up
/ it is much lyker an homelok then cheruel / so yt as far as I can judge by
the figure / it is the same herb yt Matthiolus sets forth / for Myrrhis
which Fuchsius calls wilder kerffel.

The virtues of Myrrhis.
THe root of Myrrhis dronken in wine / helps the bytynges of field spyders /
It brings to weome^ down their siknes and the secondes if they stop. It
purges also weomen after their delyuerance. It helps them that have the
tisik / sodden in a drynk. They say also that the same dronken in wine twyse or
thryse upon a day / is good for the pestilence / and that it saves a man from
infection.

Of the Myrt tree.
DIoscorides writes of ij. kinds of myrtus / of the one in the first book /
and that is the gardine myrt / and of the other in the fourth / and it is
Myrtus syluestris / which is called in Latin Ruscus. Howbeit / he seems to
mean yt there is also an other wild myrt tree beside Ruscus. Dioscorides makes
ij. sorts of sown or set myrtel trees / the one he called the white and the
other the black. But other writers make yet mo kinds of Myrtilles. Whereof I
have seen one / when I was in Bononi: it has five times as little leaves as it
that is set forth of Matthiolus for the comen set Myrt tree. And that kind did
I also se in monte Appe^nino / but they that showed it me / called it Myrtum
syluestrem / and it with the small leaves / (which is in deed Myrtus satiua
tarantina) only Myrtum satiuam. But I rather hold in this matter with
Matthiolus / then with them that hold of the contrari part. Allthough I thynk
that Matthiolus has painted his Ruscus with to little leaves and his Myrt tree
with to great and broad leaves in comparison of the other. For Dioscorides in
the description of the wild Myrte tree / which is called in English bochers
brom / makes it to have brother leaves / then set Myrt has. I have seen them
both / and doutles there is a faut in the smalnes of the leaves of Ruscus as I
intend to show more largely when I shall com to ye intreatyng of Ruscus. The
set or gardin Myrt tree / has bowyng branches and twigs / a read barck /
long leaves always grene / somthyng like the leaves of a Pomgranates leaves. In
the white Myrte appear whiter leaves / and in the black blacker. They have all
white flowers and well smellyng. The set or gardin Myrt trees have greater
fruit then ye wild have. Both the kinds of Myrt trees have long fruits /
like unto ye fruits of ye wild Myrt tree but greater.

The virtues of the Myrt tree.
THe virtue of the Myrte tree / and of the sede of ye same / is to bind. The
grene / or dry sede / is good to be given in mele to the^ that spit blood /
and it helps the prickyng of the blader. The juice pressed out of the grene
leaves / has the same virtue. It is good for field spyders. And in wine it is
good for the styngyng of a scorpion. The brothe of Myrtelles sodde^ in wine /
helps the sores that arise in the vttermoste members. The same laid to with
the flour of perched barley / swageth the infla^mationes of the eyes. It is
good to be laid to against the impostemes of the corners of the eye. If ye put
the sede into wine and hete it there in / it will be good for them that have
weyk brains to save them from dronkennes / so that the wine that is streyned /
be taken a fore hand. The bathe made with the sede of the myrt tree is good for
the falling down of the mother / for the diseases of the fundame^t / for the
isshue yt weome^ have some time to much plenty of. It scoureth away scourf or
scalles in the head / and the rynnyng sores in the head / and the wheles that
burst out in the head. It stays the heyr that falls of. The bath that is
made of the leaves of the Myrte tree / is good to sit in / for them yt have
members out of ioynte / which fasten and grow together very slowly. Also if
bones be broken / and will not easily be joined / and fastened together again /
it is good to bath them with the brothe above mentioned. It heals the white
morphew / and it is good to be poured into matery ears that ryn. The juice
has the same virtue. The leaves broken and laid to with water / ar good for
moist sores / and for all parts of the body having any isshue / and for them
that have the lax. If ye put to it the oil made of unripe olyues / or a little
rose oil with wine / they are good for tetters or crepinge sores / for the
wildfyre / for the inflammatione of the stones / and for the sores or isshue in
the eyes / that darken the sight and for hard lumpes. The powder of the
withered leaves / is good to be cast upon the whitflaw / aguayles. It is good
against the styngkyng that comes of to much sweet / in the flanks and
armholes. It stays the swetyng of them that have the disease which is called
cardiaca passio. The raw leaves / or else burnt with a trete made of wex / heal
burning whit flawes and aguayles.

Out of the later writers.
THe brothe of Myrtilles or Myrte seeds / with butter stops to much
swetyng. The Myrt leaves comfort the heart / and take away the trymlyng of the
same. The juice is good for the burning of the blader and kydnees. An emplaster
made of Myrtelles is good for the pyles and the falling out of the fundame^t.
Let the apothecaries phisiciones / and surgeanes of England take heed / that
they use no more as they have don in times paste / the little bushe ye grows
in the sennes in the stead of the right Myrt tree / but let the^ cause ye right
Myrtelles and Myrt leaves be brought unto them out of Itali / where as is of
them plenty enough to be had. Many of the apocaries of Germany have erred an
other way in the Myrt tree / in taking the bleberries or hurtel berries in the
stead of the Myrte tree.

Of the herb called Napus.
DIoscorides has not described unto us ye herb called Napus / nether Pliny in
any place yt I have red as yet. He makes v. kinds of Napus: but Matthiolus
and Fuchsius each of the^ makethe no mo but ij. kinds. Yet they divide their
kinds diuersely. For Matthiolus divides Napu^ into ye white and the yelow.
And Fuchsius divides it into the set or sown / and into ye wild. Napus is
named in Greek (...) but not bunion / in Duche Steckrub / in French nauet / I
know no English name for it / as it is no meruel / seeing that I never saw the
right Nape growyng in England. It may be called a Nape or a yelow rape until
we find out the old English name for it. The Nape has leaves like unto a
rape but smother / and indented about the edges after the manner of rocket. It
has a round stalk of a cubit hight / and depiction of plant Napus.
depiction of plant Napus agrestis.
some time higher / and a yelow flour like unto Cole / and a sede in long coddes
or small long husks. The root is some thing long and so round as a rape root
is / and commonly in Germany it is yelowish. It with the white root is not
gretely used in Germany.

The virtues of the Nape.
THe root of Nape or Nauet as the Frence men call it / sodde^ / bredeth wind
/ and norissheth but little. The sede of the Nape / dulleth poison if it be
dronke^. It is much used to be put into triacles and preservatives. Napes at
hot and moist / and they bread wind and raw fleme. They sharp the sede /
and smoothe ye breast / and throat / they hete ye kydnes. Galen seems to
conteyn Napes under rapes / for I can find no mention of Napes in Galene / in
his book de simplicibus medicamentis. And Paulus joins rapes and Napes
together in these words. The Nape and the rape if they be twyse sodde^ /
norishe no less then other herbs do. But if they be continually eten / they
make a gross juice.

Of Narcissus out of Dioscorides.
There ar some that call Narcissum / as a lily / lirium. It has leaves like unto
a leke / thyn and much lesser and narrower. The stalk is empti and bare
without leaves / and it is higher then a span. The flour is white and redishe
yelow within / and in some purple. depiction of plant Narcissus.
The root wtin is white / round and knoppy after the lyknes of a bulb. The
sede is as it were in a filme or cote / blak and long. The most excellent
grows in hills / and has a sweet savor. The other resemble a leke / and
have an herbishe stink.

Of Narcissus out of Pliny.
THe Physicianes use ij. kinds of Narcissus / where of one has a purple
flower and the other has the color of herbs.

Out of Theophrast.
IT is meruelus that chanseth unto the squill or se union / and to Narcissus.
For of all other herbs / whether when they be first sowe^ / or grow again /
after their falling / the lefe comes in his time first forth / and afterward
the stalk. But in these ye stalk comes forth before the other parts / and
of Narcissus the stalk of the flour comes only forth with speed / for the
flour hastes forward very much. Narcissus has a narrow lefe / many together
and fat. Out of all these descriptiones I gather that our comen daffadil / is
one kind of Narcissus / where of Pliny makes mention / when as he speaks of
it with the herbishe color. The fasshon of the lefe / flour and stalk of our
daffadil agrees well with the description both of Dioscorides / and Theophrast
/ only the color of the flower is contrary or beside the description of
Dioscorides. But nevertheless I judge that it is a kind of Narcissus / which
Dioscorides had not seen when as he wrote of the white floured Narcissus. The
description of Dioscorides agrees well unto the herb which we call in some
places of England white laus tibi / let them that list examine the matter / and
they shall find it as I have said. Some take this herb to be violam albam
Theophrasti / with whom I will not strive / except they say that it agrees
not with the description of Narcissus in Dioscorides. As for the lyknes that it
ought to have (as some men judge) with the flowers of the lily / whose name it
may seem to have had some time for the lyknes yt it had with the lily / and has
it not / for the leaves ar nether in fasshon like the other Narcissus nor the
lily flour / for it is not hole as the lylies flour is / but divided: I answer
that Pliny shows that the difference between the kinds of Narcissus and of
lilies stands in that / that upon the stalks of the lilies grow leaves / and
upon the stalks of the kinds of Narcissus grow no leaves at all. Dioscorides
writes of ij. sorts of Narcissus / one yt grows in the mountains / and an
other kind in other places. Where of I never saw the former kind in any
mountayn / but always in gardines. And as for the other kind I reken that it
is agreyng in savor with our comen daffadill / except my memori do fail me / and
I am suere that the white laus tibi has the stynk that Dioscorides speaks of.

The Properties of the daffadill.
THe root sodden / whether it be eaten / or dronke^ / makes a man vomit. It
is good for burning. The root broken with a little honey / makes the cut
synewes to grow together again / if it be laid to emplasterwyse. The root
laid to with honey helps the ankles out of ioynte / and the old aches of the
joints. With vinegre and nettel sede / it takes away the spots and morphew
in the face. With fiches it scoureth away the matter of wounds. It breketh
impostemes that will not ripe / laid to with darnel mele / and honey / it
draws out of the body / such things as stick fast in it. It makes flesh
grow in a wound. The root bruised and laid to / is good for weome^s breasts yt
ar swelled and against all inflammationes.

Of Spikenarde.
NArdus is named in Greek Nardos / in English Spiknarde / of the apothecaries
spicanardi. There are ij. kinds of Nardus says Dioscorides / ye one is called
Indishe / and the other is called Syriac / not because it grows in Syria /
but because one part of the hill where as it grows / lies toward Syria /
and the other part to the Indianes. Of this Syriak kind / the principal is
fresh / light / having a large thing resemblyng hare / yelow in color / very
well smellyng / and much like Cyperus in smell / with a short ear / and a
bitter taste / which dries the tongue / because it co^tineweth long in the
plesantnes of his smell. Of the Indishe kind / there is one that is called
Gangit of the flood Ga^ges / which rynneth by the mountayn where upon it
grows. This kind by the reason of the great moisture of the place is weker
in virtue / an higher in length / and it brings furthe many spikes or hary
eres out of one root / folden in one just to an other / of a very strong
savor. The Nardus of the mountayn sauoreth better / and it has a short ear /
and cutted / the smell of it is like unto Cyperus / and it has all the other
virtues of ye Syriak. There is also a kind called of ye place where it grows
Sam pharitik / with a short bushe having great ears spredyng out and a whyter
stalk / this has a rammishe or buckishe styngkyng smell: wherefore it is not
allowed. Thus far Dioscorides. Matthiolus and Amatus his follower / do take much
labor to prove that the Spica nardi / that is the ear of Nardus is no ear
growyng in the top of the stalk / but that it is the root of Nardus. And
against all other that hold the contrari opinion yt it gtoweth in the top /
they inuey very sharply / and namely against iij. greater clerks then ever
they have been or ar like to be / that is Hermolaus Barbarus / Ioannes Ruellius
/ and Ioannes Manardus. Which allthoughe they erred / yet for their other
truths that they have taught / all Europa deserved to be handled somthyng
gentlyer then these new correctores have handled them. As for me I thynk that
the ear grows not in the top of ye stalk / but hard by the root / either
partly in ye ground or very nere unto the ground / but I thynk rather that
some part of the ear grows within the ground. Yet for all this / I reken yt
the spike can not be properly called a root. And as for the place yt they
allege out of Galene de antidotis / in Galenis words they must either
understand Galene to call the spike of Nardus improperly a root / or ellis
they must in other places not only deny the autorite of Galene / but also of
Philo / and Dioscorides also / which make an open distinctione and difference
between the root of Nardus an the ear of the same: or ellis plainly deny that
the spik is a root. Galene in the.ix. book de compositione medicamentorum
secundum locos alleges in ye preservative or antidot of Philo ij. verses
amongst many other / which seem plainly to deny that Nardus is a root. The
verses are these: Et drachmam dictae falso radicis, ab ipsa
Terra, pissae quae Jove clara manet.


And Galene expoundyng these verses / says these words following: Quin and
Nardi ipsius drachmam vnam conijciendam censet, quam radicem falso dictam
appellat, quando quidem spica nardi vere nominatur. Also he judges that a dram
of Nardus must be put there to / which he calls a falsely named root /
because it is truly named the ear or spike of Nardus. Dioscorides also in the
description of the Nardus which is called gangitis / says that many spikes
or ears com out of one root / where upon it follows plainly by the autorite
of Dioscorides that the ear of Nardus is not the root of Nardus. Therefore I
reken that it is plain that the spica Nardi can not be properly called a root
/ without the gaynsaying of Philo / Dioscorides and Galene. Matthiolus layng to
other men's charges ernestly many errors writing upon Nardus / is not very
far from a manifest error if he be not wrapped within it all ready. For he
seems to judge that Nardus has no stalk at all / and that therefore the spike
or ear can not grow in the top of the stalk / which is not / or can no where be
found. His words are these: Ego tametsi nardi quam plurimum etc. Allthough I
have examined and picked out very much Nardus / in the shoppes of Venis / yet
could I never find any thing of Nardus there / saving only the ear. Wherefore
I thynk there can be found no Nardus which brings forth the ears in the top.
But what reason is this / he sees nothing of Nardus but the ear / ergo Nardus
has nothing ellis / because he has seen no more. If this be Matthiolusses
argument as he seems at the least to go toward this end: then it appears
that Nardus should have nether any stalk / nether any other root beside the
ear / which is clean contrari unto Dioscorides / whom he takes in hand to
expound / who appoynteth both a stalk unto Nardus / and also an other root
beside the spikes or ears to the same. And allthough in Germany there is not
such choice of simples in every place as is in Venis / yet in this year of our
lord 1557. I found in the shop of Jacob Diter the Apothecari of Wiseburg on
piece of Nardus which has a stalk a finger long holow / and of the bygnes of a
metely byg straw / which I have to show at this present day. As touching ye
root of Nardus if that Matthiolus could find nothing of it / saving ye ear
at Venis / I meruel where he found ye little root that the ears grow one in
his figure which he has set out in his commentaries upon Dioscorides. Amatus
holds also stiffly that the spyke or ear of Nardus is also the root. But it
seems by his writing both in the chapter of mew / and also in Nardus / that he
should mean that the ear of Nardus / should be the nether part of the root
of Nardus / for in both the chapters he compares the root of spiknard with the
root of mew. And in both the places he says that the tufty roots that are
very like spiknarde in Mew / grow in infima part radicis / in the lowest part
of the roots. In the later place he says thus. Where as Dioscorides says
that Nardus puts forth of one root many ears that serves for our purpos /
when as out of one principal root as the mother of the rest / many roots as
hary ears growyng one hard to an other / do spryng out / as a man may se the
like in the roots of Mew / whose infinite roots were divided into ears that
all that saw them / judged them to be Spiknard. And a little after he says /
wherefore we ought to conclude that there is no other root found in Nardus /
saving the spike or ear. If he mean thus as by his writing he seems to do /
he is very far deceived. For beside that I have seen a stalk immediately coming
from the spike (the stalk comes never immediately from the lowest part of the
root) Dioscorides shows that the Spikes com from one root. The roots
always in all plants ar the lowest and nether most parts of them / then
when as the Spikes com out of one root / that root must be lower and benethe
the Spikes. Then the Spikes can not be the lowest parts of the roots / as he
says that the tufty ends and lowest parts of the roots of Mew be. But
where as he says that there is no other root saving the Spike / I ask them
whether it is the manner of Dioscorides to give one thing in one place ij.
sundry names / and to disseuer one thing with ij. names when as the thing is
but one. If it be not his manner so to do / then is his gloss brought in vayn /
where as he says the the sayng of Dioscorides that many Spikes com out of one
root / is to be understand / that many roots com out of one principal or
mother root: when as Dioscorides in all his hole work never calls a root a
Spike / nor a Spike a root. As for the other error which he holds (or at ye
lest he seems to hold) with Matthiolus / that Nardus has nether stalk nether
other root then the ear / need to make no other confuratione then it that a
little above I have made unto Matthiolus for ye same opinion. Then this is my
opinion of Nardus / that it has a little root in ye ground / out of the
which the Spikes or ears spryng out / and I thynk that the lowest parts of
the ears at the least touch the ground / and that the stalk (as I have ones
seen it) comes out of the mids of the Spike or ear of blak redishe color /
thin and holow within.

The virtues of Spiknard.
NArdus has pour to hete and to dry. It dryueth forth water and makes a man
piss well. If it be dronken / it stops the belly / If it be laid to / it
stops the rynning out and matter of the mother. If it be taken with cold
water / it helps the gnawyng of the stomach / it heleth wyndenes / it
helps the liver / and heleth the iaundes and the diseases of the kydnees. If
ye will seth Nardus in water and sit in it: it is a remedy against the
inflammation of the mother. It is good for bare eylyddes that want hear / for
it brings hear againg. It is good to be cast upon bodies that are to moist
or sweet to much. It is put in to antidotes and triacles / and it is comenly
laid up in a new erthen vessel for ey medicines. But it is first bet in to
powder / and afterward made in to trochisces or round kales with wine. Nardus
is hot in the first degree and fully dry in the second degree.

Of the herb called nardus celtica.
THe celtick Nardus grows in ye alps of Liguria / and it is called in ye
country name there Aliuggia (it appears that Dioscorides would have said
saliu^ca / for there is no such latin word as Aliuggia is (It grows also
in Istria. It is a little bushlyng / and it is gathered and made up into little
hand fulles / It has a lefe somthyng long / with a pale yelow color / and a
rygh yelow flower. This herb is called in Duche Magdaleinkraut / it grows
plentuously in the alps that depart Italy and Germany. It may be called in
English / French / spicknarde.

The virtues of French spicknard.
MEn use only the stalks and roots of this herb. It is commended for ye best
which is fresh / and has a good smell / and has many roots cleuyng together
/ full / and not brukle or easy to break. It is good for the same purposes that
the other Nardus is good for / it drives water forth much more myghtely / and
is better for the stomach. It helps the inflammationes of the liver and the
iaundes. It is good to be dronke^ against the wyndenes of the stomach with the
brothe of wormwod. It is also good to be dronken with wine against the diseases
of the milt / kidnees and blader / and against venemus bytinges. It is put into
softenyng emplasters / in to drinks and heting oyntmentes. This French Nardus
as Galene says is of like properti with the other / saving that it is weicker
for all purposes / saving for prouokyng of urine / for it is hoter and is less
byndyng. Galene also in his book de compositione medicamentorum secundum locos
sayethe / that the French nardus is the best medicine / and works
whatsoever the Indishe nardus does / but that it is a little weyker in workynge.
Wherefor when the truth is so / I counsel that apothecaries use rather this
French spiknard fresh and good / as always it may be had out both of
Germany and Itali / the^ the spiknard of India / if it be old and rotten as
much of it is before it cummeth unto us. I meruel that Tragus and Matthiolus
following the common ignorance of their countrees call lauender spik / Duch
Nardus and Italia^ nardus / seeing that in form and fassho^ they have no lyknes
at all with nardus. And how much they differ in qualites / they that with
judgment examine both / can well testifi. If the world continue long / their
namyng of laua^der with the name of Nardus may bring some simple men in believe /
that lauander is a right kind of nardus growyng in Germany and Italy / when as
it is much lyker to be a kind of stechas then of Nardus.

Of gardin cresses.
depiction of plant Nasturtium hortense.


NAsturtiu^ is named in Greek kardomo^ / in English cresses or kars / in Duche
kressich / in French cresso^. Gardin cresses grow no where else yt I know /
saving only in gardines. The cresse is but a small herb of a foot and a half
long / the leaves are small and iagged about / the flowers are white. The
blackishe read sede is contained in little round sede vessels. And it is
sharp in taste and biting.

The virtues of cresses.
THe sede of cresses / is euel for the stomach / and trobleth ye belly / and
dryueth forth worms. It minissheth ye mylt. It is euel for weomen with child:
it provoke down weomens siknes and stirs men to veneri. It is like unto
mustard and rocket. It scoureth away lepres an scurffines very nere unto
lepres. If it be laid to with honey it swageth ye swellyng of the milt. It
scoureth away the sores called fauos / like to an honey comb. It dryueth forth
the diseases of the lunges if it be sodden in suppinges. The same if it be
dronken withstandeth the venom of serpents / and the smook of it dryueth away
serpents. It stays the falling of the here. It rypeth carbuncles / and
bursteth them. It is good for the sciatica / if it be laid to with perched
barley mele and vinegre. It dryueth away or scatters abroad swellynges / and
gathered humores together. And if it be laid to with bryne / drives forth
angri bytes and other sores such as one is called cattis hare. The leaves and
branches are good for the same purposes: but they are not so strong / so long
as they are grene. For the^ they are yet so gentle yt they may be eaten with
bread / as Galene says / for soul or kitchyn.

Of the tree called Nerium.
NErium is also called rhododaphnus and rhododendron / in Italiane Olea^dro /
of Barbarus writers Gleander / some Duche me^ call it Oleander / the Frence men
call it rosage. I never saw it out of Italy wherefore I know no English name
for it. But it may well be called in English after the Greek / either rose tree
or bay rose tree / or Oleander after the common herbaries.

The bay rose tree has leaves like an almond tree / but longer / fatter / and as
some textes are / brother and rougher. The flower is like a rose. The fruit is
somthyng depiction of plant Nerium I.
depiction of plant Nerium II.
like unto an almond after the fasshon of an horn / which when as it opens /
shows a wollyshe nature like an thystel down / as Ruellius tra^slatio^ has /
it seems yt his greek text had (...). But my greek text has (...). And so
seems the old translator to have red / for he he translateth thus: lanam
deintus habens similem hyacintho. Yet for all that I like Ruelliusses Greek
text better then mine / for the down is white and like thestel down / and
nothing like hyacinthus / nether in color / nor in down which it has not.
The root is long / sharp and wodishe / saltishe in taste. It grows in
pleasant places / by the se side and about rivers.

The properties of Oleander.
THe flowers and the leaves of oleander ar poison to mules dogs / asses / and
to many other four footed beasts. But it is unto a man a remedy if it be
dronken with wine / against the bytynges of serpents / and so much better it
is if rue be mixed therewith. Weike beasts as sheep and gotes / if they drynck
of the water where in ar fallen the leaves or flowers of oleander / die shortly
after. Galene writes that Oleander if it be taken in / that it kills both
man and the most part of bestes also: wherefore let no man thinck that
Dioscorides means that Olea^der should be taken of animan saving only of such
as has been hurt with the poisoned bytyng of a serpent: for if a man take it
in / except he have been poisoned before / it will poison him. But when as ye
poison of serpe^tes may well be healed by many other medicines that are no
poison / as oleander is / my counsel is that no man that is bitten with a
serpent / take in any oleander / if there be any triacle or other good herb
may be had by and by after that he is bitten. I have seen this tree in diverse
places of Italy / but I care not if it never com into England / seeing it in all
points is like a Pharesey / that is beuteus without / and within / a tauenus
wolf and murderer. The later writers say that Oleander is good for the scab and
ich / and that it is good for the old aches of the knees and kydnes / if it be
laid to after the manner of an emplaster. They write that the broth of the leaves
kills flees and such like vermind if it be cast upon the flore / where as
they be.

Of the herb called Nymphea.
depiction of plant Nymphaea candida.
depiction of plant Nymphaea lutea.


NYmphea is named of the apothecaries nunefar / in English water rose / or
water lili / in Duch se blumen. Nymphea is of ij. sorts / the one has a white
flower and the other has a yelow flour: they grow both in meres loughes /
lakes and in still or standing waters. The leaves ar like yt been of Egypt / but
they are less and longer / some of them swym above the water / some ar under the
water / and many of the^ com out of one rote. The one has a white flower as
lili / the other has a yelow flour like a rose / in ye mids of ye white
flower is a thing like unto safron. Out of the flour when it withers away /
comes forth a round blak apple like unto a poppi head / which has a blak
sede and a cla^my taste. The stalk is smothe / blak and not thick / like unto
the been of Egypt. The root of the white Nymphea is black / and roughe and
like unto a cub. But the root of the yelow nenufar is white. The roots use to
be cut down in September / October and Noue^ber / or in the last end of the
harvest.

The virtue of both the kinds of nenufar.
THe white leued water lili or nenufar dried and dronken with wine / is good for
the common lax / and for the blody flix / and it washes away the mylt. The
root is good to be laid to the blader and stomach. With water it scoureth
away white spots like lepres. If it be laid to with piche / it will hele a
scalled head when the heyr goes of. The same is good to be dro^ke^ of wiueles
gentlemen / or husbandles gentle weome^ against the unclean dremyng of venery
and filthy pollutiones that they have on ye night. For if it be dronke^
continually for a certain time / it weykeneth much the sede. The sede of the
herb has the sam properti. The sede and root of it with the yelow flower
dronken with read stoppyng and tart wine / ar good against the rynnyng out or
isshues that weomen sometime have.

Of Basil.
DIoscorides describes not ocimu^ / but a man may gather by him in the
description of other herbs where unto he co^pareth ocimum / what manner of
leaves ocimum has. The right Mercuri and Heliotropium as Dioscorides writes /
have leaves like Basil. Then he that knows the right Mercuri and Heliotropium
/ may easily know what manner of leaves Basil has. The stalk is a span long and
sometime longer. It floureth and sedeth first beneth in the stalk / and after
above. The flour is some time white mixed / some time with other colores. The
sede is black or at the lest blakishe / contained within a blakish filme. One
principal root goes deep in to the ground and that is thick and woddishe.
The other roots that com out of it / ar small and long. Basil is named in
Greek ocimon / and of the later Greeks basilicon / in Duche Basilien / in
Frence du Basilik.

The virtues of Basil.
BAsil / if it be taken to plentuously in mete / dulleth the eysyght / It
softeneth the belly / moves ye spirits / and dryueth out piss and brings
milk to ye breasts. But it is hard to be digested. But if it be laid to with
the flour of perched barley and with vinegre and rose oil / it helps the
inflammationes of the longes. It is good for the strykyng of a se dragon / and
the depiction of plant Ocimum magnum.
depiction of plant Ocimum minus.
stynge of scorpiones. And by it self only with wine of Cio / it helps ye
ach of the eyes. The juice scoureth away the darkness of the eyes. It dryueth up
the droppyng down of humores. The sede dronken is good for them that bread
melancholi / and for them that can not make water / and for them that are puffed
up with wynd. If it be put in to the nosethrilles it makes a man nese. The
which thing the leaves do also. But ye must shit your eyes when ye ar compelled
to nese. Sum thynk that it ought not to be received in mete. For if it be
chowed and set forth in the son / it bredeth worms. The men of Aphrica say
that the man that has dronken of this herb / and is afterward bitten of a
scorpion / shall have no pain of that bytyng.

Out of Galen de simplicibus.
BAsil is hot in the second degree / and it has a superfluous moystur
wherefore it is not mete to be taken to ye body. But if it be laid to without /
it is good to make ripe. Galene also in his book of ye poures and properties
of norishme^tes writes thus of Basyl. The most part use Basil and eat it with
oil and gare sauce for a soul or kitchen. But it has a very hurthfull and an
euel juice. Which thynk made some falsely believe yt if it were set in a pot in
ye son yt it would turn into a scorpion. But this may thou truly say / that
it is noisum to the stomach / and of an euel juice and hard to be digested.

Of the Olive tree.
OLea which is sumytme called also Oliua / is named in Greek (...) it is
called in English an Olive tree / in Duch ein Oelbau^ / in Fre^ce vng Oliuerer.
The Olive tree has leaves like a wilow tree / but they are smaller narrower and
harder / in color pale and of an asshy hue. The wild Olive tree which is named
in Greek (...) in Latin syluestris Olea or Oleaster or cotinus / has less and
shorter leaves the^ the gardin or set Olive tree has. The fruit is also much
less / and the bows ar full of pricks. I have seen the Olive tree both in
Italy and in Germany.

The virtues of the Olive trees.
THe leaves of the wild Olive tree bind / and the same broken and laid to
emplaster wise stay and hold in cholerik impostemes and inflammationes /
crepyng or rynnyng sores / empostemes about the corners of the ey / carbuncles
and whitflawe. And the same laid to with honey take away the crustes that are
about sores or wou^des. They scour also filthy wou^des. They drive away
inflammationes and sores called pauos. They ioyn together again the skin that
is plucked from the head. They are good for ye sores of the mouth and
specially of young childer / if they be chowed in the mouth. The juice and the
brothe have the same virtue. The juice laid to stays burstynges out of blood
and wymens isshues. It is good for the diseases of the ey called vua / and for
wheles sores and old falling down of humores. Wherefore it is put in to the
medicines of the eyes called collyria. It is very good for the gnawyng or
bytyng of the ey liddes. If ye will have the juice to serve you all the year
through: stamp the leaves / and put wine or water unto them and dry the moystur
in the son and make it up in little cakes. But the juice that is made with the
wine is stronger and fitter to be laid up / then it that is made with water.
It helps the eres / both if they be sore / and the skin be of / and also if
any matter ryn out. The leaves ar good to be laid to with barley mele / for them
that have the flix. The leaves ar burnt with the flowers that the ashes may
fill the rome of spodium. And thus ar they dressed. Put them into and vnbaked
pot that was never in the fire before / and stop the mouth of it perfitly with
clay / and let the pot stand so long until that all the other pottes be baked
inoughe. Then quench the^ whilse they are yet hot with wine / and knede them
together / and burn them after the same manner onis again. Then wash them and
make them in to little cakes. It is well known that this medicine is as good as
spodium is in the diseases of the eyes. The leaves of the set olive have the
same virtue / saving a little weiker. Wherefore they are fatter for the medicines
of the eyes by the reason of their gentler nature. The sweet or water that
comes forth of the tree when it is in burning in the fire helpethe / if it be
laid to foul scurfi scalles. The sede of the Olive tree laid to / helps scurf
and frettyng and wastyng sores. It that is within the kirnel with fat and mele
/ drives of scabbed or foul roughe reayles. The Olives that have been condited
in salt / broken and laid unto burnt places will not suffer any blader to rise.
They scour foul wounds. The bryne of Olives fasteneth the goumes if they be
washed therewith / and makes fast louse tethe. The yelow and fresh olive is
beter for the stomach / but it is hard for the belly. The blak that is ripe is
disposed to corruption / and is euel for the stomach. And it is euel for the
eyes / and engenders the hedach. If it be dried it stops frityng or wastyng
sores / and dryueth abroad and scatters carbuncles. It is good to wash the
goumes that are vexed with a filthy moisture with the oil of the wild olive. It
makes fast louse tethe. Take ye oil and put it in to woll / or a fine cloth /
and lay yt hot unto the waterishe goumes until they be white / and it will
help the^.

Out of Galene de simplicibus.
THe bughes of ye Olyue tree / as much as they have of binding / so much coldness
have they also. The fruit if it be trowly ryp / is mesurably hot. But if it
be not ripe / the^ it couleth more and byndeth more. Olives norishe but a little
/ and namely they that for rypenes fall of the tree. Which ye common people
como^ly ete with bread and otherwhyles with bryne before other metes / to louse
the belly / and these Olives ar called almacles and colymbades. As the very
ripe have much fatnes in the^ / so the unripe have a byndyng juice by reason
where of they streyngthen the stomach and make a man have an appetite.

Out of Alexander.
FOlolowing the autorite of my matters of whom I learned first ye knowledge of
herbs / who were Antonius Musa / Fuchsius / and Ruellius without any ernest
trial / judged masters that our common Alexander was Hypposelinon in
Dioscorides. But after that I had red Matthiolus writing upon Hipposelinon / I
looked more diligently upon the description / and found yt there were certain
properties yt Dioscorides gave unto his Hipposelino / which are not to be found
in our Alexander. For Dioscorides writing of Hipposelino says yt it has a
white root / and a small / and that the herb is whyter then persely / and
that ye leaves turn a little toward a cremesin color. But our Alexander has a
great blak rote / and to look to the hole herb is much blacker then persely /
and ye leaves have nothing like cremisin / allthoug such a color appear in some
places of the buddes / when as they com up first / wherefore our Alexander can
not be Hipposelino^ in Dioscorides. But nevertheless / I think yt it is
Smyrnium / but not it yt Dioscorides describes / as Matthiolus judges / but
yt Smyrnion that Dioscorides refuses as improperly named Smyrnion / and yet
other Grecianes as Galene and Aetius call Smyrnio^. But that Smyrnio^ as it is
differyng from Hipposelino Dioscoridis / so I reken it to the Hipposelinon of
Theophrast / and Aetius and the herb which Galene in his book de alime^toru^
facultatibus witnesses to be called Olus atru^ in Rome in his time. First that
our Alexander is not Smyrniu^ in Dioscorides: these tokens that our Alexander
want and ar required in Smyrnio Dioscorides / do sufficiently declare. Smyrniu^
in Dioscorides has pale / or faint yelow leaves / and our Alexanders leaves ar
blak. Smyrnium has sede like kole round and blak. But our Alexander has long
horned sede nothing like cole / but in all points like persely sede / saving
yt it is much bygger and blacker. The root of Smirniu^ is either grene within /
or else somthyng whitishe. But our Alexanders root is not grene within /
except my memori fale me / nether a little whitishe / but plain white / as I
remember. The herb Smyrniu^ of Dioscorides grows in rocky places / and
stepyng down hills / and in dry places / and about paths. But our Alexander
grows in shaddowy places / and in moist places / and in Islands compassed
about the se / as in a certain Ila^de between the far part of Sommerset shere
and Wales. Wherefore our Alexander can not be Smyrnio^ Dioscorides. But yt our
Alexander is Smyrnion of Aetius and Galene / and olus atrum yt Galene makes
mention of / which the Romans used much in meat / and also Hipposelinon
Theophrasti: trust these resones following shall prove either in part or in
hole. Aetius writes thus of Smyrnion. Smyrniu^ which other call Hipposelinu^
is of ye same kind that persely is of and petroselinon / but it has a blak
sede and much greter. By these words may I gather yt Smirniu^ is a kind of
Selinon or Opiu^ which we call perseli / and seeing that it is the gretest kind
that it may be justly called Hipposelino^. We may also know that it is
therefore a kind of selinon be cause it has like sede in proportion and
figure with other properties belongyng thereto / and yt it cannot be a kind of
apium or selino^ which has no lyknes in ye sede with Apio Selino or persely /
where upon we may gather yt louage which has seeds in no point like Selino /
nether to Oreoselino nor petroselino ca^ not be any kind of apiu^ of selinon /
and yt therefore yt it can nether be Hipposelino^ Dioscorides / nor ye Smyrnio^
Aetij / nor yet Smirniu^ Dioscorides. Galene in his second book of the
properties of norishme^tes or meats writes thus of selino / hipposelino /
Sio^ and smyrnio^. All these make a man piss / amongst which persely is
most used / and pleasant to the stomach. But Hipposelinum and belragges ar
vnplesanter. n Smyrnium is also much used / for it is sold in very great
plenty in Rome / and it is much sharper then perseli and hother / and it has
also a certain spicie taste. And therefore it stirs a man more vehemently to
make water / then persely Hipposelinon and belrages / or water persely / and it
moves the flowers of weome^. But in the spryng it brings forth a stalk (we
call the stalks when they com first forth in England in the spryng with little
knoppes growyng upon the^ Alexander buddes) which is good meat to be eaten as
the leaves / which only the herb had in winter / when it had no stalk / even
as persely / at that time has none. But after that the stalk begins ones to
com / all the hole her be is more plesanter and sweter / whether a man list to
eat it raw / or sodden. These words of Galene declare plainly yt the herb yt
he calls Smyrniu^ is our Alexander. But by it that immediately folowethe in
Galene shall prove both this matter more clerly / and also prove yt there is
one Hipposelino^ (which I take to be it of Dioscorides and not it of
Theophrast) yt cannot be our Alexander / and yt our Alexander is called of the
dol latins olus atrum yt is blak wurt. Galene words be these. But
Hipposelinum and Sio^ ar eaten sodde^: for they are both unpleasant / when as
they are raw. Some men use to ethe persely and smyrnion menged with lettuce
leaves. For when as lettuce is an eatable herb very unsavory / and has a cold
juice / it is made not only plesanter / but also more profitable if ye put some
sharp herb unto it. For which cause some me^g the leaves of rocket / and lekes
and oath / the leaves of Basil. But now in Rome all men call that wurt or eatable
herb not Smyrnion but olus atrum that is blacwurt. Thus far Galene. Now after
that I have proved that our Alexander is Smyrnio^ of Aetius and Galene / and
the Olus atrum of the old latins / I will look now if I can prove that the
foresaid Smyrnion or Olus atru^ is ye Hipposelino^ yt Theophrast describes.
Theophrast describes his Hipposelino^ thus. Hipposelinon has leaves like unto
march or smalache / but roughe. It has a great stalk and a thick root like a
radice / but blak. It brings also furthe a blak fruit / in gretenes bygger
the^ Orobus. Me^ say yt they are both good for the^ that ca^ make no water if
they be dronke^ with white sweet wine / and to drive out stones. It grows
commonly every where. And a juice flows out of it like unto myrre. Some hold
yt it is holly mirre altogether / and not like it only. I se nothing in this
description / but that it agrees well with our Alexander. The leaves of Alexander
ar like unto the leaves of smallage in figure / but they are greater and not so
smoth as smallage leaves ar. The stalk of Alexander is also great / and ye
root is as thik as a radice root is / and blak. The sede or fruit is blak /
an as byg as Orobus / though it have an other proportion and figure. As for
the natural place of growyng / it grows in every shyrr of England in plenty:
wherefore I se no cause but yt Hipposelino^ Theophrasti / is our Alexander. And
because many were of ye opinion yt myrr which is called in Greek Smyrna / came
out of the roots of Hipposelino^. I thynck that it was afterward called
Smyrnio^ / that is myr herb. If any man dout wheter learned men have judged yt
a thing like myr comes out of ye root of Hipposeline / let him read Plini of
Hipposelino and Theophraste / and he shall shortly I trust leave of doutyng.
But if any man repli / and sai yt Theophrast and Galene make Hipposelinon and
Smyrnion to have grene leaves all the hole year: I answer that as Theophraste
sayethe that Hipposelinon has grene leaves / that he says even the same of
persely and of them that they are grene in the very top / that is in the
ouermoste part of the lefe (for ye stalks that have borne sede / perish in
winter) But when as there are ij. sorts of persely / one that is a wife / which
is fruitful and brings furthe fruit / and an other kind is called a maiden
or of some a widow / which either has never borne sede / or has bego^ to have
stalk and has been cut down before it brought furthe ripe sede. As in persely
it that has had sed in summer or harvest / has no leaves in winter / but only
the mayde^ persely / so is it in Alexander / for allthough not eueri rote of
Alexander has grene leaves in winter: yet in warm places yt rough Alexander
has leaves in winter as well as yo^g persely. Now at the length I trust I have
sufficiently proved / yt our Alexander is Smyrnio^ of Galene and Aetius / Olus
atru^ of ye latins / and Hipposelinon of Theophrast / but not of Dioscorides /
and by ye way that nether louage is Hipposelinon Dioscorides / nor ye Smyrniu^
in Dioscorides is our Alexander.

The virtues of Alexander.
Beside ye properties above rehearsed Galene says without any grefe it dries
sores / and makes ripe such as ar hard / and that ye rest of his pour is like
unto Petroselino. Where fore sayethe he we use the sede / to bring down flowers
/ and to provoke vrin / and against the stoppyng of the breast / and short
wyndines. Aetius writes that it is hot and dry in the third degree.

Of the tree called Opulus.
COlumella in the v. book of husba^dry says yt Opulus is like unto a cornel
tree / and firther I read not of ye description of Opulus in him. Where as
Columella co^pareth and lykeneth together Opulu^ and Cornu^. I thynk yt he
does it not for ye lykenes of ye leaves of ye ij. trees / for therein / they are
very unlike / but for ye lykenes of gretenes and manner of tymbre. The tree yt
was showed me in Italy of the learned men there to be Opulus / has a lefe
somthyng like a maple lefe / for it was indent / but the points of the leaves
were blunter the^ the maple tree leaves are. Conradus Gesnerus told me that it is
called in French un opier. I never saw it in England / but it may be called in
English an ople tree. I know no virtue nor use that it has / saving only that
it will serve well for tymbre.

Of Organ.
depiction of plant

ORiganum may be called in English Organe as Origanu^ syluestre is na named /
in some places of England. But I never saw ye true Orga^ in England / saving in
master Riches gardin in London / where as I saw many other good and strange
herbs / which I never saw any where else in all England. I have seen Origanu^
Cretense both in Itali and also in Anwerp / where as it may be had in metely
good plenty of Peter Co^denberg a faithful and a learned apothecari.
Dioscorides makes iij. kind of origanu^: the first kind of origanum is
called heracleoticu^ / and this kind is it yt I have made mention before. It
has / as Dioscorides says a lefe not unlike unto hysop / and a shaddowy top
/ not round after the fasshon of a whele / but many ways diuyded. The sede is
in the top of the twigs not very thyck. Dioscorides makes origanu^ very like
hysop in the leaves / but in deed they are much rou^der and shorter the^ our
common hysopes leaves be. It yt is called Onitis hatk a whyther lefe and is more
like hysope. It has sede like berries joined together. This kind have I also
seen dry / and ones in Germany growyng will in which ye people called there / as
I remember wild maiora^. The wild Origanu^ has ye leaves of organ / and small
branches a spa^ high / in which is a spoky tope like dill / and white
flowers. The root is small and of small price. Our wild Merieru^ in England
which some call Orga^ / and ye Duch Do / might well be Origanum siluestre / if
it had not a purple flour and branches ij. spa^nes long. Never thelessn it may
be a bastard kind of Origanu^ or of Maru^ but nether merieru^ / nor yet
Origanum syluestre ye perfect / where of Dioscorides writes.

The virtues of Organ.
ORgan heteth / wherefore ye brothe of it dro^ke^ with wine is good for the^ yt
ar bitten of a serpent. But if a man have dro^ken homlok or ye juice of poppi /
he must drynk it with maluasey. And if a man have dro^ken alabaster / or myddow
saffro^ / it must be dro^ke^ with Oxymel made of vinegre and honey. If a man take
an alitable of it yt is about ij. ounces and an half / when it is dried / and
drynk it with mede / it draws out blak humores throw ye belly. It brings
weome^ their flowers / and if it be licked with honey / it is good for ye coughe.
Me^ use to give it to ete with a fyg to them yt have any place burste^ and
shro^ken together / and to the^ yt have the dropsey. If a man bath him in the
brothe of it / it is good for the^ yt have the iche or yueke / or any
scurffines and for ye iaundes. The grene juice heals ye sores of the mouth /
ye swelled kirnelles under ye chinne and the vuula. With milk it swageth ye ach
of the ear. And with oil of flour delice if it be put into ye nose / it draws
much dounwarde. A certain vomityng medicine is made of it / oynyones and sumach
which is used with metes / set in ye son xl. days in a coppre vessel / whilse ye
planet of ye dog burns. If ye herb be but strowed upon the ground / it
dryueth serpe^tes away. It yt is called Onitis / is weyker the^ this first
kind is. The wild kind is properly good for the^ yt ar smitten of serpent /
if the leaves or flowers be dronken with wine.

Of the herb called Orminum
depiction of plant Horminum syluestre.
depiction of plant Horminum satiuum.


I Was long of that opinion that Ruellius and diverse other were of / that
Orminum should be the herb which is called of ye Barbarus writers Sclarea / in
English Clare / and in Duch Scharlach. But after that I had wayed the
description of Orminum in Dioscorides more depely / I found that it could not
agree with our Clare. And now of late I have found that Matthiolus is of the
same mind that I am of. And therefore he sets out an other herb / but by
his ^eue a little to rowly described / for Hormino. But it is best to examine
both our clare and the herb that Matthiolus sets forth for Hormino with ye
description of Dioscorides. Horminum of the gardin is an herb with leaves like
Horehounde / with a stalk half a cubit high and foursquared / about the which
com furthe certain forth peryng things / like unto coddes / which look toward
the root / where in ar diverse seeds contained. For in the wild Hormino is
found a round and dunne sede / and in the other a blak and long which is used.
This description seems in many things to disagre with our Clare / and in one
point with it that Matthiolus sets furthe. The leaves of our Clare differ
much in bygnes and somthyng in proportion from the leaves of Horehound. Our
Clare has a stalk ij. cubits long / but Horminum should have a stalk but
half a cubit long / ye things that appear out in ye stalk in Clare / look
upward / but they that are in Horminum look downwarde. Where ye may se that the
description of Horminum agrees not with our Clare. Dioscorides makes mention
but of one stalk in his Hormino. But it that Matthiolus sets forth has
seven stalks at the least / wherefore when as Dioscorides uses not come^ly to
let such notable things to slip / it is like if his Horminu^ had had as many /
he would have made some mention of them. Wherefore yt may make some men to dowt
wheter the Horminum of Matthiolus be the right Orminum or no / which I would not
do / if I know that it had al other things belonging to Horminum beside.

The virtues of Horminum.
MEn will that Orminum stirs men to the gettyng of childer / with honey it
scoureth away the haw in the ey / or the pin and the web. And if it be laid to
with water it dryueth and scatters away swellynges with ye same: pricks or
shiuerse may be plucked out of the body. The wild Orminu^ is stronger then ye
other. Allthoughe our Clare and oculus Christi which is the wild Clare / be
not the ij. kinds of Orminum that Dioscorides describes: yet for all that they
have some virtues like unto the kinds of Orminu^ / for it that we call oculus
Christi, has this properti / that if a man put a sede of it into his ey /
under the ey lyd / it brings forth much filthy gere out of it / if there be
any there. Both the kinds of Clare be hot and dry at the least in the second
degree. If ye will put Clare into new must / and let it ly in it a convenient
time / or if it be sodden with the must / it will make a good wine and holsum
for them that have cold stomachs. The same wine as the later practicioners
write / is good to cut fleme / and for berun weomen / and for such as ar much
cumbred with their white flowers. The powder of clare put into a mannis nose
makes him nese / and brings down much water out of the head. The same clare
is good to bathe weomen with / that want their flowers / when it is sodden in
water with penny ryall and other herbs of like virtue.

Of the herb called Ornithogalon.
depiction of plant Ornithogalon.


ORnithogalu^ is a tender stalk / white / small / a foot and an half long with
ij. or three to growyng branches in ye top which are soft / out of the which come
forth flowers / without of an herbishe color / but when as they gape and ar
opened furthe / they appear white / amongst the which / a little head or knop
/ like a hasel flower / which in the spryng appears before the leaves /
comes forth. This description of Dioscorides agrees well in all points with
ye herb which is called in Duche in the city of Colon / Hundis vllich / but
that it never growethe above the hight of one span / and is seldum so long. But
it may chance that where as our common Greek text has (...) / that some has put
to this syllab di. For Pliny describyng the same herb / says that it is but
of ye lenght of half a foot as my text of Plini has. So that it seems that
Plini red in his Greek Dioscorides (for it is plain that he had Dioscorides
howsomeuer like a falslying good less man / he prete^deth as though he never
saw Dioscorides of whom he has conveyed / so much learned stuf / into his
omnigatherum) (...) and not (...), because there is so great difference between
two spannes and half a foot / which has but vj. Roman inches / when as ij.
spannes conteyn xviij. inches or a foot and an half. But it makes no great
matter whether we know it or no / seeing that it is good for nothing else / but
to be baked in bread as Nigella Romana or blak comun is / and to be eaten.
Matthiolus sets forth an herb for Ornigalo Dioscorides / which if it were
ij. span long / and had all other things agreyng with the description of
Dioscorides: I would not deny but it were the right Ornithogalon / but because
he tells nether of the lenghth of his herb / nor of the qualites that it
has / I dout more of it the^ of it that I have hither to taken for Orinthogalo.

Of the tree called Ornus
THere is some diversity of opiniones about this tree Ornus. Sum hold that it is
ye tree which we call in the North country a quicken tree or a rown tree / and in
ye South country a quikbeme / sum hold yt it is Ornus but not fraxinus of ye
mountains as Tragus / who calls it in Duche Han buchen or Hagen buchen /
Other Duche men and namely Jacob Detter the Apothecari of Wiseburg told me that
Ornus is called in right Duche Walt eschern oder Wilder eschebau^. But my
judgment is that Ornus is not the quicbeme / but Fraxinus montana / which
thing I trust I shall prove by good autorite. Columella in his book de re
rustica says that Ornus is a wyld ash or an ash of the woldes / and that it
has no worse bughes then the elm tree. Gotes and sheep ete more gladly of the
bughes of this tree then of other. Theophrast in his third book of the histori
of plants / in the eleuent chapter writes of ij. kinds of ashes / of the
which the former kind is in great plenty in England / and it is called
commonly an ash tree. But the second kind grows not in England that I know
of. And if I be not deceived it is called of the Latins namely of Virgil Ovid
and Columella / Ornus or Fraxinus syluestris. And Theophrast writes of his
second kind of ash thus. The second kind of the ashes is lower and waxes
not so high as the other / and is rougher / harder and yelower. The smothe
ash grows in low and holow places / and in watery places. But the roughe one
grows in dry and rocky ground. All that grow in plain grounds use to be
plain and smouthe. And all that grow in the mountains / use to be roughe
scuruy or scabbed / with unequal parts apperyng outward after the manner of
scabbes. Thus far Theophrast. That Ornus is a tree of ye mountains / Virgill in
ye second of his Georgikes witnesses in this verse: Nascuntur steriles saxosis
montibus Orni.
That is / the Barun Orni or wild ash trees grow in the rooky or craggi
mountains.

I know also by experience that I have of the wild or rocky ash here in
Germany / and by it that I had in the alps of Rhetia / that the wod of the
wild ash is very fair yelow / and that the Germaynes make fair tables and
cupbordes and spounes and many other things belongyng to the house of the same
ash tree. Then when as Columella says that Ornus is Fraxinus montana / and
Theophrast says that the rockishe ash is of a yelow color / and the
Germaynes walt ascher / that grows in ye mountains is yelow / I thynk that I
may well conclude that the Germaynes rock ash or wod ash is Ornus of the
Latins / and Fraxinus syluestris Theophrasti is for the quicbeme / it grows
not in high and wild mountains / but in low and watery places / wherefore it
can not be Ornus / or the second kind of ash in Theophrast.

The properties of Ornus.
I Know no other use of the wild ash but that it is good to make cupbardes /
tables / spownes and cups of. And that some use to make dagger hefters of the
root of it / for it can scarsly be known from dudgyon / and I think that the
most part of dogion is of the root of the wild ash. Whatsoever virtue the
other ash has this must have the same and more effectually / saving in such
matters as more moisture is required in. For then the common ash is more fit for
such purposes.

Of Orobanche.
ORobanche / as Dioscorides writes / is a redishe stalk two spannes high /
and some times higher / tender / roughe without any lefe / has / with a flour
somthyng whitishe / but turning toward yelow. The root is a finger thick. And
when the stalk shrynkethe for dryues / it is like an holow pype. It is plain
that this herb grows among certain pulses / and that it choketh and
strangleth them / where of it has the name of Orobanche / that is chokefitche
or strangletare. Thus far Dioscorides of Orobanche. The herb which I have
taken and taught xv. years ago to be Orobanche / which also now of late years
Matthiolus has set out for Orobanche / grows in many places of England /
both in the North country beside Morpethe / whereas it is called our lady of
new chapellis flour / and also in the South country a little from sheue in the
broum closes. But it has no name there. I have seen it in diverse places of
Germany / and first of all between Colon and Rodekirch. The herb is comenly a
fout long and often longer / I have marked it many years / but I cold never se
any lefe upon it. But I have seen the flowers in diverse places of diverse
colores / and for the most part where so ever I saw the^ / they were redishe
or turnyng to a purple color in some places / but in figure they were like unto
to ye flowers of Clare with a thing in them representyng a cockis head. The
root is round and much after the fasshon of a great lekis head / and there
grow out of it certain long things like strings which have in them in certain
places sharp things like tethe / where with it claspeth and holds the root
that it strangleth. I have found it often times claspyng and holdyng meruellously
soft the roots of brou^ / so that they looked as they had been bound foulde^
often about with small wyre. And ones I found this herb growyng besyd the common
clauer or meadow trifoly / which was all wethered / and when I had dygged up the
root of the trifoly to se what should be the cause that all other clauers or
trifolies about were grene and fresh / that that trifoly should be deed. I
found the roots of Orobanche fast clasped about ye roots of the clauer /
which as I did plainly perceive / draw out all the natural moisture from the
herb that it should have lived with all / and so killed it / as yui and dodder
in continuance of time do with the trees and herbs that they fould and wind
them selves about. They that hold that cuscuta or doder is Orobanche in
Dioscorides / ar far deceived. For Orobanche is a stalk and not a lace as doder
is. Orobanche is but a fout and an half long / but the laces of dodder will be
some time iij. or iiij. foot long. Orobanche has a root a finger thik / but
there is none such in doder / for ye shall hardly find any right root at al in
doder. The stalk of Orobanche is hollow when it is withered / but so is not the
stalk or rather the lace of doder. The stalk of Orobanche is roughe / but the
lace of doder is very smothe. Wherefore they were very far ouersene which now
of late have written that doder is Orobanche in Dioscorides. Some other without
any cause have of late put this herb which I take to be Orobanche / amongst
the kinds of Satyrion.

The properties of Orobanche.
ORobanche which may well be called in our tongue chokefiche or strangle wede /
is eten commonly in sallates / raw or sodden after the manner of sperage.
Orobanche as Galene writes is cold and dry in the first degree. Matthiolus
sayethe that Orobanche is called in Italian lupa / that is a wolf and also
herba tora / that is herb bull / because that if a cow chanse to eat of it /
she rynneth straight way after to the bull. But it that Matthiolus writes
against Theophrast / because he says that Orobanche kylleth Orobus and
strangleth it with his pressyng in / or thrystyng together / and that Orobanche
kills pulses only with his presence / pleases me not / as a sayng against
reason autorite and experience. It is against reason that only the presence of
Orobanche should kill pulses / seeing it is no venummus herb / when even
venummus herbs kill not them amongst whom they grow except they touch them
/ or be so thyk amongst them that they take the norishme^t from them / whereby
they should live. It is also both against the autorite of Theophrast / no liyng
writer / and of lat against Dioscorides / whom he takes in hand to expound.
For Dioscorides says. It is plain that Orobanche grows amongst pulses /
and that it chowketh or strangleth them / where upon it has gotten the name
Orobanche / that is Orobstrangler. Now I pray you how can Orobanche strangle it
that it touches not? Belyke Matthiolus saw no leaves in Orobanche nor any
claspers above the ground / and therefore he thought that there was no other
thing that Orobanche had / where with it cold strangle / and never marked ye
little strings in the root / which not with out a faut his Orobanche wants
/ and so came into this error that Orobanche strangled only with his presence.
Tragus paynteth well Orobanch under the name of Satryrynoni / with such little
strings as it killed herbs with. And as touching experience / I know that
the fresh and young Orobanche has coming out of the great root / many little
strings such as we se in a phrone or se sterr / but longer / wherewith it
takes hold of the roots of the herbs that grow next unto it. Wherefore
Matthiolus ought not so lightly to have defaced the autorite of Theophrast so
ancient and substantial author / with laiyng ignorance unto his charge / seeing
that Theophrastus in the same place where he speaks of Orobanche tells
plainly that sum herbs ar first strangled by the root / and that not the only
presence of such wedes kill herbs and pulses / but the taking away of their
norishement that comes partly out of the earth and partly from the air and
son. The words of Theophrast ar these. Orobancha vocata, eruum necat amplexu
compres suque suo, and linodorum foenum graecum interimit, protinus radici
adnascens. Lo here may ye se that a wede may kill a pulse by the root alone.
But Theophrast says farther. Omnia idcirco interimunt, quia pabulum tollunt,
tam quod terra ministret, quam quod a sole and aere veniat. That is all kinds
of wedes do kill / because they take away the norishment as well it that the
earth gives / as it that comes from the air and the son.

Of Rise.
depiction of plant Oriza.


ORiza is named in English and Duche Ris / in French rize. Dioscorides
writethe no more of the description of Ris / put that it grows in waterishe and
marrishe grounds. But Theophrast describes it more largely / after this wise.
Rys is to look to like unto Lolium or darnel / and for the most time of his
growyng / it stands in water. But it puts forth no ear / but a mane after
the manner of millet and panik. Thus far Theophrast / who makes a little above
Rise also like zea / which is called spelta of the herbaries / and in Duche
Speltzsperk. It has commonly an ear with ij. chesses or orders of corn / as
barley has / called in Greek Distichon. Which marks all together agree with
our Rise / except that where he says that oriza has a mane and no ear / or
spike. But I judge that he takes an ere very straytly here / for that which is
growyng hard to the top of ye strew and is not spread abroad for / and wide
from the strew that it comes out of / and that therefore he denies that
panicum has any ear / which after the common taking of an ear / has an ear
as well as barley or sperltz has. For Theophrast in his eight book de
historia plantarum describes iubam that is a mane / such as he gives unto
Rise mile and panik after this manner. Effusam illam harundinaceam comam iubam
appello: that is I call that Riedishe bushe or look that is stretched forth
abroad / a mane / so ye Theophrast means that the head of Rise is not
properly to be called an ere / because the corns ar so far from the straw.
This is ones out of al dout / that lolium and zea have ears / but Theophrast
makes Rise like unto these two / and not for the leaves sake or ye strawis sake
/ but only for the ears sake. Wherefore Theophrast means not that Rise is
without all kind of ear / but that it has no such compact ere and growyng
hard to the head of the straw as other kinds of corn have / but louse and
going abroad after the fasshon of an horses mane. I saw Rise growyng in plenty
beside Mylane.

The virtues of Rise.
RIse norissheth menely / but it stops ye belly / Rise as Galene says
byndeth sumthing / and that therefore it stops the belly. Symeon Sethi
writes that Rise is hot in ye first degree and dry in the second. Rise says
he prepared with milk makes a man look well / and brings a good color / and
increseth sede.

Of the herb called Osyris.
THe herb which is taken of ye most part of learned men to be Osyris / is
called of the apothecaries linaria / because it is like unto line or flax / and
in Duche it is named Kroten flachs / that is tode flax. But allthoughe it
grows plentuously in England / yet I never heard any English name for it. If
there be no other name for it / it may be called in English linari or todes
flax. Dioscorides describes Osyris thus: Osyris is a blak little bushe / beryng
small branches / toughe and hard to break / and in them grow four leaves
together / or five / or six like unto lint or flax / blak in the beginning /
and the color changed afterward redishe. I know no herb that agrees better
with the description of Osyris then linaria does / yet for all that / ye
certain nombre of leaves growyng together hyndereth it to be the right Osyris /
for our linaria has the branches all full of leaves without any certain number
growyng together / and at no time redishe that I cold mark hitherto.
Matthiolus writes that sum judge the fair herb that is called in Italian
beluidere to be the right Osyris / where unto he seems to consent. But at this
present I have not ye herb / wherefore I can not examine it with the
description of Dioscorides / and therefore can give no judgment in this matter.

The virtues of Osyris.
DIoscorides ^riteth yt the brothe of Osyris dronken is good against ye iaundes
or guelsought. Galene writes that Osyris has a bitter qualite (...) ^^erfore
pou^ to open stoppynges / so that it can hele the stoppyng of the (...).

Of Oxyacantha.
OXyacantha which is named in Latin Spina acuta, is a tree like unto a wild
pere tree / very full of pricks / but less. It brings furthe beries like
Myrtilles / full read / brekle / and a kyrnel within a root divided many ways
/ which goes deep into the ground. Hitherto Dioscorides. The most part of
learned men in this part of Europa have judged of late years that our berberes
should be Oxyacantha. But the description of Oxyacantha in all points
depiction of plant Berberis Oxyacantha.
does not agree with our berberis. First our berberis bushe looks not like a
wild pere tree / for it is rather a bushe then a tree / for in all the places
that ever I saw it in / it never rose up to ye bygnes of a tree. The berries of
barberis and of the Myrt tree are not in proportion and figure like. For the
berberis beris ar great in the mids and small at both ye ends / after the
manner of a long eg. Such fassho^ of figure is not in a Mirt berry. Dioscorides
seems to give one berry Oxyaca^tha / but one stone or kirnel / but every berri
of berberies has iiij. at ye lest / wherefore it is not like that our
berberis should be Oxyacantha. Thus much I had marked before I saw Matthiolus.
But after that I saw Matthiolus I learned of him an other reason to prove that
our berberis cold not be Oxyaca^tha / which was this. Dioscorides describyng
the former kind of Mespilus or medler tree / says that it has a lefe like
unto Oxyacantha. But the former kind of Mespilus / as Theophrastus witnesses
has indented leaves / and in the utter most part like unto the leaves of
persely. But there is no lykenes between the leaves of berberis and of persely:
wherefor berberis can not be Oxycantha. The forenamed Matthiolus holds yt our
haw tree or white thorn tree is Oxyacantha. But when as our haw thorn tree leseth
his leaves every year / and Theophrast in his first book de historia Plantaru^
and in ye xv. chapter reherseth Oxyacantham amongst the trees yt have grene
leaves all the year. I can not se how yt our common hawthorn should be
Oxyacantha. How that Matthiolus will answer to this I can not tell / but I have
no other shift saving this. In Summerset shyre about six miles from Wells / in
ye park of Gassenberry there is an hawthorne which is grene all the winter /
as all they yt dwell there about do steadfastly hold. If ye Oxyacantha be any
kind of hawthorn / it must be ye kind which abides grene all ye hole year
throw. But if that our hawthorne be not Oxyacantha / as I suppose plainly that
it is a kind of it / it is Spina alba in Columella as God willing here after I
intend to prove.

The virtues of Oxyacantha.
THe berries of Oxyacantha taken either in meat or drink / stop ye flix of the
belly and the isshue of weomen. The root of the same laid to emplasterwyse
pulls out pricks and shiuers.

Out of Galene in his book of simple medicines.
OXyacanthos as it is a tree like unto a wild pere tree / so it has properties
not unlike. But the fruit of the wild pere tree is throw out byndyng and very
tarte / yet the fruit of Oxyacantha is of fine or subtle parts and a little
cuttyng. But the fruit of this tree is not like unto the fruit of a wild pere
tree / but like unto myrtilles / that is to wet read and thin.

Of the herb called Oxys.
depiction of plant Oxis.


OXys / as the most part of learned men judge / is ye herb which is called
in English Alleluya / because it appears about Easter when Alleluya is song
again / or wodsore: but it should be called wod four or sorell / in Duch Hasen
ampfer / in French Pane de coquu. Pliny writes thus of Oxys. Oxys has three
leaves growing together. And further have we of no other writer that I could yet
se that tells what Oxys is. By the name we may know that it must be sour /
and by the form or fasshon three leued. Where upon we gather that Oxys must be
a sour trifoly / and when as there is no trifoly that is sour sayuyng this /
and Lotus vrbana / and it can not be Lotus vrbana / because it grows always
wild in the woddes / and commonly about tree roots / we gather that this
Alleleluya or wodsour should be Oxys in Pliny.

The virtues of wodsour out of Pliny.
OXys is given unto a flashe / louse or weike stomach. They rat of it also
that have the burstyng of the guts. The practicioners of Germany write that
the distilled water of Alleluya cools well and comfort the heart / and
quenches thirst / and that it is good in all hot diseases and inflammationes.
They hold also that the distilled water of wodsorel / is good to be tempered
with alum / for the wounds and sores of the mouth.

Of the Date tree.
PAlma is called in Greek Phoenix / in English a Date tree / in Duch ein Dattel
baum / in French un Palm arbre.

The description of the Date tree out of Pliny.
THe country of Iewry is honorably commended / for nothing more then for Date
trees / of whose nature I will speak now. There are certain Date trees in
Europa / and in many places of Itali / but they bring furthe no fruit. They
bear fruit well in the sea costs of Spayn / but unpleasant. The Date trees
bring forth a sweet fruit in Africa / but it vanissheth away by and by. But it
chances contrary wise in the East parts of the world / for there some people
make bread of Dates / and sum make wine of them / and some nationes make fother
for cattle of Dates. Wherefore it shall be most commendable to speak of them
yt are in strange and far cuntres. There grows no Date tree of it self in Itali
without setting or sowyng / nether in any other parts / but in a hot ground.
But it brings furthe no fruit but in a burning hot ground. The Date tree
grows commonly in a light and sandy ground / and for the most part in a
saltish or nitrishe ground. It loves well watery places / and where as it is
desyrus to drynk all the hole year / it is most desyrus in ye drought or dry
time of ye year. Sum judge yt dungyng hurts Date trees. And sum of the
Assyrianes reke^ that it is ill for the Date trees / if they be not set in
watery places. There are diverse kinds of Date trees. The first kind excedeth
not ye bygnes of a bushe. This kind in sum places brings forth fruit / and
in sum places it brings forth no fruit. And this kind is full of leaves /
and has a round circle of branches growing about. Sum use ye branches and
leaves of these to cover walls with / against ye falling of water upon them in
many places of this country. The busshy lok / in ye wild kind is in ye top /
and so is the fruit / and not amongst the leaves as it is in other kinds. But
this wild kind has his fruit / as it were many berries together in his
branches / among the smaller bughes / and is both of the nature of a grapi and
of an apple. The leaves have the fasshon of a sharppoynted knyfe / ye sides
being divided and turned inward into them selves. They did show at the first
goodly perles / but now the leaves ar used to make bands of to bynd vindes and
to make ropes of. They are also cloven and then there ar made certain light
things of them / for shaddowyng of mennis hedes. Trees / ye all other things
yt ever the earth brings furthe / ye even the herbs also both the male and
the female as the most diligent serchers and markers of nature have taught in
their wrytynges. And this thing is in no tree more manifestly tried then in Date
trees. The male florissheth in his branches / but ye femal buddeth without any
flour / only after ye manner of a thistel. In both the kinds ye flesh of ye
fruit grows before the stone / and that is ye Date sede. And this is proved
to be so yt there ar found in the same branches little ones without any stones. But
that is long and not round as the olive stones be. It is also cut in the bak
with a long rift or cleuyng after the manner of a pillow. And the most part have
a nauel in the mids of their bellies. And from that place comes first
furthe yt it divides it self into a root. It is best to saw it grouelyng.
There must be ever two set together / and as many about: for every one sowe^
alone / should bring forth to weike a plant. Four of the^ grow together. The
flesh of ye Date waxes ripe in a year. In certain other places as in-Cyprus
allthough it com never to rypenes / yet it is swetishe with a pleasant taste.
And there is ye lefe brother / and the fruit is rounder the^ other be. Nether
is it taken yt the body of it should be ete^ / but ye juice pressed out / yt
the other parts may be spitted out again. Date trees love to be removed. We
have said before ye Date trees love a saltishe ground. Wherefore where as there
is none such / men strew salt there / not even upon the roots / but a little
further of. They bear even in the first year / anon after their plantyng. But
in Cyprus and in Syria / and Egypt / some of them bring forth fruit when they are iiij. year old / and some when they are five year old / when it is of the
hight of a man. And as long as the tree is very young / the fruit has no stone
within him / and therefore such ar called geldynges. There are many kinds of
Date trees. Men use the barun trees for timber / in Assyria / and all the land
of Persis / and namely for the finest and perfitest works. There are also
woddes of Date trees which use to be cut down / which spryng again of the
roots. And there is a sweet mary or pithe in the top which they call the
brayn. And when that is taken forth / they live still as other do not. There are
sum that are called chame ropes / and they have a broad lefe and soft. And they are most mete to bind vyndes with. They grow plentuously in Ca^dy / but more
ple^tuously in Sicilia. The coals that are made of the Date trees / do ly long
and are long in dying / and the fire thereof / is a very slow fire. There are
sum Date trees in whose fruit is a stone bowyng after ye fasshon of an half
moon. And this sum polishe with a toothe with a certain religion / against
forspekyng and bewitchyng. There is one kind of Date trees called Margarides /
and these ar short / white / round / and more like unto round berries / the^
to acornes / by reason where of they have their name of perles. Some say that
there is a kind of them / Inchora / and also that there is one of them / which are called Syagri. Where of we have heard a great wonder / that is to wete /
that that same kind dies and lives again by it self / as the byrd called
Phoenix does / which is supposed to have received her name of this kind of
Date tree / for the cause above rehearsed. And whilse as I wrote these things
that ye now read / it brought forth fruit. The fruit of it is great / hard /
roughe and illfauored to look to / and differs from all other kinds by a
wild rammishe and rank taste that it has. The which same things we have
allmoste perceived to be in bores / and this is the most euydent cause of the
name of it. There are other Dates that grow about the higher parts of Ethiopia
/ called cariote / which have in them much meat and much juice / where of
the men of the East / make their chief wines. But they are euel for the headache
/ where of they have their name. But as there is great plenty / and the ground
bears very many / so most excellent and noble Dates grow in Iewry / and not
every there / but most about Ierico. There are sum kinds of Dates called
dactyli / and they are of the dryer sorts / and they are long and small and
somthyng crooked. Dates in Ethiopia ar broken into powder (such is the drought
there) and after the manner of mele they are thicked up and of them bread is
made. The Date there / grows in a bushe that has branches / a cubit long / a
broad lefe / a round fruit / but greter then an apple / they call them cycas.
They wax ripe in three years / and there is always one Date upon the bushe /
and other grows under the same. They are fittest to be kept that grow in
saltishe and sandy grounds / as in Iewry and in Africa about Syrene. But they
can not be kept in Egypt / Cyprus / Syria / Seleucia / and therefore they feed
swyne and other bestes with them. Many of Alexandres souldyers was strangled
with grene Dates. And that chanced in Gedrosis by a certain kind of fruit /
but in other places it chances by the reason of the great plenty. The leaves of
the Date tree never fall of.

Out of Theophrastus.
THe Date tree is always grene / and the leaves have the fasshon of a redis
lefe. It desires a saltishe and a sandy ground and of ten wateryng / and above
all things often to be removed. If ye will sow Dates / ye must bind two
together / and other two together above the first cople / and lay them all
grouelynges toward the ground. And as soun as they begin to com furthe / the
roots fold in one about an other / and so grow together that they make but one
tree. And thus do they because if one were alone / ye tree would be to weike. When
it is first removed and transplanted / and also every time afterward / men use
to cast salt about the roots of the young Date trees. If a Date tree be topped
or lopped it will live no longer after.

Out of Plutarch.
THe wod of the Date tree / if ye lay a weight upon it / and therewith labor to
press it down / yet it will not bow downwarde / but it boweth in to the
contrary / as though it withstod the burden / that violently pressed it. The
very same thing doutles chances in the trying of mastries / unto wrastlers /
and championis / for they bow down them by pr ssyng / which by dastardnes / and
weiknes of mind give place unto them. But they that continue ma^fully in that
besynes / go not only forward / and increase in bodily streyngthe / but also
in wisdom of the mind.

Out of Aulus Gellius.
AVlus Gellius also a famous writer / says in his third book noctium
atticarum, that the Date tree has in it a certain singular / and special
properti that agrees with the disposition and manner of valiant bold men / for
if ye lay / says he / great heavy weyghtes / and press and burden it so sore
/ that it is not able to abide the gretnes of the weight / it gives no place
nor boweth downwarde / but it ryseth up again / against the burden and loboreth
to grow upward / and it boweth back ward. These places have I gathered out of
the most ancient and worthiest writers for their sakes / to whom it belongs
to open the scripture unto the common people / because in diverse places of the
holy scripture / and specially in the Psalter / is mention made of the Date tree
and diverse examples ar fetched / and mo may be fetched out of the nature of
the same tree.

The virtues of the Date tree.
THe Date tree is sour / tarte / and byndyng. It is good to be dronken in tart
byndyng wine against the flix and isshue that weome^ have. It stops the
emrodes. If it be laid to / it heleth up wounds. Grene Dates bind more then
they that are dry. They ingendre head ache. If they be taken plentuously in meat
they make them that eat them dronken. The dry fruit of the Date trees / ar
good to be eaten of them that spit blood / or ar diseased in the stomak / and
of them that have the blody flix. They are good to be laid to with an ointment
made of quinces and of the flowers of the wild vinde / for the diseases of the
blader. Dates if they be eaten / they are good for the harrishenes or roughnes
of the throat. The stones of dates burned in an vnbaked pot / and quenched with
wine / if the ashes be burnt / will serve in the stead of Spodium.

Out of Galene.
DAtes if they be taken in great plenty ar hard of digestion / and bread the
head ache. The juice that is made of them which is carried in to the body / is
gross. The much use of dates stop the milt / and the liver / and they are euel
for them that have any inflammation or hard swellyng in the body.

Dates as Simeon Sethi writes / ar hot in ye second degree and moist in the
first. Beside the incommodites that Dioscorides and Galene write to com of Date
/ the fornamed Sethi / says that Dates fill ye stomach full of wind / and
that they are hurtful for the^ that have euel goumes / or ar disposed to the
squinsey / the eysore / and to the tooth ache. Wherefore our sweet lipped
Londoners and wanton courtiers / do not wisely to suffer so many dates to be
put in to their pyes / and other meats / to the great charge of their purses /
and to no less undoing of the health of their bodies.

Of Panik.
Panicum.
depiction of plant depiction of plant

PAnicum is named in Greek (...), in French panik / in Duch fench or fenich /
or heydelfenich. But it has no name in English yet / but it may well be
called panick after ye Latin. Panik has leaves like unto a read when it comes
first forth. Afterward it has a long stalk or straw full of joints. And in
the top grows a long thing like an ear / which is all full of little yelow
seeds / as little as some mustarde sede / but not so round. Panik grows
ple^tuously in Italy and in high Germany and in some gardines of England.
Theophrast writes that Panic if it be much watered / that it will be sweter /
and he says that Mille^ and Panick because they are covers with many cootes /
and are dry / will b^te well when they are laid up.

The virtues of Panik.
DIoscorides writes yt Panic has the same virtue yt Milleth has / but that
it norissheth and byndeth less. Galene says yt panic is of the kind of
pulses / and in lykenes like unto millet / and also in virtue of small
norishme^t / and dry. It stops also after him the flyx of the belly as
millet does / and if it be laid without / it dries and couleht. Constantinus
in his book of husba^dry says that panik and millet make feldefayres and
thrusshes fat / if they be fed there with / and ye small birds ar much desirous
of the same. Wherefore if any man were desirous to fat or sede in cages any
small birds / it were good to sow good plenty of panic and millet to feed and
fat them therwt.

Of diverse kinds of Poppy.
PApauer is named in Greek (...) in English poppy or chesboule / in Duch
magsamen / in French pauot. There are diverse kinds of poppy. The first kind
is called in Greek (...), in Latin papauer satiuu^ / in English whit poppy or
gardin poppy. This kind has a long head and a white sede / as Dioscorides
says and more over a white flour. The second kind of poppy is wild and it
has a head sittyng as Dioscorides writes and blak sede in it. There is yet ye
depiction of plant Papauer erraticum primum.
depiction of plant Papauer erraticum alterum.
depiction of plant Papauer satiuam purpureum.
depiction of plant Papauer corniculatum luteum.
third kind that is wilder and more appointed for physik / and longer then the
other / and it has a long head. There is also the fourth kind where of
Dioscorides writes in a several chapter alone. And it is called papauer
erraticu^ / in Latin / in Greek rheas because ye flour falls away hastily.
This kind is called in English cornrose or redcornrose / and with us it
grows much amongst the rye and barley. Dioscorides describes it thus. It
has leaves like rocket / or organ / or cicori / or thyme / but longer diuyded
/ and roughe. The stalk is rysshye / straight / a cubit long / and sharp. The
flour of it is like unto wild anemone / of a cremisin color some time white.
The head is long but less then it of anemone. The sede is read. The root is
long somthyng white / of the thyknes of one little fingre / of a better taste.
Beside all these kinds there is an other kind much differyng from all the
rest: It is named in Greek (...), in Latin corniculatum papauer, in Duche gel
magsam / or gehoernter mag samen. It may be named in English horned poppy or
see poppy / or yelow poppy. It grows very ple^tuously about ye see side in
England both beside Dover and also in Dorset shyre / and in many other places
of England. Dioscorides describes horned poppy thus. Horned poppy has white
leaves / roughe and like unto malled / indented about the edges like wild
Poppy. The stalk is not unlike the same. The flour is yelow. The sede vessel
is like Fenegreke / and boweth inward like an horn / whereupon it has the
name. It has a small blak sede like unto poppy. The root is blak and thyck /
and it grows not deep in ye ground / but in the ouerparte of it. It grows
about the sea side and roughe places.

The virtues of the gardin or white Poppi.
THe common nature of all kinds of poppy is to cool: Wherefore if the hedes
and leaves be boiled in water / will make a man sleep if his head be bathed
there with. The brooth is good to be dro^ken against to much wakyng and want of
sleep. The hedes broken with perched barley and menged with emplasters ar good
for infla^mationes both cholerik and other. The grene hedes must be brayed and
fasshoned in to little cakes and dried and laid up until need shall require
the use of them. The hole hedes ar sodde^ in water alone / until the half be
sodden away / and then afterward the brothe is sodden again with honey until
the hole broote be commed unto the thyknes or toughnes of an electuari. This
medicine is good for the coughe / ye catar that flows into the pypes / and
for the diseas of rynnyng of the belly. But the medicine will be much stronger
if ye put unto it hypoquistida and acaciam. It is good to drink ye sede of
black popy broken / with wine against the flyx of ye belly / and also against
wymens isshues. It is also good to lay to the temples and for head of him that
can not sleep. The juice of blak Poppy called Opium cools more / thicketh
more / and dries more: if it be taken in the quantite of a bitter fich /
called eruum or orobus: it swageth ach / and brings sleep / it helps them
that have the flix. But if a man take to much of it / it is hurtful / for it
takes a mannis memori away and kills him. It is good to be poured upon a
mannis head with rose oil for the head ach. With almond oil it is good to be
poured in to the ears / with myr and safron for the ach of them. With the yoke
of an eg hard roasted / it is good for the inflammationes or burnynges of the
eyes. With vinegre it is good for the cholerik inflammation called erisipelas /
it heals wounds also. With woman's milck it swageth the pain of the gout. If
it be put in to the fundament after the manner of a suppositori it brings
sleep.

The virtues of Poppy out of Galene.
THe sede of the gardin Poppy is good to be menged with bred to season it. But
the white is better then the blak. The properti of it is to cool / and
therefore it stirs a man to sleep. But if ye take it out of mesure / it will
bring the dull sleping called cataphoria / and it will be hard to digest. It
stops those humores that are spitten out with coughynge out of the breast and
lunges. The use of it is very good for that have a subtle and thin moisture
flowyng out of their hedes in to the parts that are in under. Poppy gives no
speak worthy norishment unto the body.

Out of the Arabianes.
AVerroes writes that Poppy is cold and moist / and that ye white is cold in
ye third degree / and that the blak is cold in the fourth / and that the white
brings a pleasant sleep / but that ye blak is euel and makes a dull or
sluggish sleep.

Out of Symeon Sethy a later Grecian.
SYmeon Sethy writes yt poppy is cold and dry in ye first degree / and that
white poppi taken with honey increases feed. The same writes that the blak is
colder then the other / and that opium is poison. Wherefore men had need to
take heed how they occupy it. For allthoughe sum be very bold in occupying of
it: I taught by experience how ieperdus it is / dare not without great warnes
give it in to ye body. For ones in East Friesla^d / when as I washed an achyng
tooth with a little opio mixed with water / and a little of ye same unawares went
down: with in an hour after my hands began to swell about the wrestes / and to
itch / and my breath was so stopped / that if I had not taken in a piece of the
root of masterwurt / called of some pilletory of Spayn with wine / I thynck
that it would have killed me.

The virtues of red corn rose.
IF ye take v. or vj. hedes of read cornrose / and sethe them in iij. ciathes
of wine until the half be sodden away / and give this unto a man it will make
him sleep. An acetable of the sede sodde^ in mede or honyed water / if it be
dronken / it will soften the belly gently. For the same purpose some use to put
the seeds in to honied cakes. The leaves and hedes bruised together ar good
against infla^mationes and burnynges. The same ar good to bath their temples with
all that would fayn sleep. A cyate where of I made mention before as Agricola de
me^suris and ponderibus writes / holds two ounces / one dram and one scruple
/ and an acetable holds two ounces and an half.

Matthiolus writes that some use to gather the flowers of redcorn rose and to
give the powder of them to the^ that are sike in the pleuresi. Some also says
Matthiolus / take the flowers and make a Syrop of the^ by puttyng three or four
times fresh flowers in to warm water / and afterward as much sugar as shall be
enoughe to keep ye Syrop from mouldyng. Which Syrop is very good for ye above
named diseas. He says furthermore yt about Tre^t ye people takes the yo^g
leaves when they com first forth and seth the^ and make potage and gruel of the^
/ and meng the^ with butter and chese. Theophrast writing of ye same herb
says yt it was used in meat in his time / and yt gathered somthyng grene it
purges dounward. If any man were disposed to make a read colored butter and
holsom / for the diseases above named: he may with great profit meng the juice
of the redcorn rose flowers with the butter / the same put in to the chese /
would color chese well and provoke a man to sleep. The juice of ye leaves mixed
with butter or chese will make the^ grieve / and profitable for ye purposes before
named.

The virtues of horned Poppy.
THe root of horned poppy sodde^ in water until the half be sodden away and
then dronken / heals the sciatica / and the diseases of the liver. The come^
translatores turn Trachea in to crassa, houu uuel judge thou reder.
It is also good for them that piss out with their water (...), that is roughe
things and like unto spyders or spinners. The sede taken in the quantite of an
acetable with mede louseth the belly gently. But to much of this is very
ieperdus / wherefor I counsel all men that they be not to bold in vsyng of it
/ when as the same help that it brings / may be had of other diverse gentle
medicines with out all ieperdy.

Remedies against the poison of Opium
BEcause me^ in extreme aches and pains ar by extreme need of times compelled
to fly for help to the use of Opium and it has so much ieperdy as is before
said / it is needful that we have in a redynes some remedy against such
ieperdy. Therefore I intend to tell both the tokens and remedies against the
poison of Opium. These ar the tokens where by a man may know who is poisoned
with opium. He that has eaten opium has a great sluggishnes and a
disposition to sleep / and all the body is combred with a sore iche. The
remedies against the poison of opium ar these. First if any man have dro^ken
opiu^ ye must provoke him to vomit with the drynkyng of warm oil / and ye must
serve unto him a sharp clyster. For the same purpose oximel that is honied
vinegre / is very good to be dronke^ with a little salt. Honey with rose and strong
wine dronken with wormwod or cinnamu^ ar also good. It is also good to drynck
peper with castorio which is ye cod of a beuer in honied vinegre. If the pacient
be to much slepi / put styngkyng things unto his nose to waken him therewith.
If that his ich continue still / put him in to a bath of warm water. After the
bath it is good to give him fat meats and Maluesey or such like hot wine. And
these remedies are not only good against Opium / but against the hurt that
comes by taking of any kind of poppy / or any other medicine of the same
nature that they are of.

Of Seuerfew.
PArtheniu^ as Dioscorides says called of some Amaracus has thin leaves like
unto Coria^dre. The flour is yelow in ye part yt goes about ye yelow knop. It
has a smell sumthyng grievous / and a bitter taste. If it be dried and dro^ken
with honied vinegre or salt / it purges choler and fleme / as epithymum does:
and it is a good remedy for them yt ar shortwynded / and for them that are
greueth with melancholi.

Hermolaus Barbarus and Ruellius with diverse other great learned me^ / do judge
yt the herb which is called of ye apothecaries matricaria / in English
Feuerfew / in Duch metterkraut or metter / is partheniu^ in Dioscorides. But
Antonius Musa some time my master in Ferraria / and Leonardus Fuchsius my good
friend in Germany / hold yt Feuerfew is not Partheniu^ / but the herb which
we call madenwede or mathwede. But though they are both my fre^des / yet I will
hold with yt truth rather the^ with the^ / when as I judge that they hold not with
it / as I thynck they do in this opinion. Fuchsius resoneth against the opinion
of Ruellius thus. Feuerfew has not the small leaves of Coriander / but the
brother leaves of the same / and therefore / matricaria is not parthenium.
Whereunto I answer yt indede Coriander has ij. kinds of leaves / some metely
broad benethe / and some very small above. But I can not se one word of
autorite / or one good argument that Fuchsius has brought to prove his sayng
yt by the leaves of Coria^dre ought to be understand the small leaves of
Coriander / and not the brother leaves. For it that he alleges out the Greek
text proves nothing it yt he intends. I grant yt Dioscorides says (...),
and not (...), as Fuchsius seems to understand Dioscorides. depiction of plant
Parthemium I.
depiction of plant Parthemium II.
For this word (...) in Dioscorides betokens not always it yt is narrow and
small / but often times it betokens it that is not deep nor thyk / but it yt is
thin allthoughe it be brood. For Dioscorides writes yt ye arbut tree / ye herb
called teucriu^ / and hedera helix have (...). But all me^ yt know these
pla^tes / know well that their leaves ar metely broad / for teuchrion has a
lefe like unto a ciche: the arbut tree has leaves almost as byg as a quince tree
/ and yt nether hedera helix / nor any of ye other above named is any thing at
all like unto ye smallest leaves of coria^der / but much brother the^ the brodest
leaves of coriander. Therefore Fuchsius has proved nothing by this word lepta.
The argument also that he brings of the placyng of partheniu^ amongst the
herbs yt have little small narrow leaves / is not sufficient to prove his
purpos. For if the herbs yt ar next together described were always like in
leaves: the^ should Peoni / Grummel and Phalaris have like leaves / for they are
described together. But their leaves are not like / therefore the argument follows
not. And as for the argument yt he makes of the bastard names yt ar falsely
stopped into Dioscorides / it must needs be such argument as the truth is of
the setting in of such false names: where in when as ye truth is not / who will
grant in this matter the argument of Fuchsius to be true. To his last argument
where he resoneth that none of the later / writers has given any purging
virtue unto Matricaria / and Partheniu^ purges / ergo it is not Parthenium: I
answer that / as the later writers have found by experience a purgy virtue in
diverse herbs where of is found no mention in the old writers / so have the
old autores given unto diverse herbs a purging virtue / which herbs as the
later writers never knew / so have never proved wheter they have any purging
virtue or no. For if the later writers would have proved / wheter matricaria
purges or no: they might have found that it does so. For this am I sure that
matricaria purges / namely weyke persons that are weik persons. For upon a
time when I was with a sike woman in East Fresland / and the present necessite
required purgation / and there was no potecaries shop at hand (for there is but
one city in all East Fresland where there are any potecaries in / and that is
called Emden) I went into the gardin and found there feuerfew in good plenty /
where of I took an ha^dful and put it in to water and sod it / and after that
I had made ye broth drynkable with a little honey / and had given her it /
doutles with in a few hours after she had three metely good stools of the
broth of that herb. Wherefor I am sure that it purges weik folk / allthoughe
it works nothing or very little in them that are lusty and strong as I have
proved also. Therefore I se nothing that hitherto berout that hyndereth
feuerfew to be parthenium.

The virtues of Feuerfew:
THe herb without the flour is very good to be dronken of the^ yt ar short
winded / and also of then that have ye stone. The broth of the herb is good to
sit in forweome^ that have the hardness of ye mother / and against
infla^mationes or burning heates. With the flour it is good to lay it unto
choleric infla^mationes / and to such gatheringes of humores together. Sum
learned men not without a cause judge that our ta^sey is a kind of partheniu^.
The virtues where of ar these. Tansey is good for the wyndenes of the stomach
and belly / wherefore it was well divised of Phisicianes of old time / that
after Easter men should use tanseyes to drive away the wyndenes yt they have
gotten all the lent before with eating of fish / peasen / beans and diverse
kinds of wind making herbs / where of they make at that time their
sallettes. But if men would follow my counsel / they should use tansey all the
lent throw / and not after Easter alone. And the^ should they fewer be hurt with
the colik and stone / that use commonly to be hurt there by. The same tansey is
good for the stone / to provoke water and to kill worms in the belly. The new
writers hold that tansey is better for men / and that Feuerfew is better for
weomen.

Of the gardin and wild carot.
PAstinaca is called in Greek (...), and as I judge in English a carot in Duche
geel ruben / and in French pastenad / as Rembertus writes. Dioscorides
describes not ye gardin carot but the wild carot. After this manner. The wild
carot has the leaves of gingidij / but brother and somthyng bitter / a straight
stalk / roughe / a spoky or beamytop like unto dillwhere in ar whyt sloures
and in depiction of plant Pastinaca I.
depiction of plant Pastinaca II.
the mids is a certain purple thing / almost resemblyng saffro^. The root is
a fingre thick and a span long / having a good smell / which uses to be eaten.
Thus far has Dioscorides written. Hitherto have I found no man that has
denied that the wild carot is pastinaca syluestris. Which thing is a very
great furtherance for my purpose that I go about / that is yt the gardin or
sowe^ or manered carot is ye right pastinaca syluestris. But Matthiolus a man
otherwise well seen in symples erryng very far from the truth / will have our
common persnepe to be pastinaca^ noth withstandyng yt he gra^teth that our wild
carot is the right pastinaca syluestris. In doing where of he conde^neth his
own opinion. For if wild carot be pastinaca syluestris / then must pastinaca
hortensis have sum lyknes in leaves with the wild / except some author expressedly
declare yt ye wild or other kind is altogether unlike ye gardin or communer
kind as Dioscorides does in brassica marina / and Paulus Egineta in his kind
of betony. But when there is no such exception or expressed difference made of
any good writer between pastinaca^ syluestre^ and domesticam pastinaca^ / there
ought to be some lyknes between the leaves of the one and the other. But there is
no lyknes at all between the leaves of wild carot and the common persnepe /
therefore Matthiolus erreth in making the persnepe to be the gardin pastinaca /
when as in very deed the gardin carot is ye right pastinaca hortensis. As ye
wild carot is found abroad in ye feldes like unto the gardin carot in leaves /
taste and smell / even so is there found a wild kind of persnepe like unto ye
gardin persnepe / both in leaves / sede / rote / smell and taste. This wild
persnepe grows ple^tuously beside Ca^brydge in a lane not far from Newna^
Milles. It grows ple^tuously also in Germany beside Worms / and I dout not
but it grows in many other places both in England and Germany / and
peraduentur in Itali also / though Matthiolus never saw it nor marked it:
Which if he had seen and well considered / he would not have erred as he has in
pastinaca hortensi. He confuteth the opinion of Ruellius / which Fuchsius /
Rembertus and I hold altogether / only with merue lyng and with sayng that he has
not seen nether in ye wrytynges of ye Grecianes nor Arabianes / yt pastinaca
domestica should have such a read or sanguin color as the carottes have. But I
thynk he has red / yt allthoughe he have forgotten it. For Theodorus Gaza a
learned man both in Greek and in Latin / and an excellent translater / whom I
dout not but he has red translatyng ye xv. chapter of Theophrast de historia
plantaru^. Where as he reherseth Theophrastis words / speaks after this
manner. Nascetur apud eos vterque elleborus, videlicet albus and niger, item
pastinaca, specie lauri, color croci, and in ye sam chapter. Pastinaca in
patre^si agro praestantior caeteris huic vis calfactoria, and radix nigra.
Simeo^ Sethi also a Grecian as he is translated / makethe one kind of
pastinaca to have blak or read roots / and an other kind with yelow roots.
If any man suspect the translator / the words of Symeon in Greek ar these:
(...). If yt the tra^slator be suspected again for turnyng daukia into
pastinacas / where has any man red in any other Grecia^ or Latin author / that
Daucus has read and yelow roots. If that ca^ not be found in any good author
/ Daukia ar well translated pastinace. Therefore there is no cause why / but
that our common gardin carrot should be pastinaca satiua.

The virtues of both the carotes out of Dioscorides.
THe sede of wild carot / dronken or laid to in a convenient place brings
down flowers. It is good to be taken in drynk of them that can not easily make
water. It is also good for the dropsey / for the pleuresi if it be taken in
drynk / and so is it also good for the bytyng and styngyng of serpents. Sum
hold yt if a man take this before hand / that he shall not be bitten of
serpents. It is good for conceptio^. The root dryueth out water / and
provoke men to the work of veneri. And if it be laid to the convenient place
/ it helps to bring forth the child that sticks in the birthe. The leaves
broken and laid on with honey scour fretyng sores. The gardin carot has the
same virtues / but not so strong / and yet mor fit to be used in meat then the
wild one is.

Out of Galen de simplicibus medicamentis.
THe gardin carot is the weiker / ye wild for all purposes is myghtier. The
herb and specially ye root and sede / dryueth out water and flowers. It has
also a certain scouryng nature / wherefore ye Surgeanes use to lay to fretyng
sores the grene leaves with honey to scour them.

Out of Galenes book of the poures and properties of norishmentes or meats.
THe roots of carot / daucus and carowayes ar used commonly to be eaten / but
they noryshe less then rapes and aron of cyrendo. They heat notablely / and
show out a spicie thing / but they are hard of digestion as other roots be.
They stir a man to make water / and if they be used in very great plenty they
will make a metly evil juice. The root of corowayes is of a better juice then
ye carot is. Sum call the wild carot Daucu^ / which indede moves a man to
make water more myghtely / but it is more medicinable or like a medicine / and
if a man would eat it / he had need to sethe it very much. Aueroes writes
that the gardine carot is good for them that are slow to the work of increasyng
the world with childer.

Of the herb called Peplis.
depiction of plant Peplis.


PEplis whom some call wild porcellayn / and Hippocrates calls peplio^ / for
the most part grows by the sea side / it has a broad shaddowyng bushe
which is full of white juice. The leaves ar like unto porcellayn / round and
read benethe. Under the leaves is a round sede as there is in pleplo with a
burning taste. It has but one single root / which is empty and small. I have
seen this herb in Islands about Venis. It is very lyk unto our English
wartwurth / which is judged of learned men to be tithimalus helioscopius / but
it is much shorter and thicker / and spredeth it self upon the ground / it may
be called in English see wartwurt.

The virtues of Peplis.
PEplis taken in the quantite of an acetable with one cyate of mede / purges
out choler and fleme: this herb have I seen in an yland beside Venis.

Of the herb called Peplis.
depiction of plant Peplos.


PEplus is a busshy herb full of milky juice / with little leaves like rue / but a
little brother / with a round bushe of herbs in ye top / almost a span long /
spread upon the ground. The sede is round and grows under ye leaves sumthyng
less the^ white poppy sede. It is full of many helps. It has but one root
and that void nothing worth. It grows amongst ye vindes and in gardines. I
never saw this herb in any place saving only in Bonony / where as my master
Lucas above xvj. years showed me with many other strange herbs which I never
saw sense I came out of Italy. I know no name for this herb but for lak of a
better name / it may be called pety spourge. This herb has no other virtues
as Dioscorides writes then Peplis has.

Of Vuod bind.
depiction of plant Periclymenum.


PEriclyme^non is named of the common herbaries matrisylua / in English
Wodbynde / or Honysuckle in some places of England / ye Duche men call it
Waldgilgen / the French men call it / cheure fueille. Wodbynd does bush up in
one stalk alone and has little leaves which stand by like spaces one from an
other / imbracynge the stalk / white in under like unto Iuy. And there grow
little twigges up amongst the leaves where on grow berries like unto Iuy
berries. The flour is white like the faba flowers / which men take for our
bean / somthyng round / as though it leaned down toward the leaf. The sede
is hard / and not easy to be plucked away. The root is round and thik. It
grows in feldes and hedges / and windeth it self about busshes.

The properties of wodbynde.
IF ye gather the sede of Wodbynd when it is ripe / and dry it in a shaddowy
place / and will give a dram of it in wine for ye space of xl. days / it will
melt away ye mylt / drive away werines / and it well be excelle^tly good
medicine for shortness of wind / and for ye hitchcoughe or yiskyng. It will
drive forth water / but upon the sixth day after the continual use of it / it
will drive out blody water. The same is good for a woman that has an hard
laboryng of child. The leaves have the sam virtues. And some write that if a man
drynk the leaves xxxvij. days together / that they will make him that he shall
get no mo childer. If ye seth the leaves of wodbynd in oil / and anoynte them
that have the ague coming upon them by certain courses and commynges about /
and they will ease them.

Of the Great bur.
depiction of plant Lappa mayor, Personatia.


THe great bur is named in Greek (...), in Latin personata and not persolata /
of the common herbaries lappa mayor / in Duche groS Kletten / in French
Gletteron. The bur has leaves like unto a gourde but bygger / rougher / blacker
and thicker. The stalk is some thing whytishe / howbeit it is found some time with
out any stalk at all. It grows commonly about towns and villages / about
diches and hyghewayes and doug hills and such vile places.

The virtues of the great bur.
THe root of the bur taken with pinaple kirnelles / in the quantite of a dram
/ is good for them that coughe out matter or fylthy gear / or blood. The root
is good to be laid to / for the ach that comes by the wrinchyng or streuyng
of any ioynte. The leaves ar good to be laid upon old sores.

Of the herb called Petasites.
depiction of plant Petasites.


PEtasites has soft stele or footstalk / a cubit long and sometime longer / and
it is of the thicknes of a mannis finger / and in the top of it grows a lefe
which has ye fasshon of an hat / and it hangs down after the manner of a
todestool. Dioscorides makes no mention nether of the masterstalke nether of
the flour of this herb / but I have seen both. In the mids of March in
watery grounds beside riuerse / and brooks that ryn all the year / and are not
dry in summer: this herb brings first forth a short stalk / where upon grow
many flowers as they were in a cluster / in color purple in white. After that
the stalk and flowers ar faided and gone away / then com up the leaves / even
as it chances unto the herb which is called in Greek Bechion / and in Latin
Tussilago. It has a great and long bitter root with a very strong smell. This
herb is called in Northumbreland an Eldin / in Cambridgeshyre a Butterbur / in
Duch Pestile^tz wurtz.

The virtues of Petasites.
BUtterbur is good (as Dioscorides writes) for fretyng sores and such as ar
extremely hard to hele / if it be beten and laid to after the manner of an
emplaster. The later writer and namely Hieronymus Tragus write that the root of
this herb is good against the pestilence. They give a little of the powder of
this herbs root in wine to the pacient / about the quantite of a dram / and
provoke him to sweat there with / which thing it does very myghtely. They use
the same root beaten into powder against the stranglyng of the mother. They
give it also both to men and beasts for worms / to weomen that are vexed with
the vprysyng of the mother / and to any that are shortwynded. The herb is
without all dout hot and dry much above the second degree. Matthiolus without
all reason or sufficient proof reproves Ruellius and Fuchsius in the
settingfurth of this herb / worthy more to be reproved him self for so
unworthily reprouyng of them. Amatus Lusitanus the ape of Matthiolus writes
much more unlearnedly and more lyingly then Matthiolus does. For he writes
thus. We can not tell what Petasites is / if it be not a kind of todstoole:
Ruellius says that it grows in France. For the which Fuchsius in his
herbari has set forth the greter / but which we have in the last chapter
before this described. Mark how this man says yt he knows not Petasites /
except it be a kind of todestoole / and yet he named it in Duche Pestilentz
wurtz / as though he knew it. Is not this a worthy man to write commentaries
upon Dioscorides? Fuchsius set not out Lappa^ maiorem for this herb as Amatus
bears him in hand / for he set out the right (...) or personatam / calling it
groS kletten / disseueryng it from Petasites many ways. Let Matthiolus and his
follower Amatus prove that Dioscorides makes ij. kinds of personata. If they
can not as I am sure / they can not all their speaking against Fuchsius / is in
vayn. Matthiolus alleges Plini to prove that there are ij. kinds of
personata: well let it be so. Yet for all that it follows not that the herb
that Fuchsius sets forth for Petasites / should be the second kind of
personata in Plini / nor that Dioscorides makes ij. kinds of Petasites. For
Plini makes often mo kinds of herbs then Dioscorides did. But how unjustly he
makes ij. kinds of Arcion / not only the excellent clerk Leonicenus / but all
other learned men may se that there is no such cause given him of Dioscorides
to do. How well that Plini is defended of Matthiolus against Leonicenus. All
men that are learned and not partial / may well se to no great honesty of
Matthiolus. But the case put / that there are ij. kinds of Arcion: the first
can not be Petasites Fuchsij / because it has burres growyng in ye top as
Petasites Fuchsij has not. Nether can the second kind of Arcion of Plini be
Petasites Fuchsij / for ye second kind of Arcion Plinij as ye may read plainly
in Plini / has blacker leaves then the gourde has. But Petasites Fuchsij /
has much whyter leaves then the gourd has as all men that have seen them can
judge / namely benethe under the lefe toward the ground. Therefore Petasites
Fuchsij which is the true Petasites Dioscoridis / Ruellij / and Rembertes
Petasites and mine is not the second kind of Arcion in Plini / for all the
gaynsayng of Matthiolus the Italian / and Amatus the Spanyarde / who would face
out learned men with stout checkes without any sufficient proof or learned
argument / not only in this herb / but in diverse other.

O^ the herb called Peucedanum.
PEucedanum is named in Greek (...) in Duch Har strange / and because we have no
other name for it in English that I know as yet / it may be called in English
also Har strange.

Peucedanum puts furthe a small stalk and weike like unto fenel / it has a
thick and plenuous bushe / beside the ground a yelow flour / a blak root / of
a grievous smell / thik and full of juice. It grows in shaddowye hills. Thus
far Dioscorides. But I have seen it growing not only in shaddowye hills / as
at Erenfels in Germany where as I saw it first / but also in watery myddowes
beside Worms / and also in dry myddowes / but within the breath of the Rhene. I
hear say that it grows also in England / and I found a root of it at saint
Vincentis rock a little from Bristow. But it was nothing so great as it of
Germany.

The virtues of Harstrang.
MEn use to cut the root with a knyfe / and to gather a rynnyng juice out of
it / and to lay it yt droppeth out / by and by in ye shadow: for it will melt
in the sun. But it will make his head ache and be dusy / that gathers it /
except a man anoint his nosethrilles before with roseoyle / and pour not some
rose oil upon his head before. The root is nothing worth after that the juice
is drawn furthe of it. There may be taken out of the stalk and root / both a
juice by gasshyng and an other by pressyng / as is taken out of Mandrag. But it
yt droppeth forth by gasshyng / is not so strong as it that is drawn out by
pressyng / and it faydeth away souner. There is also found a thing like rosin
/ or frankincense / cleuyng unto the stalk and root. Of the juices that
comes out of the root by gasshyng it / is best that grows in Sardinia and
Samothracia / that is of a grievous smell / read and hetynge the tongue. The same
is good to be laid to with vinegre and roseoyle / against the drousey and
forgetful euel / for the dusynes of the head / for the falling siknes / and
for the old hedeach / for the sciatica and for the cramp. And in all diseases
of the synewes it is good to be laid to / with oil and vinegre. If a woman be
strangled with the vprysyng of the mother / it is good to smell it / and so it
calls them again / that are brought in to an extreme deep sleep. The smoke of
it dryueth away venemus bestes. It helps the ach of the ear if it be poured
in with rose oil. It is good to be put in to the hollow tothe against the
tothache. The same taken with an eg / is good for ye coughe. It is also good
for them that are shortwynded / and for all gnawyng and wyndy passiones and
grefes. It softeneth the belly gently / and wastes away ye great swelled milt.
It is an excellent remedy against an hard and long laboryng of child. If it be
dronke^ it is good for the ach and outstretchyng of the blader and kydnees. It
opens also the mother. The root is good for the same purposes / but it is
not so mighty. The broth is also dronke^. The same broken scoureth stynkyng and
foul sores / and drive the scales of bones / and covers sores with a skin. It
is used to be me^ged with tretes and softenyng plasters that hete. Ye must
choose it that is fresh not freted with gnawyng / sound / and it yt has a
great smell. The juice must be resolved or melted for drynkes with bitter
allmondes or hot bred or rue. Galene writes that the juice yt is drawn out
by gusshyng or cuttyng / is stronger then that which is pressed out / and he
says that the root is fully hothe in the second degree / and dry in the
beginning of the third degree.

Of both the kinds of Peonye.
PEony otherwise called in Greek Glyciside / and of some Pentoboron / has a
stalk two spannes long. It has many bysproutynges. The male has leaves like
unto a walnut tree leaves. But the femal has cloven leaves like Smyrniu^. It
brings furthe certain coddes in the top of the stalk like unto allmondes.
Which when they are opened / have many little granes read in color like unto the
kirnelles of a pomgarnat / and in the mids there are blak / purple five or
six. The root of the male is a finger thick / and a span long / byndyng in
taste / and white in color. To ye root of the female grow certain things like
acornes vij. or viij. in number / such as the right Affodili has. The femall
is common through out all England and Germany / and in diverse places of England
/ and in some parts of Braba^t / as in Peter Coddenberges gardin in Anwerp the
male grows also. But I could never se it in high Germany. The farest yt ever
I saw / was in Newberri in a rych clothiers gardin. Diverse have been sore
deceived in taking the common dictamum for Paeonia mascula.

The virtues of both the Peonies.
THe root of Peoni is given unto weomen that are not purged after their
delyuerance. If it be dronken in the quantite of an almond / it will bring down
to weomen their flowers. And if it be dronken with wine / it will ease the pain
of the belly. It is also good for the iaundes / for the pain in the kydnes and
in the blader. The same sodden in wine and dronken stops the belly: but ten
or twelve read granes or corns of the seeds / dronke^ in read tarte wine /
stopp the read issues of weomen. The same if they be eaten / help them that
have the gnawynges of the mouth of their stomachs. But if childer eat them /
they will take away the beginning of the bredyng of the stone. And if one take
xv. of the blak corns and drynk them in mede or wine / they are a good remedy
against the stranglyng of the right mare / and against the stranglyng and
pains of the mother.

Out of Galene.
THe root of Peoni byndeth a little with a certain swetenes / and if ye will
chow it a little more with your tethe / ye shall perceive that it is somthyng
bytyng and bitter. Therefore if ye take the quantite of an almo^d of it with
honied wine / it will bring down flowers. But in deed ye must beat it well and
sift it diligently / and so cast the powder in to ye drink. It scoureth also
the kydnes / and the liver that is stopped. It has pour also to stop / if it
be sodden with sum tarte and byndyng wine. The root has also a drying pour.
By reason where of I would not dout / but yt if it be hanged about childers
necks / it would hele in them the falling siknes. I saw ones a boy delivered
viij. months from ye falling siknes / by the hangyng of the root about his
neck: and when as by chance it fell of / he fell into the siknes again / and
the same after the root was hanged up again / he was well again. But I thought
for a surer trial to take the root ones again / and as soun as I had taken
ye root of again / he fell straight way into his old siknes. But then I took
a great root and tied it tho ye boys neck again / and after that time he
fell no more / but was quite delivered of that siknes. Thus far Galene. This
that Galene proved in one child / I have proved in two childer / ye one where
of dwelled in London and the other at Syon in my lord of Sommersettes house
uncle / and Protector to ye most excellent king Edward the sixth. But when as I
proved the same in them that were of perfect age / allthoughe it did much good
/ yet it never wrought any such effect in them / as it did in the childer.

Of the herb called Phalaris.
PHalaris puts forth many small stalks / out of small and unprofitable
roots. The stalks ar two handbredthes long / full of joints / like strawes
or redestalkes / much like unto the strawes of spelt. It has a sede in bygnes
of mil or millet / white in fasshon / somthyng long. The first time that ever I
saw this herb / was in the city of Come / where as ye chief Physiciane of ye
citi no less gentle then well learned showed unto me / and my fellow master
Johan Walker. Afterward I saw it in England taken for mil / for they that
brought Canari burdes out of Spayn / brought of ye sede of Phalaris also to
feed them with. Where of when I sowed a little / I found that it was the right
Phalaris which I had seen in Itali before. I have as yet heard no English name
of Phalaris / but for lak of a better name it may be called peti panik / of the
likeness that it has with the right panik.

The virtues of Phalaris.
THe juice of Phalaris which is pressed out of the herb when it is stamped
throw water or wine / if it be dronken it is a good remedy against the ache of
ye blader. But a spoun full of the sede of the same herb / dronken in water is
good for the same purpose. Other properties I find none in Galene the^
Dioscorides has rehearsed. I have found by experience yt it is not only good to
feed small birds therewith / but that it is very good for young chickinges and
hens / to fat them with all / as some use to fat capones in Italy with mil or
millet.

Of the pulse called Phasiolus out of Dioscorides.
PHasiolus is wyndie and moves or stirs up wind. And when it is grene it
softeneth the belly / and it is fit for vomitynge. Cornarius and Matthiolus
make ij. kinds of Phasiolus / and specialli Matthiolus / who says that
Smilax hortensis is the gardin Phasiolus / and the wild is the Phasiolus which
is described in this place of Dioscorides. And Cornarius to prove that Smilax
hortensis and Phasiolus be all one / alleges the words of Aetius / which in
deed sound as he means. And Matthiolus says further that Smilax hortensis
and Dolichus in Galene / and in Theophrast / ar all one. Allthough these great
learned men and of no small autorite in their countres / where as they do
dwell: yet in this matter I do not agree with them. The first cause that makes
me dissent from them is this / that Dioscorides uses not in all his book that
I remember / to write in two chapters far one from an other / of any gardine
and field herb or plant / but ever where as he makes mention of the gardin
herb / he makes mention also of the field herb in the same chapter or in the
next following or there about. But he writes of Phasiolus in the 101. chapter
of the second book / and he writes of Smilax hortensis in the 140. chapter of
the same book. Which thing he would not have done according unto his accustomed
manner if he had thought them allone in kind / and to differ in no other thing
but in the place of growing. If this argument be not good / the arguments yt
Matthiolus makes yt secacul is not eringium / and that laurus Alexandrina and
Hypoglosson / are not all one / ar euel arguments / with all other yt ar bylded
upon ye same fundation. An other cause is yt the pulse yt I take for Phasiolus
in Dioscorides / has sede utterly unlike unto ye seeds of Smilax hortensis.
For the pulse yt I take for Phasiolus / has a long white sede somthyng bowed
in / after ye manner of some ioyners mallettes / in fassho^ and liknes like unto
a gray pease / but smaller and longer / with a blak spot in the end of it. The
sede of gardin Smilax is like a flat kydney / where fore every man may se yt
they are very unlike in form and fasshon. They say that Dolichus in Theophrast /
and Smilax hortensis / and Phasiolus in Dioscorides ar all one / which sayng
if I can confute / then have I an other cause to dissent from them. Which thing
I trust to do after this manner. Dolichus in Theophrast and Phasiolus in Galene
will perish and thrive euel if it be not under propped. But Phasiolus
Dioscorides as I have seen it by experience my self in Lumbardy / and
Matthiolus confesses the same: thriueth well inoughe without any under
proppyng as other pulses do. Therefore Phasiolus Dioscoridis is not all one with
Dolichus of Theophrast / and Phasiolus of Galen. The last cause yt makes me
dissent from them / is that their own autorites which they bring for their
purpose in some points / is quyte against them selves. For it is written in ye
chapter de Dolichis in Galene yt by the autorite of Hippocrates / yt Dolichi ar
less wyndier then peasen ar: there is also Diocles alleged to say these
words: Dolichi non minus quam Pisa nutriunt, praeterea similiter flatu carent.
That is / Dolichi norishe no less then Peasen do / and like wise they are without
wind. Where as Aetius says yt Lobi were called of all old writers Dolichi
and Phaseoli / and of some Smilax hortensis / he has these words: Nutriunt no^
minus quam Pisa, co^similiterque flatus expertes sunt. That is / Phaseoli give
as much norishment as Pesen do / and likewise ar without wind. But phasioli
Dioscoridis are not only windy / but also stir up wind / for these ar his
words: (...). Therefore I may well conclude yt Phasiolus in Dioscorides and
Phasiolus / and Dolichus in Galene / Aetius and Diocles / are not all one / not
only because they have diverse manners in growyng / and diverse liknesses / but
also because they have diverse properties / yt is to wet / yt it of Dioscorides
is wyndy / and bredeth wind / and yt other ar flatuu^ expertes yt is windlesse
or without wind. Now let men of learning and judgment give sentence / whether I
dissent from these men before named without a cause or no. Galene even in ye
same place where as he makes Dolichos and Phaseolos all one / without all dowt
makes two kinds of Dolichus / and so makes ij. kinds of Phaseolus: for
where as he had said in ye beginning almost of the chapter after ye autorite
of Theophrast yt Dolichi will rott and com to naught / except they be set up
upon proppes to hold them from the ground / in the very end of the same chapter
he shows that there is also an other beside that / which needs no under
proppyng. Galenis words as he is translated ar these: Quidam amicorum meorum
Romae agens, mihi narrauit in Caria, in patria sua quam Ceramum appellabat, in
agris Dolichos non aliter quam alia legumina seri, figuram quam habere
cicerculis longiorem. And these do I reken ar Phaseoly Dioscorides / which
differ much / as sufficiently is proved before / from Smilace hortensi / not
wtstandyng I will not deny / but other autores call that pulse that
Dioscorides named Smilacem horte^sem / Dolichum and Phasiolum. Yet for all that
Phasiolus in Dioscorides and Smilax hortensis ar two diverse pulses. Phasiolus
may be called in English faselles / until we can find a better name for it.

Of the herb called Phu.
Of Setwall.
depiction of plant Phu magnum.
depiction of plant Phu uulgare.


PHu is taken of the most part of them that write of herbs at this time / and
of them that have written of late / to be the herb which is called of the common
herbaries / Valeriana mayor, of the Germans / baldrian oder grosS baldrian /
of our countremen Setwall / and of some / caponis loiyle. But whether Setwall do
agree in all points with the description of Phu in Dioscorides or no: ye may
judge by the description which follows here after. Phu / which some call also
wild Spiknard / grows in Pontus / and it has a lefe like unto Elaphoboseo /
or Alexander / a stalk a cubit high or higher / smothe / hollow and soft /
turnyng to purple / and full of joints. The flowers ar much like Narcissus /
but they are greater and tenderer / and purple in a whytyshe color. The over
root is about the thyknes of a mannis little fingre. But it has little roots
growyng to overthwart / and one wounden with in an other as squinant / or blak
hellebor has / in color somthyng yelow / well smellyng / resemblyng Spiknard /
yet with a certain unpleasant savor / hitherto Dioscorides.

In this description is nothing that I can mark that disagreeth with our
Setwall / saving that the leaves are not altogether like unto Alexander / and the
flowers are not very like unto the flowers of Narcissus. But with a gentle
interpretation the leaves may be interpreted like Alexander leaves / and the
flowers like unto the flowers of Narcissus / wherefor seeing that the rest of
the herb with the virtues do well enoughe agree: I thynk that a man may
lawfully take our Setwall for Phu in Dioscorides.

The virtues of Setw^ll.
SEtwall has pour to heat / and to drive forth water / if it be dronken after
that it is dried / the brothe of it is good for the same purpose. It is also
good for the ache of the side / and it draws down unto weomen their natural
siknes. Galene writes that Phu has a root in virtue / like unto Spicanardi /
but for many purposes weyker / and that it provoke water more then Spiknard
of Inde or Syriak and as much / as Spica celtica does.

Of Hartis tunge.
depiction of plant Phyllitis.


ALlthoughe diverse of the best herbaries of our time have judged that
Hemionitis / is our Hartis tung / and I have followed them a long time in their
judgment: yet admonisshed by Cordus many years before er Matthiolus had either
written in Italian / or Latin / that our Hartis tu^g should be Phyllytis / I left
my former opinion and held as I do now / that the herb which is named of ye
herbaries lingua ceruina, of other (but falsely) scolopendria / in English
Hartis tung / in Duch Hirtz zung / in French Lang de cerf / was Phyllites in
Dioscorides whose description follows.

Phyllitis puts forth leaves / like a dock / but longer / and grener or
fressher six or seven together / and them straight / which in the inner part
ar smouthe / but upon ye bak side / they have as it were small worms ha^gyng on.
It grows in shaddowish places / and has a byndyng taste with an harrishnes
or hartnes. It grows also in gardines. It has nether stalk sede nor flower.

I thynk that this description agrees much better with our hartis tung then
the description of Hemionitis does. The leaves of Hemionitis ought to be very
harrish / byndyng with bitterness. But there is no such bitter taste in hartis
tung / therefore it can not be Hemionitis. The worst thing that I mislyke in
our hartis tung / is that me thynk that it has not with us here such a byndyng
harrish taste / as Dioscorides seems to require. Howbeit except my memory fale
me / I have found it in other places tarte and byndyng inoughe.

The virtues of Phyllitis or hartis tung.
THe leaves of this herb dronken with wine / ar good against the bytynges of
serpents. If they be poured in to the mouth of fourfoted beasts / they help
them. They are also dronken against ye blody flixe and the common flixe with out
any blood. These be the properties that I find in old writers of Phyllitis. I
can not find that it is good for ye mylt in any old writer. And yet now a
days it is commonly used for the diseases of the mylte / and therefore as I
suppose because it has been falsely taken for Scolopendrio / and Hemeonitis.
If that it do any good to the mylt / it is by the reason of the great byndyng
that it has / where by it may help the milt that is to louse and to much
opened.

Of the Pyne tree and other of that kind.
DIoscorides writes yt the tree called in Greek Pitys / and it that is named
Peuke / ar contained under one general head kind / but that they differ in
their proper and particular kind or spice. But he tells not for all yt /
where in they differ. Which thing has made that learned men cold not well
tell whether of ye two was our Pinus in Latin / and which of them should be our
Picea. Therefore seeing the right difference can not be found in Dioscorides: it
is needful that we set it out of other autentik and sufficient old writers.
First it is nedful to seek out in what properties Pitys of ye Grecianes
differs from pence / and wherein Pinus of the Latins differs from Picea /
and then to se wheter Pitys be Pinus or no in Latin / and wheter Pence in Greek
/ be our Picea or no / and whether these words ar diversely taken of diverse
autores or no.

Theophrast a noble writer amongst the Grecianes / makes this difference
between (...) and (...) is fatter and has a smaller lefe / and is less in
bigness / and grows not so straight up. It has a less con or nut / or
appell / and rougher or more vnplesanter to look to / and a fruit more pitchye
or rosinie / (...) after that the roots be burned / does not spring up again.
But they say that Pitys / spryngeth again / as it chanced in Lesbo / when as
the mountayn Pyrrheus was set afyre. The Ideanes hold / yt not only the heart /
but also the outter part of the bole / does turn into a tede / or wodtorche /
and that then after a manner / that it is strangled. And the same thing chances
of it self / by the excedyng great plenty of the tree it self / as a man can
conjecture. For it is altogether made a tede or woddish torche or fyrebrande.
And so this is the peculiare siknes of (...). The same Theophrast makes this
difference between the fyrre tree and (...) is of a notable hight and much
tauler then peuce. The fur tree has a wod full of synewes / soft / and light.
But the wod of peuce / is full of tedes or woddishe torches heuye and full of
flessh / or thik. The peuce has mo knottes / but the knottes of the fyrr ar
harder. Pitys serves in Cyprus to make ships of it because that yland has
it. And it seems to be better then peuke. The firr tree and peuce ar fittest
for howses / and ships / and for the most part of such other things. The
Pitys / is fit for both the works / and especiali for ships / but it
begins quikly to root. Peuce in no wise can cum forth in low and shaddowy
places / (...) and Iui can not grow in hoote places / and peuce is a tree of ye
mountains as (...) also is / about Macedonia. Peuce is of ij. sorts / ye one
is the gardin peuce / and the other is the wild peuce. The wild peuce is
divided into the male / and female. (...) grows not in Syria. Thus much have
I taken of Theophrast. Now will I se what the other Grecianes write of these
fornamed trees / and of their fruits / properties / and operationes / and
virtues. Galene in the viij. book / of the virtues of simple medicines /
writes thus of the fruit Pitys. Pityides ar named the fruytes Pity^n. But some
by a misuse / call also the fruit of Peuces Pityides. They have a menged pour
/ that is both byndyng / and having a certain sharpnes with a bitterness / by
reason where of they are good for the spittyng out of matter out of the breast and
lunges. These ar Galenes words. But now let us se what the Latins write of
Pinus / and picea. Virgil the noblest Poet amongst all the latins / writes
in his Egloges that the Pyne tree is goodliest in gardines. The same in ye
second of his Georgikes or husbandry makes the pyne tree fit and profitable to
make ships of in these words. Dant alios aliae foetus dant utile lignum
Nauigijs Pinos, domibus cedrosque cupressos.


The same thing does he also in the fourth Eglog after this manner. Cedet and
ipse mari uector, nec nautica Pinus
Mutabit merces.


Plini writes thus of the pyne tree / The Pyne tree has a lefe like a hear /
very small before / long and sharp with a prick. The Pyne tree brings forth
very little rosin / The Pyne tree is gretely to be wondered at. It has a fruit
waxyng ripe / which shall com to rypenes in the next year / and afterward in
the third. Nether is there any tree that more gredely puts it self out a
length then the Pyne does. The Pyne tree and the Cypres tree ar surest against
rottyng or mouldryng and against worms. Plini writes thus of the tree called
Picea / which may be called the pitch tree or the read firr tree. The pich tree
loves mountains / and cold and it gives very much rosin. It is not so high
as the larche tree is. The leaves of the piche tree ar dryer / smaller / and more
cold. And the hole tree is more horrible or unpleasant to look to / then the
larch tree / and it is all poured over with rosin. The wod of it is lyker the
wod of the fir tree. The piche tree after that ye roots ar burnt ones / will yet
spryng again. The leaves of the piche tree / ar diuyded comwyse. Picea has very
small and blak kyrnelles through out in all the long tagges that hang down /
which are smaller and sklenderer. Wherefore the Grecianes call it a Lousberer?

These have I gathered out of ye best Grek and Latin writers / that men might
se clearly what the oldwryters wrote of the above named trees. But now sum will
require my mind of these trees / because I profess ye knowledge of herbs and
trees. Therefore I must say my mind what I gather of these forecited places
out of ye ancient writers. As far as I can se / Theophrast called ye tree
peuken / yt the Latins call pinu^ / and ye tree yt the Latins call piceam /
he called it pyn. For he makes his peuce^to have a greter nut or appel the^
this pitys has. Also because he makes pityn to be less and more crooked then
peuce^. But for all these / peuce of Theophrast agrees well with picea of ye
latins / in sundry properties. Peuce of Theophrastus as ye same Theophrast
writes / ca^ not cum furthe in very low places and in shaddowy places / for
Peuce is a tree of the mountains / and nether it nor Iuy ca^ grow in burning
hot places. And Plini writes that picea amat montes atque frigora, and in an
other place / situs eius est in excelso montium ceu maria fugerit. Peuce and
picea do also agree in bryngyng forth of plenty of rosin. For as Theophrast
writes peuce resina copiosissima and ponderosissima est so Plini says /
Picea plurimam resinam fundit. The same Plini writing of the pyne says pinus
fert minimum resinae. The pine tree brings forth very little rosin. Of these
words of Plini I gather that peuce in Theophrast is not pinus in Plini. And
that Plini takes pityn of the Grecianes for pino / I gather this out of
Plinies words in ye xxxij. book and ye second chapter. His words ar these.
The use of oxim^li or honied vinegre / is good against the grene trees called
cantharides against bupestrem / and against caterpillars of the pine tree which
they call pitiocampas. Here may a man plainly se that Plini turns pityn in to
pinum / and not to picea^ as Theodor Gaza and diverse other do. But I judge
that Theodor has much iuster cause to do so / the^ the interpretores of Galene
have / for as pitys in Theophrast may seem to be our picea / so pitys in Galene
/ is our pinus / as it appears unto me / by it that Galene writes of the
fruit of pityos in these words following. The fruits pit (...) ar called
pityides. But some call also by a misuse / the fruits of (...), pityides. By
these words of Galene a man may learn that Galene took pityn to be the tree
which bears the greatest and most principal kirnelles / and not peucen. But
when as the greatest and most principal kyrnelles grow upon the pyne tree / as
daily experience teaches / we may gather iustli by this and other causes above
rehearsed / yt Galene took pityn for our Pino / and therefore it is like yt ye
Grecianes of Galenis time / and they that ca^ after him / took always pityn
pro pino. As for the tree that is called in Greek (...) and in Latin picea / is
called in high Germany where it grows / rote dannen bau^. It grows not
abroad in England that I have heard tell of / nether has it any name in
English that I know. Wherefore seeing it must have a name / it is best either to
call it a piche tree / because much pich is mad of the rosin of it / or ellis
after the Duch tung / from whence our English speech came / a red fur tree.
Pinaster which as Plini writes / nihil aliud est, qua^ pinus syluestris mira
altitudine, ye pinaster is nothing ellis but a wild pyne tree of a meruelus
hight / is named in some places of Duchla^de / foerenholtz wild kinnenholtz /
and in some places kiffer baume. It grows very ple^tuously in high Germany.
The leaves grow in tuftes together / not unlike unto a little round heary brushe
yt is thyn / or to some great pinselles that paynters use. Every lefe is at the least iij. inches long / grene / furrowed or guttered as sum kind of young
grass is. There comme allwaye two leaves out of one footstalk / both in the
brushy tuft / and also a little benethe the tuftes / where as the leaves grow
thynner. Plini puts this difference between the pine tree and the pinaster or
wild pyne / that as the pine tree is busshy or full of bowghes in the tops /
so the wild pyne tree is full of boughs even from the mids of the tree
upward. This tree may be called in English a wild pynetre. If any man allege
against me the authorite of Theodorus Gaza / to prove that our pinaster should
be peuce / because he turns (...) in diverse places pinastrum. I answer that
Gazas autorite helps nothing here / and that his turnyng of peuces into
pinastrum makes against him self and reproves him either of vnstedfastenes /
or of ignorance. For it is evident that although most como^ly he turn peucem
in to pinum / yet in diverse places he turns ye same word in to pinastru^ /
as who say there where no difference between pinus and pinaster. If any dowt
whether he turns (...) in to pinastrum / let him read the vi. chapter of the
fourth book de historia plantarum, and the fourth chapter of the third book
/ and the vj. chapter of the first book de historia plantarum, and he shall
find / that I lie not: But not only these places / prove either his ignorance /
or unsteadfastness / or else doutfulnes / in translatyng of (...) and (...) into
pinu^ picea^ and pinastru^: but also his turnyng of pityos in to laricem. For
in the second chapter of the second book de historia plantaru^ he turns
these Greek words (...) thus Sunt quae ex semine tantu^ nasca^tur, vt abies,
pinus, larix. The same Theodore in the first chapter of the ix. book de
historia plantarum, turns this word pitys in to laricem and picea^ / making
two sundry trose to have but one common name / which differ one from an other in
diverse properties. The same thing does he again in the next chapter unto it
which I have rehearsed here before. For where as Theophrast has in Greek /
(...). Theodore has in Latin: secunda quae ex abiete, larice, and pica.
Behold as he makes here iij. rosines of ij. names / for he turns (...) in
to resinum abietinam, and (...) in to resinam ex larice and ex picea, Then when
as Gaza is thus waueryng and unconstant / it is not to be allowed for
sufficient autorite yt he does in translatyng of these ij. Greek words (...)
and (...). Therefore I pass not / of his autorite and hold that pitys pinus
and peuce / is Picea in our autores of Physic / as in Galene / Dioscorides /
Aetius / and other that wrote after Galene.

The virtues of the Pyne tree and the piche tree out of Dioscorides.
THe barck both of ye Pyne / and Pich tree / have pour to bind / and if it be
broken / and sprinkled upon chafyng / it is good for it / and for sores yt ar
in the outermost part of the skin. So is it also good for burned places with
litarge and the fine powder of Fra^kincense. The same received in a trete or
cerat of myrtelles / bring sores in te^dre bodies to a skin / and it stops
such as ryn to far abroad / if it be broken and laid to with coperus. And if
it be given in a perfume or smoke / it casts forth chylder and the secondes.
If it be dronken / it will stopp the belly / and makes a man piss well. But
ye leaves of them also broken and laid to swage infla^mationes or hot
burnynges. They keep / and save also wounds from infla^mationes. If they be
bruised and sodde^ in vinegre / they are good against the tuth ach / if the teth
be washed with ye broth of the whilse it is very hot. If they be taken in the
quantite of a dra^ in water / or mede / and dronken / they are good for the^ yt
ar diseased in the liver. The bark of (...), and the leaves dronken / ar goood
for ye same purposes. But it is not very easy to know perfitly what Dioscorides
means by this word (...), whilse some interpreters / take it for a tree of a
several kind by it self / as Cornarius does / and other as Ruellius turns it
into the pineapel. I read in no old author yt Strobilus should be ye name of a
tree / but always for ye nut or appel / or kirnel of ye appel some time / except
that where as my Plini corcected and set out by Erasmus / after yt Hermolaus
Barbarus / Nicolaus Beroaldus / Guilhelmus Budeus and Ioha^nes Cesareus had do^
to Pliny / what they could do / has Tibulus a man ought to read Strobilus. And
though it were Strobilus in deed in Plini / and not Tibulus / it were no
stronger argument to reason thus. Plini makes Strobilus a kind of tree by it
self / and not only a fruit / ergo it is a tree / then this were. Plini makes
Tedam a several kind of tree by it self / therefore Teda is a tree by it self.
But it that Dioscorides writes / will move a man much more the^ that autorite
of Plini / whose words ar these: (...), that is the bark of the Strobil and
the leaves make for the same / or serve for the same purpose. Now a pine nutt
has no leaves / where fore it may appear that by the word strobilus he
understands a tree of the same kind that pinus is of. But this seems some
thing to hyndre that understanding / that in the beginning of the chapter
Dioscorides set forth before / of what things he would intrete of only mention
of pinus and picea / and not of Strobilus. But wheter Strobilus here betoken
the nut of the pine tree / and the leaves of it betoken the leaves of the same
pine tree / where of Dioscorides had immediately made mention before / it makes
no great matter / because all the trees there together mentioned / ar of a like
virtue and workyng. The tede also that comes of them (a tede is a fat and
roseny piece of a pyne or pich tree / which hewn of / serves for torches) cut
in to small pieces and sodden with vinegre / swageth the tuth ach / if the broth
be holden about the tooth that acheth. A stirryng stik may be made of them fit
to prepare pesses and medicines to swage werines. Some use to keep the sout of
them / to serve to make ink there of. The same serves for medicines to trym
the heirs of the ey liddes / and for the corners of the eyes / that are worn
or freted / and for hard ey lyddes and such as want hear and for wateryng eyes.
The fruits of pynes and pich trees which are within ye pine nuttes / ar called
pityides. They have a byndyng pour / and somthyng hetynge. They are good for the
coughe / and for such disease as ar about the breast / whether they be taken by
them selves or with honey. Moreover if the kirnelles be made clean and then eten
/ or be dronken with Maluesey and the sede of a cucumbre / move a man to make
water / and make dull or blunt the bytyng that is about ye blader or kidnees.
And if they be taken with ye juice of porcellayn / they swage ye gwawynges of ye
mouth of ye stomach. They take also away ye weyknes of ye body and hold down
the corruption of humores. But the hole nuttes lately phikked from the trees /
and bruised / and sodde^ in Maluesey / ar good for the old coughe / and for a
consumption / if a man drynk every day / three cyathes of the brothe that they are sodden in.

Out of the viij. book of Galene of simple medicines.
THe bark of the pyne tree has a byndyng pour excedyng the other / so much yt
it can heal very well chafinges / and can stop ye belly if it be dro^ke^. It
heals up also places yt ar burned. More over the bark of the piche tree is
like to the other / but the poures ar mor temperat or weyker. There is pour to
join / and hele sores in ye leaves of them both: because they be much moyster
then the bark. In the nutt allthoughe it be like these / yet is there a
stronger pour both in the bark and also in the leaves / so that it has a
certain grievous bytyng sharpnes. Furthermore yt sout which is gathered of the
forsayde / is fit for the falling out of the hears of the ey liddes / and for
the moist corners of the eyes / worn of / which are blered and waterynge. The
fruits of the pyne and pich tree have a mengled pour / that is to wet they
bind with a certain bitterness. Wherefore they are good to help a man to spit out
matter of the breast and lunges. Galene also in his book of the poures of
norishme^tes / writes thus of the pyne apples. The pyne apple nutt is of a
good gross juice / and norisheth much. But it is hard of digestio^. The
Grecianes call it not now (...) but (...).

Out of Symeon Sethi.
THe kirnell of the pyne appel ar hot in the second degree / and dry in the
first. They norish plentuously / and they are of a gross juice / and they are
hard of digestion / and grieve the head / and make good blood. They smouth the
harrishnes or sharpnes yt are in the breast. They are good for the sores or
blisters of the bladder / and for the sharpnes yt is in the stomach and kydnes.
They are also good for old coughes / and moist diseases of the lunges / and for
them that spit out matter. They that use the^ with honey and rasines / make them
easier to be digested / and they increase mannis sede. They are also good for
them that are disposed to trymble.

Of Pepper out of Dioscorides.
MEn say that Pepper is a short tree that grows in Indye. It brings forth a
fruit at the first long / as it where long coddes which is called long
Pepper. And it has within it a small thing like to mile or millet / which
grows to perfect Pepper at ye length. This when the time comes is spread
abroad / and brings forth berries such as all me^ know. Partly unripe (and
therefore harrishe) which are ye white Pepper / most fit for ey medicines / and
for preservatives and triacles. But the long Pepper is excedyng bytynge and
sumthyng bitter / because it is unripe / and it is also good for compositiones
of preservatives and triacles. But the blak is pleasanter and more sharp then
the white / and better for for the stomach and more spycie / because it is ripe
/ and it is fitter to season with all. Ye must choose the pepper that is heuiest
/ and full / blak / not full of wryncles / but fresh and without dust or chaffy
filthiness. There is often found in blak pepper a thing without norishme^t / lene
/ empty / and light / and that they call brasma.

Out of Plini.
THe trees that bear pepper in every place / ar like unto our iunipers. Howbeyt
there are some that hold that they grow only in yt front of Caucasus yt lies
against ye son. The seeds differ from iuneper by such little coddes as we se
in faselles. These plucked before they gape and open / and be heten in the
son / make it which is called long pepper. But when as by little and little
they begin to open for rypnes / they show white pepper / which afterward hete
with the son it is che^ged with color and wryncles. But the same are not
without their iniuri / and they are perched cinged with the intemperate wether /
and ye seeds ar made empty and void. Which thing they call brechmasin: which
betokens in the Indiane tu^g / bryngyng forth of fruit before the time of
all the hole kind / it is the roughest and lyghtest / and pale in color. The
blak pepper is more pleasant / but the white is lighther then both the other.
Ginger is not the root of pepper as some have judged.

Of the ix. book of Theophrast de historia plantarum.
PEpper indede is a fruit / and thereof ar two kinds / ye one is round as
the bitter fithche called orobus / and it has a coueryng and fleishe / as the
bay berries have / and it is somthyng in under redishe. The long is blak / and
has little seeds like poppy. And this is much stronger the^ the other. They are
both hot / wherefore they are good against the poison of the homlok as
Frankincense is.

Out of the viij. book of Galene of his simple medicines.
THe root of the pepper tree in virtue is much like to costus. The fruit that
was but growyng of late / is the long pepper / wherefore it is moyster then it
that is ripe. And this is a token of his moisture: When it is laid up / it
will be shortly full of holes / and does not byte by and by / but begins a
little after / but it dureth a little more. But the fruit that is as it were an
unripe grape / is the whit pepper / sharper in deed then the blak. Both they
do vehemently dry and heat.

Hitherto have I brought it that the old writers have written of pepper / who /
as a man may esely gather of their writing / had only by hearsay it yt they
wrote / concerning ye description and manner of growyng of peper. Wherefore
because there ar many things found out of late years by the saylyng of the
Portugalles / and diverse other aduenturus traualers in far cuntres / and
specially diverse kinds of fruits and trees which were never perfitly known
before: I will bring in what the later writers have found out / concerning
pepper which was not known before.

Out of the Jews Bartomanni: fifth book of the things that he saw in Inde.
THere grows pepper in ye field yt lies about Calecut. Some husband men
gather pepper even within the city. The stalk of the pepper bushe is very weyke
/ as a vinde is / without a prop it can not stand alone. And it is not unlike
Yuy / for it crepeth ever higher and higher / and embraseth all yt is in the
way / and byndeth it about. The forsayde tree nay rather bushe or shrub /
spredeth it selte abroad in to many branches / which are about two or three
handbredthes long / or (as some expound palmum) ij. or iij. spannes long. The
leaves resemble the leaves of a citron tree / but these ar thicker and fatter with
small veins rynnyng upon the bak side. Out of every outtermoste young twygge
hang out six clusters / not bigger then a palm that is iiij. fingers / like
unto grapes / but thicker together. They have the same color yt unripe grapes
have. They gather the^ in October and Nouembre / as yet turnyng to a grene
color / and they lay them upon mattes against the son to be ryped and dried
there. And within three days they get this color that ye se them have. The same
leaves writing of the noble Yland Taprabona / says that there grows very
great plenty of a bigger kind of pepper. He says that the same pepper
though it be greater then it that comes hither / yet that it is empti /
light / and white and very bytyng. And he writes that the tree that bears this
pepper / has a greater bole and thycker / and fatter leaves then the pepper
trees yt grow in Calecut. Hitherto Jews. Diverse that have been in Ynde / hold
yt ye long peper grows not upon the same tree that the other peper grows /
but upon other trees in long tagges like them that in winter hang upon walnut
trees. Matthiolus one of the most famous writers of simples in all Italy in
the^^ (...) days / writes thus of pepper: I have seen at Naples a peper bushe
/ agreyng well with the description of the Portugalles / because it had a bole or
body / after the manner of a vinde / and after the manner of the sharp Clematis.
But I did se also an other little tree bryngyng forth pepper in clusters in Venis
/ which did very plainly resemble the common ribes bushe. This grows grene in
ye gardin of Mappheus the noble Physiciane / where as many other herbs and
trees worthy to be known ar. Wherefor it is no wonder / if autores write
diuersely of the history of pepper.

Of the virtues of Pepper out of Dioscorides.
THe virtue of all peppers in commun / is to heat / to move a man to make water
/ to digest / to draw to / to drive away by resolution / and to scour away
those things yt darken the eysyght. It is also fit for to be taken against the
shaking of agues / which com again by course at certain times / whether it be
dro^ken or the body be therewith anointed. It helps them that are bitten of
venommus bestes. It brings forth also the birth. It is good for the coughe
and for all diseases about the breast / whether it be licked in or be received
in drynk. It is likewise good for ye squynsey if it be laid to with honey. If it
be dronken with the tender leaves of the bay tree it dryueth away gnawyng / and
quite dissolueth it. If it be chowed with rasines it will draw down thynne
fleme out of the head. It stancheth ache / and it is much used in health / it
makes an appetyte. And if it be menged with sauces it helps digestion. If it
be menged with pitch / it dryueth away by resolution we^nes. With nitre or
natural salpeter it scoureth away morphewes and such like foulnes in the skin.
It is burned in a new erthen pot / set upon the coals / and is stered as
lentilles ar.

Out of Symeon Sethi.
PEpper is hot and dry in the third degree. The nature of it is to cut in
sunder gross and toughe humores / and to break and drive away wind / and to
waste up the moisture of ye breast / lunges / belly / and stomach. But it is
euel for the kydnees. There are some that hold ye pepper is hot and dry in the
fourth degree. By these words of Symeon / and by the autorite of Theophrast /
Dioscorydis / Galene and Plyni / is the old error plainly reproved of diverse
English men and of many weome^ / that stiffly have holden that pepper is hot
in the mouth and cold in operation. Galene teaches that hole pepper heteth not
so much as broken and poudered peper does. His words ar these: There are none
of those things which are manifestly known to be hot / which appear to be
hot unto us before the be broken in to small parts. For though a man lay hole
pepper unto his skin / yet shall he feel no heat of it. No more shall a man
feel any heat / though he taste upon it with his tongue or swallow it over / or
use it any other ways hole / and vnbeten / and sifted. But if yt powder of it
be laid unto the skin / it will heat / and specially if the skin be rubbed
hard therewith. And the powder will heat quicly both the tongue and the stomach.
Wherefore when a man would have pepper to heat much and spedely / he must beat
it in to small powder after the learning of Galene. But if he would have it to
heat but little and slouly / the^ let him use it hole / or little broken. And
allthoughe pepper be good for ye shaking of angue / yet for all that it is very
ieperdus to take either peper or any such hot medicine before the body of the
pacient be well prepared and purged / and the matter of the disease be made ripe.
For if such remedies be taken before the dew time / that is before the state
or chief rage of the disease / a single ague will turn in to a double / or
ellis at the least the siknes will be much worse to heal as Galene writes of
the quartayn ague in his book ad glauconem.

Of the fistick nut.
PIstacia named so both of the Grecianes and Latins / ar named of the
potecaries and barbarus writers fistici. I have seen them in Bononi growyng
upon their tree which was but short. The leaves ar nothing like unto the lentisk
leaves as Matthiolus writes / saving yt they grow in such order as they do /
for they differ both in fashon and form / and also in greatness and color. The
fistik lefe that I saw and mesured / is thryse as broad as ye le^tisk lefe and
brother / depiction of plant Pistarea.
and it is but twyse as long and about a grane longer. The figure of ye fistic
tree is almost round: ye figure of the lentisk lefe is such / that in that
part that is next unto ye footstalk / is very small and waxes greater and
greater unto the myd lefe / and from thence it grows ever less and less
until it com unto a point all most sharp. The color of the lentisk is also
grene / when as the color of the fistik is nothing so grene / but yelower with
little read spots in them. In this lyknes and bigness have I seen the le^tisk
or mastik tree and the fistik tree in Bonony / where as I learned the knowledge
of herbs and practis of physik of my master Lucas Ginus / the reder of
Dioscorides thereof whom Matthiolus in his commentaries upon Dioscorides
oftymes makes honorable mention. It may chance that Matthiolus has seen the
leaves of the forsayde trees of greater or less bygnes and of other fasshon and
color then they were of that I saw in Bonony / where of I have certain at this
day to show / well kept in a book at ye lest these seuentene years / if any
man should dout of my truth in the rehersall of these matters. The fistik nut at
the least has two notable couerynges / one that is without all the other as a
wallnut or an almond has / an other hard and toughe and in color white /
within the which is a grene kirnell / full of oil.

The virtues of fistickes out of Dioscorides.
THe fistic nuttes ar good for the stomach. They are also a good remedy against
the bytynges of crepyng beasts / wheter they be eaten / or whether they be
broken and dronken in wine.

Out of Pliny.
THe fistickes have the same profittes and workyng that the pineapple kirnelles
have / and beside that they are profitable whether they be eaten or dronken
against the bytynges of serpents.

Out of Galene de alimentorum facultatibus.
GAlene in the second book de alimentorum facultatibus writes that fistickes
norishe but a little / and yt they are good to streyngthen ye liver and to
scouraway the humores that are stopped in the canales of it. The same Galene
writes of them thus in his books of simple medicine. The fruit of the fistic
tree is of a finer substance or complexion / and it has a little bitterness and a
good smell / and therefore it scoureth away the stoppyng of the liver chefely /
and also of the breast and lunges.

Out of Symeon Sethi.
FIstickes as Symeo^ says (after ye translation of Lilius Gregorius) norish
little / and ar hot and dry in the second degree. They are good for the liver /
and sumtyme they stopp and sumtyme they drive away / because they have juices
of ij. sorts / where of the one is somthyng byndyng / and the other somthyng
bitter / and of a spicie smell. Galene writes yt they nether greatly help nor
hurt the stomach. But the later writers hold / that they are good for the
stomach. They help them yt ar bitten of venummus bestes. They make the blood
fine / and they make thynne gross and though humores. The oil of fistickes is
good for the breast / kydnees / and lunges.

Out of Serapio and other Arabianes.
THe oil of fistickes / is good against all venemus bytynges / for ye ach of
the liver / which comes of moisture. It is hot and dry / and of a greater
heat the^ the walnut and hasel nut be of. Auerroes writes yt fistickes ar
temperatly dry and hot / and yt they comfort the stomach and liver of their
hole substance / and yt they are of ye nombre of these medicines yt have many
and great virtues to help with all. Rases also an Arabiane says that fistikes
being hot / help a woman to her syknes.

Of the pease.
AS Dioscorides describes not ye fabam / where of he makes mention and
shows the virtues / so he nether describes nether makes any mention of the
Pisi. Wherefore it is as little meruel that men have erred in the piso as well
as in the faba. Sum herbaries of Germany hold that cicer anetinum is the pisum
of the latins led by this reason. Cicer is called in Greek Erebinthos and ye
pisum of the Latins is called in some places of Duchla^d erweisen / so that
they gather that / that the Duch erweysen came of the Greek word (...). Other
gather eue^ by such an other reason yt ye Duche erbs / which is called in
English a pease is the eruum of ye Latins / and orobus of the Grecianes /
because erbs seems to come either of eruu^ or orobus / by reason of ye lyknes of
ye words between one and an other. But all these gessinges ar but vayn and
openly against the truth / as God willing I shall prove her after. But before I
take that matter in hand / I thynk it best to search out what old writers have
written of their pisis.

Theophrast in the seventh book of the histori of plants / and in ye third
chapter writes that pisum cicercula and cicera / and such other have longer
leaves then the faba. The same writes that pisum / ochros and lathyros
depiction of plant Pisum.
have a stalck yt falls upon the ground. Theophrastus also in ye fourth book
of the causes of plants writes thus of peasen. Pisum is most frayl of all
other / for it is most subject unto mil due / because it has many leaves /
because it grows by the ground / large and much rynnyng abroad. For it will
fill ye hole place / allthough one sede be set a great way from an other. And
the same is much in danger of cold and fresyng / because / it has a weyk
root. Pliny writing of other pulses / speaks thus of Piso in the xij.
chapter of the xviij. book. The pisum ought to be sowe^ in places lying
against the son / because of all other / it can lest abide cold. And
therefore in Itali / and in a roughe air / they sow it not but in the spryng
time / in an easy and louse ground. There is cicercula a kind of little ciches
which is not even / and full of corners as ye pisum is. The coddes of the
ciches ar round / other pulses coddes ar long and broad / after the figure of
ye sede. The pisum has coddes after the fasshon of a rool that the ground is
playned with all.

Here be all the places that I can find at this time in the old writers /
which declare any thing the form or fashon of pisi. But first before I bring
in what is my judgment of the pisi / I thynck it mete to consule the errores
which are committed in this pulse piso. First that they err fowly / that hold
that Cicer arietinum in Dioscorides is our common pease / and the pison of the
Greeks / because the Duches erweysen is like in sound to erebinthus / and they
that hold that pease called in some place of Duchelande erbs / is the eruum of
the Latins or orobus of the Grecianes / because these words orobus and eruum
ar like unto the Duch word erbs. It may be easily proved by that it follows
not / because a Duche word sounds like a greek or Latin word / that
therefore it that the Duche word betokens / that ye latin and Greek words
betokens the same. For if that were a good manner of argument / then carabus /
which sounds like ein krab / should not be a lobster or eyn mer kreuet / but
a krab / and vulpes which sounds like unto ein wolf / should not be a fore /
but a wolf / where unto it has a lyker sou^de and name. Cunila should not be
saueray / but time / for the high Duche call time quendell. Puligium should not
be pennyriall / but polium / because the Duch call pulegium poley.

Now may ye se how sklender the argument is which is fethched out of the
lykenes of words in diverse tongues / except ye descriptiones and properties do
agree also therewith. But yt the description and properties of pisi do not agree
with Orobus and Erebinthus / I shall easily prove it / by the autorites of the
autores above rehearsed / and with other beside them. Erebinthus / as Theophrast
writes falls not upon the ground but grows a side. But the pease falls
upon the ground / therefore erebinthus ca^ not be pisum. The pisum has long
leaves / but Erebinthus has none / such. Therefore Erebinthus can not be pisum.

Galene writes de Cicere Arietino / and de piso as of ij. distinct and diverse
pulses / Pliny also in one chapter divides cicera from pisis / therefore
erebinthus which is called in latin cicer is not pisum.

Theophrast makes orobum to grow sydlynges. But all our kinds of peasen ar
(...), that is their stalks grow by the ground / and Gale^ writes yt all the
kinds of orobus / saving the white ar plain bitter and takes not all
bitterness away from it utterly / but makes it gentler then the other as
Theophrast does also. But all our kinds of peasen and all ye kinds of
erweysen or erbsen in Duche / ar plain sweet / without all bitterness. Therefore
there can none of our pease nether of the Duche erbsen be any kind of orobus /
saving the white / and yt (as it is proved before) can not be orobus as one
that wrote upon the Georgikes of Virgil did lately teach.

That the most part of our common peasen can not be pisum of the old writers /
it does appear by both ye descriptiones of Theophrast and Plini. For
Theophrast makes his pease with a long lefe / and Plini gives corners unto
his pease. Then when as the common white pease is altogether round and without
corners / and the leaves of ye most part of our common peasen ar round / the
common white peason and other like unto them in form and fasshon can not be pisa
of the old writers.

The common gray pease with the long leaves / which is not round / but cornered /
is either the pisum of the old writers / or ellis I know it not all.

The virtues of peasen out of Galene.
PEasen of their hole substance have a certain lyknes with fabis (which are
called of the most part of learned men and taken for our beans) and ar after
the same manner taken in that fabe ar. But they differ in these two points /
from fabis both in that they are not so wyndy / and that they have not such a
scowryng nature / and therefore go slowlier down throw ye belly.

Galene in that place where as he writes of fabis / says yt all things
which are fried want the wyndenes that they had before / but yt they are harder
of digestion.

Then the perched or burstled peasen which are called in Northumberla^d carlines
by Galenis ruel / are not so wyndye as otherways dressed / and ar harder to be
digested / although they noy not so much with their wyndenes.

The physiciones of Salern write thus of peasen in their book which they
wrote unto the king of England. Sunt inflatiua cum pellibus atque nociua.
Pellibus ablatis sunt bona pisa satis.


That is peasen with their skins ar wyndy and noysum / but when as yt skynnes
ar taken away: they are good inoughe. Thus do they say. But for all their sayng
/ I will advise all them that have either wyndy stomachs / or miltes / yt they
use not much pease at any time / howsoever they be dressed / except there be
either anis sede / or cumin / or mynte / or some other sede or herb of like
property put thereto. Wherefore I must needs comme^de the honest and learned
Physicianes who of old time have taught our cooks to put the powder of mynte
in to pease potage / for that takes away for the most part the wyndines of
the pease / which might else hurt all men disposed unto any wyndines either in
the milt or stomach. The cause why I do commend them is / because they have don
both according unto reason and to the learning of Galene who writing of peasen
/ and other wyndy meats / says yt whatsoever wyndines is in any kind of
meat / the same may be amended by such herbs as ar hot and make subtle and
fine.

Of pitiusa or pyne spourge out of Dioscorides.
PItiusa is judged to differ in spicie or kind from the cypress spourge /
called in latin cyparissias. Wherefor it is numbered amongst ye kinds of
tithimales. Pitiusa (which I name pyne spourge) brings forth a stalk longer
the^ a cubit / having many knees or joints. The leaves ar sharp and small like
unto the leaves of a pyne tree. The flowers ar small / in color purple / the sede
is broad as a lentil is. The root is white / thyck / and full of juice. This
same is found in some places a great bushe. Hitherto Dioscorides.

This pitiusa is called of the common Herbaries and apothecaries esula maidr /
but how yt it is called in English / I can not tell / allthoug it be found in
many places of England. But lest it should be without a name / I call it pyne
spourge after the Greek name and lyknes of the leaves of it unto the leaves of a
pyne tree. It may also be called lynespourge / of the lyknes yt it has with
linaria. The common herbaries hold that it is hard to discern esulam from
linaria / and therefore they have made a verse whereby a man may learn to
discern the one from the other / but the verse is this: Esula lactescit,
linaria lac dare nescit.
Pinespourge has much milck / which linari lacks in her lefe.


But because linari is also like the Cypress spourge (which is much less then
this is) it were best for the auoydyng of confusion continually to call pitiusam
pine spourge.

The great kind that Dioscorides makes mention of / have I seen in diverse
places of Germany / first a little benethe Colen / by ye Rhene side / and
afterward / beside Worms in high Germany. I have seen it diverse times as
high as a man / and sometime much longer. This herb may be called in English
spourge gya^t / or merrish or water spourges / because it grows only in
merrish and watery grounds.

The virtue of pitiusa out of Dioscorides.
TWo drammes of pitiusas rote with mede purges / and so does a dram of the
sede / and so does a spounfull of the sap made in pills with flour. Three
drammes of the leaves / may be taken for a purgation.

Of plantayn or weybrede.
depiction of plant Plantago mayor,
depiction of plant Plantago minor,
depiction of plant Plantago II. minor.
depiction of plant Plantago aquatica.


THere at two kinds of plantayn or Waybrede the less and the greater. The
less has narrower leaves / less and smother / softer and thynner. It has
little stalks bowyng to the ground / full of corners and pale yelowishe
flowers. The sede is in the top of the stalks. The greater is larger with
broad leaves like unto a beat. The stalk in this kind is full of corners /
somthyng redish of a cubit hight / set about with small sede from the mids
unto the top. The roots ar tender roughe / white / and of the thiknes of a
finger. It grows in myri places in hedges and in moist places / and the
greater is the better. Hither to Dioscorides.

Beside these two kinds there are diverse mo beside which may all well be
contained under these / saving it that grows by ye see side only / which
seems to be a several kind from all the rest. The greatest kind is called
in the South part of England plantayn or great plantayn / and in the North
country waybrede or great weybrede. The less kind is called sharp waybred or
sharp plantayn / and in many places rybgrasse. The Duche call the great
plantayn breid Wegerich / and the less Spitzwegerich.

The virtues of both the Plantaynes or waybredes out of Dioscorides.
THe leaves of plantayn / have a drying pour and byndyng together. Wherefore if
they be laid to / they are good for all perillus sores and hard to heal / and
such as draw toward the common lepre / and for such as ar flowyng or rynnyng
and full of foul matter. They stopp also the burstyng out of blood / carbuncles
/ fretyng sores / crepyng sores / right blaynes / or ploukes / and they cover
with a skin old sores and uneven / and sores all most incurable / and they
heal up corners / and hollow sores. They heal also the bytyng of a dog / and
burned places / and inflammationes or burnynges / and the inflammationes or
apostemes behind the ears and swellynges / having blaynes in them after the
color of bread. They are good to be laid to hard swellynges or wennes and
wateryng of the eyes / with a sore disposed to fistelles / with salt. But the
herb if it be eaten as a wurt in meat / with salt / and vinegre / it is good
for the blody flix and the other flix without blood. It is also given sodden
in the stead of betes / with pentilles. It is also given to them that have the
dropsey which has the name of white fleme / after the use of dry things / so
that the herb sodden may be taken in the mids. It is also good to be given
to them that have the falling siknes / and to them that are short wynded. The
juice of the leaves scoureth sores that are in the mouth / if it be often washed
therewith. With Cimolia and white lead or cerusse / it heals the inflammation
called saint Antonies fire. The same is poured in to the cares for the ach of
them / and for the eysore / it is poured in to ye ey / and it is menged with ey
salues. It is dronken of them with profit / that have blody goumes / and of
them that cast out blood. It is good to be poured in under against the blody
flix. It is also good to be dronken against the ptisik. It is also good to be
laid to against the stranglyng of the mother in woll / and so is it good for a
waterish or to moist mother. The sede also dronken with wine stops the belly
and the spittyng of blood. The root sodden stancheth the tuthe ach / if they
be washed there with / and it chowed in the mouth. The root and leaves ar
good against the sores or blisters that are in the bladder and kydnes / so that
they be taken with sweet wine. Some say that three roots with three ciates of
wine with like portion of water will help a tertian / and the four roots help
a quartyn. There are also some yt use the root hanged in a band / to drive away
wennes and hard swellynges.

Out of Galene in the vij. book of simple medicines.
PLantayn is of a menged complexion or temperature / for it has a certain
cold waterishe tyng / and also a certain byndyng tartish thing / the which is
erly dry and cold. And therefore it coleth and dries / and is in both in the
second degree from the mids. But such medicines as cool and bind / ar good
for sores that are hard to be healed / for isshues and in flowynges and rotten
humores / and so ar they good for the blody flix. The root and sede are not so
cold as the leaves ar / but dryer. Aetius confirms it that Galene and
Dioscorides have written / and says also thus: The sede is of most subtle or
fine parts / but the roots ar of grosser parts. And the leaves dried / get
unto them the pour of subtiler parts / but not so cold as they had before.

When as these be the true virtues and properties of the kinds of playntayn /
it is a folish sayng of some unlearned persons / which hold stiffly that
plantayn draws humores out of sores: When as the properties of it / is rather
to drive bak humores / and to dry up them / that are flowen to the hurt places /
then to draw any unto the place. For all such medicines as shall draw / must have
an hot or warm property / and not a cold and dry / as all the kinds of
plantayn have.

Of the Plain tree.
ALlthoughe Dioscorides writes of the virtues of Plain tree / yet he describes
it not. Wherefore very mane in England and Germany have erred in taking of
diverse trees for the Plain tree / where of nono of them all / was the right
Plain tree in deed. Sum take ye lynd tree (which I with many other take for the
right tilia) for Platano: because it shuts forth long branches / and bowghes
/ and is able to cover a great number of men under it. Sum take a tree which
seems to me / to be a kind of acer / to be Platanum. And that tree is called
in Duch Ahorn. That the lynd can not be Platanus / it may be gathered by
diverse places of Dioscorides / where as he makes certain well known herbs
like to Platano. Dioscorides in the fourth book and 145. chapter / writes of
ricinus / which we call now in England palma Christi, says that it has leaves
/ like unto a Plain tree / but greter / smother and blacker. But the lynd tree
has leaves like an asp tree / or to some Iuy leaves that have no indentyng or
cuttyng / and nothing like unto the leaves of palma Christi, which are cut out
after the manner of a mannis hand. Pliny also in the xvj. depiction of plant
Platanus.
book and xxiiij. chapter / writes that the fyg tree / plain tree / and vynde /
have greatest leaves of all other / therefore seeing that the leaves of the lynde
tree ar but small in comparyson of these now rehearsed and of many other / it can
not be the right Platanus or Plain tree. They that hold that the Ahorn tree
(which I reken to be only a kind of acer) is Platanus / grant that it grows
in ye highest mountains that are some thing moist / amongst the ash trees.
But Theophrastus makes the Plain tree to grow in merrish grou^des with willowes
and by wells and water sides. And the same writes thus of the Plain trees
natural place very clearly in the third book of the History of Plants / and
in the seventh chapter. Some trees grow easily and increase with speed / as they
that arise up by ryuers or waters / as the elm tree / the Plain tree / the water
asp / and the wylow tree. Therefore the Platanus and the ahorn tree agree nothing
in their natural place of growing. Both Plini and Theophraste write also that
Platanus grows not naturally in Italy. And Plini writes that the Plain tree
was fetched out of a strange world / only for the shaddowis sake. It is like
if ahorn had been Platanus / and the Italianes had known / that it had grown
so nere hand them / in Germany / (as it is very like / they being so much and
so often in Germany / did know what grew there /) they would never have sent in to
a strange wald to fetch them / seeing they might have had it so nere home. They
also that describe the ahorn tree / make it not to have any such shaddowing
boughs and branches as Plini and Theophrast write that the Plain tree has.

For these and diverse other like causes / I reken that the tree called in Duche
Ahorn or wild asshen / can not be Platanus. I have seen the leaves of that
Platanus that grows in Italy / and two very young trees in England which were
called there Plain trees. Whose leaves in all points were like unto the leaves
of the Italian Plain tree. And it is doutles that these two trees were either
brought out of Italy / or of some far country beyond Italy / where unto the
freres / monks and chanones went a pylgrimage.

The virtues of the Plain tree.
THe young leaves of the Plain tree / sodden in wine / ar good to be laid unto the
eyes to stopp the rynnyng and wateryng of them. They are also good for
swellynges / and inflammationes. The bark sodden in vinegre / is good for the
tooth ach / if the teth be washed therewith. The young knoppes dronken in wine
/ heal the ye bytyng of serpents. If they be broken and menged with grese /
and there of be made an ointment / heal it that is burnt of fire. The horynes
that cleueth unto the leaves / is perillus both for the eyes and ears also.

Of the herb called Polium out of Dioscorides.
Polium.
depiction of plant depiction of plant

There ar two kinds of Polium / the one of the mountains which is named
teucrion / and this is it that is commonly used. It is a bushlyng / small /
white / and a spanne long / full of sede. It has in the topp a little head like
a cluster of berries / but that little and like an hory hear. And it has a
strong or grievous smell joined with a certain pleasantnes. The other kind is
more busshy / and not of so strong a smell / and weyker in workyng. Hither to
Dioscorides.

The first and nobler kind have I seen growyng in the mount Appennin / but
never in England abroad. Therefore I know no English name of it / but it may
be well called after the Greek and Latin name Poly. The second kind did I se
(except I be deceived) a little from the citi of Cour in the land of Rhetia /
but it grow not so straight up / as it that Matthiolus painteth. Pliny gives
unadvisedly those properties unto Polio that belong to tripolio. Therefore all
students had need to read him warely / as both here and in many other places
/ lest he give them full cause of error. Here is the reder to be warned that
where as it is in yt translation of Cornarius palmi altitudine, it is in ye
Greek (...) / which Greek word betokens not the length of four fyngers / as
palmus does / but a spanne / which conteyneth in it ix. inshes or xij. fingers.
This thought I necessary to warn the reder of / lest he leauyng unto the
autorite of Cornarius / should thynk that Poly should be no higher then iij. Read
Agricolam de ponderibus and me^suris.
inches or four fyngres long / as palmus most commonly in all good autores that
I have red does signify / saving in a place or ij. of Pliny / which seem to
agree with the judgment of Cornarius.

The virtues of Poly out of Dioscorides.
THe broth of the herb dronken / heals the styngyng of serpents / them that
have the dropsey and the iaundes / and also them that are grieved in the milt /
so that it be used with vinegre. It vexes the stomach / and ingendreth the
hedach. It lowseth the belly / and brings down flowers. If it be strowed upon
the ground / or if it be burned / and made to smooke / it dryueth away
serpents. If it be laid to emplasterwyse / it byndeth wounds together. Poly
by the reason of his bitterness / as Galene writes / and because he is metely
sharp / delyuereth all inward parts from stoppyng. When as it is grene as the
same Galene writes / it joins togethre great wounds / and specially the
busshye kind. When as it is dried / it will heal old sores very hard to be
healed. But the less kind is for yt purpose more effectuus or stronger in
workyng. The less Poly / which we use in preservatives and triacles / is
sharper and bitterer then the greter is. So that it dries in the third degree
/ and heateth fully out in the second degree.

Of the herb called Polygala or milk lentill.
POlygala / says Dioscorides / is a bushling / a span long / and has leaves
after the fasshon of lentill leaves / with a taste somthyng byndyng and tarte.
Dioscorides writes no more of Polygala. The herb yt I take for Polygala / is
a very short herb / and it grows in woddes and in wild places / and in
hedges beside woddes / and in laynes: the flour is in some places purple / and
in other places almost white. Allthoughe I have seen this herb often in England
/ yet could I never hear of any man the name of it. It may be called until we
find a better name / milk lentill / because it has leaves like lentilles /
and the property to make much milk.

The virtues of Polyg^la.
DIoscorides reherseth no other virtue of Polygala / saving that it makes much
milk. And Galene writes not much more of it. For he writes only this of it.
Polygalon leaves ar a little byndyng. They seem to make milk / if it were
dronken. Therefore hete and moisture must bear the chief ruel in it. Paul has
nothing of this herb but it that Dioscorides and Galene wrote before him.
Nether find I any more of it in Pliny / then is written in Dioscorides.

Of knot grass or swyne grass, and of the meadow schauigrass, out of Dioscorides.
DIoscorides makes ij. kinds of Polygonum. The one he calls the male / and
the other he calls the female. Polygonum the male (says he) is an herb
that has te^dre branches and soft set about with little knees or knoppes about
the joints / and they krepe upon the ground like grass. The leaves ar like rue
/ but they are longer and softer. It has sede desyde every lefe / whereof it is
called the male. The flour is white depiction of plant Polygonum I.
depiction of plant Polygonum II.
or purple. Polygonum the female is a little bushling or busshy herb / having
but one stalk / tender and like unto a read / and it has many knoppy joints
called of some men knees / one being always stopped into an other / after the
manner of a trumpet. And it has certain things about the joints / going round
about / like unto the leaves of a Pyne tree. The root is nothing worth. It
grows in watery places.

The former kind is named in Greek (...), in Latin Poligonu^ mas or
sanguinalis, in Duch Wegbret / in English knotgraS or Swynegrasse.

The female is called in Greek Polygonon (...) / in Latin Polygonu^ foemina /
in English little shave grass or meadow shauegrasse / because it grows much
in moist and merrish meadows.

The virtues of knot grass out of Dioscorides.
THe juice of knotgrasse / if it be dronken / has a byndyng and a coolyng
property. It is good for them that spit blood / and for the flix and for such
as choler bursteth out of / both above and beneth. It is good for the
strangurian / for it does manifestly bring forth water. It is good to be
dronken with wine / against the bytyng of venemus bestes. It is also good to be
taken against the fittes of agues an hour before their coming. It if be laid
to it well / stopp the isshues of weomen. It is good to be put in against the
rynnyng and mattery ears. It is excellently good against the sores of the
priuites / if it be sodden with wine and honey. The leaves ar good to be laid to
for the burning of the stomach for castyng out of blood / for crepyng sores /
for hot inflammationes called saint Antonies fire / or of some other the wild
fire / for impostemes and swellynges and grene wounds. The femall which I call
meadow shauegrasse / has a byndyng pour and coolyng / and it is good for all
that the other kind is good for / but it is in all points weyker. Galene
beside these properties / that Dioscorides gives unto Polygono / assygneth
also these yt follow here after. As knotgrasse has a certain byndyng / so does
a waterish coldness ber the chief ruel in it. So that it is in ye second degree
cold / or allmoste in the beginning of the third degree. It is good to make a
repercussiue or backdryuyng medicine of it / to drive bak again such humores as
flow unto any place.

Of the herb called Polygonatum or scala caeli.
depiction of plant Polygonaton.
depiction of plant Polyganatum angustifolium.


POlygonaton grows in hills or mountains. It is a bushe more then a cubit
high / it has leaves like a bay tree / but brother and smother / which in taste
has a certain thing like a quince / or pomgranat. For they send forth a
certain byndyng. There are white flowers about the out sprynges of every lefe /
mo in nombre then the leaves ar / if ye begin to tell from the root. It has a
white root / soft / long full of knees or oyntes / coughe (as some translate
this word (...)) or thyk well compact together / (as other turn the same
word) and it has a grievous smell / it is about an ynche thick.

This herb is well known both in England / and in Germany. It is called in
English scala celi. The Duch men call it WeiS wurtz / the herbaries call it
sigillum Salomonis. It were better to call it by an English name taken out of
Duch (from whence our English sprang first) white wurt then scala celi / for so
shall men lern better to know it / and to remember the name of it.

The properties of Polygonatum or white wurt.
IT is very good for wounds and to scour away spots and frekles / out of
ones face. Some use to make ashes of the root of this herb and to make ley of
it / for to scour away frekles out of the face.

Of Asp, and kinds of Popler.
depiction of plant Populus I.
depiction of plant Populus II.


DIoscorides makes but two kinds of Populus / that is the white and the blak.
But Theophrast / and Pliny / make three kinds / Dioscorides and Theophrast call
populum nigram (...), and populum albam (...). But in Theophrast is there yet an
other kind called in Greek (...) of him. But why that it has that name / I
can not perfitly perceive / (...) is as much to say in Latin as Radius / which
betokens in our speech a beam / a spoke in a whele / the less bone in a
mannis arm and a weuers instrument named a shittel. But I se no cause that
(...) the third popler / should have his name of any of these. But if that there
had been in the stead of (...), (which word it is possible that it has ones
been in the text of Theophrast / and afterward changed by some writer into
(...)) it were easy to tell / of what properti it were called (...). For (...)
in Greek is as much to say in English / a spytefull noise and (...) in Greek
is / found again. Therefore / if ye word had been (...) to ye third kind of
popler should have had the name of soundyng or of making of a noysum noise.
Which property Pliny in diuerses places gives unto the popler tree / and we
se that in ye wod popler / that it has leaves ever trymbling and mouyng / and
with in but a small wind crackyng. Theodore Gaza the translator of Theophrast /
out of Greek in to Latin / turns kerkin in to populum alpinam, that is an asp
or popler of the mountains / called the alps. Pliny called this third kind
populum lybicam / where of I intend to entreat here after.

Of the kinds of poplers out of Theophrast.
THe white popler / and the blak / ar of one fasshone / they grow right up
both. But the blak popler is longer and smother. They are both like in figure
of lefe / They have also both white wod / when as they are cut down (...) or
populus alpina / is not unlike unto the white popler / both in bygnes and by
yt it spredeth abroad with white boughs. It has the lefe of an Iuy / but in
the one half with out a corner / on the other side a long corner / going to a
sharpnes / with one color allmoste both upon the over part and nether part
also. It has a long footstalk and small / and therefore it is not right out /
but bowyng in. The bark is rougher then the white poplers bark is / and more
scabbed / as the bark of (...) is / which Theodore turns a wild pyne.

Thus writes Theophrast in the third book de historia plantarum and in the
xiiij. chapter. And in the xvj. chapter of the first book de historia
plantaru^ he writes thus of the white popler / and not generally of every
popler (as Gaza translating (...) not very well / populum with out any puttyng
to of white or blak does.) The leaves (sayethe he) in all other trees ar in all
points like them selves / but the leaves of the white aspe / of the Iuy tree /
and of palma Christi / are not like them selves / that is they have some time one
fasshon of leaves / and some time an other fasshon. For when as they are young /
they are round / but when they are old / they grow into to corners. But it is
not so with the Iuy. For the Iuy whilse it is young / has more cornered leaves /
and when it comes to perfect age / then ar the leaves rounder. And this
property belongs severally to the olive tree to the lynde / and to the white
popler tree / for they turn down their upper parts by and by after solstitium
(which is after Aetius / the xxv. of Iuny and after Pliny the xxiiij. of Iuny)
and by that token the Husbaumen know that the solstitium of summer is past.
Theophrast writes in diverse places that the poplers grow by water sides / and
in moist places / as the noble Poet Virgil does also.

Out of Pliny.
There are three kinds of Populus / the white / the blak / and it that is called
lybica / which is lest and blackest in the lefe / and most commended of all
other / for beryng of todestooles (or as the Northumberlanders call them)
bruches. The white has a lefe of two colores / white above (which sayng of
Pliny is not true until the solstitiu^ be past for a fore that time / the
upper part is grene) and the under part is grene. The rest that Pliny writes
of the poplers / saving where as he takes any thing out of Theophrast is not
worthy the writing.

Populus nigra which is called in Greek (...), and in Italian Pioponero / in
Frence du tremble or Pepleur / in Duche Aspen / is not so common in England / as
it is in Italy and high Germany. The Populus is called with us by two names /
some call it a Poppler / and other an Asp or an esp tree. But not every tree in
England called Popler or Esp / is the right Populus nigra. For it that grows
in the hills and dry woddes both in England and Germany / is not the Populus
nigra, but rather kerkis or Populus alpina, of Theophrait / or populus lybica
in Pliny. For both Theophrast and Virgil appoynte the water sides and merrishe
grounds unto populo nigrae. The popler / also that grows in the woddes of
England (if my memory fale me not) have no such blak tagges as the blak popler
has / which grows in Germany by the rene side / hard by the city called
Lauterburgh. Pliny also rekeneth the popler amongst the other trees which
have curled veins in these words. Tarde illae senescunt quarum crispa
materies, vt acer, palma, populus. That is those trees ar long in coming to
age / whose wod or tymbre / is curled / as the maple tree / the date tree / and
the popler tree. Hither to Pliny.

I have seen in Germany many well favored things perteynyng unto household
stuff made of the blak popler / which grows by the water sides / as spownes /
tables / doors and chistes / with a meruelus fine curled grayn / and pleasant
to look to. But the wod of our common popler is nothing like unto it that I
have spoken of / for it has no such grayn or curlyng / therefore it is not ye
right blak popler of Pliny and Theophrast. Therefore it were best to call
populum nigram a blak popler or a blak asp / or a water asp / and not by this
word popler / or asp alone.

As touching the white Asp / I remember not that ever I saw it in any place of
England. But I have seen it in great plentye in Italy by the river sede of
Padus / where as it is called albera / and in high Germany by the rene side /
where as it is called saurbaum. If it be found in England / it may be called a
white Asp or a white popler / because the vndersyde of the lefe is as white as
any paper. The white Asp differs not only from the blak in the whytenes of
the one side of the lefe / but also in the form of the lefe. For the white Asp
has a lefe somthyng indented or cut after the manner of palma Christi. But if
any man cast against me / it that Theophrast writes of both the poplers in
the 14. chapter of the third book de historia plantarum. (...). That is the
figure or fasshon of the lefe is like: I answer that this lyknes is only when
as the leaves com first forth / and not afterward / for if they should be like
afterward / then should Theophrast be contrary unto him self / who in the first
book de historia plantarum, and in the xvj. chapter writes these words:
(...). The leaves of the white popler of the Iuy and of it that is called palma
Christi, ar unlike and diverse in figure. For when as they are young they are
round / but when as they are older they have corners / there may ye se plainly
that the leaves of the white popler when as they are old / ar cornered. Which
thing if it be true as I have sufficiently proved to be so / the^ err they
very much and give other occasion of error / which set out in their herballes
the white popler with a round lefe without any corners at all.

The third kind of popler which is called of Theophrast (...) or as I guess
rather (...), and translated of Gaza populus alpina, and named of Pliny populus
lybica, is our common asp in England / or ellis I know not what it is. The
causes that make me to think that our common asp is populus lybica in Pliny /
and populus montana in Theophrast ar these: First both the lyknes of leaves
that it has with the blak popler and in many other so resembles the other
poplers / that I think that there is no man that has seen the other two
kinds of popler / that will deny but that this is a kind of popler. Then when
as it is nether the first kind nor the second / it is very like that it is
the third kind when as no other tree can be found as yet for the third
kind. Theodor Gaza being a man of much reding / would not call this kind
populum alpinam except either some reason or authority that he had red / had moved
him thereto. Then when as this common asp tree is much in high mountains / he
seems in calling the third kind of the popler populum alpinam, to mean that
Theophrast understands by (...) that popler that grows in hills and
mountains. Then when as the common asp grows in such places / it is like that
our common asp should be kerkis / the third kind of Populus. Theophrast makes
the third kind / like unto the white popler in bygnes and in spredyng abroad
of boughs / which two things may be found in our common asp with the
scabbednes of the bark in old trees / except my memory fale / may also be
found: but as touching the property that he gives unto the foot stalk of
(...) / I am sure agrees well with our common asp tree. But whether the leaves
that Theophrast gives unto his (...) ar agreyng with ye leaves of our asp or no
/ I leave that to be judged of them that are learned / but I dowt some thing that
they do not in all points well agree / or ellis I durst give sentence that our
common asp were there (...) in Theophrast. But though it be not (...) of
Theophrast / it seems unto me that it may well be the third kind of Populus
in Pliny which he called populum lybicam. Pliny makes one kind of Populus to
grow in the mountains and that is nether the white nor the blak / wherefore it
seems that it is the^ the third kind of populus. Pliny also makes his
third kind of populus to have great todestoles growyng upon it / and he
makes the pople tree to have a trymblyng foot stalk and leaves one crackyng
against an other. Then when as the common popler has these properties more then
any other popler tree has / it is very like that it should be the third kind
of populus / which he called populum lybicam.

The virtues and complexiones of the Popler or asp trees.
Diverse men ar of diverse judgments / concerning the degree and complexion of
the blak popler. For diverse reken it hot in the third degree / and other
reken it hot only in the first degree. And some hold that it is plain coolde
and nothing hot at all. Aetius after the translation of Cornarius says that
it is hot in the third degree. And in some textes / Galene makes it also hot
in the third degree. But in the best greek textes and translationes that we now
have / it is rekened to be hot / only in the first degree. The words of the
translatores of Galene ar these: Aegyri flores facultate quidem sunt in primo
recessu a temperatis. Sed and resina eius floribus similem facultatem obtinet,
atque etiam calidiorem. Then when as al these autores make ye blak popler
hote^: some in one degree / and some in an other: if sufficient autoryte of
ancient writers may confute any man / then is Amatus Lusitanus confuted / by
the autorite of the fore named autores where as he holds stif^i that the blak
popler is cold. These by the words of Amatus / lest any man should thynk that I
report falsely of him vnguentum populeum, prope tertium gradum frigiditatis, a
doctissimis iudicatur. Proinde populum frigidam vel saltem non calidam esse
necessarium est. And a little after he alleges Galene / Paul and Constantinus
/ which write that the popler is but hot in the first degree. And when as he
has alleged their autorites / he makes this vnhedefull consequent. Natura
ipsa arboris, and proprietates, satis iudica^t calidam non esse, quibus magis
credere debemus quam omnibus de ea hucusque scribe^tibus. And afterward he
makes an other conclusion of these forecited autores and properties. Itaque
populum ad frigiditatem potius quam ad caliditatem inclinare in confesso est.
Now because some take him for a man of great autorite / and worthy credit /
lest men should be led from the truth by him / and the opinion that they have
of his learning / I will assay if I can for the defense of the truth confute
his resones where with he goes about to prove against the autorite of the
noble writers / whom I have before rehearsed / that the blak popler is cold / or
at the least not hot. His first argument is this / populeum is judged of the
most learned men to be cold about the third degree / ergo the popler is cold.
This argument is not good / because a little portion of an hot thing may go in
to a cold composion / to lead the cold medicines to the diseased places / or
to correct or tempere the vehemency of vnholsum cold simples / and yet it is
not therefore necessari that the hot medicine should be cold for being me^ged
with many cold medicines. Nether is it necessari that the cold composition
should be made hot with a small portion of an hot simple medicine. If he had
resoned thus: the best learned men judge / that the popler is cold about the
third degree / ergo they err that hold that ye popler is hot / had been a
good argument. But the^ would I have denied his antecedent / and have said /
that Galene / Aetius / Paulus / Oribasius / Serapio and Auicenna / were better
learned then ever they were that hold that the popler is so cold. For it is a
false fallacy and a sophistical argument to argue from a part to the hole.
As thus there is sum part of the horse is white / ergo ye horse is white or
all white. And even such argument is this. If populus were hot then should
populeum be hot: but it is cold / ergo populus is cold. When as there go in to
the oyntme^t populeum only xviij. ounces of the pople budes / there enter in
xxxiij. ounces of all very cold herbs / which by many ounces ouercom the weike
hete of the popler buddes / and so abide cold still / namely when as the
poplers hete / is but in the first degree / and the coldness of the other / is
cold for the most part of them all in the second or third degree / and some of
them be cold almost in the fourth degree. And therefore it follows not.
Populeum is very cold / ergo populus which is a part of it is also cold. But
this is one great cause of his error / that he did not consydre / that learned
men did put sumtymes sum portiones of hot simples in to medicines that take
ache away / not to make the hole composition hot / but to convey the other
cold simples into ye ground of ye diseased places. Which thing Galene
teaches in the ix. book of the compositio^ of medicines after the places / in
these words. Ex opij and hyosciami mixtura, somnum soporiferum, and sensitiuae
partis stuporem inducere voluit. Quo vero citius distribuerentur, and totum
affectarum partium profundum penetrarent: calefacientia admiscuit, pyrethru^,
euphorbium and piper, quae nocentes humores discutere possint, and extergere
viscosos, and secare crassos, and ventosos flatus, attenuare. Then were not the
poplers buddes put in / to make the hole medicine / called populeu^ hot or
cold / but for this purpose now rehearsed. His second argument goes furthe
thus. Galene / Paulus and Constantinus write that the popler is but hot in the
first degree / ergo it is cold or not hot: but this argument is so unlearnedly
made / that it needs but small confutatio^. When as he ought by good logike to
have resoned / the old writers hold that populus nigra is hot in the first
degree / ergo it is hot / and in nowyse cold. For to be hot in the first
degree / is to be one degree stop or order departed from it that is temperat or
cold. And therefore Galene writing of ye heat of this tree / says in these
expressed words. The flowers of the blak popler ar hot in workyng / in the
first departing or going away / or degree from temperat symples / that is to say
from such as ar in a mean te^pre between hot and cold. Therefore / seeing
that he makes his conclusion / contrari unto his antecedent / that is an hot
antecedent / and a cold consequent / his argument is worthy to be refused.

His third argument is this: The popler tree has nether any notable smell nor
taste in it / where by it may be judged to be hot / ergo it is no wise hot.
Here I deny his antecedent or ground of his argument / and I take wytnes of all
learned men that have tasted and smelled of the yo^g buddes of the blak popler
/ wheter they have very pleasant smell and an hot taste or no. I answer that
the popler buddes / which I have tasted and examined / both in England /
Germany and Italy / ar hot / and that the gum that comes forth of the ends
of buddes / is hot about the second degree / and this shall any man that will
try it / find true / namely at the first coming forth of the buddes / about
the mids of march / and in sum contrees sooner. Therefore for all the saynges
and arguments of Amatus / ye blak popler abides still hot in the first degree
at the least.

Cornarius perceyuyng that the blak popler was so hot: he thought it best to
take the knoppes of ye white popler. But whether he co^selled right or
otherwise / if we had Nicolaum Alexandrinum in Greek / we should easily judge.
For the Grecianes have not one Greek word to betoke^ both the poplers / but
they call the blak asp (...) and the with (...). I would wish both for this
cause and for diverse other that they that find any old Greek examples or
copies of old autores / and intend to translate them / that they should as well
set out and cause to be printed the Greek textes as their oun translationes /
for so might men the better examine their translationes / and the studiouse
youth by comparyng of the^ together / might profit much more in ye greek tongue
and practicioners might be more bold to work according to it that they have
translated.

The virtues of the poplers out of Dioscorides.
THe leaves of the blak asp / ar good to be laid to with vinegre upon the
places that are vexed with the gout. The rosin that comes out of the popler /
is me^ged often times with softenyng and souplyng emplasters. The sede is good to
be dronken with vinegre of them that have the falling syknes. An ounce of the bark
of the white popler dronke^ / is good for the sciatica and the stranguria. The
juice of the leaves of the white popler poured in to the ears / is good for
their ach. The round pills which com forth at ye buddyng time / broken and
laid to with honye hele the dullnes of the eysyght.

Of the kinds of lekes.
depiction of plant Porrum capitatum.


POrrum is named in Greek (...), in English a leke / in Duche ein lauch / in
French porrean. Dioscorides makes mention but of two kinds of lekes / and
that in ij. diverse chapters. But Plini makes three kinds / and Theophrast
makes mention of one kind of leke / which is nether (...) nor (...).
Wherefor by Theophrast also there are iij. kinds of lekes. The first kind
named in Greek (...), in Latin porrum capitatum / is called in English a leke /
without any addition / in Duch eyn lauch. The second kind is called porrum
sectinum in Latin / and in Greek (...), as some writers have taught / and it is
called in English a French leke. I never saw this kind saving only in
England. The third kind is called of ye grecianes (...) in Latin even so /
because they have no other name / it might be called porrum vineale. The Duch
men call it wild lauch / it may be called in English wild leke. I never saw
farer wild lekes in all my life then I saw in the seeds about Worms in high
Germany. For they were much larger in the leaves and greater heded then they
were that I saw about Bon.

The most part of the writers of herballes in Germany / teach that our fine
which they call schnit lauch / is porru^ satiuum. But they are all far deceived
for their schnitlauch is gethium / which is numbered of Plini amongst the
kinds of vnyones / and is therefore no kind of leke. For as all the kinds of
unions have round holow leaves: so all the kinds of lekes / have open leaves
bowyng in again from / as it were a rydge / or bak / porra sectiua as Plini
writes have little crestes in their leaves / and he says that they differ only
from other lekes / in the manner of dressyng and setting / and therefore he
says / if thou will have thy lekes / sectiua / sow the^ thicker together out
of this place of Plini. I gather that of one kind of leke sede / may com both
capitula and sectiua porra. But there is no kind of right lekes sede which
will bring forth sines or schnitlauch after what soever fashon ye sow or set
it. Therefore seeing that our sine has nether the leaves of porri sectiui /
nether grows of the sede of any leke / it can not be any kind of leke /
allthough ye Duche name of schnitlauch draws nere unto ye name of porri
sectiui. Theophrast also seems to make mention of porri sectiui in the vij.
book de historia plantarum, in the second chapter in these words after the
translation of Gaza. Gethium (that is a syne) spryngeth from the side and the
leke / brings furthe also from the side benethe as it were a round knoppy head
from whence the leaves spryng out / but they spryng not out until the stalk be
withered and the sede be taken away. And because their hedes ar little worth /
therefore men gather them not to dry the^ / and therefore they are never sown.
Thus far Theophrast. It appears that Theophrast speaks here not of ye common
leke which is called porrum capitatum for that is sown / and grows of the
sede / and either never or seldum out the to warynges / that grow like little
knoppes / out of the roots / but ye porro sectiuo which grows by pullyng
away and setting more commonly then by sowyng. This porru^ seetiuum which is
called in English a French leke for the most part always grows of setting
and not of sowyng. But I thynk if me^ would let their leaves and stalks grow
forth / and would not cut the^ / and would set thynner: that they would bring
forth sede and would grow of ye sede as other lekes do. But the^ would they grow
out of kind / and should be no more festiua porra / except they were afterward
cut and set thyk to gether as Plini whom I have above rehearsed / teaches
there right plainly. By these places and resones / that I have sufficiently
proved that our sinet called in Duche schnitlauch is not porrum satiuum but
gethium.

The virtues of the lekes first of Dioscorides.
THe heded leke / that is our common leke / bredeth wind / and euel juice / and
makes heavy dremes. It stereth a man to make water / and it is good for the
belly (to louse it as some understand Dioscorides.) It makes fine but it
dulleth the sight / it draws down flowers. It hurts the blader yt has ye
skin of / and the kydnees. If it be sodden with a ptisan and received with
meat: it will bring out those things that stick fast in the breast. But the
ouermost busshy tops of the leaves sodden with see water / and vinegre / ar
good to sit over for the stoppyng and hardness of ye mother. If ye will sethe a
leke in two waters and afterward stepe it / in cold water / it will be sweet
and less wyndye then it wase before. The sede is sharper or more bytyng / and
it hat a certain byndyng pour. Wherefore the juice of it with vinegre stops
blood / and specialli it that comes forth of yt nose if Frankincense or the
fine flour of it be menged therewith. It stereth up also the lust of a ma^nis
body. And it is used against all the diseases of the breast / licked in with honey
after the manner of an electuari. It is also good against the ptisik / when it
is taken in meat. It scoureth also the wind pype. But if it be eaten / it
dulleth the sight and hurts ye stomach. The juice dronken with honey is good
against ye bytyng of venemus bestes. Ye and the like laid to it self is good
for the same purpose. The juice of the leke poured in to the ear with vinegre /
and frankincense / and milk or rose oil / heals the ach and soundyng there
of. The leaves laid to with sumach of the kitchen / take away varos (that is little
hard swelled lumpes in the face) and epinictidas (that is / wheles that com
out on ye night / which sometime being read / if they be broken put forth blodi
matter / If they be laid to with salt / they bring away the crustes of sores.
Two drammes of the sede with like weight of myrtill berryes / if they be
dronke^ they are good for the casting out of blod of the breast. The wild leke
or wynyard leke / is more hurtful for ye stomach them the common leke. But it
heteth more / and stereth a man more to make water. It brings also down
flowers. And the use of it is good for them that are bitten of venemus beasts.

Out of Simeon Sethi.
THe leke is hot and dry in the first degree as Symeon Sethy writes / but I
reken that it is hot at the least in the second degree because it has such
virtues and workyng as one yt is but hot in the first degree can not have. And
as many as ar folowers of Galenes learning in the book of simple medicines / as
soun as ever they taste of ye leaves or sede / will judge yt ye leke is either
hot in ye third degree allmoste / or at the least in ye second in ye
atremite. Beside ye properties yt Dioscorides gives unto ye leke / Symeon
writes yt it makes and head ach / hurts ye liver / and yt it is good for ye
emrodes / and for such as have cold stomachs. And Galene generally writing of
vnyones and lekes / and of all such hot herbs cou^selleth all the^ yt ar of
hot nature to avoid such / and yt they are only good for them that have cold
waterish humores or toughe / or clammy humores in their stomachs.

Out of Aetius.
THe heded lekes ar of a sharp taste as vnyones ar. By reason where of / they
heat the body / and make thin or break gross humores and cut in pieces toughe
humores. They purge ye blader / Paulus Egineta techeth yt the sede of the leke
is used to be put in medicines for ye kydnees.

Out of Plini.
THe porrum sectiuum stancheth blod in ye nose / if ye break the leke and meng
it with gall or mynte / if ye stop the nose thrilles therewith. The juice of the
leke taken with weome^s milk / stops the isshue that comes / when a woman
has had her birth before her time. The leaves ar good for burning if they be
laid to. So ar they good for the diseases of the ears with a gotis gall or
like portion of honied wine. This leke is also good for the iaundes / and for
the dropsey. The juice taken in the mesure of an acetable that is about two
ounces and an half with honey / scowreth the mother. It quenches thurst / and
dryueth away dronkennes and softeneth ye belly. The great heded leke is
stronger for all these purposes. The use of lekes is good for the^ that would
have chylder. It is also good for the clerenes of the voice / taken with a
ptisan / or if it be taken every other day raw / in the morning fasting. The
lekes hedes twyse sodde^ / and the water changed / stop ye belly.

Out of the Arabianes.
A He leke brings weome^ their syknes / and scoureth ye breast / and takes
away sour belchynges / and softeneth the belly. The leke destroys the tethe /
and the goumes. The leke of a natural property is good for a moist and slymie
mother. The sede of the leke is good to make a perfume of / to perfume the
fundament therewith against fistulas that are in it.

Of Porcellayn.
depiction of plant Portulaca,
depiction of plant Portulaca agrestis.


POrcellayn is named in Greek andrachne / in Latin / Portulaca / in Duch pursel
of bursell. There are two kinds of porcellayn. The one is the come^ porcellayn
that grows in gardines with the broad leaves. The other grows wild in the
wynyardes of Germany. They are both so well known in all countrees that they
need no further description.

The virtues of porcellayn out of Dioscorides.
POrcellayn has a byndyng pour. If it be laid to emplaster wise with percheth
barlei / it is good for the hedeach / and for the burning heat of the eyes /
and for other inflammationes and for the heat of the stomach / and for the
erysypelate called of some / saint Antonies fire. It heals the pain of ye
bladder. The same if it be chowed after the manner of meat helps the teth /
when as they are an edged / the heat of the stomach guts / and it stilleth the
flowyng. It heals the fretynges or exulcerationes of the kydnes and bladder.
And it quenches the outragius desire to the lust of the body. So is the juice
also good if it be dronken in agnes. It is also good for round worms and
against the spittyng of blood / and the blody flix / and the emrodes / and the
burstyng out of blood / if it be much sodden. It is also good against the
bytyng of a venemus beast / called seps not unlike unto it that is called in
the north part of England a swyfte. It is very good to be menged with
eymedicines. Men use to pour it in / against the flyx of the guts and the
gnawyng or fretyng of the moother. Me^ use also to pour it upon the head for ye
head ach / that cummeth of hete / with rose oil or other common oil. It is
good also to rub the head therewith and with wine against the ploukes or blaynes
that are in the head. It is good to be laid unto rotten wounds that are number with
perched barley.

Out of Galene.
POrcellayn is of a moist and cold complexion where unto is joined a little
tartnes. And therefore it dryueth bak flowynges of humores / and specially such
as ar cholerik and hot. Beside that it changes the^ / and turns them in to
an other qualite / colyng wonderfully. For it is in the third degree or
departing rfom medicines of mean and temperat complexion / coolyng: and it is
moist in the second degree. By reason where of it helps the^ that have a great
burning heat / if it be laid upon ye stomach / and also over all the places
about ye mydriff / specially in consumyng agues which are called hectice. The
juice is much stronger then the rest of the herb. Galene in an other book that
he wrote de alimentorum facultatibus / writes that allthough some use
porcellayn as a meat / that it is but of very small norishment / and yt juice
that comes of it is moist cold and clammy.

Out of Pliny.
POrcellayn restreyneth the poison of venemus arrows of the serpe^tes / also
called hemorrhoydes / and of them that are called presteres: if it be taken in
meat. And if it be laid upon the wound / it draws the poison out. When as
they can not be gotten / the sede is as good to to be used as it. It
withstandeth the vnholsommes of waters. It heals sores if it be chowed with
honey and laid to. And so is it good to be laid upon young childers hedes and
upon ye nauelles yt go to far out. If it be chowed raw / it helps the sores
of the mouth and ye swellynges of the goumes. It is also good for the tuth
ache. It is good to fasten lousse tethe. It streyngtheneth the juice / and
dryueth thyrst away. It swageth the ach of the nek with like quantite of a gall
and lynt sede. The sede sodde^ with honey is good against the short wind. When it
is taken in sallates / it streyngtheneth the stomach. Porcellayn is good to
swage the ache of wounds with oil and perched barley. It softeneth the
hardness of the synewes. It dryueth away the unclean dremes of Veneri. Plini
writes also that a certain noble man by wearyng of ye root of porcellayn
about his nek / was delivered from the vuula / wherewith he had been long
before grievously vexed. Theses and many other properties does Pliny write that
porcellayn has.

Out of the Arabianes.
POrcellayn hurts the eysyght / cools the body and stops vomytynge.
Porcellayn pulls down the lust of the body / it is cold in the third degree
/ and moist in the second / it mynisheth a mannis sede if he use it much.

Of the plum trees, bulls trees and slo trees.
PRumus which is called in Greek (...), is named in Englshe a plum tree / in
Duche ein plaumen baum / in French vnprumer. Plini writes thus of the
diversity of plum trees and plumes. Ingens turba prunorum, etc. There ar a great
sort of diverse kinds of plumbes / one with a diverse color / an other black
an other whytishe. There are other that they call barley plumbes of the following
of that corn. There are other of the same color later and greter. They are
calleday ass plu^mes of their vylenes. There are also some that are blak and more
commendable / the wexy and purple plumbes.

These kinds of gardin plumbes (if a man may trust Pliny) were not known in
Itali in Catoes time. Dioscorides makes mention also of ye wild plu^bes and
so does Galene and Pliny. Galene says that (...) is called in Asia (...), and
the fruit (...). The Latins call the plum tree spinum more then Prunum as far
as I have red. For I read only mention of prunus for a plu^ tree in Plini. For
Virgil callethe the tree or bush that bears plumes spinum in this verse
following / Georgicorum iiij. Eduramque pirum and spinos iam pruna ferentes.


Palladius also in the third book of husbandry calls the plum tree spinum /
and writes that the apple tree may be grafted in to the spinum / that is in to
the plum tree. But when as spinus seems to have the name of pricks / that tree
that has mani pricks and bears plummes / may well be called spinus /
whether it be wild or tame. Also as there are many kinds of gardin plummes as
Pliny has told us before: and experience does teach: so ar there also
diverse kinds of wild plumbes and plum trees. Whereof I know two several
kinds at the least. The one is called the bulls tree or the bullestertre / and
the other is called the slo tree or the blak thorn tree. The bulls tree is of two
sorts / the one is removed in to gardines / and grows to the bygnes of a
good byg plum tree. The other grows in hedges / but it never grows in to ye
bygnes of any great tree / but abides between the bygnes of a tree and a great
bushe. I never saw in all my life more plenty of this sort of bulls trees /
then in So^merset shyre. This less bulls tree hat mo pricks then the greater
has / wherefore it deserves better to be called spinus for the names sake
then the greter bulls tree does.

And so the slo tree having yet mo pricks / then either of both has / may
better be called spinus then any of them both may be namely where as with the
other / it bears plumbes in form and taste like to the other sorts. But
Cornarius holds contrary to the judgment of all learned men of our age yt
our common slo bushe is not spinus or prunus syluestris / because it is not a
great tree able to be grafted in. For Palladius says he makes spinum to be a
tree able to be grafted in. But seeing that the slo bushe is not byg enough to be
grafted in / it can not be spinus. This argument does follow very euel / for
allthoughe Palladius iudgethe one spinum mete to be grafted in: yet for all
that he makes not every spinum able to be grafted in. For nether he nor
Virgill deny yt there is any wild kind of spinus which may not be grafted in
for litlenes. Nay it appears by Virgil yt he takes our slo bushe for the
wild spino / whilse he writes yt the spineta do hyde the lysertes in the hete
of summer. But spinetu^ has not ye name in this place of Virgill / nether of
spina that is a thistel / for lysertes use not to hyde them amongst thystelles
/ and spina signifies not a white hawthorn tree in good writers / except alba
be put unto it / ye and that only in Columella that I remember. Spinetum can
nether com of the gardin spino / nor of the great wild / spino for they use not
to grow in any place so thyk together that the number of them may be called
spinetum / and so can not hyde the lisertes from the heat of the son. Therefore
seeing that spinetum is a thicket of spinis / and is nether of the spinis
herbaceis nether of the plumb trees / nether of the great wild spinis / it is
like that he makes his spinetum of our spinis syluestribus minoribus / which are slo bushes. And this my opinion may well be confirmed / by the co^paryng of
Theocritus and Virgil together. For where as Virgil / a great follower and a
translator of times of Theocritus has / occultant spineta lacertos, that is
the thicket of thorns hydeth the lyserdes / Theocritus has after the
translation of Eobanus Hessus. Et uirides recubant subter consepta lacerti.

That is the grene sysardesly under the hedges. Mark where as the tra^slator
of Theocrytus has consepta / and Theocrytus has his ownself in his Greek
verse (...), Virgil has spinetum. But (...) properly signifies an hedge made
of thorns and not of trees. Wherefore it appears that Virgill takes also
spinum for ye blak thorn / which is most places serves to make hedges of.
And Pliny seems also to call the slo tree which is so comen in all places /
prunum syluestre. For he writes thus of pruno syluestri. Certum est pruna
syluestria vbique nasci, that is to say / it is well known ye wild plumbes
grow in every place which ca^ not be very fied of the bullesse tree.

These ones well considered: I can se no cause why but our slobush or blak
thorn is one kind pruni syluestris / and so spinus in old latin writers. And
where as Cornarius holds stifli that our blak thorn is poterio^ in
Dioscorides / and seems to bring in there upon / that it ca^ not be prunus
syluestris / lest Dioscorides should entreat of one thing in ij. places /
contrari unto his manner: I will easily prove that poterion can not be for
diverse causes our slo bushe. First the branches of the blak thorn are not long
/ nether soft / nether bowyng like a band / for although there be many
branches upon the stalk of the top of the blak thorn / yet ar they not long /
but short and hard / and brekle.

The sloes ar of no singular good smell / when as they are smelled / for they
have either very little or none at all. Nether ar they sharp or byndyng and tarte
/ far from all sharpnes / wherefore seeing Dioscorides requires all these
things in poterio / and they can not be found in our blak thorn / it can in no
wise be poterion.

And where as he holds that our sloes ar brabyla / if he will receive the
autorite of Dioscorides and Pliny / he must needs grant that his opinion is not
true. For Dioscorides writes that the fruit of poterion / is good for
nothing: and Pliny writes that the brabilla (for so has my Pliny / and not
brabyla) vim habet spissandi cotonei mali modo: that is brabylla has the pour
to make thick as the quince has. Then can not the fruit of poterion be
brabyla. This makes also against Cornarius / that Pliny writes of brabylla in
these words: vim spissandi habet, nec amplius de ea tradunt autores: yt is /
it has pour to make thyck / nether do old autores write any more of brabylla.
For Pliny writes in two places more of poterion / following the autorite of
old writers / therefore after the autorite of Pliny / poterion or the fruit
there of / and brabyla can not be all one. And so can not our slo bush be
poterion / and ye fruit of it brabyla. And where as the said Cornarius judges
that the plum tree / where of Theophrast makes mention in the third chapter of
the fourth book de historia pla^tarum / is the bulls tree: he erreth as much
there in / as he does in pruno syluestri / in brabylla and poterio. For the tree
that Theophrast makes mention of / is of a notable bygnes / and the leaves fall
never from it. But the leaves fall from our bulls tree and from the Duch me^nis
bilsen / and the tree is of notable bygnes / therefore our bulls tree called in
Hessia bilsen / can not be ye prunus yt Theophrast writes of. Therefore
Cornarius deserves no credit in these his gessynges / though otherwise he be
well learned in ye knowledge of the Greek to^g / and a very good Grammarian
there in.

The properties of the plum tree and his fruit out of Deoscorides.
PLumbes ar euel for the stomach / but they soften ye belly. The plumbes of
Syria / and specially they that grow in Damasco / when as they are dried they are
good for the stomach and bind the belly. The leaves of the plum tree sodden in
wine / if a man will gargle with the wine / stop the reum or flowyng of humores
to the vuula / goumes and kirnelles under the jaws. The wild plumbes will do
the same when as they are dried after that they be ripe. If they be sodden with
sweet sodden wine / they are better for the stomach and fitter to depiction of
plant Prunus syluestris.
stop the belly. The gum of the plum tree gleweth together. If it be dronken
with wine / it breketh the stone and heals the skurfenes of childer.

Out of Galene de simplicibus medicamentis.
THe fruit of the plu^ tree louseth the belly / but more when as it is moist
and fresh / and less when it is dry. But I can not tell what made Dioscorides
to write yt dried Damascene plumes do stop ye belly / when as they do
manifestly louse ye belly / but they yt co^ out of Spain ar sweter. The trees
answer in proportion of qualite with ye fruits. The fruit of the wild plum tree
is manyfestly byndyng and stops the belly.

Out of Galene of the poures of norishmentes or meats
Thou shall seldum find the plu^b tarte or sour or to have any vnplesantnes /
when it is fully ripe. For plumbes before they cum to that rypenes / they have
almost all / either a sournes or a tartnes. And other ar as it were bitter. The
body gets but small norishment of the eating of plu^mes / but they are good
for them that intend mesurably to moist and cool their belly: for they louse
ye belly with their moystnes and slymines. Plumes when as they are dried may serve
and be profitables as dried figs be. Men say yt of all plu^mes they are ye
best which grow in a city of Syria called Damascus. They give ye second praise
to the^ that cum out of Spain. But these show out no byndyng. But some of the
Damascenus bind very much. They are the best among the^ / that are great / with
a mesurably byndyng and ar louse. But they that are little ones / and hard and
harrish tarte / ar sterk noughts. Whether ye would eat them / or louse the belly
with them / which lousyng of the belly follows them / that com out of Spayn.
If plumbes be sodde^ in honied water / where in is a greater dele of honey / they
louse the belly much / allthough a man take them by them selves alone. And
that do they much more if a man sup mede or honyed water after them. It is
plain that it helps much to the lousyng of the belly / after that ye have
taken them to drink sweet wine to them / and to let a certain time go between
/ and not by and by after to go to dinner. And ye must remember that this manner
must be kept in all other such like as ar taken to soften the belly.

Out of Plini lib. 23. cap. 7.
SYluestrium prunorum baccae, etc. the berryes of ye wild Prunus or plumtre /
or the bark of the root / if they be sodde^ in tart byndyng wine / so that of
x. ounces / three remayn / stopp ye belly and the gnawyng there of / it is enough
to take one cyate that is an ounce and an half / and a dram and one scruple of
the brothe at one time. Hither to Plini / of whose words it is plain that
Cornarius erreth in denying the sloes to be the fruit of the wild Plumtre. For
if that only great plumes had grown upon prunum syluestrem / as Cornarius
seems to mean / Plini would never have called the plumbes of Pruni syluestris
baccas / that is berries / which word agrees not unto so great fruits as the
great bullesses ar.

Out of the Arabianes.
THe plumes both the white and blake when they are ripe they are cold and
moist / they swage the heat of choler: they louse ye belly. They hurt somthyng
the mouth of the stomach and take away a mannis appetite.

Of Psillium or fleasede out of Dioscorides.
depiction of plant Psyllium.


PSylliu^ has a lefe like unto the herb Iue / called coronopus / roughe and
longer / and it has boughs a span long. The hole herb is full of twigs /
like hay. His busshy leaves and branches / begin from the myd stalk upward / It
has two or three little hedes drawn together in ye top. Where in is an hard
blak sede / like unto a slay. It grows in feldes and untilled grounds. Thus
far Dioscorides.

Allthoughe I have seen this her be often in Germany and in England / yet I never
saw it grow wild but only in gardines. But hither to I could never learn the
English or Duc^ name of it. It may be well called fleasede or fleawurt /
because ye sede is very like unto a fle.

The virtues of flesede out of Dioscorides
THe nature of the fle sed is to cool. If it be laid to with rose oil / vinegre
or water / it heals the ach of the joints / the swellyng about the ears /
hard and soft swellynges both / and places out of joint / and it swageth the
head ach. Fleasede laid to with vinegre heals the burstyng of chylder / and
the going out of the nauil / ye must take about two ounces and an half of the
sede / and bruise it and stepe it / and lay it in two quarte of water / and when
the water is thick / then lay it on. It cools excedyngly. But if it be cast
in to hot water / then will it stanche the heat very well. It is good for ye
burning heat called saint Antonies fire / and hot cholerik inflammationes. Some
hold that if the herb be brought in to the house / it will let no flees bread
there / the sede bruised with grese / scoureth stingkyng and grievous sores. The
juice of it is good with honey for the rynnyng of the ears and against worms
there in.

Out of the Arabianes.
PSyllium swageth the gwawynges and prickynges of the belly / and it swageth
the sharpnes or rawnes of the goumes. It takes also away the vayn desire of
going to the stool. It is good for the head ach that comes of hete. The juice
of the leaves softeneth the belly by the reason of coldness and moisture that are
in it. The harm that may com by the taking of Psyllium / is remedied with hot
medicines. Psyllium lowseth the belly taken in raw. But if it be perched or
tosted at the fire / it stops the belly / two drammes of the sede of
Psylliu^ is inoughe to be put in water: when it has been long inoughe in the
water / take the water and put white sugar unto it / and so receive it / let
all men take heed yt they take not to much of it / for it will kill a man as
well as many other poysones do. Galene writes that Psyllium is cold in ye
second degree / and that it is in a mean tempre between moist and dry.

Of the herb called Ptarmica.
PTarmica (as Dioscorides writes) is a small bushlyng / and has many small
round twigges not unlike unto sothernwod / and about them grow leaves like
olyue leaves / long and many / and in the top a head like unto camomyle / round
and little / which with his smell stereth a man to neese / where upon it has the
name. It grows in mountains rocky places. Hitherto Dioscorides.

Diverse learned men hold that the herb which is called in Duche Wilder
bertram / is Ptarmica in Dioscorides / whose diligence and judgment ar rather
to be commended / then dispraysed. Allthough there be two things in the
description of Ptarmica / which can not be well found in Wilder bertram. The
one is a lefe like an olive / ye other is to grow in mountains and rockie
places. For ye wild bertram has not a lefe like an olive / but much sharper /
smaller / and longer / for the bygner yt it has / they are also indented all
about ye edges of the lefe / and therefore is it unlike unto the lefe of an
olive. And Wild bertram / grows wheresoever I have seen it / only about
water sides / and in merrily meadows / and never that I could se / in rocks
and mountains / wherefore I dare not give sentence with yt fore named learned
men / yt the Wildbertram / is yt right Ptarmica of Dioscorides / allthough it
differ very little or nothing at all / from ye right Ptarmica / in workyng / and
so little that a man may well use the one in the stead of the other.

depiction of plant Ptarmica.


The virtues of Ptarmica.
THe leaves of Ptarmica laid to with the fruit / have a property to drive away
swellynges and old hard lumpes / and to purge bruised places. The flowers make
one neese excedingly: Galene writes that Ptarmica being grene is hot and dry
in the second degree / and when it is dried / that it is hot and dry in the
third degree.

Of Penny ryall.
PVlegium is named in Greek (...) / in English Penny ryall or puddyng grass /
in Duche Polez / in French Pouliot. Dioscorides describes not Penny ryall
where as he entreats of it / but he describyng dictamnum / makes it to have
leaves like unto Penny ryall / but greater. Then when as dictamnus is well
known to have round leaves / so must also Pulegium have. It crepeth much upon
the ground and has many little round leaves / not unlike unto the leaves of
merierum gentil / but that they are a little longer and sharper / and also little
indented round about / and grener / then the leaves of merierum ar. The leaves
grow in little branches / even from the root / out of depiction of plant
Pulegium.
certain joints / by equal spaces one divided from an other. Where as ye
leaves grow in little tuftes upon the over parts of the branches / if the lower
parts touch the ground / right over against the tuftes of the leaves they take
roots in the ground / and grow as well as the first roots do: our common
Penny ryall has purple flowers / but there is an other kind mentioned in
Pliny / which has a white flour / which he calls the male / as he called the
common one the female. Penny ryall grows much with out any setting besyd
hundsley upon the heth / beside a watery place. It grows also much wild in
Germany in such pooles as ar full of water in winter / and ar al or for the
most part dried up in summer.

The virtues of Penny ryall out of Dioscorides.
PEnny ryall makes subtle / heateth and makes ripe. When it is dronke^ / it
draws forth flowers / secondes / and the birthe. Pe^ny ryall dronken with honey
and salt / brings forth such things as ar about the lunges. And it is good
for the cramp. If it be dronken with vinegre and water / it swageth the
lothsomnes / and the bytyng of the stomach. It brings forth Melancholi
through the belly. If it be dronken with wine / it is good for the bytyng of
venemus bestes. It refressheth them that swowne / if it be laid to the nose
with vinegre. If it be dried and broken into powder and burnt / it
streyngtheneth the goumes: it is good for ye gout / laid to by it self / until
the skin wex red. The brothe of it / takes away ach / if the place that acheth
be washed with it. It is good for the wyndynes / hardness / and the turnyng or
rysyng up of the mother / if the patient sit in the brothe of it.

Out of Pliny.
PEnny ryall droweth forth deed chylder / it is good for the falling siknes
given in the measur of and ounce and an half / in vinegre. If thou must needs
drynk vnholsum water / then put Penny ryall in to it. The flowers of the grene
herb set a fire / kylleth flees with the smell of it.

Out of the Arabianes.
PEnny ryall that grows about watery places / is hot and dry in the third
degree / because it is made of a fyrie substance with some burnt erthly part. And
that does the sharpnes of it show with a little bitterness. The second workings
of it ar to dissolve / to make subtle / and to dry. The third ar to provoke
water. Some hold that it is good against the lepre and for them that are bitten
of venummes bestes / chefely / if it be laid upon the bytynges. And it kills
also worms / which bread in the ears. And it of the mountayn / is stronger
and better then the other.

Of Pyrethro out of Dioscorides.
depiction of plant Pyrethrum.


PYrethrum is an herb which has a stalk and leaves like unto fenell or wild
daucus / and a shaddowy or spokye top with a round circle / as dyll. The root
is as great as a mannis thumb. It is excedyng hot and draws out waterish
fleme. Thus far Dioscorides / Nether it that Fuchsius and Matthiolus set forth
/ for Pyrethro / nether it that is comenly sold for Pyrethro / agrees hole
with the description of Dioscorides. For it that they set out / as their
figures show / has only a top and flowers like to camomyle / and no spoky top
like dyl. And nether the rout of their herb / nether of it that is commonly
sold is so byg as a mannis thumb. Therefore the other new kind of pylletori /
refused of Matthiolus / for his great excedyng heat / lyketh me better / if it
have leaves and other parts agreyng with the rest of the description / then
their Pyrethru^ does. What meruel is it if the lately found Pyrethrum be very
hot / when as Galene gives a blysteryng and burning nature unto Pyrethro. And
Dioscorides writes that the root of it is feruidissima / that is most hot or
burning. Therefore I se no cause why that Matthiolus should refuse it / for the
great heates sake / other marks and properties being present. And therefore I
wisshe that we might have the other Pyrethrum. For it agrees better with the
description of Dioscorides / as far as I have heard or red of it / then common
pilletori does.

The virtues of Pyrethro out of Dioscorides.
PYlletoris is good for the tuth ach if the tuth be washed with vinegre where
in it is sodden. It brings forth waterish fleme if it be chowed. If the body
be therewith anointed and with oil / it stereth a man to sweet. It is good for
long cold shaking. It is excellently good for any part of the body yt is
fundied or foundered or made almost number / with to much cold / and such as ar
stycken with the palsy.

Of diverse kinds of Pear trees and Pears.
PYrum is named in Greek (...) / in English a Pear / in Duche in Byr / in
French un Poyre. Dioscorides writes of two kinds of Pear trees of the
ortiard Peartre / which is comenly called in Greek (...) / and of the wyld Pere
tree or chouke Pere tree / or worry Pear tree / which is called in Greek (...), in
Latin Pyrus syluestris / or Pyraster. Both these kinds / ar so well known
that they need no description. We have many kinds of gardin Pears with us in
England / and some kinds better then ever I saw in Germany for holsomnes / and
some in Germany more pleasant and greater then ever I saw in England. I have red
in no old writer so many kinds of pears / as I read of in Plini / where of I
will show certain Latin names / and compare them with our English pears and
Duche pears / as well as I can. Pyra super ba / that is to say / proud pears
/ are little and sonest ripe / and these are called in Cambridge / midsummer
pears. Falerna pira have their name (says Pliny) of drinck / because they be
full of juice. These are called in some places watery pears / or moist pears.
Dolobelliana are the pears that have the long footstalkes. I remember not how
they be named in England. Fauoniana are read pears / a little bigger then the
midsummer pears. Autumnalia pira / that is the pears of the autumn / which
begins in the Septembre / are pleasant with a sour taste. Volema whereof
Virgil makes mention in the second book of his Georkes or husbandry / in this
verse: Crustumijs Syrijsque piris grauibusque nolemis.


They are named also of Cato / as Pliny writes / sementina and mustea. These
because they are very heavy as Virgil shows / and very great / as their name
betokens / for they seem to have their name of Vola / that is the holow place
or loof of a mannis hand / because they be as big as a man can grype in the
palm or loofe of his hand. These are comenly called in English wardens / if
they have a bynding / and be read / when as they are roasted / and endure unto
March or February. It appears that they have their name of long keeping / for
warden in Duche / from whence our English came / is to keep Serotina pira / are
they that hang upon their mother until winter / and wexe ripe with the frost.
These are partly our wardenes / and partly other long during pears / which
are called in Duch winter biren / and they may be well called in English /
winter pears. Pliny makes mention of diverse other sorts of pears /
whereunto because I can not compare any of our pears / I think it best to
pass the^ over in silence / lest I should talk of such things / as I have
no perfect knowledge of.

The virtues of pere trees and pears out of Dioscorides.
There ar many kinds of pears / and al ar binding: and for ye cause they are
used to be put into emplasters / which stop ye course of humors that rin to any
place. The broth of dried pears / stop the bellye. They are euel if they be
eaten fasting: ye juice of ye pear tree leaves / is good for ye biting of
venemus bestes. Wild pears ar more stoppyng and byndyng / then the gardin
pears ar. An so likewise ar their leaves more byndyng. The ashes of the Pear
tree / ar good against the stranglyng that comes of todestooles or
mushrummes. And when as wild Pears ar sodden with toodstoles they will not
hurt them that eat them.

Out of Aetius
THe leaves and twigges of the Pear tree / ar byndyng an tarte. The fruit has a
certain waterishe swetenes / where by a man may learn to know that the
complexion of it is not a like / in all parts. The Pears ar good for the
stomach / and quench thyrste / if they be taken in meat. But when as Pears ar
put in to emplasters they dry and coull mesurablely / so that I know that a
wound was healed there by.

Out of the Arabianes.
GReat Pears have more streingthe or virtue then little Pears have / And Pears
norish more then quinces do. A syrope made of the juice of Pears stops the
isshue of choler / or cholerik flix. And they make skin in the stomach if it be
gone of. Pears of their property that they have / bread the colike. Therefore
they that eat Pears / must drynk wine sodden with honey and spices (or any good
hypocras made of wine sugar and other warm spices.) Vnryp Pears ar cold and
dry. But ripe Pears ar temperat / in a mean between heat and cold / or they
bow a little to coldness. Pears yt ar very sweet (as Rasis writes) cool not /
nevertheless they bind all. But if they be taken after meat / they help to
drive furthe it that is in the guts / but yet for all that / they stopp
afterward.

Out of the Phisiciones of Salern.
Add pyro potum nux est medicina ueneno,
Fert pyra nostra pyrus sine uino sunt pyra uirus:
Cum coquis antidotum pyra sunt, sed cruda uenenum,
Cruda grauant stomachum, releuant pyra cocta grauatum,
Post pyra da potum, post pomaque uade cacatum.


that is / After Pears drynk a walnut / is a remedy against poison. Our
peartre brings forth Pears / but pears ar poison with out wine. When as
thou sethest Pears / they are a triacle / or preservative: but raw / they are
poison. Raw Pears burden the stomach / but roasted or sodden / relefe and
lighten the stomak. After Pears give drynk / but after apples go to the stool.

Out of Symeon Sethi.
Pears ar cold in the first degree / and drying in the second: But they that are sweter / and ripe / they have some part of heat and moisture. But they that
have a menged nature / whether they be sweet and byndyng / or sourish / or
whether they have a little drynes / if they be taken before meat / they stopp
the belly. If a man fill him self with pears of times / they bread the colik /
but they are good for hot stomachs. The granes that are found in Pears / of a
certain property that they have / ar good for the kydnees.

Of the oak tree.
depiction of plant Quercus.


ALlthoughe quercus in Latin be the tree which is called in English an Oak tree /
or in ye North country an Eike tree / in Duche ein Eichbaum / yet (...) and
(...) in Greek / and glans in Latin: are common unto many mo trees then unto the
oak and to his fruit. For dris is common unto diverse kinds of trees / as
Dioscorides and Theophrast bear witness. And balanos is common to al their
fruits / and so is glans common unto many fruits of trees / first to the
fruit of the oak and to the fruit of roboris / esculi / cerri and suberis. For
all these trees bring forth glandes / and are called in Latin / arbores
glandifere. But none of all these grow in England / sauinge only the oak whose
fruit we call an Acorn / or an Eykorn / that is ye corn or fruit of an Eike.
Some make two kinds of oaks / the one that bears only akornes / and oak
apples. And an other kind / that is much less (as they say) then the common
oak / that we use commonly to bylding of houses. I have not seen any galls in
England growing upon oak leaves. But I have seen them growing upon oak leaves /
not only in Italy / but also in very great plenty in East Fresland / in a wod a
little from Aurike.

The galls of Italye come to perfection / and are at leyngth hard / but they
of Freslande / being ones taken with cold wether / and moist / are never hard
but soft. Not withstanding I have proved that they serve well to make ynke of.
Indede the oaks that have the galls growing upon their leaves in Fresland /
are less then our oaks be. But I thynk that the cause is either that they are
but young trees / and have been but of late set / or they are so often hewn down
(for there is very small store of wod in all Fresla^d) that they can not come
unto any perfect greatness. If there be such diversity of oaks / that some will
bear galls / and some will bear none: it were well done / to fetch some from
Fresland / and to plant them in some hot sunnye place of England / to se
whether the air of the country or kind of tree or no is ye cause that galls
grow upon some oak leaves / and not upon other some. It was told me by a learned
man / a friend of mine / that in the year of our lord M.D.LVII. that there was
a great plentye of galls found upon oak leaves in the North country of England
/ and namely about Hallyfax. Wherefore it appears that the heat helps much
to the bring forth of galls. But howsoever the matter is: it were good to
prove whether ye Frese oak would also with us bring forth galls or no / as
they do in Freseland. If they will bring forth such / then shall they bring
great profit to the realm: if they bring not forth / there is not past an half
crown lost / and experience worth three crounes should be learned thereby.

The virtues of the oak tree and the fruit thereof.
EVery kind of oak has a binding and stopping nature / and specially that
part that grows between the bole or body of the tree and the bark like a filme
or a rim. The filme also that is under the shelle of the akorne / binds also.
The broth of these are given unto them that have the blodye flixe / and to stop
blood. The same made after the manner of a suppositorie / and put into the
convenient place / stops the isshue of weomen. The akornes are of the same
virtue that the skins be of: they make water come forth. If they be eaten
they bread wind and make the headache. The same eaten withstand the biting of
venomous beasts. The broth of the bark / with kowes milk dronken / is good
against poison. Akornes raw if they be broken and laid to / swage hot
burninges. They are good with salt and swynes grese for very sore hard lumpes
and sores very hard to be healed. A gall is the fruit of an oak / and
specially of the lefe. Of galls are two sorts / the one is called omphacitis
/ and it is but little / and has the form of a man's knockle / or of the
ioynte of a man: and it is sound and has no hole. The other is smooth and has
no hole in it. But it that is called omphacitis / is to be chosen which has
most streynght. They bind both very much: they hold down / when as they are
broken and laid to: the outgrowynges of flesh / ye isshues of the mouth that
childer have most comonlye. The inner part of the gall within the shell put
into the holes of the teth / swage the ach of the^. The same burnt upon the
cooles / and quenched with wine or vinegre / or bryne made with vinegre /
stop blood. It is good for weomen to sit in the broth of them against the
falling of the mother / and against the isshue of the same. They are good for
the blody flix / and the other also / either laid to with wine or water. To
conclude ye may use galls as often as ye have need to stop and to dry.

Out of Galene.
ALl parts of the oak are bindinge or stoppinge. I remember that ones I healed
a wound / that was made with an hatchet / with the leaves of an oak / when as
there was no other medicine at hand. I ground ye leafes upon a smoth stone / and
I laid yt bruised lefe upon ye wound / and about every place about it. The
fruit of the oak has like pour with the leaves. Some use the fruit of the oak
against inflammationes at the first beginning of them. For such
inflammationes as are very great need not bindinge medicines. The gall is dry
in the third degree / and cold in the second. The gall / if it be sodden by
it self / and afterward broken / and made after the manner of an emplaster / is
a good remedy against the inflammation or burning heat of the fundament / and
for the falling down of the same. When as ye will seth the gall / if the
disease require great adstriction / or bindyng / then sethe it in wine. If it
require but little / then sethe it in water. And if ye will have it yet more
binding / seth it in rough of harrish wine.

Out of Simeon Sethi.
A Corns are hard of digestion and norishe very much. But they go slowly
down / and they make raw humores. Wherefore we forbid the use of them for
meats.

Of Cinkfoly, or five fingred grass.
depiction of plant Quinque folium primum.
depiction of plant Quinque folium secundum.


depiction of plant Quinque folium luteum minus.


QVinque foliu^ is named in Greek (...) / i^ English Cinkfoly or fyuefyn gred
grass or herb five lefe / in Duch funffinger kraut / in French quintefuille.
Herb fyuelefe / as Dioscorides writes / has small strawish branches a span
long. And in them grows the fruit or sede (as some translate here in this
place (...)) It has leaves like minte / five growing out of every lefe stalk /
and seldom more / divided or grapped like a saw / and it has a flower whitish
pale / with the lykenes of gold. It grows in watery places / beside diches
and condites: it has a long redish root / thicker then it of black hellebor.
Thus far Dioscorides.

Dioscorides makes but one kind of Cinkfolye / but other after him / have
found out four kinds / whereof they make sanicle one kind / but without
reason in my judgment. I know three notable kinds. The first is the common five
leued grass that grows every where. The second kind is many parts greater /
and grows only in pooles / and merrish grou^des commonly overflowed with
water. The third kind is it (as I guess) that Pliny speaks of / where he
makes cinkfoly to bear strauberries / I found ones this kind (except I be
deceived) growing upon the walls of a city called Cour / in the land of
chetia / a little from the Mayn alps. The leaves and stalks were all rough /
the flowers were yelow. And where as ye flowers were fallen of / there saw I in
some little knoppes like unto strawberries / which upon the one side were whitish
/ and upon the other side redish / as far as I can remember / which as I
thought by the tokens yt I saw then appearinge / if they might have crommed
unto their ripenes / should have been either right strawberries / or ellis a
fruit much like the^. But because I saw not the fruit ripe in his perfection:
I dare not give sentence that it was a right strawberry. But it is very lykely
that the often sight of such / made Pliny judge / that Cinkfoly did bring forth
strawberries.

The virtues of herb five lefe out of Dioscorides.
THe broth of the rote sodden until the third part be sodden away / and
stanche the tuth ache if it be holden in the mouth. The Same stops the
rotting sores of the mouth / if it be washed therewith. It heals the roughnes
or sharpnes of the windpype if ye gargle with it. It is good against the blodye
flix and other flixes. Also if it be dronken / it is good for the pain of the
joints / and in the huckelbone / called Sciatica. The Same sodden in vinegre
and broken and laid to / stays and holds back crepinge sores called
Herpetas: it drives away wennes and hard swellings and windy swellings / and
heals the enlarginges of wind or pulls veins / called aneurismata /
impostemes / hot infla^mations called erysipelata / agwayles in the fingres /
or toes / hard lumpes that put forth blood in the fundament or mother / and
also scabbes and scuruines. The juice of ye young root is good for the diseases
of the liver and lunges / and are also good for deadly poison. The leaves are
dronken with mede / or honye / water / or with watered wine / and a little peper
against agues that come again at certain times. Dioscorides says further
(but me thynk / that it smells of superstition) that in a quartayn / the
leaves of four stalks ought to be taken / in a tertian the leaves of three / and
in a quotidiane the leaves of one stalk. If it be dronken xxx. days together:
it is good for the falling siknes. The juice of ye leaves dronken in the mesure
of three ciates that is in v. ounces or thereabout: heals quickly the iaundes
or guelsought. If it be laid to with honye and salt / it is good for fistules
and wounds: it is also good for the brekinge or bursting of the bowelles /
both laid to without and also dronken / and so is it also good for the bursting
out of blood.

Out of Galene.
THe root of the fiueleued grass dries excedingly / and is very little
sharp. Wherefore it is greatly used / as all other herbs be / which being of
five and subtle parts yet dry with all.

Of radice or radish.
THe herb which is called in English / radice or radish / in Duche Rettich /
in French / Rave or Refort / is named in Greek / (...) and (...) / and in
Latin Radix / and of some radicula. But some of the old Greek writers used this
word (...) for cole / whereof Pliny took occasion of error / give unto radice
that which belonged unto cole.

The description.
RAdice has leaves like unto rapes leaves / and mustarde leaves / but there
are more spread upon the ground: the stak is great and round: the flowers are
white / the sede which is brown and torning a littel to reddishe / is
contained in little coddes / there are two kinds of gardin radice / whereof one
with a long rowt / which is very common in England / and in law Duche land:
and this kind is called of some Radix cleonia / and of other Radix algidensis /
and yt other depiction of plant Radix primum.
depiction of plant Radix secundum.
depiction of plant Radix tertium.
with a round root / not much unlike unto a rape. This kind is more common
about Strasbourgk in high Germany / then in an other place that ever I came
in: this kind is called of some Radix Beotia / and of other Radix Syriaca: it
is seldom seen in England / but it may be named round radice / or rape radice
/ or Almayne radice.

There is yet an other kind of radice / whereof Dioscorides / and Pliny make
mention of / and it is called in Greek / (...) / in Latin Armoratia / in
Italian / as Mathiolus says Ramoracia. Dioscorides writes yt wild Radice
has leaves like unto the gardin radish / sauinge that they are more like the
herb called Lapsana: If this be true / all they have erred / which have
taught that the great herb / which has leaves like unto a great dock / and
a very sharp / and bitinge route / called in Duche Mer rettich / and in
English redcole / should be Armoracia or radix syluestris / for there is no
lykenes between the lefe of a dock / and tame or gardin radice.

Therefore seeing that Dioscorides makes the leaves of the wild radishe like
unto the leaves of the gardin radice and to lampsana / which I take to be a
kind of carlok / this herb with the dockes leaves can not be radix
syluestris. The Same Dioscorides writes that the wild radice has a small
tender or soft route / and somthinge sharp or bitinge as the common Greek
text has / but better textes have instead of malache / makra / that is
long. But the red cole / which many of the Germaynes take for wild radice /
and Armoracia has a great and a very sharp or bytinge route / wherefore it can
not be radix syluestris Dioscorides.

Now it will be required of me / what I do take for the wild radice: surely I
take for it an herb which is named about Weissenburg / where as I did dwell /
Weissen hederich / and of some Wildt rettich: this herb grows always in that
country amongst the rapes: it is very like the carlock / but it is lower /
and it has a white flower / and a small route / but somthinge of the taste /
and somthynge of the form of the longer radishe: the leaves are cut / and
indented / as the gardin radice leaves are / and somthynge smother / then the
carlocks leaves. It appears that Pliny took this herb for lapsana lib. xx.
cap. ix. and falsely set it among the kinds of kole / when as he ought to have
set it amongst the kinds of radice / for Pliny in diverse places / names it
radice / that he should name cole / as he does in the eleventh book / and
three and twintigest chapter / and in the seuententh book / and four and
twintigest chapter / and so it appears that he takes cole also in the stead
of radice / and confounds the one with the other.

The words of Pliny that make me judge thus of him / are these. Inter
syluestres brassicas and lapsana / est pedalis altitudinis / hirsutis folijs /
napi similimis / nisi candidior esset flore. I moved with these words with
Pliny a great while took wild radice or hederick / for lapsana / but after
more diligent examinacion / I found that it was radix syluestris in
Dioscorides / that lapsana was an other herb.

The virtues of radice or radish.
THe radice bredeth wind / and heateth: it is plesaunt to the mouth / and
evil for the stomach. It moves belchynge / and makes a man make water / and
is good for the belly / that is to make a man go to the stool. If it be taken
before meat / it holds up / wherefore it is good for them that would vomit /
if it be taken before: it quickens the wits of senses / it is good for an
old cough / and for them that bread gross humores in their breasts / if it be
sodden and eaten. If the bark of it be taken with honied vinegre / it stereth
vomit the more. It is fit for the dropsey. It is also good to be laid upon them
that are diseased in the milt / with honey it stays freting sores / and takes
away blewe marks. It helps them also that are bitten of a viper or adder.
It fills up with heir again the places that were bared with scaldnes: and
with the mele of darnell it wastes away frickelles. Both in meat and drink
it is good for them that are allmoste strangled with todstoles / and brings
weomen down their flowers / the sede stereth on to vomit / and makes one
piss well: the same droncken / wastes the milt: it is good for the sqwinsey /
if ye seth it with honied vinegre / and gargle with the broth of it / being
hot in your mouth: it is a remedy against the biting of the beast called
Cerastes / if it be dronken with wine. The same laid to with vinegre / does
mightily stowre away gangrenes / or extreme hot sores.

The nature of the wild radice.
THe wild radice heateth / and provoke a man to make water / and it is full
of heat / the roots and leaves are sodden and eaten after the manner of other
eatable herbs.

Out of Galene.
THe radice is hot in the third degree / and dry in the second. But the
wild is stronger in both those qualites / wherefore there seems to be a faut
in the text of Dioscorides / where as he has (...) / because also Dioscorides
says his self afterward / (...).

The sede also is stronger then the herb / it has the power to make ripe: and
therefore it is good for bruised / and such like blewe places / Towns men or
citizens use to eat radice raw / with a salt sauce like salt fish bryne /
without vinegre / at the beginning of their dynner or supper to make their
bellies soluble: I marvel not only at unlearned / but also at Phisiciones /
which eat radices after supper and that raw to help their digestion: they say
that they have experience that it will do so: yet for all that their has been
no man which has followed them without hurt: hitherto Galene.

Of the rape or turnepe.
RApum named in Greek (...) / and is called in English of them of the South
country / turnepe / of other country men a rape / in Duche rube^ / in French
naueau / in Spanishe nabos / in Italian rape.

There are three kinds of rapes / one gardin rape which is round and very
great / and an other gardin rape / which goes out abroad / as Pliny writes
/ and the third which is called the wild rape / and it rinneth forth a long.

Theophrast divides the rape into the male / and the female / and writes that
they grow both of one sede / and that the rapes sawen / and set thick together
/ grow al into males / and if they be thynner set / they grow into females /
where upon a man may gather that the great headed ones / are the^ females / and
the longer and smaler headed / are the males / because thick setting of headed
routes commonly makes them small / and the thin setting / makes them
greater / as the fat ground also makes greater / and the leaner ground the
less and thinner.

The great round rape / called commonly a turnepe / grows in very great
plenty in all Germany / and more about London / then in any other place of
England that I know of: but the long rooted rape / grows very plenteously a
little from Linne / where as much oil is made of the sede of it.

The gardin rape is so well known that it needs no description / and
therefore Dioscorides does not describe it.

And allthough Dioscorides does describe the wild rape / yet could I never
find any herb that answered in all points unto that description. And though
I following my masters / have thought yt the common rapuncel should be ye
rapistru^ or rapum syluestre / yet after more streit examinacion I found yt
the description of Dioscorides in diverse points did not agree with it.

The virtues of the rape.
THe rout of the rape sodde^ / norisheth / bredeth wind / and makes a louse
flesh / and stirs a man to Venery. The broth of rape is good to be poured
upon gouty members / and kybed or moolde heles. But yt rape it self / broken /
and laid to / is also good for the same purpose: if ye make an hole in the
rape / and put in it the cerat of roses / and set it in ye ashes until it be
molten / it is very good for the kybes or mooles yt have the skin of. If ye eat
sperage with rapes / then it will provoke a man to make water: the sede is very
mete to be in preservatives and triacles / and such co^positiones as stanche or
lysse ache. The same dronken / is a present remedy against poysened and deadly
drinks. The same sede of rapes stereth up also the pleasure of ye body: the
rape laid up in bryne / norisheth less / but it makes a man to have an
appetite to meat. Dioscorides makes no mention of any norishement / yt the
wild rape should give / but that it serves for scouring oyntmentes / and
sopes / for the beautyfyeng of the face / and other places of the body.

Out of Galene.
ALl that stands out of the ground / is fit to be eaten / as an eatable herb
/ ye root which is in ye ground / is hard and not mete to be eaten / but when
it is sodden in water / it is meruell / if any of the like kinds of herbs
norish less / it makes a juice in the body grosser the^ measurable: wherefore
if a man eat of it out of measure / it engenders a raw juice / specially if
the stomach yt receives it be weyke: it requires long sething / and it is
most to be commended that is twice sodden: if it be taken something to raw / it
is harder to digest / and it is full of wind / and hurtful to the stomach /
and sometime it grypeth or viteth the stomach.

Out of Simeon Sethi.
THe rapes are hot in the second degree / and moist in ye first / they norish
sufficiently / and provoke urine / and inge^dre much sede / and swage ye
roughnes of ye throt and breast. If they be eaten with salt and vinegre / they
stere up an appetite: Rapes of a certain property that they have by them
selves / are good for the whyt slaw / and such like diseases of the nails.

Out of Aurrois.
RApes are hot / and moist / and bread wind / and stere up pleasure of ye
body / because they heat the kidnes / and they have a marvelous propertye to
light the eyes / or to make the eye sight clear.

Of Crowfoot kingeux or gollande.
depiction of plant Ranunculi prima species.
depiction of plant Ranunculus satiuus.
depiction of plant Ranunculum tertium.
depiction of plant Ranunculum quartum.
depiction of plant Ranunculum quintum.
depiction of plant Ranunculum sextum.
depiction of plant Ranunculum septimum.


RAnunculus is called in Greek (...) / in English / Crowfoot or kingeux / or
in some other places a golla^de / is named in Duch hanenfuss. There are many
kinds of crowfootes / but they have all one streynght / that is biting and
very blystring: one of them has leaves like unto Coriander / but brother /
something whitish and fat / a yelowe flower / and sometime purple / a stalk not
thick / but of a cubite heyght / a little route / white / which has little
things / like small thredes / cominge out after the manner of hellebor / or
neseworte / it grows beside ryuers: there is also an other kind / which is
more hory / and with a longer stalk / which has many cuttinges / or iagginges
in the leaves / and it grows much i^ Sardinia / and it is very sharp / and
they call it also wild persely. The third kind is very little / and has a
grievous smell: the flower of it is like unto gold. The fourth kind is like
unto it / with a flower of the color of milk.

Beside these kinds of Crowfoot / which Dioscorides has here described:
there are five other kinds at ye least / whereof the first kind has round and
somthynge indented leaves like unto tunhoue / with a root very round /
having little tassels / in that place that is next to the ground like a leke.
This kind grows plenteously in my orchard at Wyssenburg.

The second kind has leaves like the head of a lance / and it is called of
some lanceola / and in some places of England / Spear worte / it grows always
in moist and watery places.

The third kind is like the common soft in all points / saving that it is so
sweet / that it is eaten as a sallet herb about Mentz in Germany / where as it
is called smalt wort / and suess hanfuss.

The fourth kind is one of the two with a white flower / whereof the one
grows in woddes and shaddish places / in April / and the other kind swimmeth
above the water in poules / for the most part of Summer: for when as
Dioscorides makes but one kind of Ranunculus with a white flower / the one of
them therefore before named / must be none of his Ranunculus / but an other.

The fyfte kind is it that may be called for the great number of leaves yt it
has: in the flower Ranunculus polyanthos / and I do not dout / but beside
these / there are yet mo kinds of Crowfoote / then Dioscorides has made
mention of.

The propertye of Crowfoot out of Dioscorides.
THe leaves and tender young stalks / if the be laid unto any place / ^o make
blisters and a scabby crust with pain: it takes away ^ough scabby nails / and
the scabbes them selves / it puts away also printes of wounds / and little
marks like pricks / also if they be laid to / within a little while they take
away hanging wartes / and such as have the form of pysimpres / and they take
also away the head / it is good to wash the mouldnes of ones heles / with the
broth of it. The dry powder of the rout in ones nose / provoke nesing / and
if it be laid to ones toth / it will ease the pain / but it will break the
toth.

Of the bushe called Rhamnus.
RHamnus is a bushe that grows about hedges / and has twigges that grow
right up / and sharp pricks / as the hawthorn has / it has little leaves /
and somthinge long / and somthinge fat and soft / there is an other kind that
is whyter / and the third kind has black leaves / and a brother / with a
certain light rednes / and rods of five cubits high more full of pricks /
but the pricks are weaker and not so styffe / but the fruit is broad / white /
thin / and as it were little vessels made to hold sede in / like unto a
whorle.

depiction of plant Rhus.


Of these three kinds of Rhamnus / when I was in Italy / I saw but one kind /
that is the third kind / which has the round leaves / where as I saw it / it
was called Christ's thorn / as though Christ had been crouned with rhamnus /
I never saw it in England / and therefore I know no English name for it.
But it may be called either Christ's thorn / or buklars thorn / of the fashon
of the fruit or round ramnes / of the brodnes of the leaves in comparison of
the other two kinds / it grows in the mount Appennine a little from Bononye:
Matthiolus sets two kinds forth that I never saw.

The virtues of Rhamnus.
THe leaves if they be laid to / are good for wild fires / and great hot
infla^mationes / some hold that the bows of it set at men's doors / or
windows / do drive away sorcery / and inchanteme^tes / that wyches and
sorcerers do use against men.

Of the bushe called Sumach out of Dioscorides.
RHus is called of the Arabianes and apothecaries Sumach / it may be called in
English also. The Sumach which is used for a sauce unto meats / which some call
read: is the fruit of the lether Sumach / which has the name of lether /
because men use it to thick lether therewith: it is a littel tree growinge in
rocks of two cubits high / wherein are long leaves / somthinge redish /
indented roundabout like a saw / the fruit is like unto small clusters of
grap^s / of the bigness of a turpentine and a little brother.

Out of Galene.
SVmach is a busshye shrub / and does bind together and dries / for the
lether dyers / or tannares use this same bushe to dry and to bind together:
depiction of plant Rhuc.
together: the physiciones use chefely the berryes thereof / and the juice
which is of a very tarte taste and bindinge with all / it is dry in the
third degree / and cold in the second.

This Sumach that Dioscorides and Galen makes mention of / grows in no place
of England / or Germanye that ever I saw / but I have seen it in Italy / a
little from Bononye in the mount Appennine / it may be called in English Sumach
/ as the Appotecaries and Arabianes do.

The virtues of Sumach.
THe leaves have a bindinge pour / and serve for ye same purpose that Acasia
serves for. The broth of them makes ones heir black / and they are good to
be poured in / or to be sitten over / or to be dronken for the bloody flixe /
they are good to be poured into the ears that have water runninge out of them
/ if they be laid to with vinegre or honye / they stay and hold in aguayles
/ and deadly burning sores / called ga^grenes: but the juice or broth of the
withered leaves sodden in water / until they come to the thicknes of honye /
they serve for the same purpose that Licium does: the fruit can do all the
same things / and is fit in sauces for meat / for them that have the common
flixe or bloody flixe / it defends from inflammation or burning / if it be
laid to with water / bruised places / and the uttermost pates are / which pared
of / and blew places also. It scoureth away the roughnes of the tongue / menged
with honey / it stays also the white flowers / and heals the emroddes / or
flowing of the blood of the fundament / laid to with the cole of an oak tree /
beaten into powder: but the broth of this is sodden and congeled together / and
after a manner does better the same things / then the first does. It brings
also forth a gum which is good to be put in a hollow toth / to stanche the
ache thereof.

Of the herb called in English palma Christi.
depiction of plant Ricinus.


RICinus is called i^ Greek Cici / or Croton / in English palma Christi / or
ticke sede because it is like a tycke / it is called in Duch / Wonder baum /
Kreutz baume / and zekke^ korner / in French Palma Christi. It grows only
in gardines / so far as ever I could se.

Palma Christi which has the name of a man's hand / with the fingers
stretched out / when it is grown up: it is like unto a young fig tree / and
has leaves like unto a plain tree and hollow / stakles like a riede / the sede
grows in clustars which are roughe and sharp without: but when the husk is
of / then it looks very like a dog louse / which is called a tyke: it
grows often times so high / as though it were a tree / but as son as the
froste comes / it perishes suddenly. Some call this herb also Cataputiam
maiorem / and some call it Karuam.

The virtues of palma Christi.
MEn use to press out of the sede of Palma Christi an oil / called in Latin
oleum cicinum and ricininum / which is nothing mete for meat / but for lamps
and emplasters / xxx. corns pilled / broken and dronken / drive thorough by
the belly / sleme coler and water / they provoke also a man to vomit / but this
purginge is very unpleasant and paynfull and overthrows the stomach / the
same kirnelles bruised and laid to / scour away freckelles and little hard
swellings / and such spots as come by the heat of the same: but the leaves
broken and bruised / and laid to with the mele of perched barley / swage the
swellings and inflammationes of the eyes / the same laid to either by them
selves / or with vinegre / swage the breasts or pappes swellinge / with to
much plenty of milk / and the grievous inflammation / called saint Antonies
fire.

Of the Rose.
depiction of plant Rosa.


ROsa is named in Greek Rodon / in English a rose / in Duche ein rosen / in
French un rose. The rose is so well known that it needs no description /
Dioscorides makes mention but of one kind of roses / but Mesue makes two
kinds / that is of the whyt and read: but sense Mesues time / there are found
diverse other kinds as Damask rosens / incarnation roses / musk roses / with
certain other kinds / whereof is no mention in any old writer.

The propertye of the rose out of Dioscorides.
THe rose cools and binds. But the dry roses do bind more / the juice
ought to be pressed out of the tender roses / after that which is named the
nail / be cut away: for that part is it which is white in the leaf / the
rest of it should be pressed and bruised in a mortar in the shadow unto it be
grown together / and so should it be laid up for eye medicines / so are the
leaves also dried in the shadow / so that they be often turned / that they
moulde not / it yt is pressed out of the dried roses sodden in wine. It is good
for ye head ache / the ache of the eyes / of the ears / of the gummes / of the
fundament / of the right gutte / and of the mother / if it be laid to with a
fether / or poured on. But if they be laid to after that they are bruised
without any pressing / they are good for the outrageous heat of the midryf /
and against the lousenes of the stomach that comes of moisture / and against
saint Antonies fire / when as they are dried and broken / they are sprenched
amongst the thyghes or shares / they are mengled with medicines called anthera
/ and preservative medicines for wounds. But the flower that is found in the
mids of the rose / is good against the reume or flowing of the gummes / if it
be laid on dry. But the heads dronken / stop the belly / and casting out of
blood.

Out of Galene.
THe rose is of a waterish hot substance / joined with two other qualites /
that is to wete binding and bitter / the flower is more binding then the roses
selves be: and therefore it dries more.

Out of Mesue.
THe rose is cold in the first degree / and dry in the second / and is
compounded / and made of two diverse / and separable substances of a watery /
which is measurable / and of an erthly bynding / giving unto it much matter /
but of an aerish sweet and spicye / and fyrye and fine / of which comes the
bitterness / the leaves the perfection and the form or beautye. But ye power of
the fyrie substance which has driven in the beautye the rednes / is stronger
then it that brought in the bitterness / and for this cause with only dryinge:
this propertye is lost / which the other abide still / which if they perish /
it shall be no more a rose / then a deed man / is a man / yet the grene roses
are more bitter then binding / and by the reason of this bitterness / grene or
moist roses purge / and that cheflye with their juice / but when they are
dried / the heat being resolved / which makes the bitterness / they show a
substance binding or drawing together. The juice of rosens is hot almost in
the first degree / because it is syfted and sondred from the earthly and cold
substance / it purges and resolves / opens / and scoureth / but the dry
rose is colder and more binding / and that yet more which was not yet fullye
grown: and the white more / then the read: the rose also resolves and
quenches out hot distemperatures / and strengthens and bindinge together
the parts / and does it most with the sede and little heirs that are found in
the mids of the sede vessels: When as there are read roses and whyt / and
of both the kinds / some have many leaves / and some few / and some have plain
leaves / and some have curbed / in both the kinds / that is better whose
natural color is perfitter / and has fewer leaves and playner. The white roses
purge nothing at all / or ellis very little / but they bind and strenghten
more then the read do. The juice of them that are full ripe / are better / and
so is the water better wherein the ripe roses are steped in. It scoureth the
blood of the veins and arteries / from yelow choler of galle / it is good for
the iaundes / for it opens and scoureth away the stoppinges of the stomach
and liver / it streinghteneth the heart and stomach / and heals ye trimbling
of the heart: the cause being emptied out before. It is good for choleric
agewes: Rose oil conforteth the same parts / that the stilled water of roses
does / they streingth the louse substance in driving them together / and
fortifye the holding pour / they put out all hot burninge / and staunche the
ache that comes thereof / they make a man sleep / but they provoke a man to
nese / and stere a man to the pose / and they are evil for rheumatike person^s
/ they fasten the vuula and the throppel or throat / and strenghten the^ / and
take dronkennes away. The rose seeing that it is a gentle medicine / but weyke
in purging / it has need of helper as whay / honey: for an ounce of the juice of
roses / with two or three ounces of whay / with a little spicknarde / does purge
well / the leaves of roses infused in whay and pressed out with honye purge
also without any grefe.

The syrop of the juice of roses / and of roses themselves does purge also
gently: Roses condited in honye / scour / purge and strengthen: but condited
with sugar / they scour less / but they strengthen more. The water wherein
roses have been infused / clengeth / scoureth and purges. And distilled water
strenghteneth / but it purges not / for the purging and scouringe virtue /
because the subtle heat of it / is dissolved away with the fire. Vinegre of
roses staunche all kinds of inflammaciones and hot burninges / it cutteth in
sonder / and scoureth and conforteth or strenghteneth. The roses specially
being fresh / can abide no sething: for their purging and scouringe virtue is
driven away by the fire: the juice of roses by measurable seething / is made
more fyner / and scoureth more myghtely. Oil that is made of unripe olives /
set in the son with unripe leaves of roses / does myghtely resolve: the juice
of roses is given from an ounce unto ij: the syrop with the juice of them is
taken from two ounces unto five.

Of Madder.
depiction of plant Rubia satiua.
depiction of plant Rubia syluestris.


RVbia is named in Greek Erithrodanon / in English madder / in Duche rote aut
/ farber / rote / in French garance.

Rubia is a read dying rout / whereof one kind is wild / and an other kind is
set and trimmed: the stalks of madder are four squared / long / rough / like
unto the stalks of gooshareth / but in all points greater and stronger /
having leaves by certain spaces / going between one order of leaves / and an
other in every ioynte or kne like unto sterres going roundabout. The sede is
round / first grene / and after read / and last when it is ripe / black. The
route is small / long / read / and provoke a man to make water. The greater
kind of the madder which uses to be set / and planted / grows very
plenteously in many places of Germany / but in greatest plenty that I know
about Spyre. The wild kind grows plenteously both in Germanye in woddes /
and also in England / and in the most that ever I saw / is in the isle of
Wight. But the farest and greatest that ever I saw / grows in the lane of
beside Wynchester / in the way to South hampton.

The virtue of Madder.
THe rote causes a man to make water: wherefore if it be dronken with mede / it
heals the guelsought or iaundes. It healed also the sciatica and the palsy.
It drives out much and gross urine / and sometime blood. But they that drink
it daily / ought to be washed in a bath / and to se the difference of those
things that are emptied forth / the juice dronken with the leaves / is good for
them that are bitten of venomous beasts. The sede dronken with honied vinegre
/ called oximell / melts away the milt. The root laid to: dryueth forth
both the birth and the flowers / and also the secondes / if it be laid to with
vinegre / it heals white freckelles.

Of the Bramble bushe or blaak berrye bushe.
RVbus is also called in Latin Sentis / in Greek Batos / in English a bramble
bushe / or a black berrye bushe / in Duche ein Bromber / in French Rouce.

There are two kinds of this bramble / one that grows commonly in hedges
and with other busshes / and an other kind that grows in small ylandes of
fresh waters / and about rivers sides / and also in corn feldes. This is
called of some Chamebatos. As the great kind has always black berries when
they are ripe / and full of seeds: so the lesser kind has sometime read
berries / when as they are ripe and but a few seeds. But that they are much
pleasanter to eat then the greater berries be.

The virtues of the bramble bushe and berries.
depiction of plant Rubus.


THE bramble binds / dries and dies heir. The broth of the branches if it
be dronken / it stops the belly / and stays the isshew that weome^ have /
and it is good for the biting of ye serpent called prester: they streingthen
the goumes: and the leaves chewed / heal the diseases of the mouth. They stay
rinninge sores / they heal rinning sores in the head / they are also a remedy
for the eyes that fall down / the leaves are good to be laid upon hard
swellings of the fundament / and to the emrodes / the leaves are also good to
be used against the ache of the stomach / and for the diseases called Cardiaca
passio. The stalks or branches use to be bruised with the leaves / and ye
juice to be pressed out / and to be dried up in the son into and hard lump /
which is singularely good against the diseases before named.

The juice of the berry of a bramble bushe / if it be full ripe / is fit for ye
medicines of the mouth. The bellye may be stopped by eating of the berry half
ripe / and also with the flower dronken in wine. Galene beside all these
properties that he confesses / that the bramble has / writes also that the
bark of the route of the bramble / breaks also the stone.

Of the Brere bushe or Hep tree or Brere tree.
RVbus canis or canirubus is named in Greek Kynosbatos / in English a Brere
bushe / or of other some an help tree / in Duche Wild rosen / or heck rofen.

The description of the Hep tree.
THe Hep tree is a bushe like a tree / much greater then a black berry / or
bramble bush / it has leaves much brother then the myrtell has / with strong
pricks about the bows / it has a white flower / and a long fruit / like
unto depiction of plant Rubus canis.
the kyrnell of an olive / which when as it is ripe / is fair read / and
within it has down like flackes.

By this description of Dioscorides may diverse errores be confuted / first
theyrs that take rubum canis / for the bramble and there is also yt hold that
hold styflye / that rubus canis is our hawthorn / for nether the fruit of the
black berry bushe is long / nether has any down in it / nether has the fruit
of the hawthorn any down or flocks with in it / wherefore seeing that the fruit
of rubi canini has down in it / and nether the fruit of the black berry tree
/ nether of the hawe tree has any in it / nether of these can be rubus canis.

As touching the Eglentine I take it to be a several kind from the brere /
and reken it to be the bushe that is called of good writers Kynorrodon / or
rosa canina.

The virtues of the Brere tree, or Hep tree.
THe fruit of the brere called an Hep / if it be dried / and the down that is
within taken out / stops the belly / whereby a man may gather that it
binds strongly. But the leaves bind weykely. Ye must beware that ye eat none
of the down that is within. For it is very perilous for ye throat and wind
pype. Let them therefore take heed that make tartes of Heppes / that they purge
them well from the down. The tartes made only of Heppes serve well to be eaten
of the^ that vomit to much / or have any flixe / whether it be the blody flixe
or the common flixe.

Of the busshe called raspis or hindberry.
depiction of plant Rubus.


RVbus ideus is named in Greek Batos idea / in English Raspis or Raspices /
and in the North country Hyndeberries / in Duche Hyndbere / in French Frambois.

Rubus ideus as Dioscorides writes / has that name because it grows very
plenteously in the hill Ida. This bushe is much tenderer / then the common
bramble bushe / and is roughe or sharp / with fewer pricks: howbeit / it may
be found in some places without any pricks at all.

The bushe that I take for the right Rubo ideo / grows in the great high
hills a littel above Bo^ne / and in East Fresland in a wod beside Anrik / and
in many gardines of England. It has much smother stalks then the bramble /
and no great howky pricks at all / the berries are read.

Matthiolus writes that there is in the mountains of Trent / a kind that
has read berries and very pleasant / and without kirnelles / which some of the
later writers have judged to be rubum ideum. But he says he can not se how /
that it can be proved to be so. For when as Dioscorides says / that rubus
ideus has the name of idea / he supposes that there upon it may be well
gathered / perchance not unadvisedly that rubus ideus grows no where ellis /
but in Ida / as radix idea does / and as dittani / the right grows only in
Candy / except a man take this word idam / for growing upon the mountayn.
Because this kind of argument is often used of Mathiolus / I think now that is
mete / because the place requires (...) confute this kind of argument /
because he uses it in confuting the truth / which other men found that he
could understand and consent unto. If this be a good argument / rubus ideus
grows in plenty in Ida / therefore it grows no where ellis: then this is
also a good argument / Stechas grows only in the ylandes of French against
Massilia / which are called Stechades / whereupon it has the name / therefore
there is no Stachas / but it that grows in those ylandes. Therefore it that
grows in Arabia / and it that grows in Spain and Italy / is no Stechas.
This must also be a good argument. Dioscorides says that Aconitum lycoctonon
grows plenteously in Italy in the Iustine mountains: ergo / wheresoever any
herb having the form and properties of Aconiti lycoctoni / be found if it
grow not in Italy / it is not Aconitum lycoctonum. But seeing that these be
noughty arguments so is it that Pliny and Matthiolus make / also noughty.
Rubus ideus has ye name / because it grows very ple^teously in the hill Ida:
ergo it grows only in Ida. For Dioscorides says not / that rubus ideus
grows only in Ida: but that it grows there in plentye / and therefore
denies not / but yt it may grow also in other places as well as there.

Conradus Gesnerus writing of such herbs as are in mount Fracto / shows a
bushe to grow there / which he calls Rubum Ideum / and he describes it thus.
Rubus ideus is there almost with a fruit of a black berrie without any pricks
/ low with a woddish or hard root / with leaves like ye bra^ble / or
strawberry / with little kirnelles two together or three together / or one alone in
one berrie. The taste of it is four / it grows upon a rock.

The virtues of Raspis.
THe Raspis has the same virtues that the common bramble has / and besides
also the flower of it bruised with honye / and laid to / is good for the
inflammationes and hot humores gathered together to the eyes / and it
quenches the hot burninges / called erisypelata: it is good to be given with
water unto them that have weyk stomachs. It were good to keep some of the
juice of the berries / and to put it into some pretty wodden vessel / and to
make of it as it were raspis wine / which doutlesse should be good for many
purposes / both for a weyke stomach / and also for the flixe / and diverse
diseases of the goumes / teth vuula tongue / and pallat and other places
thereabout.

Of the kinds of Dockes.
depiction of plant Rumicis primum genus.
depiction of plant Rumicis secundum genus.
depiction of plant Rumicis tertium genus.
depiction of plant Rumicis quartum genus.


RVmex is called in Greek Lapathon / in English a Dock / in Duche Menwelwortz
/ in French de la parelle. Of the kinds of Dockes / they call one Oxilapathon
/ and in the vppermoste parts / it is hard and something sharp / and it
grows in pooles and diches: the second is it of the garding / not like unto
this. The third is a wild kind / and it is small / and like unto plantayne
soft and low. There is also the fourth kind / which is called of some Oxalis
or Anaxaris / or Lapathum agreste / whose leaves are like unto the leaves of
the littel wild dock / the stalk is not great / ye sede is somthinge sharp /
round read / and biting / and it is found in ye stalk and outgrowing twigges:
hitherto has Dioscorides written. To whose writing some of the later Grecianes
do not fully consent / and namelye in the descriptiones of Oxilapathi and
Oxalidos / for some of the later Grecianes seem to take Oxilapathum / as though
it had the name of the sour and sharp taste / and not of the sharpnes of the
ouermoste part of the top of the leaf. Aetius in the healing of the falling
sickness / writes these words after the translacion of Cornarius of Oxalis:
Oxallidem sieve rumicem acutum / viridem presertim quotidie dato a primo luna
vsque ad trigestimam / in which words he seems to confound and make all one
of Oxilapathum and Oxalis. The same Aetius writes thus of Oxalis in the
healing of the iaundes. Oxalis est rumex acri sapore / folijs ranulis et folijs
caude quadrangulari / etc. Ye may se that Aetius gives here unto the taste of
Oxalis sharpnes / with bytinge as this word Acris does signify / and a four
cornered stalk / whereof nether of both Dioscorides gives unto his Oxalis /
nether to his Oxilapatho. As for my part I do not remember that ever I saw
any such sorel as Aetius describes. Now as concerning the kinds of dockes
whereof Dioscorides writes / I am sure / we have the same / and also more then
he made mention of / we have the great kind of Dock / which the unlearned took
for Rebarbe / and is called of some Rubarbarum monachorum / and this do the
common herbaries of this time take for the garding Dock of Dioscorides / we
have a kind of Dockes that grows in shallow diches and watery places / with
a very sharp leaf / with a taste like unto other Dockes / and this do I take
to be Oxalapathum in Dioscorides. There is an other kind of Dockes that grows
in moist and watery ground / with a leaf much rounder then it that I spoke
last of / it has a very sour taste like sorel / and this do I take for
Oxalapatho of Aetij and other of his time.

We have two kinds of wild Dockes / the one with the form and lykenes of
plantayn / which grows in middowes and in bare grenes / and an other kind
with a leaf not much unlike the leaf of Aran: and so many kinds have we also
of Oxalis or Sorell / for the one has a rounder leaf / and ye other sharper /
with sharp things resembling abroad arrow head. We have also an other kind of
dock growing in orchards and gardines / and about tounes and such places as
kye and oxen / and other beasts use commonly to haunt and stand in.

This kind for the form that it has with the garding dock / may seem to be a
kind of it. But by it that grows without settinge / or sowynge / it may
seem to be a kind of wild docke. But it makes no great matter of what kind
it be of / seeing it is known by experience to have the virtue that other
dockes have.

The virtues of the Dockes.
THe leaves of all the kinds of dockes / when they are sodde^ soften the
belly. The leaf laid to raw with rose oil or safron / drives away
melicirides / which are apostemes / which have an oylish thing within them like
unto honye. The sede of ye wild dockes / and of the diche dock with the sharp
leaf / and of the sorrel / is good to be dronken in water or wine against the
bloodye flixe or other flixes / and against the lothsumnes of the stomach / and
against the biting of a scorpion. If any man drink any of these seeds / and
after chance to be bitten / he shall have no hurt of it. But the routes of
them / sodden with vinegre / and also though they be raw / if they be laid to /
heal lepres / ye foul scuruy evil / and rough scabby nails. But the place
must be rubbed before in the son with nitre and vinegre. The broth also if
the itchinge places be bathed therewith / drives away the itche. They swage
also the pain of the teth / if they be sodden in wine / and ye teth be washed
therewith / they swage also the pain of the ears / they drive also away hard
lumpes and wennes if they be sodden in wine and laid thereto. The same laid to
stop the ishewe of weomen / if they be sodden in wine and dronken / they heal
the iaundes / and break stones in the bladder / and provoke down flowers /
and they are good for them that are bitten of a scorpion. The great dock called
in Greek Hippolampathon / which grows in meres and great pooles / has the
same nature that other have. The old writers appoint no certain degree unto the
kinds of dockes / but Aetius writes that the dock is partaker of heat /
naminge no certain kind. But Rasis under the name of Acetisa / which word
the Arabianes interpretes without all discretion use for all kinds of dockes /
says that acetosa is cold and dry / but he tells not in what degree / but I
suppose that Rasis writes of sorell rather then of any other kind. But my
judgment is that sorell is cold at the least in the first degree / and that
the other kinds are not manifestly hot / but rather bowynge to coldness / then
to any notable heat.

Of the bushe or shrub, called Kneholme, or Buchers browme.
RVscus is named in Greek myrsine agria / that is myrtus syluestris / in
Barbarus latin bruscus / in English Kneholme / or Knehull / and of other Bucher
broume / and of some Petigre / I never saw it in Germany / therefore I know not
the Duche name of it.

depiction of plant Sabina.


RVscus called of Dioscorides Myrtus syluestris / has a leaf like unto a
myrtell tree / but brother / like in fashon unto a lance / sharp in the top. It
has a round fruit in the mids of the lefe read / when it is ripe with a
hard kirnel within. The twigges are bowing like vinde branches / which come
out of the route / they are tough a cubit high / full of leaves / the routes
are like unto grass binding / tarte in taste / and something bitter. This bushe
grows very plenteously in Essex and in Kent / and in Bark shyre / but I
could never se it in Germany.

The virtues of kneholme.
THe leaves and the berries dronken in wine / do move a man to make water / and
bring weomen their flowers / and break the stone of the bladder / they heal
also the iaundes / the Stranguria^ / and ye head ache / the broth wherein ye
routes are sodden / can do the same. The young stalks use to be eaten for
sperage / after ye manner of a worte or eatable herb / but they are bitter and
provoke urine.

Of Rue.
depiction of plant Ruta.


RVta is named in Greek Pyganon / in English Rue or herb grace / in French
rue de gardin / in Duch Weinraut. There ar two kinds of Rue / the gardin Rue is
so well known in all countrees / that it needs no description. But the wild
Rue is so gessen and skant / that I could never find it in all my life time /
nether in Germany nor in England / saving one time in Weissenburg / and the
sede of that / was sent me from Zurch by doctor Gesner / it has much smaller
and longer leaves / then the common Rue has / or ellis much like in other
points unto it.

The virtues of Rue out of Dioscorides.
THe wild Rue that grows in woddes and mountains / is more sharp or biting
/ then the gardin or sown or set Rue / and it is not fit to be eaten. Amongst
the kinds of gardin Rue / is most fit to be eaten that grows beside a fig
tree: they have both a burning property: they heat and bring of the skin /
provoke water / and drive flowers. And does they / whether they be taken in
meat / or drink: they stop the belsy / it is a soferayne medicine or
preservative against poison / if an acetable of the sede of it be taken with
wine: yea the leaves taken aforehand by themselves / and with nuttes / and with
dried figs / make poisoned medicines to want their streingth. If they be
taken after the same manner / they are good against serpents. Rue both in meat
/ and in drink / destroys the natural sede. If it be sodde^ with dried dyll
/ and dronken / it stauncheth the gnawinge in the bellye. If it be dronken as
is said before: it is good for the ache of the sides and of ye breast / against
pursines and shortness of breath / against coughes / against the inflammation of
the lunges / against the sciatica and the ache of the joints / and against the
cold that comes again by certain fittes or courses. If it be poured in with
oil / it is good for the windines of the great gut / and of the mother / and
of the straight gut. The same broken with honye / and put into the secret place
a good way up / delivers weomen of the stranglinge of ye mother. If it be
heated with oil and dronken / it kills worms. Some use to lay it to with
honye for the ache of the joints / and some use to lay it to with fygges
against the dropsey: yea if it be dro^ken / it is good for the same. Also if it
be sodden in wine to the consumption of the half / and rubbed on / it will do
the same. It quickens the sight both raw / and condited / if it be received in
meat: it swageth the ache of the eyes / if it be laid to with the flower of
parched barlye. With rose oil and vinegre / it helps them yt have the head
ach: if it be bruised and put into the nose thrilles / it stops the bursting
out of blood out of the nose: if it be laid to with bay leaves / it swageth the
inflammation and swellings of the stones / and it heleth wheales with myrt /
and a treat made of wax: if ye rub the place with wine / peper and nitre / it
heals the white morphew. But if it be laid to emplaster wise / with the same
/ it takes away little read lumpes like knoppes of time / and wartes also like
pysiueres: if it be laid to which honey and allome / it heals the foul
scoruy evil. The juice of Rue made hot in the pyll of a pomgranat / and
poured in / is good for the ache of the ears. The same heals dull ears /
laid to with the juice of fennel and honey: if it be laid to with vinegre /
white lead and rose oil / it heals hot and choleric infla^mationes and
rinninge sores / and tetteres / and the rinning sores of the head.

If rue be eaten afterward / it dilayeth and stancheth the biting or sharpnes
that comes of the eating of garlyk and onyones.

The Rue of the mountains if it be eaten / it kylleth a man. But the sede of
the wild Rue dronke^ / is good for inward diseases / and is fit to be menged
with preservatives and triacles.

The sede also of Rue perched / if it be given seven days to drink to him
that pissed his bed / he shall do no more so.

The root of this is called moly of the mountains.

The wild rue is like unto it of the gardin / and it is good in drink for the
falling siknes / and for the sciatica / it drives down flowers / but it
kills the birth / for it is sharper then it of the gardin / yet it may not be
eaten / because it is hurtful in meat.

Out of Galene.
Wild rue is hot in the fourth degree / and the gardin rue is hot in the
third: it has not only a biting taste / but also a bitter. Whereby it may make
ripe and cut insonder gross and tough humores / and for that propertye it may
drive urine / it is good for windines / and therefore restreyneth and bridleth
the appetite and desire of the pleasure of the body / it makes ripe and dries
migytely.

Out of Simeon Sethi.
IT is good for the windye and waterye dropsey: it is good for them that have
dronken the juice of poppye called opium / or the poison of Aconitum or
Liberdis baye / if it be dronken / it is good for ye colic / and so is it good
also in a clister / me^ hold that it quickens the eyesyght / and therefore
paynters use it much: if ye seth it with oil and bath the bladder therewith /
it is a remedy against the stopping of water. Both taken in above in drink
and beneth in a clister. It is good for the lithargie or forgetful disease: it
is also good for them that have the gout or pain in the knees of waterishe
humores: it strenghteneth the guts not by the heat alone / but of a natural
propertye. But they that are choleric of nature / and are syck of choleric
diseases / ought to absteyne from rue / for it heateth them to much / and
melts away the fine blood / and leans the gross / and makes it
melancolick: the juice of this herb is evil for weomen with child / he that
eats rue in ye morning shall be fre all the day after from venem and poison.

Of Sauin.
SAbina is named in Greek Brathys / in Duche Seuenbaume / in French Sauinera
or Sauiner.

There are two kinds of Sauine as Dioscorides writes: the one has leaves
like a Cypres tree / but more pricky with a grievous smell / biting and burning:
for it is a short tree spreding it self more out in breath: and some use the
leaves for perfumes: ye other has leaves like Tamarisk. I have seen both these
kinds in Germany / and the one plenteously in England / that is the less /
and the greater I saw in Worms in Germany in a preachers gardin.

The virtues of Sauin.
THe leaves of both the Sauines stay and stop wounds that sprede for a broad
and consume flesh as they go / and if they be laid to / they swage
inflammationes. Also if they be laid to with honye / they scour away
blacknes and filthiness / and they burste carbuncles. But if they be dronken
with wine / they drive blood by the urine / and drive forth also the birth: the
same thing will they do if they be laid to / or ministered in a perfume / they
use to be menged with heating oyntmentes / and namely with the ointment called
vnguentum gleucinum.

depiction of plant Sabina.


Out of Galene.
SAuin is of the nombre of them that dry myghtely / and that according unto
three qualites / which it shows in taste like unto the Cypres tree / but that
it is more bitinge / and as a man would say more spicye or better smelling:
therefore it has the qualite that I spoke of / that is a biting sharpnes /
standing in an hot complexion and bitterness / and a darcker or more vnfelable
binding / then the cypress tree has: for in as much as it excedeth in that /
so more myghtely does it make ripe / and therefore it can not glue together
wounds / for the strenght of the drynes / and the heat that it has / for it
has so much of both the qualites / that it does stretche out and bring
inflammation or burning: it may as well be occupied about rottenes as the
Cypres may / specially when they are stronger and longer / for these without
any auoyance can abide the strenght of medicines: it louseth or dissolueth
carbuncles.

This is a medicine that is hot in the third degree / and dry in the same /
and has very subtle parts / and for that cause it is put in to oyntementes.
Some use to put twyse as much of it in the stead of one part of Cinnamuni:
for if it be dronken / rypeth and makes fine and subtle.

Of the elder tree, and of the bushe called Vual worte or Daynwurt.
depiction of plant Sambucus.


SAmbucus is called in Grek Akti / in English Elder or Bourtre / in Duche
Holder / or Holle^der / in French Sus or Suin. There ar two kinds of Act /
says Dioscorides / the one is called Acke / and it rises up into the fashion
of a tree / and this is named in English Elder / and it stretched out twigges
like redes round / some thing hollow / something whytish and long / there grow
iij. or iiij. leaves together by certain spaces going between / like the Walnut
tree leaves of stinkinge savor / and more indented: in the top of the stalks or
bows are round shaddowye clusters / having white flowers / a fruit like the
Turpentin tree / something purple in black / full of berries / full of juice / and
of wine.

The other kind is called in Greek Chameacte / and in Latin Ebulus / and in
English Wallwurte or Daynworte / and in Duche Attich. This is low and less /
and more like an herb / and it has a four squared stalk / parted with many
joints / the leaves grow with certain spaces going between / hanging about
every ioynte after the manner of feathers / like unto the leaves of an almonde
tree / indented roundaboute / but longer / evil smellinge / with a shaddowy
clustred top like the other kind / and even so a flower and a fruit. It has a
long rout / of the bigness of a man's finger: thus far Dioscorides.

Beside these two kinds / I found the third kind growinge in the alps with
read berries / in other points like unto the former kind called Elder.

The virtues of Elder.
BOth the kinds have one property / and serve for one purpose / they dry and
drive water / and are evil for the stomach / the leaves sodden and eaten as an
eatable herb / drive out choler / and thynne fleme / and the young stalks
sodden in a pot do the same. The root sodden in wine / and given in before meat
/ helps the dropsey: if it be dronken after the same manner / it is good for
them that are bitten of the viper / the same sodden in water / if a woman sit
over it / it softeneth the mother and opens it / and it amendeth such hurtes
as are commonly about it: the fruit dronken with wine / does the same: the same
laid to / makes the heir black. The tender and fresh leaves / swage
inflammaciones laid to emplasterwise with perched barley / and they are good
for burning and the bitinges of dogs: the same glewe together hollow sores
that gape after the manner of a fistula: they are also good for them that have
the gout / if they be laid to with bulls tallowe or got buckes swet.

Of the willow or Sallow tree.
depiction of plant Salicis primum genus.
depiction of plant Salicis alterum genus.
depiction of plant Salicis tertium genus.


SAlix is named in Grebe Itia / in English a Wyllowe tree or a Sallow tree / and
in ye Northren speech a Saugh tree / in Duch / Ein weiden baum / in French un
Saulge. Salix as Columella writes is divided in to two principal kinds: the
one is called perticalis / ye other is called viminalis. Perticalis Salix is ye
great willow tree / which has long rodes growing on it. Viminalis is an oyster
tree / such as bring forth rods / yt baskattes ar made of. Viminalis is of
diverse sorts. The first is called Salix greca / the second gallica: the third
Sabina. Salix greca which is yelowe in color / grows much in East Fresland
about a city called Anrik. Salix gallica which has read twigges / grows in
many places of England and Germany also. Salix sabina which is also called
amerina / grows only in Italy and in East Fresland / so far as I have found
hitherto.

The virtues of the willow tree.
THe sede / the leaves and the bark / and the juice of the willowe tree have
pour and virtue to bind together.

The leaves broken and with a little pepper dronken in wine / are good for the
Iliaca passio / or the gnawing of the small goutes.

The sede broken / is good for them that spitte blood / and the bark is good
for ye same purpose: the same bark burned and knodde^ with vinegre / and laid to
emplasterwise / takes away hard lumpes / and little swellings like nail
hedes.

The juice of the leaves and the bark / made hot in the pill of a pomgranat
with rose oil / heals the ache of the ears / the broth of the same is good
to bathe goutye places / and to be poured upon the same: the same drives away
scurfe and scales: the time of taking of the juice of it is / when that it
floureth by cutting of the bark: this has pour to scour away those things
/ which bring darcknes unto the apple of the eye.

Out of Galene.
A Man may well use the leaves of the willow tree for to glue wounds together /
the most part of Physiciones use the flowers of the willowe tree most of all
for the preparing of a drying emplaster / for the pour thereof is to dry / for
beside that it byteth not / it has also a certain binding / there are certain
also / which press out the juice of it / and keep it as a medicine without
all biting and drying up very profitable for many things / for ye ca^ not
find any thing more profitable for many things the^ a medicine is / which
dries without biting / and does bind a little / but the bark has ye like
pour / with the flowers and the leaves: but that it is of a dryer complexion
as all barks be. Some men do burn the bark and use the ashes of it / for all
things that had need of a mighty dryer.

Of Sage.
depiction of plant Saluia. Veronica foemina.
depiction of plant Saluia mayor.
depiction of plant Saluia minor.


SALuia is called in Greek Elilisphacos / in English Sage or Sauig / in Duche
Salben or Selue / in French Saulge.

Sage is a long bushe full of bows and branches / having twigges four square
/ somthyng whytish / and leaves like the Quince tree / but longer / rougher /
thicker / and privily resembling horenes of a worm cloth / white under /
smellinge wounderfully / but the smell is grievous / it has sede like the wild
horminum in the top of the stalk / it grows in rough places / Hitherto
Dioscorides.

Dioscorides makes but one kind of Sage / but Theophrast makes two kinds of
Sage / one with a rougher / and the other with a smoother leaf / but now are
there found more kinds / the which though they differ one from an other
much in roughnes / and smoothnes in greatness and smallines / and in diversity
of colors / yet in my judgment / they do agree al in one virtue and propertye
/ and although some be stronger then other some be.

The virtues of Sage.
THe broth wherein ye leaves and branches are sodden / drive fourth water / and
bring forth flowers / and draws forth the birth / and it heals the pricking
of the fish / called in Latin pastinaca marina / which is like unto a flath /
with venomous pricks about his tayl^. It makes heir black / it is good for
wounds / it stops the blood / and scoureth wild sores / the broth of the
leaves and the branches with wine stancheth the iche of the priuites / if they
be washed therewith.

Out of Galene.
Galene writes that Sage is of an evident hot complexion / and something
binding.

The virtues of Sage out of Aetius.
THe heating pour of sage is evidently known / but the binding virtue is but
small / but some write that if a perfume be made of sage over the coals / that
it will stop the excessive flowing of women's flowers: But Agrippa writes that
sage being a holy herb / is eaten of lionesses being with young / for it
holds and stays the lively birth. Wherefore if a woman drink a pound of the
juice of it with a little salt / at a certain time / which Phisiciones can
tell / if she do lie with her husband / vndoutingly she shall conceive. They
say when as the pestilence was in a place of Egypt / called Coptos / that they
that remained alive after the pestilence / compelled their wives to drink much
of this juice: and so they had in short time great increase of children.
Orpheus says that two cyates of the juice of sage with one ounce of honye / if
it be given unto a man with drink fasting / will stop the spitting of blood:
but it is good against the tysick and exulceration of ye lunges: If it be
dressed thus / take of spiknarde two drames of the sede of sage perched /
beaten / and sifted xiiij. drames / of pepper xij. drames / menge all these
together in the juice of sage / and make pills thereof / and give a dram at a
time / in the morning to the patient fasting / and so much against night / and
drink water after the pills.

Of Sauerye.
SAtureia or Cunila is called in Greek Thymbra / in English sauerye / or
saueraye / in Duche saturey / in French sarriette: it is hot and dry in the
third degree / as the taste will teach you / whenever ye will try it / for
it biteth the tongue myghtely. Although diverse and great learned men have made
one herb of Thymbra and satureya / yet it is plain by the autorite of
Columella / and other old writers / that they are two several herbs.

And because Dioscorides makes two kinds of thymbra / it is not unlike / but
that the one is it that is called thymbra / of the Greeks and some Latins / and
the other is it that is called of the Grecianes thymbra / and of the Latins
satureia.

depiction of plant Satureia satiua.


The wild kind is greater and hoter / and the gardin thymbra is less then
the other and more gentler / and therefore more fit to be eaten as Dioscorides
writes.

The wild thymbra after the judgment of Matthiolus / is Satureia hortensis of
Columel. Whereof he makes mention in his verses.

As for the first kind that Dioscorides describes / I think it shall be
hard to find any such in England / when as Matthiolus compleyneth that he
can find none such in Italy.

And allthough we have here in England two kinds of sauerye / one that dies
every year / and is commonly called sauerey / and an other kind that is
called winter sauerye in English / and closter hysope in Duche / which dureth
both summer and winter. Yet nether of these answer unto the description of
Dioscorides / for it yt Dioscorides describes it thus / described it grows
in rough places / and in a bare ground / and it is like time / but less and
tenderer / it bears an ear full of flowers / and they of an herbish or grene
color.

The virtues of Sauerye.
Dioscorides writes no more of the virtues of sauerye / but yt it serves for
the same purposes / that thyme serves for / wherefore if ye will know what
virtues sauery has / look them out in the chapter of thyme.

Of the herb called Satyrion.
depiction of plant Satyrium.
depiction of plant Satyrium trifolium.
depiction of plant Satyrium regale.
depiction of plant Satyrium floribus apium similibus.


SAtyrion is named in latin Satyrium / it may be named in English / whyt
Satyrio^ / or white hares coddes / or in other more unmannerly speech / hares
ballockes.

Dioscorides describes Satyrion thus: Satyrion which some call Threleafe /
because it has three leaves / bowing down toward the earth like unto a dock /
or a lyly leaf / but less and read / the stalk is of a cubit hight / and
bare. It has a white flower like a lyly / and a knoppy root of the bigness of
an appel / broune in color without / and within white as an eg / in taste sweet
/ and not unpleasant unto the mouth.

I have very seldom seen this kind of Satyrion that Dioscorides describes
here. For I never saw it / saving twyse in Germany / and twyse in England. In
Germany I have seen it growing in great plenty beside Bonne / and about
Weissenburg in high Almany / and in England in Soffock. It has a leaf brother
then a lyly leaf / but shorter and rounder. The flowers are very white / and
the stalck is longer then any kind of Orchis / called Testiculus canis. Beside
this greater kind / I have seen about Charde in Sommersetshyr / a little kind
of Satyrion with white flowers / and rounder leaves / and brother for the
quantite / then the lilye leaves are. They are most like young plantayn leaves
of the greater kind. The roots are longer / then the roots of the greater
kind / and are in taste not all sweet / but a little turninge to some darcke
bitterness / and a little heat. The flowers grew very thyck together / as they
were writhen about the stalcke. I have seen about the last end of August /
this kind in the flowers / when as all other kinds of Orchis and Satyrion are
far deed away / sauinge an other little kind with a purple flour / which is
called of some our ladies traces.

The virtues of Satyrion.
DIoscorides writes that the root of Satyrion dronken in tarte binding read
wine / is good for the bowyng back of the neck / and that it is supposed to
stere men to the lust of the body.

Out of Galene.
GAlene writes that Satyrion is hot and moist in complexion / and that not
withstanding that it has an ouerflowyng and windy moisture / by reason whereof
it stirs up the lust of the body. The herb and root are both of like
streyngth in doing of these things.

Of Rye.
THese many years both Physicianes and Scoolmaysters have taught that our Rye
which is called in Duch Rogge / is Siligo in Latin. But they have been both
deceived themselves / and other also. For Siligo is not Rye / but a kind of
light wheat / as it may be easily proved by the authorite of Columella and
Pliny. Yet without all dout / they yt taught first / that Siligo was Rye / had
great occasion given them to judge so / even by Columella / who writes thus of
Siligo: depiction of plant Siligo.
Nec nos tanquam optabilis agricolis, fallat Siligo: nam hoc tritici vitium
est. Et qua^uis candore praestet, pondere vincitur. Verum in humido statu
caeli, recte prouenit: and ideo locis manantibus, magis apta est. Nec tamen ea
long nobis, aut magna diffi cultate requirenda est. Nam omne triticu^ solo
vliginoso, post tertiam sationem conuertitur in siliginem. For this I do know /
that in a country where as I have been / within the Dukedom of the Duke of Cleue
/ called Sourlant / that wheat if it be sowe^ in that sourlande / as it is
truly called / the first year it will bring forth wheat / and in the second
year / if the wheat that grew there / be sown in the same place again / that
it turns into rye / and that the same rye sown in the same ground / within
two years goes out of kind into darnell / and such other naughty wedes / as
rye / sown in some place of Saxony / as I heard say / when I was in Germany /
with in few year sown in some feldes / is turned into good wheat.

Yet for all this / there are two places in Columella / that will not suffer
siliginem to be our rye. The first places is where as he says: quamuis
candore praestet, pondere tamen vincitur. That is / allthough it excelle in
whytenes / yet in heaviness or weight other excede it. Who did ever se rye whyter
then wheat / and is it not most commonly seen / yt rye bread is heuyer then
the wheat. Therefore siligo which is whyter then the common and best wheat /
and lighter also / can not be our rye. The second place is in the second
book of Columella / in the sixth chapter / where as he writes these words: We
know many kinds of wheat / but that is most to be sown of all other / that
is called robus / because it does excelle both in weight and in shyning or
clerenes. Ye ought secondely to regard siliginem / whose chief kind wants
weight in bread. Pliny also in the xvij. book of his natural history writes
/ that Siligo spicam semper erectam habet, and pariter nunquam maturescit. That
is / siligo has the ear ever standing right up / and it never wexeth ripe
altogether. But whether our rye grows with the ears dounwarde or no / and
whether it be ripe al at one time or no / I report me unto them that are
housband men / and have skyll in corn / and both sow it and mow it.

By these places I trust / that I have sufficiently proved / that siligo of the
old writers / is not our rye / as the Phisiciones and Grammarians have taught
certain hundred years.

But some will axe of me / seeing that siligo is not rye / what thynkest thou was
it called of any old writer. To them I answer / that I find nothing like unto
our rye / the^ it which is called of Sicale: whereof he writes thus: The
taurines that dwell under the alps / call sicale Asiane: it is ye worst of al
other / and is only mete to drive hungre away. It has a plenteous / but a
small stalk / it is ugly to be seen for the blacknes / but it passes in
heaviness. Then when as our rye has these propertyes / and the Italianes in some
places call rye Segale / and the French men call it segle / which countremen
hold certain remnantes of the old Latin tongue: I think I gather not amiss / yt
our rye was named secale of the old writers. This also makes something for the
same purpose / that some of the Northen men call rye bread / aussem bread / as
though it had the name of assius.

The nature of Rye.
BY common experience we find that rye bread is cold / windy / and hard of
digestion / and a breder of melancholy / namelye in all such persons / as want
exercise of ye body. But it helps to keep ye body soluble / such as are
disposed to be hard bellied. But the medicine is gross / and brings as much
harm and more then it does good all things well considered. Some of the later
writers have taught that the young blades of rye distilled / are good for the
stone / and for great heat in any part or membre of the body. But here of /
because I have no experience as yet / I dare not warrant any man / that they
have that virtue and propertye. It were good that some man that has leisure /
should ones prove it.

Of the herb called Scandix.
depiction of plant Scandix.


SCandix is supposed of some to be ye herb which is called in English Pinke
nedle / or storkes bill. And I have judged it to be an herb ye grows in ye
corn with a fair white flower / and leaves like unto cheruel. The later herb
in my judgment draws nerer unto the bitterness and heat yt Dioscorides
requires of sca^dix. But because nether of the^ both / has so much heat and
bitterness / as Dioscorides seems to give unto scandix: I dare not certainly
give sentence / that either of them should be scandix in Dioscorides.

Of the virtues of Scandix.
I Read no other virtue ye sca^dix has / but ye it is good for ye kidnees
bladder / and liver / saving that Galene says yt it is good to provoke a man
to piss / and to deliver al ye inward bowelles from stoppinge. The same Galene
writes yt it is hot and dry in ye second degree.

Of the sea union called squilla.
depiction of plant Scilla.


SCilla is named in Greek Skilla of ye Apothecaries Squilla / of the high duch
/ meus zwybel: it may be called in English / sea union or Squilla or Squill
union. The rote of the Squilla is like a great union / covered with a thin skin
as an vnyo^ is. Within that are many pills / one growing above an other / but
not hole as vnyones be: ye stalk comes first forth of ye root / and
afterward comes a flour white and yelowe. And a long time after yt come out
ye leaves / after ye manner of an union / bowyng dounward the ground. It grows
much in Spayn and Apulia / by ye sea side / but no other where / saving in
such like places without settinge or sowing. For it greweth not from the sea
of him self.

The virtues of squilla.
SQuilla has a sharp and hot nature / but when it is roasted / it is made
profitable for many things. And it ought to be roasted after this manner. Take
the squilla / and cover it round about with clay or paste / and put it into an
oven / or cover it in the coals or ashes / until the past be baked enough.
When as ye have taken that away / if the squilla be not tender / and roasted
enough / cover it with new paste / or new clay / and roste it as ye did before.
It that is not thus dressed / is euel for the inner parts. It may be also
baked by settinge it in a pot well covered / use only the inner parts / and
cast away the outer parts: It may also be sodde^ in water after that it is cut
in pieces / the first water casten out / and fresh water put unto it / until
the water be no more bitter. Men use it also to sklise it / and to hang it on
a threde / so that one piece touch not an other / and so dry them in the
shadow. And we use it that is cut / to make oil of it / and wine and vinegre.
One part of the raw squilla heat in oil or melted rosen / is good to be laid
upon the riftes of the fete. If it be sodden in vinegre / and laid to emplaster
wise / it is good for them that are bitten of a veper or adder. We use to take
one part of the roasted squilla / and to put unto it viij. parts of bruised
salt / and here of we use to give a spoun full or two to a man fasting / to
soften his bellye. We put it also into drinks and spicye composiciones / and
into such drinks / wherewyth we provoke water / and in such drinks as we
would help the dropsey with / and help them in whose stomakes the meat swimmeth
above / or such as have the iaundes or geelsought / and have gnawynge in the
body / and them that are vexed with a long cough / them that are short winded
/ and them that spit blood: one scruple and an half is enough to be taken at
one time with honye. We use to sethe it with honye / and to give it to be eaten
for the same purpose / and so dressed / it is good to help digestion. It
dryueth away slymye matter like shauinges of the guts. If it be roasted and
laid to / it is good for hangyng wartes / and for kybed or mould heles. The
sede taken in a fyg or with honye / louseth the belly. They that have any
exulceration or place that has the skin of / and raw / had need to take heed
that they use not the squilla. Some autours write / that if the squilla be
hanged up hole above the door / that no wychecrafte nor sorcerye shall take any
place there.

Out of Mesue.
THe sea union or squilla is two ways profitable / both because it makes ripe
and ready the matter to be put forth / and dryueth forth such matters as are made
ready. It is best that grows with an other and not alone. For it ye grows
alone and beside hot bathes / is venomous. The best is bitter and sharp / and
has shyning pills / and it grows in a fre field. It prepares thick and
tough humores / and melancholy by cutting of the^ and making of the^ subtle /
and by scouring / yt they may more easily come forth / and yt does most spedely
ye oxymel or honied vinegre / made of ye squilla: and the same purges out ye
foresaid humores. Wherefore it is good for ye diseases of ye head / as ye head
ach / for ye falling siknes / for dusines of ye head / and for the diseases of
the synewes / joints / longes and breast. And that does specially / the
electuarye made of the juice of it with honye / if it be licked in. The same
makes a clear voice / and so does the honyed vinegre / made with squilla / and
the vinegre alone made with the same. The same help the stopping of the milt
and the swelling thereof. And it hinders putrefaction to be engendered in a
man's body. And therefore it keeps a man in heath / and makes a man's body
continue still in young state / but they make a man lean. The squilla helps
the louse goomes / and the vinegre of it makes fast teth that are louse / if
the mouth be washed therewyth. It takes away the stinking of the mouth / and
makes the breath sweet. It stancheth the ache of the stomach / it helps
digestion / and makes a man well colored. It makes a louse body fast and
compact / howsoever it be taken. The sodden drinck of it / may be given from
ten drammes unto three ounces. Mesue makes the sea vnyone hot in the third
degree / and dry almost in the same.

Out of Pliny.
THe use of squilla quickens the eysight / if it be taken with vinegre and
honye. It kylleth worms in the bellye. If it be fresh laid under the tongue /
it quenches the thyrst of them that have the dropsey. It is good to be laid to
with honye against the pain of the sciatica.

Out of Galene.
THe squilla has a marvelous cutting pour / but not for all that very hot /
so that a man may judge it to be hot in the second degree. It is best to be
taken sodden or roasted / and not raw / and so is the great vehementye or
streingth abayted. Auerrois also an Arabian / writes that Squilla is hot in
the second degree / though Mesue write that it is hot in the third degree:
Wherefore seeing that Galene and Auerrois hold / that it is no hoter / and I
have by tasting found it no hoter: I had lever hold with Galene / and that it
is hot only in the second degree / then with Mesue / that makes it hot in
the third degree.

Of water Germander.
SCordium is named in Greek scordion / in Duche Wasser bettenich / it may be
called in English / Water germander / or merrish germander or Garleke germander.

It grows in Oxforthshyre and in Cambridge shire in good plenty.

The description of the noble herb called Scordium out of Dioscorides.
depiction of plant Scordium.


SCordium grows in mountains and in merrishe ground: It has leaves like
unto Germander / but greater / and not so much indented about. In smell
something resembling Garleke / binding / and in taste bitter. It has little
stalks / four squared / whereupon grow flowers somthinge redishe.

The virtues of water Germander out of Dioscorides.
WAter Germander has the pour to heat / and to make a man make water. The
grene herb and also dried / if it be sodden with wine / is good to be dronken
against the bitinge of serpents / and against poison. If it be taken in the
quantite of two drames with mede / it is good for the gnawing of the stomach
against the blody flixe / and for them that can not make water easily. It
stoureth out also thick and watery gear out of the breast. If ye will take the
dry herb / and menge it with gardin cresses / honye and rosin / and make an
electuary thereof / and give it to be leked up of the patie^t / it will help
the old cough / and such places as are bursten / and shronke together. The Same
herb menged with acerat or treat / made of wax / and said to the myd ryf: it
will swage the long heat or inflammation of the^: the lame is also good for
the gout / if it be laid to either with sharp vinegre or with water / with
^ony. Also it joins together wounds / and stoureth old sores and covers
them with a skin / and when it is dried / it holds down the flesh that
grows to much. Men use also to drink the juice of it / pressed out for all
the foresaid diseases / the scordium or water germander that grows in Pontus
or in Candy / is of most virtue and streinght.

Out of Galene.
Scordium is made of diverse both tastes and poures / for it has some bitterness
/ some tartues / and some sharpnes / which is like unto garleke / called scorodon
/ whereupon I think that scordium has his name.

It stoureth out and warmeth the inward bowelles also / and it drives out
both water and also flowers. Also if it be dronken / it heals the parts yt
are bursten and shronken together / and the pain of the side if it come of
stoppinge or of cold: The same Galene in his book de antidotis / that is of
triacle or preservative medicines against poison / writes further of scordium
thus: The best scordium is brought from Candis / howbeit it is not to be
mislyked that grows in other countrees. It is written by men of great grauite
/ that so many dead bodies of certain men that were killed in a battle / as fell
upon scordiu^ / and namely such parts as touched it / were much less
putrified / then ye other were / and some came into yt believe that scordiu^ was
good against the putrefying poison of venomous beasts / and of other poysones.

Of the herb called Securidaca.
SEcuridaca is called in Greek Edisseron or Pelikino^ / I have seen this herb
only in gardines in England / wherefore I could never learn any English name of
it: but lest it should be without name / I call it Axsede or Axwurt / or Axsich /
because Dioscorides says yt the sede of securidaca is like unto a two edged
axe.

The description of Securidaca out of Dioscorides.
Securidaca is a little bushe having leaves like a ciche / called in Latin
Cicer / and coddes like unto little horns / wherein is read sede / like unto a
two edged axe / whereupon it has the name: the sede is in taste bitter / but
dronke^ it is pleasant to ye stomach / I have seen ij. kinds of Axwurt / both
with the leaves of a Ciche. But the one grew wild in Germanye / and had
coddes very little / vowed in an other kind with coddes so bowyng inward /
that they might be compared unto a bow of ayock / and this kind did I never se
/ but in gardins. Dioscorides writes yt it grows amongst ye barley and wheat.

The nature of Securidaca.
Dioscorides writes yt although it be better in taste / yet it is pleasant unto
the stomach / and yt it is put into triacles / and preservatives. Of other good
properties / he makes no further mention: Galene writes beside these
properties / that it opens the stopping of the inward parts / and that all
the buddes and branches do the same.

Out of Aetius.
The sede of Axsich is most pleasant to the stomach / and is most fit for all
the inward bowelles. In hoter complexions / ye sede of Axwurt ought to be
menged with the emplasters / that are made for the hardness of the milt. Howbeit
also in cold complexiones / and in all other it is very excellent.

Of Housleke.
depiction of plant Sedum magnum.
depiction of plant Sedum foemina.
depiction of plant Sedum tertium genus.
depiction of plant Sedum minus.


SEdum is called also in Latin Semperuiuum / and in Greek Aeizoon. There are
iiij. kinds of semperuiuum: the first kind is called in Latin Sedum magnum /
in Greek Aeizoon mega / in English Housleke / and of some Singren / but it ought
better to be called Aygrene / in Duche it is called Gros hauswurtz / in French
Iubarb.

The second kind is called in English / thrift stone crop / in Latin Sedum
minus. The third kind is called of some late writers Vermicularis / in English
Mous tail or little stone crop / and in Duche Maurpfeffer.

The description of the kinds of Semperuiuum.
Housleke has the name of Semperuiuum in Latin / and of Aeizoon in Greek / the
leaves are grene: wherefore me think that Aygrene as I said before / is a
better name for it then Singrene. The first or great kind has a stalk a cubit
high or higher / as thycke as your thumb / fatt / fair grene / having little
cuttinges in it as Tithimalus characias has: the leaves are fatt / or thyck /
of the bigness of a man's thumb / at the point like a tongue. The nethermoste
leaves lie with there bellyes upward / and the points dounwarde: but they that
are toward the top / being drawn together / resemble a circle with the figure
of an eye. It grows in mountains / and hylly places / some use to set it upon
their houses.

But the less Semperuiuum / that we call thrift or great stone crop / grows
in walls / rocks / mudwalles / and shaddowy diches / it has many stalks
coming from one root / small / full of round leaves / fat and sharp in the
end / it brings forth a stalk in the mids a span long / which has a
bushye and shaddowy top / and small grene flowers.

There seems to be a third kind of Aygrene / some call it Porcellayne / or
Teliphium / the Romans call it Illicibram / it has leaves thycker and rough
drawyng nere unto the leaves of Porcellayn / this kind grows in rocks.

The virtues of the kinds of aygrene.
THe great kind has a cooling nature and binding: the leaves by them selves /
and laid to with perched barley mele / are good for the burning heat of swelled
places / called Erispilata / or of other saint Antonies fire / against crepinge
sores and fretinge sores / against the inflammationes of the eyes / against
burning and hot goutes. It is good to pour upon the head that aketh / the
juice of Housleke with perched barley mele and rose oil / the same to be given
in drink unto them that are bitten of the field spider. It is also given unto
them that have a great lax / or the blody flixe. If it be dronken with wine /
it drives out of the bellye broad worms: if it be served after ye manner of a
suppository unto weomen / as the place inquireth / it stops the issue of
weomen: the juice also is good for them that are blare eyed / if it come of
blood. The leaves of the second kind / called stone crepe / has the same
nature that Housleke has.

The third kind called Vermicularis / has an hot nature / and sharp and
blisteringe / and power to drive away wennes / if it be laid to with swynes
grese.

Of the corn called Spelt.
depiction of plant Zeae primum genus.
depiction of plant Zeae alterum genus.


SEmen is called in Greek Zeia / in Italian Splelta pirra biada and alga / in
Duche speltz / it may in English be called spelt: howbeit I never saw it in
England. There are two kinds of zea / whereof the one is called single / and
the other two corns / because it has the sede joined together in two chaffy
coueringes. The first kind is called in Duche Tinkel. The second kind is
called speltz / and is common about Weissenburg in high Almany / viij. duch mile
of this side of Strasburg. And there all men use it in the stead of wheat / for
there grows no wheat at all. Yet I never saw fayrer and pleasanter bread in
any place in all my life / then I have eaten there / made only of this spelt /
the corn is much less then wheat / and shorter then rye / but nothing so
black.

The virtues of Spelt.
DIoscorides writes / that spelt is good for the stomach / and that if it be
taken in bread / it norisheth more then barley / and less then wheat. If any
man desire to know any more of the fashon and properties of spelta / let him
read Galene of the poures of wheates and norishmentes / and Theophrast in the
seventh book of plants / and there he shall have it / that he desires.

Of Groundsell.
depiction of plant Senecio.


SEnecio is named in Greek Erigeron / in English Groundsel or Groundiswil / in
Duch kreutzwurtz.

Grounsel has a stalk a cubit high / somthyng read / little leaves growyng
together / inde^ted in the outermost parts / after the manner of the leaves of
rock / but much less. It has yelowe flowers / which shortly ryue / and
wyther into down / whereupon it has the name in Greek Erigeron / because the
flowers after the manner of hear wax hory in ye spring of the year. The root
is nothing wurth / it grows most in mud walls and about cities.

The virtues of groundsell.
THe leaves and the flowers have a coolinge nature / wherefore if they be
bruised / and laid to with a little wine / they heal the burninge heat or
inflammation of the stones / and of the fundament / the same thing will they do
/ if they be laid on alone: but laid to with the fine powder of Frankincense
/ it heals both the wounds / and of the synewes / and other places / the
down also of it / laid to with vinegre alone / is good for the same purposes /
but the fresh down if it be dronken / strangleth the hole stalk sodden with
water / and drunk with maluasey / heals the ache of the stomach that ryseth
of choler.

Of wild thyme.
depiction of plant Serpillum.


BOth Dioscorides and Plinye make two kinds of Serpillum / that is of crepinge
thyme. But they do not agree in the description of them: for Dioscorides
describes Serpillum thus / one kind of Serpillum grows in gardines / and
resembles Mergerum in smell / and it is used to be put in garlandes: it has
the name of serpendo / that is of crepinge / because whatsoever part of it
touches the ground / it fasteneth roots therein. It has leaves and
branches like Organe / called of some wild Mergerum / but whyter: but if it be
set about hedges / it grows more lustely: the other kind is wild / and is
called zigis. This does not crepe / but stands right up / and it puts
forth small stalks / after the manner of a vind / which are full of leaves like
unto rue / but the leaves are narrower / longer and harder / the flowers have a
bytinge taste / the smell of it is very pleasante / the root is nothing
wurth. It grows more stronger in rocks / and it is hoter / then it of the
gardine / and is fitter for physic. But Pliny writes thus of Serpillum: Men
think that it has the name of serpendo / that is of crepinge / which thing
it chanseth in the wild / and specially upon rocks / the gardine serpillum
crepeth not / but grows unto the hight of a span: it is fatter that grows
of his own will / and has whyter leaves and boughs / and it is good against
serpents: Hitherto Pliny. Now ye se the contrary judgment of these two
great learned men / whereof the one says the gardin serpillum crepeth not /
but grows right up. It is hard to tell to whether of these a man should
stick: the authorite of Dioscorides moves me to stand of his side / but some
experience as I shall declare hereafter / makes me rather lean unto Pliny /
for as I have seldom seen any serpillum / though it had been brought surth of
the feldes / and set in the gardine / crepe and take routes from the joints of
the branches: so I never saw any in the field that grew altogether straight
up / from the ground specially / if it were of any age / but did always crepe
and grow along by the ground: howbeit I grant that even the wild serpillum /
when as it brings forth his top and flower / has a little stalk above the
ground about vj. inches long / or therabout: it is possible that Dioscorides
loking upon the wild serpillum / about ye time of flouringe / and not
considering it at other times / did therefore give sentence that the wild
serpillum did not crepe / but that it of the gardine should crepe / and take
routes in the ground at the joints / it is contrary to my experience /
except he mean of such as is brought from the feldes / and is planted in the
gardin / for allthough it busheth largely / and grows somthyng aside / yet it
fastneth very seldom any roots in the ground / whereof the cause may be /
that the gardineres will not let it grow so long / that it may crepe upon the
ground / and so will not suffer it to take root. It is also like it that Pliny
calls the small kind of time / that is common in our gardines in England /
serpillum hortense / and if that be his meaning / then is his opinion very
true / for that never crepeth. And that there are two kinds of time / and not
one alone as some hold / whereof Pliny may call the one serpillum hortense /
these words of Dioscorides in Epitimo bear wytnes. Epithymum is the flower of
an harder thyme / and like unto sauery. Plinye also makes two kinds of thyme
/ but he divides them not as Dioscorides does / but he divides the one into
the whyter / and the other into ye blacker / where as Dioscorides divides this
thymes into the harder / which is greater / and into the softer and less kind
/ wherefore the less and softer kind may be the gardine serpillum of Pliny /
and no kind of Plinyes thymes. And these do I say rather by the way of
serching for the truth / then for any determination / leuing the matter to the
judgment of the learned and discret reader.

Serpillum that is in gardines / is called in the most part in England
creping thyme / and about Charde pulimountayn. It that is abroad in the feldes
/ is called wild thyme in English / and in Duche Quendel / in Nether land /
vnser lieuer frawen betstro / in French du Serpolet / in Italian serpillo / in
Spanish / serpolho.

The virtues of wild thyme or rinning thyme.
RInning thyme dronken / brings down a woman's sikenes / and dryueth forth
water. It is also good for the gnawyng and wringing in ye bellye / for bursten
places and drawn together / against the inflammationes of the liver / and
against serpents / both dronken and also laid to without. The same sodden with
vinegre / and afterward mixed with rose oil / will swage the head ache / of
the broth be poured upon the head. It is marvelous good / for the forgetful
evil called of some letharge / and for the phrenesye. The juice of it dronken
in the quantite of iiij. drammes / with vinegre / stops the vomiting of
blood. Serpillu^ is more then hot in the second degree a great deal. I take
it to be hot in the third degree.

Of Melilote or Italian Melilote.
SErta campana or Sertula campana / is named in Greek Melilotos / but how it
is called in English / I can not tell / for I never saw it in England / but
it may be called right melilote / or Italian melilote / some Duche men though it
grow no more in Duch land / then it does in England / call it in Duche / Welsch
steynklee.

I have seen two kinds of Melilote / where of the one came out of Italy /
which I reken was the true Melilote / and an other kind which came out of
Spayn / which Matthiolus makes his Scorpioides / with sede in long horns /
throw the which a man might se / how every sede did lie.

Of Melilote out of Dioscorides.
THe best Melilote grows about Athenes / and in Cisik / and Chalcedonia / and
it resembles saffron / and is well smelling. It grows also in Campania /
about Nola / of the color of a quince / but of a weyk smell. I find no larger
description of melilote in Dioscorides / wherefore we must gather the
description by other means / then by his description. It does appear by the
name of Melilote / that it is a kind of Lotus / and all the kinds of Lotus
have three leaves together / like a clauer / where upon I gather that melilote
ought to have leaves like to clauer or trifoly. Dioscorides also intreatinge of
Ligustrum or appennine: louage makes the leaves of it like unto the leaves of
melilote. But the ligusticum has leaves specially them that are outermoste /
three growing together like unto a clauer or trifolye / but longer / whereby
and by the former description / a man may plainly gather / that the common
herb that is used for melilote / is not the right melilote. For the right
melilote must have long leaves like Ligustik / which the common melilote has
not / and also it must resemble saffron / and have a good smell / which
propertyes / because they can not be found in the common melilote / therefore
it can not be the right melilote / but a kind of wild lotus / whereof
Theophrast makes many kinds.

The virtues of Melilote.
MElilote has a pour to bind together / and to soften every inflammation /
specially about the eyes / the mother / the fundament and stones / with
maluasey / and so laid to / sometime there must be menged withal / the yolke
of an egg roasted / or the mele of fenelgreke / or lintsede / or flower / or
the heads of poppy / or succory / or endive sodden in water / it heals new
Meliceridas / that is impostemes / having within them an humor like honey. It
heals also the rinninge sores of the head / if it be laid to with the earth
of Cio / and wine / or with a galle / both sodden with wine / and also raw /
laid to with any of the fornamed / it swageth the ache of the stomach. The raw
juice pressed out and poured in with maluasey / heals the ache of the ears.
It heals also the head ache if it be menged with vinegre and rose oil / and
sprenckled upon the head. Galene writes that melilote is of a mixed qualite /
and that it is somthyng byndynge / and that it digesteth therewyth / and makes
ripe / and that the substance of it is more hot then cold.

Of the herb called Sesamum.
SEsamum is not described of Dioscorides / and therefore many err about the
knowledge of it. I will therefore gather as much as I ca^ out of other old
autores / whereby it may here after be serched and better found out and more
perfitly known. Theophrast rekeneth milium panicum and sesamam together / in
the viij. book and first chapter / and in the iij. chapter / and many other
places. Columella where as he speaks of the sowyng of milium and panicum /
immediatlye makes mention also of sesama as a thing / like one to an other.
Pliny in diverse places does the same / as in the xviij. book and vij. chapter
/ and in the xxij. book / and xxv. chapter / and Dioscorides by and by after
milium and panicum writes of sesama / as of a thing like unto them / whereupon
a man may gather that there is great lykenes between milium panicum and
sesama. Theophrast lib. viij. cap. iij. writes ye sesama has such a stalk as
the ferula has / which is holowe / and like unto a homlok / and in the v.
chapter he says / that there is one kind of sesama that is white / he writes
also that no beast will eat sesama when it is grene / because it is so bitter.
Pliny also in the xviij. book and vij. chapter writes / that sesama has a
stalk like ferula / and that the sede^ of it is kept in little vessels / and
in the x. chapter of the same book he writes ye sesama was fetched out of Jude
/ and that the sede of it serves to make oil of / and that the chaff of
milium panicum and sesama / is called Apluda. And as touching the leaves /
Pliny says that sesama has leaves blood read.

I think that where as there are two herbs / that are now taken for sesama /
nether of them have all these properties that Theophrast and Pliny give unto
sesama. The first herb which is of long time has been taken for sesama / has
seeds in little vessels / and the seeds are full of oil / but the leaves and
stalk are not like sesama / nether is the hole herb like unto milium or
panicum. This herb is lively set forth in Matthiolus and in Hieronymus Bock.
It is called in Duch / flackes totter / the leaves ar like a broad arrow head /
if the ends were not crooked and to small / but they are not read but grene /
and the sede is redishe yelow. It grows in Germany commonly amongst flachs /
and men feed birds with the sede of it there / namelye syskennes / and
linnettes / and gold finches / and birds of Canaria. But for the causes above
rehearsed / it can not be sesama of the old writers.

The other kind of herb / which is most commonly taken for the right and
true sesama / have I also seen growyng as well as the former kind: It has
leaves like basil / and a yelowish read sede / all full of oil. It is well set
out in the second edition of Matthiolus / but nether the leaves of it / nether
the stalk / nether any lykenes that it has with panicum or milium do agree
with the marks that Theophrast and Pliny do give unto their sesama / wherefore
I can not se how either of these can be the right sesama of the old writers /
allthough the sede of them both be very oylishe / and in many things will
serve in the stead of the right sesama.

The virtues of Sesama.
SEsama which may be called in English oil sede / is evil for the stomach /
and makes ones breath stink / when it sticks in ye teth while it is in
eating / but if it be laid to / it dryueth away the grosnes of the synewes /
and it helps bruised ears / inflammationes / burnt places / the pains of the
joints / and the biting of the serpent / called cerastes. With rose oil it
swageth the head ache that comes of heat. The herb sodden in wine / does
the same. It is most fit for the inflammaciones and ache of the eyes / there
oil made of it / which the Egyptianes use.

Of Siler mountayn.
SEseli massiliense is named of the Apothecaries siler montanum / it may be
called in English siler mountayn. Dioscorides describes it thus: Seseli of
Massilia has leaves like unto fenell / but grosser and a bigger stalk also /
and a spokye top like unto dill / wherein is long ^ede covered / and biting
straight way after it is eaten. The rote is long and well smellinge.

The virtues of Siler mountayn.
THe root and the sede have an hot pour / if they be dronken / they heal
the stranguriam / and the short wind / they are also good for the frangling
of the mother / and for the falling siknes / they drive out flowers / and also
the birth / and they are good for all inward diseases / and they heal an old
cough. The sede dronken with wine / helps digestion / and takes away the
gnawyng of the bellye. And it is good for agues / wherein a man is both hot
and cold at one time. It is good to be dronken with wine and pepper against
the coldness in a journey. It is also given to gotes in drink / and to other
beasts also to make them bring forth more easily.

Of Hartis wart.
SEseli Ethiopicum grows in diverse parts of high Germanye / where I have
seen it both grene and dry / and some call it hartzwurt / but I never saw it
in England / wherefore we may call it Hartwurt / with the Duche men / until
we find a better name for it.

It has leaves like Yuy / but lesser / and long of the fashon of Wodbinde
leaves. It is a great bushye herb / or a black bushe as my Greek text has /
for it has melas / and not megas / and it grows two cubits high / wherein
are branches two spannes long / and a top like dyll / the sede is black /
thyck as wheat / but more biting and better smelling / and very pleasant.

SEseli Peloponense has leaves like unto Homlok / but brother and grosser / or
thycker. It has a greater stalk then it of Massilia / of lykenes of ferula.
And in the ouermoste part of it / is a spokye top / wherein is brother sede /
and thycker / and well smelling. It grows in rough places / in moist places /
an in high places / and also in Yda / it has the same virtue with the other.

The figure that Matthiolus sets out / for seseli Peloponnense / in my
judgment agrees not with the description of Dioscorides: for the leaves of
his herb / in the figure / are not like homloke / nether in one point nor
other. The leaves of it that I saw growyng about Weissenburg in high Germany is
somthinge like persely / wherefore some have taken it for petroselino or apio
montano / the root is very long and great / and of a strong smell / but not
utterly unpleasant.

Of the three kinds of Sideritis.
SIderitis which is called of some Heraclea / is an herb which has leaves
like unto horehound / but longer drawyng nere unto the lykenes of sage or an
oak / but lesser and rougher: it has four-squared stalks a span high / or
higher / not unpleasant in taste / and after a manner somthyng binding / and in
them are round things like whorles / certain spaces going between as horehound
has / and there in is black sede. It grows in places somthyng rockye. This
herb that Dioscorides describes here / grows in the old walls of Colon /
and also about the feldes of Worms / not far from the harnes mylles.

depiction of plant Sideritis prima.


It has long small indented leaves / with a good smell. And I suppose that
Fuchsius describes the same herb / and although Matthiolus does reprove
Fuchsius in taking of this herb for the first kind of Sideritis / yet he
sets one for the first kind which is much less agreyng with the
description of Dioscorides / then it that Fuchsius sets forth. For (except I
be far begyled / as I think I am not) he sets out for the first kind of
Sideritis / marrubium palustre Tragi / that is water horehound. That herb
grows always about water sides / and it has a stinking smell of garleke /
and it is a cubit high / and for the most part higher / wherefore it can not
be the first kind of Sideritis / which grows in rockye grounds / and has
a stalk but a span long / or not much above. This kind is called in Duche
Glitkraut / it may be called in English Yronwurt or Rock sage.

The second kind has branches two cubits high / but small. It has many
leaves in long footstalkes / like unto the leaves of a brake / and in the over
part cloven of each side. Out of the highest wings come forth certain
outgrowynges / long and small / and in the high top of al / representing a
round bowl / having a rough head / wherein is sede / like the sede of a
beat / but rounder and harder.

I have seen no herb more agreyng unto this description / then the herb that
grows in sennes / called of some Osmunda / but I am afraid that ye top of it
and the sede will not suffer it to be Sideritim secundam.

Of the third kind of Sideritis.
THe third kind grows in walls and wyneyardes / and it has many leaves /
coming from one root like unto the leaves of Coriander / about little stalks
/ being a span high / smoth / tender / and somthyng whytish. It has read
flowers / in taste bitter and clammye. If herb Robert had had white flowers as
it has read / it might have well ben the third kind of Sideritis. But the
other kind that has the whytish stalks / after my judgment is the third
kind / which may be called in English Coriandre wound wede.

The virtues of the kinds of Sideritis.
The leaves of the first kind laid to / do bind wounds together / and
defend them from inflammation. The leaves of the second kind is also good
for wounds. The third kind is also good for blodye and grieve wounds.

Of the Carob tree.
depiction of plant Siliqua.


THe fruit of the tree / that is called in Greek Keratonia / is named in Greek
Keration / in Latin Siliqua / of the later Grecianes Xyloceraton / in Italian
Carobe / in French Carouge / in Spanishe Farobas / in Duch sant Iohans brot:
but how that it is named in English / I can not tell / for I never saw it in
England / yet I have had the tree of it / growing in my gardin at Colon in
Germanye / and I have seen the fruit in diverse places of Italy / where as it
is called Carobe. Yet allthough this fruit be not / nether has been in England
that I have heard of / for all that all the interpretours that have interpreted
the new Testament / have Englished siliquas coddes / not without a great
error. For siliqua allthough it signifye some time a cod or an husk of beans
or peasen / or such other like pulse / yet it signifies in the xv. of Luke /
the fruit of a tree / and not simply a cod or a husk without any addition /
whereof it is a cod / for it is named in Greek of Luke Keration. The tree is a
talle tree / and it has leaves in such order as the asshen leaves grow in /
but they are much rounder and shorter / and in deed the branch of the Carob
tree is lykest unto a bean / both in fruit and leaves of any tree or pulse that I
know. The fruit is like a long flat bean / in color read / in taste when it
is ripe and dried / sweet / but unpleasant whylse it is grene.

These things being so / it were better to English siliquas / Carob coddes /
then coddes alone. The tree may be named in English a Carob tree / and the fruit
a Carob / or the tree may be named a bean tree / and the fruit a Carob bean. If
any man can find any better or fitter name / I shall be well content there with.

The virtues of the Carob.
Fresh and grene Carobes are evil for the stomach / but they louse the
bellye: the same dried / stop the belly / and become better for the stomach.
They provoke also urine / and specially such as are laid up in the stones of
grapes.

Out of Galene.
The Carob bean ingendreth but a noughty juice / and it is full of wod / by
reason whereof it must needs be hard of digestion / and this is an evil
propertye that it has / that it will not lightlye go down. Wherefore it were
better that they were no more brought from the East countrees / where as they
grow hither into this country. He writes also: The carob tree called Cerotonia
/ is of a binding and drying nature / as the fruit is / which is called
Ceratium / and it has some swetenes in it. The carob has one thing like unto a
chirrye / for whylse it is grene / it louseth the bellye more / and when it is
dried it stops the bellye more / because the moisture is spent away / and
it that is of a gross substance / does only remain.

Of Mustarde.
depiction of plant Sinapi primum genus.
depiction of plant Sinapi hortense.


MVstarde is nether divided into kinds / nether described of Dioscorides /
because it was so well known in his time. And now it is so well known / that
it needs but a short description / which is metely well set forth in Pliny.
For he in the xix. book and viij. chapter writes thus of mustarde. Mustarde is
of three kinds / whereof one kind is very small. The other kind has leaves
like a rape. The third kind has leaves like rocket. This is the division
joined with a short description. There may be made an other division of
mustarde by the sede / whereof one kind is white / and the other blackish
broune or redish. It that has the white sede / is much shorter / then the
other kinds that have the broun sede. It that grows in the gardin / grows
unto a great hight / and it has very many and long branches. It that
grows in the corn in Somersetshyre / a little from Glassenberrye / is much
shorter then the gardine mustarde is / but nothing behind it in biting and
sharpnes. Mustarde is named in Greek / Napi or sinepi / or sinapi in English /
French / and Low duche mostarde / in high Duche Senffe / in Latin Sinapi or
Sinapis.

The virtues of Mustarde.
THe best mustard is it that is not wethered nor wrincled / and is read and
full grown / and when it is broken / it is grene within / and as it were full
of juice / and as it were graye in color / for such it is fresh and of a
perfect age. The virtue of mustarde is to heat / to make subtle / and to draw
unto it / and when it is chowed / to draw down thynne fleme from the head: but
the juice of it menged with mede / if it be gargled with all / it is good for
the diseases of the almondes about the roots of the tongue / and for long
roughnes / and hardness of the wind pypes. If it be broken and put into the
nose thrilles / it makes a man to nese: it is good for them that have the
fallinge siknes / and it stereth up weomen that are strangled of the mother.

It is also good to be laid upon the heads of them that have the drowsey evil
/ or forgetful siknes / called lethargus / after that the hear is shaven of.
If it be menged with a fygge / and laid upon the place until that it be read
/ it is good for the sciatica / and for the milte / and to be short for every
old ache / where as by the greffe of an other part / we will remove any
thing from the deep / unto the skin / it healed also scalled heads / where
as the stalk is read / and the hear falls of. If it be laid upon the sore
place / it scoureth also the face / and takes away blewe marks that come of
brusynge / if it be laid to with honye or fat / or with a cerote maid of wax.
If it be laid to with vinegre / it is good for lepres and wild scabbes / and
rynninge scurffe. It is good to be dronken for agues which return again by
course at a certain time / so that it be sprenkled or put into the drink
after the manner of perched barle mele. It is also good to be mengled with
drawing emplasters / and with such as are prepared against scabbes. And
the same broken with fygges / and put into the ears / it is good for them that
are hard of hearing. And it is good for the soundyng or noise of the head.
The juice of it / if it be laid to with honye / is good for the dulnes of
sight / and for the roughnes of the eybrees. Men use to press out the juice of
it / whylse it is grene / and then to dry it in the sun. Galene says that
mustard is hot and dry in the fourth degree.

Out of Pliny.
PIthagoras did judge that mustarde was most principal of all those things /
whose virtue were carried up into the head / because that there is nothing that
percheth more the nose and the brain then it does. And it sets forth his
pour and streyngth very far abroad. If that to great a sleep vex them that
have the forgetful syknes / it is good to be laid to emplasterwyse / either
upon the head / or the shynnes / with a fygge and vinegre. It heals by
making of blisteres by the reason of the burning heat / any part of the body
out of the which euel humores and faults of the body ought to be drawn out /
from the deep unto the skin / and takes away old aches of the breast /
loins and hippes / by the foresaid means. In a great hardness it is laid on
without a fygge / but if greater burninge be looked for / it is laid on a double
cloth / going between.

Of the herb called Sion.
THe herb that is named in Greek Sion / and in Latin Sium / is supposed to be
called of Pliny lauer. The same ^s called of some in English / but falsely /
water cresses / and of other belragges: but to have some sure and common name /
it is best to call it water persely / or sallat persely. It is named in Duch
Brunnen peterlin / or wasser merk / in Italian Gorgolestro / as Matthiolus
says / and in Spanish Rabacas / in French Berle.

Sion as Dioscorides describes it / grows in the water / and is a small
bushye herb / growing right up and fatt / it has broad leaves like unto
Allexander / but lesser / and of a spicye smell. By this description they are
confuted / that hold that brooklen / called in Duch Bachpungen / should be syon
/ when as it has nether leaves like unto Alexander / nether grows right up /
but grows low by the ground sydelinges / so are they also confuted to take
water kresse or burn kresse to be syon / when as it has no leaves like unto
Alexander. Either Matthiolus knows not the right syon / or ellis I know it
not. For the Sion that I know / has not sede in little coddes / but in the
top after the manner of anise / and the root is not like the roots of water
cresses. I am far deceived / except the figure that Matthiolus sets out / be
not like the monstre that Horace makes mention of / which has a mannis head /
set upon a horse neck / and many diverse feathers upon them / for I have gone
through England / high Germany and low Germany / and a great deal of Italy /
where as I sought diligently all kinds of herbs / but I could never find
yet any such herb / as Matthiolus sets forth for sion / for his sion has
the very true roots and coddes of water cresses / which never man / as I
think did se in sion. Let men that are learned in the history of herbs judge
/ whether I judge right or no.

There are two kinds of herbs beside this / whereof the greater is in all
things / sauinge the bigness is like unto sion / the other kind is of a cubite
hight / and has leaves very like perselye in figure / sauinge that they are a
great deal bigger. I judge that this kind is called of Pliny silans / which
as he says / nascitur in glareosis and perennibus fluuijs, apij similitudine.

The virtues of water persely, called in Latin Sium or Lauer.
The leaves of water persely / whether they be eaten raw / or sodden / do
break the stone / and drive it out / and they also provoke a man to make water
/ and they drive out of a womannis body / both her burdin and her flowers.
Galene grants also that Sion is so much hot / as it is well smelling /
when it is tasted.

Of Persnepes and Skirwartes.
depiction of plant Sisarum satiuum magnum.
depiction of plant Sisarum satiuum minus.
depiction of plant Sisarum syluestre.


BOth Fuchsius and Matthiolus set forth two kinds of Siser / but as they agree
in ye second kind / which is our skirwurt / so they differ much in ye former
kind: for where as Fuchsius makes the former kind of siser / to be our
pershepe / Matthiolus sets forth in his figure a kind of carot / which he
says is called in Duche / gurlin and gergelim / in French cheruc and gyroles
/ but his description afterward / agrees not with the figure of the herb yt
he painteth for siser / for he describes siser thus. Siser habet folia olus. A
tree / etc. Siser has the leaves of Alexander with a stalk and a shaddowy top
like unto the herb / called pastinaca / with roots a span long / having with
in it a sine wish pith / somthynge bitter in taste / and in color something of
saffron and pleasant unto the mouth. This description agrees with nether of
the figures of Matthiolus that he has set forth / and yet he made the
description him self.

It agrees not with the first kind / for it has not leaves like unto
Alexander / nether any such like leaued herbs / but it has leaves like unto
a Carot. And it agrees not with the second figure / for the roots of the
herb / that is our Skyrwurt / has not roots a span long / for they are not
four inches long. Therefore the description that Matthiolus makes / agrees
with nether kind of the herbs which he sets in his pictures.

Pliny lib. xx. cap. v. makes two kinds of Siser / and says thus: Siser
erraticum satiuo simile est et effectu. That is Siser the wild is like unto
the tame / and also in workynge. And in the xix. book and fyfte chapter / he
partly describes Siser thus: Inest longitudine neruus, qui decoctis
extrahitur, amaritudinis tamen magna part relicta: neruus idem and pastinacae
maiori, duntaxat aniculae. That is / there goes a synew or a pythe a long
through the Siser / which after that it is sodden / it is drawn out / and
yet a great part of the bitterness abides still / the greater pastinaca has
the same sinewe / but only after that it is a year old.

These be Plinyes words / whose autorite / if we were bound to give credit to
/ then should nether our Pesnepe / nether any kind of our Carotes be Siser
/ for I have diligently fasted both our persnepe and our carot rotes / but I
can find no bitterness at all / nether in the out part of them / nether in
the pith or synewe / as Pliny calls it. I have also tasted the scirwurte
root / and in it I have found very little bitterness / not wythstandynge some /
but not so much as Pliny seems to require / and whylse I tasted it / I found
it heter then bitterer / but I found such propertyes in it / that I dare
reckon surely / that this is a kind of siser.

But as for our persnepe / as it can not be siser of Plinye / so know I no
cause / why that it may not be siser in Dioscorides / saving that the great
swetenes may seem to hinder it / for it that is very sweet / is not wont to
provoke an appetite / but rather to take it away.

The virtues of Siser.
THe root of Siser sodden / is pleasant to the mouth / and profitable for the
stomach. It does styre a man to make water / and it ingendreth an appetite.

Of the herb called Sison.
SIson which is called both of Plinye and diverse both new and old Grecianes
/ Sinon is no otherwise described of Dioscorides / but that it has sede like
persely / long and hot in taste / and that it has as it were little corns in
the top. I find no herb in any place that ever I have been in / so well
agreynge unto this short description / as the herb which some have abused for
Amomo / depiction of plant and is called of some black perselye. It grows
about hedges and laynes with leaves like a persnep / a prettye long sweet
root / somthynge warm in taste / and black sede / which in deed is warm /
but not very hot: wherefore I dare not say / that the herb is the right
sison / or ellis I durst have been bold to have pronounced that it had been the
right sison / but it may be a kind of it.

The virtues of Sison.
IT is good to be dronken against the diseases of the milte / for them that
can not well make water / and for weomen that want their natural siknes. The
inhabiters of Syria where as it grows / use it for a sauce / receyuinge it
with a sodden gourd and vinegre.

Of the kinds of Sisimbrium.
DIoscorides makes two kinds of sisymbrium / whereof one grows on the land
/ and the other in the water. The first kind which grows in the land / is
named of some as Dioscorides writes / serpillum syluestre / and it grows in
land / that is not plowed or dug. It is like unto minte of the gardine /
but it has brother leaves and better smellyng. Dioscorides in the description
of menthe syluestris / or men thastri / makes it to have leaves greater then
sisymbrium. Of this description of Dioscorides / a man may gather that
sisymbrium is like unto pennye ryall / either both in leaf / and the manner of
crepyng / and growing / or at the least in crepyng / and that it must have
greater leaves then gardine minte / and lesser leaves then the wild minte /
called mentastrium. Matthiolus in his later edition says / that sisymbrium is
called in Duche Bachmuntz / or wasser muntz / which can not agree with the
description that he writes thus over his sisymbrium hortense. For how can
wasser muntz / that is water mint / or bachmuntz / that is brook minte / be
gardine sisymbrium.

How also can sisymbrium be called well hortense / seeing that Dioscorides
writes that it grows in places vnmanered or plowed / or untrimmed / when as
gardines are manered and dug. Therefore I doubt whether Matthiolus knows
the right sisymbrium or no. I take sisymbrium for a kind of mint / that is
called in English baum mynte / whether it grow in the field / or be brought
into the gardine / it is of a middel bigness between horse minte / and fine
gardin minte.

The second kind of sisymbrium is called cardamine also / in English water
cresses / in Duche brun kressen / or wasser kressen / in French cresson.

The water cresse is a water herb / and grows in the same places that fion
or water perselye grows in. It is called cardamine / because it resembles
cardamum / that is gardin cresses in taste. It has leaves first round / but
after they be grown forth / they are indented like the leaves of rocket.

The virtues of both the herbs called Sisimbria.
THe sede of the herb called sisymbrium primum in Latin / and in English baum
mint: if it be dronken with wine / it is good for the dropping out of the water
/ and it is good also for the stone / it stancheth also the gnawyng or wringing
in the bellye / and the hichcock / other ways called the yiskinge. The leaves
are good to be laid to the temples and forhead / for the head ache: they are
also good for the styngynge of waspes and bees. If it be dronken / it stops
perbreakynge. This herb is of an hot nature / even hot and dry in the
second degree / whylse it is grene / hot and dry in the third degree: when it
is dried / and in the same degree is the former sisymbrium.

Of the pulls called smilax hortensis, and in English Kidney bean.
depiction of plant Smilax hortensis.


SMilax of the gardin / whose fruytes are called lobia / that is coddes or
husks or shales / is called sperage. It has leaves like unto Yuy / but softer
and smaller stalks / and claspers wounden in busshes / whereunto they are set
/ which increase to that greatness / that they make arborres and things like
tents. It has a fruit like Fenegreke / but longer and more notable / where
in are seeds like unto kydnes / not all of one color / but are for a part
somthynge redishe.

The virtues of Kidney beans.
THe fruit is sodden with the sede / and it is eaten after the manner of a wurt
or eatable herb / as sperage is eaten / it makes a man make water and causes
heavy dreams.

Of the sharp Smilax.
depiction of plant Smilax aspera.


THe sharp smilax has leaves like unto wodbinde / and many small branches /
full of pricks / like unto paliurus or the bramble. It windeth it self about
trees / crepinge up and down. It bears a fruit full of berryes / as a little
cluster / growyng out of the top of the small branches / which is read / when
it is ripe / and biteth a little in taste. It has an hard root and thyck. It
grows in merrish and in rough grounds.

The virtues of the sharp Smilax.
THe leaf and fruit of this / are a preservative or triacle against dedlye
poysones / whether they be taken before or after. Some write that if any man
give a little of these broken into powder unto a new borne child / that he
shall never after be hurt with any deadlye poison. It is also put in to
preservative medicines to help against deadly poysones.

Of the smooth Smilax or great arbor wind.
The smoth smilax / which may be called in English Arbor wind / or great
wind / or with wind / has leaves like to Iuy / but softer and smoother / and
thynner / and long branches / as the rough smilx / which are without
pricks. This does also wind it self about trees as the other. It has a
fruit like a Lupine / black and little. It has above many white flowers / and
round through out all the branches: and there of are made arbores or summer
houses. But in Autumn / the leaves fall of: Thus far Dioscorides. As for the
sharp smilax / I have seen it diverse times / and I am sure the description of
Dioscorides agrees well with it: hitherto have I found no herb / wherewyth
the hole description of smilax leuis does agree. For allthough the great wind
with the great bell flower be in all other parts agreynge with the description
of Dioscorides: yet the fruit agrees not / for it is not like unto the fruit
of Alupine. Aetius also in the healinge of a dropsey / says that the smilax /
which grows in the hedges by the water side / brings forth coddes as the
kidney bean does / called gardin smilax. But I never saw any kind of wind
/ or with wind / or arbor wind / have any such cod / wherefore I must
confess / that I never saw the rygt herb / which is called smilax leuis.
The herb that Matthiolus sets forth in his figure for smilax leuis / has
nether a sede like Lupine / nor yet coddes like unto the pulls / called smilax
hortensis: wherefore it can not be smilax leuis in my judgment / except that
there be other kinds of Lupine / then ever I have seen / and other kinds of
coddes or husks of the gardin smilax / then have cummed to my sight. The herb
that Matthiolus sets forth for smilax leuis / is in my judgment the first
kind of Volubilis in Mesne / where of he writes thus:

There is one great kind of wynd or wythwinde / which has milk in it / and
is called in Latin Funis arborum / that is the rope of trees / it has a white
flower like unto a bell. Dioscorides takes it for a temporat herb / or ellis
a little hoter / then temporate / and to be dry in the second degree. It
resolves / rypeth / scoureth / louseth and opens the mouth of the vessels
of the veins / and therefore it is given with tragagant / mastick / spicknard
/ and whaye / it delivers men from the stoppinge of the liver and the veins
/ that goes between the liver and the guts / and therefore it heals
iaundes with the juice of persely / and sicorye or whaye / it purges gentely
burnt choler / and therefore it helps rotten agues / and specially such as
are long choleric agues / it scoureth also away the excrementes and
outcastes of the breasts and lounges / and therefore it is good for them that
are shortwinded.

Of Night shad.
Night shad or Petemorell is called in Greek Strichnos / in Latin Solanum / in
Barbarus latin Solatru^ / in Duche Nacht schad / in French Morelle. Night shad
is a bushy herb / which is used to be eaten / it is not very great / it has
many holes like unto Arne holes at the setting on of the branches and the
stalk.

depiction of plant Solanum somniferum.


It has black leaves and greater then basil / and brother: it has a round
grene berrye / the berrye is either black or read / when it is ripe / the herb
has a gentle taste without hurt.

The virtues of Night shad.
THe nature of it is to cool / wherefore the leaves laid to with perched
barley mele / is good for saint Antonies fire / that is a colerick
inflammation: and it is good against tetters. If the leaves be laid to by them
selves / they are good to heal the inflammation in the corner of the eye /
called Egelopa / which is disposed to bread a fistula / and also the head
ache: they are also good for an hot or boylinge stomach. They drive away the
hot imposteme behind the ear / called Parotis / if they be broken and laid
to with salt. The juice is also good for the hot inflammation / and tetters
and such like rinnyng sores or hot scurf or scabbes / if it be laid to with
white led rose oil and litarge / and with bread / it heleth ye disease of ye
eye / called Egilopa. It is good for children yt have yt burning in ye head /
and for ye infla^mation of the brayn / and fylmes and skins that go about it.
If it be poured with rose oil upon ones head / it is menged with ey medicines
instead of water or of an egg / which are laid to against sharp flowynges
of the eyes. If it pe poured in / it is good for the ache of the ears: if it
be laid to with wool / it stops the isshue that weomen have.

Of Alkakinge or winter chirres.
depiction of plant Halicacabum vulgar.


THere is an other kind of Solanum / called Halicacabus and Phissalis / it has
leaves like unto night shade / but yet brother. When his stalks are fully
grown / they bow to the ground: it has the fruit in little sede vessels
like unto bladders round and read like gold / and also smouth like a grape or
wynberry / which the garlande makers use in making of garlandes.

The virtues of Alkakinge.
It has the same virtue that gardin nyghtshad has / but that it is not to be
eaten / the fruit of it dronken / heals the iaundes / and provoke water.
The juice of both the herbs called Solanum / is used to be pressed forth / and
when it is dried / it is set up in the shadow / and when it is dressed after
this manner / it is good for all these purposes above named.

Of the kinds of Sorbus.
depiction of plant Sorbum ouatum.


DIoscorides makes mention but of one kind of Sorbus / Theophrast writes of
two of the male and female / but Pliny makes mention of iiij. kinds / whereof
I have seen iij. kinds / but one kind I confess that I never saw unto my
remembrance. The two first kinds which I know / have leaves so like as can
be / set wynge wise as the asshe leaves grow / indented / but they differ in ye
fruit. The former of them has read berryes like coral bedes / growyng in
great clusters / which the birds eat in the beginning of winter / the tree
grows in moist woddes / and it is called in Northumlande / a rowne tree / or a
whicken tree / in the South parts of England / a quick beam tree.

The second kind has a fruit of the bigness of a small crabbe or a wild pear
/ a little longer then a crab / but not full of the fashion of a pear. This tree
grows very plenteously in high Almany / where as the fruit is called sorbere
or sorbepffel / and spierlin: it may be called in English sorb appel.

The third kind which is called of Pliny sorbus forminalis / has a lefe much
like unto a plain tree leaf. This tree is called in English a seruyse tree / as
though a man would say a sorbus tree. The fruit is almost as small as are haw /
in color broun / in taste binding / as the other two kinds are. And this kind
even as the sorb appel is very pleasant to be eaten until it be rotten / but
then it is very pleasant / but not so pleasant by a great deal as the sorb
appel is.

The virtues of the three kinds of Sorbus.
The sorb appels being yelow in color before they be full ripe / if they be
cut in pieces / and dried in the son / if they be then eaten / they will stop
the belly. Also the powder of them / after they be beten or ground / if it be
taken in the stead of perched barley mele / and taken in / and the broth of
them does the same.

Of the herb called Sparganium.
SParganium has leaves like unto the herb which is called in Latin gladiolus
/ and in Greek xiphion / and that is small after the manner of a small sege or
sheregrasse / called in Latin carex: but the leaves are yet narrower / then the
leaves of it that is called gladiolus / and more bowynge: in the top of the
stalk are round knoppes like bedes / where in is sede. This herb grows most
commonly in waters and fennes / the knoppes are full of little tuftes. This
herb is common in England and in many places of Germany / but I never heard
any Duche nor English name of it: but until we can happen upon a better name
/ it may be called bid sedge or knop sedge.

The virtues of Sparganium.
The root is good to be given with wine against the poison of serpents.

Of French or Spanish brom.
SPartium is called in Greek spartion / in English / spanish brom o^ French
brom: that spartium is not ginista of the Latins / I have sufficiently proved
before entreating of the brom bushe.

The description of Spanish brom.
SPartium is a bushe / having long twigges without leaves sound / very
tough / and some bind vyndes with them. It bears coddes like unto phaseles /
where in are seeds like unto lentilles. It has a flower like unto wall gelouer
/ called of some Hartis ease. This bushe grows in diverse gardines in England
/ and in Spayn / and Italy depiction of plant Spartium.
wild. It grows in my Lord Cobhammes gardin at Cobham hall / and also at
Shene in the gardine. It has leaves in deed / but so small that I suppose that
Dioscorides took them for no leaves / because they were so little and few /
that they deserved not the name of leaves / or ellis Dioscorides looked upon
the branches / which at that time had no leaves. And that this is like to have
been so the affirminge of Dioscorides / that Dictamnus of Candy had no flowers
nor sede / may bring credit unto my gessinge. For it is well known / that it
has both flowers and seeds / though Dioscorides never saw them.

The virtues of Spanish brom.
THe sede and flowers of the Spanish brom are good to be dronken with mede in
the quantite of two scruples and an half / to pourge strongly / but without
iepardye upward: but the sede purges dounward. If the twigges be steped in
water / and ye juice be pressed out / after they be well bruised / a ciat of it
will heal ye diseases of the sciatica and ye squynansie or chokes / if it be
dronken fasting / some use to stepe the^ in bryne / and pour them in by a
clister / to them that have the sciatica / by this means it drives forth
blodye matter and full of stringes or ragged pieces.

Of the herb called Spartum or Sparta.
depiction of plant Spartum.


BEside the bushe that is called in French brom / which is called spartum.
There is an herb also called spartum / and of some writers sparta / as in this
proverb: Spartam nactus es, hanc adorna. for Pliny in the xix. book and second
chap. makes mention in these words following of the herb spartum or sparta:
Herba and hic sponte nascens, and quae non queat seri, iuncus quod proprie
aridi soli: vni terrae dato vitio, nanque id malum telluris est: nec aliud ibi
seri aut nasci potest, etc. And a little after / in sicco praeferunt e cannabi
funes, spartum alitur demersum, veluti natalium sitim pensans, etc. And a little
after: Iunco Graecos ad funes vsos nomini credamus, quo herbam eam appellant,
postea palmarum folijs, philuraque manifestum est: and inde translatum a
poenis, perque simile very est. Thus far Plinye. Out of these words I gather
that the herb that he writes of / is a kind of sea bente / or sea rishe /
whereof the frayles are made / that figs and rasines are carried hither in out
of Spain. The same bent or sea rishe have I seen in Northumberland / beside
Ceron Dalauale / and there they make hattes of it. I have also seen it in great
plenty in ij. ylandes of East Freslande / whereof the one is called the just /
and the other mordenie: there men use this rishe only for to make ropes of it
(as Pliny writes) and to cover houses with it. It may be named in English Sea
bent / or sea rishe / or frayl rishe. I have not read in any good author / that
it has any virtue to heal any disease.

Of the herb called Spondilion.
depiction of plant Spondilium.


SPondilion is named in Greek Sphondilion / in Duch Bere^ klaw or wild Pasteney
/ it may be called in English Kow persnepe or middow persnepe. It grows in
moist middowes / and about hedges sides / but not in the hedges.

The description of Spondilium out of Dioscorides.
SPondilium has leaves after a manner like unto a plain tree leaves / drawyng
very unto the lykenes of the leaves of Ponax. The stalk is a cubit long or
longer like unto fenels stalk: it has sede like unto siseli / duble / brother
/ whyter / and fuller of chaff / of a strong or grievous smell. It has a root
like a radice / it grows in merrish and watery grounds.

The virtues of Spondilium.
THe sede of cow persnep dronken / scoureth out flegmatike matter through the
belly and guts. It heals also them that are diseased in the liver / the
iaundes / them that are short winded / the falling siknes / and the stranglinge
of the mother. If a man that is fallen in to deep a sleep / receive ye perfume
of it / it will waken him again. If a mannis head be anointed with the oil
wherein it is sodden / it will help them that have the phrenesye / the drowsey
or forgetful evil / and the head ache. If it be laid to with rue / it
holds and stays creping sores and tetters. The root also is good for the
disease of the liver / and for the iaundes. The same shaven / and put in /
wastes away the hardness of fistules o^ false wounds. The juice of the flemes
being grene / is good for mattery ears. This juice may be dried in the son
/ and laid up as other iuyces be.

Of certain kinds of thistelles.
SPina in Latin / is properly called a thistel / and in Greek Acantha. Howbeit
is called improperly after a metaphorical manner / spina is taken for a prick /
because thistelles or spine / are most full of pricks. First that acantha
signifies a thystell / and not an hawthorn / or a thorn without any addition
/ as the most part of scoolmaysters and translatours English it: I am able to
prove / not only by good Greek authors / but also by the best Latin writers /
that acantha in Greek signifies a thystell / it may be proved by the autorite
of Aristotel in the viij. book of the history of living and sensible substances
/ and in the third chapter / who writes these words:

(...). That is to say / these are spiniuora / that is thistel eaters / and
under the name of the thystell / he understands the sede of a thistel / as
when we say / a man eats more wheat then rye / we mean nether the blade of
wheat / nether the straw nor chaff / but only the sede of wheat. If acantha
ought to be Englished a thorn or an hawthorne / let us se which birds they be
/ that Aristotel calls acanthophagas / and as diverse interpretours English
them thorn eaters. Aristotell says that Linetes and Goldfinches / and Grene
finches / are acanthophage: who ever saw any of these three kinds of birds
eat thorns / or the fruytes of thorns? Therefore I may say unto them / that
English acantham and spinam / a thorn or an haw / which is the fruit of a
white thorn. Erratis philosophiam and plantarum historiam ignorantes. For
beside this place now alleged: Dioscorides in the chapter whereas he entreats
of the tree called Rododendron / writes thus: Merion brings forth a fruit
like an Almonde / as it were a certain horn / when as it is opened / it is
full of a wolly nature / like unto the down of thistelles. The Greek has
(...). Who heard ever tell / that any thorn tree / had any down or any wollye
nature / like unto the down of a thistell? Plinye also writynge of the herb
called Erigeron / which we call in English Groundsell / says thus: The head
of Grounsell is diuersely divided with a down / qualis est spina. What is spina
here? an hawthorne or a thystel? when have ye seen the thorn tree have any
down? by these places it is plain that acantha in Greek / and spina in Latin
signifye a thistel / and no thorn / as our scoolmaisters and translatours use
to English it now a days. The Same word acantha does S. Luke use in the para^^e
of the sower in the viij. chapt. and all the translatours turn acantham spinam
/ but the translators of the Latin in to English / not without a great error /
turn spinam into a thorn / when as spina betokens not a thorn / but a
thistel. For Luke writes thus: Aliud cecidit super spinas, and simul enatae
spinae, suffocauerunt illud. And some fell upon: what? the thorns / or upon the
thistelled sede? and waxed or grew up with it / and chouked it. Who uses to
sow upon thorns / whether thorns signifye thorn trees / or the sede or fruit
of the thorn tree? Who dare say that a thorn tree in one year can grow so
high / that it may be a^^e to choke the corn? Is a thorn able to grow with
the corn / as Luke says / so high in one year? I trow nay. Therefore let men
learn to English acantham or spinam a thistel / when as there is nothing put
to them.

Of two other kinds of thystelles.
DIoscorides writes of two herbs / which have like names / but for all that
/ differ in description / and in substance / the one is called in Greek acantha
leuke: and the other is called leucacantha. The former called spina alba /
grows in Italye / and in some places of Germany / and beside Sion in England.
I know no English name for it / but it may be called in English whyt thistel.
The other kind called in Greek leucacantha / and in latin spina alba / is
supposed to be the herb / named of ye common Herbaries Carduus marie / and in
English / milk thistel or mary's thystel.

The virtues of these two kinds of thystelles.
The white thystel called spina alba / has a root good for the spitting of
blood for them that are diseased in the stomak and guts. It provoke water /
and it is good to be laid to emplaster wise for swellings. The broth of it is
good to wash the teth with / for the teth ach. The sede of it dronken / is
good for chylder that have the crampe / and for the biting of serpents.

Leucacantha or spina alba / named in English milkthystel / has a root good
to be chowed in a mannis mouth for the teth ache / the broth of it / taken in
the quantite of three ciates with wine / is good for long pleuresies / for them
yt have the sciatica / and for parts yt are bursten and shronken together.

Of the hawthorn tree.
THe hawthorn tree is called in Greek Oxyacantha / in Latin spina acuta / in
Duche Hagen dorne. Many have judged that Oxyacan tha or spina acuta was the
berbery tree / otherwise called a piridge tree. But Matthiolus has brought good
resons to prove / yt Oxyacantha is our hawthorn / and not berberies / and I
have nothing to say against his arguments / saving that Theophrast rekeneth
Oxyacantha^ amongst the trees / whose leaves fall not of in winter: our
hawthorn leaves do fall of in winter / then it seems yt our hawthorn is not
oxyacantha in Theophrast. If this were answered to / then durst I more boldly
pronounce yt our hawthorn were oxyacantha. It appears by it yt is written in
Columella yt our hawthorn tree which has very white flowers / and a read fruit
/ which swyne desire very much to eat / for he writes thus: Suibus nemora
sunt conuenientissima, quae vestiuntur quercu, subere, fago, corylis,
pomiferisque syluestribus, vt sunt albae spinae, Graece siliquae, iuniperus,
lotus, prunus and achrades pyri. That is the great woddes are fit for swyne /
which are anorned with oaks / cork trees / beche trees / and wyld trees /
that bring forth fruytes with stones in them / as are spina alba / that is as I
judge white thorns / Greek carobes / the Juniper / the wild lote tree / and
the slo tree / and the wild pear tree.

In these words I understand under the name of spine albe / the hawthorn tree /
which has a fruit / as all men know / very fit for swyne. And here is also
to be noted / that there is a wild prunus against some that have holden the
contrary / which prunus is the slo tree or black thorn tree / or the wild
bulls tree.

Of the herb called Stachis.
depiction of plant Stachys.


STachis is a little bushe like unto horehound / but longer. It has many
leaves rough / one far from an other / hard / horye / of a pleasant smell /
and many twigges / cumminge forth from one root / whyter then horehound: it
grows in high hills / and in rough places. I have seen one kind of this
herb / growyng in London in Master Richardes gardin / but no where ellis in
England. The other kind did my friend master Fanconer show me after that he
came out of Italy. This last kind agrees better with the hardness of the
leaf that Dioscorides speaks of / but it wants the smell that the same
Dioscorides requires in Stachi / except the age took away the smell from the
herb that he showed me. This may be called in English long horehound / or
wild horehounde.

The virtues of Stachis.
Stachis has a biting and hot nature / by reason whereof the broth of the
leaves dronken / draw down to weomen their flowers / and drive out the
secondes.

Of Stauis aker.
depiction of plant Staphis agria.


STaphis agria / is called in Duche Beis munt oder Lauskraut / in English /
Stauis aker. I never saw it growing out of Italy / but only in gardines.

Stauis akre has leaves cloven like unto the wild wind: it has little
straight stalks / soft and black / and a flower like wadde / and a sede in
little grene coddes / or sede vessels as the cich has / in figure thresquared
and rough / in black somthyng dunne read / white within / and sharp in taste.

The virtues of Stauis aker.
IF a man give to any body ten or fyften of the seeds of it in mede / or honyed
water / they will bring out gross matter by vomit. They that have dronken
them / must walk after the taking of them: and they must take heed / that
they give often times mede / because they bring a man in ieperdy of stranglinge
/ and burn the throat. The herb it self broken / and laid to with oil / is
good for the lousey euel / against itchyng or yuking and scabbes. If it be
chowed / it brings down much waterishe fleme. If it be sodden with vinegre
/ and the teth be washed therewyth / it is good for the teth ach / and it
fasteneth louse goumes. It heals the hot sores of the mouth with honey.

Of the herb called Stichados of the apothecaries.
depiction of plant Stichas.


STechas grows in the ylandes of France / over against Massilia / which are
called Stechades / whereupon the herb gat the name. It is an herb with a
small branch / and has a busshye top like unto thyme / but the leaves are
longer / and it is in taste sharp / and somthyng bitter. There are two kinds
of Stechados / for there is an other kind called Stechas arabica / beside it
that Dioscorides makes mention of. It of Arabia is less then the other / and
blewer in the flowers of the ear or top. The Stichas of Province or of the
ylandes of France is greater and brouner. I have seen beside these in the mount
Appennine an other kind of Stechas / which is called in Bonony Stechas montana
/ it has small branches all full of little leaves / amongst the which grow
out diverse very long small leaves / nothing like the other. And because that
all the kinds of Lauander are both lyker in fashon and figure / and also in
properties in stechas / then other unto spike celtik / or spike of Inde / I had
lever call them pseudo stichades / and to bring them under the kinds of
stichados / then to name them spicas germanicas / or Italicas / as Fuchsius and
Matthiolus do / following rather the rude sort who has given them that name
of spikes / because they have spicas / that is long spikes or ears. Stichas is
named in Greek stechas or stichas / and the Latins use the same names / and
the apothecaries call it stichados. The stechas that Dioscorides writes of /
is very plenteous in the town of Poule / and in diverse places of the West
country / where as it is called Cassidonia or spanish lauandar / and about
London it is called French lauander.

The virtues of Cassidonia out of Dioscorides.
THe broth of stichados / as the broth of hysope / is profitable and good for
the diseases of the breast. It is also good to be menged with triacles and
preservatives. It delivers from stoppinge. It makes fine / scoureth and
streyngtheneth all the bowelles or inward parts / and the hole body / and
the hole complexion. They that are disposed to know more of the nature of
stichados / let them read Mesue de simplicibus / and there they shall find enough.

Of Comfrey.
DIoscorides makes two kinds of symphytum / whereof the former kind is called
symphiton petreon / and hereof I intend not to write / because it grows not
in England that I know of. The other kind is called symphyton alterum / in
Duche swartzwurtzel / in English comfrey / of the common herbaries consolida
magna. This has a stalk two cubits high or higher / smoth / thick / full of
corners / holow empty as ye stalk of sowthistel is / about the which stalk /
are rough leaves (great spaces going between) narrow / long / and drawyng nere
unto the likeness of winter borrage. The stalk also has certain appearinges
out of thynne leaves / clening about the corners stretched forth from the holow
settinge on of every leaf. The flowers are yelow / the sede is about the stalk
as molleu sede is. The hole stalk and leaves have a little sharp horynes /
which when it is touched / make a man iche or yuke. The roots are without
black / white within / clammy / and they are also profitable and much to be
used.

depiction of plant Symphytum.


THE roots are good if they be broken and dronken for them that spitte blood
/ and are bursten. The same laid to / are good to glewe together fresh
wounds. They are also good to be laid to inflammationes / and specially of the
fundament with the leaves of groundsell.

Of the Vghe tree.
TAxus is called in Greek smilax / in Duche eibenholtz / in English Vghe. The
Vghe tree is of the bigness of a fire tree / and has leaves like unto the same.
It grows in Italy and in Narbone of France / which is next unto Spayn. The
birds that eat the berries of the Italian Vghe / are made black: and men that
eat the same / are cast into a flixe. The Vghe of Narbone is so full of poison
/ that if any sheep nuder it / or sit under the shadow of it / are hurt / and
often times dye. Wherefore I have written these words of the Vghe tree / that
men should beware of it. Thus far Dioscorides. Virgil also in his Egloges
signifies that the Vghe tree is full of poison where as he writes this verse:
Sic tua cyrneas fugiant examina taxus.
Galene also writes that the Vgh tree is of a poisoned nature.

Of the Turpentine tree.
TErebinthus is named in Greek Terminthos / I have not seen the tree in England
/ and therefore I have heard no name of it: but less it should be without a name
/ I call it Turpentine tree / because Turpentine comes out of it. I have seen
both the leaves and berries of turpentine / which grow in Italy / but I have
not seen the tree it self.

Because Dioscorides describes not Terebinthum / and Theophrast describes it
at large. I will translate unto you the description of ye turpentin tree out of
Theophrast. Of Turpentine trees one is ye male / and an other is ye female. The
male is barun / of ye females one brings forth fruit by and by read of ye
bigness of a lentill / which can not be made ripe / the other brings forth a
grene one / and dies after read / and makes it at the last black / when as it
waxes ripe / with ye grape / and it is of the bigness of a bean full of rosin
/ brimstony. The tymbre of ye turpentine tree is tough / and the roots are
mighty in the ground: and this tree is taken hole to be vncorrupt. It has a
flower like unto ye olive tree / but of a read color. The leaves are for ye most
part all about one little stalk / like unto bay leaves / growyng by payres
together one against an other / as the sorbapple tree leaves grow / and it yt is
in the outermost end of the payres of leaves / is od / but the leaves are not
so cornered / as the sorb tree is / and in the going about / they are more like
unto the bay tree leaf / then the sorb tree leaf.

The virtues of the Turpentine tree, and of the Turpentine.
The leaves / the fruit / and the bark of the turpentine tree / have a bindinge
pour / and are good for all things yt the mastik tree is good for / and they
are prepared after the same manner / and are taken after the same manner. Some eat
the fruit / but it is euel for the stomach / and makes a man piss well / and
heateth / and does very much stir a man to the procreation of childer. If it be
dronken with wine / it is good for the biting of the feld speder. The rosin or
turpentin yt comes out of it / is brought from Arabia Petrea. It grows also
in Iewry / Cyprus / in Africa and in Ciclad ylandes / which is better then all
the rest / and is clear / and through feable / white / like a glass and bluish
gray / well smelling / and resembling in smell the turpe^tine tree. Amongst all
rosines / yt rosin called turpentine / is principal / mastick deserves ye
second place. The rosin of the pyne tree follows mastik in goodness / after the
which follow the rosines of ye read fur tree / and of it yt is called
strobylus: some take strobilus for a tree / other as Galene / take it for the
pyne apple. But every rosin softeneth / heateth / pours abroad / scoureth /
and is good in electuaries by it self / or with honye for coughes. It scoureth
also away it yt sticks in ye breast. It stereth a man also to make water /
and makes ripe / and softeneth the belly / and it is good for lepres / with
vert gresse / coperus / and natural salpeter. With honye and oil it is good
for matter rinninge out of the ears / and against the itche of the priuye
pa^tes. If it be laid to by it self / it is good for the ache in the side.

Of Adders grass and other of that kinds.
depiction of plant Orchis mas angustifolia.
depiction of plant Orchis foemina angustifolia.
depiction of plant Triorchis mas minor.
depiction of plant Orchidis alia species.


TEsticulus is called in Greek orchis / cynosorchis: it has the leaves sprede
by the ground / about the stalk and the bottom / much like unto a soft olyue
leaf / but narrower and smother / and longer. The stalk is a span long /
wherein are purple flowers / and a knobby root / somewhat long / two growyng
together / narrow like an olive berry / the one above / and the other beneth /
and the one of them is full / and the other soft / and full of wrinkelles.

There are diverse kinds of orchis / which are called in Latin testiculus /
that is a stone. One kind of them has many spots in the leaf / and is
called adder grass in Northumberland: ye other kinds ar in other countries
called fox stones or hear stones / and they may after ye Greek be called
dogstones.

Of the virtues of Adder grass.
THe root of it / when it is sodden enough / is eatable as bulbus is / they
write of this herb / that if the greater root be eaten of men / it makes men
children / and if the root be eaten of weomen / it makes weomen childer. And
moreover / this is also told of it / that the weomen of Thessalia give it with
gotes milk / to provoke the pleasure of the body / whylse it is tender / but
they give the dry one / to hinder and stop the pleasure of the body. And it
grows in stony places and in sandy grounds. There is an other kind which is
called Serapias / as Andreas says for the manyfolde use of the root / it has
leaves like unto a leke / long / but brother and fat / bowynge inward about the
setting on of the leaves / and little stalks a span high / and flowers somthyng
purple: there is a root in under like unto stones.

The virtue of the second kind of Testiculus.
This laid to / has the propertye of dryuing away swellinge and scouring of
sores / and to stay running tetters. It puts away fistules / and if it be
laid to / it swageth places that are inflamed and set afyre. The same dry /
stops eating sores / and rotten sores / and it heals the grievous sores
that are in the mouth. It stops also the bellye / if it be dronken with
wine. Men give all the properties unto this / yt are given unto the former
kinds.

Of triacle mustarde called Thlaspi.
THlaspi is a little herb with strayte leaves / a fingre long / turned toward
the ground / about the edge iagged / and somthynge fat. It has a small stalk
/ of the hight of two spannes / which has a few forth growynges: and about the
hole / the fruit is somthyng broad from the top / wherein is sede like unto
cresses / of ye figure of a disshe or coyte as it were thyrst together / after
ye turnyng of Cornarius and broken of / whereupon it has the name. It has a
flower somthynge white / and it grows in ways and about hedges / after the
translation of Ruellius / which is nerer the Greek. Thlaspi is named in Latin
thlaspium / in Duche baurensenff / it may be named in English triacle mustard /
boures mustard / or dishe mustarde. It grows much in the corn both in
England and in Almany / depiction of plant Thlaspi.
and I have seen it beside Worms growyng beside diches / and at Frrancfort
about the walls of the city / in England in most plentye about Sion. In
London it grows in master Riches gardin / and master Morgaines also / and
in master Hambridges gardin in Summersedshyre as I remember.

The virtues of triacle mustard.
THe sede of it is sharp / or biting / and heateth / and it purges choler
upward and dounwarde / if it be dronken in the quantite of two ounces and an
half. It is also good to be put in by a clister / for the disease of the
sciatica. Taken in drink / it drives also blood / and it breaks inward
impostemes / and brings down to weomen their flowers / and it is evil for
weome^ which are with child.

Out of Galene.
The Thlaspi that is brought out of Candy / and grows there / is between
redish yelow / and pale yelow / in figure round / so little some time that it is
less then ye corn of millet. The Thlaspi yt comes out of Cappadocia / is
toward blacknes / and the sede is not fully round / and it is much greater
then the forenamed is / and upon one side it has a little thing / like as it
were a brusinge in / where upon it has the name. That is rekened to be the
best grows in saurot / and it is nether like it that grows in Candy / nor
it ye grows commonly in other places. These words has Galene written of
Thlaspi. Matthiolus compleyneth that the thlaspi in Italy has no indenting
about / but in England we have no such cause. For it has little cuttinges or
iaggynges about the edges of the leaves / and specially of them that are next
unto the root. And as touching the sede / I could never find it in any place
as yet flat / but ever round and read / and it that is written of the breaking
of it / and of the form of a dishe / after my judgment ought rather to be
understood of the sede vessels / then of the sede it self. For the sede
vessel bring hole / has the form of a dishe / and the same a little bruised /
is broken into two parts as into two halff disshes. Let every man follow it
that he fyndeth to be most true / both by reason and by experience / in this
matter.

Of the Linden tree.
depiction of plant Tilia.


TIlia is named in Greek philyra / in Duche ein Linden baume / in English a
Lind tree. It grows very plentuously in Essekes in a park within two mile
from Colichester / in the possession of one master Bogges / it is also very
common in high Germany / and it grows so far abroad there / that men set tables
above in it / whereof some are so long that ten men may sit well at one table /
and yet room remaynyng enough for many other beside the table.

The description of tilia out of Theophrast.
There is one kind of tilia that is the male / and an other that is the femal.

They differ in tember / and in all the fasshon of their bodies / because that
the one of them bears fruit / and the other is barren / ye timber of the male
is hard and yelow / fuller of knottes and fuller of pricks / the timber of
the female is whyter / the male has a thicker barck / and when it is drawn of
/ it is not bowyng by reason of the hardness. The barck of the female is more
white and more bowyng / and thereof they make cradelles. The bark of the female
is better smelling / the male is barren and has no flowers: the female
brings forth both fruit and flowers. The flower is covered with a little
covering. The fruit is long / round of the bygnes of a great pease like unto
ye berrye of an Iuy / divided into fine corners as it were synewes / appearinge
somthyng forth above the rest / drawyng themself into a sharp point. The
leaves are like Iuye in figure / saving that they are round / and have a
sharper end.

The commodites and properties of the Lynde tree.
The later writers hold that the distelled water of the flowers of ye Lind tree
/ is good for the growyng and griping of the belly / and for the blody flixe /
some use the same against the falling siknes. The coals of the Linde tree beaten
into powder / and menged with the powder of the eyes of creuesses / dissolve
clotted blood / and are good for them that are bruised with a fall. The middel
or inner bark laid in / stepe in water / has a slymye moisture / which is
known by experience to be good against all kinds of burning: there is no cole
of any tree that serves better to make gun powder of / then the coals of the
Linde tree.

Of the kinds of Tithymales or kinds of Spourges.
DIoscorides makes vij. kinds of Tithymales or Spourges. The first is the
male called Chariacias / of other Comeles / of other Cobius or Amigdeloides.
The stalks of this excede a cubit in hight / in color read / full of bitinge
and white juice. The leaves are about the twigges like unto olive leaves / but
longer and narrower. The root is thyck and woddye. In the tops of the
stalks there is a thyck busshy thing like unto small twigges / and under them
are holowe places like unto basynes / and there in is sede. It grows in
roughe places and in mountains. This kind have I seen in diverse places of
England. First in Suffock in my lord Wentfurthis part beside Nettelstede /
afterward in Sion park / above London / it may be called wood spourge.

The second kind is the female / and is called myrtites / and it has leaves
like a myrtel tree / but greater and sound / at the point sharp and prickye /
it brings forth long branches a span long. It brings forth every other
year a fruit like a nut that gently biteth the tongue. This grows also in
sharp places. This kind have I never seen growing out of gardines. I know
no English name for it / but it may be called myrtel spourge.

The third kind is called Paralius / and it grows about tke sea side as
Dioscorides writes / but I have seen the same not only in the West country
beside the sea side / but also in Germany about the Rene side / in very great
plenty. Dioscorides also writes that it has boughs a span hight / something
redish / v. or vj. from the root / about ye which are narrow long leaves
standinge in order like unto the leaves of flax / the head is round in the top
/ depiction of plant Tithymalus Helioscopius.
where in is sede like Orobus or a bitter fiche / of diverse colores. It has
white flowers. But the hole bushe and the root / is full of white juice.

This kind in deed has leaves like flax / but they are much brother and longer
/ and grow thycker together upon the branches. I know no English name that
this has / but until we get a better / it may be called either sea spourge /
or flax spourge.

The fourth is called Helioscopius. It has leaves like unto porcellayne / but
thinner / and rounder. It brings forth from the root iiij. or v. branches /
small / a span high / read / full of much white licore. The top is like unto
dyll / and the sede is as it were in little heads / the ouermost busshy top of
it / is turned about / with the turnyng of the son: where upon it is called
Helioscopius / that is sonturner. It grows most commonly in old wastes / and
fallen dounwalles / and about cities. This kind is called in diverse parts of
England Wartwurt: it may also be called son spourge / or son following
spourge. It grows much in the ground / where as flax has grown /
shortly after that it is pulled up.

depiction of plant Cyparissias.


The fyft is called Cyparissias / and it has a stalk a span long or longer /
somthyng redish / out of the which grow leaves like unto the pyne tree / but
tenderer and smaller / and to be short / it is like a young pyne tre^ / lately
sprung up / where upon it has the name: this has also very much white juice.

This kind grows much in the stuble after the corn is carried in / it is so
like Chamepitis / that if a man take not head / he may be easily deceived in
taking the one for the other. I have hitherto learned no English name of this
herb / but it may for lack of a better name be called / pyne spourge.

The sixth is called Dendroides / it grows in rocks / above it is very large
/ and full of busshy leaves full of juice. It has branches somthyng read /
about the which are leaves like unto a small myrtel.

The sede is like the sede of wod spourge. I never saw this kind that I
remember of.

depiction of plant Tithymalus Platyphyllos.


The seventh kind is called Platyphyllos / and it is like unto mullen / I
remember not that ever I saw this kind.

The virtues of the kinds of Spourges.
The first has a juice which has the nature to purge the belly by neth
driving out fleme and coler / taken in the quantite of a scruple with vinegre
and water. But if it be taken with mede / it provoke vomit. It takes away
wartes that are like unto pismires / and hangyng wartes / and great thyck ones
/ like the heads of time and scurfines. If it be laid to / it is also good for
aguayles and tarbuncles and freting sores and fistels. The sede is gathered in
Autumn / and dried in the son / and lightly bruised / clenged / and it is laid
up clean. The sede and the leaves do the same / that the juice does / if they
be taken in the measure of an half aceptable. The rote cast into mede in the
quantite of a dram / and dronken / drives forth by the belly.

The second kind has like virtue with the former kind / but that the former
kind is stronger in provoking of vomit.

The third kind is of like virtue with the former kinds.

The fourth is of the same nature with the former / but not so strong.

The fyft kind and the sixth kind is like the rest: and the seventh kind
kills fish / as all the other kinds do.

Of Thyme.
THyme as Dioscorides says is a little bushe full of branches / compassed
round about with narrow leaves / and in the top it has little heads with
flowers / resemblinge a purple color. It grows most in rocky grounds / and
in lean or bare places.

Allthough Dioscorides makes here mention but of one kind of thyme / yet
writing of epithymum / he seems to make two kinds of thyme / where he says
that epithymum is the flower of an harder thyme like unto sauerey. And Pliny
makes mention of two kinds of thyme / whereof the one is black / and the other
white. And we se that the thime that cummeth from Venis and from Candy / is of
an other kind then it that we have growyng in England. Thyme is called in Greek
thyme / in Latin thymus / in Duch thymian / or welsh quendell.

The virtues of Thyme.
Thyme has the pour to drive forth sleme throw the belly / if it be taken
with vinegre and salt in a drink. The broth of it with honey helps them that
are shortwinded / and it brings out worms / and both flowers and the
secondes / and the child also at conueniente time received / it provoke
water also. But if it be menged with honye and licked in / it makes good
avoiding out of a mannis breast. If it be put into an emplaster / it drives
away new swellings. It louseth in pieces the lumpes of bruised blood if it be
taken with vinegre. It takes away hanginge wartes / and those that are called
thymi / of the lykenes that they have with the tops of thyme. It is good for
them that have the sciatica / laid to with wine and perched barley mele.
The Same taken with meat / is good for eyes that are dull of syghte. And in the
time of health / it is good for a sauce or a seasoner of meat. Thyme is hot in
the third degree.

Of the herbs called Tribuli.
depiction of plant Tribulus aquaticus.
depiction of plant Tribulus terrestris.


THere are two kinds of herbs that have the name of Tribulus: the one that
grows upon the lan^^ / and the other in the water or upon the water.

The first kind is called in Greek Tribolos chersea: this kind as Dioscorides
describes it / has leaves like unto porcellayne / but smaller / and little
branches sprede upon the ground / and in them are very tarte (meaning
peradventure by tart sharp) also pricks and hard. It grows beside waters
and about old houses and ways.

The second kind grows in waters / with the top growing above the water /
but it hydeth the prick: the leaves are broad / and they have a long footstalk.
The stalk is great in the over part and small beneth. It has little tasselles
like hears growing up in the lykenes of ears. The fruit is hard as the other
is.

The former kind grows in Italy about Bonony in plentye / where as I have
seen it. And in deed the leaves are more like the leaves of ciches as
Theophrast describes Tribulus / then unto the leaves of porcellayn / but they
have some lykenes unto the young leaves of porcellayn. Now when as the one
says that Tribulus has leaves like unto porcellayne / and the other leaves
like unto a ciche / they err very sore / that either English tribulus / a
thi^tel or a bramble / seeing that nether the leaf of a thistel nor of a
bramble / is like unto the leaf of a ciche or the leaf of porcellayne. And as
for the second kind of Tribulus / nether can it be a bramble nor a thistel /
except there be thistelles and brambles / that grow in and above the water /
which no man hitherto has seen. If any man would know or ask me / how I
would English in Matthewes gospel this word Tribulus: If men will trust my
judgment / in englishing of this word / I answer / I had lever English
tribulus / a trible / or a ciche thistell / then english it either a thistel or
a bramble.

The water tribulus is called in Duche Wasser nuss: and therefore we may
english it a water nut / or club nut / because the fruit of it is like a club
full of great pykes. But some perchance will say that Theophrast an older
autour / makes two kinds of ground tribulus / and therefore it is possible
that though a thistell or a bramble have not a leaf like unto ciche / yet it
may be like unto the leaves of a thistel / and so may tribulus be a thistel.
For Theophrast says: Tribuli duo sunt genera, vnus folio exit ciceris, alter
spinosus constat foliatus, ambo terreni. Lo here Theophrast makes one kind of
tribulus terrestris that has pricky leaves: therefore tribulus allthough it
can not be a bramble / yet it may be a thistell. To this I answer / that
Theophrast in the sixth book and fyft chapter writes: Serius germinat qui
spinosus est, semen praecoquis sesamae vicinum, serotini rotundum nigricans
septum in siliqua. That is tribulus that has the pricks in the leaves does
spruit or bud out later. The sede of them that are hastily ripe / is like unto
the sede of Sesama / but the sede of it that waxes ripe late / is round /
blackishe / closed up in a cod. If ye will then have the second kind of
tribuli terrestris of Theophrast to be a thistel or a bramble / ye must show
some thistel or bramble that has round sede in a cod / or ellis I must think
that ye err very much that English tribulum either a thistell or a bramble.

The virtues of the two kinds of Tribulus.
THey are both bindinge / and do cool / and are good to be made playsters of /
for any kind of inflammation / with honey they heal the hot sores of the
mouth / the sore kyrnelles about the roots of the tongue / and all rotting in
the mouth / and the sore goumes. There is also pressed out of them a juice for
eye medicines. The grene fruit of the^ dronken / is good for the stone: a dram
of it of the land dronken / and laid to / is good for them that are bitten of
a viper or adder. It is also good against poisoned drinks / if it be dronken
with wine. The broth of it sprinkled upon the ground / kills flees. There is
an iron with four pykes called as I remember a callerop that is also named
tribulus / of the lykenes that it has with the fruit of tribulus. This
instrument is casten in the way to hinder the enemies that follow flyers very
sore / it is called in Latin Murex.

Of English Maidens hear.
Trichomanes.
depiction of plant depiction of plant

TRichomanes grows in the same places that Adianthum / or right Lumbardy
maidens hear grows. It is like unto a Fern / very little in quantite / and it
has small leaves of each side growyng in order: in figure like unto the leaves
of a Lentill / one against an other upon small twigges shyninge tarte / and
somthynge blackishe. This herb is called of the Grecianes and Latins both
Trichomanes / and of some Grecianes also Calliphyllon / and of other Politrichon
/ and of some Cellitrichon: the common herbaries call it capillum veneris /
which name is more agreynge with the right Adiantho. It is called in Duch
Widertod / and Venus hare / in English we call it Maidens hear or English
maidens hear.

The virtues of Maidens hear.
DIoscorides writes that Trichomanes (that is our English Maidens hear) is
supposed to have the same virtue that the Lumbardy Maidens hear has /
therefore turn to the herb called Adianthum or Lumbardye venus hear or
maidens hear / and there ye shall find the virtues of it at large. Pliny
writes that the broth of our maidens hear dronken with wine / and a little
wild Cumin / heals the Strangurie. The juice stays the hear that falls
of / and if they be fallen of / it restores them again.

Of the herb called Trifolium.
depiction of plant Trifolium odoratum.
depiction of plant Trifolium pratense purpureum.


TRifolium is named also triphillon / oxytriphillon / menyanthes and cuicion.
It is a busshye herb / and has small twigges / black like rishes / wherein
are leaves like unto the lote tree (which I English / a nettel tree) in every
forth buddinge three. The smell of them when they come first forth / is like
unto rue / but when as they depiction of plant Trifolium pratense album.
depiction of plant Trifolium luteum.
are full grown / they smell of earth piche / called in Latin bitumen. It
brings forth a purple flower / a sede somthyng broad / and a little rough /
having as it were on the one side a little cop. The root is small long and
strong. The first that ever I saw of this kind / grew in Doctor Gesnerus
gardin in Zurich. But afterward I have seen it often in mine oune gardines /
and of late in master Riches gardin in London. It may be named in English
Trifolye gentle / or smelling clauer / or triacle clauer / or clauer gentle /
or piche trifoly.

There is a common trifoly or clauer that grows in myddoes / sometime with a
white flower / and somtymes with a purple / which is called trifolium pratense
in Latin / whereof Dioscorides makes mention in his fourth book / writing de
loto syluestri.

The virtues of Clauer gentle.
depiction of plant Trifolium V.


THe sede and the leaves of triacle clauer / dronken in water / help the
pleurefye / the stopping of water / the fallinge sikenes / the dropsey in the
beginning / and the stranglinge of the mother. They drive down also flowers.
Ye may give three drammes of the sede and four of the leaf. The leaves also
broken and dronken with honyed vinegre called Oxymel / help them that are
bitten of venomous beasts. Some write that the hole broth of the root bushe
and leaves / if it be poured upon the bitten place / takes away the pain.
Some also give the leaves or three seeds to be dronken in wine in a tertian / and
in a quartayn four seeds / as things which make an end of the returnyng of
the ague. The root is also commonly put into preservatives and triacles.

Of horse houe or bulfoote.
TVssilago is named in Greek Bechion / in English Horse houe / or Bullfoote /
in Duche RoShuff / huff battich / in French Pas de cheual.

Tussilago has leaves like Iuy / but greater vj. or vij. from a depiction of
plant Tussilago.
root in the over parts white / and grene beneth full of corners / it has a
stalk in the spring a span long / and a yelowe flower. But within a short
time / it leseth both his stalk and his slowre. The root is small and fit to
be used / it grows about rivers and watery places.

The virtues of horse houe.
THe leaves of this herb broken / and laid to with honey / heal the hot
inflammation / called saint Antonies fire. The perfume of the same leaves dried
taken in by a timmel / so that a man gaspynge receive in the smooke / and draw
it in / it delivers men from the dry cough / and from the shortness of wind.
They break also impostemes in the breast. The root does the same in a perfume.
And if it be sodden in mede / and dronken / it will cast out dead chylder.

Of Cattis tail or riede mace.
depiction of plant Tipha.


TIpha has a leaf like unto Cyperis / and a stalk whyt / smooth and plain /
which has in the top a thyck flower set roundaboute with a rough thing /
which is turned into a down / which some call panniculam in Latin. This
grows in meres / and standinge waters. I have seen it grow most commonly
amongst redes and sedge: it is named in Duch Kolben or marron kolben / or or
moS kolben / some call it in English Cattes tail: it may be also called read
mace / because boys use it in their hands in the stead of a mace.

The virtue of Cattes tail.
THe flower of read mace menged with old swynes grese well washed heals
burned places with fire or scalded with water.

Of the two kinds of the herb called Veratrum and Helleborus.
VEratrum is named in Greek Helleboros / and there of are two kinds / the white
and the black: the whyt has leaves like unto plantayne or wild betes / but
shorter and blacker / and read in color / a stalk a span long / or as some
understand the Greek word xij. inches long / hollow / which does cast of the
uttermost bark / when it begins to be dry / it has many roots / small
coming out of a little head / and somewhat long / like an union / it grows in
mountains and rough places. The roots must be gathered about harvest. That is
best in white hellebore / that is measurably stretched forth white / brukle /
thyck / sharp / rishy / or putting forth dust / whylse it is broken / having a
small pyth / and nether burninge in taste / extremely / nether drawing out
spattell or slauer in great plentye together: for such will choke sone. It of
Cyrene is the principale / but it of Galatia and Cappadocia is whyter and full
of duste and choketh more.

This kind of Helleborus have I seen very often / not only in gardines / but
also in the top of the alps / where as I never saw one hole / but always the
tops were bitten of / and as I do remember / the stalks were much longer
then a foot long: wherefore I doubt that palestieon be not well translated here
of Cornarius palmi altitudine / as he does most comonlye use all through in
his translation this word palmus for ye length of ix. inches long / except he
use here contrary to his common manner palmus for more the^ a span.

This herb is called in Duche Weiss nieS wurtz: the root of it is called in
English nesing powder / the herb may be called in Englishnese wurte or white
Hellebor.

The virtue of white Hellebore.
NEsynge powder purges by vomit / and brings forth diverse things. It is
also menged with eye medicines / which may scour away such things which
bring darkness unto the aple of the eye. It brings down flowers / it
provoke nesynge: it kylleth miese knodden with mele and honye. It is given
fasting by it self / or with sesame sede / or the broth of sodden barley / or
with mede / or with potage / or with a lentill broth / or any such like
suppynge. Some do give this with a great deal of broth or much suppinge / and
some give a little meat immediately before the patient take it / if it be to
feared that he should be in any ieperdye of stranglynge / or if he be weyke.
They that take it after this manner / may take it without ieperdy. If a man
make a suppository of this / and put it into his fundament / it will make him
vomit.

Of the black Hellebor.
VEratrum nigru^ is named in Greek Helleborus melas / and Melampodion. It has
grene leaves like ye leaves of ye plain tree / but less drawyng nere unto ye
leaves of sphondiliu^ / which I call cow persnep or middow persnep / and mo full
of cuttinges / and blaker / and something rough. The stalk is sharp: the flowers
are white / purple in figure of many berries: the sede is like unto Spanish
saffron: the rotes are small / black hanging upon a little head like an onyone
/ and these are commonly used. It grows in rough places and high and dry
places. The best is it that is fet from such places as is it / that is fet
from anticyra. For the black that is best / grows in it. Choose it that is
full and thyck / having a little pyth / or heart / biting and sharp in taste:
Hitherto Dioscorides.

Men have been long of that opinion / that the herb which is called in English
Bearfoot / and of other Citterwurt / is Helleborus niger / whom I have followed
until I found that the description of Helleborus niger did not agree with it.
Our Bearfoot has not leaves like unto a plain tree / but like unto hemp. The
stalk also is not so sharp or rough as Dioscorides makes the stalk of his
Helleborus. For these and other causes showed in the chapter of Contiligo / I
consent not unto Matthiolus / otherwise a well learned man / who against
Fuchsius and other learned men / holds that our Bearfoot is Helleborus niger.
Dodoneus sets forth an herb for blak Hellebor / whose leaves agree very well
with the description / but because the stalk is smooth / and not sharp or
rough / and the sede is like anis sede / full of wrinckles / and not like unto
Spanishe saffron sede: I can not think that it should be the right Helleborus
niger. And as for me / I dare not say that ever I found the right black
Hellebor / but this I dare hold / that a man for defaut of it / may use very
well that kind of bear foot that goes every year into the ground / whereof
grows great plentye in a park beside Colchester / and in the west park
beside Morpeth a little from the river called Wanspek.

The virtues of black Hellebor.
IT purges the nether part of the bellye / driuinge forth fleme / and choler
/ either by it self / or with scammona / and with one dram of salt / or one
scruple and an half. It is also sodden with lentilles and brothes / which are
taken for purgationes. It is good for them that have the falling siknes / for
melancholic persons / for mad men / for the gout / for the palsy. If it be
laid to / it brings down weomens sikenes. If it be put in / it scoureth
fistulas / if it be taken out after the third day. It is like wise put into
the ears of them that are hard of hearing / and it is suffered two or three
days with Franckincense / it heals scabbes: or if it be laid to with wax or
piche / and cedre oil. If it be laid to by it self or with vinegre / it
heals frekles / foul scurffynes and lepres. It swageth the teth ache / if it
be sodden with vinegre / and the teth be washed there with. It is also menged
with torrosiues. But if a plaster be made of it with barley mele / and wine /
it is good for the dropsey. If it be set at the roots of vyndes / it makes
the vine to purge. The pyth ought to be taken out of the black Hellebor / as
well as out of the white.

Of Mollen and such like herbs.
depiction of plant Verbascum.
depiction of plant Verbascum syluestre.


THere are two principal kinds of Verbascus / which is called Gohlomos in
Greek. The one is the white / and the other is the black / of the white the one
is the femall / and the other is the male. The female has leaves like unto
cole / but rougher and brother / and whyter: the stalk is a cubit long and
somewhat more / white and horye. The flowers are whyt / and some what yelowe / it
has a black sede / a long root / tarte / and of the bygnes of a finger. It
grows in plain feldes / but the male kind is somthyng long / it has white
and narrow leaves / and it has a smaler stalk: But the black mollen is like
unto the white in all points: but it has brother and blacker leaves. And there
is also a wild kind that bears long twigges like a tree / and it has
leaves like unto sage / and high twigges / and woddishe / and about them little
boughs as horehound has / and it has yelowe flowers like unto gold. The
white Verbascum is called commonly in English mollen or hickis taper / and in
some places longwurt. The black may be called black mollen. The wild one
grows no where in England / sauinge in gardines. I have seen it of late in
master Riches gardin. It may be called in English Sage mullen.

The virtues of Mullen.
THe roots of the two first kinds / are binding / wherefore they are good for
a lax / if they be taken in the quantite of the bone / called in Greek
astragalos / and in English cok all / with wine. The broth of them / help
places that are bursten / shronken together and bruised / and the old cough.
They heal the tuth ache / if the teth be washed with their broth. The leaves
of it that has golden flowers / sodden in water / are good for swellings /
and the inflammation of the eyes / and for sores that are full of rottennes /
with honey or wine. But with vinegre they heal wounds / and they are good for
them that are bitten of a scorpion. The leaves of the wild are good to be put
in an emplaster against the burninge of any place.

Of Veruine.
depiction of plant Verbenaca.
depiction of plant Sacra herda.


There are two kinds of herbs named peristereon in Dioscorides / the one
properly peristereon / and the other / Hierobatone properly / and sometime also
peristereon. And Pliny makes two kinds of Verbena / or Verbenaca. Matthiolus
writes that there is no difference between these two herbs Peristereon and
Hierobatone / but that the one has his stalks / growyng right up with few
leaves / one far from an other / and the other lies with his stalks upon the
ground / turnynge a little upward with more leaves. But the text of
Dioscorides that Matthiolus takes in hand to expound / declares far other
difference / then Matthiolus speaks of: for Peristereon as the text of
Dioscorides declares / is a span long or longer / and Hierobatone has
branches a cubit long / and longer. Lo here is great difference between the
length of Peristereon and Hierobaton. The leaves of Peristereon are indented
and somthynge whytishe / the leaves of Hierobatone are so cut in and indented
about the edges / as ye oak leaf is / and they are in color grayshe blewe. Ye
may se also that they differ also in the color of the leave / if they differ
not also in the depnes of iagging or indenting as I think a man may gather by
Dioscorides that they do. For the former has but a light cuttinge about /
made mention of / and the later is declared to have much deper indentinge /
wherefore these herbs differ much more then only in the lying or standing of
the herb. And Pliny writing of the two kinds of Verbenaca / makes them after
the report of writers to be both one kind / not because they have one liknes
in leaves / stalks and flowers / but because as he writes: quonia^ vtraque
eosde^ effectus habeat, because they have both the same virtues / which saving
as it is contrary to it that Dioscorides writes of the virtues of these two
herbs / so is his description of them contrary unto the description of
Dioscorides: for he makes ye first to be a span long and more / and the second
a cubit long / and sometime longer.

The length and the indenting of ye leaf of ye herb which we commonly call
Veruine / and the Duch eisenkraut / would move me more to think yt our common
Veruine should be Hierobatono then Peristereon / if ye flowers were not so
whytish / but ye color is a deceyuable sign / for in many places and grounds
it changes / for all other things the description of Hierobatone in my
judgment agrees better white our Veruin then the description of Peristereon
does / let other men judge in this matter / that are vniuersalye seen in all
kinds of philosophy / and in old writers.

The virtues of the former kind of Veruine called properlye Peristereon.
THe leaves laid to with rose oil / an fresh swynes greise / take away the
pain in the mother. The herb laid to with vinegre / stays burning heates /
and saint Antonyes fire / and stops rotting / and joins together wounds /
and covers with a skin / and fills with flesh old wounds.

The virtues of the second kind of Veruine properly called Hierobatone.
THe leaves of this and the roots dronken with wine / and also laid to / are
good against crepinge beasts / as serpents and such like. The leaves taken in
ye quantite of a dram / with a scruple and an half of Frankincense / are
dronken in x. ounces of old wine / fasting for the space of xl. days against
the iaundes. The Same laid to / swage long swellings and inflammationes / and
they scour filthy sores. But the hole herb it self / sodden with wine /
breaks up crustes or stalks in the almondes / and it stops the freting
sores of the mouth / if it be gargled there with: some say that the broth of it
be sprinkled in feasts or bankettes / that the gestes or drinkers thereby are
made merrier. The third ioynte / from the ground with the leaves that grow
about it / is given in a tertian / and the fourth is so given in a quartayn.
They call it Hierobatone / that is an holy herb / because it is very good for
to be hanged upon men / against inchantementes and to purify or clenge with all.

Of the Fiche.
depiction of plant

VIcia is named in Greek Bikion / in English a Fiche / or of some a Tare / in
Duche Wicken / in French la Vesce.

The Fiche is so well known that it needs no description / all men know that
the leaves grow by payres wyngwyse / on against an other / and that the sede
is not so round as a white pease is / but much flatter. It is euel to be eaten
of men / for it stops ye belly to much / and ingendreth a gross and
melancholic humor in the body of a man / but it is good for beasts / as
experience has taught us these many years. Plinye writes that the Fiche
fatteth the ground / and that there are three times of sowyng of it. The first
time is about the fallinge ofarcturus / that it may sede in December. Then is
it best sown to make or gather sede of it / for it will bring forth like well
/ after that it is ones cut down / or eaten up to the roots. The second
time of sowyng is in Ianuarye. The third time is in March / and that which is
so wen then / is most fit to bring forth stalks and branches. It loves
best drynes of all things that are sown: and it refuses not shaddowy places.
The chafe of it is best of all other / if the sede be gathered when it is ripe.

Of wall gelouer and stock gelouers.
depiction of plant Viola alba.
depiction of plant Viola matronalis alba.


VIola alba is named in Greek Leucoion / but allthough the word betoken a
white violet / yet Dioscorides makes four kinds of Leucoion / whereof he
makes but one kind with a white flour / and that is the first kind. The
second kind has yelowe flowers. The third kind has blew flowers. The fourth
kind has purple flowers.

depiction of plant Viola alba Theophrasti.
depiction of plant Viola Punice^.


It that has the yelow flower / which Dioscorides writes to be mete to be
used for physik / is called of the Arabianes Keiri / in Duche geel violetten /
in English Wall gelouer or hartis ease. The other three kinds are called stock
gelouers / having there names according unto the color of the flower that
they bear.

The virtues of the gelouers.
THe dry flowers of wall gelouer / sodden to sit in / ar good for the
inflammation of the mother / and to bring down flowers. If they be received
in a cerote / they heal the rinninges in the fundamente. They heal with honye
the burninge sores of the mouth. The sede of it in the weight of two drames /
dronken with wine / or laid to with honye / dryueth down flowers / secondes
and the birth. The roots laid to with vinegre / minishe the bigness of the
milte / and are good for them that have the gout.

Of the Violet.
depiction of plant Viola matronalis purpurea.


VIola is named in Greek Ion melan / some Latin men name it Violam nigram / and
some call it Violam purpuream. The purple violet as Dioscorides writes / has a
leaf less and thinner then the Iuye / but blacker / and not unlike / and a
little stalk in the mids from the root / whereon grows a little flower
very well smellinge / of a purple color.

The virtues of the Violettes.
VIolettes have a coolinge nature. The leaves of Violettes laid to both by
them selves / and also with perched barley mele / are good for a burninge
stomach / the inflammation of the eyes / and the fallinge down of the
fundament: some write that it that is purple in the flower / if it be dronken
with water / is good for the squinancie or choukes / and for the falling siknes
in childer.

The virtues of Violettes out of Mesue.
THe violet when it is grene / is cold and moist in the first degree / when it
is dried it is both less cold and dry. A grene violet stancheth hot aches
after the manner of other that make dull / and vnsensable / and it quenches out
all inflammationes / it swageth and softeneth the throple / and the breast /
and it purges out yelowe choler / and puts out the heat of it. It heals
the head ache that comes of an hot cause. Violettes make a man to sleep /
and they are good for the disease of the vuula / the squinancie or choukes and
the pleuresye / and all swellings of the breast / they heal also meruelously
the inflammation of the liver / and the dry stopping of the same / and the
iaundes or guelsought / and inflaming agues / they quench thyrst / but they
stere up a rume that falls from ye head into the nose thrilles: the violet
is better that is gathered in the morninge / whose virtue nether the heat of
the sun has melted away / nether ye rain has wasted and driven away.
Violettes and violet oil / are put unto medicines to restreyne and make dull
the vehemence or great streingth of them. The juice of violettes and the syrop
louse the bellye by softeninge of it. The violettes condited with honey / scour
more / but cool less: but condited with sugre contrariwise. Nether violettes
nor there juice can abide long sething / the vinegre made of violettes / slaketh
wonderfullye the burninge of hot agues: the broth of violettes is given from
iiij. ounces unto viij. the juice is given from one ounce to two: the syrop is
given from ij. ounces to iiij. and ye conserve is given from one ounce and an
half unto three ounces. Thus much may ye give when as ye are disposed to pourge
with violettes: at other times when ye intend not to purge / ye may give less
then is here before appointed.

Of the Missel or Misselto tree, and lyme made of the same out of Dioscorides.
THe best missel bird lyme / is fresh resemblinge a leke in color within /
but somthynge yelow without / and has no rough thing / nether any dirt or
things like bran in it. It is made of a certain round fruit that grows in
an oak / the leaf of the bushe / that bears it / is like unto box. It
grows also in apple and crab trees and pear trees and other trees / and
sometime at the roots of sombushes.

Out of Theophrast.
IT may appear to be wondered at / and most of all against reason / that
certain seeds can not grow out of the ground as missel stelis / and hiphear.
Stelis is an euboeaue word: Hipheare is an archadical word: Ixos or viscu^ is
common / some hold yt all these have one nature / but yt they seem in yt to
differ / yt they grow in diverse trees: for hiphear and stelis grow in ye fire
tree / viscu^ in ye oak and turpentine tree / and many other. This Missel does
grow no other ways / but by ye sede in such places depiction of plant Viscum.
where as birds have devoured the fruit / and have shitten out their
excrementes in the tree.

Virgil also declares the same in these two verses following. Quale solet
syluis brumalis frigore viscum
Fronde virere noua, quod non sua seminat arbos.


By these places rehearsed / a man may learn to understand this proverb:
Turdus ipse sibi malum cacat.

The thurse shyteth mischefe her self: She shiteth out the miscel berries well
prepared in her body / and lays them upon the tree / the berries grow into a
bushe / and the bushe brings forth berries / and of the berries the fouler
makes bird lyme / where with afterward he takes the thrushe / and so the
thrushe has shitten out her oune destruction. I never saw more plentye of
right oak miscel / then Hugh Morgan showed me in London. It was sent to him
out of Essex: where as there is more plentye then in any other place of
England that I have been in.

The virtue of Miscell and miscel byrd lyme.
MIscel burde lyme / has the pour to drive away / to soften / to draw / to
make ripe impostemes / called pinos impostemes behind the ears / and other
impostemes with like quantite of rosin and wax. With Frankincense it softeneth
old sores and rebel lius impostemes. It melts a swelled milt / if it be
sodden and laid to with a get stone or the Asiane stone.

Out of Galene.
VIscum is made of an aerishe / waterishe hot nature / and a little earthly
substance / for the sharpnes of it / excedeth the bitterness. It draws out
humores myghtely from the ground / and it scatters abroad such as are gross
/ and rypeth them.

The manner of lyme of Missel berries out of Dioscorides.
DIoscorides supposes that no bird lyme is made of any miscel / sauinge only
of it of the oak: but other have proved / that it may be made also of the
miscel of the Fire tree. It is made thus: Bruise first the berries / and then
wash them / and afterward seth them in water. Some use to make the lime by
chowynge of the berries in their mouth.

Out of Plinye.
MIssel bird lyme is made of the berries which are gathered in the harvest
time: for if the rayn come upon them / indede they grow greater / but that
rotteth away that should become lyme. After that they be gathered / they must
be dried / and then beaten / and they let them rot xij. days in water. This
thing alone gets goodness by rottinge. Then bruise them in a running water
with a male / until the skins of the berries be all gone / and the lyme wax
tough.

Of the tree called Vitex.
VItex is named in Greek agnos or ligos / some translate agnon into amerinam /
as Theodore / and our Linaker do. But amerina is a kind of salicis viminalis
in Columella / which is also called salix sabina. The apothecaries call
Viticem / agnum castum. In some place of Germany the apothecaries use priuet for
agno / and in England they abuse shamfully tutsam / for agno. I have seen it
growyng at the black freres in Ferraria / and afterward in Peter Cowdenberges
gardin in Anwerp. It has fruit and leaves like unto Hemp / wherefore it may
be called Hemp tree / or of ye virtue that it has / Chaste tree.

Out of Dioscorides.
VItex is a bushe like a tree. It grows beside rivers / rough places / and
valees. It has long boughs hard to break. The leaves are like olyue leaves /
but tenderer. The one kind has a white flower with a thing resemblinge
purple. The other has a flower only purple. The sede is like peper: so far
Dioscorides.

The virtues of Chaste tree.
IT has virtue to heat and to bind. The sede of it dronken / is good for the
bitinge of venomous beasts / for them that have the dropsey / and the
swellinge of the milte. It increases also milk / and brings down flowers.
If it be dronken with wine in the quantite of a dram / it resolves and wastes
away the sede. It vexes the head and makes a man sleep. The broth of the
leaves and sede made to sit in / helps the inflammationes and diseases about
the mother. If it be dronken with pennye ryall / and the sede made after the
manner of a perfume / and also laid to / stereth up a purgation. If it be laid
in / it eases also the head ache. It is good to pour it upon the head / when
a man has a phrenesyc / or forgetful evil / being menged with vinegre and
oil. The leaves of it made in a perfume / and strowed under upon the ground /
drive away venomous beasts / and if they be laid to / they are good for the
bitinges of the same. With the leaves of the vynde and butter / they soften the
hardness of the stones. The sede also laid to with water / swageth the pain of
the nickes / or ryuinge of the fundamente. But with the leaves it heals it
that is out of ioynte and wounds. It appears also to be good for chansyng
in a journey / if a man carye a rod of it in his hand: it is called agnos /
that is chaste / because weomen kepinge chastity / in the sacrifices of Ceres /
used to straw this bushe upon the ground / and other places. It is called ligos
/ that is a twige / because the twiges of it are so strong.

Galene says that agnos is hot and dry in the third degree: it is of a
subtle substance / sharp in taste / and also binding. The sede of chaste tree /
both fried and not fried / stays the desire to the pleasure of the body. The
leaves and flowers of it / can do the same: but some believe that the leaves and
flowers not only eaten and dronken / help to keep the chastity / but also if
they be strowed all about where folk trede.

Of Brionye.
VItis alba is also called in Latin Brionia / and in Greek ampelos leuke / and
also brionia: it is called in English Briony / in Duche Hunds kurbs or kurbs
wurtzel: it grows comonlye in all countrees. Briony has long branches /
bushy / young spruytinges / and leaves like unto the gardin or manered vynde /
but all things rougher: it wrappeth it self about the next bushes /
embrasyng them with his busshye branches or claspers: it has a fruit full of
berries / in color read / and there with skins have the hear taken of them.

depiction of plant Vitis alba.


The virtues of Brionye.
THe first twigges that comme forth like unto Sperage are sodden and eaten /
and they provoke a man to make water / and also to the stool. The leaves / the
fruit / and the root have a sharp or bitinge nature / wherefore they are good
if they be laid to with salt / for old festering rotten and consuming sores of
the legs. The root scoureth the skin / and takes away winkles / with
bitter fitches and the earth of Cio / and Fenegreke it scoureth away frekels
made with the son / and such like spots / and black scarres. The same root
sodden with oil until it be soft / is good for the same purposes. It takes
also away the blewe marks of bruised places / and it draws together the
aguayles in the fingers. If it be laid to with wine it drives away
inflammationes / and it breaks impostemes / and if it be dronken and laid to
/ it brings forth bones / and it is good to be menged with Corosiue
medicines. The same is good to be dronken in the quantity of a dram every
day for the space of a year / for the falling siknes. It is good for them
that are taken / and for them that are dusye or have a swyminge in the head /
if it be taken after the same manner. But if it be dronken in the quantite of
two drammes / it heals them that are bitten of a viper or adder. It is
perilous for weomen with child: it troubles sometime the mind a little. And
if it be dronken / it stereth one to make water: if it be laid to the mother it
will draw down the secondes: it is good to be given in an electuary to them
that are almost strangled / and them that are shortwinded / and them that have
the cough / and to them that have ache in the side / to them that have any
place bursten and drawn together. A scruple and an half of the powder of it /
taken with vinegre for the space of xxx. days / melted away the swelled
milte. It is good to lay to the same with a fig for the same things: it is
sodden to sit in / to pourge the mother. The juice is gathered out in the
spring. This is dronken with mede for the same purposes: it drives forth so
thin fleme. The fruit is good for lepres and scabbes / whether the places be
anointed therewyth / or it be laid to. The juice of the fruit draws milk to
the breast / if it be taken with frumentie made of sodden wheat.

Of the black Brionye.
depiction of plant Vitis nigra.


THe black Brionye has leaves like Iuy / but lyker to the leaves of Smilax /
but greater / and so are the stalks. This does also embrace and cleue about
trees with his busshye branches and claspers. The fruit is full of berries /
grene at the first / but it waxes black when it is ripe. The root is black
without / and of the color of box within.

The virtues of black Brionye.
THe first buddes of black Brionye provoke water / drive down flowers / and
make less the milte. It is good for the dusines of the head / and for them
that have the fallinge sikenes / for the palsy. The root has like virtue
with the white Briones roots / but it is not so strong. The leaves laid to
with wine / are good for the chafynge of beasts necks. The same is also good
to lay to members out of ioynte. Matthiolus sets out an herb for black
Brionye / which in my judgment for diverse causes can not be that herb both
for the color of the berry / when it is ripe / it is nether black in Italy nor
in Almanye nor in England: and also because that this herb being manifestly
cold / has not the propertyes that Dioscorides and Galene and Mesue give unto
it / they grant all that it is of like virtue with the white Brionye / but
that it is not also strong. And Mesue makes white Briony hot and dry in the
third degree / and he makes the black Briony manifestly hot / where he says
it is not so hot as the white is. And he says vtriusque radix. The root of
both is good for the cold diseases of the synewes / and that it scoureth the
brain of rotten fleme / and is good for the fallinge siknes. He writes that
the blak Briony is also good for wennes: now whether a cold herb / as I am
sure it is that Matthiolus sets forth / will heal these diseases above
rehearsed or no: I report me unto learned men. And whether the herb be cold
or no / they may know that will taste it about midsummer / and se what
qualite it has in taste. It grows in the hedges that go about the closse /
that is next unto them. Some have taken this herb for Cyclaminus altera / but
they were deceived: for it has no such root nor virtue as Cyclaminus has. I
saw this true black Briony ones in the mount Appennine / and the servant of
Lucas Ginus showed it me there. The root was a dosen times bigger: then the
root of it is that Matthiolus sets out for Vitis nigra.

Of the first kind of wild Vindes.
DIoscorides makes mention and writes in two places of a wild vinde. The
former kind is thus described of him. The wild vinde brings forth branches
as a vynde / woddishe roughe with a barcke gapynge and having creuisses /
leaves like unto gardine night shade / but brother and longer / a flower like as
mossye hears / a fruit small clusters / read when it is ripe: the figure of
the sede is round.

The virtues of the first kind of wild Vinde.
THe root of this herb heated in wine / and menged with sea water / and
dronken with two ciates of water / purges waterish humores / and it is also
given to them that have the dropsey / but the clusters clenge the spots that
are made by the son / and all other spots. The little branches that come
first forth / are seasoned and laid up in bryne for meat. There is diversity
of opiniones between Fuchsius and Matthiolus what herb should be this Vitis
syluestris / Fuchsius would that the rinning bushe grows upon living hedges
/ and crepeth upon trees with an hory fruit / with a leaf like nyghteshade /
but a little indented about / should be Vitis syluestris. But Matthiolus sets
out for vite syluestri an herb which is called of the common Herbaries amara
dulcis / and it may be called in English bitterswete. If it had read berries
/ then would I have consented unto Fuchsius / but because it has none such
that ever I could se / I dare not give full consent with him. The herb that
Matthiolus sets forth for vitis syluestris / which grows only about diches
and watersydes / can not be vitis syluestris / because nether the description
nether ye virtues of vitis syluestris agrees unto it. For his herb has
leaves much longer and much sharper then the common nightshad has: and besides
that / about the settinge on to the stalk of every leaf / has on each side a
thing growyng forth like an ear. I have seen some heads of leaves and
borestaues much like unto this leaf. Dioscorides makes mention of no such
lefe / but of one that is like unto nyghteshade. Theophraste writes that this
wild vine / is very hot and biting in so much that it is used to pull of hare
and such frekels or spots that come by the heat of the sun. Look in ye ix.
book of the stori of plants or growyng things / and there ye shall find this
to be true. Then when as amara dulcis is not hot above the first degree / as
experience can judge: Matthiolus in my judgment erred much more in this matter
then Fuchsius did / whom he went about to confute. The duche men call the herb
that Matthiolus sets forth for viti syluestri Ie longer ie lieber / that is
the longer ye plesanter / or derer / because when a man tastes first of the
bark / it is something bitter / and ye longer ye hold it in your mouth / the
sweter will it be / if it had been an hot herb / the longer that he had holden
it in his mouth / the vnplesanter would it have been by the reason of biting of
ye tongue / as all herbs that are de pilatiue or burners of / of hare do.

Of the second kind of Vitis syluestris, called wild vynde.
DIoscorides entreats of the first vite syluestri in the fourth book and x.
chapter: but he entreats of the second kind in the first chapter of the v.
book / after this manner. There are two kinds of ampelon agrias or labrusce /
the one brings never the grape forth to ripenes / but unto the flower which
is called enanthe. The other makes perfect his grape / but has small berries /
black and binding. This second kind have I seen both in Italy and in Germany.
The leaves and new twiges with their branches and stalks / have like pour with ye
common vind / saving yt these ar mo binding.

The virtues of the gardin or manered vynde.
THe leaves and young twigges if they be laid to / they swage the head ache /
and the burning or inflammation of the stomak with perched barley meal / and
so do the leaves alone / because they have the pour to cool and to bind. The
juice of them also dronken / is good for the blody flixe / the spittinge of
blood / the disease of the stomach / and the longinge or greuinge siknes of
weomen. The young busshye boughs steped in water and dronken / will do the
same: the dropping of it which is like unto a gum / and waxes thick about
the body of the vinde: if it be dronken / drives out the stone. And if the
place be prepared with nitre / it will heal scuruines / scabbes and lepres. If
it be laid upon the scabbed places. If it be continually laid to with oil /
it wastes away hear. And that thing does specially the frothy matter /
that cummeth forth of the grene branche whilse it is in burninge. The same is
good to kill wartes also: but the ashes of the vindes boughs / and the dross
that remains after the grapes / are press^d out: if they be laid to with
vinegre / they swage hard lumpes and knoppes about the fundament. It is also
good for members out of joint / and the biting of a veper or adder / and for
the inflammation of the milt / if it be laid to with rose oil / rue and
vinegre.

The virtues of rasynes out of Dioscorides.
RAsines called in Latin vue pass / and of other passule / if they be white /
they bind more. The flesh or pulp of them is good to be eaten for the
roughenes of the throote / for the cough / for the kidnes and the bladder /
they are also good for the blodye flixe / if they be eaten with the stones /
and if they be received in meat after they be menged with the mele of millet
and barley and an egg / and be fryen in a frying pan.

The same either by them selves and with peper / if they be chowed in the mouth
/ draw out thin fleme out of the head. If they be laid to with powder of
comin and bean meal / as some translate fabam / they staunche the
inflammationes of the stones. If they be laid to with rue without the stones /
they heal read angri night ploukes and sores that have matter in them like
honye / carbuncules / rottennes about the joints / and sores called gangrenes.
The same are good for the gout. If they be laid to with the juice of panicis.
Also if they be laid unto louse nails / they make them come of the sooner.

Of wall penny grass.
VMbilicus veneris is named in Greek kotyledon scytalion and cymbalion. It has
a leaf like unto the hole that receives the round end of the huckel bone /
which has the form of a sawser / round and darkly holowe / a short stalk in
the mids / wherein grows sede. It has a round root like an olyue. This
herb grows in wells and diverse places of Summerset shyre in more plentye /
then ever I saw in any other place all my life. I know no English name for
it: but lest it should be without a name / I call it wall penny grass. To put
a difference between it and the shepekyllinge penny grass / that grows in
merishe and waterye grounds. As for the other kind / I never saw it that I
wot of / except I saw it painted in Matthiolus / but his second kind is
set out with less leaves then the former is / which agrees not with the
description of Dioscorides / who makes the second kind bigger then the
former.

The virtues of wall pennye grass.
THe juice of the leaves laid to with wine / or poured in / louseth the
stoppinge of the priuities. The same laid to / is good for the inflammationes
/ and saint Antonies fire / for kybed heles / and wennes / and burninge
stomachs. But the leaves taken in meat with the roots / break the stone /
provoke water / and they are given with honied wine to them that have the
dropsey.

Of the Elm tree.
depiction of plant Vlmus.


VLmus is named in Greek Ptelea / in Duche ein ilm baum / in English an Elm tree
/ it grows commonly in all countrees. Theophraste makes two kinds of elm /
the elm of the plain and mount elm. The plain elm is more braunchie or full
of branches: the mount elm is of greater grouth: the leaf is not divided /
lightly iagged about / longer then a pear tree lefe / rough and not smothe.
This tree is notable both in greatness and in leingth. It loves moist grounds:
the tymbre is yelowe / strong / full of synewes / and euel favored / for it is
al heart. Virgil also makes the elm an high tree in this verse: Nec gemere aeria
cessabit turtur ab vlmo.

The virtues of the Elm tree.
THe leaves / the boughs / and the barck of the elm tree / have a binding
virtue: ye leaves are good for ye lepre / laid to with vinegre / and they bind
wounds together / but the bark is better / therefore if it be bound to as a
swaddling band. But the thicker barck dronken with wine or water in the quantite
of an ounce / drives out fleme. If broken bones be sprengled and washed with
the broth of the leaves / or the bark of the root / they will sooner be
covered with an hard crust and grow together. But ye juice yt is in ye knoppes
or buddes yt come first forth if it be laid to / it makes ye face very clear:
ye same moisture after yt it is dried up / is resolved into little flies like
ganattes. The first grene leaves are sodden for kichin or sowell as other
eatable herbs be.

Of the Nettell.
depiction of plant Vrtica Romana.
depiction of plant Vrtica mayor.
depiction of plant Vrtica minor.


VRtica is named in Greek acadyphe / and knide: in English a nettel / in Duche
ein nessel / in French ortye. There are two kinds of nettels: the one is
wilder sharper and brother / and it has blacker leaves: the sede is like lynt
sede / but lesser. This is the kind that is called Vrtica Romana / and it
grows in England only in gardines: but in Italy / and in Mentz in Germanye:
it grows wild as our common nettel does. The second kind has small sede /
and is not so sharp as the other is / and this take I to be our common nettel
of England.

The virtues of Nettels.
THe leaves of both ye kinds of nettels / laid to with salt / heal the biting
of a dog / sores called gangrenes / and other ca^kred sores / and foul sores /
and parts out of ioynte / lumpes / swellings behind the ears / swelling of
kirnelles like bread / and impostemes. The same are good to be laid on the
milt with wax. The leaves broken and put in with the juice / stops the
gussing out of blood of the nose. If they be bruised / and put in with myr /
they bring down flowers. The grene leaves laid to / set the mother in her
place again / when it is fallen down. The sede dronken with maluasey / ster a
man to the pleasure of the body / and opens the mother: the same licked up
with honey / is good for the stopping of the pipes / for the pleuresy and long
sought or inflammation of the lunges. It brings out tough fleme which
cleueth fast in the breast or lunges. The leaves sodden with shell fish /
soften the belly / louse wind / and make a man piss. But then it brings
fleme best out of the breast / when it is sodde^ with a tyfan. The broth of the
leaves that are sodden with myrr: if it be dronken / it will bring down
weomens flowers: ye juice if a man gargle with it / it is good for the
infla^mation of ye vuula.

Of Clot bur.
depiction of plant Xanthium.


XAnthium is named in duch betlers leuS or klein kletten / in French glouteron
/ in English clot bur or dich bur / it grows in fat grounds and in diches /
that are dried up: it has a stalk a cubit long / fat and full of corners / and
therein many wings or holow places like armeholes. The leaves ar like unto a
reche cut about the edge / with a smell like cresses: the fruit is round / as a
big olyue / full of pricks / as the pills of the plain tree are / and they
will stick upon your clothes / if ye touch them.

The virtues of Diche bur.
THe dich bur is good to be laid unto swellings. The broth of the bark of the
root dronken / wastes away the swelling of the milt / and the broth of it /
if it be sodden with wine / fasteneth louse teth / if the mouth be washed
therewyth.

Of Xyris or Spourgwurt.
depiction of plant Xiris.


XYris has leaves like flower de Lice / but brother and sharp in the top / and
a great stalk of a cubit hight / cominge out of the leaves wherein are
thresquared coddes / and in them is a purple flower / and it that is in the
mids / is of a cremesin color / and there is sede in the sede vessels /
like the fruit called Faba in Latin / round / read and bytinge: the root is
parted with many joints / and it is long and read in color.

Diverse learned men hold that this is the herb / which is commonly called of
ye common herbaries spatula fetida / and surely I know no herb ye agrees so
well with the description of Xyris / as spatula fetida does. But the root is
falsely painted in all the figures that ever I saw set out as yet. For the
root is not set out with long joints as I have seen it often growing / but so
as though it had no joints at all. This herb is called in the isle of Purbek /
Spourgew^rt / because the juice of it purges as the juice of the root of
flower de Lyce does.

The virtues.
THe root is good for the wounds and breaking of the head / it draws forth
pricks / and it draws forth any flyinge weapon as darts an^ arrows
without any pain / if ye put unto it the third part of floris eris / and the
first part of Centory / and some honey. If it be laid to with vinegre / it
heals swellings and inflammationes. It is good to be dronken against
brusynge and shrinkinge together of places / and against the sciatica and the
strangurye / and the flixe / if the root be bruised with maluesey. The sede is
most mighty to make a man piss / if it be dronken in the quantite of a
scruple and an half with wine. The same dronken with wine / melts away the
great milt.

FINIS.
Thanks to God for all his gifts. AMEN.
THE FAVTES AND ERRORES CONTAINED IN this book, needful to be corrected. The
first figure betokens the leaf: the second, the side: the third, the line.
1 leaf 2 side 36 line, for hatt read heart. 2 leaf 1 side 1 line, for semith
read seems. line 37 for pauos read panos. 2 side 7 line, read for stables
scabbes. in the same side, read Northen men, rank and herbishe. 3 leaf 2 side
read bonefyres: line 16 read with mede: line the 20 red hellebor. 4 leaf 1
side 9 line, read boles for belles: read in the same side for bar acerues, bear
acornes, and thyme and salt Indiane: on the second side read for heun dream,
heavy dreams. 5 leaf and in all other places, whersoeuer thou see wheter,
read whether: fifth line red for kidnens kidneys: line three and thyrty red for
bonkero boukeros. 6 leaf first side line 20 for rothe read root: second side
4 line, for clip read chipp. 13. red liver, and for iunce read juice: 25 read
for art and 40 for cyrop read rerote. 7 leaf first side 9 line read lumpes: 17
read bushe: 26 for would douted, read would have douted. 9 leaf, first side, 23
line, read erred: 2 side read siues. 10 leaf first side, 23 line, read
cherephyllon: second side, 21 line, read ye for iow. 11 leaf 1 side 5 line,
read for banes leaves. lin. 8, read for new now: 2 side, lin. 36 read
eugalacton for engalacton. 13 2 29 for men's read wymens. 15 1 43 read
chelidonion for chelidion. 16 1 18 darnel for daruel: 2 10. read sethe for set.
18 2 31 read for like, is like. 19 1 14 read drives for druleth: 2 side, line
34 read aquietatem for aequitatem. 20 1 39 read describing it* second side and
the second line, read yet grow. 23 1 28 is in Slauonia: second side lin. 4
read choler for color. 32. read one is, for olye is. 24 2 1 Grecianes. lin. 7.
Methridates. lin. 13. red pulled for palled. 25 1 2 read arkeuthis. lin. 30.
read feed for sede. 26 1 33 red calls forth or brings forth. 28 1 16 read
bole for boli. second side, line 24 read hurt of it by: read to be hurt by. 29
1 22 read deal for olial. lin. 43. is that which is called. li. 45. read for
them, to them. 33 1 44 read sea water. 34 leaf read for gnorinion gnorimon. 36
2 read for older elder, for herb bushe, in the last line saving one. 37 2 28
read in Macedonia, and yet it does not follow. 38 2 8 read laid up. 10. for cis
read is. 13. red cut. 39 1 26 red for handly hardly. 40 1 3 read oil is a good
remedy. 12. read milium solis. second side, the third line, read lest: line
16. read Fuchsiusses. 32. read for 41 2 30 read said for laid. 42 side, lin.
43 red lotus for potus. 43 1 34 read iagges. second side, lin. 8. to the
bursting out of wheles. 45 1 line the last gnawyng. 46 1 20 red ey medicines,
and such as swage ache. 21. read press. 2 line 29. read two for to. 30. read
drousey. 47 1 1 wax. 11. raw. 35. have 1. 36. ad to chek and coutrole, for to
old. 45. read heat for hea. second side. lin. 7. scrab tree. 48 leaf 1 side
lin. 39. into Verinice. 49 1 39 read draw 25 balaustium. 50 1 35 greuing. 37.
read mouths for mottes. 51 1 38 read wrinkles 52 1 44 read wedede. 2. side 15.
rake it. 42. fifty foot for five foot. 54 1 4 smotheth. 2 side, 9. crudded 19
whayishe. 55 1 6 put out greuus and read, because it has a more greuus savor.
22. was for is. 56 2 18 conningest: 19. allthough 37 rootegatherers. 45 tuft.
57 1 27 moother: 28 rootecremers or root pedlers. 59 1 26 sauin. 29. lyng. 39
elder. 60 1 26 had 61 1 30 read fennes 63 2 32 read I need not 64 1 4 cakes. 2
side 33 read byles for bytes. 33 oleander. 66 1 7 clubbe. 13 wastes. 2 side 2
dries up. 67 1 2 eleia 2 17 of Alexander. 21 read trial of my masters judged.
68 1 14 read apinum and not opium: 28 hoter: 43 eat: 48 other: 2 side 21
whether 69 1 2 further: 9 indented: 28 iij. kinds: 45. widd for will: 47 the
less. 2 7 acetable. 70 2 ornithogalo. 71 2 16 for dryues, read drynes. 35.
fast: 43 drew. 72 1 1 root for roten: 2 15. but 36 straw. 37 far: 44 lock. 73
2 put out Oxyacantha in the figure, for it is not Oxyacantha. 74 1 31 read eat
and not rat. 2 grape: 3 have also. 76 1 39 covered: 2 1 millet. 77 1 18
mullayn. 2 14 brothe. 78 2 22 feuerfew. 79 2 whether: 8 a purgation. 82 2
Dunghylles. 83 2 3 burr: 41 plentuus: 84 2 22 night mare. 86 1 11 capones
tail: 16. elaphobosco. 87 1 32 whether peuce: 2 1 for peuki read abies. 88 1
22 flies. 2 15 where: 27 trees: 31 picea: 32 resinam. 36 pitys is pinus. 89 2 1
plucked. 90 2 9 self. 92 2 32 confute: 44 fox, not for: 46 pulegium. 93 2 41
spourge. 94 2 27 night blaynes. 95 1 12 erthly. 33 none: 2 34 world. 96 1 33
grew. 97 1 10 weg tret not wegbret. 98 1 2 rough. 2 10 to sound. 44
husbandmen, not hussbaumen. 100 1 33 composition. 2 22 step, not stop. 101 1
46. 2 2 sieve. 11 capitata. 12 siues. 13 sieve. 31 set them. 33 sectiua. 36
siuet. 102 1 28 extremite 103 5 perched. 2 10 these. 25 called. 104 1 3 has.
35. tysardes. 2 but binding. 106 1 40 bigness. 43 merrish. 107 1 38 draws. 109
2 1 read bringing, and not bring. 24 red an hole, and not no hole. 110 2 18
read gapped not grapped. 4 read cummed not crommed. 111 2 2 read stancheth, and
not, and stancheth. 34 for give read gyuing. 37 read they. 39 red it is in the
second side, put out the false latin, and set radix cleonia, radix Syriaca and
Armoracia. 112 1 22 read twenty. 2 9 read scour, not stoure 113 1 40 red whit
flaw. 46 kingcup. 114 1 6 Kingcup. 2 12. sort 16 shaddoish. 28 rough. 31
pismyres. 115 1 28 also sumache. 2 1 put out the figure, for it is false. 26
agnayles. 116 1 34 fleme. 2 17 roses. 37 sprinkled. 117 10 for leaves read
redenes. 13 whils. 22 inbinding. 23 that does. 27 curled. 43 helpers. 119 1 2
read or for aut. 119 there ar also that hold stiffly. 120 1 7 the hill ida. 14
could not understand. 121 1 23 caulo. 41 arone. 2 29 acetosa. 40 butchers. 122
2 5 gesen. 7 Zurich. 123 1 26 pismyres. 2 31 bredeth. 124 1 26 Cinnamum. 2 1
act. 4 act. 125 1 29 suet. 126 2 2 sauge. 8. warn. 127 2 13 read is thus,
for it thus. 129 125 red years for year. 23 read lyker for like, and called
of Pline Sicale for called Sicale. 130 1 22 read grows for greweth. 132 1 2
read same for lame. 16 red candy for candis. 25 red axfiche for axsiche. 2 read
Sedi tertium genus for Sedum tertium genus. 133 1 2 read iij. for iiij. 4 read
rather for better. 10 read in Greek because the leaves are grene, for in Greek
the leaves are grene. 134 1 4 read meats for wheates. 135 1 42 read his for
this. 2 32 read ligusticum for ligustrum. 136 1 6 read fenegreke, for
fenelgreke, 137 1 21 read of the listenes for of lykenes. 138 1 2 read fennes
for sennes, and put out te figure that is falsely set for siliqua. 139 2 19 read
scalle for stalk. 140 1 36 read silaus for silans. 2 red olus atri for olus a
tree. 141 1 12 read anniculae for aniculae. 23 read hoter for heter. 145 2 4 red
torminalis for forminalis. 7 red hawes for haw. 8 red is not pleasant for is
uery pleasant 146 2 20 red Nordenie for Mordenie. 147 2 37 red nerion for
merion. 44 spinae for spina. 148 1 33 read pipridge for piridg. 41 read to eat
is spina alba Columelli. 149 1 1 read Rychis gardin for Richardes gardin. 150 2
13 read Sleep for snepe. 151 1 28 read spyder for speder. 31 read seable for
feable. 153 2 3 read Colchester for Colichester. 9 read tymbre for tember. 154
1 3 park for part. 155 2 9 read acetable for acceptable. 30 read fleme for
sl^m. 157 1 13 read callitrichon for cellitrichon. 160 1 41 read more for mo.
161 1 2 read phlomos for Gohlomos. 162 1 12 read leaf for leave, 26 hierobatone
for hierobatono. 32 and for an. 21. scalles for stalks. 165 1 9 read to her
self for her self. 22 read panos for pinos. read the manner of making of lime,
for the manner of lime. 21 read then for they. 23 read make for male. 166 1 22
chafing for chansing. 27 read wrinkels for winkels. 167 2 30 read sheene for
them. 168 1 9 read the rinning bushe that grows, for the rinning bush
grows. 13 read if it had read berries that Fuchsius sets forth, then would
I, for if it had red berries, then would I. 21 red sum heads of lance staves,
for sum heads of leaves. 38 red ampelou for ampilon. 43. read more for mo. 2.
35 read panacis for panicis. 170 1 1 read acaliphe for acadiphe. 4. read less
for lesser. In the chapter of Ruscus put out the figure, for it is nothing
agreyng with Ruscus.
The third part of Vuilliam Turners Herball / wherein are contained the
herbs / trees / roots and fruytes / whereof is no mention made of Dioscorides
/ Salene / Plinye / and other old Authors.

God save the Queen.

printer's or publisher's device HONEY SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Imprinted at Collen by Arnold Birckman / In the year of our Lord M.D.LXVIII.

Cum Gratia and Priuilegio Reg. May.

To the right worshipful Fellowship and Company of Surgiones of the city of
London chefely / and to all other that practyse Surgery within England /
William Turner sends greting in Christ Jesus.
AFter that I had set forth two parts of my Herbal / containing those plants
and herbs whereof ye old writers have written and made mention / because that
I knew both by mine own experience / and by other mennis writing / that the
herbs found after the old writers time / if they were known with their
virtues / should be very necessary for the healing of many diseases / grievous
sicknesses / wounds / sores / brusinges / and breaking as well inward as
outward. I thought I should do no small benefit unto my country / if I wrote of
those plants. Whereof I have gathered as many as I know / or at the least as
many as came to my remembrance / leuing the rest that I have not entreated of /
to be entreated of other that have more leisure then I have. For surely being
so much vexed with sickness / and occupied with preaching / and the study of
Diuinitye and exercise of discipline / I have had but small leisure to write
Herballes. This small book I give and dedicate unto you / not only because this
part for the bigness that it has / entreats most largely and plenteously of
simples that belong unto Surgery / but also because being amongst you in
London all that I was aquaynted withal / and namely Master Wright / late
Surgion to the Queen's highness / so willing and desirous to learn and know such
herbs as were not throwly known in England at that time. If ye take this my
poor present in good worth / I think that I have bestowed my labors well /
and if I can perceive this / it may be an occasion / that if God send me health
/ leisure and longer life / that I take some more pains for your profit in
some other matter. The Lord keep you.

At Wells 1564. The 24. day of June.
Of the degrees of herbs and other things / and what a degree is.
A Degree is as littell understood as it is greatly occupied in all mennis
mouths. A degree is in Latin gradus / and it comes of gradior to go / and is
named in Greek apostasis / that is a standinge or going away from. The cause of
the name is this: There are certain herbs that are temporate yt is of a mere
quality or property between hot and cold / and are neither notably hot nor
cold. And if any herb depart from the temporate herbs toward heat / and is
sensible felt a littel hot / it is called hot in the first degree / and if it
be a littel hoter / it is called hot in ye second degree / as though it had
made two steps or departinges from temperate. If an herb be very hot / it
may be called hot in the third degree / If it be so hot as it can be / then it
is called hot in the fourth degree / and so ye may understand the degrees of
cold / moist and dry herbs.

Herbs and other things that are temperate / that is neither notably hot
nor cold.
Maidens heir of Italye called Adianthum. Maidens heir of England called
Trichomanes. Sperage called in Latin Asparagus. The shell or bark of pome
Citron / called in Latin cortex citri. The juice of Licores called in latin
succus glycirrhice. Le^tilles called in latin lens. Sebesten call mixa. The
moss of trees called in latin Muscus / in barbarous latin vsnea. Sweet oil.
Melilote called Lotus syluestris. The kernelles of the Pineaple nut. Brushe
cheris called Zizipha.

Herbs and other things that are hot in the first degree.
They that are hot in the first degree / increase the natural heat which
comes after the digestion and other natural workinges if they be taken in.
And such are these that follow: Wormwode Roman called Absinthium Romanum or
Ponticum. Agaricke / Aloe / Marchemalowe called in Latin Althea or Hibiscus /
Sweet almondes / Grene Dill / Beat called in Latin Beta / Cole called in Lattin
Brassica / and of some Caulis / Borage called in Latin Buglossum / and our
common buglosse is of ye same nature / Chamomyle / Chesnuttes called nuces
castanee / Dodder called in Latin Cassuta / and Cuscuta of others / Agrimonye
called Eupatorium Grecorum / The gum of the bushe called Leidus / Flax sede or
Lintsede / Greymyll sede or Gromel sede / called Lithospermum / that is stone
sede / Grene walnuttes / Rice called in Latin Oriza / The water of the flowers
of Aspe / Sugar called Saccharum / Whey called Serum lactis / authore Fuchsio /
Ripe grapes / New wine.

Herbs and other things hot in the second degree.
They that are hot in the second degree / are partakers of a fyrye heat /
therefore have power to make suttel or fine / and to open the stoppinge of the
poores and other ways. And such are these yt follow: Ambar of greece / Bitter
almondes / Dry dill / Percelye called in Latin Apium / Mugwurte called in
Latin Artemisia / The right natural Balm / Capers / Campher / Ground pyne
called of the Apothecaries Chamepitis / Saffron called in Latin Crocus /
Fenegreke called in Latin Fenum grecum / Figs / Mastiche / Horehound called
in Latin Marrubium / Honye / Bawme called Melissophillon / of others Melissa /
Dried walnuttes / Nutmegges / Basil / Harestrange / Fistick nuttes called
Pistacium in latin / Dry pitche / Poly called in Latin polium / A rape
otherwise called Turnepe / A Sea union called in Latin Scilla / of the
Apothecaries Squilla / The rote of Archichoke or great Thistel / Salt /
Frankencense / Wine not very old / but not new / Setwall of Inde / and not
it of the gardin.

Of the herbs and other medicines that are hot in the third degree.
Those medicines that are hot in the third degree / if they be taken in / they
cut in pieces / they draw / they heat very much and make a man thirsty. And
of this sort are these that follow: Sothernwode called Abrotanum / The rote of
Calamus odoratus / The rotes of Galingale / Margerum / Agnus castus of Italye /
not Tutsan / Asarabacca or Fold foot called in Latin Asarum / Aron or
Cokowspinte / Dittanye of Candye / Charowayes / Germander / Spanish saffron
Auctore Fuchsio / Nesing powder and Berefote / Dodder that grows upon time
called Epithimum / Fenel or Fenkel / Cloves / Flower deluce rotes and Aris
powder / Juniper beryes and the wode / Enula campane / Hissope / Minte /
Horsemint or wild minte / Musk / Nigella Romana or git or black cummin / Al
kinds of Organ or wild Margerum / Pepper / Penyrial / Raddishe / Garden rue /
Sauin / Baume minte / Old wine.

Of herbs and other medicines that are hot in the fourth degree.
Medicines that are hot in the fourth degree / raise up bladders / burn and
pull of the skin and frete inward. And of this sort be these that follow:
Garleke / Vnyones / The gum called Euphorbium / English dittanye / Garden
cresses / Lekes / Pilletorie of Spain / Rue of the mountains or wild rewe /
Mustard / All kind of Spourge and of that kind that give milk / Celendine.

Of herbs and other medicines that are cold in the first degree that is but a
littel cold.
These herbs cole the natural heat and after some manner hinder digestion / As
are these that follow: Areche called in Latin Atriplex / Sour grapes / The
inmeate of Citrones / The flesh of the Quince / Grass / Barlye / Malowes /
Mile called in Duche Hearse / in Latin Milium / Plummes / Roses / Violettes.

Of them that are cold in the second degree.
They that are cold in the second degree / make thick or gross / and euide^lye
make dull or minish the natural heat: As are these that follow / The gourde /
Cucumbers / Galls / Endive and Suckorye / Duckis meat that grows upon
standing waters and poudes called Lens Palustris / Tamarindes / Pepones /
Melones / Citrulles / Peches / Pla^tayne / Knotgrasse or Swynes grass /
Flewurte called Psillium / Sumach / Petymorrell of the garden.

Of those things that are cold in the third degree.
They that are cold in the third degree / stop and shyte up the inward ways
and passages and ye pores. They make dull all the wits or senses: And of this
sort be Henbayne / Mandrage / Water rose or water lilie called in Latin
Nimphea / Porcelayne / Houselyke.

Of medicines that are cold in the fourth degree.
Medicines that are cold in the fourth degree / frese together or congele / put
out or quench the natural heat / and kill men if they take them in in any
great quantity: As are these that follow / Cicuta / The juice of black poppye
called Opium / Black poppye.

Of herbs and other things that are moist in the first degree.
They that are moist in the first degree / swage and make slipperye / of which
sort be Borage and Buglosse / The inward meat of the Citron / Parietorie /
Malowes / Rapes or Turnepes / Sugar / Hares coddes or noble Satyrion.

Of them that are moist in the second degree.
They that are moist in the second degree / lose and make the strength of ye
inward parts more feeble / Of this order are Areche / Gourdes / Lettice /
Duckis meat that swimmeth above the water / Melowes / Pepones / Peches /
Porcelayne / Damask prumes / Violettes / Ripe grapes.

Of medicines that are dry in the first degree.
They that are dry in the first degree / make the body stronger / and a mannis
wits or senses lustier and fresher: Of this sort are Cole / Betis /
Chestnuttes / Chamomill / Saffron / Fenel / The Myrtel tree / Sumache.

Of them that are dry in the second degree.
They that are dry in the second degree / do sensibly bind or draw together /
they stop ye passage of humores / Of this sort be Dill / Mugwurte / The
flower of Pomgarnettes / Shepherdes purse called Bursa pastoris / Capers /
Dodder / Quinces / Lentilles / Mastiche / Mint / Wild mint or Horse mint / Mile
or Hearse / Nutmegges / Rice / Dry pitche / Fistick nuttes / Plantayne or
Waybrede / Pears and namely choke pears / Rosemarye / Spica nardi.

Of them that do dry in third degree.
Wormwode / Vinegar / Common calamus / Aloe / Amse / Dill / Percelie /
Asatabacca or Foldfote / Charaway / Germander / Ground pine / Gornmint or
Calamint / Cinnamum the right / Cummin / Dodder that grows upon Time / Gall^s
/ Cloves / Hissope / Juniper / Mace / Horehound / Moss / Waterroses / Wild
Margerum or Orgayne / Cinkefolie / Pepper / Herb polie / Sumach / Margeru^
gentle / The gum or juice called Deacones blood / in Latin Sanguis draconis /
Sauine / Salt / Baume mint.

Of them that do dry in the fourth degree.
Garleke / Garden cresses / Wild rewe / Mustard / Celendine.

Of medicines that are hot and moist in the first degree out of Serapio the
Arabian.
Ciches called in Latin Cicera / Almondes / The gum of Almondes / The oil of
Almondes / Iniubes / Hares coddes or Satyrion / and all herbs like unto it
that has two stones.

Of medicines that are cold and dry in the first degree.
The myrtel tree with all the parts of the same / Moss / Yelow Mirobalanes /
Chebusi Mirobalanes / Mirobalanes Emblici / Mirobalanes Bellirici / The rose /
Oil of roses / The seeds and the knoppes of roses / Rose water / Ceruices and
Sorbepeares / Sorel and Dockes / Liuerwurte / The bra^mel bushe / The Mulberrye
tree / Black berries / Pomgarnates / Barlie / Quinces / Veniger / Willow tree /
Horsetayle / Glue.

Of medicines that are cold and moist in the first degree.
Plummes / Spinach / Violettes / Endive / Dandelion / Succorie / Water roses /
Cheres / Areche / Malowes.

Of medicines that are hot and moist in the second degree.
Rocket / Ash seeds / The nut of Inde.

Of medicines that are cold and dry in the second degree.
Berberes / Flewurt called in Latin Psillium / The flowers of Pomgarnates / Gum
tragagant / Plantayne / Sumach / Galls / Nightshade / Winter cherie / Gum
Arabicke / Ribes or saint John's berries.

Of medicines that are cold and moist in the second degree.
Melones / Cucumbers / Citrulles / Great Melones being grene / Duckis meat that
grows upon the water and standing poles / Gourdes / Garden Lettice / Peches.

Of medicines that are hot and moist in the third degree.
Ginger / Graynes / Spourge.

Of medicines that are cold and dry in the third degree.
Henbayne / Dracones blood called sanguis draconis / Spodium / Mandrage /
Tamarindes.

Of medicines that are cold and moist in the third degree.
Porcelayne / Houselyke / Thrifte / Todestoles.

Of medicines that are cold and dry in the fourth degree.
Poppye / The juice of black poppye / Horned poppye / The Methell nut called
Nux methel.

The Table of the names of herbs.
A
Adders tongue 52 Alecoste or Cost mary 41 Amara dulcis 2 Angelica 4 Arsmert /
otherwise called Culerage 61
B
Balsamine 15 Bistorta 12 Burnet 9 Bursa pastoris 14
C
Carduus benedictus 18 Cassia fistula 20. 21 Cheruel 19 Clowes 22 Columbine 6
Coweslippe 80
D
Devils bite 42 Dittanye 26 Doronite Roman 27
E
Eupatorium 28 Eyebrighte 30
F
Filipendula 31 Fluellin 77 Fox glove
G
Galega 32 Gentian 25 Gratiola 33 Guiacum 34
H
Hartnut 51 Herb two pence 54 Holy tree ^1
K
Kaly 38
L
Lauander 39 Lunarye 53
M
Medewurt or Medowwurt / or Medefwert / and of some named Bimaria 8
Meirobalanes 44 Mouse ear 58
N
Nutmegges and mace 40 Nutte of Inde 48. 49
O
One herrye 35 Our Ladies mantel 2^
P
Pilletory of Spain 36 Pimp^^^ell ^^ Palm^ria 55
Q
Quibibes 25
R
Ribes 62 Rosa solis 79 Rubarbe 63. 64. 65
S
Sanders 67 Sanicle 66 Sauce alone 1 Saxifrage 68 Scabius 67 Seen 70 Setwal 79
Self heal 60 Spinach 72
T
Tamarindes 73 Tansey 3 Throw wax 57 Tormentil 74 Trinite 75
V
Valeriane 76 Virga aurea 78 Winter grene 59 Wood rose / or Wood rowel 24
FINIS.
Faults to be amended in the third part.
In the Preface. Line. 23 for (London all) read London I found all. In the
treatise of the degrees of Herbs. In the first side. 7 for (temporate) read
temperate. 7 for (mere) read mean. 20 for (glycirrhice) read glycirrhize. 21
for (call mixa) read called mixa. 23 for (brush cheries) read breast cheries. In
the second side. 20 for (foldfote) read foolfote. 22 After these words (Autore
Fuchsio) there wants Calamint or Cornmynt, especally dried Cinnamum Cummine,
autore Fuchsio. In the third side. 6 for (poudes) read pondes. 17 for (them in
in) read them in alone in. 28 for (melowes) read melones. 29 for (prumes) read
prunes. In the fourth side. 6 for (foldfote) read foolfote. In the first lease.
Side. Line. 1 4 for (lenchel or sauSkrant) read leuchel or saSkraut. 1 last for
(sauSkraut) read saSkraut. 3 6 for (leaves) read leuis, and so in the.7. and 8.
line. 3 7 for (little black) read little and black. 3 Nota, that there
wants the figure of wild Tansey. 4 17 for (knawing) read gnawing. 5 4 Close
this sentence, which I take for sphondelium, within two half circles. () 5 17
for (hircinij silue) read hircinnie silue. 5 42 for (stipe) read stepe. 6 43
For (riders spurge) read rittersporn. 7 10 For (after the same judgment) read
after the judgment. 8 Nota, that the figure of barba capri is not the figure
of Medewurt, but it is something like it. 8 6 For (sennes) read fennes. 10
Nota, that ye first figure is no kind of Pimpinel, but white saxifrage, and
belongs not to that place. 11 That figure is quite false, and belongs not
to that place. 12 16 For (of the name) read of the Latin name. 12 17 For (these
part) read these parts. 13 5 For (come into Fricelande) read came into
Friceland. 13 18 For (in these) read in those. 14 12 For (shrippe) read scrip.
14 17 For (and a great) read and are a great. 16 16 For (before the august)
read before August. 17 4 For (thumbles) read thymbles. 17 16 For greses) read
grefes. 18 2 For (atractilis aspera) read carduus benedictus. For the figure
that is there, is the figure of carduus benedictus, and not of atractilis,
although some call carduus benedictus, atractilis aspera. 8 4 For (weike) read
weke, and so afterward. 18 20 For (that stre^ghteneth) read yt it stre^gthneth
19 12 For (cerifolium) read cherefolium. 20 22 For (canes coddes) read canes or
coddes. 20 22 For (grows) read grow. 20 31 For (ashie) read asshie. 20 35
For (bean) read bone. 21 5 For (soughtning) read softning. 21 14 For (and
spica) read or spica. 21 15 For (I know) read knew. 21 16 For (was a poison)
read was as poison. 21 last For (as a Percelie) read as are Percelie. 22 12
After these words (hiera picra) there wants. But if it be to be given in
hot diseases I will not suffer any hiera picra. 22 In stead of Cariophylli
arboris that is to say the Cloue tree, there are set the figures of Auens which
belong to an other place. 23 3 After this word (Grecians) there wants. And
Pliny. 23 7 For (mutleafe) read nutleafe. 24 7 For (at first sight) read at
the first sight. 24 18 For (women) read women's. 24 11 For (wod rose) read wood
rofe, and so in other places. 24 Nota, that the figure that is set for woedrofe
is not the figure of wodrofe, but of Gallion, but yet it is somewhat like it.
25 8 For (floutes) read flowers. 25 13 For (dwarf gentian) read dwarf
gentian. 26 3 For (and perfectly) read and dry perfectly. 26 Nota, that the
figure that is set for white Dittamie is it not, but English Dittamie, which is
nothing like to fraxinella. 27 Nota, that the figure that is set for Doromicum
Romanum is it not, but it is aconitum tertium Mathioli. 27 15 For (it was) read
it that was. 28 Nota, that the figure that is set for eupatoriu^ vulgar is it
not, as it may well appear if you look back to the chapter of eupatorium
Dioscoridis, that is, Agrimonie, where ye shall find the right cupatoriu^
vulgar, otherwise called eupatoriu^ Auicenne. 31 2 For (oemathe) read
filipendula. 31 19 For (and that it is) read and is. 33 4 For (I set) read I
fet. 34 2 For (the virtues and complexion of the diet wood) read, the virtues
and complexion of Graciola or herb Gratius. 34 28 For (is set out) read is set
out. 34 32 For (the virtue of graciola or herb gratius) read the virtues of
the diet wodde. 35 13 After these words (Latin writers) there wants that
have written. 35 32 For (to be) read was. 36 Nota, because the virtues of one
berrie out of Mathiolus are somewhat hard to be understood, In the stead of
it that is translated already, read it that follows. Out of the berrie of
the herb called Paris, the seed is gathered, which is not only not venomous,
but also a present remedy against poison: for I have known diverse, whereof
some have been by long diseases, and other by poisons, made half doting,
restored to their former health again by the only use of the sede of this herb
drunken in powder for the space of.xx. days in the quantity of a dram. 37 25
For (strengteth) read strengthens. 37 28 For (thrist because it is like
thrist) read thrift because it is like thrift. 37 31 For (and those things that
answer, for the leaves are like unto wheat) read, and those that answer for
the leaves, are like wheat. 39 3 Read the four lines following thus. For an
herb having the top like an ear of corn. which is called in Latin spica,
ought not for that cause streightwaye to be called when it grows in Germany,
spica Germanica, neither when it grows in Italy, spica Italica, neither
spica in any speech, because the barbarous writers call it spicam. 39 10 For
(a lauande) read a lauando. 39 19 For (I do not judge) read I do judge. 39 21
For (olco de spigo) read oleum de spica. 40 10 For (need) read, read. 40 10
(But also further help) blot out further. 40 28 For (an moystnest) read and
moystnesse. 40 36 For (the herb nutmege) read the hole nutmeg. 40 37 For
(cundited) read condited. 40 39 For (way hard) read wax hard. 40 41 For
(moscorion) read moscocarion. 41 9 For (joint) read joints. 42 4 For (saliua)
read saluia. 43 8 For (like scubins) read like scabius 43 17 For (sore will)
read sore it will. 43 27 For (mirobalanes, read myrobalanes, and so in other
places. 44 6 For (fine) read five. 45 After the figure of myrobalanis citrini,
there wants this title. The virtues of all myrobalanes. 45 9 For (thy sweet)
read the sweat. 45 14 For (this) read these. 46 7 For (and strengthen, it
quickens) read and strengthen it, and quicken. 48 5 For (in the end of the
second degree, and farther it is so very well smelling) read, in the end of
the second degree and further. It is also very well smelling. 48 17 For (both
me) read both by me. 49 7 For (wollise) read wollish. 49 38 For (where) read
wherefore. 50 34 For (forthwithout) read forthwith without. 50 42 For (the
methell makes) read the methell nut makes. 51 39 For (but much narrower, for
the quantity of it out of the lowest part, whereof there rises a little
stalk) read, but much narrower for the quantity of it, out of the lowest
part whereof, there rises a little stalk. 51 43 For (in moist and meadows)
read in moist meadows. 54 19 For (worm) read worn. 55 2 For (french Inglish)
read frenchenglish. 56 15 For (take one lungwure) read, take oak lungwurt. 56
40 For (marlocke) read martocke. 57 6 For (it joins together) read it
joins these together. 58 2 For (otger) read other. 58 17 For (there sheep
feed) read their sheep to feed. 58 last For (has) read have. 59 17 For (iong)
read long. 59 19 For (appears) read appear. 60 12 For (prunella) read
^runella. 61 18 For (make gargle) read make a gargle. 61 19 For (for
abouenamed) read for the above named. 62 2 For (is that it is) read, is it
that is. 63 14 For (barbenes) read barberies. 64 21 For (his kinds) read his
three kinds. 64 38 For (such rubarbe and it that) read such rubarbe that. 65 5
For (varite) read raritie. 67 7 For (of the third) read of the three. 71 4 For
(scoureth away and) read scoureth and 71 23 For (from. v.) read from fine
drams. 71 27 For (in me other) read in me and other. 71 32 For (turned) read
tunned. 73 last For (tustes) read tuftes. 76 Note, that in the stead of the
figure of Phumagnum, should have been set the figure of our English valerian,
which is called of the herbaries valeriana greca, and call the next herb Phu
vulgar Germanorum, that is the common valerian of the Germans. 77 10 For
(wherein are in white and blew flowers with a little scattered here and there)
read wherein are white flowers which have a little blew scattered in them here
and there. 77 19 For (clephantia) read elephantia. 78 Note, that the figure set
out for virga aurea, is not so well made as it should be, for it wants
indented leaves. 78 10 For (two kinds herb) read two kinds of this herb.
79 8 For (of uuula) read of the vuula. 79 35 For (a broad hory thing) read a
broad red horie thing. 79 40 For (operieus) read experience. 80 7 For (call)
read called. 80 13 For (has mention) read has made mention. 80 15 For
(swigerland) read swicherland. 80 17 For (verbascum) read verbascula. 80 20 For
(prinrose) read primerose. 80 28 For (experience it has) read experience that
it has. 80 47 For (bone) read bones. 81 15 For (stricken) read striking. 81 17
For (that is out of the whole herb) read that is stilled out of the whole
herb. 81 32 For (a sodereth) read and sodereth. 81 32 For (kynyes) read
chymneys. 81 35 For (the stodes) read the seeds.

Of the herb called Saucealone.
depiction of plant Alliaria.


ALliaria is called in English Saucealone / and Jack of the hedge / in Duch
Lenchel or SauSkraut / in French Aliayre. Saucealone grows in hedges and in
wild places alone with out any setting / and it comes up in the month of
April with broad leaves like unto a violet / but broader and grener / which
when they are broken and rubbed / smell much like unto Garleke: and therefore
it is called Alliaria / that is Garleke wurt / The stalk is long / and in the
top are white flowers / out of the which after grow little horns / which
have in them black seeds like to mustard or Selendine sede.

The complexion and virtues of this herb.
THis herb is hot at the lest in the end of the second degree after the rules
of Galene / who teaches us to judge of the hete and coldness of herbs / by the
taste of the tongue. It is commonly used both in England and in Germany / to be
put in sauces in the spring of the year / wherefore the English men call it
Sauce alone / and ye Germans SauSkraut. This is good for the^ yt have a cold
stomach / and it is good to be minged with other cold herbs to delay the
coldness thereof. But it is not good for them that are of a cholerike nature /
or have hot blood / or be disposed to the head ache.

Of the herb called Amara dulcis.
depiction of plant Amara dulcis.


AMara dulcis has no English name that I know / but for lack of an other
name / it may be called Bitter sweet. The herb grows about ditches and
watery places / and hedges / and rinneth after the manner of a vine alonge. The
leaves are something like Nightshaddes leaves / but longer and rounder / and
besides that they have two little ears standing out of each side of the leaf
toward the setting one of the stalk / as some boore speres and lance staves
have / and the bark of the stalk when it is tasted of / is first bitter / and
afterward sweet / and therefore it is called in Duche / Ie longer je lieber.
The longer the more lovely / yt is / the more ye taste it / the more sweet it
is / and the more lovely. It has grene berries first / and when it is ripe,
red as coral / and of an unpleasant taste. The flowers are somthinge purple with
yelow small things like thredes coming out of the reddest of them. Matthiolus
takes this herb to be vitis syluestris in Dioscorides: but I have
sufficiently confuted him in the second part of mine herball / intreatinge of
vitis syluestris. Tragus erreth in making this herb smilax leaves in
Dioscorides / for the fruit of smilax leaves is little / black as a lupine / but
the fruit of this herb / as he him self writes / is first grene / and after
red as coralle / therefore it can not be smilax leaves.

The virtues of this herb out of Tragus.
I Have known by experience yt this is the virtue of this herb says Tragus.
Take a pound of the wood of this herb / and cut it into small pieces / and
after that you have cut it / put it into a new pot with a pottel of white wine
/ and let the pot be well covered / so that no air come in / (yet not
withstanding make a little hole in the midst) and paste it well about with
paste: and seth it upon a soft cole fire / until the third part be sodden
away / and then take it away. And then if ye take a small draught of it in the
morning / an hour before ye rise / and so when ye go to bed: It drives out
the iaunders by the bellye and also by the water. Some give this when it is
sodden against rotten agues / of which the iaundes is commed.

Of the herb called wild Tansey.
depiction of plant Tanacetum.
depiction of plant Tanacetum Indicum.


WIld Tansey is called of Tragus in Latin Anserina / and in Duche Genserich.
It may be called in Latin also Tanacetum syluestre / some call it
Potentillam. This herb grows in cold and watery places. The leaves are like
unto Agrimonye / but that they are less and grene above and white benethe / it
crepeth after the manner of strawberries / and has no other stalk / but a long
thing like a pack threde / out of the which grow yelowe flowers.

The virtues of wild Tanseye.
OUR weomen in England and some men that be sun burnt / and would be fair /
either stepe this herb in white wine / and wash their faces with the wine / or
ellis with the distilled water of the same. The practitioners of Germanye write
/ that the herb if it be sodden with wine / and dronken / is good for them
that have any knawing in the bellye / and for them that have pain in their
backs / and for the stoppinge of weomens white flowers. The distilled water as
they write / is good for them that have red eyes.

Of the herb called Angelica.
depiction of plant Angelica satiua.
depiction of plant Angelica syluestris.


ANgelica has leaves somthinge like louage / but not so far iagged in / but it
is much like unto cow persnepe / which I take for Sphondylium when it is
young / but the leaves are sharper / smaller and yelower by reason whereof some
have by error taken Angelica to be sphondylium. It has a very great stalk /
smoth and long / and in the top of it sede much like unto louage. The root
is big and of a strong smelle with some pleasantnes / and full of a clammy
juice like a gum / which sauoreth very strong / and there grow out of
this bigger rote small little other rotes like branches which grow next to the
ground. It grows much in Norwaye in the high mountains / and also in Germany
not far from Friburge / in the wood called nigra sylua / or ellis Swartwalt in
Duch / where as is the beginning of Hircinij sylue. It grows not in England
that I know / saving only in gardines. The roots are now condited in Danske /
for a friend of mine in London / called master Alene a merchant man / who has
ventered over to Danske / sent me a little vessel of these / well condited with
very excellent good honey. Wherefore they that would have any Angelica / may
speak to the Merchants of Danske / who can provide them enough.

The virtues of Angelica.
ANgelica is hot and dry at the lest in the third degree. All the later
writers agree in this and experience confirms the same: that Angelica is good
against poison / pestilent airs / and the pestilence it self. The
practitioners of Germany write thus of Angelica. If that any man be suddenly
taken / either with any pestilence / or any soden pestilent ague / or with to
much soden sweting / let him drink of the powder of the root of Angelica /
half a dram / mingled with a dram of triacle / in three or four spoundfullis
of the water of Angelica distilled out of the roots / and after go unto bed /
and cover him self well / and at the lest fast three hours after / which if he
do / he shall begin to sweat / and by the help of God he shall be delivered
from his disease. If you have not triacle at hand / you may take a whole dram
of the root of Angelica in powder / with the forenamed quantite of the
distilled water / and it will bring the same effect that the other composition
did. The root of Angelica steped in vinegre / and smelled upon in the time of
the pestilence / and the same vinegre being sometime dronke^ / if you be fasting
/ saves a man's body from the pestilence. But it were better in my judgment /
to stipe the root of Angelica in sharp white vinegre / and after it be
sufficiently steped / to put it into a round hollow balle / full of holes /
either of silver / or of tin / or of Ieniper wood / with some cotton or wolle
dipped in the same vinegre / or ellis with some fine cloth / that any of these
may hold the vinegre the longer: and if a man have such a ball / he may be
the more bolder to venture where the pestilence is / then if he had a great sort
of other medicines. The water distilled out of ye rotes of Angelica / or the
powder of the same is good for gnawing and pain of the bellye / that comes
with cold / if the body be not bound withal. To be short / the water distilled
/ or the powder of the root is good for all inward diseases: as the pleuresy /
in the beginning before the hete of the inflammation becomed into the body: for
it dissolueth and scatereth abroad / such humores as use to give matter to the
pleuresy. It is good also for the diseases of ye lunges / if they come of a
cold cause: and for the strangurian of a cold cause / or of a stoppinge. It is
good also for a woman that is in travail of child / and to bring down her
sickness. At other times when need requires / it is good also to drive wind
away that is in the body / and to ease the pain that comes of the same.
The root may be sodden either in water or in wine / as ye nature of him that
is sick does require. The juice of the root put into a holow toth / takes
away the ache / and so likewise does the distilled water put in at the ear.
Moreover the juice and the water also of Angelica / quicken ye eye sight / and
they break the little filmes that go over the eyes / whereof darkness does rise.
Of the rotes of Angelica and pitch / may be made a good emplaster against the
bytinges of mad beasts. The water / the juice / or the powder of the root
sprinkled upon the diseased place / is a very good remedy against old and
deep sores / for they do scour it and cleanse them / and cover the bones with
flesh. The water of the same in a cold cause / is good to be laid on places
diseased with the gout and sciatica also: for it stancheth the pain and
melts away the tough humores that are gathered together. The sede is of like
virtue with the root. The wild Angelica that grows here in the low woods
and by the water sides / is not of such virtue as the other is. Howbeit the
surgiones use to seth ye rote of it in wine / to heal grene wondes withal.
These properties have I gathered out of the practicioners of the Germans / but
I have not proved them al as yet my self / but diverse of the^ I have proved
and found to be true.

Of Aquilegia called Columbine.
AQuilegia is called in English Columbin / and in Duche Ackeley. Columbine
grows only in gardines in England / as far as I know / but I have seen it
grow wild in Germanye both it with the white flower and eke with ye blewe.
The first leaves that come out / are like unto great Selendine / they are iagged
round about / and spread upon the earth. In the month of June / it grows
into a round and smoth stalk / higher then a man's cubite / and in the top
it has blewe or white flowers much like unto the herb / which is called in
English Larkes clawe / and in Duche Riders spurge. After that the flowers are
gone there rise four corners like unto Nigella Romana / which have sede like
unto flees. The root is white and long / and full of small fringes about the
end like thredes. The herb / the sede / and the root resemble a certain
swetenes.

depiction of plant Aquilegia.


The virtues of Columbine.
TRagus writes that a dram weight of the sede of Columbine bruised / and with a
halfpennye weight of Saffron / dronken with wine / is good for the yelow
iaundies. This is known by experience if he will go to a warm bed after that
he has taken it / and provoke sweet: After the same manner used / it opens
the ways of the liver / of whose stopping arise many diseases. After the same
judgment of the same Tragus / the water of the flowers rightly distilled / if
it be dronken is good for the same purpose / and it is good against soundinge.

Of Medewurt / or Meadow wurt / or Mede sweet / and of some named Vlmaria.
depiction of plant Barba capri.


MEdewurte is an herb well known unto all men / it grows about water sides
/ moist places and sennes / and it has a leaf like unto Agrimonie / indented
much. The stalks are four square / holow within / dunne in color / which are
sometime as high as a man. It has very many flowers in the top which are
like the flowers of Philipendula / a far of / but not nere hand / in color
white / and in savor pleasant. After that the flowers are fallen / there
follows a sede like unto a little small were / ending into three sharp tops.
The root is long and full of little tasselles like thredes / black without /
and within brounishe / of a stinking smelle / of a bitter and binding taste.
This herb is called of some Vlmaria / and the whole form of it is like unto
the herb which is called in Duche GeiSbardt / which is Barba capri.

The virtues of this herb after the Practitioners of Germanye.
THE root of this herb sodden in wine and honye / and dronken / loses the
bellye and draws forth choler. It is good for the bloody flixe if it be
dronken when it is sodden in read wine. The weomen cooks in the spring time
use to gather this herb / and put it in there potages and mooses with other
pot herbs. Beware that the sede of it be not eaten / for it makes the head
ache. The same practitioners of Germanye do affirm that the herb bruised and
laid to with mede dryueth away swellings / and draws forth shiuers / and
also darts and arrow heads.

Of Burnet.
depiction of plant Sanguisorbia.


THE herb that is named in English Burnet / is called of some common writers
Pimpinella / and of other Pimpinella Italica / to put a difference between it
and Pimpinellam Germanicam / some of the finer sort hold that this herb ought
to be called Bipennula or Bipinnula / because there grow over thwart ye leaf
two and two little leaves like unto the wings of birds / standing out as the
bird sets her wings out / when she intends to fly. Some would it should be
called Pampinella / and Fuchsius says that it ought to be called Sangui sorba
/ ye Duch men call it Hergottes bertlin / that is Gods little berde / because of
the color that it has in the top. This herb is so well known in all places
of England by the name of Burnet / that I should but lose my labor / if I
should describe it / Therefore I will go to the virtues of it.

The virtues of Burnet.
Diverse of the Practitioners of Germanye do hold yt this herb is good to
staunche blood both in the bloody flixe / and also in the issue of blood /
that weomen have out of measure / some hold that that herb holden alone in
ones hand / is good for the same. The truth is that this herb is of a binding
nature / and rather cold then hot / and therefore it is fit for the purposes
above rehearsed / specially the root and the sede. The leaf is pleasant both
in taste and in smelle / and is good to be put both in wine / bear and ale /
for them that are disposed much to any reume or flixe in the body / and in
my judgment the use of it is good both within and without against an hot
running gout / namely the leaves.

Of Duch Pimpinell.
depiction of plant depiction of plant depiction of plant

THEre is an other herb called in Duche Bibernel / and of the Duche Herbaries
Pimpinella Germanica, and it is much like in form of the leaves unto our
Burnet / but it is yelower a great deal / and rougher. It has a white flower
in the top. The sede of it is like unto Persely sede. The herb is hot at
the lest in the third degree / both the root and the sede. Some call this herb
Saxifrage / because it grows amongst stones in many places / and cleueth
them / and some call it Saxifrage / for the propertye that it has in breakinge
of the stone in a mannis body / and it deserves much better the name of
Saxifrage / then our English Saxifrage does. It grows commonly in England
in banks of each side of holowe high ways / and in many meadows also / and
in very great plentye.

The virtues of this herb.
THE new writers hold that this herb is good against ye pestilence to be
taken in fasting in the morninge / and as I said before / it is good to
break the stone. The Germans do hold yt the rote of this herb dried / is so
hot that it may be used for pepper / which I would not deny if it were so
pleasant as it is medicinable. The roots may be sodden and condited in sugar
/ to the great profit of them that have cold stomaches / and are troubled with
tough fleme / the colike and the stone. The root of Pimpinel any ways taken
in / is good against any kind of poison / against gnawinges in the bellye /
which come of a cold cause. And it is good for to bring down weomen their
sickness. The sede will do al these things / and therefore it were good that
comfittes should be made thereof. They say also that the water of it dronken
three or four days / in the quantite of three or four sponefulles / is good
for the same purposes / but I give more credit to ye root and the sede /
except the water were better stilled / then it is here in England.

Of the herb called of the later writers Bistorta.
depiction of plant

BIstorta is called in some places of England Astrologia / and in some places
Pationes / but there is no general name for it. It may be called either of the
name twice writhen / or else docke Bistorte. I know no herb in all these part
of Europa / where as I have been / that agrees better with the description and
virtues of Britannica then Bistorta does / howbeit ye rote agrees not with ye
description of Dioscorides / and therefore I have set it amongst the herbs of
the new writers. Yet not withstanding I do vehemently suspect / that it is
Britannica of Plinye / whereof is made mention in the book of Pliny de
naturali historia, where he writes that the soldiers of the Romans come
into Freiceland / and that they drank two year of one fresh spring / for
there were no mo fresh springes / as he says in all the hole country / and
that had such a property that all that drank of it within two year / had the
disease which is called scelotirbe / and stomocace / that is the losing of the
knees and the disease of the mouth / for they waxed lame in their knees / and
al their teth waxed loose / which later named part of the disease many in
Freiselande have at this present hour / and when I was the Earl of Emdens
Physician / which is the Lord of East Freseland / diverse asked me council for
that disease / and by the help of God / I did heal them / and perceived that
it was the very same disease that Plinye spoke of / wherefore although I had
learned by experience to heal the disease with other herbs / yet because that
Pliny wrote that the inhabitores of Freseland taught the Romans to heal
their disease with an herb called Britannica / which grew in great plentye
in these parts of Freseland / which were next unto Britannye / whereof the
herb had the name. I sought with great pain / and also with some cost by all
the sea side of East Freselande / and I could never find any herb that
answered to the description of Britannica. Then I sailed to an Island / called
Just / and there I found it not / and after that I sailed to an other Island
called Nordeni / and sought there also / but I could not find it. And then
because I could not find it in no place by the sea side / I went to seek it in
meadows and woddes / and in a wode I found Bistorta in such great plentye as I
never saw in no gardine of England / and therefore seeing that Plinye wrote
that it grew in such great plentye there / and I could find no other herb but
Bistorta / I judge yt Bistorta is the Britannica that he makes mention of /
and it is surely proved by experience / that Bistorta heals the disease that
Plinye writes that Britannica healed. The rote of twice writhen is blackish
red / and within whytish red / and tastes very bindinge / crooked in and out /
whereof some gave it the name of Bistorta / and some serpentaria: The leaves
that grow next to the root / are bigger then the other / and are like unto a
dockes leaf / but much less. The stalk is small and long / and has here and
there some little leaves upon it: In the top of the stalk grows a little
ear like unto the ear of Lauander / the flower is whitishe with some purple
minged there withal.

The virtues of docke Bistorte.
THE practitioners of Germanye write / that the leaves and rote of dock Bistort
/ are good to be taken against the pestilence: and it is known by experience /
that the juice / powder / or broth of them / are good for lose teth and rotten
gummes / wherefore they are good for the disease / which is called of the low
Duche men the scourboke / and of the Northren men at this day ye scrubye ill.
The powder of the root also stops both the bloody and other flixes. The
practitioners write also that the powder is good to be sprinkled upon ye
canker of the back / and also upon sores that are hard to be healed / if the
places be washed with the juice of the herb. The powder of the root mixed
with allam / and a little honye / and put into a holow toth / stays the
falling down of the rewme from the head into the same toth.

Of Bursa pastoris.
depiction of plant Bursa pastoris.


BVrsa pastoris is called in some places of England shepeherdes pouche / of the
likeness that the sede vessel has unto a shepehardes pouch or shrippe. The
herb grows in high ways and in gardines / and in many other places about
towns and cities: the leaves are depelye indented in / and the stalk has
many branches upon it / and the leaves that are above in them / are not so
far indented as the other leaves be / and a great deal less / the stalk is
round / and of the length of a spanne and longer. In the top are white flowers
/ and when they are gone / there follows as I said before the vessel of the
sede like unto a boys satchel or little bag: the root is very small.

The Virtues.
BVrsa pastoris is cold and dry / and bindinge / and is by manyfold
experiences tried to be a very good and wholesome herb for many things.
Wherefore if it be broken and laid to emplaster wise / it is good for hot
inflammations or burninges both of blood and also of choler. It is good sodden
with rayn water / Plantaine and Bolus against the bloodye flixe / and against
spittinge of blood. The juice of it does heal grene wondes / and does stop
the runninge out of matter of men's ears. It is also good to stop weomens
flowers withal / if they run to much out / if it be eaten. It is good to be
menged with emplasters for the healing of the wounds of the head. Bursa
pastoris being dried and sodden in read wine or in rain water / wherein
burning hot stele has been quenched / is not only good for the bloody flixe /
but also for them that piss blood. Some hold that the stilled water / being
dronken for a certain time / has the same power. The juice put in a linen
clout / and stopped in a man's nose / stops the running out of blood.

Of the herb Balsamine.
depiction of plant Balsamine prima.
depiction of plant Balsamine altera.


THere is an herb which is called in Barbarus Latin Balsamina / and of some
Viticella / of some Momordica / and of some Caranza. The Same may be called in
English Balsamine or vine Balsamine / It grows much in Italy / and in some
places of England in gardines. Balsamine is a little herb and crepeth like a
vine with small branches / and claspeth about herbs and bushes that grow
next about it after the manner of Briony / and such other like crepinge herbs
/ but the same has leaves much less and more depely indented. It has many
little claspers / wherewith it holds up it self: The claspers come out from
the holowe place between the stalk and the leaves foot stalk. It has a
flower like a Cucumer / some what yelowish. It has a fruit small at the
bottom and bigger above. The shell of it is thick and fleshye. It has a
cremesin color when it is ripe. It has a sede enclosed in like unto the sede
of Languria / covered with a thick shell very slippery and red. It has a very
small root / and it is not ripe before the Auguste or September.

The Virtues.
THE leaves join together fresh wounds. The fruit if the sede be taken out
/ and set in the sun long with oil that is not full ripe / or if it be
steped in the same oil / and put into a vessel which stands in an other
vessel full of hot water / or if it be set in hot horse dunge / it will make
an oil very profitable to drive away the great heat and inflammations of
wounds and of weomens breasts / and to swage ache. It is also good for weomens
mothers / if they have their skin of / and for the ache of the emrodes. The
fruit is good for the same purpose if it be sodden in a double vessel in sweet
almond oil or Lint sede oil / so that ye put to every pound of oil an ounce
of the moist vernishe. The same is very good for them that are either burnt
with the fire / or scalded with hot water. It is good also for sinews that
are pricked and wounded. Some hold that it is good for weomen that are barrayn
/ to make them fruytefull. It is good also for burstinge of children if the
place be anointed often therewyth. The powder of the leaves in the quantitye of a
spoune full taken with the broth of Plantayne or horse tail / is good for the
wounds of the guts. And some hold that the same is good against the gnawynge
of the bellye.

Of the herb called Fox glove.
THere is an herb that grows very much in England / and specially in
Norfolk about ye cony holes in sandy ground / and in diverse woddes / which is
called in English Fox glove / and in Duche Fingerkraut. It is named of some
in Latin Digitalis / that is to say Thimble wurt. It has a long and metely
broad leaf / almost after the manner of Mullayne / but longer / blacker and
sharper / and indented roundeaboute like a saw. Digitalis.
depiction of plant depiction of plant It has a long stalk and in the top
many flowers hanginge down like belles or thumbles of diverse colors /
sometime they are blewe / sometime white / sometime yelowish.

The properties of Fox glove.
I Have heard one that said / that he proved that the hole herb / stalks /
leaves / and flowers / bruised a little / and put between the horse sadle and his
back / is an excellent remedy against the farcye or fassones.

Of Carduus benedictus.
ALthough diverse of the later writers have gone about to make Carduus
benedictus a kind of Atractilis / yet for all that the description is found not
perfitly to agree unto it. It is written that Carduus benedictus was sent out
of Inde unto the Emperor Friderike / as a very precious medicine against many
diseases and greses / it is called in English most commonly Cardo benedictus /
and in Italian / Herba Turcha.

depiction of plant Atractilis aspera.


The virtues of Carduus benedictus out of the later writers.
IT is very good for the head ache and the migram / for the use of the juice
or powder of the leaves preserves and keeps a man from the head ache / and
heleth it being present. It quickens the sight if the juice of it be laid
upon the eyes. The powder stancheth blood that flows out of the nose or
comes out of the longes. The broth of it taken with wine / makes an
appetite. It is good for any ache in the body. It strenghteneth the members
of the hole body / and fasteneth loose sinews and weike. It is also good for
the dropsey. It breaks also the stone / and breaks any imposteme. It
preserves from the pestilence if ye powder be taken in water xxiiij. hours
before a man come into the infected place. It is good for the dusines of the
head. It helps the memory / it amendeth thick hearing. It is good for short
wind and the disease of the lunges / some write that strenghteneth the teth:
Other write that it brings down flowers / and provoke sleep / and helps
the falling sickness. It is also good for falls and brusinges. The leaves
provoke sweet / ye powder is good against al poison. The same put into the
guts by a clister / helps the colike and other diseases of the guts / and
the wounds of the same. They write also that the water of Cardo benedictus /
heals the rednes and itchinge of the eyes / and the juice does the same. The
leaves bruised / are good for the biting of serpents / for burninges and for
carbuncles. There is nothing better for ^he cancker and old rotten and
festringe sores / then the leaves / juice / broth powder and water of Cardo
benedictus. The leaves are good for fomentationes / and to be sitten over /
being sodden in water / that ye vapor may come to the diseased places / against
the stone and stoppinge of flowers.

Of the herb called Cheruell.
depiction of plant Cerifolium.


CHaruel leaves when they come first up / are almost like unto percely / but
smaller and iagged with many cuttes / and therefore it seems to be like unto
Homloke. It has a white root and small / and shorter then all the kinds of
perselye have. It has a smoth stalk / somthinge purple / hollow and full of
branches / and it bears a flower like unto Coriander / and a black sede /
and the sede smells nothing at all / when as the herb has a very good
smell.

The virtues.
CHaruel is of a warm nature / but excedeth not the first degree. The Germans
do write that it is proved by experience / that Charuel does break insunder
lumpes of blood / gathered together. The juice makes the blood that is grown
together by a dry stripe / or by a wound melt and fall insunder. If it be so
that the juice of Charuel does not strongly enough by it self to dissolve and
break insunder clotted or clustered blood / that is grown together in lumpes:
Let the patient put thereto the powder made of burnt crabbes eyes / and of the
coals of Linde tree / and it will work the effect stronglier a great deal.
They write also that this is good for the pleuresye / and against the prickinge
of the side. If that it be eaten in a sallat or in a moose / it is good for the
stomache and the head / by reason of the pleasant smell that it has. The
leaves of Cheruel bruised and laid to / are as good a remedy against bruised
places and clustered blood / as scala celi is.

Of Cassia fistula.
CAssia fistula is called in better Latin / Siliqua Aegyptiaca, we have no
other name for it in English but Cassia fistula. The tree that the Canes coddes
of Cassia fistula grows on / is a great tree. The wood of the tree is fast /
and much knit together within the bark until ye come to the heart / it is
yelowe / but the pith or heart is black as the heart of Ebenus and Guaiacum is.
When it is grene / it stinketh ill / but not when it is dried. The leaf is
like unto Carobe / or saint Iohannis bread is tree / which may be called in
English Carob cod tree / but it grows sharper toward the end. The bark is of
an ashye color. The roots are great like the roots of a Walnut tree. Out of
the bows hang coddes very long / round and thick / when they are ripe and
in color black redish. These are full of a black and sweet mary / but it goes
not right out / as the marye does in a bean / but one piece is ever sundered
or parted from an other / by little thin things like woddish filmes / as ye
may se in honey combs / in certain partitiones lies a great sede / as like
as may be possible unto the sede of Carobe / or Carob cod. Cassia fistula is
brought out of diverse places / not only of Cairo and Alexandria / but also
out of the Weste new found Islands / out of Hispaniola / cuba and paria. The
best is that comes from Caire / and it has the longest Canes thinnest barks
/ and heauiest in weight / that when it is shaken / ratleth not.

depiction of plant Cassia fistula.
depiction of plant Cassia solitiua.


The virtues of Cassia fistula.
CAssia is a little hot and moist in ye first degree. It purges from the
stomach choler and fleme / gently by soughtning of the belly. It is good for
agues that rise from those two humores / and by this means it cleanses the
blood / and quenches and dulleth the sharpnes both of blood and coler. It
purges the belly very well / and the virtue thereof goes not beyond the
stomache. Wherefore it may most safely be given in the beginning of agues / and
in other hot diseases in the beginning before the letting of blood / because
it only purges the stomach and softeneth the bellye. The harm that comes
of Cassia is / that it is euel for slipperye and slimye and weike guts. But
the remedy against that / is to menge with it Mirobalanes / Rubarbe / Mastick /
and Spica nardi. But I know in my time two of my pacientes to whom Cassia was
a poison / for as soon as ever they took it / they were very sore seek / and
each of them at the least had xl. stools / the one was a gentle man of
Fresela^d the Ionker of Alders ham / and the other a gentle man of England. Or
else I never found ye Cassia did disagre with any man. If it be given unto any
that are very hard bound / then it is best to mix with it Almond oil / or
else the Muscelage of fleawurt called Psillium. It is excellently good for
them that can not well make water / if it be taken with medicines that stere a
man to make water / as a percelye and Alexander sede / Fenell sede / and such
like. Because it works very slowlye / some increase the strength thereof
with hisope or the whaye of goats milk. Cassia purges out choler and fleme
without any hurt at all. It swageth the harrishnes or roughnes of the breast
and throat / and dissolueth the inflammations thereof. It delivers the
kidneis from sand and grauel / specially if it be taken with the broth of
licores or other things that provoke water. Moreover if it be often taken / it
will not suffer the stone to grow again. Beside al these properties it is good
for hot agues. If it be laid to without / it is good for burning heat / called
the inflammation of choler or inflammed blood / and for other inflammations
that are in the outermost part of the skin. Many Phisicions never give
Cassia / except it be menged with some portion of Hiera picra to be put unto it
/ but either a little of the syrope of roses solutiue / or the syrop of Cichory
with Rubarbe / or some other of like virtue. Cassia may be given to childer /
weomen with child / to very old men without any ieoperdye. The quantite of
Cassia is ever an ounce commonly. It may be taken in greater and less
quantite / according unto the nature of the pacient. The time of taking of it
/ is two hours before dinner fasting.

Of Cloves.
depiction of plant Cariophillata hortensis.
depiction of plant Cariophillata syluestris.


ALlthough there be mention made of cloves of the later Grecians / yet there is
no mention made thereof in Dioscorides and Galene / wherefore I entreat of
cloves amongst the simples / found out after the time of the old Grecianes.
The Grecians call a cloue Cariophyllon / that is mutleafe / the barbarous
writers name it Clauum / that is a nail / whereof comes the Duche name
neglen / and our English a Cloue or a Clowe.

The virtues of Cloves.
Cloves comfort the stomach / liver and heart. They help digestion and stop
the bellye. They quicken the eye sight and scour away the clouds and hawes
of the eyes. They are generallye good against all cold diseases / and they are
almost hot in the third degree. The oil of Cloves is very good for a cold
stomach and for any other places that had need of warninge as a cold
reumatike brain and such other places.

Of our Ladies mantell.
depiction of plant Alchimilla.


ALchimilla is named in English syndaw / and our ladies mantil. Our ladies
mantil is an herb of a grene color / and grows in moist meadows / and in
some dry meadows. In the night it closes it self together like a purse / and
in ye morning it is found full of dew. It lokes much like a malow at first
sight / and it is iagged rondabout with eight or ix. indentinges. The flour is
yelow / and the sede is small / and the root five inches long / and redish in
color / in taste binding with a little bitterness. The herb is not passing a span
long.

The virtues.
THE late writers hold yt sindaw is good for inward burstinges and inward
wondes / if it be sodden in wine / and the wine be dronken. The leaves thereof
being laid to swellings and wondes / do swage the pain and take away also
hot burninges. The broth of the herb is good for all kinds of wounds / and a
cloth also dipped in the broth thereof / helps to glewe wounds together
again. The broth of it is good also to lay upon women breasts / that are to
lose and hanging down. It is often proved that this herb is good against the
inward brekinges and burstinges of children.

Of wood rose or wood rowell.
depiction of plant

Wood rose is called of some in Barbarous Latin Cordialis or Asperula / or
Spergula odorata / in Duche Hertzfreud and Waltmeister / in French Muguet. It
is a short herb of a span long / foursquare and small / about yt which grow
certain orders of leaves / certain spaces going between / representinge some
kinds of rowelles of sporres / whereof it has the name in English / the
floutes are white and well smellinge.

The virtues of wood rowell.
THey that write of this herb / give it great commendation for making of the
heart merry / and for helping of the liver.

Of little Gentian / or dwarf Gentian.
THere is a little herb in form and fassion like unto Gentian / and it is
called of the common Herbaries Cruciata / of the form of a cross that is seen
in the root. The leaves are long / and stand wing wise on the stalk which
is round. The flower is blewe and long / and the hole herb is bitter.

The virtues.
LIkewise as it is in my judgment a kind of Gentian / so it has diverse
properties of Gentian. It grows in England both in Dorsetshyre upon the
plain of Salisberrye and also in York shyre in bare places. The Herbaries
write that this herb is good against the pestilence and poison / and for
wounds / and to bring out tough humores of the breast. If this herb be bruised
and laid unto the belly / it kills and drives forth worms. Some hold that
if the powder of the herb be given unto cattle or beasts that are in
ieoperdye of contagious sickness / it will preserve them. I think and judge /
that if a man want the great Gentian / that he may for a need occupye this
herb in the stead of it.

Of Quibibbes.
I Have not seen the tree / nether the leaves / of Quibibbes / for it grows
not in those places of Europa that I know of / where I have been / and
therefore I can not describe him. I have seen the berries often times / for the
berries are common in England and in all countries. They are of the bigness of
pepper / but lighter and somewhat brouner with a little stalk / as ye Iuy berries
have. They are called in barbarous Latin Cubebe. I think yt the old writers
knew nothing of this simple.

The virtues of Quibibbes.
THE sede is hot in the beginning of the third degree / and perfitly in the
end of the third degree. This berrye makes strong the stomach / that is
weike by reason of fleme or of wind / and they scour from the breast / tough
and gross humores. They help the milte / and drive away wind / and help
the cold diseases of the mother. If they be chawed long with mastick / they
draw fleme from the head / and strengthen the brain / and to be short / they
are good against all cold diseases.

Of white Dittanye.
depiction of plant

I Have written of two kinds of Dittany alredye in my former books / whereof
the former is called in Latin Dictamnus / or Dicta^nus creticus. The second is
called Lepidium. This kind is called in Barbarous Latin Dictamus albus / and of
some writers Fraxinella / of the likeness that it has with an ash in the
settinge of the leaves. It grows in the high mountains in Germanye in
plentye. It is a very beutuous herb / and well smelling. The flowers are purple
whytish / the root is white / and stinketh like a goat buck / and goes a good
lenght in the ground. The taste of the root is bitter / the sede of it is
black / and it grows in little small coddes.

The virtues of white Dittanye / or Duche Dittanye.
THE powder of it is good to kill worms. The hole herb of nature is good
against poison and the bitinges of venomous beasts / and also against the
pestilence. It is good for them which are diseased in the stomach / and for
them that are shortwinded. The water distilled out of the flowers / if it be
poured in at the nose / is good for all diseases of the head that come of a
cold cause.

Of Doronike Roman.
depiction of plant Doronicum Romanum.


DOronicum Romanum / otherwise called Carnabadium / grows not that I know of
in England / and that I remember I never saw it growyng but ones / and that
was in Germanye. The leaf of it was showed me for Doronico Romano / was much
bigger and broader then a violet leaf / and much more blackishe grene. The
roots are well known in the Apothecaries shoppes.

The virtues of Doronike Roman.
THE Arabian commends this herb very much against the diseases of the
heart / and hold that it is good against poison and venom.

Of diverse herbs which have the name of Eupatorium.
depiction of plant Eupatorium vulgar.


IN my first book I have declared sufficientlye that Agrimony was the
Eupatorium of Dioscorides / and of other of the Grecians. Now because there
are two other kinds of Eupatorium / whereof Mesue makes mention of the one /
and Auicenna of an other: it shall be necessary as far forth as we ca^ to set
forth it which is the Eupatorium of Mesue / and which is the Eupatorium of
Auicenne. Matthiolus writes that the common Eupatoriu^ of the Apothecaries
which I have named water hemp / is Eupatorium Auicenne / and he writes that
the herb that is called Ageraton in Dioscorides / is Eupatorium Mesues /
mockinge Fuchsius and Cordus / who held that Gratiola was Eupatorium Mesue / as
much worthy to be mocked of other his own self / for the herb that he
sets forth for Eupatorio Mesues / agrees not with the description of Mesue
/ for the leaves of Mesues Eupatorium are small like Centorie / his herb has
broad leaves nothing like Centorye. The flowers of Eupatorie of Mesue are long
or somthinge long / as both the translations of Mesue witness / for Siluius
redeth thus / Floribus est subluteis oblongis, The old translator has /
Eleuantur super eum flores qui sunt sicut subcitrini, longitudinis paruae.
Wherefore I meruell out of whose translation Matthiolus describing Eupatorium
Mesue / set out these words / Floribus aureis in vmbellam cohaeren tibus
helychrysi modo. Furthermore he proves not that his Guilia purges / and I
take that it is the herb that we call Mandleyne. Wherefore his herb can not be
Eupatorium Mesues / though it could purge as he has not proved yet. As for
Gratiola which Cordus and Fuchsius take for Eupatorio Mesues / the extremite of
purginge (which Matthiolus noted well) will not suffer it to be Eupatorium
Mesue / for two scruples of the powder of Gratiola (as I have often proved)
purges strongly / when as Eupatorium Mesues purges very gently / and nothing
stronglye. Therefore nether Cordus nor Matthiolus / nether any of us all has
found out Eupatorium Mesues. And it appears by Mesue that his was not so very
plentuous in his time. For in the defaut of it he teaches to take half as
much of Asarabacca / and so much wormwode Roman. But if good Asarabacca
were not at hand / I had lever take wormwode Roman alone / or grene Cassidonia
called stichados / then either it that Matthiolus or Cordus sets forth for
Eupatorio Mesues.

The virtues of water hemp.
WAter hemp is very bitter in taste / and it opens all stoppinges / and
cutteth in sunder all tough and clammye humores / and is good for the grene
sickness / the dropsye iaundes / and for the gout that comes of gross fleme.

Of Eyebrighte.
EYebrighte is named in Duche Augen troost / in Latin Eufragia, and of some in
Greek Ophthalmica. The herb is very short / and comes not (that I have
seen) to the height of a span / the leaves are for the quantite of the herb
somthinge broad and indented / and in taste bitter / and in smell not pleasant
/ the flower is of diverse colors / but the white bears the chief rule.

depiction of plant Euphragia.


The virtues of Eyebright out of Arnoldus de noua villa.
THE wine of Eyebright is made for the eyes by puttinge the herb into the must
until it be at lenght perfect wine / whose use makes the eyes of old men wax
young again and takes away the hinderance of them / and the lack of sight in
any man of what age soever he be of / chefely if there excede fat and fleme.
There was a man that continued blind a long time / and within a year he was
restored to his sight again / for the herb is hot and dry / and it has of
a property / yt if the powder of it be eaten with the yolke of an egg / it
works the same effect / and the powder does the same thing wounderfullye
received in wine. And there are credit worthy witnesses alive / as yet that
have tried this in them selves / which could not read without spectacles and
afterward red a small text without spectacles. If the wine be to strong /
tempre it with fenel water or with sugar / Thus Arnoldus in his book of wines.
Tragus writes that he has proved that it is good for the iaundes / and I
gather by the bitterness and heat that it has measurable / that it is good
against all diseases that come of the stopping of the milt or liver / or any
other part / and that it is good to cut in pieces tough fleme and other gross
humores.

Of Filipendula.
depiction of plant Oenanthe.


FIlipendula is named in English also Filipendula / that is hanging by a
threde / for the knobbye roots hang by small things like thredes. It is
called in Duche Rotten steinbrech. It is somthinge like unto Burnet / but the
leaves are less / and it resembles also the greater kind of Yarrow / but the
leaves are greater / the roots are many little knobbes like long nuttes /
hanginge upon small things like thredes. The stalk is long and small / the
flowers are white and of a pleasant smell / not unlike unto the flowers of
Medowurt.

The virtues of Filipendula.
FIlipendula dryueth forth water / and is good for the strangurion / and for
the stone in the kidneis / and the ache therein. The same as the later writers
hold / drives away the windines of the stomach / and that it is good for them
that are shortwinded / and for all diseases that rise of cold. Some hold also
that the powder of the rotes is good for the falling sickness.

Of the herb called Galega.
GAlega is named in Italian about Ferraria also Regalicum / in other places
Ruta capraria, It grows in great plentye about Ferraria about the bank of
the noble flood Padus. It grows high up with leaves like Licores.

depiction of plant Galega sieve Ruta capraria.


The virtues.
THE new writers do hold that Galega is good against the pestilence and
against all venom and poison / and bitinge or prickinge of venomous beasts.
The juice of the herb has the same virtue / and it is good to be laid
emplasterwyse upon the same wounded and hurt places. Some write that an ounce
and a half of it is good to be given for them that have the falling sickness. I
never saw this herb growinge in any place but in gardines / sauinge only in
Italye.

Of Gratiola.
depiction of plant Gratiola.


I Have not seen Gratiolam growing in England / saving two roots or three that
I set out of Brabant / and gave unto master Rich and master Morgan
Apotecaries of London. Wherefore I know no English name for it. But it may
be called herb Gratius / or horse werye / or werye horse / because when it is
eaten of horses / it faints them and makes them weary / for the which cause
it is called in Italia^ Stanka cauallo. The herb grows in moist grondes / as
about Worms in the close that is hard by the water side beyond the bridge /
where as my servants gathered an hole wallat full at one time. The herb is
sometime two spannes long in Germanye when it grows by water sides. The
leaves are not like the leaves of hisope as Matthiolus writes / but much
bigger and longer / and of an other color that is more whytish grene / and
not so blackishe grene as hisope is. About the edges of the leaves stand out
little certain things like teth / and namely about ye ends of ye leaves / ye
flowers grow out of a long foot stalk / in figure long / in color whitish /
with some piece purplish / and within a little yelowish. The leaves grow
wingwise by coples one against an other. The rotes of it that grows in
Germany / are not like it that Matthiolus sets forth / for they are more
creping in the ground along / and out of these creping roots spring out many
little stalks / ye may cut the crepinge root into many pieces / and every one
of them will grow and bring forth stalks / leaves and flowers. The hole herb
is very bitter.

The virtues and complexion of the Diet wood.
THis herb is good for a dropsey / for it purges water fleme and choler
strongly / for two scruples will purge a metely strong body. The herb bruised
and laid to a wound as Matthiolus writes / heals it very quickly and
spedely.

Of the wodde called Guiacum.
GViacum is otherwise called Lignum sanctum, that is holy wode. Some call it
the Diet wood / because they that keep a Diet for the French pox / or any
other disease hardly curable / most commonly drink the broth of this wood.
It grows not in Europa but in Inde and in Taprobana and Iaua / and in diverse
Islands of Inde. The learned men as Manardus and other of our time / make three
sorts of the Diet wood. The first kind is very big / and in the mids /
in the in most part it appears black / and wtoute it is pale or reddishe.
The second kind is much less / and the black within much less. The
third kind which is properlye called the holy wood / is less then all the
other / and it is white both within and without / and this is more smellinge
and bitinge then the other. These three sorts are not three diverse trees in
kind / but all one kind of tree / but they differ in parts and age. The
great massy part with so much black / is the bole or body of the tree. The
second kind are the bigger branches: the third kind is either a young tree / or
the small bonghes of the old tree. The best is it that is al white / so that it
be fresh and not iuyceles and wythered. The second beneth that in goodness is
it that is less / and has less black then the greatest. The vilest of all
three is that / which is greatest of all the other / and has most black in it.
The best barcke is that which is taken of the best wode. Guiacum is set out of
diverse places / as out of Callecute / Iaua: the learned sort hold that it
is best that comes out of East Inde / because it is hot of subtle parts /
and has much rosin in it.

The virtues of Gratiola or herb Gratius.
GViacum dries up / makes fine and subtle / melts or resolves / scoureth
away / and provoke sweat / and by the reason of his rosin / withstandeth
putrefaction or rottennes of humores in the body. It is known that the broth
of Guiacum is good for the French pox / for the gout that is not depely rooted
/ for the diseases of the milt and liver. It is good for the dropsey when it is
sodden in wine. The use of the broth is good for the iaundes and many other
hardlye curable diseases. There was a French man that contended in a little
book / that the powder of the Diet wood / ought not and could not be sodden
in wine / at the lest in French wine.

But I have given this medicin often times sodden in Rennish wine / and have done
therewith much good. Matthiolus teaches how that must may be made with the
powder of the wood / and I have caused the powder to be sodden in Berewurt /
and it has been drinkeable enough. But whether ye seth the powder of the diet
wood in water or wine / or in Berewurt / or Alewurt / ye must take heed that
such herbs be sodden therewith / as are good against the matter of the decease
/ and comfort most the weikest and most diseased places: which can not be done
without good knowledge of simple medicines. There are books enough to teach
the manner of sething and dressinge of the holy or diet wood: But I advise all
men that will have any profit of this wode / to axe council of some learned
man / for the herbs and the quantite of the same / that shall be sodden with the
wode. There are diverse Latin writers of the diet wode / and how it should be
used / but I like none so well that I have red yet as Alphonsus Ferrus. I must
give you warninge of two errors that are committed in the drink and syrop
made with the diet wode. the one is / that some in England give the syrope
after supper: The other is / that one learned man makes his common drink more
full of herbs and medicines / then he does make his syrope: for when we give
many medicines / then we intend to alter much and change the humore. But
when we intend to norishe at convenient and accustomed time / then we put fewer
medicines to the meat or drink / least the number and vnpleasantnes of the
medicines should hurt both the appetite digestion / and mar the norishment.
Bitter and horrible things destroy the appetite / and make the stomach to
loath the meat and drink / and it only norisheth that is sweet and pleasant.
The medicine that is taken before meat / is drawn in first of the liver / and
goes from thence to the places convenient. But it that is taken after meat /
marreth the meat / and can not for the meat come to the convenient places
whether it should come / and often goes up to the head and troubles it very
sore.

Of the herb one berrye.
FVchsius taught us that the herb that I call one berry / to be Aconitum
pardalianches / and then he thought it had been so / and if he had known a
better / he would have showed us it. But Matthiolus proves that the herb
which Fuchsius sets forth for Aconito pardalianche / is herba paris of ye
later writers. The herb that I call One berrye / has a round stalk / which
is never above a span long / and out of the mids thereof comes out four
leaves / not unlike unto some Plantayne / and in ye top of the stalk about a
round black berrye come out other four small leaves / and there in is sede in
color white. The root is full of small things / like thredes: This herb
grows plentuouslye in a wode beside Morpeth / called Cottinge wood / and in
many other woddes in England.

The virtues of One berrye out of Matthiolus.
OVT of the berrye of the herb called Paris / the sede is gathered which is
so far from hurtinge or poysoninge / that some by the drinkinge of the powder
of that sede / in the quantite of a dram / for the space of twentye days /
that they that have been wasted / and have been made half doutinge by poison /
have well recovered again.

Of great Pilletorye of Spain.
depiction of plant

THere are two herbs that are called in English Pilletory of Spain / one
whose root is occupied against ye toth ache / and this grows not in England.
But there is an other herb that is called of English men also Pilletory of
Spain. But for a difference I call this great Pilletory of Spain. It were
best to call it after the Duche Maisterwurt. This Maisterwurt has diverse Latin
names in Italy and in Germany / For the Phisicianes of Italye call it
Imperatoriam, and the Duche Phisicianes call it Magistrantiam and Astericium,
Ostericium, and Ostricium, The common people of high Germanye call it
Meisterwurtz. I never hard that it grew wild in England / sauinge about
Morpeth in the North park there. The leaf is somthinge like Angelica / but
that it is greater / rougher and blacker / the stalk is very long / the
flowers are whytish / the seeds are not broad and flat like dill / but long
like unto siler mountain / as far as I remember / and as Matthiolus describes
his Imperatoriam. It has black roots without and very sharp / and bytinge
in taste / and a little bitter.

The virtues and Properties of great Pilletorie of Spain.
PIllitorie of Spain or Maisterwurt is hot at the least in the third degree.
Maisterwurt drives mightily away from the stomach / guts and mother.
Wherefore it is good for the colike / and the gnawing of the stomach. It
drives down flowers / and stirs a man to make water. It is good for the
toth ache if the rotes be sodden in tart wine / and bathed therewith. The root
dronken is good for the strangling of the mother. Maisterwurt helps barunes
of weomen if it come of a cold cause. The rotes chowed in the mouth / bring
much waterish fleme from the brain. The powder of the root dronken often with
wine / is a good remedy against cold diseases. Wherefore it is good for ye
palsy and the falling sickness / and for them that are taken with numnes. Some
write ye half a spounful of the powder of this herb taken an hour before ye
fit will heal a quartan. It makes ones breath smell well / and strenghteth al
ye wits or senses. It is good for all pestilent diseases that go from one to
another / and against al poison and bitinge or stinginge of venomous beasts.
It helps them that are shortwinded. It opens stoppinges / and is good for
the dropsey / and for them that have the disease of the milt.

Of the herb called Kali.
KAli as I do remember has no name in English / and although it be very
plentuous in many places of England / yet I never could mete with any man that
knew it. But lest this herb should be without a name / it may be called
Saltwurt / because it is salt in taste / and Salalkali is made thereof / it may
be called also Glass wede / because the ashes of it serve to make glass with. It
may also be called Sea thrist / because it is like thrist that grows on the
houses / which is a kind of ayegrene / when it comes first out of the
ground. I remember now that one English man called this herb Eestrige. It
has a read stalk / and those things that answer / for ye leaves are like
unto whete / but many parts longer and round / in taste saltishe / and in
color grene. The stalk of it is full of joints / and not one far from another.
The older that the herb is / the longer are the leaves / at the lenght grow
out round knoppes / wherein are very small seeds / which the Larkes in East
Freselande eat in winter.

depiction of plant KALY.


The virtues of Kaly.
I Have red no virtue that Kaly has in Phisik / but they that make glass use
the ashes of it to make glasses of / and of the broth of it is made a salt /
called Salt a kali.

Of the two kinds of Lauander.
LAuander is not written of / by name in any old writer / but in my judgment
it is a kind of Stichados / and therefore I marvel much at Fuchsius and
Matthiolus / whereof the one writes that it is Spica Germanica, and the other
that it is Spica Italica, when as it differs utterly in likeness from all the
kinds of spica / that any ancient author makes mention of. Therefore it
shall be better either to call it thin or long Stichas / or after the common
herbaries Lauandulam or Lauendulam, then Spicam Germanica^, Anglica^, Gallicam,
Scoticam, Hispanicam, or Danicam, although it grow in all these co^treys.
depiction of plant Lauendula.
depiction of plant Lauendula minor.
For an herb having in the top like an ear of corn / called in Latin
Spicam, ought not te be called straight way / therefore when it grows in
Germanye Spica germanica, nether where it grows in Italye Spica Italica,
nether Spica in any spece / because the Barbarus writers call it Spicam. There
are two kinds of Lauander / one kind only called Lauander / and this is the
less kind / and the greater and fayrer kind is called Lauander spyke.
Learned men do judge not without a cause / that it was first called Laue^da,
Lauanda, or Lauendula, a Lauande / of washinge / because wise men found by
experience that it was good to wash mennis heads with / which had any
deceses there in / or weiknes that come of a cold cause. These two kinds of
Lauander are so well known in all countrees that I have been in / that I
think that it were but lost labor to describe them that are so well known all
ready / therefore I will proceed to the virtues of them.

The virtues of Lauander or Lauander spyke.
BOth these kinds of Lauander as some of the Italianes do write / are hot and
dry fully in the second degree / and in the beginning of the third. But I do
not judge by experience and by learning / that they are perfitly hot in the
third degree / which they partly themselves do grant when they say / Olio de
spigo odoris adeo acerrimi est, vt caetera odoramenta superet. Wherefore it can
not be true that the two kinds of Lauander do not differ much in strength
from all the kinds of Spikenard / namely when as beside this / alleged Galene
in the eight book of Simple medicines / grants yt Spikenard is hot only in
the first degree / and dry in the second fullye. They grant also that these
kinds of Lauander are good for all diseases of the brain that come of a cold
cause / also for crampes and palsyes that they strengthen the stomache / and
open the liver that is stopped / and the stopped milt also / and bring down
flowers and secondes / which properties rather belong unto Stechas then unto
any kind of Spiknarde / which ye shall well se if ye need the properties of
Stechas / and of the kinds of Nardus / and compare the^ both together.
Wherefore it ought not by and by to be received as the answer of Apollo /
whatsoever the Italianes and other country men do write / except it can be
proved by autorite or good reason. The Germans do write that the flowers of
Lauander sodden in wine and dronken / do make one avoid water well. The same
(as they write) dronken three or four days together / bring down flowers and
secondes / they drive wind away / and are good for the iaundes. The flowers of
Lauander taken with Cinnamum cloves / Mace graynes / Cubebes / and the leaves
of Rosemarye / do not only help the above named diseases more strongly / but
also further help the palsy / and the tothe ache. The water of both the
Lauanders is good to wash the akinge head with / if the cause be cold / and
so it helps the dusines of the head. The broth of the flowers of both the
kinds / and the water also / are good for members that are number or taken / if
they be often bathed and washed therewith. I judge that the flowers of Lauander
quilted in a cappe and daily worn / are good for all diseases of the head
that come of a cold cause / and that they comfort the brain very well /
namelye if it have any distemperature that comes of cold an moystenes.

Of Nutmegges and Mace.
THE mace grows about the Nutmegge / and is the flower / and at the first
it is sprede abroad like a wild rose with five leaves / and the nutte appears
in the mids / and afterward closes it self roundabout the Nutmegge. The
Nutmegges grow in great plentye in an Island of Inde / called Badon / The trees
have leaves like peche leaves / but shorter and narrower. The herb Nutmegge is
enclosed in an hard shelle as a hasel nutte is. And the same have I seen very
well cu^dited in sugar / it was condited whilse it was grene / as young
walnuttes are condited hole before the shelles way hard / and they are very
pleasant in eatinge and comfortable for the stomache. The Nutmegge is called in
Barbarous Latin Nux muscata, in Latin Nux myristica, and of some in Greek
Moscocarydion, or Mescoryon.

The virtues of Nutmegges and Mace.
THE best Nutmegges are read / fat and heavy / ye worst are light black and dry
/ The Nutmegges are hot and dry in ye end of ye second degree: but some hold yt
they are hot in ye third degree / but not perfitly. The Nutmegge stops the
bellye / and makes ones breath savor well / and takes away fumes of the
stomache. It digesteth meat / and drives wind away and comfort the
stomache and the liver / and is good for the frekles in the face and ye
ringworme. It minisheth the greatness of the milt / and softeneth the impostemes
of the liver. It is also good for the cold diseases of the mother. The
Arabianes hold that Nutmegges and Cloves be of one nature / but I hold that the
Cloves are much hoter and of more subtle parts then the Nutmegge is. Some
use to take fresh Nutmegges / and to bruise them and heat them in a pan and
then to press them / and then comes out a salt olishe thing like wax /
which some call oil of Nutmegges. This oil is precious / for it is very good
for all cold diseases of the sinews and ioynte / and of diverse other places
also / It is also profitable for cold housbandes that would feign have children
/ but not for lecherous bores and bulls. Mace is dry in the first degree / and
it is much bindinge and very spicie. But the Arabianes hold / and namely
Auerroes / that Mace has nether heat nor cold that can be spied. But if he
mean of the Mace that grows upon the Nutmegge / his saying is plain false /
for it is hot in the second degree at the least / as a man may well judge by
his taste. And I think that in propertye it agrees much with the Nutmegge.

Of the herb called in English Alecoste or Cost marye.
depiction of plant Menta graeca.


THE herb which is called in English Cost / Alecoste / or Costmarye / is
called in Barbarous Latin Menta Romana, or Menta Saracenica, or Saliua Romana.
The leaf of the herb is some thing like Betonye / but it is more white / and
a great deal bigger / and it has a very strong sauoure / and in taste bitter
/ the stalk is sometime almost a cubite long and longer / and in the top
thereof are some yelowe knoppes / not much unlike the knoppes of Tansey. It
grows only in gardines in England / and in no place ellis as far as I
know.

The virtues of Cost marye out of Matthiolus.
THE juice of the herb dronken / kills both small and great worms in the
bellye. It is good for a cold mother. It strenghteneth the stomache / whether
it be dronken or laid to / and stays vomitinge. The herb of his nature
whether it be strawed / or ellis a perfume be made thereof / drives away
serpents / and is good against their poisones / and it helps stoppinges and
strenghteneth the head.

Of the herb called Devils bite.
Morsus diaboli.
depiction of plant depiction of plant

THE devils bite is called in common Latin Morsus diaboli, and succisa. The
superstitious people has believed that the devil knowinge the virtues of this
herb / bite a piece of the root away / and therefore call it devils bite. It
may be called also / of biten / because a piece of the root is biten of. The
devils bite grows abroad in untilled places / as in meddowes and plain
feldes / The leaves are something like scabius leaves / but blacker and
without the little things like fine thredes that the leaves of scabius hang
on. It is also much like the leaves of that kind of Plantayne / which is called
of some Ribwort / but the leaves are broader. The stalk is about two cubits
hye / The flower is somthinge purple / the rotes have many tasselles or
fringes / growing out of it / and one piece of the root is biten away /
whereof it has the name.

The virtues of Ofbiten.
THE later writers say that if Ofbiten be laid to grene after the manner of an
emplaster to a carbuncle or pestilent sore / will ripe / and surely heal the
same / or ye wine that it is sodden in / will do the same. The rote uses to be
eaten by it self / and also the broth of it / if it be sod in wine / is also
good for the pain of the mother / and to save a man from the pestilent air.
It is very bitter in taste / wherefore a man may gather that it is hot and of
a dry complexion / some use now a days to break and dissolve clustered
blood that is run together in lumpes with it. Some use to give the powder
into the body to kill worms / and to lay the herb unto bruised places / or
bitten places / or to such places that be hurt by fallinge.

Of the fruytes called Mirobalanes.
MIrobalanus is a Greek word / and answers not iustlye in name unto these
fruytes that I now write of / For Mirobalanus sounds a spicye or well
smellinge ackorne / when as these fruytes are like plumbes and not ackornes.
The Arabianes make five kinds of Mirobalanus as they al do grant. Mesue
writes that some have judged that yelow Mirobalanes and Indianes / and the
Chebuli / are the fruytes of one tree. But beside that it is not like to be true
/ because they have diverse and differinge qualities / It is late tried by
experience of trauaillers in to Inde / that they are fruytes of diverse sundry
trees.

The election and choice of the Mirobalanes with certain martes by the way
whereby one may be known from an other.
depiction of plant INDI.


GOod yelowe Mirobalanes are known by these fine properties. The yelowe are of
a marvelous great yelowe color / turninge somthinge to grene heavy / because
they are great and thick with much flesh / and when they are broken / there
is gum found in them. The stone is very little. The Kebuli are somthinge
black turninge toward rednes / and the greater that they are / the better
they be. They have much flesh / and therefore are so heavy / that when they
are put in the water / they sink for heaviness. The Indianes are black great /
and have much flesh / and are heuye and are without stones. The Emblikes are
best that are great and have much flesh / heavy / and have small stones. The
best Belerici are great and have much and thick flesh upon them and are
heuye.

depiction of plant CITRINI.


THE Mirobalanes are gentle purging medicines / for they make not a man weike
after their purginge / but rather strengthen the stomache and other inward
parts and help them / ye they are good for the hole body in so much that
some write that the use of them keeps a man young and makes a good color /
and make the breath sweet / and makes thy sweet not to be to rank in smell.
They make a man merye and drive sadness away. They comfort the liver and are
good against the trimbling of the heart. They are good for the emrodes and
quench the heat of choler.

The virtues of the Citron or yelowe Mirobalanes.
THis are the most excellent qualites of yelow Mirobalanes / they purge choler
/ and are good for the^ that are of hot complexions. If they be steped and
rubbed in Veriuce made of grapes or rose water / or in the juice of Fenel /
they scour the eyes and drive away the heat of them. The powder of the^ finely
beaten / stops the dropping out of the water of the eyes / and fasten louse
eyes / that are weikned with to much moisture. If they be menged with Mastike
they will heal sores. These may be taken in gross powder from ij. to v. and
in the infuse from v. unto xx.

depiction of plant CHEBVLI.


The virtues of Kebuli.
KEBVLI purge fleme / increase a man's reason and understanding / and help the
memory / and stop the rewme / they scour the stomach and strenghten / it
quickens the eye sight and other senses / and are good for the dropsey and
old agues. The ponder of the Indianes and the Kebuli may be taken from ij. to
iiij. / and the broth of the infusion of them may be taken from iiij. unto xx.
but he that takes them / must not take them whiles the North wind blows /
and must eat no fish. The sodden broth of these do stop more then the
infusion / which is only pressed out without sethinge.

Of the black Mirobalanes.
THE black Mirobalanes purge out Melancoly and burnt choler / they are good
for trimbling / sadness / ye lepre / ye quartaine / and such other deceases as
rise of melancoly. They are also good to make the color of the skin liuelye.

The hurtes of the Mirobalanes and help of the same.
AND because all these kinds of Mirobalanes do lightlye stop the veins and
liver and other places / and cleue unto the filmes of the stomach / and guts
/ and hurt them with their wringkles / they are not to be given unto them that
are much given unto stoppinge / but unto other they may be given with those
medicines or herbs that drive urine / or they may be infused in whaye / and
so taken / or in the juice of fumitorye / or with Rubarbe / or Agarike / or
Spiknarde. If they be steped and rubbed in rose oil / or the oil of sweet
Almondes / or violet oil / or with sweet Almondes / or sweet rasines or broken
with their streyninge / or honey / or taken with Cassia / Manna / Tamarindes /
or with the conserve of Violettes / or if they be taken with any other
softeninge medicine / they soften the stomache and the guts / that is purge
gentlye and slide through as sliperye and cleue no more to the guts / nether
make any wrinkles there.

The virtues of Emblike Mirobalanes.
THE Emblikes are somthinge cold and dry in the first degree / they scour
the stomache of rotten fleme / and they strenghthen it and the brain / the
sinews / the heart / the liver / and other louse parts by binding them
together again / and therefore they are good for the trimblinge of the heart /
they stere up an appetite / they stop vomiting / they stay and hold down
madness / they increase or at the least help the reasonable pour of the soul.
They slake the notable heat of the bowelles and the thirst that comes
thereof. The measure of taking of them is from one aureo / that is a dram /
and the viij. part of a dram until three / in the infuse they are taken from
iij. aureis until six.

Of bellerick Mirobalanes.
BEllerick Mirobalanes are cold in the first degree / and dry in the second.
Their chief properties are to comfort and to strenghten. Auerrois writes that
they purge choler. The same quantite is to be taken of these that is taken of
Emblike Mirobalanes.

Of the Fen shrub or bushe called Gall.
THere is a short bushe that grows in the Fenne / which is called in Duche
in Netherland / Gagel / in Cambridge shyre Gall / in Summerset shyre Goul or
Golle / of the Apothecaries in England and low Duchlande / Mirtillus /
although it be no kind of Myrtus / but only because the leaves are well
smellinge and are like unto the leaves of wild Myrtus / sauinge that they are
shorter and rounder / and blunter at the end. As far as I can perceive / our
Apothecaries have used the leaves of this bushe / for the leaves of the right
Myrtus. But they err / for the properties are not all one. For the gall is
hot in the end of the second degree / and farther it is so very well smelling
and marvelous bitter / and notable astringent or bindinge. But Galene writing
of ye right Myrtus / says it is made of contrary substances / but the cold
erthlye propertye overcomes the other. It has also a subtle propertye yt is
hot / by reason whereof it dries. Wherefore the one can not be well used
without error / for the other although they agree in many points. The
Westfalians use to put the leaves / buddes and flowers of Gall (for it has no
fruit as the Myrtus has) into bear / and it makes it have both a good taste
and a good smell / and for a need it will serve in the stead of hoppes. But I
would advise that either hoppes should be mixed with it / or else Rosmarye /
Calamint or Chamepitis called Groundpine / or such other like openinge herbs
or seeds / as are the seeds of Fenel / Caroway / or Anise. It is tried by
experience that it is good to be put in bear / both me and by diverse other in
Summersetshyre.

Of the nutte of Inde.
depiction of plant Nux Indica.


THE nutte of Inde is called in Latin Nux Indica / it is so big as a good
half pint in receyuinge of Licore / in figure like a Melon / but sharper at
the ends / and especial at the one end. The outer bark is of a read color
turninge toward black / somthinge hard tough / with a wollise nature within
/ which grows hard together / and when it is hard rubbed with hands / it is
like hears / under yt is a hard shell as hard as horn / thresquare. It has a
kernel within it of the bigness of a goose egg / hollow within / the substance
thereof is fat of the thicknes of half a fig of a sweet taste / and like
butter. They are most commended that have much of a Licor within them like
water / for by that it is known that they are new and fresh.

The virtues and complexion of the nutte of Inde.
THE nut of Inde is hot in the second degree as the Italianes write / and
moiste in the first. But in them that I have tasted / I have found no such
heat / if it be eaten / although it engendre not an hurtful juice / yet they
trouble the stomach somthinge. It increases sede / and stereth men to the
work of procreation of childer. The oil that is pressed out of the Indiane
nut / is good for the pain of the emrodes / specially menged with the oil of
peches. The same is good for the ache of the knees and sciatica / if they be
anointed therewith / and it kills worms.

Of the nutte called the vomitinge nutt / and of the nut of Methel.
THE vomitinge nut and the Methel are not in all points unlike. But yet is
there great difference between them. Matthiolus writes that the flat nuttes
like little cheses which have been sold hitherto: for vomitinge nuttes are
nuttes methel / and they that have been hitherto used for methel nuttes / are
the right nuces vomicae, that is vomit nuttes. And for his proof he
alleges Serapion / and he makes this difference / that the right vomike
nuttes have little knoppes upon them like eyes / and that the methel nuttes have
dounye or roughe skin all over them.

Out of the Arabianes / and chefelye out of Serapio / and them that he cites.
SErapio makes two chapters of Nux Methel, and of Nux Mechil, and a several
chapter of the fruit called Nux vomica, where they must be three several
things and not one simple: first I will rehearse what he writes of the vomike
nut.

Of the Vomike nut.
LEum alcey or alke / is named in Latin Nux vomica. This nut either alone or
with other medicines as salt / makes a man vomit strongly / for salt
furthereth perbreakinge / and stereth the humores / and makes them more
easelye go forth by casting or vomiting. The quantite of them to be taken is
two drammes. Take twentye drammes of ye dry tops or leaves of Dill / and
seth them in a wine pint of water until the half be sodden away / and put
some honye to it / and let the medicine be made of honye / and afterward let it
be menged with this sodden water and dronken / and then it makes a man vomit
easily / and it loses the bellye sometime. One Abraham in Serapio writes
thus. There is a nut whose color is between grayshe / blewishe / and whitishe /
greater then a hasel nut / and there are knobbes in it / and if ye take a dram
of the powder of the bark of it that is sifted with two great drammes of the
powder of Dill or Fenel sede / and put unto it a sufficient quantite of honye /
and drink it with warm water / it will make a man vomit choler and t^eme /
and it will make some go to the stole also.

Here in this text I find nothing that mislyketh me / saving that this Abraham
gives but one dram / when as other give two drammes / and that he compares it
unto a hasel nut / when as there is no lykenes at al between an hasel nut and
the vomiting nut so far as I have read or seen by experience.

Of the nut Methil out of the 365. Chapter of Serapio De temperamentis.
LEum Methel / that is nut Methel / is a fruit like unto the vomiting nut /
and the sede of it is like unto the sede of a Citron / Haese writes in the
same chapter that the nut Methel is like unto the vomike nut / and that the
sede of it is like unto the sede of Mandrago^a / and that the bark of it is
rough and the taste of it is delectable and fatty or unctuous / and that it is
cold in the fourth degree / and that if one kirat of it be given in wine / it
makes a man wonderfully dronken / and a kirat is the weight of four barley
corns. But if it be given in the quantite of two drammes and two seven parts
of a dram / it will kill a man forth without any delay. Rasis being alleged
in the same chapter says / that it makes insensible / and peradventure
kills and stops and stancheth / and make a man vomit / and an other of the
Arabianes says that five drammes of the Methel nut make one dronken very sore
/ if there be much of it given / it kills. And therefore he that takes of it
/ ought to take in hot butter / and to set his outward parts in warm water
/ and be so ordered that he may vomit enough / and let him be so cured as he
that has taken Mandragoram. Rasis also in his Simples writes that the Methel
makes number or insensible / and brings sometime destruction / and engenders
dronkennes / lothsumnes and vomitinge.

Out of Auicenna.
THE Nux methel is poison / and makes number or vnfelable / it is like unto a
vomike nut / and the sede of it is like the sede of a Citron / it makes
vnfelable the head / and makes forgetfulness / and is ill for the brain / the
quantite of a dauich makes a man dronken / and the poison of it kills in one
day.

Thus much have I translated out of the Arabianes / and so much as I could
find in any Arabian / that is translated into Latin / of all that I can gather
of these Arabianes / the nut Methel stereth a man to vomit much more then Nux
vomica does / and that in less quantite / wherefore the working of Nux Methel,
deserves more the name of the vomitinge nut / then the commonly called nut
vomike does. But seeing that it is out of all dout / that they are very
perilous / I will advise al my friends to use nether of both in their bodies /
but to use them to catch fish / birds / and some little beasts therewith:
and it were best to take out the stomach of such as are taken straight way /
and not to suffer them to live after they be dosyed or made dronken.

Of the fruit called Anacardium.
ANacardium may be called in English Heart nut / of the likeness that it has
with an heart / for it is like a birds heart in proportion and in color also. It
grows in Sicilia in the hot hills / which burn continuallye under the
ground. This heart nut is hot and dry in the fourth degree / and is very good
for the marring or hurting of the memory and senses / and is good for all
diseases of the brain that come of cold and moystenes. It is good against
losing of ye sinews / and it remoueth forgetfulness and helps the memory /
half a dram of it if it be received / is good for the memory / and the inward
part is best / but because it is extremely hot / it is deadly ieperdous for
young men / and for them that be of a colerike or hot complexion: therefore it
ought not to be given unto the^ / and it ought only to be given to them that
have the palsy / or are afraid of the palseye.

Of Adders tongue.
O Phyoglosson is called in Latin Lingua serpentina, in English Adders tongue /
of some other Adders grass / though improperly. Adders tongue has one fat leaf
a finger long like water Plantayne / but much narrower / for ye quantite of it
out of the lowest part / whereof there rises a little stalk which has a long
tongue upon it / not utterly unlike a serpents tongue / whereof it has the
name. It grows in moist and meadows in the end of April / and in the
beginning of May and shortly faydeth away.

depiction of plant Ophioglosson.


The virtues of Adders tongue.
THis is a wound herb / and heals wounds which are almost incurable / or
at the least wonderfully hard to be healed. The nature of it is also to drive
away great swellings / and to prevent extreme inflammationes / some use to
bruise it with swynes grese / and so keep it and lay it upon swellings. But I
council rather to seth it when it is grene with sallet oil / and to keep it /
and then will it be good both for swellings and wounds also. This herb is
very hot and dry.

Of the herb called Lunarye.
THere are two kinds of herbs which are called Lunaria / the one is called
Lunaria mayor, which is an hye herb and has a great flower / in the which is
the figure of a half moan / the lefe is somthinge long and sharp at the
point / some call this herb Shawbubbe. But although I have had it often in my
gardine / I never tried any virtue that it has.

The less Lunarye is a very well favored herb which has leaves growing one
against an other / which are also much like a half moan / whereof it seems
to have the name / and has seeds in the top like the seeds of oak of
Jerusalem / growinge together after the manner of a cluster of grapes /
wherefore the Duche men about Colon / call it Meydruben. It is found in the
end of May / and in the month of June / and sone after faydeth away.

depiction of plant Lunaria.


The virtues of Lunarye.
THE new writers say that the less Lunarye which may be called well in
English Cluster lunarye / or Cluster Mounwurte / is very good for wounds /
and to stop both the red flowers of weomen and the white issue also. It is
reckened to be of a cold and dry nature. The Italianes write that it is
excellentlye good to heal both outward wounds and burstinges and also
inward. It is good for bursting of childer / and the powder is good for the
bloodye flixe / it stops also both the bloodye and white issue of weomen.

Of herb two pence.
depiction of plant Nummularia.


MAtthiolus names also Lunariam minorem, the herb that other call Nummulariam,
and the Duche men Schlangenkraut / and I have named it herb two pence. It
grows by hedge sides / and in shaddowe ditches / and in such holowe dark
places as water has been in winter / and are dried up in the beginning of the
Summer. It rinneth along by the ground with small branches where one / grow
small round leaves / like pennies / by coples one against an other / whereupon
it has the name. It has yelow flowers in the month of May.

The virtues of herb two pennies.
THE nature of this herb is to bind and to dry. This herb as the later
writers say / that they have tried if it be sodden with wine and honye / is
good to heal the exulceracion or the sore of the lunges that have the skin
worm of them. It is also good for the cough and for them that are shortwinded
/ and it is good for the cough that young childer have called in right English
/ The kindt cough: for kindt is a child in Duche / and in French / English /
The chingcough. Some use to seth the herb in water with sugar for the same
purpose. The same is good for the bloodye flixe / and for ouermuche flowynge of
weomens humores. The Germans hold stedfastlye that this herb will heal
very sore wounds / and hard otherwise to be healed. They first will that the
herb should be sodden in wine / and that the wound should be washed with the
wine / and that the herbs should be afterward laid to. Some give the same
virtue unto the distilled water. But I reckon no. The Germans hold also that
it is found by experience / that the serpents that are wounded / bite this
herb and are healed thereby. And an Apothecary of Germanye told me / that if
an horse do halt / because he is stricke in the quick / if the nail be
plucked out / and the juice of the herb / or the herb chowed in a man's mouth
/ be put into the hole / will sooner then a man can believe heal the horse houe
/ so that he shall not be hindered of his iorneye thereby.

Of the herb called Pulmonaria.
depiction of plant Pulmonaria.


THere are two kinds of Pulmonaria / the one is a ragged thick moss that
grows upon oak trees / and has certain spots upon it like as some lunges
has / whereupon it seems to have the name in Latin / if it be not named in
English already Lungwurt / it may be named now so / or rather Lungmosse.

The virtues of Lungwurte.
LVngwurte of the oak dries and binds. It joins together and heals grene
wounds / and specially them of the lunges. It is also good for ye outrageous
outflowinge of weomens flowers / and for spittinge of blood / and against
great laxes that endure long / and for the bloodye flixe. This herb is good
for the coughe / shortwindines / and other diseases of the lunges / ye may
dress it thus: Take one Lungwurt half an ounce of Anis sede / of Fenel sede /
of Licores / of each two drammes / one dram of the lunges of a fox / half a
dram of Enula campana / beat them al into fine powder / and put as much sugar
to them as all the pouders / menged do wey / and take every morninge and
eueneninge a spoundfull of this powder. Some that keep cattle / give this
herb in powder with salt against the shortwindiues of beasts. I think it
were good to give it also unto a horse that has bloodye gere coming out of
his lunges by the nose thrilles or mouth. Matthiolus calls the herb which I
have judged most like unto Baccharis of al herbs that ever I saw / and is
called in English Sage of Jerusalem / Pulmonariam also / as other before him
have done / by the reason of the white spots that are in the leaves / being
like unto such as are on the lunges. He says that it is excellentlye good for
vomitinge out of blood out of the mouth / that comes from the lunges most
specially. Sethe the flowers and leaves in a sufficient quantite of water /
until the half be sodden away / then put sugar to it and drink it. Ye may
beat the herb and flowers / and take the juice purified with half as much
sugar. The same is good for diverse diseases of the lunges / as the Italianes
have left in their writings.

Of Throw wax.
THere is an herb with a leaf like a pease and a yelowe flower / and a top
afterward full of little dunnishe black seeds / which is called in Latin
Perfoliata, because ye stalk goes through every lefe. I have seen this herb
growing in great plenty in a corn field on the Northsyde of the city of
Worms in Germanye / and in no less quantite in in Somersetshire / between
Summerton and Marlock. It appears not with the sede until the corn be
almost ripe / and when it is a cold year / much after the caryinge in of
corn. I have not seen it in Italye / nether have I heard any English name of
it / saving for lack of other I name it Throw wax.

depiction of plant Perfoliata.


The virtues of Throw wax.
THrow wax is a little bitter and bindinge / wherefore it is a little warm and
dry. The hole herb is very mete to heal both inward and outward wounds /
sores and burstinges / for it joins together. Above all other things it is
most commended for healinge of burstinges and brokennes of childer. It is also
good for the going out of the nauel and the great gut / ye may use both the
sede and leaves of this herb.

Of Mouse ear.
MOuse ear is called of some writers in Latin Pilosella, of other Auricula
muris, but yet is it not Myosotis, that is / auricula muris of the old writers
/ as an English writer has of late taught in his herbal. It crepeth upon the
ground with horye or rough leaves like unto a mouse ear. The flowers are
yelowe / but the rote is very small. There is an other kind yt grows up
righter with a purple flower / and whyter / and more horye leaves / and longer
then the otger has. Matthiolus calls this Pilosellam maiorem, but Fuchsius
calls it Pilosellam minorem.

depiction of plant Pilosella.


The virtues of Mouse ear out of the later writers.
THE kinds of Mousear are hot and dry / for they have a bindinge virtue
joined with some heat. By reason whereof they are both very good to clenge and
join wounds together / and to heal them / for men hold that the powder of
the herb is exceeding good to glewe wounds together. Some use to give the
juice of this common Mousear to hinder the cold of a quartane ague. The same is
good to harden iron with / or to make stele harder. The common Phisiciones in
Germany gather the root of this herb in May / and dry it and give it to
them that are bursten or broken. Matthiolus writes that this herb is so sore
binding / that the shepeherdes knowinge that propertye / will not suffer there
sheep feed long there / where as ye herb grows in plentye. It binds the
shepes bellies so sore / that it kills many. Whereupon as the same man
writes the Phisicianes has learned that it is good for bloodye flixes / the
great scouringe of the mother / for wounds both outward and inward for common
flixes / and vomitinge of choler / and spittinge of blood / and bursting / and
all kinds of breakinge / and specially for the breakinge of the brain pan.

Of Winter grene.
depiction of plant Limonium Fuchsij.


PIrola has the name in Latin of the lykenes that the lefe has with a Pere
tree. I have not seen it in England / and therefore can give no English name for
it / but I have seen it often in Germany / where as it is called winter grene /
because the leaves bide grene al winter / which name we must use in England
until we can find one of our oune. Winter grene has seven or eight or mo
leaves growing together like unto Pere trees leafes / which leaves are not
longer then the Beat leaves are / and therefore can not be Limonium. The stalk
is long and small / and in the top of it are flowers growing / which are
pleasant to look to / much like the flowers of Lilium conuallium, and after
the flowers are gone / there appears read seeds / which are very astringent
and bindinge. The herb grows in moist places under bushes.

The virtues of Winter grene.
THis herb is very bindinge and dry / wherefore the stone cutters and other
surgions use it much / and no merueyle / for it heals wonderfullye in short
space grene wounds. The surgiones of Germany use to make a wound drink for
inward wounds of this herb Ladies mantel / Agrimonye / Sanicle / and herb
two pence / which has been tried to have done good many times for inward
wounds. The leaves and the sede both are good for bloodye flixes. Some take
the powder of this herb / and sprincle it upon sores with great profit.

Of Self heal.
depiction of plant Prunella.


Self heal is called of some of the Germans euelfauoredly Prunella / when as
it ought to be called Brunella / that is Brounwurt / of the broun color that
the herb has in the top after ye purple flower be gone / and therefore the
unlearned people of Germanye call it Braunellen and not Praunellen. And that this
herb ought to be named rather Brunella then Prunella / the Duche ryme of
Hieronymus Brunswike bears witness in these words following: Braunel so bin
ich genant / Ein braune blum is it mir bekant. Self heal has a stalk in the
mids full of wrincles / fat and rough / the leaves are like the leaves of
Basil grene of color / and sharp toward the ends. It has tops like ears
in the height of the stalks much like the herb which we call Lauander. It
has a small root full of little tasselles like thredes / the ear has first in
it purple flowers and afterward broune little leaves where the flowers were /
and the flowers that were purple before when they fayd / wax done in color.

The virtues of Self heal.
Self heal is good to heal grene wounds / both such as are without and
also within. The broth of Self heal / or as some write / the water well
distilled in balneo Mariae, is good for both outward and inward sores: other
hold that the same is good for the head ache that comes of a cold cause /
and to scour wounds. The same is good for the burning of the throat / for the
exulceration or sores of the mouth and jaws / if a man make gargle of it with
a little roset honye. The flowers or leaves sodden in wine or honye / are good
for above named disease of the mouth and jaws.

Of Arsmert otherwise called Sulerage.
depiction of plant Persicaria.


THere are two kinds of Arsmert or mo / one kind is that it is taken of some
to be Piper aquaticum, of others Crateogonum. The other is it which has the
black spotte in it / and some write of an other that is not worthy to be called
Arsmerte / because it is so cold that it can not do the thing whereof it
should have his name. This herb is called Persicaria, because it has leaves
like a Peche tree. It grows most commonly in moist places.

The virtues of the common Arsmerte.
ARsmert is a very hot herb / and better to be taken without then within /
for it can not be taken within without great ieoperdye. Arsmert being broken
/ or the juice that is pressed out / is very good for rotten wounds does of
man and beast / if they be washe^ often with the juice / weomen that would have
there flesh free from flies and maggottes / lay it often upon their flesh /
for it dryueth flees away and hinders maggottes to bread. This thing is
proved by sure experience / if ye gather this when it has dew upon it / and
straw the chamber with it / and afterswepe the dust and the herb out together
/ it kills flees.

Of the bushe and fruit called Ribes.
depiction of plant Ribes.


RIbes is a little bushe and has leaves like a vine / and in the tops of the
bushe are red berries in clusters / in taste at the first somthinge sower /
but pleasant enough when they are fully ripe. I have seen them growing in
gardins in England / and also by a waters side at Clouer in Somerset shyre in
the possession of master Horner.

The virtues of the common Ribes.
THE juice and syrope of Ribes / are good for hot agues and against hot
flixes and vomitinge of choler. They stop laxes / provoke appetite / and
quench thyrste. Ye may two ways keep Ribes / either in there oune juice and
verges / or ellis dried in the sun and so kept. Ribes in all points has the
virtue of Barbenes.

Of the noble root called Rubarbe.
depiction of plant Rabarbarum.


RVbarbe is called of some Rhabarbarum / of others Reubarbarum / and there are
three sorts of Rubarbe / whereof one comes out of Inde / and it is called
Rauetsceni of the Arabical writers / and an other kind is called Raued
turchicum or Reuturchicum / or Rha turchicum. The best Rubarbe is that / that
we call Rauetsceni that comes out of Inde / and because it grows in Tanguth
/ that is in Sinarum regione / it is called of the better Latinistes Rha
siniticum, or sinicum, or Rha Indicum. This comes from Tanguth throw the land
Cataia into the land of the Perses / whereof the Sophia is ye ruler / and from
thence it is sent to Egypt / and so to Italy. The second sort in goodness is
it that is called in Latin Rhabarbarum, and it comes of the country / whose
inhabitours are called Troglodytae, that is dwellers in holes dens and caves
/ in the highest places of Ethiopia / and this is the worst of the three. That
sort that is called Rha turcicum / is thought to be of some new writers
Rheon ponticum of Dioscorides and other old writers. But I can not consent
unto them / for Mesue makes his kinds or sorts of Rauet to purge. But who
can show me any kind of Rheon ponticum / that purges? none I trow / for all
that they say that they have proved it / therefore it follows not that
allthough that Pontus is now under the Turk / that therefore that Rauet
turcicum of Mesue is Rha ponticum of Dioscorides and Galene / for it may have
the name turcicum of an other cause / then because Pontus is under the Turk /
for there are other places under the Turk / where as Rauet turcicum may grow
beside Pontus. It shall be an easy matter to any man that has leisure to
answer Marinus ye Italian in this matter / where he goes about to prove that
Rauet turcicum is Rha ponticum. The best Rubarbe of Inde is it that is fresh
/ something black / and turninge to rednes rare or spoungius yet heavy withal
/ and if it be broken / it looks something reddishe / and something bluish /
and if it be steped in liquore / it dies it yelowe like Saffron. The
inhabitours of the country / where as it grows / use to stepe it five days
in water / and let the water dry up / and then make trociskes of the ground
thereof / which they sell to kings and princes / and then send Rubarbe unto
us which has been steped / and lost his strenght for true Rubarbe / but Mesue
says that such Rubarbe / and it that is so marred / is more bindinge and
faster compact together then the other / and the other dies not like saffron /
or ellis very little. Ye may know what figure and form the leaves of Rubarbe
have by the figure that is set forth here / the which Andreas Marinus has
first of all set forth / and if thou will know any more of the description /
read it that Marinus alleges of Joan Baptista / Ramusius upon Mesue.

The nature and virtues of Rubarbe out of Mesue.
REubarbe is hot and dry in the second degree / It has a duble substance / one
waterish / and erthly giving unto it a bindinge substance / and an other
aerishe giving unto it the varite or lousnes of substance / and there is a
firishnes in it making it perfect. The which thing has made it bitter by the
workinge of it into the erthlynes. But the erthlynes is deep in and the
fyrishnes is in the outward part. And these substances may be disseuered or
parted by steping / so that it that is hot and purging / may be removed in the
licor / and the erhtly and binding property abide behind. Rubarbe purges away
choler and fleme / specialy from ye stomach and liver / and it purges the
blood / and puts away stoppinges / and the deceases that arise there upon /
the iaundes / otherwise called the guelsoght / that is the yelow sickness / the
dropsye / the swelling of ye milt / it heleth rotten agues and long the
prickinge ache of the midriffe toward the sides. This same stops the
spittinge out of blood out of the lunges or of other places / and it heleth
places bruised by fallinge or by a stripe and inward brusinges and brekinges /
if one dram be taken with two greines of mummia / and one greyne and half of
madder says Mesue / but I would advise to take at the least half a dram or two
scruples / for this mesure is a great deal to little / it must be taken with
tart or binding wine. The oil of Rubarbe is good for stripes / brusinges / and
shrinking together of the muscles and synewes / and for the ache of them. It is
also a good medicine against the bloodye flixe / if it be perched or tosted at
the fire / and be taken in with red wine / or with the juice of Plantaine. It
is also good for agues that come about by courses. The infusion of one dram and
an half / or three drammes is sufficient. It may be taken in powder from one
dram to three as Mesue says / but I would not advise English men gladly to
excede two drammes in powder / and I would give four drammes in the infusion
rather then two and half in powder. Rubarbe may be preserved either in good
honey or in flewurt called Psyllium or in Turpentine and wax / or wax alone or
in mile / or millet called in Duche HirS and in Latin Milium.

Of Salsa perilla.
SAlsa perilla is named of some also Sparta perilla. It is so like unto the
root of Walwurte or Danwurte / that Matthiolus thought it had been the very
root of Danwurt / but he durst not pronunce / because he had not seen the
leaves of the herb. The new writers give the same virtues unto Sparta perilla
that they give unto Guaico and to the rote chine.

Of Sanicle.
depiction of plant depiction of plant depiction of plant Saniculae.


SAnicle is much like unto Cinkefoly or fiueleued grass / or unto the leaf
of a vine / but it is more depely indented in five places / the leaf of it is
much like unto some kinds of Kingcuppe / the rote is black without and white
within / full of little small tasselles like thredes coming out of them /
the stalk is very small like unto a rishe / sometime a cubite long. In the
top of it grow many little flowers / they depart away and leave behind
them pretye little knoppes like little burres. The root with the rest of the
herb is astringent / and something bitter. It grows commonly in cold and
shadoish woddes and hedges.

The virtues of Sanicle.
THe leaves or rote of Sanicle sodden in mede and dronke^ / scoureth away ye
diseases of ye lunges / and if it be sodde^ in water or wine and dronke^ / it
is good for inward burstinges and wondes: if it be dressed after the same manner
/ it is good for them that spit blood / for the ache of the back / for ye
gnawing of ye belly / and it stops both ye running out of blood of man or
woman / men use to put this herb commonly with other inward wonde herbs. It is
good for all manner of burstinges / laid to after ye manner of an emplaster / some
hold yt it has such a mighty pore in joining flesh together / yt if it be
sodden with flesh it will make the flesh grow together in the pot whiles it
is in sethinge.

Of Sanders.
SAnders are kinds of wood / there are three kinds / the white / the red /
and the yelowe / the yelowe is best smellinge / next unto that is the white /
and last of all is the red / and the yelow in my judgment is hotest / and
next unto him is the white / and of the third the red is the coldest. I do not
agree with the Arabianes which hold that all the Sanders are cold / seeing
that the yelow are at the lest hot in the first degree / and the white is
temperate / and the read scarcely can be proved to be fully cold in the second
degree. It is proved by often experience that all the three kinds are very good
and profitable for man's principal parts / and that the yelowe are good for the
trimblinge of the heart. Read sanders hinder the flowinge of humores to the
parts of the body / and strenghthen the gummes and stomach. Al kinds of
Sanders are good for the trimbling of the heart joined with an ague / and the
specially when they are laid upon the heart. Read sanders are good to be menged
with cold herbs both for the gout and for the head ache of an hot cause /
and they stop humores that flow into the eyes. Sanders / namelye read / are
good to be bruised and put into rose water / and to foment there with any place
diseased with heat / and namelye the liver. Sanders are good against itchinge
/ if the place be bathed with the water that they are sodden in.

Of Saxifrage.
THE later writers call many herbs Saxifrages / and especially such as
break the stone / for so does this word Saxifrage signify. In England there
is a wild kind of Daucus with long small leaves / which grows commonly in
rank meadows / that our Countremen call Saxifrage. About Colon there grows
in sandye grounds not far from the Rhene side a kind of Saxifrage / which
grows very thick and crepeth by the ground in fashion and form like unto
Time: the Coloners call it Klein steinbrech / and I name it in English Time
saxifrage. I have seen of this kind growinge in Essexe by the Seasyde. There
is an other in Germanye called weiss Steinbrech. This has round leaves / and
is indented very little / I might compare it to Yuie / if it had a sharp
point coming out of the mids / the stalk is small / and white flowers
grow in the tops / the rote is full of little knoppes like pearls. It
grows very commonly in Germanye and in diverse places of England to /
Fuchsius makes the common Melilote Saxifragiam luteam / that is yelow
steinbrech.

depiction of plant Saxifragia alba.


The virtues of Saxifrage.
THE name of Saxifrage teaches the virtues of all the kinds thereof / and
declare the virtues of the^. The white Saxifrage with the indented leaf is
most commended for the breakinge of the stone / for if the leaves and roots
be sodden in wine / they make a man make water / and purge the kidneis and
drive out the stone both of the bladder and kidneys / if it be not confirmed
into much hardness before. The new writers hold also that if the rotes be
beaten into powder / and made after the manner of an electuary and received / is
good for the same purpose. Some of them hold also / that if in the month of
May the herb be distilled in a duble vessel after the manner of alcumistry /
that the water thereof after a man has sitten in a warm bath dronken / has
the same propertye to break the stone.

Of the herb called Scabius.
SCabiosa is named in English Scabius / and there are diverse kinds of Scabius
/ wherofsome are more and some are less / most commonly according unto the
nature of the ground where as they grow: it yt grows amongst ye corn / is
ra^kest of al other. And this is the token whereby Scabius is known from the
devils byte / and diverse other like herbs unto it / that if ye break the
leaf insunder / there will come out small sinews like small here is which will
not suffer the one half of the leaf to be pulled insunder one from an other
to fall away to the ground of a long time. All the leaves of every kind of
Scabius are indented or iagged / and have blewe flowers in the vppermoste of
the stalk.

depiction of plant Scabiosa.


The virtues of Scabius.
SCabius which has the name of Scabbes / is good against scabbes and breking
out of ye skin / whether it be taken in with ye broth wherein it is sodden in / or
if the sore places be anointed with the juice of it / or with an ointment made
of it. It is good for all the diseses of ye breast and lunges / for it purges ye
lunges and breast of all filthy matter. It is very good to be laid upon
pestilent sores to ripe the^ / and to break them / in so much yt if dedly sores
be anointed and plastered therewith al / in iij. hours as ye later writers hold
/ the same will vanishe and go away / or ellis at the lest be resolved or made
ripe.

Of the herb called Seen.
depiction of plant Sena.


THere has been a great error of late years among many men / which have
thought that Seen had been a tree / which grows in many places of England.
But the right Seen is an herb that grows in Italy in Hetruria and Apulia /
and in Alexandria / which is sown in April and in May every year / and
dies before winter. It has thick leaves and somthinge fat like unto licores.
The stalk is a cubit high / out of the which grow little branches that will be
wonde about after the fashion of a withy. The flowers are yelowe / and in them
run certain purple veins. After the flower comes a sede vessel or a cod
in form hoked or crooked in / after the manner of a hook or a sycle. The seeds
are in color some thing grenishe in black / much like the seeds of grapes.
The tree that they call Seen in England / is Colutea in Theophrast / and has
coddes much unlike the coddes of Seen as ye may se by this description.

The virtues of Seen out of Mesue.
THE Seen coddes are hot in the beginning of the second degree / and dry in
the first. And the leaves are hot in the first degree. Seen scoureth away and
purges away gentlye melancholye and burnt choler / from the brain / from the
sensible parts / from the heart / lunges / liver and milte / and therefore it
is good for diseases that spring of the humores of those places as are
melancholic and old agues. And Seen makes a man to be joyful and merye / for
it takes away the humore and cause that makes men sad without a cause / and
it makes the body to look florishinge and lustye / and opens al stoppinges
of the inward parts of the body. The broth of the leaves of Seen and of
Camomill / do strenghten the brain and sinews if they be washed therewith.
The same used any way that ye will / strenghteneth the sight and the
hearing. Bitinge sharp things as ginger / earth salt / salt of Inde / do
further the workinge of Seen / because it is very weke and slow in workinge.
Because it shall not hurt the stomache / there must be menged withal such
medicines as comfort the stomache and heart. Therefore it is ordened that it
should be sodden with a good deal of ye broth / either of a cock or a hen /
or wether mutton or vele / or ellis it ought to be infused in whay with a
little spyke of Inde / and afterward when it has sodden a long time softely
upon the fire / then it must be taken / or ellis his powder is to be taken with
sweet milk. It may be taken from. v. and an half to an ounce. It is found by
experience after that Mesue wrote / and proved by good reason / that Seen is
not so noysum for the stomach as Mesue writes / and that the leaves purge
even as well as the coddes. Howbeit this I can witness by experience in me /
other weyke persons that Seen in workinge makes a great rumblinge /
gnawynge and pain in the bellye / and that in other that be strong / it
makes no such busynes. If there be any man or woman that is sore given to
sadness and melancholye / and be vexed with diseases arisinge thereupon / it
shall be good for him to put to every gallon of new bear before it be turned
half an ounce or a little more or less as he can abide the taste of Seen. And
it were better to put it into new wine / when it is first pressed out of the
grapes / in the same quantite as I have told before / in the like quantite of
must aunsweringe to the quantite of bear. Some late writers hold that Seen will
also purge fleme well / and that it will clear and clenge the blood.

Of Spinach.
Spinach or spineth is an herb lately found and not long in use / but it is so
well known amongst al men in all countrees / that it needs no description / it
is well known from other herbs by the indented or cut leaves / pricky sede
and waterish taste / I know not wherefore it is good / sauinge to fill the
belly and louse it a little.

depiction of plant Spinach.


But with those profittes it hurts the stomach and bredeth wind. It were
best that they that would use it / should seth it a little / and press out
between two trenchers a great part of his watery juice / and so choppe it and
eat it with other herbs / somthinge hoter then it is it self.

Of Tamarindes.
TAmarindus is as much to say as a Date of Inde / yet is it more like a plume
then a Date / and therefore some false thieves menge bullesses and other kinds
of tarte plumbes with Tamarindes / and so begile us Christianes / but the
falshode may be known by the color and exceadinge sourenes. This fruit is
called of the later Greeks Oxyphaenix, that is sour Date.

depiction of plant Tamarindus.


The virtues of Tamarindes out of Mesue.
TAmarindes scour away choler and hold down the rage of it / and the heat of
the blood. They are good for the burninge of ye liver and stomach. And they are
a good medicin against thirst / and for all kinds of burninges / and for the
iaundes or guelsought / they stop vomitinge / and help hot and hasty agues
yt had need of a purgation. Mesue gives in Tamarindes from the quantite of two
ounces unto five ounces. But the later writers give but one ounce of the flesh
streyned throw / and it works well enough. I have purged some weike bodies
with an half ounce. Because Cassia is very loathsome unto many / it were good to
menge half an ounce or six drammes of Cassia with an half ounce of this / for
it will tempre with his sournes ye lothsum swetnes of the Cassia. Because this
fruit is cold and dry in the second degree / and therefore hurts a cold
stomache / the use is to menge with them a little spyke of Inde or Mastick or
Mace. It will work more strongly / if ye put to it the juice of young hoppes or
of fumitory. Mesue says also that the noysumnes of Tamarindes is taken away
by menginge them with the iuyces of Fenel / Percely / Endyue or wild succorye.
The best Tamarindes have sournes menged with a certain sweet taste / blackish /
and are shyninge with certain tustes or thrommes / like roots / fresh and
not dry.

Of Tormentill.
depiction of plant Heptaphyllon.


TOrmentilla is so called in Barbarous Latin / and in English Tormentil / of
some it is called in Greek Heptaphyllon. It grows in mores / hethes and
closes in all countres. Tormentill has seven leaves / where as Cinkfoly has
but five / and at the first sight is very like unto Cinkefoly. It has a small
stalk and very yelowe flowers / and has a short knoppye root / which in
taste is bindinge.

The virtues of Tormentill.
THE common herbaries have proved by experience yt the herb called Bistorta /
that is Dock bistorte and Tormentill are altogether like in properties and
virtues. They write that they are good to heal old rinninge sores. If one
part of the root of Tormentil be dronken in rain water / and an other be
bruised and laid to the kidneys with vinegre / it will hold the birth that it
fall not before the time. Tormentil is good for them that can not hold there
water / if it be taken with the juice of Plantayne. It will stop weomens
flowers if they sit in the broth of it up to the navel / the roots will do
the same / if they be small broken / and knodden together with honey and
spicknard / and laid to the lowest part of the bellye. The ponder of Tormentil
sprincled upon a wonde / stops the blood that runs out of it: the powder
mingled with the white of an egg and fried upon a tyle stone / and by and by
eaten / stops the vomitinge of choler. The broth of the roots is a good
remedy for all kinds of poison / and some hold that if it be stilled in balneo
Mariae, it will do the same / many use to put the root in medicines yt are
made against the pestilence. The rote of Tormentil is good for the bloodye
flixe / and to heal grene wondes that are without and within taken in with
drink.

Of the herb Trinite.
THere is an herb which I have seen growing in the alps and in some gardines
in Germany which is called of some writers Trinitaria, of other Hepatica
nobilis, in duch Edel leberkraut. It has three sharp points on every lefe.
The lefe looks like unto a clauer / but that it is hole and not cut to the
bottom. The leaves grow upon long foot stalks. The principal stalks are
long and small / and upon the top of them grow flowers / and no where
ellis / in white blew. When the flowers are gone / there arises a knop wherein
the seeds ar / in color bluish and long / not unlike unto the sede of
Columbine.

The virtues of herb Trinite / or noble Liuerwurte.
THE later writers hold that this herb is good for the liver / and specially
for the liver of new married young men / which are desirous of childer / and that
it is good for the prouokinge of Urine / and for the diseases of the bladder
and kidneis / and other diseases of the bladder and kidneis / and other
diseases of the inward parts. The same say that the water of this herb is
good to drive fyrye burninges from any place grieved therewith.

Of Valeriane.
THere are diverse herbs that are called Valerian / Phu in Dioscorides is
called Valeriana magna of the Apothecaries. There is an herb that grows in
watery places besides ditches and rivers / which has leaves growing upon
branches like unto Ash leaves / and has a root full of small stringes like
thredes / of a smell not unpleasant. There is an other kind which we call
Valerian in English / and it has a blew flower which is called of some Latin
men Valeriana Graeca.

depiction of plant Phu magnum.
depiction of plant Phu vulgar.


The virtues of these herbs.
OVRE English men use the Valerian / which is called Valeriana Graeca,
against cuttes and wounds. And the Duche use there Valeriana to drink it or
to lay it in white wine / and to wash the eyes withal / for they say it is
tried by experience / that it is wounderfullye good both for the kepinge of the
eyes and also for the increase of the eyesight. Some use to lay the root
among clothes / to make them smell sweet. But I would that it should be
menged with other herbs that are good for the plague / and with such herbs
as are good for the openinge of the liver and the milt / for it serves well for
that purpose.

Of Fluellin.
depiction of plant Veronica.


FLuellin is called in Latin Veronica, in Duch Ehre^preis / it crepeth by the
ground and has small little iagged leaves / which are not very long nor very
broad. They grow in order two and two together / some of the leaves bow inward
and bear the likeness of a gutter / one kind which is most common crepeth by
the ground / and is found upon old mold hills covered with grass / and
about tree roots / in the top of the stalks are long ears where in are in
white blewe flowers with a little scattered here and there. When as the flowers
are gone / there arise little sede vessels like unto them of Bursa pastoris. The
seeds are very small that are contained therein.

The virtues of Fluellin.
VEronica or Fluellin has a certain bitterness in it / and very much
bindinge or astriction. It is wonderfully good both for grene wounds and old
also / for scabes / fourfines and all sores / some hold that it is good for the
common lepre / which is in deed Clephantia. The new writers hold yt it drives
away swellings / and namely such as are in the neck. And they say that it is
good for the pestilence and for the stopping of the liver and milt / and that
it is good for lunges that have the skin of.

Of the herb called Virga aurea.
depiction of plant Virga aurea.


THE herb that is called of some Virga aurea, is named of other Herba Iudaica,
and Solidago Saracenica, It is named in Duche Heydnisch wundkraut / it may be
called in English Golden rod / or Hethnish wountwurte. It has a stalk
somthinge hollow / two cubits long / which is read as the rotes are also /
the leaves are long like a Pech or Wylow lefe / but al indented about like a
saw. There grow yelowe flowers in the top / which at the length turn into
white down. I have marked two kinds herb / whereof the better is it with the
read stalks / branches and rotes / and does grow in plentye a little from the
city of Wysenburge in high Almanye in the side of an high mountain / and in
diverse other mountains and wildernesses in that country. The other kind has
a grene stalk and grene branches / but it differs nothing in fashon and
figure from the other kind / but in color and in the place of growing / for
this grows in many places beside the Rhene.

The virtues of the Golden rod.
THE Surgianes of Germanye make of this herb with other of like nature / as
are Sanicle / Fluellin / Herb two pence / and such other a wound drink /
which they give into them that are wounded within / and douteles they do many
great cures there with.

This herb is wonderfullye good both for inward and outward wounds. They use
this also for fistulas and false and hollow wounds / crepinge inward.
Arnolde of Newton writes that this herb is good to make a man make water /
and to break the stone. This herb stops laxes both in drink and in
clisters. The broth of it heals sores and blisters in the mouth / and it
fasteneth and strenghteneth the teth. If ye gargle with the broth or juice of
it / it will drive away the inflammationes or hot burninges of Vuula /
squinansy and of the jaws. The powder is good for old sores / for it dries
them up and heals them quickly. Hierom Bock gives almost all the fornamed
virtues unto the distilled water of the herb / and says also that it is good
for the stomach and mother / and other parts that have the skin of / and
bread gnawinges in a mannis body. But I set more by the juice / broth / and
powder of the herbs / then I do by their waters.

Of the root called Setwal / or Zedoaria.
I Have not yet spoken with any man / nether read any mannis book of this age
/ that has seen Setwal grene / wherefore we can not describe it. But because
we have the root / we can judge somthinge of it both by taste and the workinge
of it / and by books of elder writers that have written of it.

The virtues of Setwal out of the Arabianes.
SEtwal or Zedoaria is of a certain natural propertye and not elemental /
makes a man fat / and withstandeth poison and venom / and therefore it is good
against napellu^ / and many use to put it into diverse kinds of triacles. And
if a man eat of it after vnyons and garleke / it takes the smell of them away
/ as it takes also the smell of wine away. It breaks gross wind / and
heals the bytinges of venomous beasts / and it stops the belly. It
resolves or melts away gross empostemes and swellings / and specially
them that are in the mother. It stops perbreakinge / and is good for a
windye colyke.

Of Rosa solis.
ROsa solis is a little small herb that grows in mossey grounds and in
fennes and watery mores with a broad hory thing in the top / it grows not
above the height of three or four fingers height.

The virtues of Rosa solis.
OUR English men now adays set very much by it / and hold that it is good
for consumptious and swouning / and faintnes of ye heart / but I have no sure
operience of this / nether have I red of any old writer what virtues it has
/ wherefore I dare promise nothing of it.

Of the Coweslippe.
A Coweslippe is named in the Herbaries and Apothecaries Latin herba paralysis,
and there are two kinds of them / and ye one is redder yelow then the other /
and the other paler / they differ also in smell / for the one smells better
then ye other / the one is called in the West contre of some a Cowislip / and
the other an Oxislip / and they are both call in Cambridge shyre Pagles. There
are some grene Cowislippes and some dubbel / tripel and quadrupel that grow in
gardines / but they differ not in kind from the other / of ye same kind is
our prinrose / which I never saw grow in any place / saving in England and East
Freseland ij. cold contrees / be like it will not grow in hot countrees / and
of al them that hither to has written of herbs / no man that I do remember
has mention of this kind / nether set out any figure of it / saving only
Rembertus / and a Barnet of Swigerlandt / in the book called the garden of
Germans / who writes yt it grows in the top of a cold mountain in his
country. Ruellius calls our two kind of Cowislip Verbascum and Phlomides,
but Matthiolus brings reasones against him yt they are not Phlomides, and he
says yt our Cowislip is called in Latin Primula veris, which name we give more
justly to our prinrose / which comes forth a great while before the
Cowislip. The Germans call the Cowislip Schlussel blumen / because they have a
great sort of flowers like keys / growing together in the top of the littel
stalk.

The virtues of Cowislip out of Tragus / Fuchsius / and Matthiolus.
Tragus.
THE flowers of Cowislip conserved in sugar / and also ye stilled water there of
/ are very good for the^ yt are weke and very low brought by consumption of
long sickness / also for them yt have the hole palsy / and for them that sound
often / and they say that this is known by experience / it has a singular
property to comfort the heart. The flowers and leaves of Cowislip bruised and
laid to / are good against the bitings of venomous beasts / and they swage
swellings / they heal also wounds / both if the water be poured upon them /
and also if the leaf be bruised and laid upon them. Tragus says that the water
of Cowislippes laid to a mannis head / swageth the ache thereof / if it come
of a hot cause / and that he says to be known by experience. Some weomen
springkle ye flowers of Cowislip with white wine / and after still it and wash
their faces with that water to drive wrinkles away / and to make them fair in
the eyes of the world rather then in the eyes of God / whom they are not
afraid to offend with the scluttishnes / filthiness / and foulnes of the soul.

Fuchsius.
THE later writers give these properties to the two kinds of Cowislip / they
are good to be broken and bruised / and laid to the joints that ache / the
stoppinge of the bladder and kidneis is taken away by the using of the roots
of these. The juice of these herbs is good to be taken in / and also to be
laid with out upon broken bones / and them that are out of joint / they bind
very littel / and they are bitter / and a littel biting in taste / by which
properties they can not fully bring to pass that the practitioners say they
can do without the help of other herbs / in heling of bone and displaced
members / yet they may well enough dry up and scour away / which properties
Galen gives unto his Verbasculis. The Herbaries of our time say that they
are hot and dry / and the weomen that would be fair / and labor to increase
their beauty / wash their faces with the juice of the flowers of them.

Matthiolus.
THE later writers hold that this herb has the virtue to swage the ache of
the iointes / they do also commend the broth of the rotes to be good for the
stone of the kidney and also of the bladder / They say also yt the juice of
them both dronken inwardly / and laid to without / is good for broken bones and
such as are out of joint / they say also that if they be sodde^ with sage and
mergerum / their broth is good against ye cold diseases of the sinews and the
brain / wherefore they are very good to be given to be dronken unto them yt
have ye palsy / or any number or tremble member. The water of the flowers of
Cowislippes is good to be dronken of them yt sound / when as the body is very
feeble and weke / for as the experimentores do say they comfort the heart
wonderfully / the flowers are good to be laid to the stricken of scorpiones and
feldspiders / for they easelye scatter away the swellings and dissolve them.
The leaves or the flowers bruised / will heal wounds / the stilled water that
is out / if ye hole herb is good for ye head ache / and Matthiolus confirms
it yt Tragus and Fuchsius wrote before / concerning the property that Cowlip
water has to make fair faces.

Of the Holy tree.
THE tree which is called commonly in England Holy / and in some places Holme /
and in other places Huluer / is judged to be Aquifolium in Latin or Agrifolium,
and of Theophrastus to be named Crateagonon, and of some Paliurus, whatsoever
men judge it to be / it is not certenelye known as yet what it is / but
because it has one good propertye in Physic / I will not pass over it without
making of some mention of it.

The virtues.
THE broth of the barks of the root are very good to be sodden for them that
have had their iointes or members out of ioynte / and have waxed hard
thereafter. For it softneth and resolves / and drives away swellings / and
sodoreth together broken bones. Other properties that this tree has / I know
none / saving that the bark is good to make byrd lime of / and the bows are
good to swepe kynyes withal / and the stades are good baytes to entyse field
fares to come to lymeroddes / when as all other berries are eaten up in the
wood / this tree is called in Duche Wald distelen / and Stech palmen. If any be
desirous to make byrd lime of the barks / they may learn it of me which have
made it often times after this manner: About Midsommer I pill of the barks / and
strayt way seth them a good while / and then I pull of the outtermost rind /
and lay them in a moist corner / or dig them in the earth or a dunghill / and
within eight or ten days / I take them out again / and bray them or beat them
in a mortar as small as is possible / and then I wash them in a running stream
/ or if I can not come by that in other cold water until the unbeaten pieces of
the barks be fallen away / and the rest become lyme.

FINIS.

